Transnatural Philosophy, OR METAPHYSICS: Demonstrating the Essences and
Operations of all BEINGS whatever, which gives the Principles to all other
Sciences. AND Showing the Perfect Conformity of Christian Faith to Right
Reason, and the Unreasonableness of Atheists, Deists, Anti-trinitarians, and
other Sectaries. With an Appendix, Giving a Rational Explication of the Mystery
of the most B. TRINITY. By I. S.

LONDON: Printed by the Author, Sold by D. Brown at the Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar, Abel Roper at the Black Boy, Fleet street, and Tho. Metcalf in
Drury Lane, 1700.

To the Right Honorable JAMES, Lord Drummond.
MY LORD,
DID I think that the Present I here make Your Lordship needed any Man's
Patronage to set it off, I should, instead of doing You an Honor, disparage
Your good Judgment by such an Address. TRUTH is of Another Kind of Metal than
that Rich Oar which Avaricious Worldlings dig out of the Bowels of the Earth.
Her Worth is wholly Intrinsic; nor can she owe any part of Her Valuableness to
the Face of a Hero, or a Caesar, stamped upon her to make her more Current and
Authentic; and it would argue she wanted Worth, should she beg it. It Is her
Prerogative never to go out of her self: Nor does this Restrain or Imprison,
but Enlarge her. The whole Vast Extent of BEING is her Ordinary Purlew, and
within the Precincts of her farstretcht Jurisdiction. Though her Steps are Steady
and Wary, yet she ranges over All Nature. Her Unconsined Progress takes it is
Rise, and starts from Principles: Sciences are her Stages; whence she makes
Excursions into Endless and Numberless Conclusions. Nor does she content her
self, much less affect, to walk on even Ground: The Paths she treads are all
up-hill, and she knows no Resting Place in her long Ascending Journey, till she
settles her self in the Clear Contemplation of the FIRST BEING.

These Considerations will make it seem very Improper for a Man who professes
to regard nothing but the Promoting of TRUTH, to Preface his Book with a
Dedicatory; which, in the Common Opinion of the World, makes a Show of courting
a Patronage, I do once more assure Your Lordship this was not my Aim: For no
Man can patronize Error, and Truth needs no Man's good Word or Authority to
abet her. Not all the Power of Alexanders, or Caesar's, can make a Bad Proof
conclude, nor hinder the Consequence of a True Demonstration. Arguments
grounded on Evident Principles are of such a Stiff and Sullen Nature, that they
can neither how out of Respect, nor fawn out of Complement, nor shake out of
Awe or Fear. Since then Applications of this Nature can no Ways advantage my
Cause; what Excuse can I make to the World why I am so Inconsistent with my
Profession; or, why I would needs do such a needless thing as to Particularize
to Your self what I had intended for the Common Good of all my Learned Readers?

It Is Natural, my Lord, for us all, when we apprehend some sinister Imputation,
to lay the Blame on others; and it is Honest too, when those Others are really
the Cause or Occasion of our incurring that Censure. Pardon me then, my Lord,
if, to save my self Harmless, I lay the Good Fault at Your door; and openly
declare, that it is none but Your self who has made me Guilty of this odd
Singularity. Had there been nothing in Your Lordship above the Common, the
Common should have taken my Book among them without any Restriction. Had there
been no Particular Qualification in Your Lordship, which Distinguished and
Signalized You; my Indifferency had yet remained Undetermined. This Specialty
in Your Lordship, if I can with Truth make out, and prove to the World, and
(under Favor) to Your own face too, and that it is of such a Nature as became
Me to take Notice of it; my Credit is acquitted, and Your Lordship must answer
for it. I believe Your Lordship is not aware Your self what this Distinctive
Mark is, which could oblige a Man in my Station to single You out thus from
Your Peers. I will take leave then to make my Approaches to the telling the
World what it is, by acquainting them first what it is not.

Were my Talent Heraldry, I would then blazon in the best colors the Antiquity
of* Your Noble Family; how it came first into Scotland with St. Margaret the
then Queen. I would lay open the Royal Alliances of it by the Marriage of the
Lady Annabel Drummond with Robert the Third, King of Scots; how from Her, by
the Mother's Side, descended the Family of the STUARTS; who, in a long
Succession, Reigned in Scotland, and afterward in England too. By which means
some of the Royal Blood of those Great Monarchs was derived from that of the
DRUMMONDS; and, by consequence, is Allied to that which circulates now in Your
Lordship's Veins. Were I skilled in such matters, I could with Truth declare
how far your Lordship outstript all your Equals in those Exercises in which
Noble Gentlemen use to be trained up; to that Degree of Skill and Vigor, that,
whereas You came thither as a Learner, You arrived, in a short time, to the
pitch of a Master. I could add, were my Profession Soldiery, what Bravoure
Your Lordship showed in War, even in the Bud of your Youth; and how You durst
even then look Danger in the Face with an Undaunted Courage. I could recount
your Travells through the most polite Nations of Europe, culling out of each all
that is Commendable, and conduces to accomplish a Personage of your Rank; and
leaving behind you whatever was Unworthy and Misbecoming. I could, out of a
fair Experience, dilate upon your Noble and Civil Deportment; which claims at
once a High Respect, and wins the Love of all that Converse with you, and Know
You: How the native Sweetness of your Genius secures you from having any
Enemies, and the Greatness of your Mind from fearing them. Lastly, how your
Friendly Affability, and Unpretended Courtesy, is neither deprest by mean
Condescensions; nor raised above its just Level by the least Disrespectful
Height: Which make up a Mixture so Charming, that it is impossible to know you,
and not pay you the double Duties of Esteem and Love.

All these are very great Embellishments to your High Extraction, and make a
great Esclat in the Eye of the Generality of wellbred Persons. But, what are
all these to Me, whose sole Addiction is to pursue Truth, and to bend the
whole Intention of my Mind to promote that Best, and, in comparison, only
valuable End, Though the Luster of these do burnish Honor, and is so Conspicuous
and Bright in you, that it casts a shadow on others of your Quality and Age;
yet these were not my Chief Motive why I give this Book a particular Reference
to your Lordship. No, my Ld. there is another piece of your Character left yet
untoucht, which, in my Esteem, excells all these; which is, that you are a
Hearty and Sincere Lover of Truth. It Is This, it is This, my Ld. which gives you
a just Title and Appropriation to this Present of mine: It Is This, that can
best satisfy the World (as it does me) that your Thoughts are Truly Great, and
not detained in Insignificant Trifles, as too many of your Rank are; nor,
consequently, are your Affections placed on Low and Contemptible Objects. It Is
This that double-guilds Your other Heroical Qualities, and sets you on the
Highest Pinnacle of Honor.

There is nothing which more shocks a true-bred Gentleman, than a Ly, though it
be but in puntilio's of ordinary Conversation. But how exceedingly does a
Hearty Lover of Truth refine upon this Common Genius of a Man of Honor. Such a
Person bids Defiance to the whole Tribe of Errors, which are Lies in their
several ways. A Falsehood in Natural Philosophy gives the Ly to Nature. A
Falsehood or Paralogism in Logic gives the Ly* to Human Reason* which is the
true Nature of all Mankind. A Falsehood in Metaphysics gives the Ly to the
whole Nature of Being; that is, to the whole Creation* and to the First Being,
who by his Flat Established those Natures. You have not yet, my Ld. taken the
Full Dimensions of the Grandeur, to which this High Title, [ A Lover of Truth]
has raised you. You may please to reflect that this Mistress whom You affect
and court, is very nearly Allied to Heaven by the Father's side; and if You
espouse her, (for You may be sure of her chaste Consent, if You sincerely affect
her) You dignity and ennoble your Extraction by a Relation transcendently above
what Sublunary Marriages could have given it.

It Is then, to one of those Greatest of Men, or rather one of those Paragons of
Mankind, that is, to a Sincere Lover of TRUTH, I dedicate my Book. I doubt not
but I might have found diverse of those whom the Populace of Scribblers call
Patrons or Mecoenasses, who, out of a vain Consideration ^f being Praised in
Print, would have gratefully accepted it; had I been willing out of a Mercenary
Humor, to prostitute TRUTH to Unqualify'd Persons. But how would it have
shamed my Choice, and brought my Prudence and Sincerity into Question, to make
a Present of Pearls to those whose Thoughts are digging in the Dunghill of
Worldly Riches; and value the Barly-corns of their Opulent Estates, above the
best Ornament of their Mind, Knowledge. Such Gifts to those Little-Great Men
had been as Improper as to present an Atheist with a Prayer Book, who would out
of Exterior Civility, or some other Respect, seem to accept it kindly; but
afterward burn the Book and laugh at the Writer.

Yet, all this while, I do not pretend to lay any Obligation at all on your
Lordship by this Dedication; for, had this Book been published without it, You
would presently have made it your own by Perusing it. To do which intelligently
both your own Natural Genius, and your running through the Course of your
Studies, in Learned Company, with such Applause, has more effectually enabled
You, than it would some of our old School*term-Doctors. Such Maturity of
Judgment in such Youthful and Green Years. would easily enable your Vigorous
Understanding to take in and digest the most Elevated Conceptions. You see
then, my Lord, I only give you what I could not keep from you; and Forced
Kindnesses deserve no Thanks; though I have some Title to your Pardon, because it
was Your own Worth that laid this Force upon me. I had, I say, just reason to
apprehend Your Lordship would have made this Book your own when you had once
got it into your hands, seeing how sedulously You made a strict Search for
every Trifle I had written; and never desisted till you had found them ^ll, and
Purchased them at a dear rate: To do which, nothing but the Love of Truth could
move You; since there was neither in them any Affectation of Rhetoric, nor
Melodious Gingle of Words, nor the Diverting Conceits of Romances; with which
those Gentlemen, who dwell in the Middle-story, do so contentedly entertain and
please their Fancies. And, if Your Lordship was so intently inquisitive after
those Pieces of mine which were less Valuable, I had all the reason in the
World to think You would not let my Metaphysics escape your Perusal: Which, if
I may be allowed to be a Competent Judge of my own Productions, is worth them
all. But, I do not altogether blame Your Lordship for your Overvalue of my
poor Labors, because You have it partly Ex Traduce. It Is Hereditary to Your
Lordship to have too good an Opinion of my Writings. Your Lordship's Noble
Father, who is justly accounted the most Universal Scholar of your Nation, did
formerly, though perfectly unknown to me, give so High and Undeserved a Character
of them, as would make a Man, though but indifferently Modest, Blush; and tempt
me to admit some thoughts of vain Self complaisance, had I not been provided
before hand with an Antidote; which is, a most clear Demonstration, in the
Cloze of my Metaphysics, that all the Good we have, even to the least tittle,
does entirely spring from the Inexhausted Bounty of the World's Great
Governor, who works every thing in us, and by us: And, why may not this be a
second Excuse to the World for making your Lordship this Present, upon the
Score of Gratitude; since the Greatest Honor I can by this Address confer on
your Lordship, is but a poor Requital of what your Lordships Noble Father was
pleased to bestow on me.

I shall add one word more, which, though it may be some Comfort, and an especial
Honor to Your Lordship, yet it is a very great Trouble to me: Which is, that
those High and most Due Encomiums I give Your Lordship as a Zealous and
Unprecedented Lover of Truth, (tho this be, in reality, one of the Highest
Commendations Rational Nature is Capable of) will not yet draw upon you the
least Envy from any. No, my Lord, never fear it; let your Pretensions to that
Title be never so High, You will have but Few Rivals and Competitours. This
Darling of Heaven [ TRUTH] though the most Generous and Universal Benefactress to
Mankind, is in such Disreput^ with the Generality of our Great Ones, except
some Few (whom I do as highly Honor for their True Worth and Rarity, as I
contomn the rest) that they fancy they should stoop themselves below their
Dignity if they mali^* Her the least part of their Concern And Knowledge, though
employed in Defense of the most Fundamental Article of Christianity, is so
Unpalatable to their Depraved Taste, that it becomes Nauseous. To talk to such
Men of Establishing any Truth, or Explicating Faith, by Rational Principles,
sounds to them like Gibberish. They look upon Manly Reason as a kind of
Madness, as least as Foppish* and so strangely are their Brains turned, that
they judge those Discourses which are Solid and go to the bottom, to be Aerie
and Superficial. Not considering how this slight Opinion they have taken of
TRUTH, leaves them wholly to the Conduct of Fancy, makes their Life Uneven, and
their Devotion Bigottish and Fanatical.

I am confident that Your Lordship's Discerning Judgment will observe that this
Book I send You, contains in it a Cure for all those Distempers, if the
Stomachs of the Patients do not turn at the Medecin. You will find here
multitudes both of Clear and Well Built Truths; and, that they are the Genuin
Offspring of Evident Principles: Nor only this; but You will discover, in my
Second Book, the ly True and Firm Grounds of Solid Piety and Devotion. That
they may beget and improve in Your Lordship's Noble Soul those Dispositions
that will carry You steadily to Eternal Happiness, shall be the Fervent and
Daily Wish of

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Affectionate Friend, and most Humble and most
Faithful Servant, J. S.

PREFACE, TO THE Sincere Lovers of Truth in both our Learned Universities.
Gentlemen,
I. MANY are the High Encomiums and Glorious Titles which have been given to
METAPHYSICS by those who teach and profess it. They call Her The Queen of
Sciences. They tell us that, in regard all other Knowledges do depend for their
Certainty and Evidence, on her Sublime Maxims, she is not merely to be called,
in a Common Appellation with the rest, Scientia, a Science; but Sapientia, or
Wisdom; which carries a kind of Majesty in its Notion above other Endowments of
our Understanding. They pretend that she does not only Demonstrate, which every
Petty Inferior Science must, under Penalty of forfeiting her Name and Dignity;
but moreover, that she demonstrates ex Altissimis Causis, by the Highest
Mediums or Reasons: In a Word, they make her the Sovereign of all other
Sciences; and give her the Prerogative of Superintending over the rest; of
Assigning to each of them their Province; of Distributing to each of them their
proper Function, and the Matter on which they are to work; and of Enabling
them, by her Supreme Direction and Influence, to Perform what she Enjoins them;
and much more to that purpose.

II. I do not at all wonder that Learned Men have adorned Metaphysics with
these and such like Singular Commendations: They are no more but her Just Due.
What I admire at is, how, these things being True, and she being of so
Transcendent a Dignity, it comes to pass that she is strangely sunk into such
an Undervalue and Contempt in the World, that no Body seems to regard her. If
her Influence be so Universal, and her Evidence so Clear, who would not strive
in the first place to cultivate his Mind with such an Unparalleled Perfection?
Why are not Schools and Chairs erected in all Learned Societies merely to teach
Metaphysics, and large Endowments settled to Encourage the Professors of it?
And yet we hear no News of any such. Certainly, it she does, indeed, carry such
a high hand over all other sorts of Knowledge, a great Metaphysician should be
looked upon as a Monster of Learning; at least such an Extraordinary Person,
that all Mankind would most highly caress and value him; whereas though Beggary
be the Badge of Poetry; yet a Metaphysician is in such a mean Repute, that, had
he no better Livelihood, he might sue to be Subcizer to a Poetaster, and be
glad to feed on his Scraps. Whence we may conclude that there is something very
much amiss in the business; and that either the Writers of Metaphysics have
not done her the Right she deserves; or else that, through the Ignorance of the
Mob of Half-witted Readers, a General Outery is made against her; whence Men
have taken a Toy at her, and made, a wrong Apprehension of her as Insipid, Dry,
Steril and Insignificant.

III. There is no doubt but Skepticism also has been a great Enemy, as to all
other Sciences, so more especially to Metaphysics; because she is the most
able to shame and confute* the pretense that there is no Certainty or Evidence
at all* Fancy, which being of a contrary Genius, has a natural Antipathy
against her, is Another Adversary of hers; and that a most powerful one; for it
is able to bring into the Field a vast Rabble of Nimble-tongu'd Gentlemen,
armed cap-a-pie with Flouts, Jests and Drollery, which of late have (I know not
how*) ^ot the Reputation of Wit, and Noise, if finely delivered, has a powerful
Ascendent over the Generality. It may be feared too, that Voluminous
School-term-men, whose Productions have been only Wordish Digladiations and
fencing with Distinctions, without any farther Effect, have given, to many,
occasion to think that Metaphysics is nothing but a Mysterious kind of Talk,
to make an Exterior show of Learning, and appear Extraordinary; and that to
write Metaphysics, is to no more purpose than it is to plant a Nursery of
Briars to enlarge a Wilderness. For these Men speak as high of Metaphysics as
any: Whence, Men reflecting that these Large Promises vanish into Smoke, and
that neither Principles are laid, nor any Useful Demonstrations or Conclusions
drawn thence which are found to be Influential to other Sciences; it is natural
for Men to revenge the Defeat of their High Expectations, by exposing those
Authors, and disgracing Metaphysics it self, as Chicanerie, and altogether
Fruitless* and unable to make good what the Professors of it did, in such Big
Words, pretend. But, leaving those Persons to answer for their own Faults, let
us see what more Indifferent Men have objected against Metaphysics, and what
Reasons they allege for their Aversion from her.

IV. First then it is objected that Metaphysics is an Abstruse and Crabbed kind
of Study, and scarce Intelligible without Revelation; so that a Man may break
his Teeth with cracking the Shell; and, when he has done, he will find never a
Kernel. Secondly, that it is Aerie, Superficial, and merely Wordish; and not
handsomely worded neither, but scurvily Barbarous. Thirdly, that it was never
yet seen how it influenced any other Sciences at all; as is Pretended. Lastly,
that it has no Influence at all upon Men's Manners, nor conduces, in the least,
to make them live better. These are the Faults generally imputed to
Metaphysics, which we will consider in their Order. Premising first that I
have Reason to hope that whoev^^ pleases to peruse attentively our Ensuing
Metaphysics, will see that they are already answered to his hand.

V. The first Objection is so perfectly Groundless, that the Direct Contrary is
most Evident. The Object of Metaphysics is our most General Notions, of Ens
or Being: Which an easy Reflection will tell us, are, of all others, the ^t
Clear and Evident. For, an Individual (...) (v. g. Peter) being constituted by
such ^ Complexion of Innumerable Accidents as ^s found in no other Thing;
hence, our Knowledge of it is so Confused, that, however we can distinguish it,
as far as concerns our Use, by Time, Place, and oft-times by some outward
^dents; yet the Intrinsecal Essence and ^^ture of that Body is so intricately
woven; ^omprizes in it the Grounds of such numberless Considerations we may
make of it, that it is impossible to frame any one Distinct Conception or Notion
of it. Homo, has fewer; whence it is more Clear, so that we are now able to
frame a Definition of it, which we could not of the Individuum: Yet, because it
comprehends in it the Natures or Notions of Animal, Vegetative, Mixed, Body and
Ens; it is still very Confused, and therefore less Clearly Intelligible. Animal
is less Confused, because it contains fewer Superiour-notions or Natures in it.
Vegetative is still less Confused than Animal* for the same reason. Mixed is
less Confused than Vegetable; Body than Mixed. And lastly, Ens is the least
Confused of any of the Other; and, therefore the Clearest of any o^ them; as
having no Superior Notion in it ^^ all: Whence all the Composition, and,
consiquently, Confusion it has, is that it confound in it the Notions of its
own Metaphysical Parts which its Definition [viz. That which is Capable to bee]
gives us; which contains only the Notions of the Power, and of the Act (viz.
Existence,) to which it is a Power: The Sense^ of which Words is so Obvious and
Easy, the it is impossible the rudest Vulgar should be Ignorant of them.

VI. Still it will be objected that such Abstracted Words as [ Power] and [
Act] ^^ Unusual to Mankind, and seem to hover in t^ Air, so that no Man can
make any Fancy of them. And; it must be confessed they suit not with Fancy at all
(for Brutes have none such,) nor ought they to suit with it; for it is
impossible for us to have any Proper or Express I hantasm^ of Abstracted
Universal Conceptions, because ( as they are such) they never entered into our
Senses, nor have any Being but in our Understanding. But, why are not those
Notions or Conceptions of [ Power] and [ Act] Easy (...) Can any Man living be
ignorant of the Meaning of these Words [such a thing can be, or may be?] It Is
impossible; nor was there ever any that came to the use of ordinary Knowledge,
but understands them-* Now, the Word [ can] signifies that which we call Power;
and the Word [ Be,] that which is the Act of that Power; only they are put
into a manner of Expression^ Proper to Abstract Words. Nor can this breed any
difficulty: For, he who knows what it is to love, cannot but know what the Noun
Substantive [ Love] means: Nor, was ever any Man who knows what [ White] and [
Round] mean, so dull as to be pazzled in knowing the meaning of [ Whiteness]
and [ Roundness.] Yet the Reader may observe that the main Body of my
Metaphysics is built on the Self-evident Notions or Meanings of those Words,
Power and Act, or the different Kinds of them. Whence, were I to begin to teach
a Philosophy-School, I should think it best to take this Method; viz. that,
after my Scholars had perfectly learnt the Doctrine of the Ten Predicaments so
as to distinguish exactly our Natural Notions, got knowledge of the necessary
Laws of Predicating, and how to place the Terms best in order to conclude
evidently, I should begin with teaching Metaphysics: Not at all doubting but
that any Man of a good Natural Mother-wit, would perfectly comprehend it; and,
thence, become excellently disposed to demonstrate a priori, which is the most
Effectual and Best way to attain True Science; and to branch out his Knowledge
of Principles to an incomparably greater Number of Particular Conclusions than
he could by Demonstrating a posteriori. Besides, all Inferior Objects would
far more easily, and connaturally, open themselves to his View, after he had
once taken a Distant Sight of them from the higher Ground of their Causes and
Principles.

VII. The Second Objection is grounded on a Gross misunderstanding of the main
Fundamental of all True Philosophy; which I most religiously observe in all my
Discourses; and which, if neglected or not well attended to, brings every thing
into Wrangle and Confusion; which is, that all our Abstracted Conceptions,
(without which we cannot possibly Apprehend, nor consequently Discourse of any
thing Distinctly and Clearly) are of the Things themselves considered according
to such or such a Respect. This is the Basis of all the Aristot^lian
Philosophy; however there be too Few that exactly attend or hold to it. For
example. That Great Man, when he was Distinguishing all our Natural Notions
into Ten several Heads, called the Second* (...), and the Third (...), Quantum
and Quale: Now these Words being Concretes of a Thing (or Substance) and an
Accident, if they be not taken Formally or with a ^eduplication, for the Thing
as it is Big, or Qualified, would Confound Substance and each of those
Accidents, into one Compound Notion; which being quite contrary to his
Intention, which was to distinguish them, we must conclude that he took those
words, as we take our Abstract words Quantitas, and Qualitas, in a mere Formal
Sense, for the Thing quatenus Quanta, and Quatenus Qualis or Qualified; which
word [ Quatenus] cuts off that precise Consideration or Notion from any other;
which done, their Perfect Distinction is Evident. The Objecter then, may please
to reflect that we (following the same Method) do mean, by all those Abstract
Words, the very Thing it self, Considered or Conceived according to such a
precise Respect, and no other: So that, when we speak of Power, Act, Essence,
Existence, Ens, Suppositum, Person, Bigness, Quality, Relation, etc. we mean
still the Thing, apprehended according to such a Formal Consideration; nor can
we, with any Sense mean any thing else. Whence we, building all our Discourses
on our Natural Notions, each of which is the Thing it self Conceived thus and
not otherwise, do by consequence, ground all our Philosophy on the Things
themselves; which being Established in their Essences by GOD'S Creative Wisdom,
must be acknowledged to be the most Solid Ground imaginable. Wherefore there
can be no show of Reason in objecting to us that our Discourses, thus Grounded,
are Aerie or Superficial; whereas it is an Unanswerable Objection against those
who build their Philosophy on Ideas; which they confess not to be the Things,
but Distinct from them.

To give an Instance what Mistakes arise when Writers do not exactly
Distinguish their Abstracted Notions, it would not be much a miss to take
notice of the famous Controversy between the late Bp. of Worster and Mr.
Lock, which might have been prevented, had this Method of Distinguishing our
Conceptions been accurately observed. The former of these being worthily
Sollicitous, lest the Mystery of the B. Trinity (which he was then Explicating)
should receive any Prejudice, did check at Mr. Locks denying he had any Clear
Idea of Substance. Now, had Mr. Lock declared himself to take the Word [
Substance] to signify the Abstracted Notion or Conception he had of the Thing,
as it is Distinct from that of the Modes or Accidents, or declared it to
signify the Conception of a Thing as it is Capable of Existing* (which is the
First and Proper Notion of a Created* Being) he might by depuring it first of
its Imperfection, necessarily annex^ in all Creatures, have Transferred it to
GOD, and ^^ it had been not Injurious but Serviceable to the Explication of
that Mystery:) But he, having in his Eye the words of some Scholas^ic^s, who
failed of thus Distinguishing it; and, besides* did not explain it Literally,
but called it in a Metaphorical Expression, Supporter of the Accidents, had
good reason to say that such a Notion of Substance, no farther nor better
explicated, was very Obscure; especially, if they made it a kind of Entity
supporting other feebler Entities, as some of them did.

IX. Now, to supply their defect, and give the Literal Meaning of that
Metaphorical Word [ Supporting,] the only good Sense can be made of it is
clearly This. The Proper and Precise Notion of Substance as it is Distinguish
from all other Abstracted or Inadequate Notions we make of a Thing or
Individuum, is This, that it is Capable of Existing; which, as it is thus
Conceived, is its Definition: Whereas, let us Define Quantity, Quality,
Relation, etc. We find that they do not at all imply in their Notion, that is,
in the precise Signification of those Words, any Capacity of Being at all, as
did the Other most expressly; but of Modifying or Determining, after their
several Ways, the Thing which is Capable of Being; because in our Mind we must
first conceive the Thing Capable to Be, ere we can conceive it Capable to be
Modified. Since then we see Accidents are, and yet out of their own precise
Notion are not Capable to be, they must be conceived to Be, by Virtue of the
Notion of Substance, which is of its own Notion, (or as signified by that Word)
Capable of Being; whence they are said, by a Metaphorical Expression, to be
Supported in Being by Substance. Which also is the true Sense of those Sayings
[ Accidentis Essentia est Inhaerentia; Accidentis Existentia est Inexistentia]
and such like; which suits with the Natural Notions of Substance and Accidents
both, if Bad Art does not make Disagreement between them. Whence it is to be
noted, that this Supporting here explicated, must signify the Priority and
Dependence one Notion has to the other in our Minds, or, (which is the same)
which the Thing as thus Conceived, has to the same Thing as otherwise
Conceived; there being a Natural Order or Priority of one Notion to Another in
our Mind; and, consequently, a Dependence on one another* for to think there is
a Priority or Dependence on one another in re, as two Things in Nature, of
which one is Stronger, the other Feebler, (which I doubt too many, led by the
Sound of Words, imagine) is most ridiculous Nonsense. Unity, or indivision
within its self is the Property of every Ens, or Individual Thing; and
therefore it remains, as in its self, One or Undivided, till our Understanding
comes to divide it, after its Fashion, into more Formal, or (as we call them)
Metaphysical Parts, by her Abstractive Way of Conceiving it by Inadequate
Notions.

For Answer to the Third Objection, I refer my Reader to the Close of my last
Reflection in Solid Philosophy Asserted; where this Objection is Cleared even to
the Weakest Understanding.

X. Lastly, as to the pretended Uselesness of Metaphysics, I cannot but admire
at the short Speculation of those who object it. Is it of no Use to settle all
the First Principles of our Understanding, without which (as I have
Demonstrated in my Non*ultra) we could know nothing? Is it of no Use to
acquaint us with the Essences of all Beings, whence proceed all the Common
sorts of their several Operations; And to give us, amongst the rest, the
Essence of Man, and, consequently, show what Actions are becoming or
misbecoming a Being of such a Nature? Is it to no Use or Purpose to Demonstrate
the Immortality of the Soul, a Tenet upon which all Religion depends; How it
will fare with her when she is Separated from the Body; or What Dispositions in
her when the Man dies will make her Eternally Happy, or most Miserable? Is it
of no Use to Christian Life, or the Good of our Neighbor, to stand up for
God's Honor, and preserve others from the damnable Tenet of Atheism, by
Demonstrating that there is a Great GOD who governs the World; who is
All-powerful, and Infinitely Just, Good, Merciful, etc. Is it of no Use to
demonstrate the Existence, Essence and Operations of Angels; and how, by their
Means, and the Virtue of other Second Causes, GOD's Wisdom administers the
World in the Best and most Providential manner; and that, therefore Things are
not Governed by Chance, nor by the Stoical Fatality? Lastly, is it of no Use to
explicate the Mystery of the most B. Trinity (and other Articles of Christian
Faith,) so clearly, as to show they are perfectly Agreeable to our Natural
Notions, and to all the Maxims of True Reason; which wipes off the Scandal with
which Atheists, Deists, and Anti-trinitatians bespatter them, as Perfect
Contradictions, and mere Nonsense; on the Verity of which Tenets (as will be
shown) depend all the most Effectual motives to Raise Mankind to Heaven, and
dispose them for Eternal Happiness; in Explicating and Defending which
Fundamental Articles of Christian Faith Metaphysics has the Chief Hand?
Certainly, if these things be of no Use, it may certainly be concluded, that no
part of Knowledge ( Theology excepted, which also depends, in great part, on
Metaphysics) is Useful. But, these Objectors discourse as if there were no Use
at all to be made of any Science or Art whatever, but of Handicrafts,
Agriculture, and such like: As if they had forgot there was any such Thing as
Virtue, Truth, Religion, Faith, Soul, Salvation, or even GOD Himself, that
deserves to be heeded or regarded. To obviate this Calumny, I have added
Meditations at the End of each Chapter; to show (as the Matter would bear) how
Applicable and Useful the foregoing Speculations* are to the Improvement of our
Mind in Virtue. And I hope, I may, without Immodesty, say thus much for my
Metaphysics, that there never was yet any Speculative Piece written, that
makes Reason more Subservient to Faith, nor Philosophy more serviceable to True
Divinity than it does. I wish the Example may propogate to others.

XI. But, let us suppose that all this which is plainly shown to the Reader's
Eye, were False; and that there were no other Good in the Study of M^ physics,
but the Enriching our Minds with Multitudes of High and Solid Truths; would not
this Alone be sufficient to make every Considerate Man apply his Thoughts to
that Noblest Science, even though it had no farther Effects, nor any Exterior
Use to be made of it? What is there of more Use than the Mathematics? And yet
Plutarch tells us in the Life of Marcellus, that Plato was offended with those
who did corrupt and disgrace (as he judged) the Noble and Excellent Science of
Geometry, by making it descend to the contriving Engines, in which the Base and
Vile Handiwork of Man was to be Employed: And that Archimedes himself esteemed
all his Inventions of Engines but Vile, Beggarly and Dross, in comparison of
the Speculative Productions and Demonstrations in that Science. So much were
those Great Souls, though Heathens, enamored with the naked Beauty of TRUTH, for
it is own Sake: So much did they value the Interior Natural Perfection of their
Mind, above the Prospect or Intuitus of any External Use of it, or Profit
accruing by it; which yet is so Unpalatable to our Skeptical Age, I could wish
those Noble and Learned Gentlemen, our Modern Virtuoso's, would seriously
consider this Temper of those Heroes of Learning in the former World, and think
it worthy their Imitation. What excellent Speculative Productions, to the vast
Advancement and Progress of True Science, would so many Great wits make in a
short time, did they please to think fit to emply their Thoughts in following
and carrying on the way of Demonstration. To do which, nothing can more
powerfully invite them than to reflect that in so many Years Applying
themselves to the way of Induction, they have not been able to establish so
much as One Universal Principle in Natural Philosophy, or to gain the Knowledge
of any one Scientifical Conclusion: The Impossibility of which by the way of
Experiments has been shown more at large toward the End of the Preface to my
Method to Science.

XII. Having thus Defended Metaphysics against the Calumnies thrown upon her,
it remains to inform my Reader of my Conduct hitherto in pursuing the
Advancement of TRUTH, the only End I aimed at. After I had published my METHOD
to Science, I discovered that the Chief Remora which had kept back Learned Men
in our last Century, from attaining True Science, was the Doctrine or Way of
Ideas; which some very Ingenious Men had taken great pains to set up and
improve. I observed that, That Way had two Especial Patrons; Cartesius in
France, and Mr. John Lock here in England: Both of them were Men of Excellent
Parts; so that it seemd hard to determine which of them had the Advantage in
Wit. But, as for their Productions in Philosophy, if I may be allowed to judge
between them, Mr. Lock did in very many particulars, make far greater
Advancements toward Science, and in many things arrived at it. Whereas the
whole Fabric of the Cartesian Hypothesis is Aerie and Fantastic; yet so
dexterously Proposed, and so prettily Compacted within it self (for I cannot at
all Commend it for having any Connection with Principles) that it decoyes his
Readers, who do not reflect that nothing is to be held True which Evident
Principles do not warrant, into a kind of Complaisant Assent to his Doctrine:
Much after the same manner as our Judgment is lulled, and our Passions are
carried along, with Reading a Romance; so that we become at unawares highly
Concerned; 'till, our Reason Awaking out of that Pleasing Dream of our Fancy,
our Deliberate Judgment recovers it self; and we come to reflect, that it is
not a True History, but a mere Fiction contrived to amuze our Imagination.

XIII. These two Ingenious Gentlemen did, in proposing to us their Ideas, take
several ways in giving us Account of them. That of Mr. Lock is the more
Candid, while he calls them Pictures, Similitudes, Pourtraitures, and such
like; which plainly acknowledges, they are not the Things themselves. Whereas,
the Followers of Car^sius (who, should best know his Mind) shuffle ^etween the
two sides of the Contradiction, and ^eem resolved not to be understood. For,
sometimes they directly avow they are the very Things themselves Conceived by
us, or exsting in our Understanding after a Spiritual Manner; and, sometimes
again, they banter and ridicule what Themselves had Granted. ^f which more
hereafter.

XIV. Wherefore I saw that my very Design did ^navoidably oblige me to offer my
Reasons against both those Authors; as Persons who ^id not only oppose many
Particular Truths, ^ut even obstructed and damm'd up the Way ^o arrive at any
Truth at all, while they set ^p and introduced this New Way of Ideas, ^s the
Only Method by which any Truth in Philo^^hy could be attained. This I had done
former^^, (in part, and briefly,) by laying Grounds to ^^nfute them in my
METHOD, where I ^rofessedly declare against the Way of Spiri^ual Ideas in our
Mind; for, as for Corpo^eal Ideas in our Fancy, which we call Phan^^sms, none
ever denied there were such; nor ^^n, without calling in Question our Constant
^xperience. Mr. Lock was pleased to object to ^e, occasionally, my own Thesis
or Conclusi^n; viz. that I put the Things themselves to ^e in our
Understanding; as if it were so self-evidently Absurd that merely to name it
were enough to confute it. I request I may be represented as not having barely
said so, but that I attempted to prove it by many pretended Demonstrations,
none of which have yet been Answered; this being the true Case. I beg also that
my Tenet may be exhibited not rawly, or to the half part, but fully; viz. That
I hold that the Things are in our Mind Spiritually, or after the manner of her
Objects. In which Sense I believe Mr. Locke's Discerning Judgment would agree
with me; if he would please to wean it a while from his Customary Addiction to
his own Way, and bring it to an Indifferency. For I cannot depart from
thinking, that the plainest Signification of Words gives it, that, if no Thing
be any way in our Knowledge, (that is, if it be not at all there) it is
self-evident that We know Nothing. Besides, I think, under favor, that, if his
Leisure, Health, and other more pressing Occasions had permitted, some Answer
should have been given to my many Arguments produced there in my second
Preliminary; which I have enforced here in the 6th Chapter of my Metaphysics;
and, moreover, shown the Reason of that Position, B. 2. Chapter 2. Sect. 7, 8, 9.
And, indeed, without farther Examination of the Validity of those Arguments, it
will, at first Sight, seem Prodigious, that so many Pretended Demonstrations
(for they are near Twenty in number) should be offered for any Point that is
False; and that, though my whole Discourse, nay all my Philosophical Works, are
professedly built on that Thesis, yet not one of them (had it been so Absurd
and False) should have received an Answer from such Acute Adversaries.

XV. Wherefore, setting aside the Silence of my Opposers, which diverse
Circumstances might possibly have occasioned, I still insist upon it, and do
farther allege, that it is Absolutely Impossible so many Demonstrations for a
Falsehood should be Pretended, and yet the Confident Asserter of them should not
be Exposed to Open Shame. Did the Producer of them cloak his Rambling
Discourses in Rhetorical Language, Plausible Expressions, or Tricks of Wit;
perhaps he might, in such a Case, ^ave escaped for some time, from being utterly
Confuted; but, when he solely relies on Rigid and Blunt Reason, or on the Close
Connection of Terms, nothing can be Easier, or which more Provokes others to
overthrow him. There needs no more but to show, that the Connection he pretends
to lies Open, or is In^oherent: For, this done, the Sinows of his ^iscourse are
Slackened and Enfeebl'd, and ^he Arguments he so much presumed on, lose ^ll
their Credit. Truths are so compacted and cimented with one another, that it
would be impossible his Reasons should keep up their Repute, when the most
Authentic Testimonies of so many Opposite Truths conspire to show their
Senseless Vanity. Especially, when those Arguments are pretended to be drawn
from the Nature of the several Subjects or Things, there mentioned; v. g. from
the Nature of a Spirit, of the Soul, of her Operation of Knowing, of the Object
of Knowledge, of Similitudes, of the Nature of Relation, of our Notions, and of
Words which are to signifi^ them; of Predication or the Verification o^
Propositions, etc. For, in such a Case, each of these Natures having their
peculiar Maxims or Principles belonging to them, all which give Light, and are
Consonant to one another, all the Art of Mankind could not possibly hinder such
a Position from being seen plainly* and held, to be Pure Nonsense. On the other
side nothing that I can see has been Objecte^ against this Position, but that
their Fancy, t^ which it is very Unsuitable, is out of Humou^ at it. Whereas
that Faculty (it being perfectly Material, and Common to Us, and Brute^ has
nothing at all to do with Spiritual Natures or their Operations; in regard they
never entered into our Senses, nor, consequently could we have any Phantasms of
them; a^ yet these Gentlemen seem to make their Fanc^ the Sole Judge in such
Matters, of which she is no more able to have any Light, than a Blind man is to
see Colors.

XVI. The Cartesian Ideists did, indeed, oppose that Thesis which a Jest or
too; but (I thank them) never Answered so much as one of my Arguments; as if
they held that the Nature of Man did not consist in Rationality, but merely in
Risibility. The rest of their Performances was Railing, Forging and Ridiculous
Libelling. What Success they had, may be seen in my several Replies, viz. in my
Ideae Cartesianae Expensae, my NONULTRA, or RULE of TRUTH, and my Raillery
Defeated by Calm Reason. In which their Philosophy (as they called it) was
shown to be quite destitute of any Principles; their Fundamental Positions were
confuted by Plainest Demonstrations; nay, their very RULE of Knowing any thing,
was manifestly and Unanswerably Proved to be most Ridiculous Nonsense. But,
that which put them to Silence and Shame was the Fair Offer or Civil Challenge
I sent them ( Rule of Truth, p. 119. 120, 121.) to bring so much as One
Argument which they would vouch to be Conclusive, for any One Point of the
Cartesian Doctrine, and it should Conclude the whole Cause: Or, if that were
too Troublesome; that they would barely Name any Principle of theirs which they
conceived to be the Strongest or most Evident of any they had, and which they
judged was Influential upon the Cartesian Doctrine; and I would undertake to
Demonstrate that either it was, no Principle; or else that it had no force to
prove any one Point of their Doctrine True, nor had any Influence upon it. This
was so Direct and Honest a Procedure on my part, and so Easy to be complied
with, on theirs, in case they had, indeed, any one such Principle; and yet (as
appeared of their Non-acceptance of it) so impossible to be done, or complied
with, that every Intelligent Man could not but see that Cartesius did only talk
Wittily in the Air, but had not so much as one Inch of Firm Ground on which he
could build the least piece of his Doctrine.

XVII. Hence, the more I considered these Unaccountable things called Ideas,
the more I became Dissatisfied with them. For, first, I could not get any Light
from the Users of them to guess at, much less know what they are. ^ saw the
Ideists totally build upon them, and divide them into many several sorts; yet
none of them were so kind as to acquaint us what Kind or Sort of Things the
Ideas themselves were, or what was their Generical Notion; without knowing
which all those Particular Sorts of them, and, consequently, their whole Book^
were utterly Unintelligible. The Cartesian^ made them several, and Inconsistent
things; that is, perfectly and in many Regards, Chimerical. Now they tell us
they are the very Things themselves, as conceived by us. Presently after, their
Fancy recoiling, they tell us that Vicem gerunt rei, that is, that they stand
instead of the Things; which signifies they are not the Things. Can the Thing,
stand for, or supply the place of it self? Or can there need any Proxy for what
is, it self, Present to the Mind? What can any Man living make of that which
neither is the Thing, nor is not the Thing; or rather which at once, both is
the Thing, and is not the Thing? Shortly after, as if they meant to split an
Indivisible, or to nick the Middle between two Contradictions, they explicate
their Ideas to be [ quasi res] as if it were the Thing; whereas one should
rather think that, if they be not the Thing, they are as if it were Nothing.
Afterward they assure us they are Ipsissima Mentis Operatio, the very
Operation or Action of the Mind. Now, this is neither the Thing, which is the
Object of our Understanding, (if it knows any Thing) as they sometimes grant;
nor what stands for the Object, nor so much as if it were the Object; but is
relatively Contradistinct or Opposite to the Object; for the [ Operation] and [
that on which it Operates] are most clearly such. Again, they tell us it is a
Representation of the Thing, but not a mere Similitude of it. The latter Words
tell us what it is not; and, lest we might hapto understand the former which
should tell us distinctly what it is, they quibble in it, and make it
ambiguous. The Obvious sense of Representare is to Resemble; but they have
found out an odd Sense it may (as a Term of Art) have in some Occasions, and to
amuze us, they pretend it must have it here; which is, presentem sistere; that
is, to put or set the Thing Present to the Mind. Well then; if it puts or makes
the Thing Present to the Mind, Common Sense tells us the Thing it self is in
the Mind when it is made Present to it, or put there: And if the Thing it self
be there, why is it said that only Vicarium Rei, or quasi-Res is there? What
Stuff is this! See each of those particulars at large shown from their own
express Words, Ideae Cartesianae Indicatio 3, from p. 116. to p. 124.

XVIII. Mr. Locke's Candor and Iudiciounes set him above this Shuffling Folly.
He could not but see it would be expected from him, and was Necessary, to give
us some Definition of an Idea, since his whole Essay proceeds upon Ideas; yet
his Acute Foresight made him Wary to Venture upon such an Impossible Task*
Wherefore he thought it best to hover aloo^, without giving us any Particular
or Distinct Character of it. Accordingly he tells us* B. 1. Chapter 1. Sect. 8.
that He used the Word [Idea] to express whatever is meant by Phantasm, Notion,
Species, or what ever it is which the Mind can be employed about in Thinking.
This, I must confess, is very Genteelly and Civilly done, to leave it to the
Reader's Choice to let that Word signify as he pleased, or to make what he
could of it; but it had been a greater Kindness to let him know Distinctly in
what Sense Himself took it; without which it was impossible for any Man to
understand his following Book; no not so much as the Titles of his Chapters.
Indeed, had the Sense of those Words he mentions, been the self - same, and the
Word it self Univocal, it had been Indifferent which Word he had pitched upon,
since they had the same Signification: But when the Meanings of some of them is
as vastly and widely Different as the two first Species of Ens, [ Body and
Spirit,] are; in that case to declare his own Indifferency which Word we would
use, and leave it to our Choice in which of those Senses we would understand
him; does leave the Readers in perplexity, and utterly in the Dark, what an
Idea is; and, besides, exposes him to a possible Mistake of his Mind every step
he takes while he peruses his Book. For a Phantasm, which is the Proper Object
of the Fancy, is merely Material, Corporeal, and Common to Brutes as well asto
Mankind: And Notions which are the Elements of Cognition, must he above Matter,
and of an Intellectual or Spiritual Nature. Wherefore the Confounding thus the
Sense of those two Words, hazards to lead the Author and his Readers to
confound Corporeal and Spiritual Natures: Which diverse complain of in this
Gentleman; and my self, though I much honor his Person, and highly esteem his
Excellent Parts, cannot but think this is one of the Greatest Desiderata in his
Ingenious Book. Besides, a [ Phantasm] is not that about which the Mind is
employed, (as Notions are;) it being the Proper Object of that Faculty called
the Fancy or Imagination. And this is that I fear which occasions much
Unevenness in his Discourses. Sometimes he builds on Notions or Spiritual
Conceptions, taken from Natural Objects, as others do; and then his Productions
are very Solid and Judicious; sometimes again, he grounds his Discourses on
Roving Conceits suggested by Witty Fancy; and then they are Aerie and
Superficial, and impossible to be Reduced to any Solid Principle. When he does
the one, when the other, is noted in my Reflections on the several parts of his
Essay. To show this by an Instance; it has been remark't by my self, as it has
been also by others, that, in His Excellent Demonstration of a First Being, no
Man can discourse more Clearly or more Solidly: But then, withal, it is
observable that while he does this, he lays aside his Way of Ideas, and argues
in the same manner as one would do who had never heard of them; or as those
would go to work who oppose them.

XIX. Not being able to gain any kind of Light from the Ideists themselves,
what their so much magnified Ideas should mean, or what to make of them; I set
my own Thoughts to work, to find out (if I could) what kind of things they
might be. Others may be as acutely Ingenious as they please: I, for my part,
have but One plain Dunstable way to satisfy my self and others in such a case;
which is, to consider to which of those Ten Heads of our Natural Notions
(called the Ten Predicaments) they might belong. Resting assured that (till
that Division of all our Notions be Confuted) whatever belongs to none of them,
or confounds the Distinction of them, is not any Natural Notion a^ all, only
which are the Solid Elements of True Knowledge; and, consequently, that it is
no more but a Fancy. At first sight, I discerned they must be of a Spiritual
Nature, because they are put to be in the Soul. Next, that they must have a
peculiar Entity of their own, distinct from the Soul; because they make them to
be her Informers or Intelligencers, which sufficiently tells us they are
distinct Things from the Soul which they inform. I proceeded therefore, to find
out the Essence of this New Entity, and what it consisted in. In this Quest the
Cartesians gave me no Light at all, as has been shown; but Mr. Lock lent me
some Assistance, while he constantly characters them to be Similitudes. Now a
Thing whose Essence it is to be a Similitude is a Monstrous Chimera. For the
Notion of Thing or Entity belongs formally to Substance, and has a Positive or
Absolute Sense; and Similitude or Likeness belongs to Relation; which makes the
Heads, or Notions of Substance and Relation to be Essentially and Formally the
self* same. A Thing may indeed be Related to Another, or like it; but then the
Thing to which the Mode of Relation supervenes, must be of its own Nature
Positive, for the Relation cannot be with any Sense conceived to be what is
Related. So that this Notion of an Idea seemed to me to be a mere Hirco-Ceruus,
a Positive (or Unrelative) Relative: A Substance which is a Relation, and a
Relation which is a Substance; or at once, That which is Related, and That by
which it is Related. Which makes a Babel of our Inward Speech by our
Conceptions, and is purely Chimerical.

XX. I was as much at a loss, to know what these Ideas which they put to be
Similitudes, were good for, or to what Use they served. When we have once the
Materials of Knowledge into our Mind, our Soul, by her Reflection, can work upon
them and order them well enough. Wherefore, all the Kindness they can do us, is
to give us the First Notices of the Thing: But this they cannot do; because the
Thing it self must be in our Mind, or else we cannot know that they are even
Similitudes; since we cannot see they are Like a Thing, till we know what the
Thing it self is, to which they are Like. Otherwise we shall fall into that
precious Nonsense of Bays, the Conceited Poetaster, in the Rehearsal. [I Gad,
says he, I have an Excellent Similitude, if I knew but what to apply it to.]
Nor can there be worse Sense, than to say, [ It Is Like, indeed, but I know not
to what it is like.] Whence is concluded, that we must have the Thing it self in
our Knowledge, before we can know what is either Like it, or Unlike it. And if
the Thing it self, (as being the Original) be in our Knowledge First, what need
we any Ideas to make us know it, since to be in a Knowing Power is to be Known.

XXI. I am sure Similitudes are of no use in Metaphysics, though they serve to
good purpose in Mathematics; for when we come to Universal Notions, such as
are Act, Power, Essence, Existence and such like, those Proper and Express
Similitudes disappear; and the Ideists must either bid farewell to their Ideas
or Resemblances, (which will be very Uncomfortable to them;) or they will find
themselves at a great loss. For example; I would ask them what kind of Thing is
this Pourtraiture or Idea of Existence? Has it Being, or has it none: If none,
it is Nothing: If it be such a Thing as has Being in it, it cannot be known
without Another Idea; nor That, without Another Idea, and so Endlesly. If it be
such a Thing as can be in the Mind, and known there without any Idea of it; why
may not Other Things be there too, and known by themselves, or without any Idea
as well as it? What even Answer is given, I am confident it will be precarious
and alleged gratis. Again, is the Essence or Nature of this Idea of Existence
such that it is Essentially Existent, or not? If the Former, it is a GOD; whose
sole Perogative it is to be Essential Existence: If the Later, then 'its Nature
is only Potential to Existence, and not Actual Existence; and then how should
that which is only Potential to Existence, or only a Power to Be, be a
Resemblance or Similitude of Existence it self, that is, of Actual Being? Many
such Exceptions might be brought against such Ideas which are only Similitudes
of Things in our Minds, and not the Things themselves. Now in our way, how
impossible is it to oppose any such Difficulties? We conceive the Thing
Inadequately, and make many Abstracted Notions of it; and amongst the rest,
since the Thing does Exist, we abstract or cut off This from other Notions of
it, by considering it precisely according to This Respect; and thence we come
to have in our Mind the true Notion or Nature of Existence.

XXII. And, hence it comes that, since amongst our Natural Abstracted Notions
which we have from Bodies (with which only we converse) either by Direct
Impressions or Obvious Reflection, there are some that are very Imperfect,
Potential, and clogged with Matter; and Others that are more Universal, and
Defaecated from Matter, such as are Act, Ens, Essence, Existent, Subsistent,
Person, etc. Those who proceed upon the way of Abstracted Notions of the Thing,
can, by discoursing upon those Notions of the Later sort, not only demonstrate
those Beings which are of a Superior Nature, to which such Notions, stripped of
their Imperfections, do agree; as we have done in our Metaphysics: but,
moreover, they become hence enabled to explicate the Mysteries of Christian
Faith, and show their Conformity to our Natural Notions, as we have shown, in
our Appendix, that Highest Mystery of the B. Trinity is; which makes the
Principles of Nature (and Art too) bear a kind of Secondary Testimony to their
Truth. Now, I would gladly know what Assistance the Way of Ideas can afford us
in such a case; Similitudes of Angels, and of GOD, and generally of all
Spiritual Natures, would be strange Language, and the applying them to such
Subjects would look very Extravagant. It Is this Way then, I much fear, which
has given occasion to many, either to deny Spiritual Natures, as do the
Atheists; or else to apply the worst of Corporeal Attributes to them. Rather,
indeed, I may complain, that a right Understanding of Spiritual Nature is so
stifled and depraved; that, if care be not taken, it will quickly be lost to
Mankind: It Is a strange step to it, or rather the utmost Attempt of quite
destroying and Effacing it out of Men's Minds, when we see it openly maintained
that GOD himself is Spatium reale, which is the Notion of Quantity. For which
reason I have exerted my self in my Metaphysics to demonstrate and explicate
the Nature of a Spirit, and even to force the right Conception of it, in
despite of the Reluctance of Fancy.

XXIII. In a word, since Ideas are both Unintelligible, and altogether Useless,
and (I fear) ill Use is made of them, contrary to the Intention of their
Authors; it seems but fitting that the Way of Ideas should be laid aside; nay,
that the very Word [Idea] which has got such a Vogue, should be no longer heard
of; unless a good reason may be given why we should use such Words as no Man
understands.

Your Faithful Servant, I. S.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I. Of the ESSENCES of Compound Entities. CHAP. I. Of POWER and ACT.
. 1. POWER and ACT are Natural or Common Notions. 2. There are Three Sorts of
each. 3. The First Sort of Power belongs to all Things, but the First Being. 4.
And is Essential to them. 5. Hence the Definition of Created Ens, is, [That
which is Capable of Being*] 6. This Power consists in it is Possibility, or
Non-Repugnance to Be. 7. What Metaphysical UNITY is. 8. The Essences of
Things, Antecedently to their Existence, are only in the Divine Intellect. 9.
How the Cartesian Doctrine leaves no Ens in the World. 10. How the Essences of
Things are in the Divine Understanding. 11. And how they are said to be
Eternal. 13. In what consists Metaphysical VERITY. 14. Hence the First Formal
Truths are Identical Propositions. 15. Of which there are only Two Sorts. 16.
Why some Propositions are said to be Aeternae Veritatis. 17. The Second sort of
Power respects not the Notion of Existence, but the Notion of THING. 18. In
what Sense Bodies are said to be Compounded of This Power and Act. 19. This
Second Power, [MATTER] is the Sole Ground of all Mutability. 20. Hence Pure
Acts are Immutable. 21. The Third sort of Power respects Modes or Accidental
Acts. 22. Which, though not Properly Things, have yet Analogical Essences. 23.
What Metaphysical Divisibility and Composition are; which give the Ground to
all Logic. 24. Hence there is not the least Show of Contradiction in the
Doctrine of the TRINITY. 25. Nor in that of the INCARNATION, or other Mysteries
of Revealed Religion. 26. The Difference between Logical and Metaphysical
ABSTRACTION. 27. That Excellent and most Useful Maxim, That [There are no
Actual Parts in any Compound whatever], Demonstrated and Explicated. 28. The
Ground and Reason of that Solid Maxim, [Actiones and Passiones sunt
Suppositorum.] 29. Hence the Cartesians destroy the Notions of Unum and Ens.
39. The Proper Metaphysical Parts of BODY, are the Second sort of Power and
Act; called, in Physics, MATTER and FORM. 31. The Possibility or Essence of a
BODY consists in the Agreeableness of it is Matter and Form. 32. That there is
no Real or Actual Distinction in any Ens whatever. 33. How many Sorts, or
Common Kinds, of Entities are Possible to be Created. 34. [Existence] is the
Ultimate Act of Ens. 35. Wherefore it ought rather to be called Actuality, than
an Act. 36. Hence is Demonstrated, that [ There is a GOD.] Advertisement. In
what Sense we take all the words we use throughout our whole Philosophy.
MEDITATION. The Method how GOD's Providence gave us our Elements of Knowledge;
and ripened our Knowledge afterward; What great Encouragement our Present
Acquests have given us; and what Assured Hopes of Success in our Quest of
Science; so we ground our Discourses on the Natures of the Things, made and
established by GOD's Creative Wisdom.
CHAP. II. Of the ESSENCES of Bodies in in Common; and of the First, or Simple,
Bodies in particular.
. 1. ALl Concrete Notions do include some Form, which constitutes them such. 2.
The Form of [Ens,] is [Essence.] 5. The Essences of Pure Acts consists in
Actual Knowledge. 4. Yet they are Potential to the Act of [Existence.] 5. The
Essence of Body is chiefly taken from it is Form. 6, Yet, not only, but from the
Matter also. 7. Quantitative and not Quantitative are not the Proper
Differences that constitute Body and Spirit. 8. The Essence of the FIRST MATTER
of the Cartesians cannot consist in only Extension. 9. Nor (as Mr. Lock
speculates) in Extension and Impenetrability together. 10. Every Body is
essentially a Distinct Part of Nature. 11. Wherefore it is essentially ordained
for some Proper and Primary Operation in Nature. 12. Wherefore what sits it for
this Primary Operation, does Constitute it. 13. In this Fitness to perform this
Primary Operation, consists it is Metaphysical Bonity or GOODNESS. 14. Every
Body, is, also, Essentially an Instrument. 15. The Essential Difference of Body
is chiefly taken from it is Action. 16. The Modes or Accidents which make Bodies
thus Fit, are their ESSENTIAL or SUBSTANTIAL FORM. 17. But the Thing must
retain that Complexion of Accidents for some time. 18. Divisibility in common,
cannot constitute any Body. 19. More and Less of Divisibility, may. 20. One or
Two different Accidents may constitute the Simplest Bodies. 21. Wherefore the
Elements may be constituted by Rarity or Density. 22. That is, they were thus
Constituted at first; though, perhaps, there are not any such now. 23. Hence the
Cartesian First Matter, which they put neither to be Rare nor Dense, is a
Chimera. MEDITATION. What we have gained by our Speculation hitherto. What Dull
Unactive Instruments Bodies are: Yet none of them is Useless, but in it is
Degree Good. The Reason why we discourse of such Abstract Notions; and of the
many Vast Advantages that Way yields.
CHAP. III. Of the Essences of Mixed, Vegetable, and Animal Bodies.
. 1. It Is scarce conceiveable there should be, now, any Pure Elements. 2. How
First-Mixt Bodies may be conceived to have been made. 3. The Essential Form of
First-Mixt Bodies. 4. And their Essence, or Total Form. 5. The Second Sort of
Mixed Bodies. 6. The Third Sort of Mixts. 7. The Fourth Sort. 8. What other
Accidents are added, to make Variety of Mixts and Demixts. 9. Yet Rarity and
Density are the Principal, and most Intrinsecal. 10. Hence, the Corpuscularians
can give no account of the Intrinsecal Constitution of any Natural Body. 11. Of
the several Sorts of Demixts. 12. The Ground of Sensible Qualities. 13. Of
Imperfect Mixts. 14 Of Living Bodies. 15. Of Vegetables. 16, The Primary
Operation of Vegetables. 17. The Form of Vegetables. 18. The Essence of
Animals. 19. The Primary Operation of Animals. 20. What Animal is most Perfect
in it is Kind. 21. In what Sense we speak here of the Primary Operation of mere
Animals. MEDITATION. What has been proved here, Recapitulated. The Excellency
of Metaphysics; and the Sublime Way of Discoursing, peculiar to that Science.
What slight ways of Discoursing are affected by some Great Pretenders to
Science. Of our Duty, as we are Rational Creatures.
CHAP. IV. Of the Essence of MAN.
. 1. MAN is One Thing, made up of Soul and Body. 2. Therefore the Soul and
Body, are, here, only Potential Parts of Man. 3. Therefore, neither Part can
Operate Alone. 4. According to that Excellent Maxim, [Actiones and Passiones
sunt Suppositorum.] 5. Hence, the Christian Tenet of the Incarnation is
Agreeable to Right Reason. 6. Of the Act or Form of Man, as he is MAN. 7. That
Both Parts concur to every Operation of Man, as he is Man. 8. Hence every
Notion has a Phantasm accompanying it. 9. Of the Total Form of Man. 10. What,
chiefly, in both those Parts, distinguishes Man from all Other Things. 11.
Hence, all pretense of GOD's Voluntary Annexing one thing to another, is
Groundless and Unphilosophical. 12. Hence the Men's is not the Man, as Cartesius
fancied. 13. The Soul's Manner of Existing and Operating, here, is, in part,
Corporeal. 14. The Primary Operation of Man, is Reasoning. 15. The Attainment
of Truth, is the Perfection of Man's Understanding. 16. The Knowledge of Truth,
which thus perfects Man, must be Evident. 17. Hence, Probability perfects no
Man. 18. Nor the Improvements of Memory, or Fancy. 19. Hence, the Promoting
Evident Truth is the Noblest Action of Man, as he is Intellectual. 20. Hence,
ERROR is the Greatest Depravation of Man's Nature, as he is Cognoscitive. 21.
The Essence of Man is RATIONALITY. 22. And Distinguishes him from Angels and
Brutes. 23. Hence [Animal Rationale] is his True Definition. 24. In Rationality
are included the Powers of Apprehending and Judging; as also of Receiving
Impressions from the Senses. 25. The Power of Reflecting, is also an Essential
Property of Man. 26. The Soul acquires Knowledge by Impressions, from Outward
Objects, on the Senses. 27. First Proof. 28. Second Proof. 29. Third Proof. 30.
Fourth Proof. 31. Fifth Proof. 32. Sixth Proof. 33 Seventh Proof. 34. Eighth
Proof. 35. That the Soul cannot Elicit Ideas out of her self, Proved from many
heads. 36. That the Position which makes the Soul and Body Two Things, hinders
the Right Explication of Christian Faith. 37. And, moreover, makes every Man to
be a Monstrous Chimera. 38. That the Pre* existence of Souls is a Senseless
Conceit, and Impossible. 39. So is the Pythagorean Transmigration. 40. That
it is a Folly to ask how the Soul and Body (which they fancy Two Things) come to
be United. MEDITATION. What Immediate Steps we have taken in our Rational
Progress hitherto. Why it was Fitting such a Creature as Man should be made. By
what Connatural Means GOD's Infinite Wisdom contrived that Soul and Body should
make up One Thing. The Condition of our Soul, here, laid open. What Incredible
Inconveniences and Absurdities arise from putting the Soul and Body to be Two
Things.
CHAP. V. Of the Constitution and Dissolution of Individual Bodies.
. 1. THat only Individuals are properly THINGS. 2. And therefore only
Individual Essences are properly ESSENCES. 3. Yet, we can discourse more
clearly of the Common Essences, than we can of the Individual ones. 4. There go
more Accidents to constitute the Individuum, than there go to constitute the
Common Essences. 5. The Individual Complexion of Accidents is the most Perfect
Act next to that of Existence. 6. Hence it is Demonstrated that to give
Existence is above the Power of Natural Causes, and only Peculiar to GOD. 7.
There must be some Instant in which the Individual Thing first begins to Be.
8. This Complexion of Accidents is Essential to the new-made Individuum. 9.
Therefore it is the Essential or Substantial FORM of the Individual Compound.
10. Those Accidents that accrue afterward are Accidental. 11. To be an
Individuum, some degree of Constancy, Permanency, or Stability, is required.
12. Which Existence, supervening, does establish 13. The Twisting the Results
of so many Causes into one Individuum, argues the Design of an
All-comprehending Providence. 14. This Complexion of Accidents can never be
eradicated while the Individuum continues. 15. And gives the Compound a
Different Genius, and Natural Propension. 16. Existence can with no show of
Reason be pretended to be the Principle of Individuation. 17. The Distinction
between the Notion of a Subsistent Thing or a Suppositum; and the Notion of an
Individual Ens, clearly manifested. 18. How, and When the Individuality is
lost. 19. The First Rule how to know this. 20. The Second Rule. 22. The Third
Rule. 22. Hence Simple Division of the Matter, or Quantity, in Living Bodies,
does not change the Individuum. 23. Much less in Man. 24. When it is Changed in
Simple Bodies. 25. When in First-Mixt Bodies. 26. When in Demixts. 27. When in
Homogeneous Mixts. 28. When in very Heterogeneous, or Organical Bodies. 29. Two
Contradistinct Natures may compound One Thing. 30. The Divine and Humane
Natures may si^^sist in the same Suppositum. 31. Notwithstanding, those Natures
and their Properties must remain Unmingled; and not Confounded, as some
Eutvchians imagined. 32. Yet, all the Actions and Padions must be attributed to
the Suppositum; though according to such a Nature; contrary to what Nestorius
fancied. 33. Hence, Lastly, There is no show of Contradiction that GOD should
be Three according to the Respect of Person; and yet not-Three, but One,
according to the Respect of Nature or Essence. 34. A large Explication of some
Grounds, very Useful to take off all Shadow of Contradiction from diverse Chief
Mysteries of Christian Faith; and to show how Consonant they are to the most
Exact Rules of Right Reason. MEDITATION. How impossible it is for us to know
perfectly all that belongs to our own Individuum. By what Wonderful and
Untraceable ways GOD's Providence has brought about our Individuation; and
gives us all our Knowledge, and other Endowments. How little our Best
Performances contributed to the Acquisition of them; and, how little reason the
most Knowing and most Virtuous Man living has to be Proud of the most Laudable
Actions GOD has done by him. That we ought to comply with the Designs of our
Creator by pursuing the End of our Nature; and by what Means this may be best
accomplished.
CHAP. VI. Some Preliminaries fore-lay'd, in order to Demonstrate the
Immortality of the Soul.
. 1. WE cannot but have Different Conceptions of the Essence of MAN. 2. And,
consequently, of every Operation of his, a^ he is Man. 3. We are, therefore, to
examine whether there be any thing in Man according to his Soul, which is above
Quantity or Matter. 4. There are Three Distinct Operations of Man, as he is
Intellective. 5. The Notion of [Ens] or [Thing] is Indifferent to Actual Being
and not-being: 6. Every Form must denominate the Subject, in which it is, such
as the Form it self is. 7. A Notion may either be considered [Subjectively] or
[Objectively.] 8. Every Object of our Knowledge must either be the Thing it
self in, the Mind, or something that is Like it. 9. NOTIONS, (understood
objectively,) are the Things themselves, as they are in the Mind; and not mere
Similitudes of them; Proved unanswerably. 10. Proved no less unaswerably, by
the Concession of the Ideists themselves, that the Thing it self must thus be
in the Mind. 11. In what Sense that saying, [Every Like is not the Same] is
verified. 12. Every Inadequate Notion, we have of the Thing, is of the Whole
Thing Confusedly and Materially; though it be only of one Metaphysical Part, or
Considerability of it, Distinctly and Formally. 13. A Third Unanswerable Proof,
that the Thing must be in the Mind when we know it. 14. The Author's Reason why
he builds on this Thesis. The Reasons why some others are backwards in
Assenting to it. 15. Notwithstanding, the Immortality of the Soul may be
demonstrated, though this Thesis were waved.
CHAP. VII. Of the Immateriality, and, consequently, the Immortality of Man's
SOUL.
. 1. FIrst Leading Demonstration. Because her Operations, and Objects are
received in her after an Indivisible Manner. 2. Them. II. Because her Capacity
is Infinite. 3. Them. III. Because she has Other Natures in her without Altering
her own. 4. Them. IV. Because they are in her, not as Intrinfecal Modes
affecting Her; but as Distinct from her: Contrary to the Nature of Material
Subjects. 5. Them. V. Because the Contrary Thesis is Opposite to the Natural
Notions of all Mankind. 6. [Existence] is the only Absolute Notion we have, and
all the rest are Respective. 7. Them. VI. Because she has in her the Notion of
[Existence] which is every way Indivisible. 8. Them. VII. Because she has Actual
Respects in her. 9. This Demonstration enforced. 10. Them. VIII. Because she has
in her the Notions or Natures of Vast Quantities; which are impossible to be
there Themselves as they are in Matter; n^^ yet any Material Similitudes of
them. 11. Them. IX. Because the Parts of Motion are perfectly Distinct and
Determinate in the Soul; which are utterly Undistinguisht and Indeterminate as
they are in Material Subjects. 12. Them. 10. Because the Soul has Past and
Future Parts of Time Present in her at once. 13. Them. XI. Because the Soul can
tie together as many Singulars as she pleases, in the Notion of One Number; of
which (generally) the Fancy can have no Material Resemblance. 14. Them. XII.
Because Sensible Qualities, though Innumerable, and Contrary to one another, are
in the Soul, without Disordering her in the least. 15. Them. XIII. Because the
said Qualities, as in her, do not fight and expel one another; as they must,
were their Subject made of Matter. 16. Them. XIV. Because Innumerable multitudes
of various and large Figures are in the Soul at once. 17. Them. XV. Because the
Soul has in her Universal Notions. 18. Them. XVI. Because the Thing is, in and
by the Soul, Divided into such Parts as Material Division cannot reach. 19.
Them. XVII. Because that kind of Composition, which the Soul makes afterward of
these thus-Divided Parts, is impossible to be performed by a Material Agent.
20. Hence is seen the reason why Angels do not thus Compound and Divide; and,
consequently, they know the Whole Thing Intuitively. 21. Them. XVIII. Because
what is meant by the Copula [is,] which we use in all our Affirmative
Judgments, cannot be so much as shadowed or represented by a Material
Similitude. 22. Them. XIX. Because the Connection of the Conclusion with Right
Premises, is above the force of all Nature, or Matter, and impossible to be
Solved or Broken. 23. Them. XX. Because all the Notions the Soul has, are most
concise, and exact, even to an Indivisible. 24. Them. XXI. Because the Soul is a
Pure Act, and therefore Immaterial. 25: Them. XXII. Because the Soul gives a
kind of Being to Non-Entities and Chimeraes, which can have no Existence in
Nature. 26: How some do mistake the Nature of the Indivisibility attributed to
the Soul. 27. The Proper and True Sense in which a Spirit is said to be
Indivisible. 28. That it is consonant to the Nature of the Subject that the Soul
should contain Corporeal Nature, and it is Modes, Indivisibly. 29. In what Sense
we are to take the word [Instantaneous], when we say the Operations of Pure
Spirits are such. 30. Last Demonstration, Concluding the Whole Point; That our
Soul, it heing so manifestly and manifoldly Demonstrated to be IMMATERIAL, is
necessarily IMMORTAL. MEDITATION. In discoursing of our Soul, we must transcend
our Senses and Corporeal Phantasms; and avail our selves only by Reflection on
those Operations which are Proper to it. It Is to be feared, the Chief Origin of
Atheism is in Men's Wills, it being so easy to satisfy their Understandings.
What Duties are incumbent on Us, who know and acknowledge our Soul to be
Immortal. Our former Demonstrations of that Great and most Concerning Truth
summed up, and Recapitulated. Of what vast Importance it is to lay (...) heart
this Preliminary Truth to all Religion.
BOOK II. Of PURE ACTS. CHAP. I. Of the SOUL SEPARATED, and ANGELS.
. 1. THe Soul, does, at her Separation, receive some Change, according to the
Manner of her Existing, and her Suppositality: 2. The Means how this is done,
illustrated. 3. Yet the same Individual Nature remains in her. 4. All the
Knowledges and (Unretracted) Affections the Soul had here, remain still in her.
5. Each Soul, when Separated, knows all Created Truths. 6. How this is very
Possible. 7. Hence, every Separated Soul knows all Time, and Place. 8. Hence
her Operations are not measured by Time; They and their Subject being of a
Superior Nature. 9. Hence, she will be Eternally Miserable, unless she knows
the First Cause, GOD. 10. Hence also, she is naturally Unchangeable. 11. Hence
too, as soon as Separated, she knows all the Thoughts and Affections, Words and
Actions of her past Life. 12. Whence follows the Particular Judgment, which
determines her Lot at the hour of Death. 13. Hence is understood how the Book
of Conscience will be laid open at the Last Day. 14. And how Infants are
connaturally saved by Baptism. 15. Hence Ana-Baptism is Impious and Unnatural.
16. The foregoing Principles show how much more easy it is for the Saints and
Angels in Heaven to know our Actions and Necessities. 17. The Practical
Judgments, or Affections, do carry the Soul to the Attainment of the Good she
most Loved here, in case it be Attainable in the Future State. 18. The Best
Intellectual Good, or the Sight of GOD is Attainable in the Next Life, if the
Soul be Disposed for it. 19. Therefore to work up our Christian Principles to
such Good Dispositions, ought to be the whole Employ of our Life here. 20. This
good Disposition is CHARITY, or the Love of GOD above all things. 21. Hence all
the Means and Motives laid by our B. Savior, tend only to breed and cultivate
in our Souls this Predominant Affection for Heaven. 22. Hence RELIGION is the
Way of breeding up Souls in such a manner as may dispose them f^ Eternal Bliss.
23. From the same Principles is Demonstrated, that, To depart hence with a
Contrary Disposition, (...) a First Affection for any Creature, will torment
the Soul, when Separated, with most Unspeakable Grief and Anguish. 24. The
State of Separation Elevates the Soul to a^ Incomparably higher Perfection of
Existence, (she being then a Pure Act) than she had here. 25. Wherefore, it
does, consequently, Elevate the Activity of all her Powers; and particularly
the Acts of her Will, her Affections, to an Unconceiveable Intenseness and
Vehemence, above what she had while in the Body. 26. Hence the Poena Damni in
Wicked Souls for the Loss of the Sight of GOD; and also the Loss of the
Temporal False Good they here doted on, is Unspeakable; and plunges them in a
HELL of Misery. Their Sad Condition described. 27. Hence it is evident that GOD
damns no Man* but that the Sinner, while he hugs and cherishes (...) his
Thoughts those Inordinate Affections for Creatures, on which, by his own
Deliberate Choice, (...) had set his First Love; does connaturally kindl^ and
foment, all the while, Hellfire in his own Soul* To which GOD contributes no
farther, but by conserving the Wisest Course of the World, that Prope^ Causes
should have their Effects; which he has (...) reason to alter for their sakes.
28. The Knowing, then, all Truths Speculatively, doe^ not alter the Predominant
Affection for Creatures. As the Tree falls, so it lies. 29. Hence, one Enormous
Actual Sin, unrepented renders a Separated Soul liable to Eternal Damnation.
30. That the State of Separation does not alter the First Affection of Souls,
farther Demonstrated. 31. Hence Sin does not formally consist in the Falsity of
the Practical Judgment, or Affection; but, in the Disproportion and
Inordinateness of it. 32. 'From the former Principles it follows that all those
several Kinds of Knowledges we had here, will be Elevated to an Unmeasurable
Excess in the State of Separation. 33. Hence also, all the Virtuous Affections,
which good Souls had here for Friends, Relations and Acquaintances, will remain
in the Next Life; and make them ardently wish and pray for their Salvation. 34.
That each Particular Deduced here, is Demonstrable by the Principles laid
formerly: Shown, by repeating those Principles. 35. Wherefore, there is not the
least Thought, Word or Action, Good or Bad, which we ever had or did, in this
Life, but will have it is Consequent and Proper Effect, Adjusted and
Proportioned to it, in the Next. MEDITATION. The Admirable Nature of a Soul,
when separated, and become a Pure Spirit, Displayed. That there is no
Comparison between our Soul's Condition here, and That in the State of
Separation: Mere Humane Science, when at the Height, was too short and Impotent
to raise Mankind to those Dispositions that fit him for True Happiness: The
Necessity of Divine Revelation farther shown. That the Christian Life is most
Comfortable; and the Un-Christian Life most full of Anxiety. The Unexpressible
Transports of Joy which Holy Souls experience at their first entering into Bliss.
CHAP. II. Of the Existence, Essence, Knowledge, Distinction and Action of
ANGELS.
. 1. THE Order of the Universe requires that there should be Different Kinds of
Beings. 2. And, much more that there should be Pure Acts, or ANGELS. 3.
Especially, since the Angelical Natures are Capable of Existing. 4. And, that,
otherwise, there could be no Immediate Cause of Motion. 5. As is also
demonstrated from the Nature of all Causality. 6. Every more perfect Ens
includes in it the Nature of the less-perfect, as it is an Ens. 7. And,
therefore Pure Acts or Spirits, Contain in them, the Nature of Body. 8. Which,
since it cannot be done by way of Quantity, they must contain them by the way
of Knowledge. 9. Therefore the very Natures or Essences of Bodies are in a
Spiritual Understanding; and not Ideas or Similitudes of them only. 10. This
Doctrine being grounded on that Logical Maxim, [All Differences are nothing but
More and Less of the Generical Notion;] the consideration of that Thesis is
recommended to the Reader. 11. This holds equally in a Soul too, when she comes
to be a Pure Act. 12. Angels, being Pure Acts, are Immutable. 13. The
Distinction of Angels is taken from being More or Less Cognoscitive after their
manner. 14. This is not to be understood of the Extent of their Knowledge; but,
of the Intenseness or Penetrativeness of it. 15. Hence, as far as Reason
carries us, is taken the Distinction of the Three Hierarchies, and Nine Quires
of Angels. 16. The Different Manners by which Angels and Human Souls come to
have all their Knowledge. 17. That those Angels have Nobler Essences, whose
each Act of Knowledge has for it is Object a Greater portion of the Universe.
18. Which fits them to super-intend the Administration of a Larger Province.
19. How Consonant this is to those passages of Holy Scripture, which speak of
such Operations of Angels. 20. An Angel cannot operate upon another Angel, so
as to Change it. 21. Wherefore, all it is External Operations, which work a
Change in another thing, can only be upon Bodies. 22. An Angel can thus operate
upon Material Beings, or Bodies. 23. That we only intend to evince here the An
est of this Operation of an Angel, and not the Manner how it is performed. 24.
Yet no One Angel has an Unlimited Power to operate thus on All Bodies whatever.
25. An Angel can Move or Change those Bodies which are within the Sphere of
it is Activity, in an Imperceptible Time. 26. Hence the wonderful Effects,
recorded in Holy Writ to have been done by Angels, are Consonant to
Metaphysical Principles. 27. That the Ordinary Ministering Spirits, or
Angel-Guardians of Particular Persons, are the Lowest sort of Angels. 28. But
the Greater and Weightier Affairs ure managed and transacted by Archangels. 29.
The Lower Angels received Intellectual Light from GOD by means of the Superior
ones, in the very Instant they were Created. 30. In what manner the Good Angels
perform the Will of their Maker, without New Instructions. 31. That GOD makes
use of Holy Angels to procure our Good; and of Bad ones to afflict and punish
Mankind, as His Divine Wisdom sees fitting. MEDITATION. By what means
Metaphysics has raised our Thought^ above the Sordid Mass of Matter, to
contemplat^ the Angelical Nature. The surpassing Excellency of their
Intellectual Essences Decypher'd. How Faith has antecedently enlightened our
Reason; and that it is our Duty to Explicate and Defend it against the Empty
Flourishes of the Drollich Renouncers of Faith and Reason both. What Gratitude,
Love and Veneration we owe to those Blessed Ministering Spirits; and what
Benefit we shall reap by keeping up a Spiritual Communion with them, by
following their good Inspirations. Yet, that we ought to honor them so, as to
remember they are only our Fellow Servants; though highly Dignified by our Common
Master.
BOOK III. Of the most Pure Actuality of Being, the Adorable DEITY. Of the
Existence, Essence, and Attributes of GOD.
. 1. THat there must be Something which is a most Pure Actuality of Being;
Demonstrated. 2. Them. II. From the acknowledged Potentiality of Being;
necessarily annexed, or rather Essential to all Creatures. 3. Them. III. Because
what is not, cannot Act. 4. Them: IV. Because Actual Being (or Existence) is the
Noblest Effect imaginable. 5. Them. V. Because no Power can produce an Effect
which is Contradictory to what it self is, or, to it is own Nature. 6. The
foresaid Proofs summed up in One, and Enforced. 7. This Actuality of Being gave
Being to all Other Things. 8. The Objection of the Atheists proposed; viz. That
The World was ever. 9. First Answer. That this does not solve our
Demonstration. 10. Second Answer. That it is a mere Voluntary Assertion; neither
Proved; nor Attempted to be Proved; nor Possible to be Proved. 11. Third
Answer. Farther showing, that our Argument is not Touched; and Reducing it to an
Identical Proposition. 12. Fourth Answer. This Pretense, or Voluntary
Assertion, is shown to be an Absolute Impossibility. 13. Fifth Answer. That the
putting an Infinite Antecedent Time, (which, in their Supposition, is
absolutely necessary,) is a plain Contradiction. 14. Sixth Answer. That the
very Notion of the word [Infinite] applied to our case, shows also, that it is a
manifest Contradiction. 15. The putting a Finite Number of Causes, giving Being
to one another Circularly, is as Absurd and Contradictory as the former. 16.
The Notion of [Ens] is different from that of [Existence]; and, consequently
[Essence] from [Existence.] 17. Philosophers must discourse of the First Being,
by such Notions as they have. 18. The Notion of [Existence] is the most Actual
of any we have. 19. And, therefore, the Fittest to express a Pure Actuality of
Being; and given us by GOD himself. 20. Every Abstract word includes
comprehensively the Whole Nature of the Form or Act it signifies, without any
Limitation. 21. Therefore it is Limitation either proceeds from the Subject, or
from the Causes that Determine it. 22. Wherefore GOD's Essence being EXISTENCE
^^ self, is absolutely Unlimited, or Actually Infinite. 23. Therefore GOD is
but ONE. 24. Hence Polytheism, or the putting Many Gods, is a most senseless
Absurdity, and a plain Contradiction. 25. Hence the Christian Doctrine is
DIVINE; the Dawning of which chaced away that Universal Darkness; in despite of
all Opposition, Humane Power, Wit, or Learning could make. 26, [Existence] is
the Whole Perfection of every thing that Exists. 27. Much more, when it is
Essential, and actually Infinite. 28. Therefore the Divine Existence, or the
DEITY, Includes or Concenters all imaginable Perfections in it is self. 29.
Therefore GOD is Infinitely Perfect in all Intellectual and Moral Attributes.
30. Therefore GOD is a Spirit. 31. And no ways Corporeal. 32. Therefore it is an
Indignity to the Divine Nature to apply any such Predicates to Him as belong to
Bodies. 33. Hence also He is Immutable. 34. And a Self-Subsistent Being. 35.
Also His Essence is most Simple or Uncompounded. 36. And his Duration ETERNAL.
37. Whence it ought not to be Explicated by a Correspondency to our Time. 38.
Hence also, GOD is IMMENSE. 39. It Is highly Derogatory to this Attribute, to
explicate it by Commensuration to an Infinite Space. 40. Lastly, the Divine
Nature is, of it is self, infinitely Knowable, or Intelligible. 41. Of what
comfort this may be to some Humble and Pious Souls. 42. That the Author.
confines himself, here, to Metaphysical Mediums. 43. Notwithstanding all that is
said, no Notion or Word we have, is Univocally, (or in the same Sense) applied
to GOD and to Creatures. 44. Wherefore all the Words we use, when we speak of
GOD, are, in some sort, Metaphorical. 45. Because each of them signifies some
one Notion, or some one Perfection; whereas the Divine Nature is the Plenitude
of All Being, and All Perfections, centered in One most Simple Formality: 46.
Hence even the Names of our Best Virtues, are not, in every regard, properly
spoken of GOD. 47. Nor, Omnipotent, Creator, or such like: All our Language
having some Tang of Imperfection Annexed to it. 48. Nor yet, Negative Words, as
Immense, Infinite, Immaterial, etc. 49. No Priority or Posteriority, either
Real, or made by our Reason conceiving some Ground for it in the Thing, can be
attributed to GOD. 50. Notwithstanding all these are with some Impropriety
spoken of GOD, yet all of them (but the Last) are Truly said of Him. 51. The
Solid Ground of Mystic Theology. 52. Hence is concluded, that all the Names or
Words we have, whether they be Affirmative or Negative, do fall short of
reaching the Divine Essence. MEDITATION. How, by considering the Visible Things
of this World, we have arrived at the Knowledge of the Invisible Things of GOD;
His Essence, and Attributes. That these have been Demonstratively Deduced; and
this, with an Evidence beyond that of the Mathematics. That this will redound
to our greater Disadvantage, if we live not accordingly. This Knowledge of GOD
obliges us to the Duties following; viz. Of most Profound Adoration, and
Respectful Attention when we address to him in Prayer; Of a Firm Belief of what
he has Revealed. Of Endeavoring to dispose our selves to receive farther
Influences of His Grace; and to Hope with Full Assurance that He will most
certainly give us all we are Capable or Disposed to receive: Of Trembling at
his Justice, if we wilfully break his Commands, or carelessly run on sn Sin: Of
Hoping Unwaveringly we shall obtain his Pardon, if we sincerely Repent. Of
Resignation, in all sinister Contingencies, to the Infinitely Wise Disposition
of His Providence in the Government of His World. Especially, to Love Him, who
is our Only Happiness and True Good, as we ought; both for what He is in
Himself, and for what He is to Us. Lastly, to the Duty of Imitating His Holy
Moral Attributes; which is the most Effectual Means to perfect us in all sorts
of Virtue.
BOOK IV. Of the several OPERATIONS of Things; and of the Manner (in common)
how the First Being administers His World.. 1. ALL Action springs Immediately
from the Existence of the Cause. 2. And the Acting in such a Manner, from the
Thing's being of such a Nature. 3. Therefore the Power of Operating thus or
thus is refunded into the Essence of the Thing. 4. Therefore all Causality is
the Imparting to the Patient somewhat that was, some way or other, in the Agent
or the Cause. 5. Hence Motion only Applies the Natural Agent to the Patient. 6.
The First Operation among Bodies is DIVISION. 7. The Next Operations are
IMPULSE and ATTRACTION. 8. The Reason of which Operations is not to be fetched
from Physics, but from Metaphysics. 9. Nor, in Metaphysics, from the Matter,
or Form. 10. But from the Essence or Nature of the Common Modification of Body,
Quantity. 11. This Disputable Point fully Cleared. 12. Hence is seen,
particularly, the Reason of Attraction. 13. Every Impulse, does, at first,
Condense; and every Attraction, at first, does Rarify. 14. All these Operations
are either performed by Local Motion, or concomitantly with it. 15. All Motion
comes, at first, from the Angelical Nature. 16. Every Part of Motion is a New
Effect. 17. And therefore it requires a Continual Influx of some Moving Cause.
18. This Moving Cause is some Chief Angel, which Rarefies the Matter in the
Solar Bodies. 19. Angels are Pre-mov'd, and Directed by GOD to move Matter, in
such a manner as is most suitable to His Eternal Decrees. 20. The First-mov'd
Bodies do Determine and Continue the Motion of the Others. 21. Hence Angels,
and the Bodies which they move, do, as Second Causes, determine the
Individuation of all new-made Bodies. 22. But it is evidently beyond their Power
to give Existence. 23. Which, therefore, is Peculiar to GOD; 24. As it is also
to Conserve them in Being 25. And to give to a Nobler Essence a Nobler
Existence. 26. For the same reason a Spiritual Form will be given to Matter,
connaturally Disposed for it. 27. The same holds in Supernatural Gifts, which
also (abstracting from Miracle) are carried on by Dispositions. 28. Hence GOD
is not the Cause of any Defect; much less of SIN. 29. That all the
forementioned Sorts of Operations do spring from the Respective ESSENCES. 30.
That GOD does All that is Good, in All; and; in what Manner, and by what Means.
MEDITATION. That God's Ordinary Providence carries on the Course of Nature by
Proper Causes still producing Proper Effects, Demonstrated: And Confirmed,
because, otherwise, Mankind could not possibly have any Science; nor know how
to behave themselves, or what to do in their Practice and ordinary Actions. The
same Great Truth Demonstrated a posteriori^* Hence, the Course of GOD's
Workmanship, (the Fabric of Nature,) is Close and Indissoluble. The Epicurean
Tenet that the World is Governed by CHANCE, shown most Absurd and Senseless.
What CHANCE truly is. How Groundlessly some Christian Philosophers, (the
Ideists) do in part violate this Method of GOD's Ordinary Providence;
Demonstrated. The Witty Folly of Stoical FATALITY confuted and exploded. The
Application of this Doctrine to our own Duties.
A Rational Explication OF The Mystery of the most Blessed TRINITY.
Trans-natural Philosophy: OR, METAPHYSICS.
BOOK I. Of the ESSENCES of Compound Entities.
CHAP. I. Of POWER and ACT.
1. ALL Mankind must necessarily have the Notions of POWER and ACT, or know
what those Words POWER and ACT are Natural or Common Notions.
mean. For, since all Mankind do, in their Common Language, use to say that
such a Thing which was not before, can be or exist; as also that Fire can be
made of Wood, that Water can be made Hot, and such like; and this in
innumerable Occasions; And, it is Evident, that the word [ can] does, in those
Speeches, signify the Power to Exist, be made of Wood, be made Hot, etc. and
the other words do signify the Acts which answer to those Powers; and, by
reason of which, when they come to have those Acts, they are truly said to be
Actually such as the words which correspond to those Powers do import. Also,
since all Mankind have in their Minds the Meaning of those Words which
themselves do intelligently use; and the Meaning of any Word i^ the same with
that which we cali their Noti^^ expressed by that Word, which Notion we have in
our Minds when we use that Word; It follows evidently, that All Mankind must
necessarily have the Notions of POWER and ACT, o^ Know what those Words mean.

2. Hence is gathered that there are three So^^^ of Power and Act: For, since
That there are Three sorts of each.
we can truly say that such (...) Thing, newly generated, was (...) and now is;
and it is most Self evident that could not be which had not a Possibility, or
Power to be; it is manifest that the Thing had a Possibility, or Power to be;
that i^ had a Power to that Act, called Existence. Again since we see that
Thing called Wood turned in^^ that Thing called Fire; we are hence forced (...)
have the Notion of a Power in the former Thing to become this later Thing; that
is a Power (...) the Notion of [ Thing] or [ Substance:] which is clearly
distinct from the Power to [ Existence* Lastly, since we see that Existent
Things, (v. (...) Bodies,) though Unchanged as to the Notion of Thing, have a
Power to be many ways Altered or otherwise than they were, either Inwardly or
Outwardly; v. g. to be Bigger, Hot, Related; as also to Act, or Suffer; to be
in a different Time or Place; to be Situated, or outwardly Habited thus or
thus; it is no less Evident that there is Another sort of Power in the Thing or
Individuum, though remaining the same Thing, or Unchanged as to the Notion of
THING, to have those Accidental Acts, or Modes, in it, or else Applied to it;
which kind of Power is most Evidently Different from the other two. Wherefore
it is manifest that there are Three sorts of Power. One, which the Whole Thing
has to that Act called Existence: A Second, which the Thing, according to some
Part of it, as it were (which we call Matter) has to be Another Thing: A Third,
which the Thing Existing has to it is Accidental Acts, or to the Modes or
Manners how it is.

3. The First sort of Power belongs to all Things whatever, but the First
Selfexistent That the First sort of Power belongs to all Things but the First
Being.
Being. For, since the very Notion of All Things but the First Self-existent
Being, imports that they are such as have not Actual Being or Existence of
themselves, or ^om their own Essence or Nature; and therefore (not being able
to give it to themselves) ^ey must receive it from Another; and yet it is no ^s
manifest they could have had Being given them by that Other, or by the First
Being; because they now Actually have it, and a thing cannot actually receive
that which it has no Power, or Possibility, to receive; It follow^ that this
Power to have Actual Being or Existence, must belong to all Things which we
call Creatures; that is to all but the First Self-Existent Being.

4. This Power of Existing which belongs t^ to all Creatures is also Essenti^
to them. For, since we cannot And is Essential to them.
have a Formal Notion of Nothing; nor of a Thing under the precise Notion of
Ens, but we must conceiv^ it constituted such by some Formal Cause or other,
Proper to it is Nature; which Form^ Constituent of Ens we call it is Essence; and
Essence speaks something that concerns Be^ one way or other, and involves it in
its Signification; and the Essence of Creatures does n^ include Actual Being in
its Notion, because (...). 3. they have it from Another; it follo^ that the
Essence of all Entia or Things whate^ that are Created, or of all Creatures,
cons^ merely in their Potentiality or Power to have Actual Being; which we call
their Possibility.

5. Corollary I. Hence the Proper Definition (...) Created Ens in Common, (...)
That which has a Power to Ex^ Hence the Definition of Created Ens is, That
which is capable of Being.
or, That which is Capable Existing. I mean as far as can bear an Exact
Definition which I say, because the which we use here for a Genus, and whi^ we
are forced to use in such very Comm^ Notions, is a Transcendent, and not a
Proper Genus, which has always a Notion a Determinate Sense, and is capable to
be Divided by more or less of the Generical Notion as by it is Intrinsecal
Differences; neither of which is found in the words [ that which] which we are
necessitated here to put instead of a Genus.

6. This Power to the Act of Existence, which (as was now shown is Essential to
all Created Beings) consists That this Power consists in* it is Possibility, or
Non-Repugnance to Being.
In this that it is Nature is such that it has no Repugnance, Chimericalnes, or
Ground of Contradiction in it is Notion. For, since an [ Impossibility] and a [
Contradiction] are in effect the same, and differ only in this that
Impossibility regards only the Incapacity any ^ing has to Exist in re, and
Contradiction the ^capacity it has to exist in the Understanding, because it is
Opposite to the nature of Ens, which is it is Adequate Object. And, since all
Effects are Possible to GOD which do not imply a Contradiction; and those
Effects that do so are therefore Impossible to Him, because (Contradictions and
Lies being the Height of Folly) they are Diametrically Opposite to GOD's Wis^m,
by which they are, (if at all) to have existence given them: It follows that
the Power which Creatures have to Exist or be Created, (which we call their
Possibility) consists only in ^his, that there is no Repugnance, Chimeri^lnes
or Ground of Contradiction in their Natures; only which renders them Impossible.

7. Hence is seen, why [ UNUM] is said to be a Property of Ens; and in what the
Unity of every Entity What Metaphysieal UNITY is.
consists. For, since nothing in Common can exist, or (which is the same) is an
Ens; but, to be an Ens or Capable of Existing, it must be determinately This;
and, to be determinately This, includes to be Different from all others under
the Notion of Ens: Also, since to be No One, signifies to be None; and
therefore to be No One Ens is to be No Ens; hence, nothing is Capable of
Existing* or an Ens unless it is Determinate under the Notion of Ens; or, not
Two Entities but Determinately This, and therefore Distinct under that Notion
from all others; that is, unless it be Indivisum in se and Divisum a quolibet
al^ under the precise Notion of Ens; which is the very Notion of UNUM.

8. The Essences of Things antecedently to their Actual Being or Existence, can
only* be in the Divine Intellect* The Essences of Things are, Antecedently to
their Existence, in the Divine Intellect.
For, since they cannot be themselves Actually, until they have that Act which
is the Formal Cause of their Being, viz. Existence, given them; because a mere
Possibility or Power to be, which is all that Creatures have from their own
Nature, cannot give or denominate them to be actually: It follows that all the
Existence (nay Possibility of Existence, or Essence) they have, antecedently to
their Being or Existing in Nature, is only in GOD, or in the Divine
Understanding.

9. Corollary II. Hence is Demonstrated from the Altissimae Causae, that is,
from the Supreme Reasons Hence the Cartesian Doctrine leaves no Ens in the
world.
or Mediums in Metaphysics, viz. from the Nature of Ens and Unum, that the
Cartesians leave no Natural Ens in the World, while they put them to be made up
of innumerable Particles of their First Matter, each of which could exist alone
independently on the other, and so each of them was an Ens. Whence follows that
each Natural Body, it being made up of Many of them, is truly and properly
Multa Entia; that is Divisum in se under the Notion of Ens; and, consequently,
not Unum; and therefore not an Ens, or a Non-Ens.

10. Corollary III. Hence is Deduced how the Essences of all Things are How the
Essences of Things are in the Divine Understanding.
said to be in the Divine Understanding. By which it cannot be meant, that, as
they are in GOD they are so many Actually Distinct Formalities which he views
there and contemplates; for this would put a Formal Dictinction of many Limited
Beings in GOD; and, withal, that, the Object, in some priority, anteceding the
Knowledge of it, he owes his Knowledge, in some degree, to the Essences of
Creatures. Wherefore, it is, Literally speaking, no more but that God being
Infinitely Wise, and being by His Wisdom to make a World, the best Order of
which is to consist of such and such particular Essences put in Actual Being;
hence His Knowledge antecedes both their Essences and Existences, and is
terminated in them as the Effects of his Creative Wisdom. Or it may be said
that their Essence (by. 6.) consisting in their Possibility of Being; they are
said to be in Him, because he gives Being to nothing but what is Possible to be
and Fit for the Best Order of the World; and not to what is Unfitting,
Impossible* and Contradictory; which being the highest strain of Folly, cannot
be said o^ thought of Infinite Wisdom.

11. Corollary V. Hence also is understood why the Essences of Things are And
how they are said to be Eternal.
said to be Eternal, viz. ^ they are in GOD, in whom is the whole Plenitude ^^
Being. For, otherwise, the Essences of all Things, of themselves, and as they
are in themselves, (Bodies especially) are Mutable* For, since no Body in
Nature is Capable of Existence, nor consequently, has any Essence, but
Individuals; and we see many Individual Bodies Corrupted and others Generated
of them; and since we know certainly that the rest of them (they having* all of
them a Power to be Alteril, nay to become Other Things) are liable to the same
fate; it is evident that the Essences of all the Individuals in Nature do perish
with them; and that, as in themselves, they are Generable and Corruptible; that
is Temporary, and far from Eternal. Again, since the Essences of Pure Spirits
or Angels, they being Created, are Indifferent to Being and Not-Being; there is
no Repugnance, (however they cannot be Corrupted by the Operation of Natural
Causes, as Bodies can) why, for any thing they have from themselves, they may
not cease to be as well as Bodies may.

13. In this Possibility, or Non-Repugnance to Existence, which is Essential to
In what consists Metaphysical VERITY.
all Creatures, consists also the Metaphysical VERITY of Things. For, since a
Contradiction, which is grounded on the Impossibility of the Thing, is the
Greatest of Untruths: which put, all we could say concerning any thing may be
False: Again, since all we can truly say concerning any Thing must be taken
from the Nature of that Thing, (for otherwise we should discourse ^ther of
Nothing, or of Another Thing, and not of It;) and therefore if the Nature of
that Thing be Contradictory, Repugnant and Chimerical, all we could say of it
must necessarily be False: It follows on the contrary, and for the same reason,
that all the Truths we can have, when we Speak or Discourse of any Thing, must
be Grounded on it is Possibility or Non-Repugnancy. But we call that the
Metaphysical VERITY of a Thing on which is Fundamentally Grounded all the
Formal and Particular Truths we have, or can have, concerning that Thing;
Therefore this Possibility, or Non-Repugnancy to Existence, which is found in
all Creatures, and is Essential to them, is that in which consists their
Metaphysical VERITY.

14. Corollary VI. Hence, the First Formal Truths or Propositions, o^ (which is
the same) our Hence the First Formal Truths a^e Identical Propositions.
very First Principles, are those which speak the Metaphysical Verity of the
Thing, or that it is it is self and no other; which cannot be expressed otherwise
than by Identioal Propositions; as every Attentive Reflecter, who will attempt
to do it any other way, must be forced to acknowledge,

15. Corollary VII. Those First Principles can only be of Two sorts* One of
them is taken from the Of which there are only Two sorts.
Essence, Nature or Notion of the Thing; v. g. Every Thing is what it is, A Man
is a Man, Quantity is Quantity, Idem est Idem sibi ipsi, Aequal^ est aequale
sibi, etc. The Other from it* Existence: v. g. What is, is; It Is Impossible the
same thing should be and not be at once* Existence is Existence; Self-Existence
is Self-Existence, etc. The Use and Necessity of which seemingly Dry and
Insignificant Propositions is shown at large in my Method to Science, B. 2.
Less. 2. and, in my Solid Philosophy Asserted, Reflection 19. and more at large
in my NON-ULTRA.

15. Cor^ll^ry VIII. Hence also is seen, how* and in what good sense, some Why
some Propositions are said to be aeternae veritatis.
Propositions are said to be aeternae Veritatis; viz. a part post, (as the
Schools phrase it) or so that they can never cease to be True. For, since no
Proposition can be at all, or any where, but in such Knowing Substances, as
working by Abstracted Notions, do frame a Subject and Predicate by conceiving
the Thing diversely; and compounding again those Notions into a Proposition.
Also, since this manner of Knowing a Thing by Abstract, Partial and Inadequate
Notions can only be found in the Soul of Man, which gleans her Knowledge by
piecemeal from various Impressions on the Senses; and not in Angels, which
comprehend the whole Thing at once by Simple Intuition, much less in GOD.
Hence, the Soul (as will be proved) being Immortal, all the Affections or
Modes, consistent with her Nature (as all True Propositions are) must likewise
continue and remain in her for ever; since neither can there be any reason on
the Subject's side, why they should decay or perish: Nor on the Objects,
because GOD has unalterably fixed the Essences of Things, from which all True
Propositions are taken, and on which they are Grounded. Whence those
Propositions must be Eternally True, meaning by those words, a part post; nor
can they be so, a part ante, because the Soul, their only Subject, is not such
her self.

17. The Second Sort of POWER, which is the Power to the Notion of [ Thing] as
it is found in Nature, The Second sort of Power respects not the Notion of
Existence, but the Notion of Thing.
must have such an ACT corresponding to it as determines the Power to be This
or That Thing in Nature. For, since the Notion of [Thing] is very Common, and
the Power to be a Thing adds to it still more Indetermination; and, what is
Common to All, and Indeterminate to Any Thing, cannot particularize, or
constitute This or That Thing; and only This or That Thing, and not Thing in
Common, or what is Indeterminate to every Thing, can exist in Nature: It
follows, that either there must be no Particular Bodies in Nature, that is No
One Body, or (which is the same) No Body at all in the whole World; or else it
must be granted that there must be such an Act corresponding to this Sort of
Power, which so determines it as to constitute This or That Body in particular.
Which Second Sort of Act is called by the Schools the SUBSTANTIAL or ESSENTIAL
FORM; and this Second Sort of Power, which answers to that Act, and is
Determined by it, is called MA^TER.

18. Hence those Things which include in their Natures this Second sort of In
what Sense Bodies are said to be Compounded of this Power, and its Act.
Power and its correspondent Act, which use to be called Matter and Form, are
said to be Compounded of them; because such a kind of Thing involves in it
self, and consequently, causes in us, and verifies the Conceptions of somewhat
according to which that Thing is Indeterminate, and somewhat according to which
it is Determinate under the Notion of Thing or Ens, which two Considerations do
comprehend all that can be conceived belonging to the Nature of such a kind of
Thing, as to that Notion precisely: which kind of Compound Thing we call a BODY.

19. This Second sort of Power called. [ Matter] is the sole Ground of all
Change and Mutability. For, since whatever This Second Power, Matter, is the
sole Ground of all Mutability.
Thing is Determinate, is Fixed by that which formally Determines it, to be That
Thing it is and no Other; it is manifest that from the nature of that Act or
Form, which, by Determining the Matter, makes that Thing be what it is, no
Change into another can proceed. Wherefore, since (by. 17, 18.) there can be
nothing else Conceivable belonging to such a particular Thing, or Body, but its
Power to be such a Thing, and its Act which Determines that Power and formally
constitutes it such a Thing, that is, the Matter and the Form; and from the Act
or Form, as far as is on it is part, no Mutability, or Change from what that Act
made it, ^n proceed; it follows necessarily that all Change and Mutability
under the Notion of Thing must proceed from the Power or Matter. Again, since
all Accidental Acts, or Modes, do no less, in their way, Determine and
Constitute the Thing to be actually such as that Accident is apt to make it,
(or to be after such a Manner) as well as the Essential Act or Form did
Determine and Constitute it to be This Thing and no other Thing; and that their
whole Notion or Nature is terminated in their making it Actually such; it
follows that from those Accidental Acts, or those Modes, precisely, nothing can
have any Ground to be Altered, or to have Another Mode or Accident. Wherefore,
all Change and Mutability, whether Substantial or Accidental, can be refunded
into nothing but merely into the Power, or Matter, as it is only Ground*

20. Corollary IX. Hence is demonstrated, that if there can be any Pure Acts
which have no Power or Matter Hence Pure Acts are Immutable.
in them, (as will be shown hereafter there can) such a^ are Angels and Souls
Separated, they must be naturally Immutable, both Substantially and
Accidentally. See Method to Science B. 3. L. 7. Thesis 6. and Raillery Defeated
from. 49. to. 59.

21. The Third sort of Power is that which the Things consisting of Matter The
Third sort of Power respects Accidental Acts.
and Form, and having, over and above, it is Ultimate Act of Existing, has to
the Modes or Accidental Acts belonging to it; as was mentioned. 2. and shown
particularly in my Method^ B. 1. Less. 2.

22. Though these Accidental Acts, or Modes, (a^ is shown above Coroll. III. and
in my METHOD, B. 1. Less, 4.. 1, 2.) Which, though not properly Things, have yet
Analogical Essences.
are not Things in the First and Proper signification of the word [ Thing,] but
only in a Secondary Improper and Analogical Sense; yet they have,
notwithstanding, their Improper and Analogie^ Essences; (as has also every
Abstract Notion of* Conception we have of the Thing) and, consequently, their
Nature is sixth to be what it is and no other. Whence they have also their
Improper (but yet Real) Metaphysical Verity, and First Principles peculiar to
their Natures, as well as Things, properly so called, or Substances have. So
that whoever, in Discoursing of Quantity, ^. g. or Action, makes Quantity (by
consequence) (...) to be Quantity, or Action not to be Action, but destroys the
nature of those Modes, is as evidently convicted of Contradiction as if he had
destroyed the nature of a Man, or an Animal, or any other Substance; and had
made them, by consequence, not to be what they are, as all False Discoursers do.

23. Hence is clearly seen what is meant by Metaphysical Divisibility and
Composition; and that they are not What Metaphysical Divisibility and
Composition are.
^^ch as are found between Thing ^^d Thing in re; for this kind of Composition
and Division would destroy the Unity and Verity of the Thing; be^es that such a
Composition is Proper to Artificial things, and is contrary to the Constitu^ of
Natural Entities; Natural Composition (...) was shown,. 17, 18.) being made by
the ^eting of the Matter and Form in one such ^, or one Body. That Composition
and Divisibility then which we call Metaphysical, is of the Parts (as it were)
of the Thing as it is in ^our Understanding; or, of the Thing as concelv'd by
us thus, and the same Thing as concelv'd by us otherwise. For out of our
Conception, or Understanding, there is no Actual Distinction of Matter and
Form, of Substance and Accidents, etc. though there is Ground in the thing, as it
is the Object of our Imperfect pitch of Understanding, not able to comprehend
all that may be thought of it at once, why we thus frame Abstract, Partial and
Inadequate Conceptions of it, or (which is the same) why we thus Divide or
Distinguish it. And, hence it comes, that, since there can be no Contradiction,
(nor consequently Impossibility) unless we* Affirm and Deny in the same
Respect; therefore as there is no Contradiction, in such a case, in our
Understanding, because these Respects there are Diverse; so there is no
Impossibility in Nature, but the Thing may be Changed, Distinguished, Acted
upon, or Act, according to some of those Respects or Conceptions; and yet be
not-Chang'd, not-Act or Suffer according to others of them* as will be seen by
Instances hereafter.

24. Corollary X. This Doctrine, particularly this last Clause, were the words
Ens or Substance, Nature, Suppositum, Person, Existence, and Subsistence,
exactly Distinguished, and distinctly understood, will be signally Useful to
defeat almost all the Arguments, drawn from Reason, by the Deists; and if well
reflected on, clears many Objection^ brought against the B. Trinity, by the
Soci^ians, and other Anti-Trinitarians, opposing the Christian Tenet of the
Unity of the Divine Nature in Three Persons; and to confute, (as far as it
impugns that Tenet it self) that Treatise, Entitled, [ A Letter to the
Reverend the Clergy of both Universities, concerning the Trinity and the
Athanasian Creed.] Which though it seems to be the utmost Effort of those
Parties, and has a very plausible Appearance to those who either are not well
skilled in, or do not well reflect on the Laws of Predication and the Use of
Humane Language in parallel Cases; yet it is easy to show, that that piece of
Wit and Fancy is utterly void of Art and good Sense; and that the Christian
Thesis it self, if rightly represented, is perfectly consonant to the Nature of
the Subject, (the DEITY) and to Right Reason; and that there is no more show of
Contradiction that that most Simple Being should verify Sending and being
Sent, Generating and being Generated, and such like, though they be Opposites;
than it is that the same Infinite Being, when GOD knows himself, (which
themselves grant) should, notwithstanding it is most perfect Simplicity, verify
that he is the Knower and thing Known; which are as much Relatively Opposite as
are any of the Others. Lastly, it may be shown very evidently, that all the
while they oppose the Doctrine of the Trinity, those witty Gentlemen do quite
mistake the whole Question, by confounding what the Deity is in it is self,
abstracting from any order to our Conceptions, or rather, as it is above our
Conceptions, (according to which consideration we cannot think or speak of it
at all;) with what GOD is as conceived by us; or what, as He is the Object of
our Understanding, His Infinite Essence obliges us truly to conceive and affirm
of Him. All which may perhaps, particularly and at large be shown hereafter.

25. Corol. VI. The same Doctrine clears the Mystery of the Incarnation Which
clears Objections against the B. Trinity, and against the Mystery of the
Incarnation also.
from the least semblance of Contradiction; and shows how not only Possible,
but consonant to right Reason it is, that the Humanity of our B. Savior may be
Assumed by the Second Person of the B. Trinity, and yet not be Assumed by
either of the other Persons. As also how that Person may supply to it, or be
united to it immediately according to the Subsistence or Personality; and yet
not be thus United to it formally according to it is Nature or Essence. And the
same may be said of the same Doctrine in order to some other Revealed Mysteries
of Christian Faith, which I here, forbear to mention.

26. Corollary VI. Hence is clearly discerned* what is the Difference between
Logical and Metaphysical ABSTRACTION; The Difference between Logical and
Metaphysical Abstraction.
and that Logical Abstraction is of the Generical or Specifical (that is, of
more Common) Notions from the Inferio^^ ones; which is done by taking from
these later that precise Consideration iu which they Agree, leaving out those
in which they Disagree; that is, by taking merely what belongs to the Genus or
Generical Notion; and leaving out, or Abstracting from the Differences. Whereas
Metaphysical Abstraction regards only this, that the Notion, Nature or Essence
of the One is not the precise Notion, Nature or Essence of the Other; or that
both the One and the Other are different Respects or Considerations of the
Thing; though they do, both of them, stand upon the same Level, and neither of
them be Higher or Lower in the way of Predication, or in the Extent of their
Notion, than the other. In which later Sense of the word [ Abstraction] we use
to say that our Soul works, or knows things, by Abstract or Inadequate Notions.

27. From what is said above, it is manifest that there can be no Actual Parts
in any Ens whatever; whether we conceive That Excellent and Useful Maxim, That
[There are no Actual Parts in any Compound whatever] Defended and Explicated.
it under the Notion of Ens; or of such an Ens, called Body; or, as affected
with such an Intrinsecal Mode or Accident, v. g. Quantity, or any of the rest.
For, since to Distinguish cannot belong to the Power, (it being of it self, or
of it is own nature, utterly Indistinct or Indetermi^^te;) it follows that to
Distinguish must properly and only belong to the Act. Wherefore in case those
Parts were Distinct Actually, they must have Distinct Acts; and by consequence,
the Power or Subject must be made Distinct by having those Distinct Acts in it;
that is, the Subjects must be More under that Notion. Therefore Unum being the
Property of Ens, in what Sense soever the word [ Ens] be taken, (as is shown.
22.) there would, in that case, be no Unity, nor consequently Entity, under any
Notion, left in the World. To explicate this more ^y, and show it particularly:
In case the First ^^rt of Power called Ens, and it is Act [ Existence,] ^^d each
of them it is Proper Act which constitutes a Thing, and so were Two Things,
nothing in the World that Exists would be One Thing, ^or consequently, ( Unum
being the Property of Ens) A Thing, or Any Thing. Also, if the Second fort of
Power [Matter,] and it is Act or Form that constitutes Body, were Two Things;
there would be no One Thing of that Sort, or no one Body; and, consequently,
there would be No Body in Nature. And, since, (as will be proved hereafter, L.
2.. 16.) the Complexion of Accidents is the Essential Form which constitutes
Body, were those Accidents Distinct Things from the Matter, and the Matter from
them; or, were they Distinct Things from one another, and, therefore, each of
them were Capable of Existing alone, or properly Entia; there would be no One,
or No Individual Body in the World; but every such Thing would be a Multitude
or Many, and perhaps Innumerable. Or, were the Parts that compound Quantity,
(or, which is the same, the Parts of Body as precisely having Quantity in them)
Actually Distinct, as many Schoolmen hold; then, each of them (as was lately
proved) must have a Distinct Act of that sort to make them Distinct Actually;
whence they would be in that case Diverse Quanta, or Things having diverse
Quantities in them: Wherefore, it being Demonstrable, that Quantitas est
Divisibilis in semper Divisibilia, there could be no Quantum, or Thing of that
Kind in the World but would contain many Lesser Quantums in it; and therefore
there could be no One, or No Quantum; and, consequently, No Thing that had
Quantity in it, found in Nature. Add, that those pretended Distinct Actual
Parts, must be distinguished (by. 17.) from others by some Act* and yet most of
them could have no Act i^ them to Distinguish them from their Comparts* For the
Second Power [ Matter,] has no Act at all in it is Notion to distinguish it
actually from it'^ Proper Form; and the Forms themselves, whether Essential or
Accidental, are mere Distinguishers; and have nothing in their Nature or Notion
by which they can be said to receive an Act, and, so, become the Thing
Distinguished. Wherefore it is most Demonstrable by Metaphysical Mediums, that
there can be no Actual Parts in any Compound whatever. Wherefore, all the Parts
they are said to have, (whether they be Physical or Metaphysical,) are
Potential only; or (to speak more properly) there is nothing but one whole
Actual Ens, which has a Power to be divided into Many, either in re, or in
intellectu.

28. Corollary VIII. Whence is clearly Demonstrated the reason of that Useful
Maxim, [ Actiones and The Ground and Reason of that Maxim, [Actiones and
Passiones sunt Suppositorum.]
Passiones sunt Suppositorum.] For that which Acts or Suffers must Actually
Be; Wherefore, since no Part actually is, but only the Whole; it follows, that
only the Whole or the Suppositum can be said in proper Speech to Act and Suffer
and not any Part; or, (which is the same) the Whole according to such a Part.
Which agrces perfectly with the Sense and Language of Mankind; who, if a man
strikes another with his Hand upon the Cheek, use to say, [ He struck him,]
where, though he [ He] and [ Him] signify the whole Suppositum; yet they clearly
mean that [ He] according to such a Part only, called the Hand, struck him; and
that the Other, according to such a Part, called the Cheek, was struck; and
that neither of them did strike, or was struck, according to any other Part.

29. Hence is still more evidently Demonstrated against the Cartesians, that,
since they put all the Things in Nature Hence the Cartesians destroy the
Notions of Unum and Ens*
to be made up of the particles of their Three Elements* each of which, seeing
it can exist alone, must be an Actually-Distinct Thi^^ from all the rest; they
leave nothing in Nature which is truly One Ens; that is, ( Unum being a
Property of Ens) they leave no Natural E^^ in the World, except each of those
particles may be thought to be such; which yet, accordi^^ to their Doctrine,
cannot be said. For, ^in^^ they must admit Diverse Things in Nature called
Bodies, and those things that Compound an E^^ or Unum in Nature, cannot each of
them b^ an Ens or Unum it self; Common Sense telling us most evidently, that
diverse of such Components would make the Compound Multa E^tia, or Divisum in
se, under the Notion of Ens* and not an Ens or Unum, which must be Indivisum in
se: Hence follows, that, for want of Skill in Metaphysics, they leave nothing
in Nature which is truly One Natural-Body or One Ens* but a kind of Heap or
Aggregate of Ma^^* It Is to no purpose to object the Distinction of Ens
Completum and Incompletum; for every E^^ is Complete under the Notion of Ens,
or Thing which is Capable of Existing alone; as each of those Particles is
which they Club into One Ch^merical Ens. Nor can they evade, by saying* that
the Entia in Nature are Compounded, and those Particles are Uncompounded, or
perfectly Simple: For, since each of those Particles is Distinct from the rest,
it must have something in it that ^^ common to them all, which we call the
Matter; and also somewhat by which it is Distinguished from all the other
Particles, which we call it is ^ct or Form. Whence follows, that every one of
those Particles, even the very least, has all the Composition that can be
required to make it ^^uly and properly a Corporeal Ens, or a Body, ^specially
since it is Capable of Existing alone, or without needing the help of any
other: And therefore, none of those Entities they put to be Compounded of
these, is truly an Ens or Unum; ^u^ a Medly or Aggregate of Many Entities; ^^^t
is, it is Non unum, as being Divisum in se ac^^^ding to the Notion of Ens; or,
which is the ^^me, being a Non Ens or Chimera.

30. Hence is Demonstrated, that (speaking of ^^dies) the Proper Constitution
^^ Composition belonging to an The Proper Metaphysical Partt of Body, are
Matter and Form.
^^s or Thing, as such, is that Second Sort of Power and Act. For, ^oth of
these bearing in their Notion some Respect to the Thing as it is an Ens; and,
neither of them having in them the Notion of a WHOLE Ens, since neither of them
^^one is Capable of Existing; it follows, that their Proper Nature is to be
PARTS of Ens, and therefore it is Proper to that Whole Ens to be ^ompounded of
Them. Again, since as was lately ^^own, no Natural Ens can be made up of more
^ompleat Entities, each of which have both ^^wer and Act in them; because in
that case, that Compound Ens would be Non-Unum, and therefore Non-Ens; it
follows necessarily, that they must be Compounded of Power and Act; neither of
which singly, or alone, can have that Composition in them, which is requisite
to make them such Entia.

31. In the Consistency, Compossibility or Agreeableness of the Act and Power
with one another, found in Corporeal The Possibility or Essence of a Body
consists in the Agreeableness of its Matter and Form.
Substances, consists the Possibility or Essence of all the Bodies in Nature.
For, while the Power is Dsterminable by such an Act, and the Act is
Determinative of such a Power, they are connaturally fitted to one another, or
apt to be joined in order to Compound an Ens, as Proper Parts to such a Whole.
Which frees the Compound from Chimericalness, Repugnancy, and Incompossibility
of it is Constituent Parts; because neither of them is Actually an Ens, and yet
they are apt to join in one Ens; whence it becomes Fit for Creative Wisdom to
give to such a kind of Compound, Actual Being, or Existence.

32. Hence is clearly Demonstrated, that there* is no Real and Actual
Distinction found in any one single That there is no Real or Actual Distinction
in ^n any Ens whatsoever.
Thing whatever in re, but only what is made by the Understanding, or what is
found in the Distinct Notions we frame of it* which springs from the
Metaphysical Divisibility of the Thing, or (which is the same) from it is Power
to ground Different Conceptions in u^* For, since what is Divisible, is, for
that very regard, One; (for, were it More, it would be Divided to our hand, and
not Divisible) it follows, that what is thus Divisible by our Understanding, is
necessitated, out of the very Terms to be On^ in it is self before our
Understanding came to Divide it. Whence it is evinced most evidently, that
before this Operation of our Understanding thus Divided it, by making Different
Abstracted Conceptions of it, the Thing (though having it is Matter, Form,
Existence, and all it is Accidents in it) was in it is self, or as it was in
Nature, truly One Thing; or One Ens; and that all these Particulars, now
enumerated, are Nothing but merely our Different Conceptions, Considerations,
or Notions of it; taking those words objectively; that is, indeed, the very
same Thing it self as diversely conceived, considered, or apprehended. So that
the Thing gives us the Ground of Verification, and our Understanding the Formal
Distinction, expressed by the Abstractive or Distinctive Particle [ as;] to
answer the signification of which word, nothing is found in the Thing as it is
in re, or i^ Nature.

33. From what has been Discourst above concerning Power and Act, it is
Demonstrable how many Common How many sorts of Entities are Possible to be
Created.
Sorts or Kinds of Entia can be in the Universe, or are Possible to be Created.
For, since nothing is Capable to have Existence given it but what is
Determinate, that is, This or That; and the mere Power to be a Thing, (called
Matter) is utterly ^^determinate; and Act is the Only Determiner of
^^tentiality or Power; and therefore can also have Determination by Virtue of
it is own Nature; or rather bears Determination in it is very Notion: It follows
that there can only be Two Sorts of Things Possible to be Created, viz. Those
which are Compounded of Power and Act, that is, of Matter and Form, which we
call BODIES; a^ Pure Acts, which have no Power or Matter i^ them, which we call
ANGELS, or SPIRITS.

34. Hence it is inferred, that EXISTENCE i^ the most Formal, and, consequen^ly,
Existence is the Ultimate Act of Ens.
the Ultimate Act of all other whatever; and all others Pot^^tial in respect of
it. For, sin^^ it has been shown,. 3, 4, and 5. that the Essences of all
Creatures, whether they be P^ Acts, or Compounded of Act and Power, do consist
in a Possibility or Power to Exist; and much more, the Improper Essences of
their Accidents ^^ Modes, which have of themselves not so much as a Power to
exist at all, but by means ^^ the Ens or Substance, on which both their Essen^
and Existence does immediately depend; It follows that Existence is the most
Formal and Ultimate Act, as supervening to all Created Essenc^ Imaginable; and
that all other Acts, compar^ to it, are but Potential, or, as it were,
Dispositi^^ to it. Wherefore when Angels are called P^ Acts, it is to be
understood, that they are Pure ^^ Free from that Second sort of Power, called
Matter* notwithstanding which, the Essences of those P^ Acts, are but Potential
in respect of that First and Purest Act, EXISTENCE.

35. Corollary VIII. Wherefore [ Existence] ^^ more properly called [
Actualit^] than [ Act;] as having no ki^ Wherefore Existence is rather to be
called Actuality, than Act.
of Potentiality to any farther Act; but is the perfect Quintessence (as it
were) of Act ^^ self, without the least Alloy or Mixture o^ Power; as becomes
the Immediate Effect of GOD, our Creator, who is essentially an Infinite
Actuality of Being, or (which is the same) Self-Existent; as will be
demonstrated hereafter.

36. Wherefore, since it has been Demonstrated, ^. 4. That the very Essence of
all Created Beings consists in the mere Possibility or Power to have Existence,
and That there is a GOD.
therefore they have not Actual Being from themselves; it follows, that they
must have it from Another; to whom, consequently, Existence is Essential; that
is, from the First Being, or from GOD. There is therefore a GOD. But of this in
my Third Book.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I desire it may be remarkt once for all, that by the Words Power, Act, Matter,
Form, Existence, and the same may be said of all the Words I shall use
hereafter through this whole Treatise, ^^r those I have published formerly, I do
not mean * Idea's] or [ Similitudes,] or any other Conceits, found out, or made
by my own, or any other Man's Wit or Fancy; but the very Real Thing it self,
(of which, and not of Similitudes we intend ^^ speak,) conceived by us
according to such ^^spects or Considerations Grounded on it, and ^^ly found in
it: Without which no Solid Dis^rse can possibly be made; as is shown in my
^^THOD, B. 1. L. 1. and is demonstrated at large in my SOLID PHILOSOPHY
Asserted, Preliminary First and Second; and in my other Writings.

MEDITATION On the foregoing Chapter.
IT IS time, my Soul, to turn thy Thoughts upon thy self; and to reflect what
Advancement of Knowledge thou have gained by those Easiest, most Common, and
most Familiar Notions of POWER and ACT. But first, consider, How Provident thy
Generous Maker has been for thee, as soon as then wast delivered out of the
dark Womb of Nothing; and how he has assisted and nourisht thee up in thy
helpless Infancy. Thy Nature was to be Capable of Knowledge; and therefore,
only Knowledge was the Connatural The Method, how GOD's Providence gave us our
Elements of Knowledge.
Food, which could give thee Growth and Strength, and ripen thee to Perfection.
How wretched then and miserable had thou been, had not He, like a Loving
Father, taken care thou should not live perpetually in a Dungeon of Spiritual
Darkness and comfortless Ignorance? To this end ^e planted thee amongst an
Infinite Variety of thy Fellow Creatures, Bodily Substances; which played
continually about thee with such Motions as were agreeable to their several
Constitutions. These, being the Manufacture of an Infinitely Wise Creator,
could not but retain in them the manifest Prints of the Wisdom of their Divine
Artificer; which made ^^^m fit Instruments to inform thy Empty Understanding,
and to instruct thy Rudeness. But, alas! they could not reach or affect thy
Nature, which was Spiritual. All their Operations were performed by Local
Motion; which being* Quantitative and Divisible, could not be received in thy
Spiritual and Indivisible Essence. This had rendered thee, considered according
to thy peculiar Nature, (had thou been a Distinct Thing from all Bodies
whatever) Insensible of their smartest Impulses* and Incapable of Knowing any
thing by their most vigorous Impressions: Nor had thou, as being one of the
Lowest Class of Knowing Substances, any Right or Title to have Actual Knowledge
Infused into thee gratis, at first; as had thy Elder-Brothers by Creation, the
Angels. In this forlorn condition wast thou found in the First Instant thou
came into this Material World; viz. only Capable of Knowledge, and utterly
Unable, of thy self, to gain any, or help thy self in the least: For a mere
Power which was undetermined to all, or any Act of Knowledge, could not, alone,
enable thee to produce any Particular Act, which is necessarily This, and
Determinate. But it belongs to Essential and Infinite Goodness not to leave his
poor Indigent Creatures destitute, but to take order they should have (as far
as consists with the best Order of the World) all the Perfection their Nature
is capable to receive. Wherefore His Providence wisely ordered thou should
have a Material Compart* linked so intimately to thee as to Compound with thee
One Ens, or Suppositum; and thence partake of the Actions and Sufferings of one
another. By which means, Impressions made by Outward Objects, scattering about
their minutest particles, upon some very sensible Part of thy Body (with which
Part thou wast immediately united as the Form with it is proper Matter) might at
the same time aff^ thee also according to thy peculiar Nature, that i^
Knowingly; and imbue thy yet-Ignorant-Understanding Power with Tinctures of
their several N^tures.

These First Rough-Draughts of Knowledge were indeed very Rude, Scanty and
L^mited; And ripened our Knowledge afterward.
being (as it were) an Imperfect View of the Things on one side only; and
rather Glances th^^ a Full Sight of them; for they gave thee no more Light at
one time, than of some one of those many Respects or Notions the Thing was able
to i^-part to thee; and, withal, being the Immediat^ Effects of Objects made
of Matter, (the Parent o^ all Undistinctness or Confusion) they were far from
Exact. To supply which Defect, and make amen^ for this Disadvantage, thy
Creator endowed th^^ with a Faculty of Reflecting; which enabled th^^ to
refine, separate, and range into Distinction and Order those Raw and Tumultuary
Impressions; and* moreover, fur^isht thee with a Comparing Power; which, by
Judging and Discoursing, could Connect and Compound those Narrow Abstracted
Notions with one another, and, by Degrees, give thee a Broader Prospect of the
Thing; and, in time, improve thy Knowledge to that pitch which is suitable to
thy condition here. The Entire Comprehension of all things being reserved to
thy Future State, when thou shall be got out of thy Nonage, and thy Eaglesight
be no longer blinded with the Screen of thy Body. Do not repine, that thou
can not, at first, readily and fully comprehend any thing, but ar^ forced to
gain a Distant and Shy Acquaintanc^ with them, by those Conceptions of them in
part only, which our Dull Senses afforded thee. Not ^he least of them, but, if
well husbanded and im^^^v'd, will lead thee to far-distant Truths, and very
Large and Strange Discoveries. Thy Reasoning Power had been Useless and in
vain, and thou had wanted, all the while thou live here, that Employ^^nt
which most properly belongs to a Man, (thy Reasoning or Discoursing) had not
the World's Governor thus parcell'd out to thy Low Understanding the Book of
Creatures. He gives thee at thy Entrance into Nature's School, the First
Rudiments ^^ Elements, thy Ordinary Notions; which are, ^s it were, the Letters
or Alphabet of all our Knowledge; with which, like little Children of the
Lowest Form, we are first to get Acquaintance. Apply thy self to these at
first; Endeavor to learn their Distinct Characters, and what their Force is;
er^ t^^^ come to Spell them into Syllables, by Com^^^nding them into
Judgments; or to put those Syllables together, to make up Entire Words, by
^^^ming Discourses concerning them. Not doubting but that, by this Methodical
and Industrious Applic^tion of thy Faculties, thou will come at length to read
this Book of Creatures currently; at least as ^uch of it as can concern thee to
know in thy Condition here.

Think not that even the least of those Elements of Knowledge, (thy Vulgar and
What Encouragement our present Acquests have given us.
Nature-taught Notions,) is Barren ^^d Fruitless. Consider, how, by
^^^eriencing, that Bodies work on ^^^ Compound or Suppositum, thou ^^^est to
know that they actually are; and therefore, that they had a POWER to be; as
likewise that they had a Power to be Changed into others, and to be affected
after various Modes or Manners and then reflect, how much Light thou have
gain'^ hitherto by Viewing Attentively, and Discoursing consequently, of those
most Ordinary and most Obvious Notions, POWER and ACT; which seemed at first
Sight, so Steril, Insipid and Insignificant.

These Two, joined with a few others, already known without Speculation, and
fully as Evid^^^ as themselves, have demonstrated to thee, How, and What, and
Where, our Essence was ere it ha^ Existence given it. What are the Essential
Part^ of all Bodies in Common. Which are the First Principles that fix and
rivet all Inferior Truth^ in thy Understanding; and how the^ Descend from the
Father of Lights, GOD's Essential Wisdom. They instruct thee, by looking into
their Natures, ^^ Notions, from whence it is that all Change a^^ Mutability
proceeds; a Principle, which draws many Great and Important Truths after it.
They sh^^ thee clearly, what, and how many, several sorts of Things could
possibly have been Created. They inform thee what kind of Division is made by
thy Acute Understanding; which the Subtillest Agents in Nature, though assisted
by the most Exact Chemical Art, could never have reached; and how thou
compoundest again those thus-Divided Parts to fram^ Judgments and Discourses.
They have given th^^ Evident Knowledge, that There are no Actual Parts in any
Ens whatever. A Truth most Useful to the Attainment of very many of thy Future
Knowledges. They have preserved thee from falling into the Precipices of diverse
F^ndamental Errors, by embracing which Great Wits have miscarried. They have,
moreover, taught thee how Absolutely Pure that Act called EXISTENCE is; and
that it is above the Power of any Created Cause to confer that Sovereign Gift
on Themselves, or Others: Which leads thee a fair Step toward the Knowledge of
the FIRST BEING; to know whom perfectly is thy Eternal Happiness. And, are all
these Acquisitions worth nothing? Add, that thou know not yet what
Multitudes of High and most Important Truths do hitherto lie hid, involved in
these Few now mentioned; and in some others, here omitted. All which spring
originally from the bare Notions of POWER and ACT, joined with some others
Allied to them, and Connected with them.

Awake then, my Soul, from thy Desponding Leth^rgy, and exert thy Industry by
What assured Hopes we have of Success in our Quest of Science, if we ground our
Discourse on the Natures of the Things made by the First Being.
the well-assured Hopes of gaining ^^mense Degrees of Knowledge by Studying and
Improving the Vast ^^ock of thy other Notions; that is, indeed, the Things
diversely Conceived by thee, and therefore in thee. It will comfort thy Labor,
to find so much Good, and to have reapt such Benefit by Two of them only; and
those two, as it may seem, none of the Fruitfullest. Such Beginnings are
Hopeful, and give thee Earnest of a Successful Progress. Only be sure thou ^^st
not relinquish the Works made by the Hand of thy All-wise Creator, in which he
has stamped all Natural and Acquired Truths; nor strivest foolishly to Create to
thy Self New Things, and New Worlds, by thy own Shallow Wit; and to ground
Truth on the Mock-Creatures, made by thy own Fantastic ^magination. That
Faculty was intended to be a Servant to thee, to reach thee the Materials thou
^^st need of. Take heed then that her Brisk and Gay Genius do not make her
presume to domineer over her Mistress, or inveigle her to follow her desultory
Vagaries. Expect Substantial and Real Truth, no where but in the Things whose
Essences the GOD of Truth has made and Established; and then thou may be
confident thy Judgments and Discourses will be Well-grounded and Solid, not
Airy and Fantastical Imaginations: Which, tho they flatter thee with fine
Appearances, counterfeiting Evidence; will certainly prove most Obscure, leave
thee in the dark, and be found to be no more but Airy Bubbles, when thoy come
to be graspt by the Strict Hand, or Palma Contracta, of Connected Discourse or
Exact Reason.

CHAP. II. Of the ESSENCES of Bodies in in Common; and of the First or Simple
Bodies in particular.
1. EVERY Notion that is not Abstract but Concrete, must have some Form, or
Formal Cause by which it is constituted such. This is Self-evident; for All
Concrete Notious include some Form that constitutes them such.
we call that a Concrete Notion, which is compounded of the Subject which has
such a Form in it, and the Form which is had by it; and which, by being in it,
makes and denominates it to be This Kind of Concrete in particular.

2. Wherefore the Notion of Ens, it being not an Abstract but a Concrete, is
constituted by it is ESSENCE, as it is The Form of Ens is Essence.
Form, or Formal Cause, which makes it to be an Ens or Thing. For, since the
word [ Essence] imports somewhat that belongs intrinsically to Being; and yet
is not the Notion of Actual Being, or Existence in Nature; consequently, it can
only signify a Capacity of Being, or the Form of that which is Capable of
Being; that is, (by Chapter 1.. 5.) of Ens. Wherefore, as that which is White is
made Formally such by having that Mode, or Accidental Act, in it called
Whiteness; and that which is Round becomes Formally such by having Rotundity in
it; so every Ens or Thing is formally constituted such, by having that
Formality in it called ESSENCE.

3. The Essences of those Things called Pure Acts or Spirits, consists in their
Actual Knowledge. For, since, being Pure The Essences of Pure Acts consists in
Actual Knowledge.
Acts, they have no Power ^^ Matter in them; their Essence cannot consist in a
Power to have what is Natural to them, as Knowledge is; therefore their
Essences must consist in Actual Knowledge of what is due to their Natures to
know. Again, if their Essences did consist only in a Power to Know; it being
evident, that whatever is reduced from the State of Potentiality, or Power, to
that of Actuality or Act, is intrinsecally Changed; and all Change or
Mutability proceeds from Matter, (as is proved, Chapter I.. 19.) and Pure Acts are
therefore called Pure, because they have none of that Power called Matter in
them; it follows necessarily, that the Essence of all Intelligences or
Intellectual Things, can only consist in Actual Knowledge.

4. Notwithstanding that Actual Knowledge is Essential to Pure Acts, this
hinders Yet they are Potential to the Act of Existence.
not but that they have a Potentiality to that First sort of Act called
Existence, which, (as is shown; Chapter 1.. 3. and 4.) is Common and Essential to
all Creatures. For, since to Know is to have the Thing in it intellectually;
and the Notion of Ens or Thing (speaking of Created Things) abstracts from
Existence; it follows that the Knowledge of those Things to which Existence is
Accidental, consists with the Power to Existence; especially, since all
Knowledge, even of the Existence of other Things, (as will be shown, Chapter 6.)
consists in being those Things as Other, or as Distinct from the Knower.
Wherefore, though Angels, by Actual Knowledge, are those other Things with their
Existences intellectually; yet they being in them as Others, they are still
left Indifferent in their proper Natures to exist or not exist.

5. The Essence of Body, or of such an Ens as consists of Matter and Form, is
The Essence of Body is c^^^^ly taken from its Form.
chiefly taken from it is Proper Act, or it is Form. For, since what
distinguishes a Thing from, all others, does, consequently make it This, and no
Other; and Matter being of it self perfectly Indeterminate, cannot distinguish
or determine a Thing to be of this Kind, much less to be this Individuum; it
follows, that the Essence of all Bodies, and consequently of Body in Common, is
chiefly taken from the Form or Act.

6. Yet the Complete Essence of Body is not only taken from the Form, but also
Yet not only, but from the Matter also.
from the Matter, which, together with the Form, compounds the Nature of Body.
For, since that constitutes the Notion of that Species of Ens, called Body,
which distinguishes it essentially from the other Species of Ens, called Pure
Acts or Spirits; and the not-being a Pure Act, is that which distinguishes it
from those Entities, which are Pure Acts; and the not-being a Pure Act, does
also, out of the force of the very Terms, import, that it has Power or Matter
mixed with it: it follows, that Body is essentially distinguished from Spirit, by
it is being compounded of Power and Act, or Matter and Form, and, consequently,
not by the Form only. Again, since Essence speaks the Total Form of any Ens, as
Humanitas does of Homo, or Petreitas of Peter; and not merely that Partial
Form, which, with the other Part, called Matter, compounds Body; it must
necessarily import an Act of that whole Compound; and, consequently, include a
respect to to the Matter also, and not to the Form only; as is evident from the
word [ Corporeity], which signifies the Total Form or Essence of Body.

7. Hence Divisible and Indivisible, taken as they signify Quantitative and
Not-Quantitative, are not the Proper Quantitative and Not-Quantitative, are not
the Proper Differences that constitute Body and Spirit.
Differences which constitute the First Kinds of Ens, [Body] and [ Spirit]; but
the Metaphysical Divisibility and Indivisibility into Matter and Form; as
(besides the Reasons here given) is clearly demonstrated in my METHOD to
Science, B. 1. Less. 3.. 4. and 5. In which Lesson, if I do not flatter my
self, that most Useful Doctrine of assigning Proper and Intrinsecal
Differences, and of Dividing any Genus by such, is more Solidly established, and
more clearly and largely delivered than has been hitherto. The Knowledge of
which is so necessary, that, without this, it is impossible to keep our Notions
Distinct, or preserve them from interfering and being confusedly jumbled: which
must forcibly, in a high manner, obstruct the Way to that Clear and Distinct
Knowledge, called SCIENCE.

8. Corollary I. Hence those Philosophers are convicted of a Vast Error in one
of the First Principles The Essence of the FIRST MATTER of the Cartesians
cannot consist in only Extension.
of Nature, who make the Essence of their First Body to consist in Nothing but
Extension. For, since (as has been Evidently demonstrated in the place now
cited,. 1. and 2*) all Proper and Intrinsecal Differences can be nothing but
more or less of the Notion Divided; if Extension be the Essential Constitutive
of that Matter of theirs, which (it not being pretended to be a Spiritual
Substance) must be some kind of Body; then Difference in Extension, or more and
less of Extension, must essentially constitute Distinct Things under the Notion
of Body, or Distinct Bodies: By which Doctrine, no Man living, nor perhaps any
Body in Nature, while it continually sends out it is Particles or Effluviums,
would be the same Body, or the same Thing, one single moment: Which quite
destroys the Stability of Things; and would alter all or most of the Actions,
Comportments, Duties, and even all the Discourse of Mankind; since, ere they
could speak or think of any Thing, it would no longer be the same Thing but
Another; in regard it is perpetually otherwise than it was according to it is
Extension, which is, (as they hold) it is Essential Constitutive. Nor will it
avail the Cartesians to say, that this holds in every Simple Body, such as are
their Three Elements, but not in a Mixed Body. For no Mixed is, according to
them, any thing but an Aggr^gate of Many, and not One Body; and so the Subject
of our Discourse is altered; while we speak of One, they of a Multitude. None
of their Mixts being One Thing, as is shown, Ideae Cartesianae Expensae, from
Page 240. to page 248.

9. Corollary II. Hence our Modern Ideists ar^ equally Faulty, while they Nor
in Extension and Impenetrability together.
make the Essence of Body to consist in Extension and Impenetrability, (which
they Nickname Solidity;) for they leave out the Matter as not worth
considering, which* (as was shown,. 6.) is part of the Essen^ of Body. Besides,
they reflect not the those Notions, which are merely Quantitative, cannot be
the Total Form of any En^ nor consequently the Essence of that En^, called Body.

To show farther the Essential Distinction of Bodies, I advance these following
Positions.

10. Every Particular Body in the World is essentially, a Distinct Part of
Nature. For, since the whole Complex Every Body is essentially a Distinct Part
of Nature.
of Bodies called the Universe, or the World, does essentially consist of a
Multitude of Things, which are of many Distinct Natures, as of it is Parts; and
their Essence, as they are Parts of Nature, does consist in their compounding
or making up this Aggregate or Whole; and all those Parts are such Things as we
call Bodies; it fol^^ws that every Body in the World is essentially such a [
Thing] by it is being a Distinct Part in Nature.

11. Wherefore every Body is also essentially ordained for some Distinct,
Pro^^, and Primary Operation in Nature. Wherefore it is ordained for some Proper
and Primary Operation in Nature.
For, since the Course of Nature does essentially consist in the Motion of a
great Variety of Things, which are Agents and Patients in respect of one
another; and those Things are Bodies; which, being Distinct in their Individual
Essences, must consequently (every thing acting as it is) have also some
distinct O^^^^tion primarily and properly belonging to them, (...) proceeding
from them; that is, such as could (...) proceed from any other Body: It
follows, that ^^^^y Body is essentially ordained for some Distinct, Proper and
Primary Operation in Nature.

12. Wherefore, whatever fits the Matter for the Performance of this Primary
Operation, does essentially constitute Wherefore, whatever fits *it for this
Primary Operation, constitutes it.
such a Thing in Nature or such a Body. For, since the Course of Nature
consists in Mo^^^^* carried on with that Regu^^^^y* and Exact Order, that ( See
B. 4. Med. last.
every Distinct Thing acting as it is; that is, after a Distinct but Certain
manner,) Proper Effects should still be produced by Proper Causes; were there
any Body or Part of Nature which had No Effect at all, (or which comes to the
same) no Proper Effect; such a Body would be in Vain and Useless, or Good for
nothing. Wherefore, since it is imposs^ that Infinite Wisdom, which Created and
Gove^ the World, should make any thing that is in v^ and Good for nothing; it
follows, that every Thin^ and every Body in Nature, is constituted such (...)
Part of it, or such a Body by the Aptness it h^ to perform its Proper or
Primary Operation; a^ therefore, whatever fits the Matter for the P^^formance
of this Primary Operation, does essentially constitute such a Thing in Nature,
or (...) a Body.

13. Corollary III. Hence is seen in what co^sists the Metaphysical BON^ or
GOODNESS of every body, In this Fitness to perform its Primary Operation
consists it is Metaphysical GOODNESS.
which is one of the Properties of it as it is an Ens (...) Thing; viz. That it
is Use^ for some Effect or other t^ proceeds from it as it is such (...) Ens; or
for such an Operation as is Prope^ and Peculiar to it. Whence those Cartesi^
who deny Bodies to be Causes of any Effect in Nature, no, not so much as
Instrument^ ones; but only to be Occasions, which themselves say, are No
Causes; and, consequently, do put them to have No Operation; do, by making them
Good for Nothing, take away their Metaphysical Bonity; and, BONUM being a
Property of ENS, by consequence, their ENTITY also. Moreover,

14. Every Body in Nature is essentially an Instrument. For, since the
Definition of an Instrumental Cause, is Every Body is essentially an Instrument.
that it can no otherwise Act than as it is Acted upon or moved by Another; and
no Body can actually move of it (...) but has only a Power to be moved by
ano^r; because it is far from being a Pure Act, ^ich is essentially in Act
according to it is Nature; but, having Matter in it, which is a Power (...) the
Notion of Thing, it is a fortiori only Po^ial in order to it is Operation, which
is Subse^nt to the Notion of Thing. Wherefore every ^dy is only an Instrument
put into Motion (immediately) by Angels or Intelligences, which are Pure Acts;
in such a manner as best conduces to ^^complish the Intention of the World's
Supreme ^overnour.

15. The Essential Difference of Body is chiefly (...) from the Action it is
or^n'd for in Nature, and not The Essential Difference of Body is chiefly taken
from it is Action.
(...) it is Power to be acted on or ^'d by Another. For, since ^t which
constitutes any Essence (...) be the most Formal, and (as it were) the ^st
Noble consideration found in the Thing: And Act, (let it be never so imperfect)
is far ^ore Formal and more Noble than the Power which corresponds to that Act:
It follows that the Essential Difference constituting Body must chiefly ^ring
from it is Activeness, which belongs to Body (...) ^t has the nature of Act or
Form in it; and not ^om it is Passiveness, or Aptness to be operated upon by
others, which it has from the Matter.

16. Those Accidents or Modes which do make a Body fit for it is Primary
Operation in Nature, do constirute it The Modes or Accidents that make Bodies
thus Fit, are it is Essential Form.
(...) Distinct Body, or, are it is Essential Form. For, since nothing is
required to make one Body essentially distinct from another, but to make (...)
a Distinct Part of the Universe; and that which makes it a Distinct Agent in
Nature, does also make it a Distinct Part of the Universe; and that which fits
it for a Distinct and Peculiar Operation, makes it a Distinct Natural Agent;
and the Modes or Accidents (as will be shown in (...) several sorts of Bodies)
make it a Distinct Age^* It follows, that those Modes or Aocidents the make it
fit for it is Primary Operation are (...) Essential Form.

17. The Suppositum or Individual Body must retain that Complexion of Accidents
with some Constancy, or for But the Thing must retain that Complexion of
Accidents for some time.
some time, according as it is Constitution requires; and not (...) transitu
only, or by way of continued Motion. For, otherwise we could never pitch upon
any thing in Nature* so as to be able to say, it is This or That Thing* if it is
intrinsecal Constitution were perpetually Fleeting. Besides, a Thing, is that
which is Capable of Existence; and actually has it when it is a Part of Nature;
and Existence has some Steadiness and Permanency in it is Notion: Whereas, in
case Individual Bodies did possess those Accidents only in a Transitory
Succession, we could never assign any the least time in which it could be said
to be This or That Thing at all; nor* consequently, (since nothing can exist,
which is not either This or That,) to Be at all. Whence follows, that Accidents
are not Entia, or Capable of Existing without any subject: Since the Complexion
of those Accidents, which, with the Matter, make the Thing fit for it is Primary
Operation, is the Form; that is, but one part of the thing. Besides, they are
no more but Modes or Manners, how the Thing is, as all Cartesians hold; which
is consistent, in Sense, with the Doctrine of the Aristotelians, who make them
to be Affections or Determinations of the Matter. Now the ^otions of Ens, Res,
Substance or Thing, is to be ^able of Existing; wherefore that Definition ^nnot
possibly agree to any other Notion; and, ^refore, those Modes or Accidents,
cannot be (...) themselves Capable of Existence: Again, how (...) it
conceivable, that the Mode, or Manner, can be ^^thout that of which it is a
Mode? especially, ^ce in the Definition of every Mode or Accident* the Thing of
which it is a Manner, is con^ated or included. Lastly, If Accidents were ^ble
of Existing alone, or Entia; then, since ^ry Body has Many, and some of them
Innu^able such Modes in them, that Ens which has (...) could not be said to be
Unum, nor, consequently an Ens; which would leave neither any ^nity, nor, by
consequence, any Entity in all Nature.

18. No Body can exist in Nature if it have ^o other Form in it but mere
Divisibility in Common. For, since Divisibility in Common cannot constitute any
Body.
^thing can exist but what is ^rminately This or That; and that is Common to
all, is Inde^minate to every Individuum; and, therefore, cannot determine it to
be This or That in particular: It follows, that Divisibility in Common cannot
fit or determine any Body in Nature to Exist.

19. More and Less of Divisibility, which (...) the Immediate and First
Di^rences of Divisibility in common More and Less of Divisibility, may.
determine it is Notion; and may consequently, (taken within some Determinate
Degree) fit the Matter to recei^^ Existence. For, since all that is requisite
to ma^a Thing capable of Existence, is to determ^it and make it distinct from
others; and m^ and less of Divisibility, (that is, Rarity and De^sity) so they
be in some particular Degree, an^ belong to their Subjects with some Constancy
do make their Subjects thus Distinct from on^ another: It follows, that such
Rarity and Density may render the Matter capable of Exis^ence.

20. One or two different Modes or Accide^^ which are Intrinsecal to the
Su^ject, (so they be determinate^* One or Two different Accidents may
constitute the Simplest Bodies.
such, within such a Degree may suffice to make the First an^ Simplest Bodies
essentially Distinct. For, as it has been proved, and will be more amply shown
hereafter, that the Complexion of Accidents, which make a Body fit for it is
Primary Operation, is the Essential Form to all Mixed Bodies; of which perhap^*
all Nature does now consist: So it is Cons^nant to Reason, that the Simplest
and First Bodies, which, by being such, cannot have such a numerous Complexion
in them, should be constituted by some one or a few Modes; or be distinguished
from other Simple Bodies, by it, and it is Opposite.

21. Wherefore the Essences of the First and (...) Simple Bodies of all, which
we call the Four Elements, are Wherefore the Elements are constituted by
Density and Rarity.
constituted by the First and most ^^mple Differences of Divisible (...) or
Body in common; viz. (...) their being, to a Certain Degree, more and (...)
Divisible; that is, by their being Rare and ^se. This is evident from the very
Terms; (...) these Determine. the Indifferency of the Mat^; and distinguish the
Subjects from one ano^^er; and withal suffice to render them Capa^ of
performing the Primary ^ration Proper to them. For See B. 4.. 6.
(...) First Operation in Nature is ^l Motion or Division, by which Mixed Bodies
(...) consequently all Nature is made: Where^ since Density renders the Dense
Body able (...) divide the Rare one, and Rarity make the ^re one apt to be
divided by the Dense; they ^^^ exactly and perfectly fitted, each in it is Kind,
^o accomplish the Primary Operation in Nature; which is also theirs: They being
as yet considered ^t the only Agents and Patients: Add, that Ra^ity and Density
are Intrinsecal to them; as is evi^^nt, because their Notions cannot be thought
(...) belong to any of the Six last Predicaments, which are all Extrinsecal.

22. Corollary IV. Whether those Simplest Bodies do now exist in themselves, or
as in their own Nature; that The Elements were thus constituted at first; though
perhaps there are not any such now.
is, out of the Compounds, or no, is not easy to be demonstrated. What I
conceive, is, That Earth, Air and Water, (which were Created in the Beginning
of the World,) did really exi^ Separate, before Motion, which caused Mixture,
was set on work: Also, that the Degree of Rarity and Density they had at Fir^
was the true Standard of their Nature; an^ most exactly so proportioned and
fitted (when that most Active Divider, Fire, called (...) the Scripture [
Light] was made the first Day,) as to be mingled variously in such a manner as
was perfectly Best for the Forming the World, and for carrying on the Series
^^^ it afterward most connaturally. But I cannot be Positive, that since
Motion, and the Course of Nature was universally set (...) playing, the
Elements are now found P^ and Unmixt; by reason of the continu^ turmoil of
Bodies pressing 'upon one another; for this forces them to mingle an^ remingle
with one another; and (by See B. 4.. 8.
the Motions of Pulsus and Tractus) Thrusting one another before them, or, (by
the continuity of Quantity) Drawing* them after them, hinders them from
preserving steadily any Determinate Degree of Rarity and Density.

23. Corollary V. Hence, it is farther demonstrated against the New
Philosophers, (as before from the Hence the Cartesian, First Matter, which they
put neither to be Rare nor Dense, is a Chimera.
Notion of Quantity, as it i^ Extension, so now) from the same Quantity as.
it is Divisibility, that it is impossible anything should Exist, (as they put
their First Matter to have done) which is neither more nor less Divisible; that
is, neither Rare nor Dense. For, sinee what is in no Degree Divisible, is in no
particular Manner, or no way Divisible, and what is in no manner or no way
Divisible, is not Divisible at all; it is a plain Contradiction to put it at
once to be Divisible, and yet no way (that neither more nor less, easily or
hardly) Divisible; that is, to put it to be Divisible, and yet to be neither
Rare nor Dense. Again, since in that Supposition, Divisibility must be the
Essential Form of that Simple Body they call the First Matter; and, to be
merely Divisible, and neither more nor less such, or neither Rare nor Dense, is
Common to all things that are Divisible; and what is Common to All cannot
constitute or determine it to be This, or of This Kind; and* nothing can exist
but what is Determinately This or That: It follows, that either what is
Indeterminate it self must formally make it is Subject, (their First Matter) to
be Determinate, which is a Contradiction; or else their First Matter, though
remaining still Indeterminate, is capable to exist; which is equally
Impossible. For it is to be noted, that these Men, neither put Rarity nor
Density, (which are Qualities) in their First Matter; but hold that all Modes,
but bare Extension, are made by the mingling their Three Elements, after their
First Matter was Created and put in Motion.

MEDITATION.
ANd now, my Soul, let us cast up our Accompt^ and compute what Degrees of
Knowledge ^^ have gained while we run over this Second Stage of our Traveling
What we have gained by our Speculation hitherto.
Thoughts. We have gone, indeed, but slowly forwards; but the smalness of our
Advance is recompensed by our making our selves Masters of our Ground every
Step we have taken. We have gained a Clear Light what Essences are, which
puzzles so many Speculaters; and in what consist the Essences of the two most
General Kinds of Things, Body and Spirit We have seen what Dull Lumpish things,
All (eve^ the Best of) Bodies are: which Unthinking and Unelevated Worldlings
do so blindly admire; and that the most Subtle of them, being unable of
themselves to stir or move, are but Unwieldy Sluggs in comparison of the
Activity of a Subsistent Spirit, which sets them all on work. We have discerned
clearly, that all this Material World is but a vast Shop of Instruments; which
are to be managed and wielded regularly and artificially by the Iourneymen of
it*^ Great Artificer and First Mover, to bring about hi^ Infinitely-Wise Ends.
We see that not one, no n^ the very least of them, is Useless and in vain; b^
that they perform such Operations, and cause such Effects, as are suitable to
their respective Natures* and, thence, we come to see the reason why their All*
wise Creator, viewing his Great Workmanship, no^ perfectly Formed and
Completed, did declare, that all things he had made were exceedingly GOOD;
which they could not be, were any of them Useless and Good for nothing. We have
discovered what it is that Determines the Common Matter of the Corporeal
Universe; what shapes the Parts of Matter into Distinct Things, and so sits it
for Existence, (...) have found how much of Determination suffices ^^ make the
Simplest Bodies; which will lead its ^o the Knowledge of what farther Degrees
of it are ^^quisite for those which are more and more Mixed, (...) Compounded.
Lastly, We have avoided many Great Errors about the Primordial Constitution of
Entities; and we know certainly the Terms and Conditions which grounds their
Title to Existence, or ^ders them Capable to be Actually. All this we ^^^e got;
and, yet, contrary to our Acquisitions in (...) Material World, we have lost
nothing at all ^^ getting it. And, which abundantly perfects our Satisfaction,
we foresee, by what we have attained already, that we have a comfortable
Prospect, and are in a fair way of Improving our Growing Stock; and of making
Large Accessions to it, without Ha^arding the least Diminution of it, while we
drive ^^^ gainful Trade of getting the true Riches of our Mind, Knowledge, or
Trafficking for Science.

Perhaps, some inconsiderate Readers, who reflect (...), that Knowledge of
Truth is the Natural Perfection of their Soul, will think it ^t worth so much
pains; but will The Reason why we Discourse of Abstract Notions; and of the
vast Advantage it yields.
^gh at us for drawing our Consequences with such nice care, and ^inning out
our Speculations into ^^ch Subtle Threads: They will ask (...), What are we the
better for know^ a Few insipid Common Notions; or the Wiser, for dwelling so
long upon them? But these M^ reflect not what Incredible and most Useful
Consequences are Deduced in the Mathematics, by att^^tive Descants on those
three Common Notions (...) Length, Breadth and Thickness, variously consider
(...) If Mathematicians, by considering, studying, (...) poring, so many years,
on one single Mode or Accid^ of that Ens, called Body, (viz. Quantity,) arriv^
such wonderful Conclusions; certainly we may b^ for far more Excellent and more
Noble Producti^^ by studying the nature of Ens, or of Body in Common; without
which, the other being but a M^ or Manner of it, could have no Being or Entity
all; nor, consequently, any Notion or Intelligibili^^ They consider not that
all Science, which is a Distinct and Clear Knowledge of Things, must h^ for,
it is Immediate Object, some Abstract Notio^ for if it be Complex, or involves
more Not^ than one; we must either take the Complex N^ in pieces, that is, we
must make Diverse Abstract Notions of it, and consider each of them apart;
(...) else, (as experience will teach us, if we set our selves to discourse of
two Notions at once) we can^ possibly know either of them Clearly, but only at
t^ best, Blindly and Confusedly. Again, they mista^ us, if they think we
intended to terminate our Discourse in those Common Notions; We take them (...)
in our way, and we are forced to do so, if (...) intend to discourse solidly;
as every Man, who kn^ what a Demonstration a priori means, must (...) see and
acknowledge. Lastly, They reflect not (...) the Considering the most Common
Notions of (...) Thing enlarges the Soul; and that, though those (...) Abstract
Conceptions be but a very small part, a partial, and very Inadequate Notion of
the wh^ Individual Thing; yet, that Shortness is abundantly re^^mpenced by the
Largeness of their Extent. He that knows distinctly the Notion or Nature of
Quantity, knows the whole World, and each particular Body in it, as far as they
are Quantitative. In like ^nner, he who has the Exact Knowledge of Ens, ^nce,
Act, Power, etc. knows the whole Crea^, and every particular part of it, as far
as they ^ve in them what grounds the Notions of Ens, Essence, Power, Act,
Divisibility, Composition, etc. ^t what, is all this, if we add the vast trains
of ^lear Consequences, enriching our Mind with Innumerable Truths; many of
which are near as Universal (...) these Notions themselves were. Let us permit
(...) those Men of Fancy to slubber over their Know^ of things by their
Confused Methods of Talking (...) random; and pursue the Way to Science, which
Right Nature, and the Rules of Exact Art, have ^ablisht to our hands.

CHAP. III. Of the Essences of Mixed, Vegetable* and Animal Bodies.
1. THere are not in Nature, (as far as we can judge) at this time, any
perfectly Simp^ Bodies, or Pure Elements. For since, to perfect the Forming of
It can scarce be imagined that there are now any Pure Elements, farther proved.
the World at first, it was requisite that there should be a thoro^ Mixture of
those Simplest Bodies* or Elements, which were made in the Beginning: And, fin^
there are many pregnant Reasons, which are very hard to solve, that at the
Flood or Universal Deluge, the whole Body of the Earth, and all it is parts,
were still more confusedly blended together with the other Bodies, which were
themselves Mixts or rather Demixts before. Again, since it is hard to conceive,
(the Course of Nature, which consists in Motion, still continuing) how those
Simple Bodies should re-gain their Original Purity, and not rather mingle still
(...) and more; It may, I think, be concluded hence and from what has been
alleged, Chap. 2. Cordlary IV. that there are not now in the World an^ Pure
Elements or Unmixt Bodies.

2. To pursue the Thread of my Discourse: When Two very Minute Bodies, of
different Natures, of which How First-Mixt Bodies may be conceived to be made.
one is Rare, the other Dense, do cling together; which, by being of the
smallest size, are not easy to be divided or separated from one another by
others, they being too big to come between their parts, and so divide them;
they may be reasonably conceived to constitute a First-Mixt Body. For, since,
by their constant Adhesion, they do not Act or Operate as Two, but Conjoyntly,
or as One; (...) follows that they have a peculiar Modified Operation of their
own, distinct from that which other of those Elements had produced in case it
had existed alone. Wherefore, since every Part (...) Nature is then a Distinct
Thing, when it has a ^ct Operation; it is consequent, that these were at first,
or in the beginning, Distinct Entities; which kind of Things we call Mixed or
Compounded; and, this being the Simplest or Least sort of Mixture, First-Mixt
Bodies.

3. Wherefore the Essential Form of those First-Mixt-Bodies, was the Complexion
The Essential Form of First-Mixt Bodies.
of those two Primary Qualities, Rarity and Density; since it is evident, that
the having those Two in it, does distinguish them from Simple Bodies or
Elements which have but One of them; that is, (at that time,) distinguished them
from all others.

4. Therefore the Essence or Total Form of those First-Mixt And their Essences.
Bodies consists of Power and Act; or in this, that they have Matter in them,
Determined by such a Form; viz. by the Complexion of those two Accidents.

5. The next Sort of Mixed Bodies, is, That they have Three, or All, of the
Elements in them. For, all Proper The Second sort of Mixed Bodies.
and Intrinsecal Differences being nothing but more and less; and the Elements,
having each of them, a Distinct Degree of Rarity or Density in them; It
follows, that these are evidently more-Mixt than the others were, which had but
only Two Elements, and their Particular Degrees of Rarity and Density, in their
Composition. Whence, it is easy, by what is discourst here,. 4. and 5. to
discover in what their Essential (or Partial) Form, and their Essence, which is
their Total Form, consists.

6. The Next or Third Sort of Mixed Bodies, (if it be not in some sort the same)
is, when the Compound possesses The Third sort of Mixts.
with some Stability and Constancy, an incomparably greater Proportion of some
one of those Elements above the rest. For it is manifest, that there are in
Nature many sorts of those Things which we call Fire, Air, Earth and Water; in
all which, some One of those particular Elements does so much abound, that we
cannot well discern, at first Sight, any Mixture of the others; though it is
Evident to our Reflex Thoughts there is; and even to our Sight, when Art comes
to separate them; though our Rude and First Impressions make us commonly give
them their Name from the exceedingly- Predominant Element.

7. The Next or Fourth sort of Mixts, which, perhaps, are (in proper Speech)
the First Sort of Demixt or Decompounded The Fourth sort of Mixts.
Bodias, is, when they have More or Fewer of the former Sorts of Mixts
variously united in them; whose (...) is the Complexion of those Qualities,
found in those several Mixts. And, their Essence consists in this, that their
Matter is Determined by the Complexion of those Mixed Accidents; which giving
them, as Constant Agents, the power of Operating thus; or, after a Distinct
Manner from the former; do, by consequence, principally concur to make them
Distinct Parts of Nature; that is, Distinct Things, or Bodies. I say,
principally, for it is to be observed, that ^^st. Many other Accidents, besides
those most Intrinsecal ones of Rarity and Density; (either Single, or Mingled)
What other Accidents are superadded to make variety of Mixts and Demixts.
do concur to the Essential Constitution of most Mixts and Demixts. For, since
Mixture is made first by the Division of the Simple, and afterward of
First-Mixt-Bodies; at and Division makes more of One; the parts of those
Divided Bodies (the ways of Nature's Operation being manifold and various) must
necessarily be Diverse in Number; and, consequently, (each Divided part being
Determinate) in Bigness, Figure, and Situation; which, the Potential parts of
the Elements, before Division, (each of them being Homogeneous or Uniform,)
were not. Whence follows, that most of the Mixed, and all of the Demixt bodies,
besides their Different Degrees of Rarity and Density, must also have in them
great Variety of the Bulk, Figure and Situation of their Parts: Which, every
thing operating as it is, must needs make them operate diversely; and,
consequently, these are parts of their Essential Form; and therefore, (their
Consistency, or Constancy of being such, supposed) must constitute them
Distinct Agents in Nature, of Distinct Bodies.

9. Notwithstanding that these last-named Accidents do thus concur, yet it is
chiefly their Rarity and Density Yet Rarity and Density are the Principal and
most Intrinsecal.
which gives those Mixts and Demixts that Nature in which consists their most
Intrinsecal Temperature and Constitution. For, since Rarity and Density are
those Primary Qualities, the partaking of which, within some certain Degree,
did constitute the Simple Bodies; and all the Mixed Bodies are essentially
compounded of Simple ones; those two First Qualities must needs be more
Intrinsecal to them than are those others which ac^ru'd to them by the Division
of Matter; tho they also concur, each in his way, to determine the Matter, so
that the Mixed or Compounds may have Different Operations in Nature, and,
thence, become Distinct Things, or Distinct Mixed Bodies. Conformably to what
Aristotle asserts, Lib. Physic. 8. Cap. 7. (...), etc. Of all the Affections,
or Determinations of Matter, Density and Rarity are the Principal, or the
Beginning and Origin of all others.

10. Corollary I. Hence all the Followers of Democritus, whether Epioureans,
Cartesians, or others, who Hence the Corpuscularians can give no account of the
Intrinsecal Constitution of any Natural Body.
put no Parts of their Matter to be distinguished by Rarity and Density, which,
as is proved, are most Intrinsecal; and affirm, that they have only in them
these two Accidents, Extension and Figure; the former of which being Common to
them all, cannot without wronging clear Reason, distinguish them; and, the
Later of them, it being only the Termination of Quantity, is rather
Extrinsecal, or belonging to the Surface of the Bodies: And is evidently
impossible to give the Body, which has it, it is Inward Constitution; hence,
they cannot possibly give any account of the most Intrinsecal or Essential
Constitution and Distinction of their Mixts and Demixts; nor, consequently, of
what it is in which the Essence of any particular Body, which must certainly be
most Intrinsecal to it, does consist.

11. Of this last sort of Demixts, are all Minerals, Gems, Coral, Clay, Marl,
all the several sorts of Earths, Of the several sorts of Demixts.
and such like. Which are Differenced by the Proportion, Size and Figures of
their Rare and Dense particles; and not a little by the Situation, or Manner of
their Texture: Whence they come to be more or less Solid or Compacted, Light,
Heavy, Clammy, Friable, Porous, Pellucid, Fusible, Malleable, etc. To treat of
which particularly, and reduce them into their Proper Causes, belongs to
Physics or Natural Philosophy. Nor is it very hard to do this, were true
Principles of Nature taken up at First, and pursued home by Immediate
Consequences.

12. The same Accidents, and particularly the Figure and Situation of Parts,
give Bodies their different manner The Ground of Sensible Qualities.
of affecting our Senses. For, it is not hard to show, that all Color, and it is
several kinds, are chiefly produced by These; as also, the Qualities of
Odoriferous, Stinking, Sweet, Sharp, Sour, Rough, Smooth Bodies. Though Sound,
and it is Varieties, spring from the Greater or Lesser Tension, Thickness, or
Smart Force of the Instrument that makes the Different Motions of the Air.

13. Corollary II. If the Duration of those Bodies be Transitory and Unconstant
in comparison of others that seem Of Imperfect Mixts.
of the same sort, they are called in a Common Appellation, Imperfect Mixts;
such as are, Winds, Snow, Hail, Smoke, Mists, Meteors, etc. and therefore,
wanting that Constancy, (an Argument of their not being well united) they are,
less properly Entia or Things, than the Perfect Mixts are; as is shown, Chapter 2..
17. And, perhaps, they are no more but Aggregates of more Distinct Bodies
lighting together casually; or approximated to one another, and sticking
together, by virtue of some Physical Quality, for some short time; which is not
enough to make those Compounds to be Constant and Distinct Agents in Nature, or
Distinct and Perfect Natural Bodies.

14. When the Parts of a Demixt are exexceedingly Different in their several
Temperaments; and withal, Of Living Bodies.
One of them (the Common Causes of the World setting them on work) is apt to
move Another, that Body is said to be LIVING. For, since the Notion of LIFE is
A Principle of Self-Motion; and there are no Actual Parts in any Compound;
(whence we say, All Actions and Passions are of the Suppositum;) it follows,
that the Action or Motion of each of those Parts, is the Action or the Motion
of the Whole Thing, though considered particularly according to such a Part of
it. Hence, such a Thing, one Part of which moves another, is truly said to move
it self, or to be LIVING.

15. The Simplest, Lowest and Ignoblest sort of Living or Self-moving Things,
are those which are mere Vegetables: Of Vegetables.
For, since all Proper Differences are more and less of the Generical Notion;
and Life is Self-Motion, that is, One sort of Motion; and to move Swiftly and
Slowly is to move more or less; it follows, that Vel^city and Tardity are the
First Differences of all Motions; of which, to move it self, is one; and,
consequently, that, to perform their Primary Operation more quickly and more
slowly, does essentially distinguish Living Things, as they are Living.
Wherefore, since Experience shows, and it will be more clearly manifested
hereafter, that Vegetables or Plants do more slowly, and more dully, go about
their Primary Operation than other Self-moving Things, v. g. Brutes or Men do:
it follows, that those Bodies we call Vegetables or Plants, are the Simplest,
Lowest and Ignoblest of Self-moving of Living Things.

16. The Primary Operation of mere Vegetables is to nourish the Compound, For,
since (as any attentive Speculater The Primary Operation of Vegetables.
may observe) every Thing is ordained to preserve it is own Unity and Entity, as
much as it can; this preserving it self is most Natural, and Intrinsecal to it;
and therefore not a Secondary, but it is Primary Action. Wherefore, those
Individual Vegetables, which have a Power in them to concoct their Proper Juice
or Sap, and so make it fit Aliment for them, which is the Preserving themselves
from Withering or Decay; must be ordained, in the first place, or primarily, to
perform this Operation. Especially, since whatever other, or Secondary sorts of
Actions they may be Useful for in Nature, will be better accomplished by their
being first nourisht duly, and as they ought; which, by perfecting them in
Being, does make them more-perfect Agents.

17. Wherefore the Form of Vegetables, is that Complexion of Accidents, as fits
the Vegetable for that Operation; The Form of Vegetables.
and it is Essence consists in this, that the Matter of it is Parts has such a
Complexion of those Modes or Accidents in it as sits one of them to work upon,
or move, another in order to the Nourishment and Preservation of the Whole.

18. Those Living Bodies whose Parts are more^oving-one-another, or with more
Velocity, in order to their Primary The Essences of Animals.
Operation; that is, upon the least Excitation from External Causes, are
therefore a Higher and Perfecter ^ort of Vegetables, or something more than
mere Vegetables. These we call Animal, or Sensitive; because, upon Impressions
on those Parts called the Senses, they proceed to Action.

19. The Primary Operation of Animals, is to pursue such Food as is Agreeable
Their Primary Operation.
^o their Natures; as is shown,. 16. of mere Vegetables: and the reason given
there holds equally for both.

20. Whence, that mere Animal is most perfect, that moves it self to acquire
What Animal is most Perfect in it is Kind.
such Food as is agreeable to it is Nature; that is, such as ^akes it is Fancy
(which is the principal Faculty that sets on Work all the rest) Calm or
Indifferent. By which means it becomes applicable to more Motions. Add, that
^^ch Food as is Violent, or extremely distant from (...) Constitution, and
therefore is disproportioned to the pitch of it is Nature, does make it is
operations depraved, and to some degree Preter^^tural; As we Experience in our
selves, when ^e Eat any thing too Hot or too Cold for our Constitution; which
disorders our Tempera^ure, or [as we use to say] distempers it, or ^akes us
Sick.

Note, That we discourse here of what is the Primary Operation of Individual
Bodie^* as to themselves. What farther, or more Remote Effects they are
intended or ordered for by the Governor of the World, belongs to another
Question, and will be treated of toward the End of this Book.

ADVERTISEMENT.
These Discourses suppose it proved th^^ Rare and Dense, or more and less
Divisible, are the First Differences of Bodies as they are in Nature, or as
they are the Subjects of Natural Operations; which has been already
demonstrated here, Chap. 2.. 19, 20, 21. as also in my Method to Science, Book
I. Lesson 5.. 10, 11. and Solid Philosophy, Reflection 17.. 13, 14, 15.

MEDITATION.
THus we have deduced the First Difference of Bodies from the more and less
Divisibility of them, considered as givi^g What has been proved hitherto,
recapitulated.
the Ground to all Natural Action, and Passion; and have found th^^ they are of
two sorts; viz. Rare or Dense; whence also the several Kinds of those First
Bodies can only be taken from their having more or less Degrees (I mean, such
as are very distant and notorious) of those two Primary Qualities; in which
therefore, the Form or Act, which supposing it is Power or Matter) does chiefly
give them their Essence, consists. Moreover, we have shown, how from ACTUAL
DIVISION, which is the First Operation in Nature, there naturally and
necessarily arise other Modes or Accidents; viz. the Number, Bigness, Figure
and Situation of the several Parts of those First Bodies; the variety of which,
woven together after a different manner, and cohering with some Durableness,
does compound all Mixed and Demixt Bodies. We have seen (in common) that those
Accidents do make them fit to produce their Proper Effects, or to perform their
Primary Operation; which constitutes them Distinct Parts and Agents in Nature;
and, therefore, Distinct Things. Whence follows, That the Complexion of
Accidents is ^eally that which we call their Essential or Substantial Form: And
that, by this Doctrine, an Intelligible Account is given of those Forms, so
much talked of, and so little understood; that lame account which the Schools
give of them, making them as Obscure as an Occult Faculty; neither giving any
grounded Reason by what Connatural Means they come into the Matter; how they
determine it ultimately for Existence, by making it Distinct from all others,
or This and That Individuum; nor, lastly, how they fit it for some Proper or
Primary Operation; which Considerations are Requisite and Sufficient to give it
the Nature or Notion of an Ens or Thing, While we were doing this, we have, at
the same time, laid Grounds for the pursuing orderly the Knowledge of Secondary
and Sensible Qualities, about which the greatest part of Physics is employed;
and to distinguish the Essences of all Things in the World, under what Sort or
Kind soever they are rankt. Which shows, how the Architectonick Science of
METAPHYSICS (as becomes her Highest Stati^^ and Dignity) does Superintend the
Inferior Science of Physics, and The Excellency of Metaphysics; and the
Sublime way of discoursing, peculiar to it.
consequently the rest; Prescribing them what they are to do, by assigning them
their Proper Objects; as also, by Enlightening them, and Establishing the Truths
they deduce, by her most General, most Evident, and most Certain Maxims; which,
though they be Deductions in Metaphysics, are Principles to them. For, her
manner of considering the Objects of all other Sciences is far Exa^ted above
the Inferior manners, according to which Subordinate Sciences treat of them;
nor does she regard any Quality, Operation, Bulk, Figure, Motion; etc.
otherwise than under that Sovereign Respect as they c^^duce to constitute and
establish the Essences of Things by determining the Common Power or Matter to
such a Particular Nature as is Different from all others* which makes it
Capable of Existing, or an (...) We have avoided the Precipices of some very
Fundemental Errors, highly prejudicial to the Intrinse^^ Constirution and
Distinction of Essences, and consequently, to the Knowledge of the Things
themselves; without settling well the Grounds of which first, it is impossible
to have true Science of any Thing whatever; or to know what a Thing is.

All this we have endeavored, and we hope, performed by an Immediate and
Orderly Connection of (...) Natural Notions; deducing still our Consequences in
(...) Frame so closely compacted, that each Foregoing Knowledge (setting aside
the Corollaries) naturally leads (...) the Following ones. A Method Unusual to
the Generality of Philosophers; and yet. so Proper and Effectual to assert and
establish Truth; that, however, ^ may not please such Men and their Readers;
yet it ^^ght not to deter us from pursuing a Way so evidently, of it is own
Nature, What slight ways of Discoursing some others affect.
Conclusive and Decisive, and withal so Proper to Science; how lamely soever
we travel in it: Whereas Dishevelled, Ill-knit and Unprincipled Discourses,
however Witty and Pleasing to the Dotage of ^^r Fancy, have not the least
Semblance of Concluding evidently, or Establishing solidly, any one Truth.

In a word, having seen in what consists the Essence of mere Animals, which is
part of our selves, we have made way to the Contemplation of our own Nature,
which is, What is our Duty, as we are Rational Creatures.
^ver and above, Rational: which therefore ought to challenge from us (...)
most Attentive Reflection; that, ^ng to a Distinct and Clear Knowledge of what
i^ our true Essence or Nature, and what the Primary Operation for the
performance of which the GOD of Nature intended us; we may not deviate from it;
(...) labor for our own True Good; pursue that best^isht Food, which
connaturally nourishes our Soul, in it is way; and comply with the Best
Intentions and End of our Creation.

CHAP. IV. Of the Essence of MAN.
1. MAN is One Thing, made up, or Compounded, of a Corporeal and a Spiritual
Part which we call BODY and SOUL* For, were the Body and Soul i^ MAN is One
Thing made up of Soul and Body.
Man Two Distinct Things, those Two Things, they being of such Different
Natures, could not possibly have any Coalition, nor any kind of Union (...) as
to make up One Compound, more than can (...) Angel and a Brute: Nor could they
be in (...) Manner, or according to any Mode of which w^ have a Notion,
cemented together. Not according to that Mode or Accident called QUANTITY; the
Unity of which kind of Parts is Continuity; because the Spiritual Part, the
Soul, is not Quantitative, nor can it be thus Continued or Joined to the Body.
Nor, consequently, according to the Notion of Quality: For, first, Quality
supposes t^ Thing, which it Qualifies, already constituted and only superadds
some Perfection or Imperfecti^ to it is Nature. Secondly, Because all the
Qualities of One of those Parts are Corporeal ones, a^ all the Qualities of the
Other Part are Spiritual that is, they are Quantitati^s and Not-Quantitativ^
which can no more unite than a Body and a Sp^ could. Nor, according to
Relation, or to spe^ more properly, according to the Things themselves, as they
are considered to be Relata, or (...).: For this Notion is of the Thing it
self, as it gives us the Ground or Reason of our Relating or Comparing it to
Another in such a Respect; which presupposes the Things, and is so far from
giving us a Ground of conceiving them to be One that it obliges us to conceive
them as (some way or other) Two; and, moreover, Relatively Opposite to one
another; and Opposition cannot be the Formal Reason of Unity. And, if we take
the word [ Relation] not Fundamentally, but Formally, for the very Act of
Referring; it is clearly a Spiritual Mode, peculiarly belonging to One part of
Man, (the Soul;) and, therefore, for the Reason lately given, it cannot unite
both those Parts together. Nor can they be United according to any of the Four
last Predicaments; for These, (as is shown in my METHOD) can only belong to
Bodies. Nor lastly, can those Parts, were they Two Things, be United according
to Action and Passion, (in which the Cartesians ^^ce this Union;) for these
(besides their being Extrinsecal Considerations) do most evidently presuppose
the Whole Thing, or Suppositum, (only which Acts o^ Suffers) constituted; and
therefore cannot be the Formal Cause or Reason of constituting that Whole, or
Compounding those Parts together; but are the Exercise of that Essence and
(...) Existence, already Constituted such. It is left ^^en, that those Two
Parts can only be United, (...) make One Compound, according to the First
Predicament, or according to the Notion of Ens, Thing, or Substance. But, to be
United, or (which ^the same) made One, precisely under the Notion or Respect of
Thing, is, out of the force of the very Words, to be One Thing: Therefore this
Compound of SOUL and BODY, called MAN, is truly and necessarily One Thing.

2. Therefore, the Soul and Body in Man, are only Potential Parts of that
Compound; Therefore the Soul and Body are, here, only Potential Parts.
and neither of them, while in the Compound, is Actual. For, it has been
already Demonstrated (Chapter 1.. 27.) that there can be no Actual Parts in any
Compound whatever. Moreover, were they Actual while in the Compound, each of
them would have it is o^^ Act there; and, consequently, it is own Essence* and
this not only Distinctly from the Other, but Independently of it; since every
Act in the Line of Substance, (as both these Parts are) determines the
Substance to be This, fits it for Existence, and makes it capable to Subsist
alone; wherefore each of those Parts, when separated, would retain it is Act and
Essence; and exist, or actually remain, such as it was; whereas it is manifest,
that a Human Body, does not exist, or remain, so much as a Sensitive or
Vegetative Thing, but becomes a mee^ Dead Carcass.

3. Therefore, neither Part, while in the Compound, can Act or Operate Al^
Therefore Neither Part can Operate Alone.
For, it is Demonstrable, that [ Wh^ ever Acts must Be Actually;] B^ in our
case, neither Part Is actua^ but are both of them only Potential, by. 2. When
fore it is manifest, that Neither Part can work Al^ but concomitantly with the
other; that is, in all (...) Operations of Man, as he is Man, it is the W^
Compound, or that Ens, Thing, Substantia Pri^ or Supp^s^^um, which only can
Act, or Oper^ since It only Is actually.

4. Corollary I. Hence is seen on what Evident Ground that most Useful and
Solid Maxim, [ Actiones Which Ground^ that Excellent Maxim, [Actiones and
Passiones sunt Suppositorum]
and Passiones sunt Suppositorum,] (which all seem to admit, but Few, I fear,
duly reflect on,) is built; viz. on those most Evident Truths, [ Nothing can
Act but what is it self in Act, or Is Actually;] or [Nothing can Act in such a
manner, unless it Be such], and [ No Parts in any Compound, singly considered,
Are Actually.] With which, notwithstanding, it well consists, that The Whole
may act, more chiefly and Peculiarly, according to This Part, than to That; as
we also experience not only in Man, but in every Compound whatever.

5. Corollary II. How Useful this Doctrine is to explicate the Incarnation; or
the Subsistence of Two Natures Hence the Christian Tenet of the Incarnation, is
Agreeable to Right Reason.
in One Divine Person, and the Different Operations of Christ, our Savior, as
he is GOD and MAN, will easily appear to Reflecters; and will more fully be
seen, when we shall have occasion to show the Conformity which that Fundamental
Article of Christian Faith has to the Principles of True Philosophy.

6. Though the Peculiar, and Immediate Form or Act of that Part, called, The Seat
of Knowledge, be that Spiritual Of the Form or Act of Man, as he is Man.
Part we call The Soul; yet the Act or Form of Man, as he is Man, is the said
Spiritual Part, together with that Complexion of Accidents in his Body, which
contribute to fit him for his Primary Operation. For, since Man is One Thing*
which has in it both a Corporeal and a Spiritual Nature, (. 1.) and every Thing
acts as it is; his Operation peculiar to him as he is Man, must also be
Corporeo-Spiritual; and, consequently, his Total*Form, which constitutes him
such an Individual Acter, must likewise partake of both those Natures.

7. Corollary III. Hence, in every Operation of Man* as he is Man, the
Operations peculiar to the Soul Both ^arts concur to every Operation of Man,
as he is Man.
cannot be produced without the Immediate Concurrence of the Fancy or
Imagination; and by the Remote Assistance of the Complexion of those Accidents
by which he is constituted an Animal, and comes to be Imaginative.

8. Corollary IV. Hence every Notion or Conception we have, has a Phantasm
accompanying it; either Hence, every Notion has a Phantasm accompanying it.
Simple or Compounded, Lively or Obscure, Express or Confused, Proper or
Metaphorical. The Distinction or Variety of which is taken from the Different
manner of the Action of the Object, the different manner of Reception in that
Part called The Seat of Knowledge; or from the Reflection of the Man himself,
framing and ordering those Phantasms as he finds most convenient.

9. Hence, this Total Form which constitutes Man, must also distinguish him Of
the Total Form of Man.
from all other sorts of Things; that is, from all mere Bodies, and from all
Pure Spirits, or Angels. For, otherwise, it could not be the Peculiar Act of
that Compound* if it did not give him a Distinct Essence from all other
Species, or Sorts of Things; which it could not do, were it either merely
Corporeal, or merely Spiritual.

10. That which chiefly distinguishes Man essentially, according to his
Corporeal What chiefly, in both these Parts, distinguishes Man from all other
Things.
Part, from all other Bodies; is, that he has some such Part in his Body,
(called by us* The Seat of Knowledge) which is a fit Instrument to assist the
Soul to work comparatively, by representing diverse Distinct Things at once.
Which property it has from it is being in the highest manner Sensitive; so as to
be apt to receive the several Impressions with an exact Distinction; and also
to receive, retain, or exhibit More or Many of them, at once. Whence, that Part
requires it should have a Spiritual Power in it to work thus Actually; as is
shown, Solid Philosophy Asserted, Preliminary IV.. 13. to. 20. That which
chiefly Distinguishes him according to his Spiritual Part, is, that That Power,
being but a Part of the Compound, or of the Whole Ens, cannot, while it is
such, connaturally Act after the Manner of a Pure Spirit; but Dependently on
the Body, and by means of the Impressions on it. Whence, it works by Abstract
or Inadequate Notions, and not Comprehensively; and withal, by observing the
Pace of the Body's, or the Fancy's Motion; which is performed leasurely or
Successively: Neither of which can agree to a P^ Spirit or an Angel.

11. Corollary V. Hence all Pretense of GOD's voluntary Annexing Knowledge to a
Corporeal Being, or to Hence all Pretense of GOD voluntary Annexing, is
Unphilosophical and Groundless.
Matter not thus Fitted for it, and therefore not Requiring it, or Connaturally
Disposed for it, is against GOD's Wise est Administration of the World by
Previous and Proper Dispositions. Besides, it is a pure Voluntary Assertion,
without any kind of Ground in Nature, and utterly Unphilosophical; as is shown,
Ideae Cartesianae* Indicatio 3.. 44, 45. etc. and Solid Philosophy, Reflection
20.. 2, 3, 4.

12. Corollary VI. Hence the Men's is not the Man, nor an Actual Part of him, or
a Thing; but a Potential Part Hence the Men's is not the Man.
only. Nor, consequently, could it receive Impressions of pretended Idea's, or
be connaturally affected with them, unless it were Identify'd with the Body:
That is, it is the Suppositum, or the Whole Man that can receive them, though
peculiarly according to such a Part.

13. Corollary VI. Notwithstanding that Man has evidently a Spiritual Part in
him; yet his Manner of Existing The Soul's manner of Existing and Operating,
here, is, in part, Corporeal.
in this State is Formally Corporeal, and only Virtually Spiritual. For, since
his Spiritual Operations here do follow the Slow Pace of the Motion of the
Fancy, and are not Instantaneous or Simultaneous, as will be shown the Manner
of Operating Proper to a Spirit is; and the Manner of Operating follows, and
observes, the Manner of Existing; it is Evident, that the Manner of Existing
which Man has here, is Corporeal, and not Spiritual. Whence, if we regard
Physical, or (which are built on them) Logical Considerations, he is such a
Body; and placed directly under the Notion of Corpus: But, if we regard
Metaphysical Principles, which Abstract from Motion and Corporeal
Considerations, and all the Manners of them; and consider him precisely under
the Notion of Ens; then, he is considered as jointly constituted of both these
Parts; of which the Spiritual Part, and the aforesaid Complexion of Bodily
Accidents, which disposed the Matter for such a Form, and clubs to his Primary
Operation, is his Formal Act; and, together with the Matter, does compound that
Ens called MAN.

14. From what has been deduced, Chap. 3.. 16, 19. it is evinced, that the The
Primary Operation of Man is Reasoning.
Primary Operation* of Man, as he is Man, is Reasoning, or Discoursing
rationally. For, since that is the Primary Operation of all Vegetable and
Animal Things, by which they are Conserved, Perfected, and Nourish^ agreeably
to their Respective Natures, so as to attain the Good, or the End, for which
they were immediately ordained by Nature; and the Natural Good of Man, is that
which improves, betters, and (as it were) nourishes his Better part, the Soul;
to which the Body is only Subservient, Subordinate, and a Means to procure and
promote it is Good: And, that which most perfects the Soul, which is of an
Intellectual Nature, is the Acquiring and Increasing of KNOWLEDGE; which,
during the whose Course of our Lives, is done by Reasoning, or Deducing New
Knowledges out of Foregoing ones; it follows, that Ratiocination or Reasoning
i^ the Primary and Proper Operation of Man. And, accordingly, we shall find by
an easy Reflection, that, when we arrive at the Knowledge of any New
(especially very concerning) Objects, by Exact or Evident Reasoning, the Soul
finds it is Self Improved, Dilated, and Nourisht according to it is Nature, and
we use to acknowledge that our Desire, or (as it were) Hunger, or Natural
Appetite of Truth, is then Satisfied. So, that as the Pursuit of Food is the
Primary Operation of a mere Animal; so the Pursuit of Knowledge (which can only
be performed by Reasoning) is the Primary Operation of MAN.

15. Hence follows, that this Knowledge, which gives Nourishment, Growth, and
Strength to the Soul, according The Attainment of Truth is the Perfection of
Man's Understanding.
to her Nature, must be Knowledge of TRUTHS. For, First, Falsehoods cannot, in
true Speech, be Known, because they are Contrary and Destructive to the nature
of ENS, (which is the Adequate Object of the Understanding; and has for it is
Property, Intelligibility) and Confound it with Non Ens. Next, all Falsehoods,
are either Formally or Virtually, Contradictions; as is shown, Method to
Science, B. 3. L^ss. 3.. 17. Whence, Contradictions cannot Unite to the Knowing
Nature of the Soul, or be Received in it is Judging Power; but are directly
Opposite to her Nature, and (as it were) Poison to her; and therefore cannot
nourish or improve her, but tend to pervert and destroy her Spiritually.

16. This Knowledge must also be Evident, or beyond Probability. For,
otherwise, The Knowledge of Truth, which thus perf^cts Man, must be Evident.
it is not properly Knowledge: Nor can we be truly said to ^now a thing to be,
if we see it may not be; it being against a First Principle; and a Proof which
is no more than Probable, cannot make us see that the Thing may not be, or
necessarily is; for an Evident Proof can do no more.

17. Corollary VII. Whence, what has but a Probable Proof cannot sink into, or
cling to, her Knowing Probability perfects no Man.
Nature; or improve and nourish it; nor so much as be received in it at all as
it is Knowing; but as it is Unknowing, or Ignorant, either of True Principles, or
of Right Deduction.

18. Corollary VIII, Hence also what only affects and dilates the Memory, or
Nor the improving his Memory or Fancy.
Fancy, or serves to excite the Passions; (as, Skill in Languages, Eloquence,
Wit, and such like;) is not, properly, Connatural Food for the Knowing Nature
of the Soul; though they may be very Useful to express her Knowledge; or be a
Means to gain Knowledge from those Authors who writ in other Languages: Or
lastly, For her Recreation; which is not properly the Food of the Soul, but a
kind of Sauce to that Food.

19. Corollary IX. Hence, to endeavor the Promoting the Evident Knowledge of *
Truths, especially of those The promoting Evident Truth is the Noblest Action
of Man.
which are of the Highest Concern, is the most Manly, most Noble, and most
Universally Beneficial Action that can possibly be performed by Man^ as having
for it is Object the most General Good of MANKIND that can be imagined: And
which (if it be of Sacred or Revealed Truths) has a Direct Tendency to bring
him to his Last End, and dispose him for Eternal Happiness.

20. Corollary X. Hence, all Error, it being* when reduced to it is True and
Hence Error is the greatest Depravation of Man's Nature.
Proper Original, a Contradiction* is a Deprauation of the Soul; and, if it be
such an Error as is Opposite to those Truths which guide her toward her True
Last End, it tends of it is own nature, to ruin and destroy her Spiritually:
And, would Actually do so, if the Poison of it were not rebated and rendered
Ineffectual by the Antidote of a Sincere and Good Intention; that is, such a
one as springs from some Truth of a High Nature: which, well imprinted,
cultivated, and become Practical in that well-meaning Soul, directs and
strongly addicts her to the Pursuit of that which is her Chief Good, Eternal
Happiness.

21. From what has been Demonstrated,. 14* it is Evident, That the Essence of
Man, is RATIONALITY, or the The Essence of Man is Rationality.
Power of Reasoning. For, as was proved above, (Chapter 2.. 9. 10. and is evident
of it self, That is the Essence of every thing from which immediately proceeds
the Power to perform it is Primary Operation for which it was ordained and made:
But, the Act of Reasoning, (which by. 14, is his Primary Operation) proceeds
immediately from the Power of Reasoning; therefore the Power of Reasoning, or
Rationality, ^^ the Essence of Man.

22. Moreover, Rationality, does perfectly distinguish Man from all other Sorts
And distinguishes him from Angels and Brutes.
of Things, whether they be Bo^s or Spirits. For Matter, though (...) parts be
never so artificially ^d together, can never make Knowledge; and therefore no
mere Body can * know or Reason. And, it distinguishes him also from all other
Sorts of Spiritual Natures; that is; from Pure Spirits, or Angels; in regard,
that These having no Matter or Quantity in them, their Operations ^re therefore
Unsuccessive or Instantaneous; because there cannot be Part after Part, (which
is the Notion of Succession) in that which has no Parts at all. Whereas in the
Act of Reasoning, the Whole Suppositum, which has in it both Soul and Body,
being that which operates; hence, every such Act, it being accompanied with the
Act of the Fancy, which is Corporeal, is thence necessitated to be Successive;
both because no Corporeal* Motion can be in an Instant; as also, because no two
Parts of such a Motion can possibly *be together; for this would make it
Unsuccessive.

32. Corollary XI. Hence is demonstrated, That* [ Animal Rationale] is a True
and Proper Definition of Man: Hence [Animal Rationale] is his true Definition.
Because it both explains, or gives us his True Essence; and also Distinguishes
Mankind from all other Kinds or Sorts of Things.

24. In this Essence of Man, [ Rationality] are included the Power of Simply
Apprehending or Conceiving; and In Rationality are included the Powers of
Apprehending and Judging.
the Power of Judging; especially the Power of Seeing the First Principles to
be True and Self* evident. For, since in that Complete Act of Reasoning, which
is Formally o^ Equivalently a Syllogism, there are necessarily included
Judgments; because we cannot hold a Conclusion, Inferred by our Reason, to be
True, unless we first Judge the Premises to be such; nor, that it follows from
those Premises, unless we Judge that Identical Proposition, on which is
Grounded the Force of the Consequence, to be both True and Self-evident: Again,
since in every Judgment are Included those Notions or Simple Apprehensions,
called the Subject, Copula, and Predicate; which are the Immediate Parts of the
Proposition we Judge of, and the Remote Materials of all our Discoursings or
Reasonings: It follows, that, though the Powers of Apprehending and Judging be
not Formally the Power of Reasoning* yet they are Included in it, as Integral
Parts constituting it, or Presupposed to it.

24. For the same Reason, the Power of Re^ing the Particles or Effluvi^ emitted
from outward Objects, As also the Power of receiving Simple Apprehensions, by
Impressions from Objects* transmitted them to the Brain.
and Transmitting them at ^^rst to the Brain, or the Seat of Knowledge, is a
Necessary Requisite, or Previous Disposition, to Rationality. For, since we
cannot Discourse without Judging; nor Judge, without Propositions, which are
the Objects of Judging; nor have Propositions in us, without having Simple
Apprehensions or Notions; which are the Parts of a Proposition, of which it
^sists: Nor, lastly, can we (as will be proved ^ortly) have Notions but by
Receiving Impressions on the Senses from Outward Objects, and ^nce on the Brain
or Seat of Knowledge; by affecting which they do, consequently, or after it is
manner, affect the Soul, (which immediately in^ms that Part and is identify'd
with it,) and thence imbues her with those Notions: It follows, that the Power
of Receiving those Particles by the Senses, and transmitting them to the Seat
of Knowledge, is a Necessary Prerequisite to Rationality, and an Essential
Property of Man.

25. The Power of REFLECTING on our Notions, had at first, by means of the
Senses, is also an Essential Property The Power of Reflecting is also an
Essential Property of Man.
of MAN. For, daily Experience tells us, that Reflection makes the Notions and
Thoughts of all Mankind, in what Business whatever, more Lively and Express; it
preserves Men from Mistakes and Miscarriages; and makes all their Judgments and
Actions Orderly, Steady, and Prudent. Nor, could Men of Art, or Scholars,
without Reflection, (which, when used with a Sedulo^ Application, we call STUDY)
range all their Notions with exact Distinction under Gene^ Heads; without doing
which, all their Discourse might be Confused, and Interfere, or Ramble from one
Notion to another; nor could they so firmly* and certainly, hold to the same
Point, or to the same Subject of their Discourse. Nor, could they Divide those
Notions by Proper Differences, nor Define them right; much less, lay them
together, or Connect them Orderly; without which it is manifest, no Evident
Ratiocination can (...) made, nor any True Science be possibly attained*

26. It Is most Connatural to the State of the Soul while in the Body, that s^
should Acquire her First Eleme^ The Soul acquires Knowledge by Impressions from
Objects, on their Senses.
of Knowing, or Notions, by mea^ of Bodily Instruments, and (...) have them
Infused into her (...) first, or Innate: This is Evident from diverse
Considerations.

27. First, Because the Soul had her Being (...) first, by reason that some
part of the Body was Disposed, and therefore First Proof.
Naturally Required to have such a Form; Nor can any other reason be assigned,
why Ordinary Providence, or GOD as he is the Author of Nature, puts a Soul into
each Embryo; much less such a Soul into such an Embryo when it is fit to
Receive it. Wherefore, it is Agreeable to the same Wise Course of Nature, the
her Operations, which follow her Being, should likewise observe the same
method, or depend o^ those Previous Operations or Impressions on the Body,
causing such or such Dispositions in it.

28. Secondly, We find in the Body Fit Organs and Instruments to receive those
Impressions from Objects, and Second Proof.
convey them to the Brain; which therefore had been Useless and to no End, did
they not work that Effect, and convey them thither.

29. Thirdly, Since it has been Demonstrated here,. 1. that this Compound of
Soul and Body, called MAN, is Third Proof.
^e Thing; and, therefore, that ^e Soul is primarily, and immediately,
Identify'd, (...) Entitatively United with some Chief Corporeal ^; which, by
the wise Contrivance of an animal Body, is apt to influence all the rest; that
(...) to some Part in the Brain, where the Animal ^ts chiefly reside, and
whenee all their Motion begins: It follows necessarily, that as that Corporeal
Part is affected after it is manner; (that is materially, or as Material things
are wrought ^on by one another;) so, the Soul, which makes ^e Thing with it, as
the Form does with the Matter, should also, at the same time, and by the same
^ns, become affected after it is manner; that (...) Spiritually, or, (to some
degree) Knowingly; ^, which is the same, should have Direct Spiri^l Impressions
made upon her: which are those ^e call NOTIONS or Simple Apprehensions; which
^re the First Rude Draughts, and the Materials of ^ll our Knowledges.

30. Fourthly, We find by Evident Reflection that when Outward Corpor^ things,
that are Sensible, are objected Fourth Proof.
to us, with which (...) were before Unacquainted, we have immediately New
Notions of it: But we do not find by o^ best Reflection, that any Idea or Notion
of suc^ a thing was in us antecedently, and only excited (...) new.

31. Fifthly, We find also by Evident Reflection that our Notion (or Idea) is D^
and Dull, if the Impression from Fifth Proof.
without do but slightly affect (...) or imperfectly exhibit the Object.
Wherefore, the Degree of Clearness or Obscurity in the I^pression, does make a
correspondent Degree (...) Clearness or Obscurity in the ( Idea or) Notion it
argues, likewise, that the Substance of the Notion is made by the Substance of
the Impression; a^ consequently, that our Notions themselves (...) caused by
Impressions from without, and are (...) Innate. For, otherwise, since a less
Clear Impression might serve to excite this Idea rather tha^ Another; the Idea
in the Soul, having there, (^qually) it is Native Brightness, independently on
t^ Body; it would, when once excited, appear (...) it is full Luster; the
contrary to which we ^perience whenever the Impression is Imperfect.

32. Sixthly, The Objects, or Things to be kno^ are without us; and, by sendi^
out their Effluviums, which (...) Sixth Proof.
minute particles of the same Nature, are apt to affect our Senses, and to
P^trate, or be Transmitted to, that most Sensi^ part called the Seat of
Knowledge. Wherefo^ (as was proved) Man being One Thing; and, consequently, the
Soul being immediately United with the Body as the Form to that Noblest Part;
and, all Passions or Receptions, having for their Subject the Suppositum, or
the Whole Compound; it follows that, when that Part is affected, the Whole, and
consequently the Soul, must be affected or wrought upon at the same time.
Especially, since the very Essence of Man fundamentally consists in the
Substantial Union or Identity in the Notion of Ens of those two Parts. Whence,
follows, that every Impression being Received according to the Manner or Nature
of the Receiver; and, the Receiver here, consisting of two diversnatur'd Parts,
one of which is Corporeal, the other Spiritual; consequently, when the
Corporeal Part is affected after it is manner, or has the Nature of that Object
in it Corporeally; the Spiritual Part, or the Soul, will be affected, or have
the Nature of that Object in it Spiritually, that is, Knowingly: Or, which is
the same, there will be a Notion or Simple Apprehension of the Nature of that
Object directly Imprinted in it, as far as the Sense, or Senses, exhibit that
Object. Of which, see Preliminary IV.. 14, 15.

33. Seventhly, There being no Actual Parts in any Compound whatever, (by Chapter
1.. 27.) the Condition of Seventh Proof.
the Soul, while it is a Part of that Compound Thing, MAN, is only Potential;
and far different from that of a Pure Act, or an Angel; which, because it has
no Organs or Means to acquire any New Knowledge from Outward Objects, has,
therefore, all the Knowledge, that can be due to it is Nature, given it in the
First Instant of it is Being; that is, all it is Knowledge is Innate. Whereas,
the Soul, being h^ in a State of Potentiality; and, besides, the M^ner of
Existing which she has here, being (...) some sort Corporeal, (by. 13.) this
Potentiality ^hers is to be reduced to Act, or her Power (...) Knowing is to be
brought to Actual Knowledge by Degrees But, were her Notions Innate, she would
have her Knowledge by the same Connatural Way, and after the same Manner, by
which Angels have theirs; which confounds the Nature of those two vastly
different Kinds of Being^ MAN, and ANGEL; contrary to all the Ma^ims of Sound
Philosophy.

34. Lastly, If All the Ideas or Notions be Innat^ and there can be no reason
why some should be so, and other Eighth Proof.
not, since the Soul is equally capable of All as of Some only; then, since to
be Actually in a Knowing Power, is to Actuate or Inform that Power, that is, to
render that Power Actually Knowing; it would follow, that the Sou^ in that
case, having in her all those Notions of which her Nature is capable, (that is,
All Notions whatever) she would either know all things while she is here; or
else she would have, while here, Innumerable Ideas or Materials of Knowledge,
which never come to be Excited, and so are perfectly Useless. Which makes the
Immediate Act of the First Being, which Infused them, Frustraneous, and to no
purpose. For, their own Principles must force them to confess, those Ideas
which shall never be Excited, cannot, in that case, either serve for Reasoning,
Contemplation, nor Outward Action; and therefore the Imbuing the Mind with them
here, is Preposterous, Su^ous, and to no end.

35. It Is equally Groundless and Unphiloso^cal, in many regards, to affirm,
That the Soul cannot Elicit Ideas out of her self, from many heads.
(...) the Soul has a Power to Eli^ or Produce such Ideas in her ^* upon
Occasion of such an Im^ssion made on the Senses. For, ^, the Reasons given
above, I mean those which have been produced,. 28, 29, 30, 32.) ^* (in a manner
equally) disprove such Ideas, ^se which are properly Innate. Secondly, (...)
impossible to show by, their Grounds, any Natural Connection between that
Impression on the ^ve, and the Production of such or such an (...) nor, as far
as I can see, do they so much (...) pretend to show how this Effect does, ex
na^a rei, spring from that Cause. For it is con^* that the Stroke on the Nerve,
and the Idea which starts up when it is made there, are utterly Unlike one
another: By which lame account, any kind of Impression, provided it be Unlike,
may occasion the Production of any Idea whatever; and therefore there would be
no Reason why (...) particular Impression, more than another, made (...) the
Body, should concur any way, (no, not so much as a suitable Occasion): to the
Production of any particular Idea at all. Thirdly, Hence, they make this
Impression on the Nerve to be only an Occasion, that is a kind of Conditio sine
qua non, and not any sort of Cause; contrary to the whole Intention and End of
all Philosophy; which is to refund Effects into their Proper Causes. Fourthly,
They put the Soul, which is of an Indivisible nature, to Act upon it self, and
to be the Sole Cause of such an Idea; which is against diverse Principles
confining upon Self-evidence, and easily reducible to it. Such as are. [
Nothing that is merely i^ Power to such an Effect can reduce st self to Act.
Nothing Indetermin'd can produce a Determinate Effect. Nothing can change it
self. An Indivisible Entity cannot work upon it self. A Thing in Rest cannot
move it self.] Or, in a word, the Whole Course of Causes* consisting in this,
that One Thing which is in Act it self, is to work upon Another which is in
Power to receive that Act, is, by this Extravagant Doctrine, made Needless,
Absurd and Incoherent.

36. Corollary XII. From what is Deduc't above, it follows, that that Position
of That the Position, which makes the Soul and Body Two Things, hinders the
Right Explication of Christian Faith.
the Cartesians, which makes the Soul and Body in Man to be Duae Res, or Two
Things, does not seem to suit well with Christian Faith. For, since Cartesius
does therefore make them Two Things, because he finds them to be of Different
Natures; it is Evident, that he does not Distinguish between the Notion of the
Thing, which has the Nature in it; and of the Nature, which is in the Thing, or
is had by it: Whence follows, that wherever, and whenever, there are those two
Distinct Natures, there must also be two Distinct Things: But, the Second
Person of the Trinity will ever retain the Humanity of Christ, and the Humanity
of Christ will ever consist of the Corporeal and Spiritual Natures called Soul
and Body* therefore there will ever be, according to this Doctrine, two
distinct Things in the Humanity of Christ-Again, since these Two Natures in
Christ's Humanity (which they call Two Things) are Individually or Numerically
such; and an Individual Thing, is the same as a Suppositum; the Followers of
this Doctrine must hold there are Two Suppositums in Christ, according to his
Humanity: Wherefore, since it is a Fundamental of Christian Faith, that there is
also in Christ the Divine Suppositum; they must be forced to put three
Suppositums in Christ* GOD and MAN; which is strange Language in Christianity.
Nor will it avail them to allege, that the Divine Personality, by Assuming
Humane Nature, s^pplies the Subsistence of both those Natures; for this takes
not away the Distinction of the Two Natures in the Humanity; wherefore, if
wherever there are two Natures, there must be Two Things, and those (in our
case) Individually such; of force there will remain two Individual Things; that
is; Two Supposita in Christ's Humane Nature; and, consequently, Three in all.
Whence, since Verum vero non contradicit, the Christian Tenet of but One
Suppositum in Christ being True; the Cartesian Doctrine, that the Soul and Body
in Man are two Things, because they are of such Different Natures, must needs
be False; and our main Tenet, that the Soul and Body in Man do make but One
Thing, is both Evident to Reason, and Consonant to Faith, and to the Creed of
St. Athanasius.

37. Corollary XIII. Hence also it follows from this Thesis of the Cartesians,
that every Individual Man in This Tenet makes overy Man to be a Monstrous
Chimera.
the World is a Perfect Chimera, nay a more Monstrous one than a Hircoceruus, a
Centaur, or any other we use to Instance in. For, since all Created Beings are
either Pure Acts* or Compounded of Power and Act, that is Matter and Form, by
Chapter 1.. 33. and the Word [ Thing] signifies, [What's Capable of Existing,] and
therefore Two Things must be Capable of Diverse Existences; and if they exist
actually, must actually have Two Existences: It follows, that the Soul and
Body, even in this State they have here, must have actually Two Diverse
Existences. Again, since their Nature, the one being Corporeal, the other
Incorporeal, are far more Distant and more vastly Different than a Goat and a
Stag, or any other Natures amongst Bodies; to clap two such Things, thus
actually distinct under the Notion of Thing, and Existing thus Distinct, into
One Species called MAN, makes all the Individuals under that Species to be
Chimerical; nay greater Chimera's than is a Compound made of any two Things in
Nature which are of diverse Corporeal Species, and exist actually by distinct
Existences; as a Stone and a Tree, a Horse and an Eagle, a Lizard and a
Herring, etc. Nor is at all to purpose, to allege they are a Compound Thing,
for this is contrary to many Evident Truths; since it has been demonstrated,
Chapter 1.. 27. that there are no Actual Parts in any Compound whatever: Nor can
the Parts of Ens join to make One Thing otherwise than as one of them is
Determinable, Potential, or has the Notion of Matter; the other Determinative
of the Other, as it is Form: Lastly, that Unum, or One Thing, would be Divisum
in se, which is against the Nature of Ens. Nor is it to purpose to allege they
are United by their Acting together; for this only makes them Coacters, (such
as the Principal Cause and the Instrument uses to be) and not One Thing; as is
clearly shown, Preliminary V.. 25. Besides, they must Be One Thing ere they can
Act as One Thing; which (as is there shown) makes the alleging this for a
Reason, very Preposterous.

38. Corollary XIV. From what is deduced above it is demonstrated against that
every-way-Groundless Opinion That the Pre-existence of Souls is a Senseless
Conceit, and Impossible.
of the Pre-existence of Souls. Since, the Form of an Ens being but a Part of
that thing it belongs to, and a Part of a Thing not being the Thing it self, or
the Whole Thing; and only the Thing it self being Capable of Existance; the
Soul, which is the Form of Man, cannot possibly exist till it informs the
Matter; and, with it, makes up that Thing called Man.

39. Corollary XV. Hence that foppish Opinion of the Transmigration of Souls So
is the Pythagorean Transmigration.
is confuted. Since, the Form is not Received but in Matter fitted to receive
it, or Disposed for it; and, with it, compounding one Thing which shall have a
Primary Operation suitable to the Nature of such a Compound; which kind of
Disposition can no where be found but in Humane Bodies; otherwise, every mere
Animal, and Vegetable, might require, and therefore have a Rational Soul, in
them; which put, there could neither need any Transmigration; nor could it be,
without having two Souls in one Body, or Two Forms in the same Matter, which
would make every such Compound a CHIMERA. Whence, I am forced to declare, that
those who talk of GOD's Annexing Reason to the Matter of a Brute, bid fair for
the Tenet of a Pythagorean Transmigration; for, to what other end can the
starting such a Question, or such a wild Supposition tend?

40. Corollary XVI. Hence is farther shown, that to those who ask, How the Soul
and Body come to be That it is a Folly to ask, how the Soul and Body came to be
United.
United? The properest Answer is, They were never DISUNITED, or TWO. A farther
reason, how they come to be One may be gathered out of the following Meditation.

MEDITATION.
BY this time, my Soul, we have raised our selves by immediate Steps, from the
Material World, our Underling and God's Footstool, The Rational Progress, and
Immediate Steps of our Thoughts hitherto.
till we are come within Ken of our own Nature. Nor can we think we have erred
in that Noble and Necessary Quest: There have been no Meandrian Turnings and
Windings in our Rational Progress, which is the Way we have taken. We started
first from the Simplest and (as we may say) Embryo-Notions of POWER and ACT,
which belong to every Created Being. We proceeded next to that sort of Power
and Act, which compounds the Changeable Nature of BODY. We went on to take a
view of the Essences of the most Uncompounded Bodies, and those of their
Simpler Mixts and Demixts, till we arrived at those most Compounded ones which
are Organical; such as are Vegetables and Animals; diverse Parts of which seem
to have distinct Natures and Operations of their own: But they only seem to
have them; for out of the Compound, they can perform no such Operations at all;
because those Parts being only Potential, or in Power to be Things, they are
hence, of themselves, not Actually Things, nor capable of Being; nor
consequently, of Acting. So that it is the Compound only that Acts according to
such a Part, which is somewhat of it; because it only Is, or is in Act. Lastly,
We have shown the Establishment of the Essence of an Animal; and that its
Primary Operation, for which it was ordained, is (like it self) merely
Sensitive or Material.

But must the Climax of BEING, stop in that lowest Degree of Entity, Base
Matter? Why it was necessary such a Creature as MAN should be made.
No surely. For, how should the Alpha of all Being be the Omega of it too, if
there were nothing Created here but such a Stupid and Senseless Nature as Body;
which is utterly unable to ascend to him, or raise it self toward him, and
choose him for its Last End, and Final Good; And yet, how should mere Matter
rise to that vastly higher Story of Being, called Spiritual; or, how should it
arrive to a next Neighborhood with an Angel? They seem rather Contradictory,
and in the highest manner Opposite. The one is of its own Nature Divifible, the
other Indivisible. The one is a Pure Act, the other is merely Potential, being
made of Matter, which depresses it is Compart, while here, to a Potential State
also. The Order of Beings, which is the Product of God's Creative Wisdom, could
not but be contrived with all the Beauty of the most exact Harmony; which
consists in fitting one Thing to another. It must then arise by Immediate
Degrees, otherwise it would not be Compacted but Shattered* And, it had been
too great a Leap, and had left too wide a Chasm in the Frame of the Creation,
to ascend, or rather skip from mere Matter to a Pure Spirit, But what cannot
Infinite Wisdom By what means GOD's Infinite Wisdom contrived the Union of the
Soul and Body in one Thing.
contrive, without either perverting or straining the Proportions of Order, or
Violating the Natures of Body, or Spirit either? Wherefore to make the
Contexture of Beings Close and not intersticed by Flaws, Gaps, or Incoherences;
Divine Providence, which disposes all things sweetly, ordered there should be
some Dispositions in Matter, which required to be indu'd with such a Form as
was beyond the Power of Matter to produce, (...) have educed out of it; viz.
Such as was of a Spiritual Nature, though of the lowest size; to perform with its
Assistance, Operations beyond the Power of Matter to compass alone; that is,
with a Faculty of Reasoning, which partakes, in some sort, ^^th Natures; or,
with a Power both of Knowing, (...) also of Succession in Acquiring, or Using
that Knowledge. Those Dispositions being laid in Matter, (...) ^^llow'd
necessarily that a Form of a Spiritual Na^^re would be in it: For, to an
Infinite Being, stream^enerously his Gifts from his Exuberant Source of ^ss,
there needs no more to receive, and have, the Effects of his Bounty, but to be
Disposed for them, or naturally Require them; especially, when that
Disposition, or Requiringness of a farther Perfection was laid by Himself. He
saw that to link Matter to a Spiritual Nature Orderly and Connaturally, it was
Requisite the Former should be raised to its Highest Pitch of Perfection; and
the Later deprest, while ^ere, below what was due to a Pure Spirit; that so the
Supremum Infimi (as was fit to build up Methodically the great Work of the
Creation,) might immediately confine upon, and thence be joined to the Inflmum
Supremi. He contrived then that some Part of the Brain, which was the
Quintessence and Flower of Animality, (called by us, The Seat of Knowledge)
should be capable of serving for a more excellent Operation than Matter alone
could perform; that so it might become his Wisdom and Goodness, as he is Author
of Nature, to endow it with a Nobler Form than the Heard of other Animals could
deserve; and thence produce that more Elevated Operation. I say, as Author of
Nature. For, as the Matter of Wood, ultimately Disposed by increasing Degrees
of Glowing Heat to become Fire, not only has given it the Form which makes it
such an Element, or such a determinate Thing; but also, at the same instant, by
the steady and ever ready Emanation of God's superabundant Goodness, it has an
Existence given it, though this latter Effect exceeds the Power of all
Creatures together to bestow it: So, in the same manner, as soon as the said
Dispositions in the Brain of an Embryo are grown up to their due Perfection;
the same Goodness, and for the same Reason, infuses into it a Rational Soul,
though it was beyond the Power of all Natural Agents to produce it.

Thus came we into this Material World. Thus were we compounded of the Top of
Corporeal Nature, and the Bottom or Lowest Size of the Spiritual; Minuisti cum
paulo minus ab Angelis. Thus was Man constituted the Horizon of the two
Opposite Hemispheres of Mere Matter, and Pure Spirits; confining upon, and by
Nature near Akin to both. Whence he becomes capable to Ascend to, and even ^^
Transcend, the Dignity of the Highest Angels; or to be Debased below the
Vileness of the most contemptible Brute. Nothing is so High, but, through God's
Assistance, we may not aspire to; nor any thing so Low and Filthy into which we
may not plunge our selves; according as we follow the Conduct of Angelical
Reason, or Brutish Passion.

Let us then, my Soul, know our own Dignity; but yet, let us not overween.
Matter The Condition of our Soul here, laid open.
is indeed, in us, exalted and superindu'd with a Spiritul Power; yet we are,
for all that, at present, but a Part of this Material World; and our Condition,
while here, is (at least, at first) merely Passive, and ever subject to Change
and Alteration. Thy self art liable to receive Impressions from Natural Agents:
Nor is this intended by thy Creator to debase thee and keep thee down, but to
improve, and perfect thee. Thou had no Title, being but a Part, to be a
Subsistent Knowing Thing, considering thee in thy single self; and therefore,
could not claim to have Actual Knowledge given thee at thy Creation: Thou art
then to acquire it by the Operations of our Fellow Creatures, or rather Useful
Servants, Bodies; which play about us perpetually, and by their subtillest
Particles, which they perpetually send forth, affect our Senses. We had our
Being at first by Bodily Dispositions; How the Coalition of the Soul and Body
into one Ens, agrees with Principles of Reason.
and therefore it is no Disparagement to us, by the same means, to have those
Materials, which give and continue to us our Operations. Let us not listen then
to those Mistakers, who would persuade us that we are Two Things, while we are
here. Such Conceits spring from Fancy unable to reach the true Nature of Unity
and Entity* The Notion of Ens comprises in its spacious Extent, both Corporeal
and Spiritual Nature; wherefore there is Room enough, in that Comprehensive
Conception, to comprise both Natures in One Thing; provided those Parts can be
Adapted and Fitted, to make up One Compound, as we have seen they are. Let us
ask all Nature, and our own Thoughts reflecting upon it; and they will tell us
this is done by the Proportion and Sutableness the one Part of an Ens has to
the other, as Power, and Act, or Matter and Form; which are the Proper Parts of
all Things here below; that is, by the Capacity which the Material, Potential
and Indetermin'd Part has to be Determined or Actuated by the Form; and* the
Correspondent Virtue, which the Form, or Act, has to Actuate and Determine the
Matter, when it is fitly disposed for it. By which Determination it becomes This
and no other, in which consists its Unity; whence it is made capable of
receiving Existence; which is the same as to make them One THING.

Consider what innumrrable Errors have spawned from the Ignorance of this one
Great Truth, which gives us the right What Errors and Absurditics have sprung
out of the contrary Opinion.
Knowledge of our selves. First* Those Men fancy thee to be a kind of Distinct
Spiritual Thing; whence, since thou art Individually such, and the very Notion
of an Individual Thing, is [What is capable to Exist] they must attribute to
thee the having a Peculiar Existence of thy own; whence, thou can not, by
this Tenet, be the Form of thy own, or of any Body, but an Assistant, or
Extrin^^cal Form; that is a Subsistent Spirit, or an Angel* Next, because they
cannot conceive how an Operation of Body, which is Divisible, should be
received in an Indivisible Subject, they are forced to deny that any Impression
from outward Objects conveyed by our Senses to the Brain, can affect thee, or
give thee Knowledge; and, therefore, they make those Necessary Assistants,
assigned thee by Nature, nay, our own Inferior Faculties too, to be altogether
Useless for th^^ End. Hence, they will needs endow thee with (...) Power to
give thy self Knowledge, by thy producing* within thy self, little Spiritual
Mirrours, call (...) Ideas: Not reflecting that whatever is of its self only a
Power to have any Thing or Mode, or has only a Power of Knowing, cannot
possibly reduce its self t^ Act, or give its self what it has not; and that,
what is Indetermin'd to every particular Mode, cannot of it self produce
Determinate ones: Since from mere Indifferency to all, no One particular Effect
can proceed. For this Reason, finding no Similitude or Resemblance between
those Spiritual Effects and Corporeal Causes, they substitute, instead of such
Causes, Stupid and Unactive Occasions, which have no Influence or Causality at
all; by which means they break ^^^^der the Chain of Causes and Effects; by
which the well-compacted Frame of Nature hangs together, and the steady Course
of God's Ordinary* Providence At^^git a fine usque ad finem fortiter, and
dispon^t om^ suaviter: Not considering also that this closely^ Order of Causes
and Effects is that which gives Consistency and Coherence to all our
Discourses, and (...) the only Ground of all Demonstration; and, cons^^^^ently,
of all the Science Mankind has, or can (...). Whence also it comes that,
puzzled with their (...) ill-lay'd Principles how to find any Contexture
between those Natural Effects and Causes, they are given to have frequent, and
in a manner constant recourse to the Gratuitous Pretense that God Wills This or
That; without so much as attempting to Demonstrate that God does indeed Will
such particular ^ects, or showing any Necessity why he should do (...) or that
it becomes God's Wisdom, in the ordina^ Administration of Nature, to set aside
the Opera^^^^s of Second Causes, for which they are Essentially Ordained; and,
at every turn, to act Immediately by Himself. These, and many other most absurd
Doctrines (every great Error being Fruit^ of False Consequences) they are
thrown upon through their not reflecting on this Grand Truth, that Man being
One Thing, consisting of a Corporeal and Spiritual Compart, hence (as was said)
the Impressions sent from Outward Objects by means of the Senses to that
Material, most Sensitive, and most Noble Part of the Brain, (where the Fancy
resides) called, The Seat of Knowledge, which Part is immediately Informed by
the Soul; do, by reason that the Soul and Body, as Matter and Form, make ^p One
Thing, affect also the said Form or Soul, at the same time, after her manner,
or according to her Nature; (that is, to some Degree Knowingly;) by Imprinting
or Stamping upon her Direct Conceptions, Notions, or Simple Apprehensions of
somewhat, or some Mode of the Thing: On which fast Rudiments of Knowledge, duly
reflected on, well Distinguished, and aptly Connected by our Discoursing
Faculty all our Science is built.

What other Important Truths occur in this Chapter, affording matter for our
farther Contemplation, is les^ to our more leisurely Consideration,

CHAP. V. Of the Constitution and Dissolution of Individual Bodies.
1. HItherto, of the Constituting the Generical and Specifical Kinds of Bodies;
which, they being but Common, that is Partial or Inadequate, Notions of That
only Individuals are properly THINGS.
Ens or Thing, are therefore no otherwise Entia, but only in a Secondary and
Improper Sense of that word, or (...), as Aristotle calls them; because,
regarding them under this Common and Abstracted consideration, they are not
Capable of Existing, which is the Definition of Ens. We come next to treat of
INDIVIDUAL Entities, called, (...); that is, Primarily and Properly Substances
or Things; because, consisting of Matter ultimately Determined to such and such
Particulars, they only, (as being Wholes, or Entire Things,) are of themselves,
or by the merits of their own Notion, Capable of Existing, or Entia: Whereas
the Former are not at all THINGS, but as they are Metaphysical Parts of the
Things truly so called; abstracted from one another, by our conceiving them
singly, or aparted from their Fellow-parts; and therefore, (since the Parts
cannot exist out of the Whole) they are Incapable of Existing but in these
Later, and by virtue of Them. Wherefore,

2. Hence follows, that the Generical and Specifical Essences, of which we have
hitherto treated, are not properly And, therefore only Individual Essences are
properly ESSENCES.
ESSENCES, in the First and Primary Acceptance of that word. For, since the
Notion of Ens, is properly, That which is Capable of Existing; and Essence is
that which properly constitutes Ens; it follows, that That which does not
constitute it is Subject Capable of Existing, is not, in proper Speech, an
Essence. Wherefore, since neither Corpus, Mixtum, Vivens, Animal nor Homo,
taken (as those words signify them) in Common, are Capable of Existing, but
the Particulars or Individ^ums of each of those Kinds; it is consequent, that,
as none of These is properly an Ens, but only the Individuums of each of those
Common Sorts; so, neither is that which constitutes any of them properly to be
called an Essence, but That only which constitutes the Individual Thing. Again,
since an Individuum (v. g. Peter) contains in it self all those Common Notions;
and so, that what answers to the Definitions of each of them is Included in
Him, and Verified of Him; it follows, that they are, all of them, (as was said)
Metaphysical Parts of Peter, or Parts of his Essence; and that He is a Whole in
respect of The^* Wherefore, since (as was said) a Part cannot exist but in the
Whole; none of these can exist but in their Individuals, nor is ( of it is self)
properly an Ens or Thing: Nor, consequently, (since Essence is the Formal
Constitutive of Ens, or o^ that which is Capable of Being,) are their Essence
in proper Speech, ESSENCES. In a word [ Ens] signifies what is Capable of
Existing; which none of those Common Essences, (staying in Them) is or can be;
for, were they such, they must necessarily make the Concretes, which are their
Subjects, to be thus Capable of Existing; which, *^is most Evident they do not;
seeing nothing in Common does, or can exist, but only Particulars.

3. Corollary I. This notwithstanding, we can discourse as clearly of those
Improper Essences, nay, far Yet we can discourse more clearly of the Common
Essences than we can of the Individual ones.
more clearly and evidently, than we can of those Proper ones. For, since those
Improper and Analogical Essences, are, each of them, some One Inadequate or
Abstracted Conception which we make of the Whole Thing; v. g. the Essence or
Nature of such a Quantity, Figure, Time, Place, Situation, etc. and (our Soul,
as will be seen hereafter, being Indivisible) they, by being in our Conception
are there Indivisibly, that is, most Dsstinctly, such: Hence, they are apt to
render our Discourses, which are conversant about such most Distinct Objects,
most Distinct and Clear also. Whereas, on the other side, the Essences properly
so called which Constitute the Individuums, do involve many of those Improper
Essences in their Constitution; which must needs make those thus-Compounded
Objects Confused; and, thence, less clearly Intelligible. It follows then
manifestly, that we can discourse more clearly of those Improper Essences or
Natures, which abstract from their Subject, and from the rest of their
fellow-Modes; than we can of the Proper Essences that constitute the Whole
Individuum; of which (as was said) the other are but Metaphysical Parts, which
are blended (in some sort) confusedly to compound or make up that Whole.

4. That Complexion of Accidents which constitutes the Essence of the
Individuum, must be far Greater than There go more Accidents to constitute the
Individuum, than there goes to constitute the Common Essences.
that which constitutes the Generical or the Specisical Natures* For, since
these Later are but Parts of the Individual Essence; there is necessarily
required more Parts to constitute the Essence of the Individuum, which in
respect of them, has the Nature of the Whole. Again, since there are found
under every Common Notion or Nature Great Multitudes of Individuums, each of
which must be Distinct from all the others; there, must necessarily be a far
Greater Complexion of Accidents to distinguish these, by their various
Complication, from one another, than was requisite to distinguish and
constitute the Common Natures; the Common Kinds of Things being, in comparison
of them, but a very Few.

5. That Complexion of Accidents which constitutes Individual Bodies, must be
the most perfect Act they can Thts Complexion of Accidents is the most Perfect
Act next *c^ that of Existence.
have, except that of Existence. For, since it is the Nature of Power, (taken in
a Physical sense) or of Matter, to be Common to All, it can distinguish no Two
of them from one another: On the other side, it being hence evident, that it is
the nature of Act, and of It only, to Distinguish; nor can there be a greater
Distinction, than to make each Subject to be This, and ^^ Other; it follows
hence, that the Complexion of Accidents which constitutes Individuums, and
which imparts this Formal Effect to each of them, is the greatest
Distinguisher, or, (which is the same) the most Perfect Act Second-Causes can
give. And that this is a less perfect Act than Existence is Evident; because
the utmost it can do is to make it is Subject, This Thing, or This Ens; that is,
to make it Capable of Existing; and, consequently, though it be most Actual in
the, direct Line of Ens, yet it has the Nature of ^ Power in respect of
Existence; which is therefore the Ultimate Actuality, or most perfect Act
Imaginable next to that of a DEITY, and most resembling it.

6. Corollary II. Hence is evidently demonstrated against the Atheists, that
it is above all the Power of Natural Hence it is demonstrated, that to give
Existence is above the Power of Natural Causes, and Peculiar to GOD.
Causes, and only Peculiar to GOD, to give the last Actuality of Existence.
For, since, as appears by our former Discourses, all that Natural Causes can
do, is, by Motion, to mingle the First Bodies, which have more or less of
Quantity in them, (that is, which are Rare or Dense;) from the Diversity of
which Action, follows their various Size, Number, Proportion, Figure,
Situation, etc. and these do make the several Complexions of Accidents which
constitute all the Individuums in Nature; and, in none of those Effects is
found the Notion of Existence, much less of a New Existence, (which yet belongs
to every Individual when it is first made,) as will easily be discerned by any
Reflecter, who considers the Notion or Essence of those several Modes, and
compares them to the Notion or Nature of Existence: It follows manifestly, that
the last Actuality of Existence cannot be given by Natural Causes, but must
come from some Cause above Nature; that is, from the Author of Nature, or from
that Supreme Essentially-existing Cause, GOD Whence is demonstrated, a
posteriori, th^^ There is a GOD.

7. There must be some Instant, in which the Individuum becomes another Thing
or of another Kind. For, (...) There must be some Instant in which the
Individual first begins to be.
it is a manifest contradiction to say, that any thing can, for any one Instant,
much less for any part of Time, be, at once, what it lately was, and what it
newly is; or be at once it's-self and ^* it is self, but Another: It Is
Demonstrable that there must be some Instant, in which it first becomes* This
Individuum, (or of this Kind) and ceases to be Another, or of Another Kind.

8. This Complexion of Accidents, which Determines the Matter to be This, and
no Other, in the First Instant This Complexion of Accidents is Essential to the
New Individuum.
of it is Being, must necessarily ^^ Essential to the Individuum newly made.
For, since mere Accidents do advene to the Thing already made This* and,
therefore, do presuppose it according to some Priority or other; and there can
be no Priority* (no, not even that of Nature or Reason) of the ^ng to that
which constitutes it; because that which constitutes it, as being it is Formal
Cause, (...) Priority of Nature to It, as the Cause has to (...) Effect: It
follows, that That Complexion of Accidents which Determines the Matter to be
This (...) no Other, in the First Instant of it is Being, ^st necessarily be
Essential to the Things or Individuums newly made.

9. Therefore, this Complexion of Accidents ^ow spoken of, is, the Essential
Therefore it is the Essential or Substantial FORM of the Individual Compound.
(...) Substantial FORM of the new^ade Compound or Individuum. That it is the
Form of it is Evident; because the whole Notion (...) the Form or Act, is
nothing (...) but to be the Distinguisher of the Confused or Undistinguisht
Potentiality of the Matter; or to be the Determiner of it is Indifferency to
This or That, (which, in the Schools Language, is to Inform it;) and by doing
thus, to be the Constituter of the Individuum: And, that this Complexion of
Accidents does these Essects, is manifest; because it is supposed to be
Peculiar to the Individuum it constitutes, and found in no other. Lastly, That
this Complexion of Accidents, or Form, is Essential (...) it is Proper
Individuum is shown,. 8.

10. For the same Reason, whatever Modes or Accidents do accrue to the Ens or
Individuum afterward, are Accidental Those Accidents that accrue afterward
are Accidentals,
to it; whether they concern it is Quantity, or the Accession or Diminution of
the Matter; that is, it is Growth and Decay; or it is Qualities which perfect it;
or the Relations it acquires to other Individuums; and much more what
Denominations soever come to it from any of the last Predicaments; because all
these do adven^, or are superadded to the Ens already Essentially constituted;
and are, as it were, engrafted on that Stock of Being, and do not constitute it.

11. All Individuums must have some Degree of Constancy and Permanency i^ their
Notion. For, since all Natural To be an Individuum, some degree of Constancy,
Permanency or Stability is required.
Motion is for some End, to the attaining which it is a kind of Way or
Tendency; and the Way or Means is not the End; and, consequently, Motion is not
the End of Motion; it follows, that the End of Motion must be something that
has some kind of Rest, Fixure, and Constancy in its Nature. Wherefore, since
the End of that Natural Motion which Determines the Power or Matter to be This,
and no other, is to produce the Individuum; it follows. that the Individuum or
Ens produced by that Motion, must not be perpetually-Changing, or continually
Successive, as that Motion was, but must have some degree of Permanency in it.
Add, that were not this so, we could never say with Truth, that any thing is
what it is; nor, indeed, that it is; nor, could we act or discourse about it;
since ere we could speak, act, or think; the. Thing would be Changed and
Vanished. Nor would the Notion of Substance consist in an Indivisible; nor be
Distinct from that of Quantity. Nor would the Accidents have any Being; there
being in that case no Determinate Thing to which they could belong, or by means
of which they might Be, or which they might modify.

12. EXISTENCE supervening to the Notion (...) Nature of Ens, does add also
Which Existence, supervening, does establish.
(...) the Ens or Substance, some Degree of Stability and Constancy. ^or, since
Motion., considered ^ormally according to it is precise and abstracted Notion,
does only import, that no Two Parts, that is Nothing of it, is at once; but
that some ^arts of it are not now, but past; others, are not ^, but to come; it
is manifest to any acute con^^derer, that Motion, according to it is own precise
Notion, or taken as Abstracted from it is Subject which is moved, and from the
other Accidents which are found in It, and in the Conti^ous Bodies through
which it moves, is nothing (...) but a Continued Flux of certain Not Beings;
which it sows (as it were) all along through it is ^hole Progress; of which
therefore it seems formally to consist. Wherefore, since Existence (in what
kind soever) is diametrically Opposite to Not* being; it follows, that as
Motion gives a fleeting Inconstancy to the Subject it affects; so Existence
does, of it is own Nature, give to the Ens or Substance, it is Proper Subject, a
certain degree of Stability and Constancy; and some degree of Permanency in
retaining the same Essence; as far as the nature of the Subject, and the best
Order of the World, designed by it is All-Wise Governor, sees fitting. The
twisting the results of so many various Causes into one Individuum, argues the
Design of an Allcomprehending* Providence.


13. Corollary III. Hence, our steady Reflection upon what has been hitherto
deduced, will inform us, that this Determination of Matter, as to certain
Lesser and Greater Degrees, which constitute the Superior and Inferior Kinds
of Things; and, especially this Ultimate Determination of it by such a
Complexion of Accidents as is Incommunicable to any other, and constitutes and
fixes the Essence of the Individuums, as is shown,. 9. is absolutely Necessary
for all Created Things; as rendering them Apt or Fit to exist, which is the Main
Work of Nature, and the only Means to continue the Succession of Creatures.
Whence it is not carried on by a Temerarious or Fortuitous Conduct; but is like
the Artificial Twisting together of many scattered Ends, and tying them into
one Firm Knot; or the summing up the many Scenes and Interludes, or the
Windings and Turnings of variously-operating Causes* in one harmonious Close at
the last Act. All which clearly argues a formed Design, and an All
comprehending Providence in the Giver of Being; sweetly and surely disposing
his Creatures to this Ultimate Determination to be This, or to a Capacity of
receiving Existence.

14. Corollary IV. This Complexion of Accidents being Incommunicable to any
other Individuum, and withal This Complexion of Accidents can never be
eradicated, while the Individuum continues.
Essential to it, can never be Eradicated while the Compound continues. This is
in a manner Self-Evident. For, this Complexion being the ESSENTIAL Form which
constitutes the Compound; it follows, that the Compound must remain
Constituted, or continue, while that which makes it such is in it; in the same
manner as Rotundity being the Formal Cause why a* Thing is Round, that thing
must continue to be Round while Rotundity is in it.

15. Corollary V. This Complexion of Accidents gives each Individuum, and
sometimes the whole Species, And gives the Compound a Different Genius and
Natural Propension.
a Different Genius and Propension. Thus every single Man has from his
Conception, some peculiarity of Temperament, Genius, Humor, or Inclination,
distinct from that of all others; which though Art, Education, Reflection and
Circumstances may alter, for the better or the worse; yet nothing can so
totally efface or extinguish it, but the Root of that peculiar Propension will
stick fast rivetted in his Selfish Individuality. Thus Original Sin is
transfused from Adam, and engrafted in the primigenial Constitution of each of
his Descendents* [ In peccatis concepit me matter mea, Psalm. 50.] inclining Men
more or less to this or that sort of Sin, according as their Individual
Temperature determines their Propension. And, though God's All-powerful Grace and
careful Christian Discipline may restrain it is promptitude from breaking out
into Enormous Outward Actions; yet no Man but feels it too deeply rooted in his
Nature to be ever extirpated; so that even the greatest Saints may with grief
cry out, Quis me liberabit a corpore mortis hujus? Thus, every Individual Seed*
though it be of the same Kind, has a peculiar Temperament and Complexion of its
own; which though we cannot discern while we view it in little; yet in evidently
discovers it self in the Individual Shrub or Tree which springs from it, when
grown up; in which we may then observe thousands of Diversities from other
Individuums of the same kind; though they be planted in the same Soil, watered by
the same Rain, and equally quickened and warmed by the same Sun: A certain
Argument that all those Varieties amongst such Vegetables, were included
intrinsecally in the Primordial and Individual Constitution and Temperament of
each of those single Seeds, and did spring thence Originally.

16. From what is said above it is evidently Demonstrated, that there can be no
show of Reason, why Existence Existence can with no show of Reason be pretended
to be the Principle of Individuation.
should be the Principle of Individuation. For, since what is Nothing cannot
exist; That only which is an Ens, or (which is the same) an Individuum, can be
capable of Existence. Wherefore, there must be conceived First, (in Priority of
Nature) an Ens, Thing or Individuum constituted, e're we can conceive there can
be any Subject fit to receive Existence; and, consequently Existence, which
presupposes the Individuum Constituted, cannot be the Principle that
Constitutes it. Again, since nothing that is Common to more Individuals (v. g.
A Man or Horse is Common) cannot exist, but only what is Determinately This or
That, (v. g. This Individual Man or this Horse, etc.) it is most evident that
the Matter must be made or Determined to be This or That; that is, it must be
constituted such an Individuum, ere it can possibly be Capable to exist.
Wherefore, Existence is Subsequent to the Constitution of the Individuum, and,
so, cannot be the Principle by which it is constituted. Lastly, the Power does
ex natura rei antecede the Act; otherwise it would follow, that That is which
cannot be; which is against an Identical Proposition, and a manifest
Contradiction. Whence, seeing (as was lately shown) only Individuums, which are
This or That in particular, can be, or have a Power to be; they must first be
supposed to be Determined by Natural Causes, ere Existence, which is their
Proper Act can supervene, or put them in the state or condition of being
Actually, or Extra causas. The Literal meaning of which Philosophical phrase,
consonantly to the Doctrine now delivered, is this; that while that Action,
called the Determination of the Potentiality and Indifferency of the Matter,
was yet on foot and not completed or brought to Perfection, the Ens or
Individuum was not as yet otherwise than in fieri, (as the Schools call it) or
yet a doing or making; that is, within the Power of those Determining Causes;
but, as soon as that Action is brought to perfection, there results thence, as
the Ultimate Terminus or End of that Determination, an Individuum, capable to
be put extra Causas, or put out of Subjection or Dependence on those Natural
Efficients; which now had done working, having performed all that belonged to
them to do. At which very instant the never-failing Goodness of the First
Being, gives actually to the Individuum, thus rendered Capable of Being, that
most perfect Actuality we call Existence, by which* it is Formally put in a
condition of being extra Causas; or no longer immediately dependent on them,
but on GOD only.

17. Corollary VI. From this Stability, which the Thing has from it is
Individuality and from it is being Existent, The Distinction between the Notions
of a Subsistent Thing, or a Suppositum, and the Notion of an Individual Ens,
clearly manifested.
results Another Formal Conception of Ens, called it is Subsistence, or being of
it is self, or from the merits of it is own Notion or Nature; and also, the being
That by which only it is Nature and Modes have Being. Whence it comes that some
define Ens to be, [ Id quod subsistit in se and substat Accidentibus:] which is
something more than the bare Meaning or Notion of the word [ Ens] imports,
which only speaks a Capacity of Existing. The word [ Thing] taken in this
Sense, or under this Consideration, is commonly called a Substratum, Subjectum,
Suppositum, or the Quod both of the Nature and it is Accidents; for both these,
in respect of it are but Quo Res est; or that by which it is constituted such,
either Substantially or Accidentally. That this Notion is formally Distinct
from the Notion of an Ens or Individuum is most Evident; for These regard no
more but that the Matter be ultimately Determined to be This, and thence
becomes Capable of Existing: But, that what is thus Capable to Exist, or
Actually Exists, does exist of it self, without the Assistance of Another; and,
thence, gives the Nature and the Accidents that accrue to it, to have Being, or
to Be, (whence it has properly the Notion of a Suppositum) is too clearly
Distinct from the other to need Proving. And, that the Notion of Subsistence is
Different from that of Existence is no less manifest; because the Formal, or
rather Total Effect of Existence, being only to make the Thing be actually, or
to put it extra Causas, is clearly Different from the Notion of Subsisting by
it self, or sustaining the Modes and the Nature too. And, indeed, if we regard
it attentively, the Notion of a Subsistent Thing, or a Suppositum, is
Subsequent to the Notion of Thing or Ens, and superadds a New consideration to
it; both as it regards it is Standing by it is self, and also, that the Nature
and Accidents do all stand in their Being by means of it. Whence the Notion of
a Subsister, or a Suppositum, (or, in Intelligent Things, of a Person) seems to
include all the Perfections, and to have all the Advantages an Ens, or
Individuum, is Capable of: Though sometimes the Notions of Ens, Being, Existing,
and Subsisting, are, for want of due Reflection, carelessly confounded.

18. From what has been discourst above, Chapter 3. and in this present Chapter, it
How and when the Individuality is ^.
will not be hard to determine when the Individuality of the several Bodies in
Natureare Changed (...) Lost. There can be no doubt but that this happens when
those Bodies can no longer retain that Primogenial Complexion of Accidents
which make the Individuum fit to perform that Primary Operation, peculiar to it
self, as it is Distinct from all other Indiviuums. But the difficulty is how we
can ever come to know That; those Individuating Complexions of the Accidents
being so many, and mingled with such a peculiar, accurate and singular
Niceness, that, it is impossible we should ever come to Know or Comprehend them
exactly and distinctly. But, I hope this Difficulty that seems at first sight
so Insuperable, will upon Examination appear to be none at all. To clear it
then, I lay these few Positions.

19. First, We may observe, and plain Experience will inform our ordinary
Reflection, that (speaking of Mixts) The First Rule how to know this.
no Individual of any Kind, when it ceases to be, or, is Corrupted, is Changed
into Another Individuum of the same Kind, V. g. No Individual Stone, Tree,
Horse, or Man, is thus Changed merely into Another Individual Stone, Tree,
Horse or Man: For, were this so, then, indeed, the Difficulty would be
Insoluble.

20. Secondly, Hence follows immediately, that the Individual Nature is never
Changed alone, but the Specifical The Second Rule.
Nature always, and oft-times the Generical too, is Changed likewise.

21. Thirdly, That it is very easy to know the difference between the Primary
Operations of such Bodies as The Third Rule.
differ Specifically or Generically, (as is shown above, Chapter 2. and 3.) and
thence to discern when the Species or Genus, and, consequently, the Individuum
is Changed. The reason why the Change of those Former, induces a Change in this
Later, is, Because all the Superior Notions are Essential to the Individuum;
as Logic demonstrates, and Common Sense informs us Peter cannot be This Man,
unless he be a Man; nor can Man be this sort of Animal, (which is Essential to
it, or rather part of it is very Definition) unless he be an Animal; nor can
Animal be This sort of Living Thing, unless it be Living, etc. Whence follows,
that whenever the Individuum is rendered Incapable of performing the Primary
Operation of it is Species or Genus under which it is rankt, the Individuality
is a fortiori perished and Changed. For, every Individuum is nothing but One of
that Kind, or Higher Notion, under which it is comprehended: And, how can it be
said to be One of that Kind, when that Kind it self (as far as concerns it) is
Changed and Gone!

22. Hence, neither the Specific Nature, nor the Individuation of Vegetables
or Animals is lost, when a Branch Hence every Simple Division of the Matter in
Living Things, changes not the Individuation.
or a Limb is cut off; provided that Mixture and Organization of Parts be not
destroyed which enables them to Digest the Nourishing Juice or Aliment,
requisite to preserve the Compound, which is it is Primary Operation.

23. Hence the Individuality of Man, as Man, ^^ot Changed, whatever Limbs
^loses, unless those parts be Corrupted, Much less in Man.
or totally Disabled, that are necessary for Ratiocination; which is the
Primary Operation of his Species, Man.

24. Hence the Individuality of a Simple Body or Element (if there be any such
now) would be altered, if the Degree of Rarity When the Individuation is lost
in Simple Bodies.
and Density be so notably changed, that a vastly different Operation follows
from it; and that the Subject which is thought to succeed, does enjoy that
Degree, not merely successively, or in transitu, but with some kind of
Constancy, or for some time; so that it will not be immediately reduced to it is
former state by Natural Causes. For, in this case, that Degree alters the
Species it self of the Simple Body, (as is shown, Chapter 2.. 21.) and,
consequently, the Individuation.

25. Hence the Individuality of First-Mixt Bodies is lost, when they are
dissolved into Simple Bodies; because When in First-Mixt Bodies.
this changes the Specific Nature of a Mixed. See Ch: 3.. 2, 3, 4.

26. Hence, Demixts are Individually Changed when the Proportion of the
First-Mixts is altered to a high Degree, When in Demixts.
and continues so with some Constancy. See Chapter 3.. 7, 8.

27. Simple Division, if perfectly such, takes away the Individual Unity in
Homogeneous Bodies. For, since When in Homogeneous Bodies.
to Divide is to make more of o^^* and what divides the Thing or Individuum, as
it is an Ens divides it as it is Un^^, and therefore takes away it is Unity; and,
on the other side, since Homogeneous Bodies are such that each part of them
does, according to it is pitch, perform the same kind of Primary Operation; It
follows, that mere Division, if it be perfected, takes away the Individual
Unity. Again, since neither part of the Divided Body is by Division
annihilated; each of them, after Division ^s Capable of Existence; and,
consequently, they being made Two, (at least,) by Division, they become duo
Entia; and, since they can and do exist. Two Individuums.

28. Yet mere Division does not necessarily alter the Divided Individuum,
essentially, if it be very Heterogeneous When, in very Heterogeneous or
Organical Bodies.
^^ Organical. For, since the former Individuum is in that case, (if not
always) under such a Species a^ is Constituted by such a Complexion of
Accidents as fits it for it is Primary Operation; and the Individuum has,
moreover, a peculiar Complexion of it is own; both which being Essential to
them, they must, consequently, continue essentially the same while the same
Formal Constituent remains, because it is still Capable to perform the
Substance of it is former Operation: It follows, that the former Individuum and
Species too must continue, unless the Division is such that it destroys the
said Complexion, which (as was shown, Chapter 2.. 16. and here. 9.) is their
Essential Form. Wherefore the former Individuum is, in these, only changed
Accidentally; that is, ^oses only some virtuality or potentiality of it is
Matter, some part of it is Quantity, or some Qualities immediately affecting
that part which is taken from it; none of which are Essential to it; and these
Accidents which the Matter of that part had formerly, being sufficient to
Determine the Matter of which a New Individuum is made; that Matter is so
disposed beforehand, that there needed little but to put it out of the
condition of being any longer a Port, to fit it for Existence.

29. Two contra-distinct Natures may very connaturally, if things be well
ordered, compound One Individual Two contradistinct Natures may Compound One
Thing.
Ens or One Thing: And, therefore, the Soul and Body may make up that One Thing
called A Man. For there can be no doubt but that Things of the most opposite
Natures can and do perfectly agree in the Common Generical Notion of Thing,
and, that, therefore, all their Disagreement, Opposition and Inconsistency,
does spring from their Differences; or, (that we may bring the Discourse from
Logical to Metaphysical Language, from the Act:) from which only, and not from
the Power, all Distinction (and, consequently, Contradistinction) comes.
Wherefore, when there are not two Distinct Substantial Acts in the Compound,
(as there is in Hirco-ceruus and other Chimera's) nothing can hinder their
Coalition into One Thing. On the other side, since there can be no difficulty
for the Proper Parts of any Compound to make up One Whole; and it has been
shown, (Chap. 1.. 17, 18.) that the Proper Parts of a Compound Ens, as such,
are Power and Act; it is Clear that there are not more Contradistinct Acts in
such an Ens. Wherefore, if the Matter or Power, on the Body's side, can by the
Author of Nature be so disposed as to require a Form of a Spiritual Nature; the
Bodily Part will thence become the Proper Matter of that Compound Ens; and that
Spiritual Nature will be the Proper Act or Form of such a Body; and this vere
and essentialiter, as the Council of Vienna has defined; and so, both together
will friendly conspire to make up that One Ent, called a Man. The main
difficulty then objected is quite taken away and superseded: For, since only
Two Substantial Acts can distinguish and multiply Entia or Things; and here is
but One Act determining the Power or Matter to This Entity, and, consequently,
to Unity under the notion of Thing; it is demonstrable by a Metaphysical
Argument, as it was (Chapter 4.. 1.) by a Logical one, that Man, made up, according
to this Doctrine, of Soul and Body, is most truly and properly One Thing, as
much as any other Natural Compound whatever, and not Two Things. This Discourse
supposes there can be some Disp^^^ion in a Body, requiring a Form which is not
educible out of the Power, or Matter, by Natural Causes. Of which, see Chapter 4.
especially. 10. and the Preliminary there cited.

30. There is no show of Impossibility, why the Divine and the Human Nature may
not join in one Suppositum; And the Human Na ture may subsist in the Divine
Suppositum.
or rather, why the Human Nature may not subsist in a Divine Person. For, since
an Infinite Being, as the Divine Nature i^, has eminently in it is self all the
Perfections belonging to Being; of which, (as was shown above, Coroll. 6.)
Subsistence or Standing alone by it is own virtue, is one; and, consequently, it
can supply by it self immediately any such Perfection, so it does not induce
any Imperfection in GOD, only which can render it impossible; it follows, that
Humane Nature may be made to subsist in a Divine Suppositum, provided it draws
not after it any Imperfection or Unbecomingness Unworthy of GOD; which cannot
be said in this case. For, to communicate or impart it is Subsistence or
Personality to another is most Agreeable to an Infinite Goodness, when his
Wisdom sees it most fit and most Necessary for the Good of a very considerable
Portion of the Creation. Nor does this put the least degree of Potentiality or
Imperfection in the Divine Nature, or makes it a Potential Part, or an
Informing Form; but it supposes the Humane Nature constituted, and only
supplies it is Subsistence or Personality; it is evident then, that this neither
alters nor depresses the Divine Nature from it is Highe^^ Dignity of being
still, in it self, a Pure Actuality, but is rather Agreeable to that Attribute;
since it only exalts Humane Nature, by thus Assuming it, or Uniting it to a
Divine Person Hypostatically, (that is according to the Notion of Suppositum)
to which, of it is self, it could not otherwise aspire. To do which, also, (the
Wisest and Best Ends of the Incarnation being well reflected on) is, as Divines
show, no way Derogatory, but in every respect Agreeable to the Divine
Attributes And all the Objections that the Ancient Greeks and Modern
Adversaries can bring to show ^^ Foolish and Misbecoming GOD, seem grounded on
this, that GOD is Infinitely GREAT, (which makes the greatest Esclat in their
Fancy) without considering at the same time that he is Equally, that is,
Infinitely GOOD. Which resembles those men'^ way of Arguing, who are only
sollicitous of magnifying GOD's Power and his Will, without considering his
Wisdom; which (according to our manner of Conceiving) determines the exercise
of those other Attributes.

31. Notwithstanding this Hypostatick Union of those two Natures in Yet those
Natures and their Properties will remain Unmingled; and not Confounded, as some
Eutychians imagined.
Christ, each Nature retains it is own Distinction, Essence, Properties and
Attributes. For, ^^^ce this Union of these two ^^tures in one Suppositum or
Person, supposes those Natures Distinctly and Essentially constituted; and the
giving them merely to Subsist, super^^^es to the Nature already constituted,
and therefore can be no part of it is Essential Constitutive; consequently, it
neither alters the Divine Nature, no^ affects the Humane Nature at all by
making (...) Subsist such as it is; which is a Notion evidently Extraneous to
the Notion of the Nature, and ^ifferent from it. Wherefore, each of those
Natures remains in it is own precise Essential bounds; and not Mingled or
Confounded with the other, as some Eutychians fondly imagined.

32. Yet all the Actions and Passions of this Subsistent Thing, to which soever
of those Natures they properly Yet, all the Actions and Passions must be
attributed to the Suppositum, though according to such in Nature; contrary to
what Nestorius fancied.
^^long, are justly attributed to Christ, GOD and Man. For, ^ince the
Suppositum of those two Natures are but One, and that Suppositum is Christ's;
and all Actions and Passions belong to the Suppositum, and are attributed to
it; it is consequent, that the Actions of this diverse-natur'd Suppositum do
belong to Christ who has those Distinct Natures in Him. Moreover, since every
thing do^^ connaturally Act and Suffer as it is; and Christ, he having Two
Natures or Essences in One Suppositum, is truly GOD and Man; it follows,
against Nestorius, that all the Actions of Christ are Divine-Human, or
Theandrical. With which yet well consists that some Actions and Sufferings may
belong to his Suppositum according to, or by reason of the one Nature, and not
by reason of the other.

33. Hence also, there can be no show of Contradiction in saying the Divine
Nature is Three according to the Hence, lastly, there is no show of
Contradiction that GOD should be Three according the Notion of [Person], and
yet but One, according to the Respect of his Essence or Nature.
Notion of Subsistence, and yet but one according to the Notion of Essence.
For, since, as has been shown here,. 17. the Respect or Notion of Subsistence
is quite different from the Respect of Essence; and there can be no
Contradiction where Opposites are Affirmed and Denied of the same according to
a Different Respect: It follows, that neither can there be any show of
Contradiction in saying the Divine Nature is Three according to the precise
Notion or Respect of Subsistence, and yet not-Three but One only in respect of
the Notion of Essence.

34. Advertisement. For the clearer understanding some parts of these late
Discourses, and to render some A large Explication of some Grounds, very Useful
to take o^f all Shadow of Contradiction from diverse Chief Mysteries of
Christian Faith; and to show how Consonant they are to the most Exact Rules of
Right Reason.
Terms we have used more distinctly intelligible, I take leave to re-min'd my
Reader here of what I have frequently inculcated in my former Books, viz.
first, That all our Knowledge, which is Solid, is of the Thing; and taken from
the Thing: Secondly, That we cannot know the Thing Clearly and Distinctly any
other way than by having several Partial or Inadequate Conceptions of it; which
therefore are Knowledges of the Thing in part only. Thirdly, That hence when
ever we speak of Act, Power, Essence, Ens, Form, Matter, Existence,
Subsistence, Quantity, Quality, or of any other Intrinsecal Mode; we neither
can, nor ought, mean any other by those words, but the Thing, according as it
is the Object of those several Abstracted Notions or Considerations we make of
it; and, which are Verified of It: and, consequently, (since all Verification
is made by the Copula [ Est], which signifies Identity) which are truly It.
Fourthly, Hence, when we speak of Metaphysical Parts of the Thing, according to
the mere Notion of Thing, we mean that they are Parts of the Thing
Metaphysically considered; or as it is the Object that verifies, or has in it,
what answers to those Conceptions or Notions which do properly belong to ENS or
BE^^G; because the Supreme Science, Metaphysics, does only, or chiefly, regard
or concern her self with such Notions as belong to Being ^^ it is Proper Object.
In the same manner as the Notions of Length, Breadth, and Thickness which
belong to Quantity as it abstracts from Natural Motion, are the Parts, or
Partial Conceptions of Bodies, or of that Thing, called Body, considered
Mathematically; and those Notions which regard Quantity, as affecting t^^ Thing
in order to Natural Action or Passion, (^^^ Rarity, Density, Divisibility,
etc.) are Parts, ^^ Partial Conceptions of Body, Physically considered* As
likewise are Matter and Form, for the same reason, if taken under the same
consideration of Grounding Natural Action or Passion: For, as they merely
relate to Being, or, as they are considered precisely as Parts or Partial
Conceptions of Ens, they belong to Metaphysics, and are there called Power and
Act. Fifthly, Hence, the Ens or Thi^^ (properly so called,) that is the
Individuum, ^^ called by us a Whole; because all those Partial Conceptions, (
objectively considered) are Contained and Involved in the Individuum, an^ are
Verified of it, as is shown above; which being only Inadequate in respect to
the Whole Thing they are hence said to be only Parts of It; and It a whole in
respect of them. Sixthly, Though the^ be only Different Conceptions of the same
Thing yet thus Aparted and Abstracted by our Understanding, we can discourse of
each of them singly, as if they were so many Distinct Essences or ^^stinct
Things; though in re they be but One Thing variously conceived. And, thence, we
can consider, what, or how great a Complexion of A^^dents is requisite to
constitute the Essences of ^^^ of those Superior or Inadequate Notions; an^
what is required to constitute Another; as is se^^ Chapter 2, 3, 4. Hence, also, we
can truly say, that One of them is not Another; viz. Formally or Distinctly
taken; though Materially or as in ^^ they are but One and the Same Thing; in the
same manner as we can say, The Hand is not the Foot; which are Integral parts
of a Man, and not ^^stinct Things from the Man materially, but ^fy'd with him
in re. Seventhly, Hence ^, we can say with Truth, that the Thing ^^y be Changed
according to One of these Con^tions or Respects, and not-Chang'd according ^^
another: That the Determination to be This, ^de (immediately) by Second Causes;
the ^istence not, but given by GOD: That a Thing, ^^^ording to the precise
Notion of Essence or ^^ture, may be Two; and yet not-Two, but One ^^^ording to
the Notion of Suppositum; or may ^^ Three as to it is Suppofitality or
Personality, and ^^ but One according to it is Essence or Nature. ^^ which
sayings are properly Verified, because ^^ ^^^^^mation and Negation are only
made in ^^ Mind, where One of those Notions is not the (...); or (which is the
same) where the Thing ^^ ^^^ceiv'd THUS, is not the Thing as conceived
^^HERWISE: And the same, is, of the Things (...) United or Assumed according to
the No^^^^ of Person, and yet not-United according to ^^^ Notion of Essence.
Lastly, it is to be noted, ^^^ as [ Conception, Apprehension, Proposition,
Dis^^^^, etc.] are Metaphorical Expressions tran^ from Corporeal to Spiritual
Natures, by (...) of some Analogy, Proportion or Resem^ to those other; so,
likewise, are those ^ds, [ Substratum, Suppositum, Subjectum, Inhe^, Accident,]
and such like: And the Literal meaning of those words is this; that, As those
things which cannot subsist or stand by themselves, or by virtue of any
Firmness of their own, ^^ re, or in Nature, must, and use to be under^^^^ and
sustained by Another, which is more Substantial (as we use to say) or more
strong than they; so, neither in our Mind, can the Notion of Mode, Manner, or
Accident stand alone, unless we conceive Some Thing of which it is a Mode, or
speaks the Manner HOW it is; or Some Thing to which it advenes, or is
superadded; whereas, on the other side, we have the Notion of Being or Thing
without apprehending such a Transcendental Relation to the Mode or Manner how
it is: Whence the Notion of Thing has a kind of Priority in our Minds to the
Accidents or Modes, under the consideration of Standing in our Intellect
without them; and the Notions of the Modes or Accidents has a kind of
posteriorily in our Mind, and a Dependence on them for their Being these;
because the former has Being, one way or other, in it is Notion; the others, as
Length, Whiteness, Roundness, and ^. have in their Notion no express
signification of Being at all. Whence, I cannot but think Mr. Lock should not
have applied his Ingenio^^ Raillery of Supporting and Underpropping; and of an
Elephant supporting the Earth, and a Tortoise the Elephant, to those Authors
who were forced to use those words; in case they did not take those Expressions
in that Gross and too-Literal Sense: And I conceive he might with equal Justice
have applied them against Grammarians, who tell us, that a Noun Substantive can
stand by it is self; a^^ a Noun Adjective, cannot without it is Elephant and
Tortoise (the Substantive) to support it.

MEDITATION.
WE have seen formerly in what consisted our Essence, as we are of that
Species, called Mankind. This was a fair Step toward the Knowing our
Individual How impossible it is to know perfectly all that belongs to our
Individuality.
Self; which we have here, to ^^r power, attempted. But, alas! How lamely and
imperfectly have ^e reached it? We experienced no great difficulty to find our
way amongst so many Common Kinds of Things, though* in a manner, Strangers to us;
but we have lost our selves at home. A Few Abstracted Modes twisted together ^y
by Nature, did oft*times satisfy our Enquiry, ^^ile we discoursed of the
former; but, when we came to consider that numerous Complexion of them, only
which can serve to constitute our Individual Body, ^^d to distinguish our
single Self from every other Particular Thing, whether of our own or of any
other Kind, we are at an utter loss, and seem bewildered ^^ ^ pathless Wood!
Such a Concourse of various Ac^^ents, and (as it were) Thrums-ends of Being,
are requisite to weave our Particular Texture, so to make up This Thing which
we are; that, to endeavor to comprehend them all, seems the same as to go
about to fathom at once a great part of Nature; and, in stead of enlightening
us, stuns our Understanding. Our Primigenial Composition, in the last minute of
our Embryo-state, which was the first Instant of our being This Man, is so
admirably Deli^ate, and the Stamina of it so finely spun by the most wise
Contrivance of the Author of Nature, that we may break our Eye Balls by bending
our Sight ^re we can gain a Glimpse of it. Nor can the help of Microscopes,
which, as Modern Virtuoso's tell us, can show tho Outward Shape of the Tree in
it is Seed, discover to us those imperceptible Particles, their Natures,
Mixture, Order, Proportion, Situation, etc. that make up the Individual
Composition of our Body, which gave the Particular Degree of Excellency and
Nobleness to our Soul. Dull Artificers must see all the parts of the Matter
they are to work upon; that, so, they may measure, proportion, and place them;
but the Architect of the World needs no reflected Rays of his own Sun to
discern them, but sees them by the Creative Light of his own Wisdom, (or rather
by seeing them, makes them,) though they be mere Darkness to us. Non est
occultatum os meum a te quod fecisti in occulto. and substantia mea in
inferioribus terrae. Imperfectum meum viderunt oculi tui; and every part of all
thy Creature in libro duo scribuntur, Ps. 138. But, alas! Who can read so
abstruse a Manuscript, much less the Original from which it is Copied. Let us
then vail our over-weoning Pride; bewail our Ignorance, and lament with the
Eaglesighted Evangelist, that No Man is found worthy or able to open the folded
and Sealed Book, even of Created Nature; nor read the Contents of it, wrapped up
in the shady leaves of an incomprehensible Providence.

But how large a Field of Contemplation is opened to us, when we come to
consider the Infinite number of Causes which By what wonderful and Untraceable
Ways GOD's Providence has brought about our Individuation.
were ordered to make this Complexion of Accidents that constituted This Body
of ours, and Distinguished it from all others in the First Instant of our Being?
What Mathematics could contrive, what Mathematician can explicate, how all
those Crooked and mutually-crossing Lines of sundry Kinds, in which those
Causes moved, shohld meet in our Individuation as in their Center? How much
more wonderful will it be to reflect, that each of those numberless Causes had
also their Causes fore-lay'd; and they others before them; and so upwards to
the First Framing of the World? And yet, our Reason assures us* that none of
these later or immediate Causes, nor, consequently, our self, their Product,
could ^ver have been, had not this long Pedigree of Causes, as Ancient as the
Beginning of Time, successively anteceded; determining Matter to this
Individual Body of ours* which required the Infusion of such a particular Soul,
whence we became what we are. Blind Matter could never have seen her direct way
to such a Steady End: Rash and Heedless Chance could never have cost Senseless
Matter into such an orderly and wellcomplicated Frame. Be ever praised that
Adorable Providence, which has designed so large a portion of the Creation to
run in a direct Track for the Production of so mean a Thing, so poor an Atome
of Being* ^^ our selves, and our Contemporary Individuu^ns* ^re.

Yet we have by this Discourse gained a clear sight of what in common makes our
Individuation, and in what it consists, And has given us all our knowledge, and
other Endowments.
though the Detail of it is particular Ingredients be hid from us: We have learnt
too that nothing but an allcomprehending Wisdom and Providence, which has
Placed us, though remotely, yet surely, in the Rank of Effects from the First
Constitution of the World, could have ripened Nature so as to make us Spring
out of the Seeds of our Causes in our proper Season. How Unreasonable then and
how short-sighted is our Pride, which would persuade Mankind, that any
particular Acquired Endowments of Dignity, Progeny, Beauty, or Parts,
particularly that the Knowledge, in which some may excel others, do belong to
our selves or our Individuums, or essentially distinguish us from those of our
own Kind, who have not been so Fortunate, or so blessed by Providence as we have
been. I have done this, and I have done the other, thinks the Proud Boaster;
God has done this and the other by me, says the Humble and Wise Christian. Nay,
if we reflect well, we shall find that we fall short of being even Common
Instruments: For, those owe only their Motion and Direction to the Principal
Cause; but We owe our Being too to Him, who makes use of us to bring about his
Infinitely-Wise Designs. None of those Endowments, Productions, or Acquisitions
are to be attributed to us as Us. Our Substantial Individuation anteceded those
Ornamental Accessories; for we must be This, ere we could thus Act, or be thus
Qualified. Nay, there is not one of those superadded Accidents, whether
Intrinsecal or Extrinsecal, that furbisht up our Individuum, and fitted it to
act for the Ends of the World's Great Governor, but required as vast a Chain
of Precedent Causes as our Individuum it self. Our Nurses showed us one fine
thing after another; which, that we might pick and glean Notions out of them by
our Senses, we looked wistly upon, and longed to handle them. We put them to
our Mouths, and knocked them against other things, as if we had a mind to know
how they Tasted or Sounded. And, after we had perused them so long till we had
sucked all the Knowledge out of them they could afford us; we straight grew
weary of them, threw them away, and cried for some new thing we had never seen
before; which we used in the same manner as we did the former, to enlarge our
little Stock of Simple Apprehsnsions, which are the Elements of our Natural
Knowledge. Then they began to name the things they showed us; and by, their
continual Tattle, they framed our Tongues, and instructed our Lisping Vocal
Organs to imitate them; and so taught us by Degrees to prattle and ask for
those things we needed. Growing up, we came by little and little, to compound
those Simple Thoughts or Notions, which we had acquired, into Judgments; and
were delivered over from How little our best Performance contributed to the
Acquisition of them.
our Natural Instructers to the Discipline of Schoolmasters; and, in process of
time, we began to converse with the Learned Part of the World by their Books
and Verbal Discourses; whence we become tinctured with their Thoughts
concerning the several Natures of Things, and the Rules of Art, (...) which we
stored up in the Repository of our Memory.. When we were thus furnished with fit
Matter, and some Forms of Discoursing, New Occasions and Circumstances joined
those previous and preparatory Knowledges, with which we were pre^u'd, to our
Present Thoughts; which Dispositions had (even to every single particular) been
fore^aid in us through the whole Course of our former Life; and, working in us
according to our Natural Genius, (...) our Individual pitch of Rationality,
were the Adequate Cause of that peculiar Turn of Writing and Discoursing, in
which we differ from other Scholars.

Now, each of those Assistants of ours which contributed to this Effect were,
themselves, And how little the most Knowing or Best Man has to be Proud of the
most Estimable Actions GOD has done by him.
Individuums too; and, consequently, had as far-fetcht, and as Ancient a
Descent of Causes, to make them be what they are, as our Selves had: And the
same may be said of those Circumstances, by which those several Informations
come to be Applied from time to time to our Knowing Faculty; which, how little,
for the most part, they are in our power to foresee, lay or prevent, every
Reflecter knows. So, that, that Maxim of the Stoics, [Agimur, non agimus]
seems in a manner (though not in their Sense) Appliable to the Wisest of us. We
do all of us Act indeed, by our Natural Powers, which were given us by our Good
Maker at first; yet those mere Powers could not have exerted themselves into
Action at all, nor have been Useful to us, unless order had been taken, by the
same Goodness, to Determine them to perform This or That Action in particular,
or to Act after such a manner; and this by a Course of Causes impossible to be
laid, or carried on by any in by the same Great Governor of the World. When I
set my self to speculate or write, do I know before hand what New Thoughts I
shall have, or what ^^ Former Thoughts will Dictate to me? Not one j^^. The
present Circumstances do, indeed set those Thought I had got on work, and level
them at such an Object: But the Disposal of them Rationally depends ^^ Millions
of Unseen Causes, preordain'd to bring ^^ about; which it is Impossible for us
to recollect, or ^^ give any account of them. Whence, [A Joue Principium] is
but a scanty Acknowledgement of our Entire Dependence on GOD for every Step our
Soul takes toward Knowledge; (and the same discourse holds as to our Acquiring
Virtue:) and only beseems some Heathen, who had but Half-Lights of a DEITY. The
Progress and Conduct of every Act of ours, toward both it is Immediate, and
it is Ultimate, End and Perfection, do, all of them, spring from the Giver of
every Good and perfect Gift, as well as the Beginning of it. This Sovereign
Cause, is, as well in Natural as Supernatural Effects, Principium, Rector, Dux,
Semita, Terminus idem. Nay, every least Manner of Action, as far as it is Good
(as well as the Action it self) is not only Determined but Proportioned to it is
Proper End by his Universal Superintendency. Therefore Right Reason and True
Philosophy, as well as St. Paul's Sublime Faith and Divinity, do oblige us to
catechize and ask our selves, Quid ^abes quod non accepisti? Quod si accepisti,
quid gloriaris quasi non acceperis? It Is Vain and False Philosophy then, and
not the True one, which begets that (miscalled) Science, which does inflare, or
puff ^^^n up with a self-assuming Pride. Philosophy were ^^^ Philosophy, did it
not bring us to True Science; ^^^ Science would not be Science, did it not
refund ^^^^cts into their Genuine Causes; and, consequently, ^^^ry Action of
ours (as far as it is Good and not Defective) into that Supreme and First Cause
in whom we live, move, and have our Being. Hence, also* is seen how powerfully
True Science conduces to ^ake Men Virtuous; For, by seeing thus evidently ^^r
Total Dependence on GOD, and how little we ^^^ do of our selves, it reads us a
Solid and most effectual Lecture of Profound Humility; which is the Ground of
all Virtue, and the Basis of all our Spiritual Building.

At least, (I say) we have through God's Assistance, gained by our former
Discourse, a Certain, though something Confused Knowledge of what That we ought
to comply with the Designs of our Great Cretour; and, by what means this may be
best accomplished.
we are as to our Particulars; and a Clear Discernment of what Kind we are; viz
an Intelligent and Rational Being. Let us follow then, and comply with what we
undoubtedly know: Let us not degenerate from our Nature, and then we may be
sure we shall not wrong our Creation, nor offend our Great Creator. Let us
cultivate ^^^ Reason; and extirpate it is Enemy, Passion. Let us love Truth, our
Best Natural Perfection; and pursue it by making use of those Means which are
most Proper to attain it. To do this as we ought, let us not precipitate our
Assent rashly; but warily, and wisely suspend, till Self-evidence of our
Principles, and Evidence of our Deductions appear; only which can secure our
Steps from stumbling into Error. While we take this way, we may hope in the
same good Providence which has led us on hitherto, to grow fit to comprehend
Higher Truths; till we ascend by those Gradual Approaches, as by the Step^ of
Jacob's Ladder, to reach Heaven; and attain the Blissful Ssght of Him who is
TRUTH it self; which only can satisfy fully our Inquisitive and infinitely
Capacious Understanding.

CHAP. VI. some Preliminaries fore-lay'd in order to Demonstrate the
Immortality of the SOUL.
1. THOUGH Man be but One 1. Preliminary
Thing, as was proved, Chap. 4.. 1. and Chapter 5.. 20. ^^r we cannot but make
Diverse We cannot but have different Conceptions of the Parts of Man.
Conceptions of Him as he is Man, according to those Different Na^^^es or Parts
found in him, called ^^^l and Body. This needs no farther Proof, it being
granted by all; insomuch as some will ^^eds make them Two Distinct Things. And
is ^^^her Proved. For, since, as has been demon^^rated above, the Soul is the
Form (or ACT) of the Body; and we cannot but have Different Notions or
Conceptions of ACT and POWER; it follows, that we cannot but have Different
Notions or Conceptions of the Soul and the Body.

2. Preliminary II. Whence follows, that we may, and must have Different
Notions, or Conceptions, of every Operation of Man, as ^^ is Man. For, since
every And, consequently of every Operation of his, as he is Man.
Man, though One Thing, yet has two Different Natures in him, of which he
consists; and every Thing is that of which it consists; and Operates or Acts as
it is; it follows, that every Operation of Man, as well as Himself, is of
vastly Different Natures and partakes of both; and, consequently, we can, and
are obliged, to have Diverse Conceptions of every such Operation, for the same
Reason for which we must have Diverse Conceptions of those Natures themselves:
that is, we can find somewhat in such Operations that is Proper or Peculiar to
One of those Natures, and not Proper or Peculiar to the Other.

Hence I proceed Closer to my Main Thesis, to be demonstrated in my next
Chapter, viz.

3. If we can find by Evident Reflection, that there is somewhat in the
Operations which Man has according That we must examine, whether there be
anything in Man, according to his Soul, which is above Quantity or Matter.
his Soul that is above the Nature of Matter; or, above Quantity, which is the
Common Affection of all Corporeal Nature; and, therefore, that is Indivisible,
or (which is the same) Indissoluble or Incorruptible; it must follow
demonstratively, that then, that Part of Man called his Soul, is Immaterial,
Incorruptible, or Immortal. In order to Demonstrate which, we proceed with our
Preliminaries.

4. Preliminary III. There are Three Distinct Operations of Man according to
his Soul, as it is Intellective or That there are Three Distinct Operations of
Man as he is Intellective.
Knowing; viz. Simple Apprehension, Judging, and Discoursing. This I think, is
granted by all, and is easily proved. For, we must first, Lay hold of that
which we are to work upon; or take into out Mind that of which we are to Judge
or Discourse, (that is, have a Notion of it); for, otherwise, we should Judge
and Discourse of we know not what* Wherefore that Operation called Simple
Apprehension, or the having the Notion of the Thing in our Mind, is clearly
Antecedent to the other Two; and, consequently, Distinct from them. Again, [
Discoursing] does clearly presuppose some Judgments already had, and Assented
to, ere we can Deduce any thing out of them by Discourse; since we must
necessarily Judge our Premises True, ere we can hope to derive their Truth to
another Proposition, or Deduce any thing* out of them by our Reason; which
manifests a perfect Distinction between the Operations of Discoursing and
Judging. It Is therefore Evident, that there are Three Distinct Operations of
Man according to that Part called the Soul, as it is Intellective or Knowing;
called Simple Apprehension, Judging and Discoursing.

5. Preliminary IV. The Notion of (Created) Ens or Thing Abstracts from, or is
Indifferent to Existence and Nonexistence; The Notion of [Ens] or [Thing] is
Indifferent to Actual Being, or Not-Being.
and (a fortieri) to all Manner of Existence, Corporeal or Spiritual, in re or
in intellectu, and therefore it is Capable of either. The first Part is Evident
from the very Sense of the Word: For in the Signification of the Word which
expresses any Created Being, as Peter, Michael, a Stone, a Man, etc. we find
nothing at all of Being or Not-Being, either expressed or implied: Again, we can
truly say of any Individuum, (which is properly a Thing) v. g. of Peter, that
he is newly dead, or of Wood, that it is turned into Fire; which signifies, that
those Things called [ Peter] and [ Wood] were before, and now are not; which
could not with truth be said, unless those Things were Indifferent to Being and
not-Being, or Capable of either.

6. Preliminary V. The Form cannot be in the Subject, but it must make it
Formally of his own Nature: V. g. Every Form that is in any Subject, must
denominate it to be formally such as it self is.
Rotundity cannot be in any Subject, but it must make it Round; Nor can any
Quantity or Quality, v. g. the Quantity of a Yard, or Whiteness, be in a Thing,
but they must make it a Yard long, and White, as the Nature of that Quantity
and Color is. This is Self-evident; for to be a Yard long or White, is to have
such a Length or such a Color in it. Nor, for the same reason can any
particular Nature be in any Thing, but it must make that Thing be of such a
Nature.

7. Preliminary VI. A Notion or Conception may either be considered
Subjectively; as it is an Operation of the Mind, A Notion may either be
considered Subjectively, or Objectively.
Affecting It, and Received in It as in it is Subject; or Objectively, as that
about which the Mind, when it has that Notion, is employed, as it is Object, or
the thing Known. This is a manner Self-evident. For, an Operation of a Knowing
Power cannot be, but there must be something Known; nor can a Thing be known
without an Actual Knowledge of it.

8. Preliminary VII. Whatever is Known by the Soul, or is the Object of our
Knowledge, must either it self Every Object of our Knowledge must either be the
Thing it self, a^s in the Mind, or something that is like it.
be in the Soul, or else some Similitude or Representation of it. This also is
in a manner Selfevident. For, in case neither It self, nor any thing Like it be
there when we know it, it is Impossible to imagine any reason why our Knowledge
should be of It rather than of Another thing Distinct from i^; which must
necessarily confound all our Knowledges whatever. Again, since the Power of
Knowing is of it self Indifferent to the Knowing This or Another; it is
Impossible to conceive how this Indifferent Power should be Determined to Know
This rather than Another, unless either This Object be it self in that Knowing
Power, that is, in the Mind; or something that Resembles or Represents it.

9. Preliminary VIII. Notions taken Objectively, are the Things themselves,
existing in our Mind intellectually, and That Notions, undrrstood Objectively,
are the Things themselves, as in the Mind; and not mere Similitudes of them;
Proved unanswerably.
not the Similitude, or Representation of them only. This may be presumed to be
an Established Maxim, having been proved by so many Demonstrations in my Second
Preliminary in Solid Philosophy Asserted, none of which have been hitherto
Answered by the modern Ideists, though nothing more nearly concerned them.
Notwithstanding, I shall add this farther Proof of it. Words are meant to
express that which is in our Mind; that is, to express our Conceptions or
Notions* taken Objectively, which therefore (thus taken) are the Thing meant.
But that which is meant by the Words, is the Thing it self; therefore that
which is in our Notion, or the Object of it, is the Thing it self. To prove the
Minor, let us put this Proposition, [There is a Similitude of the Thing it self
in our Mind;] and then reflect, that since we understand what is meant by all
th^se words, we have a Notion of each of those Words in our Minds. Hence I
argue; Therefore there is in our Notion not only what is meant by the word
Similitude], but also what is meant by the words, [ the thing it self;] for
those words are Parts of the Proposition. But what is meant by the words [ the
Thing it self] cannot be any other but the very Thing conceived by us;
therefore the very Thing is in our Notion or Conception when we intelligently
speak that Proposition. This is farther enforced, because in this Proposition,
what is meant by the words [ the Thing it self] is Relatively Opposed to the
Similitude or Representation of the Thing, as is evident to every Reflecter:
Therefore, what is meant by the words [ the Thing it self] cannot possibly be
the same that is meant by the word [ Similitude], which is formally Opposite to
it. Whence those who deny the Thing is in our Minds, do at the same time
unawares, confess it is there; since they put what is meant by [ Thing it self,]
over and above what is meant by the word [ Similitude] to be there. Nor were
these words [ The Thing it self] ever used by Mankind, (especially when they
speak Dogmatically) to signify A Similitude of the Thing. Lastly, If we have
only Similitudes of what is meant by our Words; then since, (as they will have
it) the Words [ Thing it self] signify only a Similitude of the Thing; by the
same reason, the Word [ Similitude], which is found also in that Proposition,
must mean a Similitude of a Similitude; of which who can make any Sense?

10. But to put this out of all Doubt by Argu^ unanswerably from their own
Concession; Let us abstract any Proved Unanswerably by the Concession of the
Ideists themselves, that the Thing it self must be in the Mind.
particular Notion of the Thing from the rest, and we shall see clearly, that
every Similitude consists in the Unity or Identity of some Form or Act (whether
Essential o^ Accidental) which is found in the Things said to be Alike. For
Example: If two Things be Alike in Quantity, or Length, v. g. each of them a
Yard; all Mankind will say, that the Same Length or the Same Quantity is and in
each of them. If two Walls be Alike (...) Color, or both of them White; we
truly say they are of the Same Color. If two Sons be Alike ^^ their Relation
to one Common Father, they ^^ truly said to have the Same Relation, or to be
(...) of them Sons. If two Things be perfectly (...) in- Figure, v. g. both of
them Triangular, we truly affirm they are of the Same Figure. If Alike in
Nature, (v. g. Manhood) they are truly said to be of the Same Nature. For,
since we consider them under such a precise Notion, and no other, and they do
not at all differ under that Notion; this Discourse is as Self-evident, as
it is, that a ^^rd is a Yard, that Whiteness is Whiteness, a (...) is a Son, a
Triangle is a Triangle, or a Man ^^ a Man. And, in case These, or any other,
hap not to be the same, it is because they fall short of being Perfectly Alike
under that Consideration or Respect, or that some other respect is mingled with
it. Hence I argue: Since our Soul works by Abstracted Notions, and conceives
the Thing now under One Notion or Respect, now under Another; and it is granted
that our Soul has* ^ Likeness to the Thing, as far as she conceives it* or has
a Notion of it; and, by having such a Likeness of it, she must (by. 5.) be
truly denominated Like it; it follows with Equal Evidence as it did in the
former Instances here mentioned, that there is also an Unity, Identity, or
Sameness in the Mind with the Thing, ( as far as it is Conceived;) which,
according to it is Proper and Natural Manner of Existing, is without us; and
that the Thing without us, as far as it is thus inadequately and precisely
Conceived, is the Same with the Thing existing in our Conception or Notion.
Whence follows, (by the same evidence) that our Mind* considered precisely as
Knowing the Thing; and, by Knowing it, being Like it; is the Same with the
Thing Known, or truly (after an Intellectual Manner) that Thing. By which we
may see how True, though Scandalous to Men of Fancy, that Saying of Aristotle is,
that [ Anima intelligendo fit Omnia:) and why he adds the word [ Quodammodo] to
hint to us the Different Manner of Being it has in the Understanding from that
which it has in re.

11. Corollary I. Hence we may collect, that that Saying, [ Every Like is not
the Same], is only True when the In what Sense, [Every [Like] is not the Same,]
is verified.
Things are not perfectly Alike, but are Unlike to* one another in some Other
Respect or Consideration; and that it cannot be meant that they are not the
Same under that Respect in which they are perfectly Alike; this being, as was
shown, contrary to the Sentiment and Language of all Mankind. Now, it is
impossible, that being (as is granted) Alike, they should not be perfectly
Alike when we speak of them (as we here do) according to some One precise
Respect; Every Respect or Notion we have being Indivisible, and shut up
concisely within it is own Bounds; so that it cannot admit any Unlikeness in
Another Respect, every Inadequate Notion (as ours are) being but one single
Respect of the Thing. Wherefore the Meaning of that Saying is generally this,
that it does not follow they are the same Thing, or the same according to the
Notion of Thing, because they are Alike according to the Respect or Notion of
some Mode or Accident, which is not the Notion of Thing, but Another; which we
easily grant without the least prejudice to our Argument* which proceeds upon
Likeness in such a precis^ Respect and no other; (which therefore cannot but be
a perfect Likeness) and thence infers an Identity or Unity in that Respect only.

12. Corollary II. This Identity which our Abstracted Notion or Conception
Hence, every Inadequate Notion we have of the Thing, is of the Whole Thing
Confusedly and Materially; though it be only of one Metaphysical Part, or
Considerability of it, Distinctly and Formally.
has to the Thing in Part, hinders not, but forces, that the Whole Thing is in
our Mind intellectually, though our Conception be but of one Abstracted
Considerability found in it: Only the Whole is there but Confusedly, as That to
which that Metaphysical Part belongs; and that Part Distinctly, as the Peculiar
Object of our Inadequate Conception of it. In the same manner, as when we see
or touch One part of a Man, v. g. his Face or Hand, we truly say we see or
touch that Man, or Him; which words signify the Whole Man. For, since the word
[ Part] must mean a Part of Something, that is of the Whole to which it
relates; [ A Part of the Whole,] signifies the same as [ The Whole in Part.]
Again, since (as was demonstrated, Chapter 1.. 27.) there are no Actual Parts in
any Compound whatever; and, therefore, all Operations of our Minds, as well as
all Actions and Passions in Nature, are of the Suppositum, or Subject, and
exercised upon other Suppositums, or Subjects, when we know them: Hence, to
know some Part of the Thing is to Know the Whole Thing Materially, though it be
only one Part of it Formally, Expressly, and Distinctly. Whence is seen how
Solid our Way of Philosophizing is; being entirely built on the Thing it self,
whose Essence is Established by the First Being* and not on any Fantastic
Similitude of it, Elicited by our Soul, or coined by our Fancy.

13. It were not amiss for the more perfect Satisfaction of every Reader, who
is even of an ordinary Capacity A Third Unanswerable Proof, that the Thing it
self must be in our Mind when we know it.
to borrow here one of those Demonstrations from my Second Preliminary
aforesaid, it being at once Clearly Convictive and very Easy. It Is this, [We
can never know the Thing certainly by a Resemblance of it, unless we know
certainly that that pretended Resemblance is Like it, or truly Resembles it:
Nor can we possibly know with Certainty that it resembles it, but by comparing
the Resemblance with the Thing, as we do all* Copies with their Originals, and
all Originals with their Prototypes. Nor can we thus compare them together,
without having the Thing too, as well as the Resemblance, in our Comparing
Power; that is, in our Mind, or Understanding. The Thing it self then must be
in our Mind, to be there Compared with the Resemblance of it; or otherwise, the
Resemblance or Similitude can never be known to be ^ike the Thing; and, so, can
never make us certainly know it, nor do us any Good. And, if the Thing be
there, what needs a Similitude of it to know it; since to be in a Knowing Power
is to be Known.

I am to expect it will be apprehended and objected that I much wrong my Cause
by putting so much stress upon the Thing's being really in the Understanding as
an Object, it being so hard to be conceived, or unlikely to be granted but by a
very few. To which I Answer:

14. First, That this Tenet is the Basis of all Philosophy in the World that is
Solid, and that, besides my many The Author's Reason why he builds upon this
Thesis, that the Thing it self is in the Soul when she knows it.
Demonstrations in the place lately cited, and some here also, which evince it,
innumerable others may be added to make good that Thesis; diverse of which may
perhaps occur hereafter. The Reasons why many Witty Men are so prejudiced
against this Tenet, are chiefly Three. First, Because they do not distinguish
between those different Questions [ An est], and [ Quid o^ [ Quomodo est.] And
thence, because they cannot comprehend The Reasons why some others are backward
to Assent to it.
what the Nature of a Spiritual Operation is, or conceive How this is done;
they will needs conclude it is not done at all, or cannot be done. But how void
of Common Reason this Inference is, is obvious to every Ordinary Reflecter.
When we see a Thing a-far off, we know, that it is, though we know not yet What
is is. The Rudest Vulgar knows That there are Sun, Moon, and Stars; but they
are utterly Ignorant What they are. Again, We All of us know most certainly,
that the Loadstone attracts Iron; and that we move our Hands and Feet, etc. but
very Few of these All do perfectly comprehend How this is done. Now, it is only
the [ An est] of the Things being in our Mind, or [ That it is there] which is
in Question here; for it is only this which we strive to evince, and not the [
Quid est] of that Spiritual Operation, or How this is performed; which perhaps
is beyond any Man's Skill in this State. The Second Reason is, Because they do
not distinguish between the Indivisible or Spiritual Manner of Existing which
Things have in the Soul and the Proper Manner of Existing they have i^
themselves, as they are out of it: Whereas, (by. 5.) what is meant by the word
[Thing], or the Notion of it, abstracts from both, is Indifferent to both, and
consequently, can have both* or either of them. And, it is also Evident hence,
that it is granted by all who hold a First Being, that the Essences of all
things, (and amongst them, of Bodies) and consequently those Things themselves,
were, and are in the Divine Intellect after a Spiritual Manner; and yet they
exist in themselves after a Manner quite Different from the Other. Whence, it
being only asserted by us, that they are in our Mind after a Spiritual Manner,
their Objection is wholly grounded on their Confounding those two Manners of
Being, which are most Vastly, and indeed Contradictorily Different. Nor have
they any way to confute our Assertion but by Producing some Metaphysical
Arguments to evince that Things cannot possibly have two such Manners of Being;
which we are confident they can never do. On the contrary, we cannot but judge
we have Unanswerably Demonstrated our Affirmative, that they can have such
Different Manners of Existing, and Actually have them. The Third Reason of
their Dissatisfaction is, That such Objecters do not guide their Thoughts by
regarding the Connection of Terms in Propositions or Discourses; in which, and
by which only, Truth is Clearly and Certainly to be found; but by customary.
Impressions on the Fancy, begetting dive^s Phantasms there; which being taken
from Material or Corporeal Objects, must needs be very Unsuitable to Spiritual
Operations; nor, consequently* can they any more enable us to judge of
Spiritual Natures, unassisted by Reflection and Reason connecting our Notions,
than a Blind Man is able to judge of Colors. Let then these Gentlemen correct
their Thoughts as to these Three Faults, and they will quickly see what a
puzzle they will be at to frame any Objection against this Thesis that will
hang together; and, on the other side, what a struggle it will cost them to
solve, with any show of Reason, the Connection of the Terms which gives force to
those Demonstrations that pretend to evince this Great and most important Truth.

15. My Second Answer to those who dislike my making use of, and relying upon,
Notwithstanding, the Immortality of the Soul may be Evinced, tho^ This Thesis
were waved.
such an Abstruse point, is, that Many, if not Most of my following
Demonstrations will equally conclude the Immateriality of the Soul, even
according to the Opinion of those who hold that only Similitudes of the Thing
are in our Understanding when we know it, as they will, according to our
Thesis, that the Thing it self is after a Spiritual Manner there. Wherefore,
since (by. 8.) Knowledge must necessarily be performed by one of those ways or
by the other, it will far more conduce to the Evincing this Main and
Fundamental Point, by showing that my Demonstrations do conclude, which soever
of these Hypotheses my Readers hap to embrace. I add, that having thoroughly
studied that Point, which some Men think is so Abstruse, and seeing evidently,
to the very best of my Judgment, that no Objecter ever did this; and withal,
that that Point is Demonstrable, nay already Demonstrated; and that no
Objection can, with True Reason, be brought against it; Hence I conceived that
I ought not to lose the Just Advantages which that True Thesis gave me to
conclude such a Grand Position as is the Immortality of the Soul, (on the truth
of which all Religion fundamentally depends) merely because many dislike it,
but neither well know, nor can give any good Reason why; as none I have yet
heard of ever gave any*

CHAP. VII. Of the Immateriality, and, consequently, the IMMORTALITY of Man's
SOUL.
1. THAT Subject is evidently. 1. Demonstration
Immaterial, which Works, is Affected, or has Objects in her after an
Immaterial Manner; Them. I. Because her Operations and Objects are received in
her after an Indivisible manner.
that is, after such a Manner as is Impossible to be found in Material or
Quantitative Things. But such is that Subject called Man's SOUL, in respect of
her Operations, and of the Objects in her: Therefore the Soul is Immaterial.
The Major is Evident; For, were the Subject Divisible, or had Quantitative
Parts, whatever Mode or Object Affects it or is Received in it, must be
Received in some Part, or other, of that Divisible Subject; for, if it be in no
part of it, it would not affect it at all. And if it effects or be received in
some Part of that Divisible Subject, it must be Divisible, and, consequently
Extended, as that Part is which received it. The Minor, which proves the
contrary, is hence demonstrated; because it is See Solid Philosophy Asserted,
Reflection 9. S. 7.
perfect Nonsense to think that Knowledge, which is the Proper Operation of the
Soul, is of such a Nature as can be measured by any Material Extension. This
will be farther demonstrated by Innumerable Arguments. And, first, by those
drawn from the Nature of Knowledge in Common.

2. Demonstration II. If the Knowledge which the Soul has were in her after a
Divisible, Material, or Quantitative Them. II. Because the Capacity of the Soul
is Infinite.
Manner, and, consequently her self were Divisible and Quantitative; then, the
Extent of that Quantity being Finite, the more Knowledge she gains, the nearer
she would approach to being Full; and so, be less able to hold or contain more.
Whereas, on the contrary, we find by Experience, that the more Knowledge the
Soul has in her already, she is so far from becoming Fuller, that her Capacity
is by that means Enlarg^d, and she is enabled to take in still more and more.
But this is directly against the Nature of a Material, that is, a Divisible or
Quantitative Capacity that is Finite, as is most manifest; since the least
Quantity takes up some Space, or Room, of this Finite Container; and, so, still
lessens the Capacity of holding as much as it could before. Therefore, the Soul
is of a quite Contrary, or rather Contradictory Nature to the Capacities of
Quantitative or Material Subjects, and by consequence she is evidently
Immaterial.

3. Demonstration III. That which has innumerable other Natures in her, without
Altering or Destroying it is Demon. III. Because she has Other Natures in her,
without Altering her own.
own Natural Constitution, is evidently Immaterial. But the Soul has
Innumerable other Natures in her, (by Preliminary 9. and 10.) without Altering
or Destroying her own; There^^^^ the Soul is Immaterial. The Major is evident,
because many new peculiar Natures or Complex^^ns of Accidents, advening to the
constitution of the former Material Thing, must needs affect it accordingly,
and give it as many New Modifications and Determinations as there are Accidents
i^ it: Since, these (by Prelim. 5.) must each of them impart to the Subject
it is Formal Effect, and as much alter it is Nature, as Water does Wine, or Aloes
does Honey; much more when Multitudes of these Complexions of Accidents are
jumbled together, they would scarce leave to that Material Entity any Remnant
or Show of it is former self; but quite pervert, efface and de^roy it is proper
Temperament or Constitution. Again, those various Complications of Accidents
must make the Soul, were she Material, to be of so many several Kinds, and
consequently to be many Corporeal Individuums; which would make her the most
Monstrous Chimera imaginable; and destroy her Unity and Entity both. Nay, since
all those Notions which are (taking them objectively) those Natures and Modes,
do (^s will be demonstrated hereafter) remain still in the Soul, many of which
are Contrary and In^^nsistent; and, must impart to her, were she Material,
their Formal Effect; or make and denominate her such as their several Natures
are: Whence she would be at once Rare and Dense, Hot and Cold, (and this too in
the Highest, and also in the Lowest Degree) Long and Short, and of all
different Quantities; Black and White, and of all Different Colors, Moist and
Dry; Round, Square, Triangular, and of all Figures; nay, at once Virtuous, and
Vicious; Knowing and Ignorant; since she has the Notions or Natures of all
these in her. The Minor is proved, (by. 9, 10, 11*) where it was demonstrated
that by having Notions of the Things according to all these Modes, she has
these Modes themselves in her: which how impossible it is they should be all at
once in a Material Subject, Common Sense shows every Man.

4. Demonstration IV. Hence it is clearly evinced, that None of those Things,
Natures, or Modes, which the Soul Demon. IV. From her having Things and Modes
in her as others; or as not belonging to her own Nature.
has in her by Knowing them, is an Intrinsecal Affection, Mode or Determination
of the Soul it self, as are her Faculties, Thoughts, Judgments, Discourses,
Affections, and such like, which do properly belong to her own Nature. Whence
follows, that when they are in the Soul by her Knowing them, they are there
tanquam aliud, As Another, or as Distinct from her: And therefore, that [
Knowing] is the becoming Another Thing, as it is Distinct from the Knower;
which, (though, perhaps few reflect on it) is no more in true Sense, than what we
familiarly say, that it is an Object of the Knowing Power, or the Thing Known;
for the words [ Object], and [ Thing Known], do import a Relative Opposition,
and consequently Distinction from the Knower as such. How this piece of
Doctrine may (in part) conduce to the Explication of the most B. Trinity, may
appear in due Season; by showiag, that the Opposition and Distinction according
to the Notion of Relation, does not hinder, but rather, in our case, induce the
Unity of Nature in the Knower and thing Known.

5. Demonstration V. That Tenet must necessarily be False which is contrary to
the Natural Notions and Language of all Mankind; Demon. V. Because the Contrary
Thesis is opposite to the Natural Notions of all Mankind.
not excepting even Atheists themselves, who deny Spiritual Beings. But such is
the Tenet of the Soul's Materiality: Therefore that Tenet must necessarily be
False. The Major is proved; Because all our Knowledge, and all the Truths we
have Naturally, are built on our Natural Notions as on their Ground. The Minor
is thus manifested: It is Nonsense according to the Natural Sentiments and
Language of all Mankind, to ask of any particular Knowledge, (for Example, of
our Knowledge that Two and Three make Five) How Big, or of what Quantity or
Extension it is; v. g. whether it be an Inch, or a Yard Long, whether it be
thus Broad or Thick: As also, Whether it be Rare or Dense? Whether it be as
Hard as a Stone, or as Soft as Butter? What Figure it is of? Whether Square,
Round, Cylindrical or Octogone? Whether it be White or Black, or of some middle
Colors? Whether it be Diaphanous or Opacous? Whether it sends out Effluviums
or Particles of it is own Nature, or no? What kind of Place will fit it? Whether
the Parts it has do stand Erect, or lean Sloping, or lie Flat? How we are to
Act upon it by another Body's smart Impulse, shattering it is Parts asunder, or
Pressing them Close, or Tearing them off by little and little? etc. Now it is
such Nonsense to all Sober Mankind, though never so Skeptical, to ask such
Questions, that it looks like mere Gibberish, or the playing at Cross-purposes;
and would make the Asker, if he do it seriously, be held a Madman; whereas yet
it would not be thought at all Absurd to ask, at least many of these,
concerning any Material Being whatever. It Is given us then and granted by the
Free and Ingenuous Acknowledgement of all Mankind, guiding themselves by their
Naturetaught Notions, that this Operation of our Soul, called Knowledge, which
is most Natural to her, (and, consequently, that her Nature it self,) is vastly
Different from that of Material or Quantitative Beings, that is, Immaterial.

6. Thus far of Knowledge in Common. What Light is afforded us to demonstrate
the Immateriality of the Existence is the Absolute Notion; and all the rest ^re
Respective.
Soul from all her several sorts of Operations mentioned Chapter 6.. 4. will be
seen hereafter. We proceed now to examine the several Objects of the Soul's
First Operation, or her several sorts of Notions; which are comprehended in
those Ten General Heads called Ten Predicaments. These Notions are adequately
Divided into Two General Kinds, viz. Absolute and Respective: I say,
Adequately, it being impossible for us to have any Conception which is not
either the One or the Other. Of these, the Modes or Accidents, which take up
the Nine last Predicaments, are, all of them Respective to the Thing or
Substance, which they one way or other modifie; because we cannot conceive a
Mode or Manner which modifies Nothing; (which is the Literal Sense of that
Saying of the Schools, [ Accidentis Essentia est Inhaerentia;]) And the Notion
of Thing, or as the Schools call it Substance, being That which is Capable of
Being, or, which is the same, a Power to Existence: It follows, that the Notion
of Thing relates to its Act, Existence; and that the Ens or Substance, which is
Capable to be, or is the Power to be, does respect it as such. Whence follows,
that Existence has no Respect at all, in the Line of Ens, to any other Notion
whatever that perfects it, there being none more Actual than it self is; nor
has it any Reference or Order to any thing but to GOD, our Creator; who is the
Immediate Cause of it; on whom only it depends, and whom only, of all our
Natural Notions, for it is Indivisibility, Simplicity, and Actuality, it most
resembles. From which Discourse it is clearly seen, that Existence or Actual
Being is the only Absolute Notion we have, and that all the rest, either
Immediately (as Ens) or Mediately, (as the Modes of Ens or Accidents) are
Respective to It. To begin then with the only Absolute Notion; [ Existence], I
argue thus.

7. Demonstration VI. That Subject is Indivisible or Immaterial that has
Objects in her which are every way Indivisible, (by. 1.). But, the Soul, when
she has in her Them. VI. Because she has the No tion of [Existence] in her,
which is every way Indivisible.
the abstract Notion of Existence, has an Object in her which is every way
Indivisible: Therefore the Soul it self is Indivisible or Immaterial. That the
Soul has the Notion of Existence in her, is Evident by Experience; for we know,
nay cannot but know, that we have the Notion of what is meant by the word [ is;]
since without this we could neither Affirm nor Deny. And, it is farther
Demonstrable, because the Soul has no Notion at all in it but t^^o' it, or in
Order to it: For the Ens or Thing, with all it is Complexion of Modes in it,
which constitute the Individuum, is no more formally but a mere Power to
Existence; and every Power is nothing but a kind of Order, Degree, or Step
toward it is Act; nay, it is so Confused a Notion, staying in the Notion of mere
Power, that it is no way Distinctly Intelligible without some Order to the Act,
from which all Distinct Knowledge in our Mind, proceeds. And, that the Notion
of this most Distinct and most Perfect Act, called [ Existence], is every way
Indivisible, is Evident* For, it cannot be Divisible Quantitatively, or
Physically, (that is Materially;) since all such Division is done by way of
Local Motion, that is, by Degrees, or Part after Part; whereas there are no
Degrees, or Part after Part in the Notion of meet Existence. We no sooner alter
the Actual Being of a Thing, but we destroy it, and make it not-bee? Nor is
there any Middling or Gradual passage from the one to the other; it being
impossible a Thing should half-be, half-not-be, or (which is the same) neither
be, nor not be. Again, even in Material Things, Existence presupposes all the
Matter, Quantity, and the Complexion of all the Modes which constituted the
Individuum, nay, it presupposes too all the Motions that anteceded and
terminated the precedent Operation of Natural Agents, which caused the perfect
Determination of the Matter, or Power to be This Thing, which fitted it for
Existence, and fixed the Thing in Actual Being, as is shown above, Chapter 5.. 16.
Nor is the Notion or Nature of Existence Divisible Metaphysically, by our
framing different Conceptions of it as we do of other Objects; for, being in
it is self most Simple, it is impossible it should afford us Ground to make
different Notions of it; as appears by this, that No Wit of Man can invent or
assign a Genus or a Difference for it, nor consequently resolve it into
Metaphysical Parts by Defining it: Therefore the Notion of Existence is every
way Indivisible; and, consequently it is Subject, the SOUL, is also Indivisible
and Immaterial.

8. We come now to consider those Notions which are Respective: Which directs
That the Soul has Actual Respects in her.
us in the first place to re^^ect what a Respect (in common) means, or is; and
whether it can be any Material Thing or Mode of Thing; or can be represented by
a Material Similitude. A Respect then is an Order, Reference, or a kind of
Alliance which one Thing or Mode has to another. Now who sees not that such a
thing as Respect is not to be found, nor has any place in Material Nature?
There are nothing in the Material World but such and such Individual Bodies;
each of which has it is own Distinct Complexion of Accidents, by which it is
aparted and Distinguished from all others; is Independent on them, and enjoys
it is proper Existence and Subsistence. Each stands on it is own Bottom, without
having any thing to do with any other. Whence comes then this General Nature
(as it were) of being Respective to others, which we observe is found in all
the Notions which belong to all the last Nine Predicaments? It is certain, that
all our Notions (except that of Existence) are of this Respective Nature, as
appears by all their Definitions. The Modes or Accidents do respect the Thing
or Substance, as a kind of Form, which makes it be such, or of such ^ Manner,
as they are apt to determine and denominate it; and the Thing is Capable to
Exist, and so respects Existence as it is Act or Perfection: But though we run
over the whole Beadroll of Individuums in the world, we find nothing in any of
them which answers to the word Respect. Each Thing is what it is; and it is
Accidents or Modes are the Accidents of that Thing, and of no other; or respect
no other Thing but that which is their Proper Subject: And there are in Nature
nothing but particular Substances and their Accidents; nor have we (except the
Absolute Notion of Existence) any other Natural Notions. There is indeed found
in them what grounds, or gives the Reason why they should be Referred to
another or respect it, when they are put together in a Comparing Power. But
where is this Reasoning Faculty, or Comparing Power found in Matter, by which
we consider, build upon, and make use of this Ground or Reason; or, which is
Attentive to lay hold of this Reason why it ought to be Referred, and make
Things actually respect one another; and thence actually denominate them Genera
or Species, Predicate or Subject, Inherent, that is, Dependent for their Being,
or Independent, which we call Subsistent: This Notion of Actual Respect then is
not to be found in any of the Lordships, Territories, or Purlews of Material
Nature. Hence I argue.

9. That Subject which has Affections or Determinations in her which are no
where found in Matter, is Immaterial: This Demonstration enforced.
But the Soul is the Subject of such Operations or Affections, ( viz. Actual
Respects.) Therefore the Soul is Immaterial.

10. Demonstration VIII. We come now to Quantity, and we discourse thus. We
Them. VIII. Because she has the Notions or Natures of Vast Quantities in her;
which it is impossible they should be there Themselves, as they are in Matter;
or any Material Resemblances of them.
have clearly a Notion of a Yard, or of a Mile, etc. and have truly in our Mind
the Meaning of those Words, and the Meaning of them is a Real Yard, and a Real
Mile, and not a Similitude of them only. We can also define a Yard and a Mile;
and, therefore, since a Definition tells us the Essence of a Thing, we have,
consequently, in our Souls the Essence or Nature of those Determinate
Quantities; whence the Essence or Nature of those Quantities must be in our
Minds first, otherwise we should define we know not what. Wherefore, since (by
Chapter 6 ^. 6.) the Form denominates and makes a Thing such as it self is; when
the Nature of a Yard or Mile is in the Soul, it must make our Soul a Yard or a
Mile Long, if this were done after the manner of Things made of Matter: Whence,
o^^ Soul would be Extended a vast way out of our Body. Nay, since she has some
kind of Notion of the Immense Expansion of the Heavens; and by Reflection
multiplying it, (as she easily may)* can also have a Notion of a Million of
times more, she would stretch her self to a kind of Ubiquity. But, waving the
Thesis of the Thing's being really in our Minds as an Object when she knows it,
and allowing or supposing that when we know it, there is only a Similitude or
Resemblance of it there; I would ask* what can there be in Matter that can
resemble a Yard, after the manner we find in Material or Corporeal things,
unless it self be, some way or other, a Yard Long. It must be some sort of
Quantity that can do this; for otherwise it is quite Different from it, and so
can no way resemble it; and, if it be some Quantity, and yet it self be not a
Yard Long, it must necessarily be either more than a Yard, or less than a Yard:
And how can that which is more than a Yard or less than a Yard, represent this
precise and distinct Quantity of a Yard; which would not be it self, were it
never so little either more or less than it is. As certain then as it is* that
A Yard is a Yard, or is it self, so certain it is that nothing does or can
resemble it materially, but Another Yard; which (as is lately seen) is in our
case most Absurd and Impossible. I remember I pressed this Demonstration in the
year 1658. against a very Civil and Ingenious Gentleman, who was a Scholar of
Mr. Hobbs's; he replied, that the least Quantity imaginable might represent the
greatest; instancing in the Scale of Miles in Maps. I answered, that 'ere we
can say, [This very little Quantity shall stand for a very Great one,] or, This
Inch shall stand for Five or Ten Miles, we must have the exact and full Notions
of Inch and Mile, in our Minds antecedently; otherwise we could never
proportion them; nor could we even understand what The Scale of Miles meant, if
we had not in our Understanding what is meant by the word [ Mile,] that is, a
Real Mile; for, (as is here proved) even the Similitudes of a Mile must be
such. And so the Question returns, and we are but where we were. It Is most
Evident then, that we cannot possibly have in our Minds either the Nature or
the Similitude of a Mile, after the manner it is found in Matter. Wherefore, it
is in us, quite otherwise, that is, Immaterially. And, since it has not this
Manner of Being from the Things which are without us, (for there it is
Divisibly or Extendedly) it follows necessarily, that it has it from it is new
Subject, the Soul; and, consequently, that the Soul, which imparts to the
Nature of Quantity such an Indivisible Manner of Being, is it self Immaterial.

11. Demonstration IX. From that kind of Continued Quantity, now spoken of,
which is Permanent, we come to Them. IX. Because the Parts of Motion are
perfectly Distinct and Determinate in the Soul, which are utterly
Undistinguisht as they are in Material Nature.
consider that other sort of Continued Quantity, which is Successive, called
Motion. This Succession or Motion, though it has it is Degrees of Slowness or
Vel^city; yet, while it endures, as it is in Matter or Nature, it flows or goes
on in one Even Undistinguisht Tenor, without any Butts or Bounds terminating
it here or there. Now, for Instance, Let Us consider this Regular Motion of the
Heavens, or of the Sun, called Time; and we shall find, that we have Notions of
such Parts of it, called an Hour, a Day, a Year, an Age, etc. Distinct from any
other Quantity of it, as much as we have of any two Individual Things which are
most perfectly Distinguished in Nature. Wherefore, since this Motion, called
Time, as it is in Material Nature, has no such Actual Distinction of it is
Parts; plainest Reason assures us, that it has another different Manner of
Being, as it is in the Soul, than it has in Matter; for, in Matter, it is Parts
were only Potential, and utterly Undistinguisht; but in the Soul they are all
Actual, and most exactly Distinguished. Wherefore, since the Manner of Being
they have in Nature, is confessedly Material; it follows, that that
contradistinct Manner of Being they have in the Soul must forcibly be
Immaterial; and, consequently, the Soul it is self, which gives them that vastly
distinct Manner of Being, must necessarily it self be Immaterial also.

12. Demonstration X. Diverse other Demonstrations might be drawn from the same
Head: I shall select* one. Them. X. Because the Soul has in her Past and Future
Parts of Time Present at once.
No two parts of Time, (or of any other kind of Motion) as it is in re, or in
Material Nature, can be present at once without a manifest Contradiction; for
it would make some Successive Quantity to be Simultaneous or Unsuccessive; But,
in the Mind many, and great Portions of Time are at once Present: For we could
not work interiously, or discourse of a Day, v. g. or a Year, by Dividing,
Multiplying or Proportioning their parts, if those parts were not all at once
in our Minds; which, since, as was shown, they could not be as they are in
Material Nature, they must therefore be there Immaterially; and, consequently,
our Mind, their Subject, is Immaterial. Which is enforced by this, that both
Past and Future Parts of Time exist in the Soul when she has a Notion of them;
whereas it is direct Contradiction to say they can actually exist in re or in
Matter: Add, That our Soul comprizes as much of Time as she pleases in one
Notion, as a Day, a Year, etc. which remains there as steadily, and grounds all
her Notions about it as firmly, as if it were the most Stable Thing in Nature.
So that the very Notion of Succession is in the Soul Permanently, or
Unsuccessively; which is directly contrary to it is Nature as it passes in the
Material World.

13. Demonstration XI. The same may be said of Discrete Quantity or Number.
There is nothing in Nature but Them. XI. Because the Soul can tie together as
many Singulars as she pleases, in the Notion of One Number; of which the Fancy
has no Material Resemblance.
Individuals, each of which is properly an Ens, and consequently, Unum; and
therefore, if we put a Multitude, the Unity they had in Nature is lost; since
One cannot be Many; nor Many, One; and this is all the Unity we find among
Individual Beings as they are in Matter, or out of the Soul. Now, when the Soul
takes Many or More of these together; she bundles up even those Incommunicable,
Actual, and perfectly Distinct Individuums, at her pleasure; and though they were
never so many, she p^^ches upon what Quantity of them she lists to take notice
of, and gives even their Singularit^^s a new sort of Unity in her Notion, which
Nature never gave them; and calls this Notion which comprizes them all Three,
Ten, or a Hundr^^, or what she pleas^s. Which since it depends on her Choice
how many she will take of them, it is Evident, that this Union was not given
them by the Being which they had in Material Nature. Or out of the Soul, where
they were altogether Distinct, and one of them has nothing to say to the other.
And, let it be noted, that this Union is not made, as Universal Notions are, by
Abstraction, or our leaving out the Particular Considerations belonging to the
Species or Inferior Notion, and only taking in one Common Consideration found
in them all, there being a fair Ground in Nature to consider them on that
fashion; But this Colligation of many into One Number is a kind of Union of
those whole Individuums in despite of the multitude of their Singularities; and
a Reducing those Things which are ultimately Determined, Distinct and stand
aloof from one another, as they are in Material Nature, to a Close Unity;
compacted so Indivisibly and Indissolubly, that the least part added or
detracted, that Unity is specifically altered, and presently becomes another
kind of Number. Lastly, which makes this Point yet more Evident; We can have a
Material Resemblance in our Fancy of Four, Five, or some small number of
Natural Things; and have in our Heads a kind of Picture of them (as it were)
standing all on a Row. But it is impossible for us to have such a Lively, and
exactly-Just Picture of a Hundred, a Thousand, a Million, etc. so as to see
clearly there is not one more or less; and yet we experience that we can have
most Clear, Distinct, and Exact Notions of These, as well as we can have of Two
or Three; Nor do we look upon those Great Numbers by the Eye of our
Understanding, as a Confused Heap or Multitude, as it happens when we see a
great Crowd of Men standing together; but with a clear and perfect Discernment
that they are just so many, not one more or less; and this as easily as we can
know Four or Five. Since then, in the way of Matter, nothing can resemble a
Thousand but a Thousand, (for the Resembler must be some sort of Number,
otherwise it is not at all Like it; and, neither One more nor less; that it is
must it self be a Thousand) it follows, that the Distinct and Exact Notions we
have of very great Numbers, is Immaterial; and, consequently, the Soul, their
Subject, is such also.

14. Demonstration XII. Come we now to these Notions which belong to the Head
of Quality; which, because Them. XII. Because Sensible Qualities, though
Innumerable, and contrary to one another, are in the Soul without Disordering
her in the least.
they are Innumerable, we will instance in Two of them, Sensible Qualities, and
Figure. As for the First of these, If when we have the Notion of a Sensible
Quality, v. g. Dry or Moist, the Thing or Body thus affected be in our Mind,
and consequently the Nature of those Qualities, we have gained our Point, and
proved, it is in us Immaterially, it being evidently impossible a thing should
have two Material Manners of Existing. Nor can these Qualities be there by some
Material Representation or Resemblance; For what can resemble* Dryness or
Moistness? Whatever it be, it must be some other Sensible Quality; for,
otherwise, it would be utterly Unlike it; and the same would happen, were it a
Sensible Quality belonging to some other Sense than that of the Touch, v. g.
were it Whiteness or Fragrancy, which belong to the Sight and Smell. It Is
Evident then, that nothing but Dryness it self can represent Dryness
materially. Wherefore, it must either be said, that Dryness it self is in the
Soul Immaterially, or not at all; and yet, that we have i^, in us, we are
satisfied, in regard we have it in our Notion, and can discourse of Dryness it
self. Again, if Dryness, Moistness, and all other Sensible Qualities be in the
Soul materially when she knows them; then, as they did in Material Nature
affect their other Material Subject, according to the peculiar Genius of each,
(by Chapter 6.. 6.) so they must affect the Soul too after the same Manner, and
make her materially Dry and Moist. And, moreover, since no Notions are ever
blotted out of the Soul, she would also be at once, Moist and Dry, Hot and
Cold, White, Black, Blue, Green, and of all Colors, Rough and Smooth, Fragrant
and Stinking, Diaphanous and Opacous; and imb^'d with a thousand other Contrary
Qualities; which finee they could not be all of them Agreeable to any Material
Nature, (each of them having a peculiar Constitution of it is own) they must
needs Disorder, Distemper, and Corrupt it; the Effects of which the Man must
necessarily experience, if the most Frincipal Part of him, the Soul, were made
of Matter; and they would render the Compound affected with many Diseases:
whereas yet none ever found himself in the least Distempered, Grieved or
Pained* by having in his Mind the Notions of all these Opposite Qualities, and
ill-agreeing Dispositions.

15. Demonstration XIII. This is farther enforced, because, were the Soul
(which is confessed to be our Knowing Them. XIII. Because those Sensible Qualities
do not fight and expel one another; as they must, were their Subject made of
Matter.
Power) Material, all these Opposite Qualities, when they are in that Power, or
Known, must be perpetually Fighting, Contrasting and Expelling one another out
of their Subject; at least they would Refract one another's Nature, and make it
otherwise than it was, to some Degree; as they do in Material Things, or
Bodies. Whereas we experience that they ami^ably cohabit in the Soul; and are
so far from ( ^^pelling one another out of the Knowing Power, that they draw
their Contraries into it; and each ^^tters one another as an Object, and makes
it more distinctly Knowable; according to that ^^^axim, Contraria juxta se
posita magis elucescunt. Wherefore, since to put those Sensible Qualities
^ither Themselves to be in our Mind after the manner they are in Matter, or as
Material Similitudes of them, is in every respect such Incon^^stent Nonsense;
they must be in our Soul Im^aterially; or (which is the same) our Soul is ^n
Immaterial Subject.

16. Demonstration XIV. The same is Demonstrated (if possible) more evidently
from the Notion of Figure. Them XIV. Because Innumerable multitudes of Various
and Large Figures are in the Soul at once.
For the Soul has in her the Figures of all things that ever entered into the
Senses, and can frame to her self Millions of others; Nor is any thing that is
once in her (as will be proved) ever blotted out of her, but (while she is in
this state and cannot work without the Body) they are reposited there
habitually as it were, nor can be brought actually into Play till re-excited.
Hence I argue thus: Were these Numberless Figures in her Materially, then each
of them (by Prel. 6.) must make the Soul, their Subject, such as themselves
are; Wherefore the Soul would be at once Round* Square, Triangular, Quadrate,
Chiliagone, C^nical, Cylindrical, etc. Nay, but an Inch Long* and yet at the
same time as Long as a Yard, or a Mile; she having in her the Natures or
Notions of all these. Whence also, (besides the manifest Impossibility of such
a Position,) those Figures, interfering with one another, would, all of them,
be defaced and blunder'd, and leave nothing but one Confused and Indeterminate
Figure, of which we could never have any Notion: Whereas yet it is Evident by
Experience that we have a Clear and Distinct Notion of each of them; and can
judge and discourse about each of them as exactly as if we had none but that
one Figure in our Mind. If it be replied by the Atheists, that our Soul being
Material, these Figures may be in several Parts of her; besides the
Incredibility that the Soul should have so many thousand several Apartments in
her, and that one of them should just light into that one Part, and no other
hit upon the same place and so confound that former; we may, moreover, reflect
that each of those Figures are not represented to our Mind in a small
Imperceptible Extension, but in a very Visible or Large Appearance; and
therefore, when there are so many thousands of them, their Quantity, so often
multiplied, would be extended to a vast Space beyond our Body, as was shown
above. 10. Wherefore it is concluded, that it is absolutely Impossible those
Figures, thus clearly and distinctly known, should be in our Soul materially,
or Quantitatively, or as such Qualities are in Matter; and that, therefore the
Soul, their Subject, is necessarily Immaterial.

17. Demonstration XV. We experience that we (...) in us* Universal Notions, or
^er Notions of an Universal, Demon. XV. Because the Soul has in her Universal
Notions.
(...) of Man, Body or Ens in Com^; and the same may be said of the Summum
Genus of every Accident or Mode, viz. Quantity, Quality, etc. (...) their
respective Species. We find we can dis^rse, nay write whole Treatises of each
of ^ose Universals, as such; nay more, that each (...) them has a kind of Unity
belonging to it self, which it had not in Nature, or Matter, where ^ere is
found nothing but Individuums constituted and Determined by such a Complexion
of Accidents; none of which are found in Universals, which are Indetermin'd and
abstract from them all. Therefore this Manner of Existence which Universals*
have in the Soul, is contrary to the Nature of Existing in Matter; and,
consequently, both they and the Soul, by which, and in which, Universals have
this manner of Existence, are Immaterial.

18. Demonstration XVI. The same is clearly Demonstrated from the Soul's Manner
of Working by Abstract Notions. Them. XVI. B^the Thing is in and by the Soul
Divided ininto such Parts, as Material Division cannot reach
For Example, we can frame diverse Abstract Notions or Conceptions of the
Self-same Individual Thing; v. g. a Stone; which we can consider as Extended,
hard, Rough, Cold, Moist, Heavy, Round, etc. And thence have the Abstract
Notions of Quantity, Hardness, Roundness, etc. Now, that which is signified by
each of those Words being materially the Thing it self, (in regard they have of
their own Nature no Being, nor are Capable of Being of themselves alone) and
yet none of them being the Whole Thing; it follows, that the Thing, by being
thus diversely conceived, becomes evidently, some way or other, Divided by our
Mind, or as it is there: For one of those Parts after it is thus separated or
Divided by the Mind is not, in the Mind, Another, since* they are denied of one
another: Quantity is not Weight, nor is Roundness, Roughness; and the same may
be said of all the rest. Hence I argue. It is Evident, that there is some kind
of Division of that Whole Thing made in our Mind, when the Thing is thus
Abstractedly, Partially or Inadequately Conceived: But this Division is not
made after a Quantitative or Material Manner; for those parts of Body which are
Divided Materially, do, after the Division is made, exist apart in Nature, and
become so many Wholes, as is manifest in a Lump of Earth or Lead; whereas these
Parts, thus Separated by the Soul, cannot exist at all but in the Whole and by
it is Existence, having none of their own. Therefore, this Division made by the
Soul, conceiving the Thing by piecemeal, is made after a manner not competent
to Material Parts, or a Material Divider: Wherefore, this manner of Division,
and, consequently, the Soul, that made it, and is the Subject in which it is
made, is of an Immaterial Nature.

19. Demonstration XVII. This leads us to the Second Operation of our
Understanding, Demon. XVII. Because the Composition the Soul makes afterward
of these thus-Divided Parts is impossible to be performed by a Material Agent.
Judging; which Compounds again* those thus-divided Parts. Judging then is an
Actual Referring or Comparing the Predicate to the Subject, in order to see the
Truth or Falsehood in Propositions; which Referring (when either done
interiourly in the Mind, or expressed in Words) we call Predicating; whence also
we ^sely refer those Predicates, which, as they (...) our Minds, are diversely
Referrable to the S^ect; as is seen in the Predicables of Porphyrius. B^^ this
Referring Actually one Notion or Thing ^other cannot be performed by Matter,
(as is ^'d above,. 8, 9.) where we argued from (...) Notion of Respect in
common. Again, All o^^ Predication is a Composition, and such a one as answers
to the Division lately made, (which it ^upposes) and therefore is of the same
Nature ^* But, that Division (as is proved. 18.) could not be made by a
Material Agent; nor, consequently, could this Composition which answers ^o it,
and is of the same Nature, be made by such an Agent. Therefore the Soul, in
which this Composition is made, is Immaterial. Of this Metaphysical Composition
and Division, see Chap. 1. ^. 23.

20. Corollary I. Hence is clearly seen the reason why Angels do not thus
Divide and Compound, when Hence is seen the Reason why Angels do not thus
Compound and Divide.
they know, but all passes in them by Simple and Simultaneous Intuition, viz.
Because they have no Abstracted Conceptions; as having no Senses which receive
Different Impressions from Outward Objects, as we have; and therefore they
cannot frame Judgments, as we do, by Connecting Notions or Predicating. Whence,
they must either not know at all, which is against the nature of an
Intelligence or Intellectual Creature, which is a Pure Act; or else they must
know the Whole Thing at once Intuitively.

21. Demonstration XVIII. But to come nearer that Operation of our Soul called
Judging. All our Affirmative Demon. XVIII. Because what is meant by the Copula
[it,] which is used in all our Affirmative Judgments, cannot possibly be so
much as Shadowed or Represented by any Material Similitude.
Judgments are (as Logic shows) made by the Copula [ is,] which connects the
two Terms: But it is impossible to conceive that what is meant by [ is] should
be represented by a Material Resemblance* A Painter may delineate Caesar but
it is impossible to Pourtray by Particles of Matter, though never so artificially
laid together, that Caesar [is] or [ was,] He may paint him Fighting, and
(putting that Action had ever been) it would signify he was once, because What
Acts, IS: But, what Pencil, or what Colors, can ever signify that that Action
ever [ was?] This must come from an Intelligent Mind, which, having the Notion
of [ Existence] in it, consented it should be signified by [ is,] or [ was;] or
else it must ever remain Unknown, though Apelles had set himself to resemble it.
The most Delicate Subtilty of Parts can no more avail here than if it had been
drawn in those of the largest size; Actual Being, as we experience, abstracts
from, or is Indifferent to Greatness and Littleness; and all the Materials
which a Painter uses are Indifferent to Being and Not-being, and are equally
apt to re^^^sent things that are, as things that are not. ^dd, that whatever is
portrayed by Matter, must have part after part, or one part out of another;
whereas the Notion of Existence, or that which is signified by the word [ IS,]
is every way Indivisible, and has no parts at all, as is shown, Demonstration 6.

22. Demonstration XIX. The same is (perhaps) more forcibly demonstrated from
the Third Operation of our Mind, De^^^. XIX. Because the Connection of the
^^^clusion with Right Premises is ^^^e the Force of all Nature or ^atter, and
Im^^^^le to b^ Solved ^^ Broken.
Discourse, or Ratiocination. For First, this consists of Propositions and
Judgments, and therefore is proved, Them. 19. and 21.) not to be perform^ble by
Matter. Secondly, Discourse is the Deducing a Conclusion, from the Connection
which the two Extremes in the Premises have with a Third; which kind of
Connection is called Inference, Deduction, P^^ving, Argumentation,
Ratiocination; and, if the Medium be Proper, Demonstration. Discourse then
being evidently such a Connection of Propositions, I ask, In what Soil or
Territory in Nature do Propositions grow? Not in Material Nature; since no
Division or Composition of those kind of Metaphysical Parts, of which
Propositions consist can be made in Matter, or performed by a Material Divider
or Compounder, as has been lately shown. Again, to what Material Cement, or
Connecting Virtue, conceiveable in Bodies, can this Close Coherence, which (if
the Terms be Proper and rightly ordered, is absolutely Indissoluble) owe it is
Origin? Nor to Quantity, whose Coherence is Continuity; for this is by a great
force Dissoluble, whereas the Connection we speak of is above all Material
Force; Nor can all the Strength or Nerves of Natural Causes, strained to exert
their utmost Efforts, not that of Canons shattering the Hardest-Walls, or of
Powder riuing asunder the most impenetrable Rocks, be able to solve a Good
Argument, or tear in pieces the Connection of it is Terms. Nor can their
Indissolubleness be owing to some Tenacious or Glutinous Quality. Nor are those
parts of a Conclusive Discourse hooked or clung together by means of their
Figure, as Epicurus pretended of his Atoms: Nor any way but by the Reason of
the Sequel or Consequence, which (as has been demonstrated in my Method, B. 3.
L. 1.. 3.) is built on a self-evident or Identical Proposition; which First
Truth is so Invincibly Strong, that sooner may all Material Nature crumble to
Dust, and be reduced to a Chaos, than such a Proposition can be Solved or made
False. Wherefore this Connection of Notions found in our Judgments which are
True, is of a Strength above all Matter or Quantity; and of a more Stable, and,
consequently, of a Superior Nature to all Material Beings: Whence follows,
(that both It, and the Subject in which it is, the Soul,) are Immaterial.

23. Demonstration XX. The same is evidently deduced hence, that all the
Notions in the Soul are most determinately Demon. XX. Because all the Notions
the Soul has, are Concise and Exact, even to an Indivisible.
such to an Indivisible; even though they be of things which in their own Nature,
as they stand in Matter, are Indeterminate. For Example: There ^^ ^^ Body in
Material Nature which is exactly ^^ Mathematically Square, Round or Triangular,
^^ reason of the perpetual turmoil of Natural Causes Acting and Re-acting;
which, making Impressions upon one another, are perpetually (...) their
Surfaces or Figures: Nay, though Art ^oes it't utmost to assist Nature by drawing
Fi^^^^^ with the most Exact Instruments, yet a (...) Microscope will tell us,
that there will be (...) Extancies, Cavities and Irregularities, which (...)
not with the Figures which are in our (...): Whence were they not more
accurately ^^^^^ated in our Minds than they can be drawn ^^ Matter, all our
Mathematical Demonstrations, which proceed upon their being such to an
^ndivisible, would be rendered Incondusive. From whence it comes, that we fancy
to our selves ^^^ts in Lines, and Instants in Time, which are ^^ Indivisibles.
Nay, it is Evident, That all No^ whatever do admit of no Degrees, but are
Indivisibly such as we conceive them; and are (...) to Numbers, in which the
least Addition ^^ Detraction alters it quite, and makes it ano^* Which appears
hence, because every least (...) in any of them, if known by us, is a ^^w
Respect, or a New Consideration, that is, a ^^w Notion. Whence is concluded,
That the ^^ject, our Soul, which gives these Modes an ^^^^visible Being in her
self, which they had not ^^ Matter, is also it self of an Indivisible and
Immaterial Nature.

24. Demonstration XXI. Hence Demon. XXI. Because the Soul is a Pure Act, and
therefore Immaterial.
is demonstrated, that the Soul is of her own Nature a Pure Act; it being the
Property of the Act to Determine, and of the Power or Matter to cause
Indetermination and Conf^sion; Whence follows, that that which Determines most
perfectly, or to an Indivisible, has no Matter at all in it; but is of it is own
peculiar Nature; and, considered according to her self only, a Pure Act, and
therefore Immaterial.

25. Demonstration XXII. Numberless are the Demonstrations, and (to the shame
Demon. XXII. Because the Soul gives a kind of Being to Non-Entities and
Chimeraes, which can have no Existence in Nature.
of Atheists be it spoken) as many as the Soul has particular Acts or Objects,
to evince her Immateriality, and consequently, her Immortality. I have rather
hinted a few of them here, than endeavored to enumerate them all, or pursue
them home, as they might deserve. Only I hope, that the Grounds I have laid,
and the Way I have taken in my Proofs, may exci^^ some others to add many other
Demonstrations, (as occasion invites) and enforce these I have here touched
upon, to a fuller and clearer Eviction of this Preliminary Point to all
Religion. I shall only add this Last Demonstration. We have Notions in our
Minds of Indivisibles, of Negations, Privations, of Non-Ens, of Chimera's, of
Crystal Mountains, a Golden Earth, and innumerable such, which we can frame to
our selves at pleasure. We are most Certain, all these are in our Minds, as
Objects of our Simple Apprehensions because we know, and have in us the
Meanings of those Words which signify them; as also, because we can, by our
Judgment, admit some of them as Possible, and reject others as Impossible;
which we could not do, unless we had the Natures (as it were) of each of them
in our Understanding before we come to judge of them; otherwise we should Admit
and Reject we know not what, nor why; which we are sure we do not. Nay, we can
by a Reflex Act, have a Notion of their Formalities as Distinct from, or
Superadded to the Subjects they are conceived to affect: Now none of these, (
formally conceived) can, with any show of Sense, have any Being in Nature or
Matter, some of them being formally Non-Entities, others Chimerical, which is
in a manner the same. Therefore this Distinct Being they have in our Mind, as
Objects of our Simple Apprehension, is most incontestably Immaterial; and
therefore their Subject, the Soul, is such also.

To clear the Meaning of some Words we have used, and to meet with some
Objections, I thought fit to subjoyn these following Notes.

26. Note I. I fear that when we say, the Soul is of an Indivisible Nature,
some Readers who are not well versed in Metaphysics, should be apt to
apprehend How some do mistake the Nature of the Indivisibility attributed to
the Soul.
that we take the word [ Indivisible,] in a Mathematical Sense, and mean she is
Indivisible as a Point is; or so little, that there is not Space enough for the
least possible Divider to come between the Parts of it, and, so Divide it: And
hence they may imagine it Inconceiveable, that all these several Notions or
Natures of things which are in our Knowledge, and so many Innumerable
Operations should all be Comprised and Transacted in so narrow a room as is a
Point, or a Quantitative Indivisible. But the thing is quite otherwise. Those
kind of Indivisibles, called Points, and such like, have no Positive Being in
Nature; but, because we must conceive a Finite Line, whose every Part (it being
some Quantity) is Divisible, has an End; hence, this End, or (as we may call
it) No-fartherness of Quantity is no Quantity, and therefore (Quantity being
Divisibility) it is not Quantitative, nor Divisible, but Indivisible. Now,
those Ends or Not-Beings of Quantity we call Points or Surfaces, according to
the Respective Quantities which they are conceived to terminate. So likewise
Continuative Indivisibles, which some do imagine in Quantity, and suppose them
to be in the midst of all Quantitative Beings, can mean no more in any good
Sense, but that, let us divide any Continued Quantity where we please; the
Parts, when Divided, becoming so many Wholes, will, for the same reason, be
each of them Terminated, as that Greater Whole was; Whence some conceit, that
these result, as it were, from that Division; only they change their Office,
and are become Terminative now, whereas they were before Continuative; and that
they were potentially in that Former Whole before, and are only of late
Discluded. For, Because we call this sort of Quantity Continued, it being the
Genius of such Mis-Speculaters, whenever they are at a plunge, to invent some
New Entity to do the Job, they cannot apprehend how Quantitative Parts should
cohere, but by this Cement of Continuative Indivisibles. Not considering that
it is the Nature, Entity, or Unity peculiar to Quantity, to be Continued of it is
self: For, it is Essence being Divisibility, and what is Divisible, or has only a
Power to be Divided quantitatively, (or a Power to be made More according to
the Respect of Quantity) not being Actually thus Divided; and, what is not
Actually thus Divided, or made more, is (out of the force of the Terms)
Actually One according to the notion of Quantity, which kind of Quantitative
Unity we call Continuity, to contra-distinguish it from Discrete Quantity, the
Parts of which are actually and really Divided and Separated, and only Tied
into One Number by the Operation or Consideration of the Mind, as is shown
above: Hence, whatever Bodies have Quantity in them, are by It, as by the
Formal Cause, Quantitatively One, or Continued, without any other assistance.
Another Reason, or rather the main Error which led those Schoolmen into that
Groundless Conceit, was their Fan^ying that there are Actual Parts in every
Compound* particularly in Quantity; the contrary to which is Demonstrated, Chapter
1.. 27. No wonder then, such a Fundamental Truth in Metaphysics being
violated, those Gentlemen have fallen into these absurd Tenets about
Indivisibles; especially being apt to conceit, that whenever we have a diverse
Conception or Notion in our Mind, there is a New Entity in re answering to it
adequately; even though sometimes the Object of that Conception be purely a
Non-Ens.

27. Note II. When therefore we say, that an Angel or a Soul is Indivisible,
however we are forced to use a Negative The Proper and True Sense in which a
Spirit is said to be Indivisible.
Manner of Expression, because we have no Proper Notion of a Spiritual
Substance; we do not intend to express by that word a mere Negation, as we did
in those Indivisibles called Points; but the most Positive Being that can be,
next to that of GOD himself. Which I show thus. Ens, and all other Common
Notions, (as is Demonstrated in my Method to Science, B. 1. L. 3.) is Divided
by More and Less of the Common Notion of Ens; or* by being more Capable of
Being or Existing. Thus far Logic; which teaches us how to Divide our General
Notions by Proper, or Intrinsecal Differences: The Supreme Science of
Metaphysics, which treats of the Essence of Things, takes up the Thesis, and
pursues it thus. The Essence or Nature of Body, consisting of Power and Act, or
Matter and Form, has, consequently, in it is Bowels a Ground of. Separability of
one from the other, or of Dissolution and Destruction of that Compound Ens;
whenee it is Less Capable of Being, as having a constant Capacity of Not-Being
woven into it is very Nature: Whereas, the other Species of Ens, [Spirit,] being
of it is own peculiar Nature, or as it is contradistinguisht from Body, a Pure
Act, without any Power in it to become another Ens, that is, without Matter in
it; has, on the contrary, no Composition in it, nor Power, by means of which it
might come to lose it is Act or Form; and, therefore, it is of it is own Nature
Indissoluble, ^ncorruptible, and Immortal. The very Terms evincing, that what
has no Composition in it as to it is Entity, is of it is own Nature Incapable of
Dissolution as to it is Entity; that is, (not Mathematically Indivisible, as our
former Note showed, but) Metaphysically or Entitatively Indivisible; and
therefore not obnoxious to lose it is Unity or Entity. Wherefore, the best, most
Positive, and most Proper Notion we can have of a Spiritual Being, is, that it
is a Pure Act, which has an Incomparably Greater Capacity of Being than Body
has; and consequently it is of a Superior and far more Noble Nature in the
Line of Ens. Whence follows, that it comprehends eminently in it self the whole
Inferior Nature of Body; and, being a Pure Act essentially, and consequently
essentially Active, (or rather Acting) it has a Power or Virtue in it, (if
nothing hinders it is proceeding to Action) to order, dispose of or alter that
Inferior and merely Passive Ens, [Material Nature,] as it pleases.

28. Note III. The Spiritual Nature of the Soul then transcending in it is
Essence this That it is consonant to the Nature of the Subject that the Soul
should contain Corporeal Nature, and it is Modes, Indivisibly.
Corporeal World, made of the Perishable Rubbish of Base Matter; and, thence,
containing in it self after a manner Proper to it is own Nature, that is
Intellectually or Indivisibly, (taking this word as explained above) all the
Natures, Powers, Modes, Operations, Existence, Duration, Succession, etc. that
ever did or can belong to Material Nature: there can be no wonder that all
these (as we have shown in our several Demonstrations) are comprised, and can
exist in the Soul's Spiritual Nature, as in a Higher Orb of Being;
comprehending, after it is manner, all that can be in the Lower and Narrower one
of Body. Nor can it shock any considerate Man, that the Operations proper to
the Soul should be Inexplicable according to Physical Principles, or transcend
the Notions of Bodily Substances, and their Modes, which we receive by means of
the Senses and the Phantasms they imprint, which makes them so unsuitable to
Fancy; and yet I am sure this is all that the Impugners of this Doctrine have
to build upon or object: For* not one Objection drawn from a Metaphysical
Medium did they ever produce; though nothing is more Evident, than it is, that
only These can have any force against us, or do them any service.

29. Note IV. As my First and Second Note show* how grossly those shortsighted
Speculaters do mistake, In what Sense we are to take the word [Instantaneous,]
when we say the Operations of Pure Spirits are such.
while they conceit that the Essence of the Soul is Indivisible after the
manner of a Mathematical Point; so they fall into a parallel Error, by
misunderstanding me, when I say, that all the Operations of a Spiritual Nature
are performed in an Instant. For, they imagine, that I mean by the word [
Instant,] an Indivisible of that Successive Motion, called Time; Whence their
Fancy is stunned, and they are at a strange Wonderment to conceive how so many
several Acts, following (as it were) and depending on one another, can be begun
and ended in one such Instant. Whereas, though I use the Word, partly, (arguing
ad h^minem) because They do so; partly, because it is hard to find another Word
to signify the Opposite to Succession; yet I mean there by the word [ Instant]
such an Indivisible Duration, as is directly Contradictory to the whole Nature
of Quantitative Succession, and corresponds (if that improper word, which
signifies a kind of Commensuration, may be here allowed) to all the Successive
Motion Bodies ever had, or can have; nay, which eminently comprehends it all,
under the Notion of Duration, (as was shown lately) as the Essence of a Spirit,
being of a Superior Nature, does (as was shown lately) eminently comprehend in
it self the Essence of Body under the Notion of Ens or Being. Nay, it seems to
differ from Eternity (which is the Duration proper to GOD, and which in an
Inferior Degree it resembles) only in this, that it does not include
Impossibility of not-being; for it centers in it self ^^ the Differences of
Time, Past, Present and Fu^^^^ by comprehending them all, and therefore is
called Aeuiternity. Wherefore; when I say that all the Spiritual Operations of
a Spirit are in ^stant, I only mean, that they have such a Duration as befits a
Pure Act, which being devoid ^^ Matter, and, consequently of Quantity, can have
no Successiveness in it. Whence, pursuing ^sely, and keeping strictly to the
Reflex Notions I ^ave of Spiritual Nature as contradistinguisht from that which
is Material or Corporeal, and from, the Duration Proper to each of them, I must
beg leave to recede, in this particular, from some Philosophers and Divines of
most celebrated ^ame, and Greatest Eminency; and to declare, that I cannot at
all conceive what a First and Se^h Instant in the Duration of a Pure Act, (or a
Spirit) can signify. For, since their Duration has no Parts after Parts, as
the Successive Duration of Bodies has, if it endures or is at all, it has it is
Whole Duration; and, so, all Second and Third Instants are Insignificant, and
seem to have their Origin from an Imaginary Correspondence to a Mathematical
Instant of Time; which Mistake we have lately rectified. And, seeing
Succession, in what ever Thing or Mode of Thing it is, must signify Part after
Part, which (as both Logic and Metaphysics demonstrate,) is the very Notion
of Quantity; whoever puts Succession, or Part after Part, in any Modes
belonging to a Pure Act, or a Spirit, does put those Modes, and, consequently,
it is Subject, to be Quantitative or Material; that is, he puts A Pure Act to be
no Pure Act, which is a Contradiction.

30. From the foregoing Demonstrations, that the Soul is Immaterial, our Grand
Conclusion is Demonstratively Last Demonstration, Concluding the Whole Point;
That our Soul, it being so manifestly and manifoldly Demonst^a^ed to be
Immaterial, is necessarily IMMORTAL.
evinced, That Man's Soul is IMMORTAL. First, Because, being Immaterial, she is
a Pure Act in the Line of Being; whence she has no Composition in her under the
Notion of Ens; only which can render her capable of Dissolution or losing her
Unity; and, consequently, her Entity. Secondly, Because Matter is the only
Power to become a New Ens; and, consequently, the only Principle of Corruption
or Mortality, that is, of Mutation according to the Notion of Entity, as has
been demonstrated, Chapter 1.. 19. Lastly, Because for what reason Bodies are
corruptible, viz. Because, they are compounded of Matter and Form; for the same
reason, the Soul being Immaterial, or a Pure Act, is Incorruptible or Immortal.
So that we may as well deny that Bodies can be Corrupted, as affirm, that the
Soul can die or cease to be; either by her own Nature, she having no Ground of
losing her Being, in her own Intrinsecal Constitution; nor by the Operation of
all Natural Causes; because all their Action has Passion answering to it, which
cannot be produced, when there wants the only Passive Principle, Matter. She
can then only lose her Existence by the Omnip^^ence of her Great Creator
working Mirac^^ously; nor, can it be, that it should work this; unless it be
Agreeable to his other Divine Attributes; and it has been as yet never shown by
any, that Annihilation can consist with them; but, on the contrary, it has been
shown by us, that it is hi^hly. Repugnant to them. See Raillery De^* from Page
41. to page 52.

MEDITATION.
AT length, my Soul, after a tedious Journey of thy Thoughts, traveling through
all the vast Reg^^^ of those Inferior Essences of ^odies, thou have arrived at
thy That the Nature of our Spiritual part, the Soul, can only be known by
Reflection; and, therefore, in discoursing of It we must T^ansc^nd our Senses,
and Corporeal Phantasms.
Self* Thy Individuation, which g^^^ thee thy particular Degree of Rationality,
is, in this State, best learned* from thy Material Compart; to whose
Pre-existent size and pitch thou wast adjusted; but thy Peculiar Nature it
self, can only be known from the Genius of ^^ Interior Operations as they
proceed from Thee, and are Proper to thee. But, ^ow, or by what Vehicle, came
the Knowledge of those Operations into thy Understanding? They are, as has been
shown at large, Immaterial, and of a Contrary Nature to Quantitative Beings;
whence, they could not enter by the Senses, nor be imprinted as those Natural
Notions were which were Directly Stamped in thee. Nothing therefore but thy own
Reflection, comparing thy Operations with those of Bodies; and seeing These to
be of a quite Contrary Genius to Those, could give thee this knowledge of thy
self. Which shows that the First Lesson to be learned by all those Speculaters
who study Thee, is, that they m^^^ abstract from Fancy, and lay aside, and
transcend all the Objects of our Senses and all Corporeal Phantasms; otherwise
they can never reach thy Indivisible Essence; tke want of knowing which
Preliminary Rule has made so many Unskilful Thinkers degrade their own Soul
from the Dignity which the Author of* Nature has given it; and to apprehend it
to be Material or Mortal. It Is only the Connection of Notions, (the Proper Act
of the Comparing Power* called REASON) in which all Formal Truth consists,
which could elevate thy Thoughts above th^se Baser Objects, and bring thee to
frame a Just Conception of thy Self. Our Body cannot see it is own Face but by
Reflection from a Looking-glass; Nor can thou gain knowledge of thy Immaterial
Essence* but by the Spiritual Mirror of thy own Understanding; which Reflects
thee upon thy self, by considering the nature oF thy own Interior Acts, and
how they differ from those which are produced by Bodily Substances. Nothing is
easier to discern than it is, that all Corporeal Operations are performed
Part-after Part, and therefore have Parts or Quantity in them* Nor is any
consideration more facil and obvious than to conclude thence that their
Subjects are, of their own Nature, Dissoluble, Perishable, and (if they be
Living Things) Mortal. And, I may presume, ^^ have seen Demonstrations enough
alleged to manifest, that the Operations of our Soul, and of all the Objects,
as they are in her when she knows them, and, consequently, our Soul her self,
which is their Subject, is of a quite Contrary, or rather Contradictory Nature;
and, therefore, is Incorporeal, Immaterial, Unquantitative, Indissoluble and
Immortal. Nay, ^^^ sh^wn,. 4. That the Natural Notions of all (...) who use
even Common R^^^^xion, does in a manner imbue The Unreasonableness of Atheists.
^^ with this Sentiment. Which ren^ers the Atheists void o^ll Exc^se; and give^
us just occasion to fear that it is Perversity of Will, and not Weakness of
Understanding, which makes them disacknowledge it. They w^^^d* live like
Libertines and at large, or, as the ^ure expresses it, like Sons of Belial,
sine jugo; ^, placing all their Affections on the Pleasures or ^ts of this
Life, they are loath to think there (...) be any Future State, in which they
should be (...) to an account. The Goodness of Rational Nature which their
Creator had given them, could not but (...) and upbraid them that they had
depraved that N^^^^e, and wronged the Best Order of the World by ^centious
Debaucheries. Wherefore, their Thoughts, (^^ St. Paul says) thus accusing
themselves by the ^inct of the Law writ in their hearts, they endea^^^^'d to
stifle all those Truths which could put them (...) an apprehension of a future
reckoning; and thence ^^ey willingly entertained the opinion, that there being
(...) survivency of the Soul, Death would Seal an ^^^esty for all their
Extravagancies, and cancel all ^, Debts. And, for the same reason, they were
^^th to think there was a GOD who governed the ^^^ld; lest, being Just, he
should severely punish them (...) abusing the Nature he had given them, and for
^olating the Universal Law of the World which he (...) established.

But, leaving those poor Miscreants as Objects of (...) Pity, after we have
charitably What Obligations are incumbent on us, who know and acknowledge our
Soul to be Immortal.
^^de^vour'd, to our best Power, to ^ctifie and convince their Reason; et us,
(which most concerns us) look home to our selves; and take care that We* to
whom God has given the Knowledge (or Belief) that our Soul is Immo^^al, be not
beaten with as many stripes as They; if we neglect to guide our lives according
to that Principle which we profess and acknowledge to be True; the^ which, if
it be a Truth, it is Self-evident, that nothing can more highly, or more nearly
concern as* The more Evident it is, the more indispensable obligation it lays
upon us to follow it in our Practice and the more Inexcusable we shall be if we
neglect that Duty. Our own Clear Reason has shown as, that our Soul, it being
of a Spiritual Nature, or ^ Pure Act, is Superior, and, in the Heraldry ^^
Being, of a far Nobler Extraction than is all t^^ Great Heap of Rubbish,
Matter; and, therefore, i^ of more Intrinsic worth than all this Visible Worl^
Not an Operation of thine, not an Object that is ^^ thy Knowing Power, but, if
well reflected on, info^^ us clearly of this Great and most Important Tr^^ How
Unreasonable then, and Unnatural would it ^^ in us not to bestow our Chief, if
not Only car^, ^^ provide for the Eternal Welfare of our Soul, which ^^ so
Precious in it self; and so nearly allied to Us, t^^ it is a Part, and by far
the Best Part of this Thing ^^ are, called Man: What will it profit a Man
(say^^ who is the Eternal Wisdom) to gain the Who^^ World and lose his own
Soul? How Senseless ^^ Foolish must we appear in the Sight of GOD and ^^ Angels
^o prefer the Conveniences of this Mome^tary Life, (for all Time, could we
live while it l^st is but a Moment to the Endless Duration of a Spir^^ before
the M^ans to live Eternally Happy in the O^^^^ How Vile, to enslave our
Affections here to Riches, ^^^^o^eal Pleasures, or Airy Honor, which are so
in^^itely below us, being indeed nothing but Shining Clay, well figured and
colored Earth, and Articulate Air; which are, perhaps the Basest of all
Material Beings? What Generous heart, if not infatuated even to Madness, would
so debase his Dignity as to subject himself, and all his dearest Concerns, to
his Underling or Slave; and such a Slave as will certainly ruin him by his
over-kind Condescendency? Knowledge and Virtue are the Only True, and the ^^^t
Perfections of our Soul, while she is in the Way to her Last End: Whence we may
be Certain they ^^^ Agreeable to her Nature. The Increase in these gives her
Growth and Strength; and, consequently must advance her toward the Right End
for which Nature ordained her: Whereas, what is made of this corruptible Trash,
Matter, must needs depress ^er Highborn Nature, and disgrace her Extraction.
^^deed, those Material Creatures, may, by our Sober ^se of them, serve as
Drudges, to assist our other Comp^rt, the Body, with necessary Conveniences.
They may also be a means to raise the Soul to the Knowledge of her self and her
Great Maker; but, ^f we affect them farther than as they are subservient to
those Laudable Ends, we shall put the Order of the Creation out of it is Frame;
and ( Irrational Love, especially if Excessive, being a perfect Slavery) we
shall invert the Gradual Series of Beings of which the world consists, turn the
Climax of Causes with the ^eels upwards, and make our Soul servilely truckle to
those Despicable things which were made to do her Homage.

Lest our Fancy not much assisting our Memory in things above us, we may forget
what we lately demonstrated, of how Our former Demonstrations for the
Immortality of our Soul, summed up, and Recapitulated.
surpassing an Excellency and how Refined a perfection of Being our Soul is,
above this Dross of Matter, of which our Bodies are ^neaded; let us review once
more the Product of some of our most Attentive and Deliberate Thoughts.

We have seen it clearly Demonstrated, that our Soul's Capacity, (which is of
Knowledge) contrary to the Nature of Material Containers, is Infinite; Whence
she is so far from being filled by the accession of such Objects as this
Material World can afford her; that even now, while here, they serve but to
enlarge her said Capacity; that is, to increase ^er Thirst of knowing still
more: From which follows, that in her future State, when she is all Mind, and
constantly, and most eagerly Attentive, and addicted to her only* Natural
Perfection, Knowledge; she will, being then a Pure Act, and operating
accordingly, strain her incredible Activity to attain the Sight of the First
Cause of all things, and to know what he is in himself; and thence must remain
ever in a vehement Longing and Tormenting Dissatisfaction, unless she attain
that only Soul-satiating Contemplation of Him who is Infinite Truth and the
First Cause of all those Created Effects, the Knowledge of which transported
her with such an Insatiable Desire of seeing him.

We have seen, that as the Purest and most Refined Gold cannot incorporate with
Dust, the Natures or Qualities of Corporeal Beings, when in thy Knowing Power,
cannot mingle with thy Purer and Nobler Essence; nor, (as Proper and Connatural
Affections do use) alter it or bring it to their Nature* But they stand aloof
from it; and, though they be in thee, yet they keep their Distance; and, contrary
to the Genius of Corporeal Modes, they are there ^s Objects, that is, as Other
Things, or as Distinct from thee.

We have shown, that by our Apprehending what [Existence], or Actual Being, is,
(which it is Evident we do, since we know the Meaning of those words) thou have
the Nature of Existence in thy Knowledge, that is, in thy self; which is
impossible to be shadowed or represented but only in a Spiritual Mirror; Nay,
by having what is meant by the word [Existence,] in thee, which Abstracts from
all Limited or Particular Manners or Degrees of it, thou have in thee the
Nature of Existence in Common, or in it is whole Latitude, Unconfined to this or
that Subject; which demonstrates that thy Nature is Capable to comprehend the
whole Creation; and to see clearly even that Sovereign Being it self, whose
Nature is Unconfined or Infinite Existence.

We have seen by thy framing Respects of one thing to another, that thou have
in thee a Power of Ordering them; and, consequently, the Nature of that Order
it self; whereas there is nothing in the Material World but so many Singulars;
each of which is ultimately Determined by it is Individuating Principles; and,
therefore, is Independent and Absolute in it self, without the least Reference
or Actual Respect to one another.

We have seen clearly demonstrated, that thy Ess^^ce is Superior in the Line
of Being to the whole ^^ture of Continued Quantity, though stretched out to the
vast Expansion of the Heavens, and even as far as the World's Surface; and that
thy Knowing Power is able to fathom it all, without straining it is Capacity
beyond it is reach. We have seen also how it is capacious enough to contain the
whole Nature of Discrete Quantity, though it fills all those Boundless Rooms in
the Long Row of Number, algebraically repeated. All those short Items of
particular Times and Places, summed up into one Total are comprised, and writ
in short hand, in thy Indivisible Essence. The whole Progress of Motion and
Time, and it is Untraceable Antiquity from the First Winding up the Clock of
Nature till it is Line is run out at the World's last Period, when the sick
Tapour of dying Nature, and the Eye of the World, (the Sun) shall begin to
wink, and become bloodshot, till it is darkened and Extinguished; All this Long
Race of Time, I say, is far too short to be commensurated with thy Essence and
Duration. The Former sort of Quantity is but as it were a Point, the later but
an Instant, when resumed after an Indivisible manner in thy Comprehensive
Being. All the Permanent parts of the one are in Thee without the least
Extension or Distance, and all the Succeeding Parts of the Other, whether Past
or Future, when vested with thy manner of Being, amount but to one
still-Present Now. Nor can this seem Incredible to any Christian; since we all
hold that Spiritual Natures are Capable of seeing GOD's Essence as in it self;
which (as is Undeniable) infinitely surmounts all the whole Machine of this
Material World.

We have seen that all Physical Qualities do enjoy, when in thee, another
manner of Being; and affect Thee, their Subject, after a quite different way
from what they had when they were in Material Nature. The most Opposite ones,
which are perpetually contrasting, and restlessly striving to expel one
another; do, by thy Sovereign Power, remain at peace in thy Steady Essence;
which is of (...) High a Dignity to be moved, or disturbed, by their Petty
Quarrels.

We have seen that thy Abstracting. Power can ^de these Lower Beings more
Subtly than can the Operation of Fire, or any Chemistry of Nature assisted by
Art; and can take in pieces their very Essences, and the Essences of their
several Modes, by cutting them into their Metaphysical Parts; which are too
delicate for our Bodily Sight, though assisted with the best Microscopes, to
discern or make Observations how they differ: Each of which Parts too (though
naturally Impartible) have a Distinct Being given by Thee; and can be wrought
upon by thy Understanding, as if they were so many Wholes; and this, with that
most perfect Distinction, that they do not in the least interfere, in thee,
though they ^^^ All of them confusedly blended as they stand in Rude and
Unpolisht Matter.

We have seen, how, by the cement of Existence, expressed by the short
Monosyllable [is,] thou do* i^ thy Comparing Power, (the Laboratory where
Truths are framed) re-connect those thus-divided Parts into Propositions; and
this, with an Union so Close, that it is* absolutely Indissoluble by the utmost
Force of all the Causes in Nature. Nay, that thy Spiritual Essence can in some
manner, Create, by giving a kind of Being in Thee, to Not-Beings or Nothings.

In a word, we have seen, that all the whole Material World, and every Part of
it that ever came to thy Knowledge, do enjoy a New sort of Being in Thee; and
such a one as is contradictorily Opposite to the Being they had in their
Material State.

All these high Prerogatives, dilating thy Essence and Duration to a kind of
Infinity above this Narrow World, we The most Important Use we ought to make*
of this Doctrine, That our Soul is Immortal.
have found clearly to be no more but thy Just Due; however Unreflecting
Atheists, whose grovelling Souls, immerst in Matter, cannot, or will not, raise
themselves above Fancy, do use their misemploy'd Foolish Wit, (as the World
calls it) to divest themselves of their own Dignity, and, like so many worst
Feloes de se, by maintaining their Soul is Mortal, do give themselves to be
Guilty of Eternal Death; or, (which is worse than Death) of Annihilation, by
granting their Souls incapable of Surviving. But let us, to whom the Providence
of our Good Make^ has indulged these Clear Informations, make o^^ Right Use of
them. Since these are Great Truths* let Truth have it is Due Effects. It Is so
Gross at Error, that it is below Confute, to imagine, that any Truth is an
Idle and Fruitless Speculati^^* The Knowledge of Truth in Particular things,
does* of it is own Nature, tend to direct our Outward Actions; and Universal
Truths (such as these are) do naturally conduce to enlarge our Soul, raise ^^
to High Contemplation, and to breed in us Conformable Affections. Since then we
have the best ^rance Clear Demonstration can give us, that this Material World
is below our Essence, it is most fit we should esteem it to be also below our
most Serious Thoughts and our Best Affections. Let us ^^ancipate our selves
then from the Slavish Adoration, with which Worldlings devote themselves to
that Dull and Senseless Idol. And, seeing Evident Reason has perfectly
convinced us there is no shadow of Likelihood that our Soul is Mortal; let us
bend all ^^^ carefullest Endeavors to provide she may be Happy in her Eternal
State, when she comes to be ^^^^^dg'd from her terrene habitation, and has got
clear of her Body, and this World, nay, is got above it; which is the only True
Wisdom. To the Consideration of which State of hers we advance in our next
Discourse.

Transnatural Philosophy: OR, METAPHYSICS.
BOOK II. Of PURE ACTS. VIZ. Of the SOUL SEPARATED, and ANGELS.
CHAP. I. Of the State of the Soul Separated from the Body; and, what
Dispositions in her when the Man Dies, will make her Eternally Happy or
Miserable.
1. THE Soul does, at her Separation, The Soul, at her Separation, receives
some Change, according to her Manner of Existing, and Suppositality.
receive from GOD, as he is the Author of Nature, some Change, according to her
Existence, and her Subsistence or Suppositality. For, since in her former State
of Union with her Body, she was the Form of that Body, and therefore (Form and
Matter being the Parts of every Compound Ens) only a Part of Man* and a Part of
an Ens is not an Ens or Individuum; nor* consequently, capable of Existing;
much less of Subsisting, which (as is shown above, B. 1. Chap. 5.. 17.)
superadds some Perfection to the Notion of Existence: It follows, that, seeing
the same Soul, when separated from the Body, (she being (by Book 1. Chap. 7.)
Immortal) does Exist, and also Subsist, in regard she Sustains her own Nature;
and, as will be proved shortly, her Modes too; she must be made apt to Exist
and Subsist, which she was not while in her former State; that is, she must be
Changed according to those Considerations or Respects; and made an Existent and
Subsistent Thing, and consequently a Kind of Suppositum. And that it belongs to
GOD, as he is the First Cause, to give the Soul this highest Perfection of
Being, is hence demonstrated. For it belongs to an Infinite Actuality, or an
Infinite Goodness, to give to his Creatures all the Goodness and Natural
Perfections they are capable to receive; especially such as the very Nature he
has given them makes them require: Now it is evident, that the Nature of the
Soul (she being Immortal) is capable of, and requires still to Exist; and also
to Subsist and be a Suppositum; because she had, while in the Body, Power to
have in her, as in their Subject, (that is, to Sustain or be the Suppositum of)
innumerable Accidents, Notions or Knowledges, which, they being Spiritual or
Indivisible, could not be received in a Divisible Subject, the Corporeal part
of Man; and, therefore, could only be peculiarly in Her. Whence it follows
that, since (...) Ordained the Dissolution of the Man, or the (...) Separation
from the Body, and had also m^de the Soul Immortal, it became His Goodness to
give her, when separated, Existence, which her Immortal Nature required; and
also the Power of Subsisting, and of being the Subject, or Suppositum of those
Accidents.

^* How this is done we may learn by this Pa^el. A Quantitative Thing, v. g.
The Manner how this is done Illustrated.
Stone, has many Potential Parts in it; some of one Color or Figure, some of
another: Now, none of those Parts, taken singly, can Exist or ^ub^^st while
they were Parts, but only the whole Thing called a Stone; for only that was a
Distinct Individual Thing, which only is capable of Existing. But, because this
whole Thing had a Power to be Divided (or had Potential Parts in it), ^^^ so
was apt to be made more Actual Wholes, or, (...) ings: hence each Part, when
thus Divided, ^ade a Distinct whole Ens, has immediately its ^^^^icular
Existence given it by GOD. And, be^se some of those Parts, while in the Whole,
(...) some different Modifications in it, which another Part had not; whence it
was independent on any other Part, as to the sustaining such Accidents; and,
consequently it has a Power to ^^^^ain them, when it should come to be made a
Whole; therefore it has given it to Subsist independently on the former Whole,
or any other Part of it; and to be a Suppositum to sustain those Accidents.
Much more are those Perfections of Being ^^turally due to the Soul, which is of
an Immortal Nature.

3. Notwitstanding, each Soul, when separated continues the same Individual Yet
the same Individual Nature remains in her.
Soul which it was in the Body* First, Because in the Body she was the chief
Essential Part of the Man: And Essence abstract, from Existence, and,
consequently from Subsistence and Suppositality* So that her being changed
according to Suppositality, or in some manner according to Existence, does not
alter her particular Essence or Nature. Secondly, She had her Individuality
from the Individual Dispositions in the Embryo, which determine the Matter so
as to require that such an individual Form (or Soul) and no other, should be
infused* Thirdly, She had her Determinate or Individual Pitch of Spirituality
or Cognoscitiveness, given her at the Instant in which she was first infused*
nor could it be taken away by the succeeding Accidents of Knowledge afterward;
both because they superven'd to her Individual Nature or Degree of
Cognoscitiveness; as also because they were not contrary, but agreeable to such
a Nature. Again, were this true Reason waved, yet, since in this Mortal State
the Soul gains Notions or Knowledge, by means of her Senses, from every
Circumstance the Man is in; and it is impossible any two Men, should be all
their Lives in the self-same Circumstances; it is impossible (abati^^ their
Constitutions individually different) that my Soul should have the self-same
Complexion of Spiritual Modes of Knowledge, and consequent Affections, in this
World, which another Soul has; which sufficiently distinguishes her from every
other Particular Soul, or (which is the same) Individuat^ her as she is a Soul.

Wherefore this Change of the Soul, at her ^ration, amounts to no more but to
take from (...) the Imperfection of being a Part, and to ^fer upon her the
Privilege of a Whole Ens; which is given to every new Individuum in Nature
that is made such by Division or mere Separation.

4. Nothing which was once in the Soul in this ^e, (excepting False Judge^nts)
All the Modes or Accidenti, v. g. all the Knowledges and Affections, she had
while here, do* remain still in her.
is blotted out of her in (...) State of Separation. For, (...) whatever is
naturally ex^d out of any Subject is driven ^^^ce by* it is Contrary; and
Con^^^es (by Chapter 7.. 15.) do not ^l one another out of the ^d, but fix one
another better there; it is evi^^nt that from this Head, or from the Objects
which are in the Soul, nothing whatever that (...) once in the Soul is Effaced
out of her, but ^ains there for ever. Again, since the pecu^ Nature of the Soul
is not Material or Divisi^; but, when she is separated, she is a Pure Act; ^re
can be no Ground, from the Subject's side, ^^at Notions or Knowledges should be
worn out, (...) decay by reason of the Alterableness or Fading Genius of the
Subject, or her Incapacity to retain ^m still: Whatever Knowledge therefore was
(...) in the Soul will be ever there. And the ^son why in this State they come
not into ^^^y, when we would use them, but seem forgotten, is, because the
Phantasms, (without which the Soul cannot operate,) being the smallest
particles of Matter, are either perished, or else lost in a wilderness of
innumerable others, so that they are not still ready at hand to re-excite our
Knowledge of them, or make us remember them.

5. Every Separated Soul which had any one Notion in her while here, does know
all Created Truths as soon Each Soul, when Separated, knows all Created Truths.
as she is out of the Body. For, since B. 1. Chapter 5.. 2.
, as has been demonstrated, the knowing of a Great Number of Finite Truths do
not, to any Degree, tend to fill the Capacity of the Soul, but enlarge and
enable it to know still much more; there can be no difficulty, on the Subjects
side, why she should not know all Created Truths, they being Finite both in
their Nature and in their Number. On the other side, since our Notions are the
Ground of Truth; and All Truths, though they be never so many, are connected; and
this by the Identifying particle [ is,] which shows they are after some manner
i^ one another: Nay, (which alone suffices) since it has been fully
demonstrated, ( Method to Science, Book 3. Chapter 4.. 14. beginning at. 8.) That
Every Soul Separate that knows any one Natural Truth, does know all Nature at
once in the First Instant of her Separation; it is evinced, that there can be
as little difficulty on the part of the Objects to be known as there was on the
Subjects side. Whence follows, that every Soul Separated which had here any one
Notion in her, especially (as she must) of her own, or the Man's Existence,
does know all Truths as soon as she is out of the Body.

6. To satisfy those, who, led by Fancy, and customary Impressions from
Material Objects, do make them the How this is very Possible.
Rule and Measure to judge of Spiritual Natures; and thence are very backward
to assent to a Truth which seems so Paradoxical and Impossible; I take leave to
recommend to their serious consideration a far stranger Point, which yet all
Christians hold, viz. That a Holy Soul, when separate, is capable of seeing
clearly the Divine Essence it self; in comparison of which, all Created Beings
are but a s^if^e, or rather a mere Nothing.

7. Hence follows, That every Separated Soul comprehends all Time and Place.
^^r, since those innumerable Natural Hence every Separated Soul comprehends All
Time and Place.
Objects, which ^he then knows, are in Distinct Times and Places; nay, are the
very Things whose Extension and Succession do make all Place and Time; it is
Impossible but that, having those Things in her Knowledge, she must comprehend
those Times and Places, which are Modes of those Things; and, consequently,
Parts of the Entire Notion of those Things themselves; that is, she must
comprehend all Time or Place.

8. Corollary I. Hence is demonstrated how great an Error it is, and against
Hence her Operations are not measured by Time; They and their Subject being of
a Superior Nature.
the Nature of a Pure Act; to put the Duration of Pure Spirits to be in some
sort Successive; and that their Operations, and consequently their Existence,
are measureable by the Differences of Time, [ Before and After,] whereas they
comprehend all Time, and are of such a Nature as far transcends it,

9. Therefore such a Soul cannot but naturally have an Ardent Longing to know
the Nature of the First Cause that Hence she will be Eternally Miserable,
unless she knows the First Cause, GOD.
made and ordered those Things. For, since it is Essential to the Soul to be
Cognoscitive; and, consequently, the whole Bent (and only Good) of her Nature,
in that State, is to have all the Knowledge she can, and must wish; and the
Knowledge of the Effects does naturally, and also vehemently excite and inflame
those who are wholly addicted to Knowledge, (as the Soul naturally is in that
State) to know the Cause which Created them of Nothing, and ranged them in that
most beautiful Order: Nay, since they do not know those things as they ought,
without knowing them a priori in their First Cause; and how, and by what
virtue, he Created them. Again, since (as was often proved) the Knowledge of
all Created Truths, they being Finite, cannot in the least fill or satisfy the
Natural Desire of the Soul; and therefore only the Knowledge of an Infinite
Truth can satiate and content her; and she cannot but vehemently long to enjoy
that, which only can satisfy a Propension so ^adicated in her Nature: It
follows from all these heads, that the Knowledge of all Created Truths do serve
only to increase her Thirst, and to inflame her Desire more ardently and
impatiently, to know the Nature or Essence of that Infinite and Glorious Source
of all Being, the First Cause; from which issued all those admirable Effects,
and which she now sees is the Object only worthy of her Knowledge: Whence she
must look upon her self as utterly lost and un^one, and remain eternally
miserable if she falls short of that only Soul-satisfying Sight.

10. From the.. 4, and 5. it follows necessarily, that a Soul, when Separated,
is naturally, while Separated, Hence also, she is naturally Unchangeable.
Unchangeable. For, (besides other Reasons) the Notion of Created Ens is
adequately Divided by Indivisible and Divisible, as by its Differences, which
are Contradictories; Nor is there any thing in the Species but the Notion of
the Genus (in which they agree) and the Notion of the Difference by which they
disagree, and this (in our case) contradictorily: Hence it follows, that
whatever is Affirmed of One of the Species besides the Generical Notion, the
Contradictory to it must be Affirmed of the Other Species; wherefore, as truly
and certainly as we can affirm of One of the Species, Body, that it is
Quantitative, Divisible, has Part after Part, and that its Operations are
performed Successively one after another, etc. so truly can we affirm of the
Other Species, Spirit, that it is Unquantitative, Indivisible, has not Part
after Part, and is not Successive in its Operations; in regard none of these
relate to the Genus. But what has no Successiveness in it, cannot be otherwise
than it was before, or Changed; Therefore the Soul, while it is a pure Spirit,
is naturally Unchangeable.

11. From the same. 5. it is demonstrated, without needing any farther Hence
too, as soon as Separated, she knows all the Thoughts and Affections, Words and
Actions of her past Life.
Proof, that the Soul, when Separated, knows, and cannot but know all the
Words, Actions, Thoughts and Affections of her whole fore-past Life, finding
those Later in her Self; she her Self being then her own First, Immediate, and
Ever-present Object; and the Former in the Course of Causes, and in the
Circumstances there mentioned. Also that she cannot but know the Natural
Actions, Thoughts, etc. of others, since these also were Effects, and had their
Causes; and so were knowable by her as well as the others. Lastly, That she
must a fortiori know what Good or Bad Dispositions were in her self when she
Died, they being now Modes or Accidents of her self; nor is it possible that a
Creature that has Knowledge and Will in it, should not (even in this dull
State) know what it self chiefly wishes and desires.

12. Corollary 1. Hence is understood how the Particular Judgment, determining
the Soul's Future Condition, Whence follows the Particular Judgment, which
determines her Lot at the Hour of Death.
is made at the Hour of Death; and how she comes to Hope or Despair of Eternal
Hap piness, according as she sees her self Fit or Unfit for it; whence she
becomes Determined to her Final Lot: which Fitness or Unfitness is, in the Old
Language of the Christian Church, called, Merit or Demerit; which are the same
as Disposition or Indisposition for Bliss; only differing in an Extrinsecal
Denomination, taken from GOD's having Promised and Threatened the Happy or
Unhappy Consequences of Good or Bad Actions.

13. Corollary II. Hence also is understood how the Book of Conscience will be
laid open at the last Day; Hence is understood how the Book of Conscience will
be laid open at the last Day.
when GOD shall reveal abscondita tenebrarum, or (as the Sybill expresses it)
Cunctaq, cunctorum cunctis arcana patebunt; and this after a more Clear and
Solemn Manner than mere Nature could have performed.

14* Corallary III. Hence also we may see why, and how, Infants are
connaturally saved by Baptism, as And how Infants are connaturally saved by
Baptism.
by the most General and Genuine Means. For, they carry no Dispositions out of
the Body, but Affections to the Mother's Dug, to lie soft and warm, and such
like; which being merely Natural, or rather Animal, were too weak and too base
to put any thing in them, which might raise them in their Future State toward
Heaven. But, when they come into the Region of Light, and know all things;
amongst the rest, that they were Baptized in Christ's Name, and that that
External Action, (the Impressions, and consequently the Notions of which remain
yet in their Soul) was particularly done upon them, and was Ordained as a
Supernatural Means by Him, acting as a Supernatural Agent, for their Salvation,
or to addict them to Him, and make them His; immediately, that Sacrament, (as
others also do) working its Effect ex vi Institutionis Christi, gives them
other Thoughts, and Higher Aims than mere Nature could have done; makes them
conceive Actual Hope and Love of their Good GOD and Savior; and so disposes or
fits them, at the same Instant, for Heaven.

15. Corollary IV. Hence we may discover how Unnatural, as well as Impious a
Heresy Ana-Baptism is; in debarring Hence Ana-Baptism is Impious and Unnatural.
their Infants from the most Certain Means, in the Course of GOD's Supernatural
Providence, to bring them to Heaven, in case they Die before they come to use
their deliberate Reason in choosing their Last End. But I am here only to lay
Certain and Evident Grounds to Confute Errors, and not to Pursue them.

16. Corollary V. Lastly, hence is seen how far more easy it is for the Saints
and Angels in Heaven, to hear The foregoing Principles show how much more easy
it is for the Saints and Angels in Heaven, to know our Actions and Necessities.
our Petitions, either put up to our common Lord, or desiring the Assistance of
their Prayen ^ as also to know our Necessities our Amendment, the Repentance of
a Sinner, for which as our Savior says, they have a particul^ Joy; though such
happy Spirits know the Things after a far Clearer and Nobler Manner than
Natural Knowers do; viz. not i^ ignoble Effects, but in the best Manner a
Pr^ori, or in the First Cause; by seeing his Divine Essence, in whom we do all
Live, M^ and have our Being.

17. The Practical Judgment, or Affection of the Soul, (as Experience teaches)
does more sway the Operations of it, The Practical Judgments, or Affections, to
carry the Soul to the Attainment of the Good she most Loved here, in case it be
Attainable in the Future State.
and carry it toward the Attainment of what it wishes, than the Greatest
Speculative Knowledge of any Good whatever. For, since we have two Operative
Faculties of the Soul, Understanding and Will, and the Understanding, as
contradistinguisht from the Will, has for it is Proper Act or Effect, only a
Speculative Knowledge or Judgment of the Truth of the Thing, abstracting from
this consideration, whether it be our Good or no; and goes no farther; but when
our Consideration, by a Close and frequent Converse with the Object, and a more
thorow-Penetration of it is Agreeableness, or how Good it is to us, lays this
Agreeableness to ^art, and Conceits it to be our Interest to have ^* there are
immediately produced in us Affections, or (which is the same) Practical
Judgments, ^pelling us to Act for it or pursue it, which are ^cts of the Will:
Hence, it is only these Practical Judgments, and not Speculative ones, which
move us to the pursuit and Attainment of any ^ood; whether that Object be our
True Good, (...) no.

18. Intellectual Goods, though Infinite, or the seeing Him who is Infinite
Truth, The Best Intellectual Good, or the Sight of GOD is Attainable in the
N^xt Life, if the Soul be Disposed for it.
are immediately attained by the Soul, when Separated, if she be disposed with
a Perfect Affection or Love for it. For, since the Soul is of an Intellectual
Nature, and such that she is not Capable to be satiated or filled with Finite
Truths, how Great or Many soever they be; and, therefore, she is, by her
Nature, ordained to see an Infinite Truth; nor can her Speculative Knowledge of
all Created Truths, breed any Hindrance; but by giving her more Light of the
Excellency of that Divine Object, is rather (if no sinister Affection detain
her) ordained to beget in her a high Affection for it; nor, in the Case here
put, does any sinister Practical Judgment, or any such Affection detain her
from it, in regard it is here supposed that she has an Affection for it; so
that not only the whole Bent of her unperverted Nature, but also the whole
Propension of her Voluntary Affections, gained here by frequent and most
Deliberate Acts, have addicted her to know or see that Blissful Object:
Wherefore, all imaginable Dispositions being put on her part, to see this
Infinite Truth, it will be seen and known by the Soul in case it be of its own
nature Intelligible, which it is most evident it is. For, since all
Unintelligibleness, or Obscurity of any Object springs from the Confusedness
and Indetermination found in it, which arises from the Power or Matter; and all
Distinctness, and by consequence, greater Intelligibility, from the Act; and
GOD, or Infinite Truth, is an Infinitely Pure and most simple Actuality; or
Purus Candor Aeternae Lucis, and therefore of his own Nature infinitely
Intelligible; and consequently, will be actually known, so there be no
Indisposition, Blemish or Impurity in the Spiritual Eye of the Understanding
which is to know it; or, (which is the same) some Inordinate Affection for some
Created or False Good makin^ it addict its squinting Eye toward It. It follow^
hence that, since Extrinsecal Application has no place here, or rather this
Perfect Affection being the very, and only, Application of one Spirit to
another; all imaginable Causes are put for such an Effect, or, for such a
Soul's seeing God; and consequently the Effect it self, or the Beatifical
Vision must follow.

19. Coroll. VII. Hence the whole Employ of our Lives here ought to be this,
viz. to take care we do not Therefore to work up our Christian Principles to
such Good Dispositions, ought to be the whole Employ of our Life here.
set our Affections inordinately on Temporal or False Goods; which (being
Fleeting) do perish, and leave us Empty in our Future neverdying State; but
wisely to wean our selves from affecting them excessively; and withal to gain
Predominant Practical Judgments or Affections for Eternal Goods, which will
never leave us; and, withal, will fill and satisfy our Boundless Wishes in the
other World; or, which is the same, make us Eternally Happy.

20. Cor. VIII. Hence is shown that only Love of God above all things can
dispose us for Heaven, or (which This good Disposition is Charity, or the Love
of GOD above all things.
is the same) make us held worthy, or deserve such an Infinite Reward; which is
Promised us by God's Goodness, upon our putting that good Disposition.

21. Coroll. IX. Hence all the Law and the Prophets, all the whole Body of
H^nce all the Means and Motives laid by our B: Savior, ^^nd only to breed and
promote in us this Predominant A^f^^ction for Heaven.
Christian Doctrine, all Christ's Instructive Words, Exemplary Actions and
Affective Sufferings; all Church Government, Sacraments, Teaching, Preaching,
Mortification, Reading Holy Books, perusing the Lives of the B. Saints and
Martyrs; nay, all our Keeping Festivals, and all Ceremonious Actions of what
kind soever, (if righ^ly understood and made use of) are of no worth or
Efficacy toward our Salvation, farther than they may ^end Immediately or
Remotely to breed and advance in Souls this Ultimate and Effectual Disposition
to Bliss, Perfect Charity, or the Love of GOD above all things; whence will
follow of course, the Love of our Neighbor as our selves; and Eternal
Happiness, as the Reward of both.

22. Corollary X. Hence, RELIGION is the Art of breeding up Souls in such a
manner as may dispose them The Definition of True Religion.
for Eternal Happiness. This is evident, Because all the Maxims, Means,
Motives, and Methods of True Religion do, either immediately or remotely, tend
to that End.

23. On the contrary, and for the same Reason, those Unhappy Souls, which, at
their Separation, have their First From the same Principle is Demonstrated,
that, To depart ^h^nce with a Contrary Disposition, or a First Affection for
any Creature, will torment the Soul, with most Unspeable Grief and Anguish.
Affection placed on some False or Temporary Good, (v. g. on Aerie Honor,
Ambitious Greatness, Corporeal Pleasure, or Sordid Riches) will, as soon as
they are out of the Body, be in a State of Intolerable Grief and most Horrid
Torment. For, as is already proved,. 20. they can never obtain their True Last
End, (to which Nature does now give them most Violent Propensions) because they
want the Disposition Proper for it; or rather, by not loving it as they ought,
but having Chosen another False End in stead of it, and Loving that above all
things, that is above It, they are utterly Indisposed for it; which Disposes or
Entitles them to that Eternal Pain called Poena Damni, or Damnation, which is
the loss of ever seeing GOD. Nor yet can they get or enjoy those Temporary or
False Goods, which they did here, and must now unchangeably, (or for ever)
chiefly, if not only dote upon: the Loss of which affects them with that
Tormenting Grief, called Poena Sensus, or the Pain which arises from the want
of an ill-chosen Temporary Last End. So that they have lost, and are left
destitute of all they can possibly wish; they have their Wills crossed in every
thing, and this for all Eternity; which fills their whole Soul with most
Unspeakable and Unconceiveable Anguish.

24. The State of Separation Elevates the Soul to an Incomparable, and, in a
manner, an Infinite Perfection of The State of Separation Elevates the Soul to
an Incomparably higher Perfection of Existence, (she being then a Pure Act)
than she had here.
Existence above that which she had in the Body. For, as was proved lately, she
is now a Pure Act, knows all Created things, comprehends Time and Place,
perfectly sees all her former Thoughts and Actions, and this all at once: Nay,
when Separated, she is Capable (if due Dispositions be put) to see the Divine
Essence, which none can see and live.

25. Therefore all her Modes or Accidents, and particularly the Affections she
had here, are elevated in a vast Wherefore, it does, consequently Elevate the
Activity of all her Powers; and particularly the Acts of her Will, her
Affections, to an Unconceiveable Intenseness and Vehemence, above what she had
while in the Body.
proportion, as far as the State of Separation can heighten them; that is, to
an Unconceiveable degree of Intenseness. For, her Modes are only her Knowledges
and her Affections; how vastly her Knowledge is increast and extended, is
already proved; and her Affections, which spring from her Knowledge, and are
proportioned to them, must necessarily be increast accordingly; and this out of
the force and nature of her Separated State. So that, put case the Affections
she had here for a Temporary Good, was (as we say) ad unum, and the Love she
had for her Eternal Good was ad centum; and that the State of Separation raised
that Affection ut mill, (which, as appears by these Grounds, is but a weak
expression) it would follow, that the Soul, when Separated, would be found
loving her Eternal Good a hundred thousand times more than she loved that
Temporary one; which would make her fly with a most ravishing Transport to be
united with her Chief Good, if that Temporary Affection does not indispose her.

26. Wherefore, those Wretched Souls which part from the Body with Love of
Created and Temporal Goods Hence, the Poena Damni for the Loss of the Sight of
GOD, and the Poena Sensus, for the Loss of the Temporal False. Good she here
d^ted on, in a wicked Soul, are Unspeakable, and plunge her in a HELL of
Misery. Their sad Condition described.
above the Increated, Infinite, and Eternal one; especially those, who, by
Supernatural Light had a higher Knowledge of GOD than Nature could have given
them; must necessarily, by means of the Elevation of their Affections in their
Separate State, have their Torments increast to a Hell of Misery. For, since
the State of Separation exalts the Soul, and, consequently, the Knowledges and
Affections she had in the Body, to an incompatable pitch above what they were
here; and Every Thing operates as it is: It follows, That the Pain and Sorrow
they have for the Loss* of what they thus Affected, and on which they had set
their whole hearts; must in a manner infinitely exceed any Sorrow they could
possibly have had in this life. Besides, they have this Surcharge of Torture,
that their Contrary, and ever Unre^^actable and Irreconcilable Judgments tear
the Soul in pieces, (as it were) within her self; and make her become her own
Torment. The Natural Love of her True* Last End, (and much ^ore if it were
formerly known also Supernaturally) carries her with a Violent Bent toward
that which, he sees now is her only-True Happiness; and, at the same time, the
far stronger Torrent of her Affections, for that False Last End, which she had
here, with a full Deliberation and long-frequented Practice, made Choice of and
pursued for her Summum Bonum, hurries her with a Madness of Transport, and an
impetuosity equal to the inconceiveable activity she is now endowed with, to
enjoy them; though at the same time she sees them impossible to be had, and
withal most Base, Vile, and below her Nature, if they were had; and yet as
Base as they are, she must, as her condition now is, ever affectionately hug
the Thoughts and Wish of them; though she sees this Affection for them is her
Torment, and the true Cause of all her Endless Misery. Add, that they have, and
must have, these racking Convulsions of their Mind all at once; without hopes
of the least Intermission for all Eternity. Lastly, Those Souls comprehending
now all Time and Place, their Affections work accordingly; So that* whereas in
this Life they confined their Wishes to enjoy those False Goods in some one
time or place, or some one Circumstance; they now long vehemently to enjoy All
of them which are suitable to such an Affection, in every part of Time and every
particular* Place; nay, they wish to subordinate all the whole Creation to
attain that False Last End, which they had unfortunately chosen, and must now
for ever dote upon. Which being impossible, as the Course of Causes now stand,
it follows, that every Creature in the world crosses them and is their Torment;
according to that saying, Pugnabit orbis terrarum contra insensatos. So that
their whole never-ending Life (if it may be called so) is wholly made up of
Distracting Madness, Furious Rage, Selfracking Contrary Wishes, tearing their
own Bowels; Heart-gnawing Regret; Shameful Confusion; Fruitless Repentance;
Black Desperation; Cursings of themselves and all Creatures; Blasphemings of
the Holy Saints, and of their Dread Creator and Just Judge, GOD, Blessed for
evermore. Or, as our B. Savior, in accommodation to our greatest Griefs here,
moderately expresses it, Weeping and Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth. The Gnawing
Worm of Helpless Remorse ^ever dies there; nor is the Vehement Fire of these
Violent and Contrary Affections ever quenched. Quis poterit habitare cum igne
devorante -- Quis habitabit cum ardoribus sempiternis! Isaiae, Cap. 33. 14.

27. Hence is seen, That GOD damns no Man. For, since (by. 23.) Inordinate
Affection for Creatures addicts the Soul to a wrong Last End; and, at the GOD
Damns no Man.
same time, by doing so, does In^^pose her for her True Happiness, the Sight of
GOD, which she cannot, when Separated, but Naturally desire and long for; and
these Inordinate Affections, if Unretracted here, do still remain in the Soul,
(by. 4.) and, when Separated, she is Unchangeable in that State; and,
consequently sees she must for ever Despair of ^^taining her True Good, she
being Impure and In^ispos'd for it; and also of ever getting that False Good,
upon which she had here set her Chief Affection; because it is impossible,
according to the Circumstances of things, in the other Life; and that hence she
becomes incapacitated of having any kind of Good she can desire, but has her
Desire and Wish crossed in every thing; And the perpetual crossing her Voluntary
and Natural Wishes in every thing, especially in what is of Infinite Concern to
her, must naturally cause in such a Soul Extreme Grief, Torment and
Desperation: And this Tormenting Grief is enhanced by the Intenseness and
Vehemence of her Acts, when she is a Pure Spirit; with which the greatest and
most violent Grief in this life bears no proportion. Lastly, since it has been
clearly shown, that all these dismal Effects, which induce and make up that
wretched State we call Damnation, do (as is here shown) spring originally, as
from their Sole Cause from her having, by her own Free Choice, pitch^ her First
Affections upon some Created or False Good; and all the other bad Consequences
do follow out of the very Nature of a Spirit, thus Affected or Indisposed: It
is manifest, That GOD Damns no Man; but that while a Sinner hugs and cherishes
Inordinate Affections for Creatures in his Breast, he is all the while
connaturally kindling, and adding Fuel to Hellfire in his own Soul; to which
effect of Damnation GOD contributes no otherwise than by preserving the Natures
of things, and carrying on the Course of Causes according to those Natures;
which Wisest Method he has no reason to alter miraculously for their sakes who
have preferred a Creature before Him.

28. It may be objected, that these Affections for Creatures were Passions,
which either Spring from the Body, or The Knowing all Truths Speculatively in
the State of Separation, does not alter the Predominant Affection for
Creatures. As the Tree falls so it lies.
from the Circumstances of the former World; and, therefore, they do not
remain, in a State where neither of them have any Influence upon the Soul. I
Answer, First, That these are not Passions in our future State, as that word
imports Motion; but they are far worse, viz. the Termini or Effects of the most
steadily fixed and worst Passion; which we call Resolvedness in ill, or
Willfulness: And this can, and must remain in a Soul determined to a wrong Last
End; she having, though no Motion of the Spirits, or Passion, a Power in her
called a Will, of it is own Nature indeed, determinable to Good and Bad, but by
her State of Separation fixed unchangeably in that Determination which she died
with. Secondly, Though those Passions did indeed spring here from our Material
Compart, the Body; yet they did not stay in that Part, but affected, by means
of material Impressions, the Soul; and were ^^t in her by a deliberate and
serious pitching her Chief Affections on them; nay, perhaps rivetted there by
long-continu'd Habits; and therefore they must still remain in her for ever,
unless they had been Retracted while she was in a Changeable condition in this
Life.

29. Corollary XI. Hence, one Actual Sin of a high Nature, and done with Hence,
one Enormous Actual Sin, Unrepented, renders a Soul liable to Eternal Damnation.
perfect Deliberation, of which the Man dies Unrepentant, will make the Soul
miscarry eternally; such as are Self-murder, being killed in a Duel for a
Puntilio, and such like.

30. It may be said, that the Knowledge of all Truths will rectify and alter
the Soul as soon as she is separated, That the State of Separation does not
alter the First Affection of Souls, farther demonstrated.
in regard that she sees then clearly the Vileness and Perniciousness of
placing her Affection on a wrong Last End. It Is Answered: First, That the Soul,
as soon as Separated, knows all Truths only Speculatively; but that the
Practical Judgments or Affections which had prepossest her, (as has been
proved,. 17.) do more sway with her than all her Speculative Knowledge; which
her Choice did not give her, but Nature forced into her. Secondly, There could
be no Cause which was Competent to alter her: Not her Separation; For the whole
Effect of that Action is to Divide the Potential Parts of a Compound; that is,
to take from them the State of Potentiality, and make them (if they can exist
separate) Actual Wholes; Actual Parts, as it has been demonstrated, being
Impossible. Wherefore Death, being only the Separation of the Soul and Body,
terminates it is Agency in making them Two of One, and has no Influence upon
changing them. Nor does their State of Separation, or their remaining or
becoming Separate, alter their Natures or their Modes; for this consists in the
Soul's existing now A Pure Act; which has nothing to do with taking away what
she had; but only, taking her as it found her, to elevate her, such as she was,
and, consequently, those Knowledges and Affections she actually had, to a
higher Perfection in the Line of Ens, or to give her to exist after a Nobler
manner than she did formerly. Lastly, Were this so, the Order of the World
would be quite perverted; for, in that case, the Wickedest Livers would have
equal Privilege and Benefit in the next world, as the greatest Saints; since,
each of them, (as is presupposed to our question) knowing all things as soon as
Separated, their Wickedness would be corrected, and effaced; which takes away
all the dread of Hell, evacuates all the Motives to good Life, and even
destroys the Notion of Virtue and Vice, Punishment and Reward; and,
consequently, GOD's Attribute of Justice.

31. Corollary XII. Hence is seen, that Sin does not consist merely in the
Hence Sin does not formally consist in the Falsity of the Practical Judgment or
Affection; but, in the Disproportion and Inordinateness of it:
Falsehood of our Speculative Judgments, but in the Disproportion of our
Practical Judgments or Affections for a Temporary Good, above the Degree of
Affection it has for Eternal Goods. For, it may be a Truth, that the Objects of
Sin were Agreeable to the Man in this Mortal State, especially taking him as
thus circumstanced, which made him apply his Thoughts only to them; and by that
means he came to conceit strongly the Good he found in them; and so by
oft-repeated Acts he came to beget in his Soul (Unattentive and Unapply'd to
other Goods which were incomparably Greater) vast Practical Judgments,
impelling him to act for them, and pursue them; or, which is the same, by a
long Converse with them, he got a strong Addiction to them, and most ardent
Affection for them: But the reason why he came to fall into such Pernicious
Sin, was because he did not to the same degree apply his Thoughts to Eternal
Goods, nor so carefully and studiously consider the incomparable Excellency of
them, as he did the Trifling Good of the others. Which had he done, (as he
ought) it would have bred in him such solidly-grounded and strong Judgments and
Affections for Heaven, that it would have corrected (either wholly or to a high
degree) the Affections to Creatures. The Falsehood then which may have
accompanied the Practical Judgments of a Sinful Soul, will be corrected in the
State of Separation; because she knows then all Created Truths; and Truth and
Falsehood, (they being Contradictions, and therefore opposite to the Notion of
Being, the only Object of our Understanding) cannot consist together in an
Intellectual Substance; but the Predominancy or over-proportion of the
Practical Judgment or Affection to Creatures; (whether it proceed from
Falsehood, or, as it does generally, and perhaps always from a more frequent and
more hearty Application of the Soul to Creatures,) does, and must, ever remain
in her; and withal the consequent Sad Effects mentioned, in case the Man dies
with those Bad prevalent Judgments Unretracted.

32. Hence all those Knowledges, whether Physical, Moral, Mathematical,
Metaphysical, Theological, or of From the former Principles it follows that all
those several Kinds of Knowledges we had here, will be Elevated to an
Unmeasurable Excess in the State of Separation.
what kind soever they be, in which the Man had particularly cultivated his
Soul here, will, in the State of Separation, be Elevated to a very Deep, or
Proportionable Penetration of the Objects of those Sciences in the State of
Separation; whence a peculiar Accidental Satisfaction is, by the Design of
Nature, apt to accrue to every such well-employ'd Soul whatever. But, with this
Distinction that those Souls which are Good, besides what Natural Means gives
them, will have a particular Content or Accidental Joy in seeing the Supreme
Reasons for the Truth of those respective Sciences in the First Cause; Whereas
in the Wicked they only serve to ex^ a more vehement Thirst of seeing the
Highest Grounds of their Truth in the First Truth it self, ^^^ Original Author
of all Being; which avails ^^^m nothing but to increase their Grief and Torment.

33. From the same Principles, it is clearly deduced, that all the Virtuous and
(...) Affections which Good Hence also, all the Virtuous Affections, which good
Souls had here for Friends, Relations and Acquaintances will remain in the Next
Life; and make them ardently wish and pray for their Salvation.
^^^^^ had for Friends, Relations ^^^ Acquaintances in this world, (...) remain
in them after Death; ^^^ that too, in a higher mea^^^^ and affect them more
heart^^ than they did here. Whence ^^ey cordially wish and pray for (...)
Progress in the way to True ^^^piness. They are Glad when (...) do well; are
Sorry, (if their (...) would permit it) when we Sin; at least, have ^cidental
Joy than they would have had, if (...) lived virtuously. Which Propension,
(...) Natural or Acquired here, is exceeding^^ enhanced by true Charity; in
which Best of ^ues they do now abound more than we are (...) to conceive. They
take it kindly that we (...) for the Consummation of their Bliss, and ^^^ the
Coming of Christ's Kingdom, when the New Jerusalem, the Church Militant and
Triumphant, joined in one Body, shall, without the least spot or wrinkle of
Vice or Imperfection, and Adorned with the Lustrous Gems of the Purest Virtues,
descend from Heaven like a Bride to meet her Spouse and Savior. They require
our Devout Wishes with their Powerful Prayers. Particularly, they rejoice at
any Good of ours to which themselves have been Instrumental. The same Joy have
all those B. Saints, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and with them the
Holy Angels also, when we keep their Festivals, to the end that we may Honor
their Virtues, follow their Instructions, imitate their Holy Lives,
obsequiously comply with their good Inspirations, Repent our Sins, and improve
in Virtue. The same do those Good Souls, departed in an Inferior ^^gree of
Grace, who (as most hold) need our Prayers and Oblations. They are glad, and
have Ease and Refreshment, by knowing that we have not forgot them, (as
Worldlings do, who love for petty ends) but that we dutifully and charitably
remember to pray for their Deliverance and Final Happiness. By which Doctrine
we see how that Article of our Creed, the Communion of Saints is explicated,
maintained and shown agreeable to Reason by Metaphysical Principles. Nay, even
the Damned in Hell retain a Natural Affec^^^^ for their surviving Friends and
Relations; as appears by Dives his Request to Abraham, that he would send to
warn his Brethren to beware ^^ coming into his place of Torment.

34. It may be thought that all these Particu^^rs are said gratis, because, to
That each Particular Deduced here, is Demonstrable by the Principles laid
formerly: Shown, by repeating those Principles.
avoid Prolixity, I have not applied each of them to it is Proper ^inciples. But
if it shall please any ^^ponent to challenge me with ^^y Flaw in this
Discourse, or ^^etend to show, that they are ^^t well-grounded, I shall not
^^ubt but to demonstrate them from the Prin^^^les already fore-laid and
fore-prov'd, viz. That our Soul is Immortal; That, when out of the ^ody she is
a Pure Act, and of a Superior nature (...) Body: That in that State she knows
all Natural (...), and is Unchangeable: That she remains (...) the same
Affections which she had in her (...) were unretracted when the Man died; (...)
that they are most exceedingly heightened (...) State of Separation: Lastly,
That those ^violent Affections, and Unretractable in that (...) have
conformable Effects issuing from them (...) ^eavenly Joy, Hellish Sorrow, or
penally^ ^^ded Hope.

35. Corollary XII. From this whole Discourse is naturally and necessarily
deduced Wherefore, there is not the least Th^ught, Word or Action, Good or Bad,
which we ever had or did, in this Life, but will have it*^ Corsequent and
Proper Effect, Adjusted and Proportioned to it, in the Next.
this Corollary as a Summary of all that has been said hitherto; That, There is
not the least tittle of our whole Life in which we act as Men, or with perfect
Deliberation of our Reason, which is Indifferent; or that passes Unregarded by
the World's Infinitely-Wise and Just Governor; but that every such Word,
Action, Thought, Gesture, Look or Wish we ever had, and died without altering
it, will have (according as it is well or ill Intended) Effects, in the other
world conformable to it is Nature, and to the Degree of it is Goodness or
Badness; and that, each of them will receive, with most Just and Exact
Proportion, Reward or Punishment, by the Course of Natural and Supernatural
Causes; laid and appointed by GOD's Infinite Wisdom for the Eternal Salvation
of those who love him, and the Eternal Confusion and Perdition of his Enemies.

MEDITATION.
WHere art thou now, my Soul, after thou have abandoned and flitted from thy
Terrene Habitation, and into what strange Ultramundane Region art thou flown
The Admirable Excellency of a Soul when Separated and become a Pure Spirit,
Displayed.
in an Instant? The whole Earth* nay, all Material Nature, seems a contemptible
Atome, when thou look down upon it from the Transcendent Height of Being, to
which the Wisdom and Goodness of thy Creator, who promotes all his Creatures
to those Perfections they art* capable of, has raised thee. I see thy
Knowledge* that is, thy Essence, stretched out boyond the Vast Expansion of this
Material World's Circumference, and our Firmament bespangled with those Starry
Bodies which it contains; or, rather, I see them all centered ^ Spiritual and
Indivisible. Essence, as in a (...) Orb of Being. Thou see now at one (...)
the Whole Sphere of Time sweeping along (...) ^^^ thee; or, rather, thou
comprizest it all in (...) (...) Natural Thought: And can now (...) more ease
comprehend it is whole Race, than (...) could, while here, resume th^se
Fleeting Parts (...) ( v. g. an Hour or a Day,) int one Steady (...) in which
they were all Present and Perma^^nt at once. The whole Bulk of Quantity is in
(...) more Noble Being, without Extension, and the ^^ng Course of Motion,
without Succession. But the Extent of thy Actual Knowledge, is nothing in
comparison of thy Clear Penetration of those Great, (...) Various, and
Numberless Objects, which are now ^nted to thy view. What was here Misty and
^^^dy, is now, the Screen of Matter (the Ground ^^ ll Confusedness and
Obscurity) being taken away, (...) brightly Intelligible with Noonday
Evidence. (...) clearly, that, if thou have in this World but ^^^prehended or
laid hold of any one Piece of the (...) Link in the Chain of Causes, which
weaves (...) one orderly Loom all Natural Truths; thou ^^^est into thee the
whole Length of that Line (...) the First Birth of the World till it expires
in^^ Eternity: Or rather those Truths are so innext ^e another by the closest
Texture of Identity, (...) if thou admittest any one of them, all the rest
(...) ^roud themselves into thy Capacious, though Space^ Understanding.

^ow shall we then frame any That there is no Comparison between our Souls
Condition here, and the State of Separation.
^^^ Conception of the Difference ^en thy Former and this Future State? Or, by
what parallel shall we illustrate it? Shall we compare it to the condition of a
Child in the Womb on the one side, and of a perfect Man grown up to Rip^
Knowledge on the other? Indeed, this World is but as it were our Second Womb;
Nature is delivered of Thee; and thou art born a Pure Spirit when the Man di^s.
Or, Shall we compare these two States to those of a Man, first shut up in a
dark Tower; who can see no Objects about him but when presented before five dim
Glasses placed in it is Walls; but afterward, when the Tower by some Chance is
thrown down, and the Man preserved unhurt; then he can freely range with his
Sight all over the large Prospect about him; and discover, at once, the various
Scenes of all the vast circumstant Region, of which he could before take but a
scant, obscure and leasurely Survey! Both those are but lame Comparisons, and
far from parallelling the Excess, which this New State of thine has above thy
Former one. Thy Capacity in thy purely-Spiritual Condition does Infinitely,
that is, beyond Proportion, go beyond that thou had in the Body, when it was
at it is best: Whereas thy Capacity in the other two States, (that pretended to
parallel this) being both of them Finite, are very easily Proportioned:
Wherefore we will leave this Consideration to be seriously and at leisure
meditated on by those truly Wise Souls, who think it their* highest Concern to
reflect on their Future State; and what Happy or Dismal Consequences attend it*
according to the Good or Bad Dispositions they contract here, and carry with
them hence.

That we may gratefully and humbly acknowledge to whom we owe this Clear
Knowledge of our True Last End, the That mere Humane Science, when at the
Height, was too short and Impotent to raise Mankind to those Dispositions that
fit him for True Happiness.
Attaining which is our Only, and Eternal Happiness; Let us consider how far
Natural Reason carried those Heathen Philosophers who were the Greatest Masters
of Human Science in their ^^^es, and where it stopped. The (...) Intelligent
Followers of Aristo^^^ do gather from his Principles this ^^^^sonant Discourse.
The Goods of (...) Body are preferrable to those ^^ Fortune; and the Goods of
the (...) to those of the Body: Wherefore Happiness ^^st consist in something
that in the best manner ^^^ects that Part of Man called the Soul. Now, the
Powers of the Soul are the Understanding and t^^ Will: Of which the
Understanding is the No^^^^; because the Will is naturally ordained to be
^^^^ed and Governed by the Understanding; and (...) Act of the Will, which the
previous Reason (...) Understanding does not dictate and warrant* ^^llfulness;
which is justly held the Greatest ^^perfection Imaginable. Happiness therefore
(...) be sought for in the Best Perfection of the Understanding. Farther, the
Understanding is but a ^^^wer, and Act is better than Power; for it includes
(...), and adds to it the Acting or Exercise of it; ^^^ch is the Immediate End
for which the Power was ^^^n'd; Therefore Happiness must consist in some (...)
Perfect Act, of the Understanding. Wherefore, (...) Power and it is Acts taking
their Degree of Per^^^^ from the Clearness of the Sight, and from the ^^^llency
of the Object about which they are em^^^; and the Primum Ens being the most
Excellent Object; it follows, that the Beatitude of Man does (...) in the
Actual and Clear Knowledge of the First Being; which in Christian Language, is
the seeing GOD face to face, or in the Beatifical Vision.

Thus far their Speculative Thoughts raised them* But there were other
necessary Truths requisite er^ Man could be Happy, which were below their short
Reach. As, First, That this Contemplation of the First Being must also be most
Durable, or never* Interrupted, that is Everlasting; without which, the
Attaining it could be no Happiness; since the being Deprived of so Sovereign
and excellent an Object, after having enjoyed it, and known the Goodness of it
by Experience, must needs make them more miserable than they had been, had they
not known it at all. Secondly, It must be proposed to them as a State that is
Attainable, and therefore is to be Hoped for. For, let it be never so Gallant a
thing in it self, yet unless we could hope to come at it and enjoy it, what is
it to us, or how can it possibly be our Happiness? Thirdly, For want of holding
this Blissful State Attainable, and thence making us entertain some Hope of
enjoying it, we can never come to love it heartily; much less place our Chief
Affection on it, or bend our Best endeavors to pursue, or gain it. What Man
has a hearty Desire to climb to the Moon? And why not? Because he judges it
impossible, and beyond his Hope. Or what Virtuoso had ever an Effectual Love or
Wish to dig to the Center of the Earth, to make curious Observations of the
Rarities found there? And why, but because it is Hopeless and Impossible?
Wherefore, without holding the Possibility of the thing, it is impossible to aim
at it or intend it. Nay, it must be more than merely Possible; it must be
Hopeful too, or have some degree of Likelihood that it is within our Power ^^
compass it* otherwise none but a Frantic Man c^^ be moved heartily to pursue
it, much less to take off our Principal Affection from Temporal Goods, (the
^ableness of which, in some sort, to our Na^ we experience) and to place them
on Eternal (...) which we are not assured we can ever come to ^: And yet,
without this Predominant Affe^ for our True Happiness, we cannot (as has (...)
Demonstrated) be Disposed for it, or ever en^.

Behold here the utmost to which mere Natural Reason could raise Souls immerst
in Matter? Behold (...) most vigorous Efforts of Humane Knowledge, ^isted by
Superior Light had from Revelation; (...) how it falls short in three most
Necessary, and (...) Proper Dispositions, addicting Souls and fitting (...)
connaturally for the Sight of GOD, our only ^itude! No wonder then, the Wisest
among the ^ed Heathens, though Deum cognoverunt, non ^n sicut Deum honoraverunt.
No wonder, if ^fible Pleasures, Worldly Interest, and Consuetudo ^li, did
easily draw them, to run along with the ^; No wonder, present Temporal Goods
did ^ross* all their Choicest Affections; and left them ^ne for Unseen, Future,
and Unhop'd for Eter^ Happiness in the Sight of GOD. But it is the ^der of
Wonders, that those Deists, who hold their (...) survives, and that it is True
Bliss is to be placed (...) that Beatifical Vision, can, after so many thousand
^riences how short Nature falls of elevating us ^m at it, should still maintain
that there is no ^d of Revelation, and Supernatural Assistances; (...) so
wilfully blind, as not to see and acknowledge (...) Excellency of Christianity;
and how far it sur^ the Deepest Search and Highest Reach of ^atural Knowledge
and Human Philosophy.

For their sakes especially, and to make this Truth sink deeper into the Minds
of all our The Necessity of Divine Revelation farther shown.
Readers, we will give this Point a Second Review. All Mankind have, and ever
had, in their Thoughts the Notion of being Happy, since they all know the
meaning of the word [Happiness,] and that it means Perfect Satisfaction, or the
having all they could desire. It Is what every Man covets, either immediately or
ultimately, in all his Wishes; and pursues in all his Actions. But some sought
for this Happiness in some Temporal Good of this World, as Honor, Greatness,
Corporeal Pleasure, Riches, etc. Each of them vainly flattered themselves,
that, that Darling Object of their Affection once obtained, they should be
satisfied, and could wish no more. But, alas! All of them did by their carriage
confess, that after their most successful Acquisitions, they still remained as
Empty, Hungry, and Dissatisfied as formerly. Alexander, after all his fortunate
Victories, weeps that there are no more Worlds to Conquer; Unus Pellaeo iuveni
non sufficit orbis, etc.

One World sufficed not the Pellaean King;
The Unhappy Youth sweats in that narrow Ring.
The Miser, after he has hoarded up immense Banks of Money, is still Covetous
of laying up more: Crescit amor Nummi quantum ipsa pecunia cre^cit. Besides he
is racked with Care of securing it; and at length he dies Despairing, that he
cannot carry along with him his Shining Idol, which he had here so devoutly
Adored. Wanton Lais, when Age had crippled her feet and wrinkled her face, and
made her un^it for pleasure, laments that her holiday Trim ^^ short Imaginary
Happiness was but the Prologue to ^eal and never to be released Misery. And the
(...) may be said of all the other Worldlings, who (...) their Happiness in
some Temporal Good. Some (...) few Philosophers (as we showed above) did in^ by
their Reason gain some Glimpse of what (...) Man's True Happiness: But it was
no more (...) ^ Flash of Light, which disappeared and died (...) soon as their
Actual Speculation was over: They (...) laid fast hold of it; applied their
Will to it (...) True Good, raised their Hope to it, nor loved (...) pursued it
above all things; so that all their ^wledge of it ended in an Idle Talk, or
Airy ^m. But, Oh! The incomparable Philosophy Re^d to us by the Wisdom of the
Eternal Father! ^eanest Scholar of that Divine Master, can tell ^^ n^w, that
our True Happiness is not placed in the ^isition er Enjoyment of any Goods of
this Life, ^n a never-ending Contemplation of GOD's Es^ in the next. Nor does
Revelation only assure (...) where Happiness is to be found and hoped for;
(...) it acquaints us, moreover, with all the Methods (...) Ways how to attain
it. It gives us gratis, (...) assures to us, by well-attested Miracles, the
Truth ^ose Sublime Theses; which directs the Reason of ^lators, to show them
Agreeable to Natural Princi^ viz. to the Nature of a Soul, and her Affections;
(...) the Ground whence they spring, to the Nature of ^re Act, an Infinite
Being, and of Beatitude it (...) For the seeing clearly how Consonant and
^formable those High Mysteries are to Natural ^, does comfort Faith in those
Faithful; and (...) Unbelievers to an Opinion they are True, since they are (if
rightly explicated) no way Repugnant, (...) perfectly Agreeable to those
Verities, which Nature ^eaches us in gross, and Art demonstrates.

Perhaps, the last Corollary of the precedent Chapter may give some Readers
frightful Apprehensions, that a Christian That the Christian Life, is most
Comfortable, and the Unchristian most full of Anxiety.
Life is Melancholy and full of Anxiety. Indeed to those rechlest Souls* who
are resolved to mind and pursue nothing but idle Toys, and think nothing worth
their Affection but Fleeting and Perishable Goods, all Discourse of perfecting
the Soul as much as is possible, (in which consists her Complete Satisfaction
or Happiness) must needs be irksome and tedious: But to those Wiser Souls, who
think the Attaining or Falling short of Eternal Bliss is their main Concern,
and most worthy their Consideration, it will appear quite otherwise. What
Greater Joy, since we know we must die, and that our Soul survives for ever,
than to know where our Soul shall go to be Eternally Happy? What more solid
Comfort than* not only to have Assurance what is our True Last End or Felicity,
but to know also the Certain Way to attain it; and that that Way is Easy? For
what can be Easier, or more suitable to the whole Propension of our Nature, than
to love that above all things, which is infinitely worthy of our Whole
Affection for it is own sake; and, withal such, that the loving it will make us
Eternally Happy? What easier than to have a good Intention to pursue our own
Happiness, and to do nothing that can make us lose it; and, by losing in undo
our selves? Nothing can endanger our falling short of it, but that Sottish
Nonsense, and Ri^icul^us Madness, of preferring a Wretched, Indigent, Empty,
Perishable Creature, before our Great and infinitely Good Creator. Miserable
then, and justly most miserable They, who, through Neglect of considering what
GOD* is in Himself, and what he is to be to us, (...) for some Momentary and
Trifling Content, give (...) the Reins of their Reason to embrace such an
^avagant, Pernicious and Blasphemous Folly!

Nor let our daily Failings deter us. The rich ^-house of most efficacious
Motives left to us in (...) Christian Church, and proposed by Her, will, if
(...) regard them, and listen to them, very easily ^rve us from such a Wicked
Slighting of our (...) GOD, our Father, Redeemer, Sanctifier, and (...)
Bountiful Benefactor, as to prefer a poor Crea^ a Thing next to Nothing, before
his every way ^nitely perfect Deity. Now, that Point secured, (...)
By-Affections are already in some sort Subordinate (...) Prevalent Affection
for our Eternal and Spirit Good; and therefore, may easily, if care be taken,
^ally subdued to that Sovereign and Predominant (...) of Heaven; especially,
when Death comes, ^^ich sets all these Worldly Baubles in a true Light, (...)
shows them in their own fading Colors, it will (...) ^e at all hard to shake
off those weak Fetters: ^^e Sacraments usually received at that Season, re^ing
the Soul; and the Assistance of a Prudent ^^iritual Guide, directing our whole
Intention for ^even, and erecting our Hope to obtain it immedi^y. Now, when the
Soul is thus perfectly set ^ut, our whole work is at an end for Time and ^ity;
and our Glorious Reward waits ready for us. ^deed, the Purifying our Souls to
this refined de^ must cost us some labor; but how Unreasonable (...) to think,
that to enter certainly and immediately (...) Endless Happiness, is not worth
some Pains^ing? Especially, if we consider, that Worldlings ^d Libertines, though
they put on a Jolly Countenance ^idst their False Pleasures here, do suffer far
more Vexation by giving up the Reins to their unruly Pass^, than it costs Pious
Souls to curb and keep them Subject to Reason! Nor is our Indulgent Heavenly
Father mortally offended at every petty Failing of o^^s Ipse cognovit ^igmentum
nostrum, recordatus est quoniam pulvis sumus, Ps. 102. 14. He excuses s^^^ of
them for their Indeliberateness; others, because our Ghostly Enemy surpised
our short foresight by his wily Ambushes: Others of them are so weakened by a
Firm and Sincere Resolution to avoid and detest them* that upon our first
Recollecting our Christian Principles* they are in a moment Retracted; or
rather, they never sunk into the Substance of our Will, but only swam
superficially in our Fancy. Lastly, although (which his Mercy forbid) we should
hap to fall into some Grievous Offense; there needs no more but heartily to
retract our Fault, and to apply to our All-powerf^l Advocate in Heaven, with
full Hope in his Merits and Intercession; and the Syngrapha, or Black-Bill our
Condemnation is immediately cancelled; the Di^^ being abundantly paid by his
infinitely Superoga^ Death and Passion. These plain Truths being dul^
considered, what Life can be so sweet and full (...) Spiritual Joy as that of a
well-meaning Christi^ who sincerely regards his own True Interest, Eter^
Happiness? And, on the contrary, What Life so U^ comfortable as theirs, who
hold their Soul survi^ and must never return to enjoy her too-much belo^
Objects; and yet had no prospect, whether she must go^ what will become of her
for all Eternity.

But, Oh! What Tongue of M^ or Angels can express the Ravishin^ The
unexpressible Joy of Holy Souls at their First Entering into Bliss.
Transports of Joy which those Happy Souls feel when they are first admitted to
the Glorious Sight of that Infinite ^ Being, in whom all Goods that our
Boundless (...) can grasp at, are centered and emparadis'd? (...) my low
Conceits, you Blessed Spirits, to lisp out, (...) least, some faint Resemblance
of their Amazing ^ie, that so, I may excite my self and my Readers ^rdent Love
of that Blissful State. But I ask ^bles* For not even your selves, though you
expe^ it, are able to declare it; and, though you could (...) it, yet our
Rudeness could not understand the ^age of your Celestial Country, untravell'd
by us ^ls, and removed by a vast Chasm from our Ter^ Habitation. That B.
Apostle, who was rapt to ^hird Heavens, checks all such bold Attempts, by ^g
us, That Non licet homini loqui, that is, (...) Impossible for a Man to speak
those Unuttera^ Arcana Verba; though perhaps that signal favor (...) him at that
Season, was infinitely short of the ^ical Vision it self. It Is enough, that the
same (...) 1 Cor. 2. 9. has told us, That Eye has not (...) nor Ear heard, nor
has it ascended into the ^t of Man to conceive what God has prepared (...)
those who love him. It Is enough, That the ^nal Wisdom himself has assured us, (
Luke 6. 38.) ^st comprehensive words, strained to the highest ^osis, and
redoubled with a still-increasing Energy, (...) Good (or Full) Measure, pressed
close down, ^haken together to make the Vessel hold more, ^eapt up till it runs
over, shall they give into (...) Bosom. Nothing will be defalkt from the ^t
Satisfaction we shall experience when we come ^ve our Rich Reward, by
Antecedent and Over^g Expectation; as it happens in our False ^s here; which we
do oft-times, or rather always ^ncy. It will be inconceiveably beyond all we
^ld imagine; insomuch, that though we had spent our whole Life in sharpest
Tortures here for Heaven's sake, we shall be astonished and Amazed at the
Infinite Over-proportion which such Unspeakable and Eternally secure Bliss
bears to such slight and momentary Sufferings.

Bright Fountain of Eternal Light, whose ever-Noon-day Rays no Night darkens,
no Gloud (but that of Sin) eclipses. Give us Grace to sink deep and fix
steadily in our Mind this most Solid, most Clear, and most Important Truth;
that, as to live for ever in a dark Dungeon would be highly Disastrous to our
Bodily Sight, and the seeing the Cheerful Rays of the Day, is the only true
Perfection, Comfort, and Satisfaction of our Corporeal Eye: So, when our Soul,
now Separate, comes to be altogether one Intellectual Eye; her falling short
for ever of seeing thy Divine Essence, (her only True Light, for which, as her
Last End, she was Created) will certainly plunge her in a Dismal Hell of
Torment and Misery; Since Nothing but the Clear Sight of thy Glorious Being can
be able to give her True and Eternal Happiness; in whose Face is the Fullness
of Joy, and at thy right hand Pleafures for evermore, Psalm 16. 11.

CHAP. II. Of the Existence, Knowledge, Distinction, and Action of ANGELS.
1. THE Order of Things requires that there should be Different Kinds of
Entitles, arising gradually to Higher Perfection under the Notion of The Order
of the Universe requires that there should be different Kinds of Beings.
Ens. For, since, were all Things of the same pitch of Perfection, or all of
One Sort, the Creation would look like a Confused Multitude, or (as it were) a
Heap of Things, and quite destitute of Order; which, by placing them in Due
Ranks of Superiority and Inferiority, makes up this Harmony which beautifies
the World. Again, since there can be no Distinction, nor, consequently, any
Ground of Order under the Notion of Ens, but it must be made by Intrinsecal
Differences, or such as are found within the Precincts of that Line; that is,
(as is Demon^^rated in my METHOD to Science, B. I. L. 3. ^^. 1. 2. etc.) by
Partaking More and Less of that Common Notion; and, what has More of it,
^ontains what has Less, and superadds to it; and, ^^^^quently, is more perfect
under that Notion (...) the other; which several or Distinct Degrees ^f
Perfection, when they come to be Excessive, ^o constitute diverse Sorts, Kinds
or Species of it* ^^s; therefore, Evident, out of the Order of the World, which
is the Workmanship of the First Being; and is also Logically Demonstrated, that
it is Requisite there should be Different Kinds of Things, arising Gradually to
higher Perfection under the Notion of Ens. This is seen almost to our Eye in
the Predicamental Scale of Substance; where we find the several kinds of Ens
gradually Descending in one of the Collateral Lines, as to the Extent of their
Notion; but Increasing or Ascending as to their Degrees of Perfection; v. g.
Body, Mixed, Vegetable, Sensitive, Rational. Which Orderly Distinction is not
invented by us, (as are the imaginary Lines in the Heavens put by Astronomers,)
but Copied from Nature.

2. Hence follows immediately and necessarily without Proof, that there ought,
a fortiori, to be Pure Acts, or ANGELS, And much more, that there should be
Pure Acts or ANGELS.
Created, unless they be Incapable of Being; that is, Chimerical, or Non-Entia.
Otherwise the Order of Entities had been Maimed and Imperfect in its Principal
or most Noble Part.

3. The Angelical Essence is Capable of having Existence given it. For, since
the reason why Individual Bodies have Especially since the Angelical Nature is
Capable of Existence.
Title to have Existence given them, is, because, by their peculiar Complexion
of Accidents, they are become Distinct from all others, or Determinate under
the Notion of such an Ens, o^ Body; and this Distinction or Determination
springs from it is Act or Form; and, consequently, the Act, which gives
Determinations to all others, cannot but be Determinate it self; a forti^^^,
the Nature or Essence of a Pure Act bears in it is Notion, that it is of it is
own Nature, or Essentially, Determinate in the Line of Ens; and more Capable of
Existence than any other sort of Ens whatever. Again, since (as was shown, Book
I. ^^. 1.. 6.) the Essence of all Einite Entities consists in their Possibility
or Non-Repugnance to Existence; and, there can be no shadow of Impossibility,
but much more Reason, that the Nature of a Pure Act should exist, than that
Bodies should, that have Matter or Power in them, which i^ of it self the
Principle of Indetermination and Confusion; in regard this Indetermination
makes Bodies less fit for Existence; or rather, did not the Act determine the
Power, or Matter, utterly Unfit. Wherefore, seeing it belongs to the First
Being to give to his Creatures what they are Capable of; especially when it
consists with the Best Order of the World, as is shown. 1. this does: It
follows, that he has given to that Nature or Essence which is a Pure Act, that
is, to the Angelical Nature, to Exist; and, consequently, ANGELS are. Which is
farther Demon^^rated by the following Medium, showing that, otherwise, there
had wanted a Proper or Immediate ^^^se of Motion.

4. Every Thing acts it is: Wherefore Imperfect Agents do produce first that
part of the Effect which is Imperfect, And that otherwise there could be no
Immediate Cause of Motion.
and thence proceed to what is (...) perfect; as we see all Natu^^^ Agents do:
But, Perfect Agents, and most especially, that Agent which is (...) Perfect,
produces first that Effect which is most Perfect, or most Like* it self.
Wherefore the First and Immediate Effect produced by GOD is Existence, it being
the most perfect of any thing found in Creatures. To proceed, Since nothing is
more Preposterous, and contrary to Reason, than to order that which is most
perfect, as a Means to produce that which is Less-perfect, it follows that
GOD's Wisdom does not order Existence, which, (as being most Actual) is most
perfect of any thing found in Creatures; it does not, I say, order It, as a
Means to cause any thing that is less perfect, than it self is. Wherefore,
whatever less perfect Effect is produced by GOD, (as Motion is) it must either
have been caused by him, because it is necessarily concomitant to Existence, or
else necessarily consequent to it: But Motion is neither necessarily
Concomitant nor Consequent to Existence: For, let us put diverse Bodies to be
Created in Rest, (as they must be in the First Instant they were Created, ere
Motion began) they would have* in that Case, all that is requisite to
Existence; nor would Motion follow merely upon their being put to Exist.
Therefore, some other Cause is requisite to produce the First Motion of Bodies.
Which since it can neither be a Body, as is granted, and indeed, in a manner
Self-evident; nor GOD, as was now proved; nor a Separated Soul, for this
presupposes the Motion of Bodies to her Being; it must be some other Cause
distinct from all these: But no other Cause is imaginable or possible to be
assigned, but some Creature which is a Pure Act, or an Angel. Therefore, as
certain as it is, that there is Motion* so certain it is that Angels are. Nay,
so impossible it is, that Motion can be Concomitant to the First Existence of
Bodies, that it is a Contradiction they should be together in Duration, or at
once; For, Existence, it having ^^ parts, is Indivisible in Duration, or
without part after part; whereas it is Essential to Motion to be part after
part, or Successive. So that it is equally Contradictory, that Existence should
not be all at once, as it is, that Motion should be all at once, so far is the
Later from being Consequent or Concomitant to the Former.

5. This is farther Demonstrated from the Nature of Causality, by this
Argument. No Effect can proceed As is also Demonstrated from the Nature of all
Causality.
immediately from a Cause which is of a Nature diametrically Opposite to such
an Effect. V. g. Notbeing cannot produce Being; Light cannot produce Darkness;
not can that which is essentially ^^^ immediately produce Cold. But Motion,
which is essentially Successive, or (which is the same) perpetually Changing,
is diametrically Opposite to the Nature of GOD whose Essence is Unchangeable
Existence: Therefore Motion cannot be produced by GOD as it is Immediate Cause.
Wherefore, since by our former Discourse, the ^^^ Motion of Bodies could not
have been immediately produced, either by any mere Body, ^o^ by a Human Soul,
nor yet by GOD; it is (...) that it could only be caused by a Pure Act, ^^ an
Angel. See Method to Science, Page 299. ^^^^^s 4. Ideae Cartesianae, P. 44..
31. and Rail^^^ Defeated,. 43. where this Demonstration is ^^ large put down,
and pressed home. What I ^^^tend for here, is, that the Contrary Tenet ^^erthrows
all Likeness of the Cause and Effect, ^^d all Causality; and therefore all
Connection of Proper Causes with their Proper Effects, and Vice Versa; that is,
it quite destroys all Possibility of Science and Demonstration.
Notwithstanding, it is Granted, that GOD is the Mediate, Remote, or Principal
Cause of Motion; as giving Second Causes both the Power to move Bodies, and
Pre-moving or Determining them to move them.

6. Every more perfect Ens contains or includes in it the Nature of the less
perfect. Thus, (as was said) the Every more perfect Ens includes in it the
Nature of the less perfect.
Nature of a Mixed or Compound Body (having diverse Elements in it; and
therefore having more of the Nature of Body than a Simple Body, or any one
Element has) includes in it the Nature or Essence of a Simple Body. Thus, and
for the same reason, a Vegetative Mixed, has more of the Nature of a Mixed in it,
than a meerly-Mixt, such as are Pebbles, Clay, Gold, or such like. Thus
Sensitive Things include in them the Nature of a Vegetable; and every Rational
Animal includes in it the Nature of a mere Sensitive Thing or an Animal. All
which are Evident; because the Perfecter Ens has in it the Notion or Nature of
the Imperfecter, and superadds something to it. So that to deny the force of
this Demonstration, or the Truth it demonstrates, is the same Folly as to deny,
that what has more in it of any Kind does not contain in it what is Less of the
same Kind; or that, what is a Whole (in respect of the other) is not more than a
Part of it, or, (which is the same) that a Whole does not contain or include
it is Parts. And that they include them Essentsally, is most Evident to all
Logicians, and granted by all; while they acknowledge those Later or less
perfect Notions to be essentially predicated of the former, in regard they
superadd to them nothing that is Positive.

7. Wherefore, for the same Reason, Every Pure Act, Spirit, or Angel, includes
in it self, one way or And therefore Pure Acts contain in them the Nature of
Body.
other, the whole Nature of Body. For, since Ens is adequately divided into
Pure Acts, or Spirit and into those Entities whose Essences are alloy'd with
Power and Potentiality, (as are Bodies, which are compounded of Matter and
Form;) and these two Species are constituted, as by it is Intrinsecal
Differences, by partaking ^^^e and less of Ens, their Genus; and that which is
more in any Kind or Respect, includes what is Less in the same respect; as a
Yard in Quantity contains an Inch, which is Less under that Notion, or a Lesser
Quantity. Hence, it follows demonstratively, that the self-same Discourse must
equally hold in the Species of Ens, as it does in those of Quantity now
mentioned; or in the Species of any other Genus; and, consequently, that a Pure
Act, or Spirit, must include some way or other, the whole Nature of Body, which
has less of the Nature of Ens in it, than had the other.

8. Wherefore the very Essences of all Natural Bodies are really and truly
contained Which, since it cannot be done by the manner of Quantity, they must
contain them by the way of Knowledge.
in the Knowledge of an Angel, and not their Ideas or Similitudes only. For,
since it is granted, that Angels, they being Pure Acts, are of an Indivisible
Nature or void of Quantity; the Essences of Bodies, which by. 7. are one way or
other, contained or included in an Angel, cannot be included in it
Quantitatively; after the manner a Vessel contains Liqu^ur, or as a Bigger Box
contains a Lesser. Wherefore, it must be said, that those Lesser Essences of
Body are contained in the Superior Essence of an Angel Indivisibly; or after
the manner of a Spirit, that is, Knowingly, or as Objects of their Knowing
Power; which was the Point to be Demonstrated.

9. Wherefore, he who denies, that the very Essences of Bodies are in the
Understanding of an Angel, or, in Therefore the very Essences of Bodies are in
a Spiritual Understanding, and not Idea's or Similitudes only.
any Spiritual Nature, and affirms, that only the Similitudes of them are
there; may, as well say, the Essences or Natures of Simple Bodies are not in
Mixts; or that the Essences of mere Vegetatives are not in Sensitive Things or
Animals; or that the Essence of an Animal is not really in a Rational Thing or
a Man, but Likenesses only; which is both against the Sentiments of all
Logicians in the world, who do acknowledge that the Former are Essential
Predicates of the Later, (and not Accidental ones;) which could not with Truth
be said, unless the Essences themselves, from which the Denomination of [
Essential] is taken, were really in them: Nay, it is moreover, against the
Definitions of these Later, in which those Former are found. I add, against the
Sense of all Mankind too, who reflect upon what they say. Whence, those
Ideists, who hold the contrary Opinion, are desired to take notice that our
Argument here is drawn from the Notion of the Thing, as it is a Thing or
^^^tance; and from the Nature of the Species of ^^, as such; and not from the
Qualities or Relations of them, from whence their Likeness or Un^^^ness is
taken. Which clinches the force of our demonstration drawn from Logic and
Metaphysics, and will forestall and defeat all the Op^^ion that can be made
against it.

10. Corollary I. Our foregoing Discourses being chiefly built on that piece of
Doctrine in my Method, This Doctrine being built on that Logical Maxim, [All
Differences are more and less of the Generical Notion,] The Consideration of
that Thesis is recommended to the Reader.
B. I. L. 3,. 2. that all Intrinsecal or Essential Differences in any
Predicament, or under whatever Notion, are nothing else but More and Less of
that Notion; therefore, since so much stress is put upon this Thesis, I beg of
my Readers to peruse attentively the Third Chapter of my Method to Science; my
Ideae Cartesianae Expensae, Page 51, 52, 53. and Raillery Defeated,. 72. where
this Position is at large explicated and defended against the Mistakes of my
Opposers. Which I do the rather Request, because, however it may seem New, yet
I dare affirm, that, besides it is being perfectly Demonstrable, no one Rule in
Logic is more Useful to keep our Notions Distinct, or to frame Right
Definitions, or to Discourse solidly or exactly.

11. Corollary II. What Is deduced here of the very Essences of things being
intellectually, or as Objects, in the This holds equally in the Soul, which is
of a Spiritual Nature.
Understanding of an Angel does for the same reason hold in every Spiritual or
Cognoscitive Nature; and consequently, in the Soul, whether in the Body, or
Separated* the Argument being grounded on the Nature of a Spirit; and it is
being Superior to the Nature of Body.

12. Corollary III. For the same reason what has been discourst before of the
Angels, being Pure Acts, are Immutable.
Immutability of a Soul, while Separated, and of her Final or Eternal State,
(springing from her Choice of a wrong Last End, if unretracted before Death)
may, Mutatis M^tandis, be applied to an Angel, without needing Repetition, or
farther Enlarging upon it.

13. Since the Essence or Nature of an Angel is to be after such a manner
Cognoscitive, the Distinction of Angels The Distinction of Angels is taken from
their being more or less Cognoscitive, after their manner.
must consist in their being more or less thus Cognoscitive This is already
Demonstrated; because, by the Doctrine lately given, all the Intrinsecal, or
Essential Differences, under whatever Kind or Notion, are nothing but more or
less of the Common Notion, or the partaking of it unequally.

14. Yet this Degree of Cognoscitiveness, which ^^^^itutes Distinct Angels,
must This is not to be understood of the greater Extent of their Knowledge, but
of the Intenseness, or Penetrativeness of it.
understood of the Intenseness ^ their Knowledge, or the Penetrativeness of
their Knowing Po^^. For, since every Pure Act ^^is shown above, and particu^^^
Raillery Defeated, P. 89, 90.) ^^ws All things; it cannot be understood of the
Extent of their Knowledge, or that one of them knows a Greater Number of things
than Another; It must therefore be meant, ^^ One of them knows things more
perfectly, ^^^ clearly, thoroughly, or deeply, than Another ^^^. Which, as may be
seen in my Ideae Cartesianae, P. 68, 69. may spring from two Causes. O^*
Because, Eorum aliqui magis perspica^i Intel^^^ acie praediti sunt quam alii;
which seems ^^ be most Essential to them. The Other, Because by their seeing
better the First Cause it self, they must better, and withal more solidly and
^^^ndedly, know those Effects that spring ^^^m that Supreme Cause.

15. Corollary IV. From this Greater or Lesser Excess of Knowledge, as thus
explicated, as far as Natural Hence, as far as Reason carries us, is taken the
Distinction of the Three Hierarchies, and Nine Quires of Angels.
Reason carries us, are taken the Diverse Orders of Angels. All farther or more
particular Disquisition concerning the Three Hierarchies, and Nine Quires of
Angels, is left to Divines, gathering them from Holy Writ and the Ancient
Mysticks. A Philosopher must step no farther than he can tread sure upon his
own Firm Grounds.

16. Corollary V. From our Discourse about Human Souls and Angels will be seen
in what different manner, The different manner by which Angels and Human Souls
come to have all their Knowledge.
and by what means, an Angel, and a Humane Soul, when Separate, come to know
all things. The Later, by Notions, caused at first by Impressions on the
Senses, and improved into Judgments and Discourses. The Former, by Knowledge,
not Acquired, but Innate. The First and Immediate Objects of both of them is
Themselves or their own Essence: Whence a Soul, in regard it is Body (and,
consequently, the Determination of the Degree of Rationality it had) grew, as
it were, out of Natural Causes; knows all things, as first Connected with her
self, then with one another in the well-linkt Chain of those Causes; in which
there can be no Flaw or Interruption. But an Angel knows all Things, by
Transcending from one Ens or one Degree of Entity to another, and this
Intuitively; that is, an Angel by knowing it self, knows what place it bears in
the Order of Angels or Spirits: And, since it could not know it is own
particular pitch or Individuality, but by knowing how high or low it is in the
Order of Angelical Beings; nor could this be known but by knowing the whole
Order, because in an Order which is contrived after the best manner, each part
is proportioned in exact Symmetry to the rest: Hence, the Knowledge of that
whole Order, and consequently of each part of it, or each Entity in the whole
Creation, is Due to it is Nature; and, therefore is given it. As for the
Knowledge of Corporeal Nature, it is below them both, and therefore both of them
comprehends it Knowingly, as is deduced above. Lastly, The Soul gains her
Knowledge by Abstract or Inadequate Notions, and by Discourse; whereas an Angel
knows at once the Whole Entities, and all that belongs to them; and this, not
by Discourse or Reflex Thoughts; but by a Direct, Penetrative and Comprehensive
Intuition.

17. There is, besides those Differences amongst Angels mentioned,. 13. 14. and
C^roll. V. Another, arising from These Angels have a Nobler Essence, whose each
Act of Knowledge has for it is Object a Greater Portion of the Universe.
the several Degrees or rather Manners of that Cognoscitiveness which is
Essential to them, viz. That some of them know more things by One Operation or
Act of Knowledge, or, as it were, by one Thought, than Another does; which
happens because the Object of each Thought which some of them have, is more
Universal than are the Objects of those Thoughts that others have Parallels of
which may be found among our several Sorts of Knowers or Philosophers here.
Some treat of such particular Sorts of Quantities or Figures; Others, of
Quantity or Figure in their whole Latitude, or i^ Common. Some Philosophers
have for the Objects of their Knowledge such a sort of Ens; as Minerals, or
such a Species of Birds or Beasts: Others, raise their Thoughts to contemplate
Body or Ens in their whole Extent, as do Metaphysicians. But, with this
difference, which renders them Unparallel, that our Science is employed about
Abstract Notions of the Thing; that is, about the Thing considered in such an
Abstracted or Common Respect, without descending to the Under-Kinds or to the
Individuums under it; whereas, the Intuitive Knowledge of an Angel, as not
being made by way of Abstract or Inadequate Conceptions, comprehends in one
Act, or at once, the Individualities of all those Things, (from which We
abstract one Common Notion) and all that belongs to them. Whence, when we said*
that the Generical Notion, common to all Angels, is to be Cognoscitive, it is
to be understood of an Intuitive Cognoscitiveness, or such a one as we have
described above; by which they are distinguished from the Inferior or Narrower
Degree of Knowingness peculiar to the Soul in this State; and even, in some
respect, as she is found in her State of Separation.

18. The same is evinced by Reason. For, since the Object speci^ies the Act,
and the Excellency of the Act Which makes them fit to superintend the
Administration of a Larger Province.
argues a more excellent Faculty or Power, and consequently, a more Excellent
Degree of the Essence or Nature of the Acter; and, since Bonum, (I add [
Verum,] this being the Best and most Connatural Good of a Knowing Creature) quo
Communius eo Divinius! It follows, that the Essence of those Angels are more
Excellent and Noble, who have a more Comprehensive and Larger Knowledge of more
Universal Objects, at once, or by one Act; whence it comes that (since
Reflection or Deliberation can have no place in Pure Acts, but are contrary to
their Nature) they are fitted for the Overseeing more-Common Goods, or to
preside over the Spiritual Good of Provinces, Kingdoms, or great Nations of
People.

19. Corollary VII. That which gives greater force to this Doctrine, is the
Consonancy it has to the How Consonant this is to those Passages of the Holy
Scripture, which speak of such Operations of Angels.
Sacred Scripture: Where, ( Daniel, Chapter 10.) we read of the Angel of the
Kingdom of Persia, withstanding that particular Angel (in likelihood Gabriel)
who presided over the Jews; till Michael, who was Higher in Dignity than the
former, being Chief Patron and Defender of the Jewish Church then, as he is
held to be of the Christian Church now, overpowered his Inclination by his
more Sovereign Influence. Where also we read of the Angel who was Prince or
Super-intendent over the Greeks; diverse of which sort, if not all, were
Archangels: Whereas it is generally held, and is Consonant to Reason, That the
Angel-Guardians of Particular or Individual Persons are of the Lowest, and
least-Cognoscitive, Quire of mere Angels.

Thus far concerning the Essence and Internal Operations of Angels; We proceed
now to their External Operation, or their Action upon other Things.

20. An Angel cannot operate upon another Angel, so as to make it otherwise
than it was. For, since that An Angel cannot operate upon another Angel so as
to change it.
Operation must work some new Effect in it; and this requires some Passive
Principle, in the Subject, rendering it Mutable, which Principle we call Matter:
And Angels, they being Pure Acts, have not that sort of Power called Matter in
them; it follows, that an Angel cannot thus operate upon another Angel; nor,
for the same reason, upon a Soul, while it is Separate.

21. Wherefore, all such External Operation of an Angel can be only upon
Bodies. For, since an Angel can neither Wherefore, all it is External Operation,
so as to work a Change in another thing, can only be upon Bodies.
thus operate upon, that is, alter another Angel, nor a Separated Soul, because
they are Pure Acts; much less GOD, who is an Infinitely Pure Act, and
essentially Immutable; and there is no other Subject imaginable; it follows,
that the External Operation of Angels must either be exercised on Bodies, or on
Nothing.

22. An Angel can operate upon Material Entititles, or on Body. For, since the
Being of an Angel is Superior An Angel can thus operate upon Material
Entities, or Bodies.
to the Nature of Body; and, consequently, it is Faculty or Power of Acting is
Superior to whatever is in Body that can resist it is Activity: Also, since*
being a Pure Act, it is Nature is Active. Wherefore, seeing, on the other side,
Matter is easily, or rather essentially Passive; and there can want no
Application of such an Agent to such a Patient, because an Angel has the
Natures or Essences, nay, the Existences of Bodies, and all that can belong to
them, intimately joined to their Understanding by Knowledge of them: It Is
Evident that there are all the Requisites imaginable put for their Operating
upon Body, and producing some Effect in it, which was not in it before; that
is, of Changing it. Wherefore, an Angel has Power to Operate this upon Body or
Material Nature. Nor is there any Disproportion between the Motion which the
Angel works in Bodies, and such an Immediate Cause, as was shown,. 5. is
between GOD and such an Effect; since, as has been shown, Method to Science, B.
I. L. 8.. 2. Motion, according to it is precise Nature, or as it superadds to
it is Subject, is as it were made up of Non-Entities, or next to nothing; and
every Created Being, as to what it has of it self, is such: All the Essential*
Distinction between Creatures, and consequently their Formal Constitution being
only such and such Limitations of Being; or more and less, that is, thus much
and no more of Entity.

23. Advertisement. Let it be noted, that what (...) intend to evince here, is
con^'d That we only intend to evince here the An Est of the Operation of an
Angel, and not the Manner how it is performed.
to the Question An est; or, ^o demonstrate that Angels have Power to move
Bodily Nature; ^od not to show How, or in what ^articular Manner, they work
this effect. To clear which Point, requires a perfect and penetrative Knowledge
of the Angelical Nature; which is perhaps Unattainable by us in this State.

24. Notwithstanding what is said, no One Angel has an Unlimited Power to move,
or change, all the Bodies Yet no one Angel has an Unlimited Power to operate
thus on all Bodies whatevee.
in the World. For, since the Natures of Spirit and Body are constituted by
their Partaking More and Less of Ens; and, more and less do manisestly
signify, only Degrees of the Nature of Ens in Common, from whence their Power
over another is taken, and on which it is entirely and adequately grounded; and
what exceeds another only in some Degree, does only exceed it Finitely,
Limitedly, and in some Proportion: It follows, that however the whole*
Angelical Nature, or some considerable Part of it, may have Power to work upon,
or alter, the whole Mass of Material Beings; yet a Single Angel, being but one
Individual of it, and, consequently, inconsiderable in comparison of the Whole,
though it may change some Part or Parts of it; yet, it is Activity, (which
consists in it is Addiction to do that Effect, or in it is Act of Voliti^^, and
not in it is bare Knowledge of it) is stinted to a certain Proportion of Matter;
according to the Greater or Lesser Excellency of it is Essence; from which it is
Activity springs, and to which it goes parallel.

25. An Angel can easily, and in an Impercepti^ Time, order and alter that
Quantity An Angel can move or change those Bodies which are
of Matter, or those Bodies that are within the Bounds of it* Activity; which
generally speaking, are only those which it superintends; an^ also those
material Causes, which are requisite as fit Instruments for Holy Angels, to do
Men Good or Protect within the Sphere of it is Activity, in an imperceptible
Time.
them; or for Bad Angels to do them Harm or Punish them; as suits best with
GOD's Mercy or justice. For, since all Motion proceeds from Angels as Second
Causes; and that, by knowing all Nature Intuitively, their Knowledge reaches
not only to the Subject or Patient which is to be altered, but to every
imaginable circumstance, either belonging to the said Patient, or to those
Material Agents, which being applied, are proper to work upon them: It follows,
that this, alone, must needs wonderfully facilitate the Effect. Again, since
those Acts of the Angel's Will, which were the Efficient Causes of Altering
those Bodies, were, of themselves* Instantaneous: It follows, that though the
Nature of the Patient, which is Material or Quantitative, would not permit the
Effect or Change to be put, by a ^ite Power, in an Instant; yet all imaginable
Requisites do concur to produce in it such, or as little, a Time as the perfect
Subjection of the Patient can bear, and as the Activity of the Agent, which
acts, on it is part Instantaneously, requires; that is* in a very Imperceptible
Time. And accordingly, (1 Cor. 15. v. 51, 52.) the Holy Scripture tells us,
that the Change of those Bodies which survive at the Resurrection, from a
Corruptible to an Incorruptible Condition, (the ^rangest Change Matter can
possibly bear!) will be made in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, that is,
in the least time we are able to conceive.

26. Corollary VIII. Whence, it being so consonant to the Natures of Things,
Hence the Wonderful Effects, recorded in Holy Writ to have been done by Angels,
are Consonant to Metaphysical Principles.
viz. to the Activity of Angels, and to the Passiveness of Matter, our mere
Naturalists need not wonder, that the Prophet Habbacuc was carried so suddenly
( Dan. 14. 35.) by an Angel, impetu Spiritus sui, as the Scripture expresses it
to Daniel in the Lion's Den at Babylon, (a place unknown to the Prophet, and
therefore very far off,) so quickly; which can scarce be conceived possible to
be done so suddenly, without strangely disordering, and even killing him,
without taking from the Air all power of Resistance. Nor need it be wondered
at, that a Light shone so suddenly in St. Peter's Prison; nor that his Chains
fell off, and that the Iron-Gate opened to them of it is own accord, (Act. 12.)
nor that all the Guards were stupify'd with a dead Sleep. Nor that Angels so
suddenly make to themselves a Body of Air to appear in* and as suddenly
disappear again; Nor, at many other such like Effects, related in Holy Writ.
None of these, I say, ought to appear Wonderful to any Solid Philosopher who
attends to his Principles, and True Reason. For, since the Motion of Body (and
therefore all Action) springs from Angels as the Immediate Causes; their
Activity upon Bodily Substances, so Inferior t^ them, must needs be very
Sovereign and Powerful. Nor is there any thing in the whole Discourse, or in
any of these an^ such like Particular Actions, which does not subsist upon
Solid Grounds, and is not built upon, and is consonant to, Evident Principles
of Reason.

27. Corollary IX. From what has been deduced formerly, we may Collect, as most
Agreeable to Rational That the Ordinary Ministering Spirits or the Guardian
Angels of particular Persons are the Lowest sort of Angels.
Principles, that those Angels, or Ministering Spirits, who, by their Office are
to work upon Matter; and are, with good reason, hold to be those of the lowest
Quire; and, particularly, the Angel Guardians, should, at the General
Resurrection be employed in Changing the Mass of preexistent Matter (for we
cannot think Creation begins anew when the World is near an end) into Human
Bodies; fitted according to the respective Dispositions of the Holy and the
Wicked Souls; as is seen, ( Mat. 13.) where the Harvest is said to be the
Resurrection, and the Angels the Reapers, gathering the good Seed to be
eternally preserved; and the Tares to be burnt: We may hence also* clearly
gather, that the Chief Overseeing that Grand Affair belongs to the Superior
Influence of an Archangel; signified Metaphorically, (1 Thessal. 4. 15.) by
the Voice of an Archangel, and his Trumpet, blowing to summon the Dead to
appear before Christ's Dread Tribunal. Which, understood literally, is the
putting them, or making them to appear in their Distinct Ranks according to
their several Merits or Demerits, that Christ may judge them by discriminating
the Sheep from the Goats; that is, by Beatifying the Former, and Establishing
them in Sanctity, and, the Reward of it, Glory; and the Later (as the Nature of
their State requires) unchangeably in Sin, and consequently, Damnation; as is
emphatically expressed in our Saviors Words, ( Apoc. 22. 11.) He that is Unjust,
let him be Unjust still; and he that is Filthy, let him be Filthy still; and he
that is Righteous, let him be Righteous still; and he that is Holy, let him be
Holy still. Which Final Sentence forbids and precludes to the Damned, all hope
of Change, or fruitful Repentance; and fixes them Unalterably, and for ever in
their Sinful State, and consequently in Eternal Death, which is the Reward, and
Connatural Effect or Fruit of Sin. Whence also we see the reason of that severe
Saying, Ex inferno nulla Redemptio; and why their Bad and Unchangeable
Affections, which so strongly detain them there, are called Rudentes Inferni, 2
Pet. 2* 4.

28. Corollary X. For the reason given above, all the Affairs of very High
moment are said to be done by But the Greater and Weightier Affairs are
transacted by Archangels. ^
an Archangel. Thus Michael made head against Lucifer, and subdued him. Thus
Gabriel, the Archangel, was the Messenger of the Incarnation. Nor can it be
doubted but the Head of those Angels which gave the Law on Mount Sina, as is
written, Acts 7. 38. and v. 53. was of the same Dignity: Nor that those
Intelligences which give and continue Motion to the Matter of ours, and of all
the other, Suns, (if that opinion may be allowed which holds all the Fixed
Stars to be so many Corpora per se lucentia, or so many Suns) are all of them
of the same high Excellency; since upon that Motion, given by them, every
single Action of all the Bodies throughout the vast Regions, which those
Luminaries do enlighten and influence, does wholly depend.

29. From the Unchangeable Nature of a Pure Act, or an Angel, which we have
Demonstrated above, it is The Lower Angels received Intellectual Light from the
Superior in the same Instant they were Created.
evidently Deduced, that whatever Intellectual Light the Inferior Angels, did
(as was most Requisite and Fit) receive from the Superior ones, was imparted to
them as soon as they were, or was Co-aeve to their Being. This is evident from
the Immutability of a Pure Spirit, and needs no farther Proof; since, if they
had any thing anew, they must have been Changed.

30. It Is likewise Evident, That, since every Angel did comprehend all Material
Nature, and consequently, every least circumstance of it; they did from In what
manner the Good Angels perform the Will of their Maker without New Instructions.
the very Creation, (as far as was on their part) stand over Ready and Bent
with their Will to act upon Matter, in such precise junctures, and in that very
manner, in which, and according to which, they knew they were by the Divine
Appointment, to exert their Active Power; without needing any New Motive, or
any New Change fitting or Disposing them to act hic and nunc. This follows
manifestly from the same Principle. Wherefore the Resistance of one Angel to
another, and such like Expressions, neither ought, nor need, be so interpreted
as to a gue their Ignorance of what they were to do, Defeat of their
Intentions, or Opposition to one another Will; but in the plain obvious Sense,
as when we use to say, [I had gone about such a Business, but that such Causes
made me see it was impracticable, or imprudent to attempt it; or, I could not
come till it had done Raining.] So that it was a Natural Opposition, (as it
were) and not a Moral on; which is between the Good Angels. For Example: The
Angel of the Princ^ of Persia had a desire to do the Persians all the good he
could, (it being his Province and Duty) which was to keep the Jews there still;
by which means the Persians might better learn the Knowledge of the true GOD.
And the Angel of the Jews desired to deliver them from Captivity, that so they
might serve GOD and observe the Law better in their own Country. These were the
particular Inclinations of each of them, all other Considerations being
Abstracted or set aside. GOD had prefixed a determinate time of their
Deliverance, and of comforting Daniel in the Interim. Both of them knew GOD's
Will and submitted to it. Yet the Angel of Persia acting for his Province, and
detaining the Jews till the prefixed time came, was the reason why the Jewish
Angel could not, till that time came, act for their Deliverance: Whereas, had
there been another state of things, and had not he obviated the particular
propension of the Jewish Angel, he had sooner assisted them, and come to Daniel.

31. From the Nature and Genius of Good and Bad Angels, and from this
consideration, that GOD's Wisdom That GOD makes use of Holy Angels to procure
our Good; and of Bad ones to afflict and punish Mankind, as His Divine Wisdom
sees Fitting.
makes use of the properest Instruments to perform his Will, we may conclude,
that, as he orders the Good Angels to protect, guide and inspire Pious Souls,
and procure their Good; so he sends, and orders, Bad and Malignant Spirits, his
Executioners, to inflict Punishments on Misdeservers; to do which, their
inveterate Malice to Mankind gives them most eager Propensions. As appears in
the Disasters which befell Job; and may also be collected from Psalm 78. 45.
Prove. 15. 11. Judges 9. 23. and Kings 22. 22. and diverse other Texts.

MEDITATION.
LET us now, my Soul, look down upon those Low and Despicable Essences, from
which we took our Rise; and we shall see to what By what means Metaphysics has
raised our Thoughts above the Sordid Mass of Matter, to contemplate the
A^gelical Nature.
an Unexpected Height we have climbed. Our Steps, were, indeed, all the way
Immediate; yet, it has cost us some panting Labor ere we could mount to the
Superior Region of Beings. We have transcended our own Essence, and wound our
selves up by the Connected Chain of our Reason, twisted of our Natural Notions,
as high as the Lower Story of Heaven; and gained some Acquaintance with those
Winged Inhabitants of it, the ANGELS; the Contemplation of whose Essences does
confine next upon that of the Adorable DEITY it self. We behold, with
Admiration, those Bright Beings; whose Understandings are gilded and
beautified with Pure Rays of Intellectual The surpassing Excellency of their
Intellectual Essences deciphered.
Light; streaming, together with their Essence, from the inexhausted Source and
Luminary of all Knowledge, Essential Truth. Nay, we can, moreover, take a
Steady View of their Eminent Nature without those Astonishing Ecstasies, which
so surprised Daniel, Esdras, and the Eagle-ey'd Evangelist himself. And,
notwithstanding, we see them all over bespangled with the most glittering
Truths; yet our Eyes, though weak, are not dazzled, nor our Thoughts distracted
with Fear and Horror, as were those others to whom they appeared. But it is,
because we see them at distance through the Dull Optic of our Natural
Speculation; not near at hand, nor clad in those Majestic Resemblances, which
they put on when they were to represent the great King of Glory, whose
Ambassadors they were.

Our Reason has ascertained us that there may and must be such Things as Pure
Acts or ANGELS: That being in the Climax of Entities, Superior to Bodies; they
do, therefore, Include and Comprehend in themselves, after their manner, (that
is, Knowingly,) the very Essences of Bodies, their Underlings. That, being
depur'd from that Passive Principle, Matter, and, withal, being the Immediate
Cause of all Motion, and, consequently, of all Action, in the Material World;
their Nature, is in the highest manner, Active; whence, they come necessarily
to be endowed with a Power to work upon Corporeal Nature, which is essentially
Passive; and this with an Incredible Celerity: Also, that being free from the
Alloy of Matter, the Principle of all Mutability, they are, of their own
Nature, Unchangeable. We have gained certain Light, how they are to be
distinguished into their several Ranks or Kinds; and that those Lower Sorts of
them, which are employed in the managing Material Nature, and procuring the
Good of Mankind, (for whose sake the Corporeal World was made,) have, as is
most sitting, Larger or Narrower Provinces assigned them; according to the
Dignity and Excellency of their Essences, to which their Power of Acting is
proportioned. We have seen how consonant to Reason those passages of the Holy
Scriptures are, which deliver to us narratively many Actions done, and Effects
produced, by those Administering Angels; and how we are to understand diverse
Places there, in which Sacred Writers accommodate themselves to our Rude
Fancies. Though GOD's Wisdom has laid Means for our Natural Knowledges in the
works of the Creation, yet it is below the Dignity of those Heaveninspir'd
Oracles, to teach us literally such Truths as belong to Philosophy; or to give
Reasons for every particular they mention: It Is Unworthy the Majesty and
Authority of the Divine Spirit that Endited them, to instruct us
Scientifically; as if no Credit or Belief were to be given to his Word,
signified How Faith has antecedently enlightened our Reason; and that it is our
Duty to Explicate and Defend it against the Empty Flourishes of the Drollish
Renouncers of Faith and Reason both.
to us by such Authentic Instruments writ by his Immediate Commission It Is
Favor enough that he has been pleased to give us some Conclusions, or acquaint
us with some Theses of a higher Nature, and to ascertain their Truth by
engaging his Infallible Veracity; and, that by means of our Industrious Study
he bestows upon us the Inferior and more Familiar Light of Scientifical
Knowledge, to explicate those Truths, by showing their Agreeableness to Evident
Principles of Nature; which the same GOD of Truth has also taught us, though not
so immediately; that so, we may comfort Faith and make it more Lively and
Operative in our selves, and others, as also, defend it against Opposers, and
confute by Solid Discourses the Fantastic Raillery of Ignorant Unbelievers;
who choose rather to mistrust their own Natural Notions than assent to any thing
that suits not with their Imagination; and are ready to renounce the best
Productions of their Reason reflecting upon Principles, than to allow any thing
to Faith; though the same Reason informs them, by a thousand Instances, that
nothing is more Unreasonable than such a restiff humoursomeness. So certain it
is, That No Man can be an Adversary to Faith, but he must, withal, be an Enemy
to True Science. If any Man complains, he is injured by this censure, I Will
heartily tell him how he may clear himself: Let him leave off his Witty Talk
and Loose Drollery; and, laying, first his Principles, draw thence, by
Connected Discourses, his Conclusions. This Method will have force upon Humane
Nature; whereas, when Truth is inquired after, Raillery satisfies no Man of
Sense, nor pleases any but Gigglers. But, alas! Their weak Cause forbids them
any such Manly Procedure. The very Attempting it will convince themselves, if
Candid, that it is impossible and impracticable; and, make them confess, (at
least by their carriage and ill performance) that they never followed the wise
Conduct of True Reason, but were deluded by the Folly of their Imagination.

But what Gratitude, what Acknowledgments do we owe to those Blessed Spirits,
for their ever-watchful care over us; for What Gratitude, Love and Veneration
we owe to those Blessed Ministering Spirits.
preventing our Heedlesness and want of Foresight from falling into a thousand
Mischances; for keeping us in all our ways, (Psalm. 90. 11.) For inspiring us
with good Thoughts, and pitching their Tents about us, to defend us from the
Assaults and Fiery Darts of our Ghostly Enemy? What Respect ought we to show
toward them for the Excellency rf their Nature, and their High Station in the
Created Universe? What Veneration for their Purest Sanctity, and for the Glory
they enjoy by being Attendants in GOD's Empyreal Court, and their seeing daily
the Unvailed and Blissful Face of our Father who is Heaven? Mat. 18. 10. Let us
then present them with our humble thanks for their Sollicitons care of us, and
their offering up the Incense of our Prayers in their Golden Censor at the
Throne of Grace, Rev. 8. 3, 4, 5. Our Good GOD, who has commanded us to honor
our Father and Mother, and our Magistrates, and to be Grateful to our
Benefactors, whom, as Second Causes, he has ordered to be Instrumental to our
Good; will not be offended that we honor his Holy Angels, whom he has
appointed to assist us in a more Sovereign manner, both Temporally and
Spiritually; and who have a greater power over the World, and all material
Nature than Alexanders or Caesar's. Who can reflect upon those words told us by
the mouth of our Savior himself, that the Angels do rejoice at the Repentance
of a Sinner, and not admire at such a disinteressed Goodness and Charity
toward us poor Mortals; and love, honor, and thank them for it. Common
Morality and Nature enjoin us these Duties; and what is Agreeable to the Laws of
Right Nature or Reason can never be opposite to Christianity, which establishes
and not dissolves those Laws. Though they need not, nor require those Duties at
our hands, yet we do nevertheless owe them. Though they do neither more or less
assist us, whether we apply to them or neglect them; yet our Obligation is not
the less, but rather more for their Love What Benefit we shall reap by keeping
up a Spiritual Communication with them.
to us, and such a Love as is not at all Selfish. There is not such a Distance
between the Church Militant and Triumphant, as to render a Mutual and Spiritual
Commerce between them Impracticable. We are all of us Fellow Servants of the
same Common Lord, and have the same Head, Christ Jesus. Nor can Distance at all
hinder the Communication of Spiritual Natures, which are above the Limited
Nature of Quantity. They are truly and in a better manner Present with us while
we are in their Thoughts, which is all the Presence of which Spiritual Natures
are Capable; and we are really United Spiritually with them, when we have the
same Pious Affections with them. They frequently conversed with Mankind under
Visible Apparitions in the time of Moses his Law: And, though Better Ordinary
Means be now allowed, and therefore such Extraordinary Favors need not be so
Frequent; yet this is no reason to neglect an Invisible or Spiritual
Communication with them: Especially, since it is our Interest and Benefit to
caltivate it, by considering their Happy State, their Obedience to the Divine
Will, and their Diligent and Charitable Concern for us. They are as Pure in
their Morals from Sin, as they are in their Naturals from Matter; and they
purify and spiritualize our Souls, while our Understandings and Wills are
employed in thinking on such Holy and Pure Objects. Our Soul takes a Tincture,
and a kind of Nature, as it is Moral, from the Objects it affectionately
converses with. That Soul which is often thus thinking of Earthly Things is
Earthly; Of Corporeal Pleasures, is Brutish; Of Empty Honor, is Aerie and
Vain; Of GOD, is Divine; and for the same reason, the Soul which thus
affectionately applies it is Thoughts and Yet, to honor them so, as still to
remember they are only our Fellow Servants, though highly dignified by our Common
Master.
Affections to Angels, or converses with them spiritually, (cum Sancto Sanctus
eris,) is ANGELICAL. Only, let us be sure we honor them for their Masters
sake, and that we do not venerate them so that the Honor done to them, does
interfere with that Supreme Honor due by a thousand Titles to their and our
Infinitely Perfect GOD and Creator: To treat of whose Adorable Majesty we
consecrate our next Endeavors.

Transnatural Philosophy: OR, METAPHYSICS.
BOOK III. Of the most Pure Actuality of Being, the Adorable DEITY.
CHAP. I. Of the Existence, Essence* and Attributes of GOD.
. 1. THERE must be Something whose Them. I. Essence is a most Pure Actuality of
Being, without any That there must be Something which is a most Pure Actuality
of Being, Demonstrated.
Potentiality whatever. For, since Names are invented to signify the Natures
of the Things we ^ceive; and none of the Names ^f those Beings which we call
Creatures, whether they be Angels, Men, or Bodies, (as Michael, Peter, a Stone,
a Tree, etc.) do imply Actual Being, or Existence, in their Signification: It
follows, that they Abstract from and are Indifferent to Existing and
Not-existing; or, are a mere Power or Potentiality to that Act called
Existence. But, from a mere Power, Potentiality, or Indifferency, nothing can
follow, or issue; much less such a Noble Effect as Actual Being. Wherefore,
were there not some Other Thing which has no Potentiality or Indifferency to
Existing, but has of it is own Nature Actual Being, neither it Self, nor any
other Thing, could ever have been Actually. But we know certainly, that our
selves, and many Other Things are; Therefore, as sure as it is, that any Thing
is, and that we know the Meaning of the Words which we intelligently use, and
by which we intend to express our Conceptions; (which it is Self-evident we do,
since without doing this we could be sure of nothing we say,) so Certain and
Evident it is, that there must be Something whose Nature or Essence it is to
have no Potentiality or Indifferency to Being; and, consequently, which is, of
it is self, a most P^r^ Actuality of Being.

2. Them. II. Nothing is more Evident than that Actual Being is not contained in
the Notion, Nature o^ From the acknowledged Potentiality of Being, necessarily
and manifestly annexed, or rather Essential to Creatures.
Essence of some of those Beings called Creatures; for we experience that such
and such Trees* Animals, etc. sometimes ar^ sometimes are not; whence we can
with Truth predicate or say of them, according to the Notion of Thing, and
using the same word which signifies the same Individual Thing, (in respect of
those several times) that they are Existent, or Not-existent; which we could
not do were it their Nature or Essence to be Existent; for in that case, this
Proposition, [ Peter is not-existent,] would be the same as [ Peter is not
Peter,] which is against an Identical Proposition* and the greatest of
Falsehoods; whereas all Mankind grants that these Propositions, [ Such a Man,
Animal, or Tree, now are not,] may be Certain Truths. Hence I* subsume; But we
find no more of Actual Being in the meaning of those words, Gabriel, Michael,
or any other Finite Being we can imagine, than there is in these, A Stone, a
Tree, B^cephalus, or any other Thing which we see is Corrupted, and therefore
we truly say of it, that it is not: Wherefore not one of those Finite Beings we
call Creatures, have Actual Being in their Essence or Nature. Therefore all we
can say of them, in order to Being, is, that they can be, or have a Power to be
Actually. But that which ^^ a mere Power to any Act cannot give it self (...)
Act; for then Water, which* has a Power ^e Hot, might make it self Hot; and
every thing in Nature might give* it self whatever ^al or Accidental Acts the
Matter or Power (...) bear; that is, every Body in Nature might (...) it self
any thing. Wherefore, since none ^ose Potential Beings could exist of them^s,
or by virtue of their own Nature or Es^e; It follows necessarily, that there
must ^ome Other Being whose Nature and Essence (...) is to have no Potentiality
to Being in it, or (which is the same) which is a Pure Actuality of ^ng.

3. Them. III. Were there any Thing, whether Body, Man, Angel, or whatever
Higher Being we can imagine, Because what is not, cannot Act.
that were of it is own Nature only a Potentiality of Being or a Power to Be,
and yet gave it self to be Actually; it must be conceived, in priority of
Reason, as yet not to have that Being which it gave it self: But it is a flat
Contradiction to conceive that what has Not Being, or is not, should act or
produce Being in it self. Therefore there must have ever been a Pure Actuality
of Being.

4. Them. IV. This is enforced, because Actual Being is the Noblest Effect that
can be imagined, and far more Because Actual Being is the Noblest Effect
imaginable.
Excellent than a Power to be, as it is contra-distinguisht to Being Actually;
as appears hence, that the Power to any Form is but a kind of Disposition,
Order, or (as it were) a Means, or Way, to that Form or Act to which it is a
Power; or rather, the Form, is the End that Disposition was ordered for, and to
which that Way led. Whence, in case a Power or Potentiality of Being should
give it self Actual Being, it would act beyond the Virtue of such a Power; that
is beyond it is self; and, therefore, would do what it cannot do; which is a
direct Contradiction.

5. Them. V. No Cause can produce an Effect contradictory to it is own Nature
Because no Power can produce an Effect, which is Contradictory to what it is it
self, or to its own Nature.
or Essence: But, if a Power, which is essentially Indeterminate, should give
it is self it is Form or Act which is essentially Determinate, that Cause would
work contradictorily to it is Nature; which would destroy all Causality, and all
Order of Natural Operation. Therefore, what is it self but a Power to be, can
never make it self be actually.

6. So that from the plain obvious Notions of Power and Act, this Great
Conclusion The foresaid Demonstration summed up, and Enforced.
is by a Metaphysical Medium, that is, ab Altissimis Causis, most evidently
demonstrated; that, since from a Potentiality or Power of Being no Actual Being
could have been produced: Hence, had all Beings been Potential, nothing could
ever have been; and therefore, there must necessarily be some Being whose
Nature or Essence is Pure Actuality of Being! Which as will be shown, is the
Notion of the First Being, or the Deity.

7. Hence follows, that this Actuality of Being did Create or give Being to all
other things. For, since it has This Actuality of Being, gave Being to all
other Things.
been demonstrated here that none of their Essences has Actual Being in their
Natures, but were Potential to that Act called Existence; nor, con^ntly could
give themselves to be actually; (...) the very Terms evince, that all Things
that a^e* must either have Actual Being in their Natures, or not have Actual
Being in their Natures: (...) follows evidently that they must either have ^d
Actual Being given them (or have been ^reated) by that Self-existent Thing,
that has Actual Being in it is Nature, or is essentially an Actuality of Being;
or else they must have had Actual Being given them by Nothing.

8. Against this Demonstration for the Existence of some First Being, (or
Beings,) some may object, That The Objection of the Atheists proposed, viz:
That the World was ever
there has been an Infinite Number of Things Antecedent to one another, without
any possibility of conceiving a First; none of which Things were merely
Potential in order to Being, but all of them were actually in their Proper
Seasons; and therefore they might give Actual Being to those Things that still
succeeded. To which I Answer.

9. First, That this does not solve the Argument, but objects against the
Conclusion; than which nothing is more Answer I. That this does not solve our
Demonstration.
Unfair in Discoursing. For this untoward Method allows him who is the
Respondent, to prevaricate from his Duty, and turn Opponent: Which confounds
those two Offices, and perverts all the Laws of Reasoning or Discoursing.

10. Secondly, which is yet much worse, It opposes the Conclusion by a mere
Voluntary Assertion; neither Demonstrated, Ans. II. That it is a mere Voluntary
Assertion, never yet proved nor Attempted to be Proved, nor Possible to be
Proved.
nor (as we peremptorily challenge them) possible to bear even any show of a
Demonstration. Whereas, against a Pretended Demonstration, (even in case this
awkward Method of Discoursing were allowable, as it is not) nothing under a
Pretended Demonstration has right to be alleged. Probabilities, in such a
case, being Insignificant and Incompetent to be put in the Balance.

11. Thirdly, That the Argument is not solved, (...) Evident; for, it
manifestly proceeds upon what of it is own Ans. III. Farther showing that our
Argument is not touched; and is reducible to an Identical Proposition.
Nature, or essentially, is Potential to Being, or Actual Being; and, (as is
seen,. 6. 7.) the Demonstration is, in part, grounded upon the Necessity that
one side of the Contradiction must be True. Now, it must be confessed by
themselves, that ma^y of these Actual Causes, which they pretend ^id all along
give Actual Being to others, (viz. many Bodies) were not of their own Nature,
or Essentially Existent; for, had they been such essentially, they had not
needed, nor could they receive Existence from others, since they had it of
themselves, nor could they ever not have been; ^e contrary to all which we
experience, since we see many of them Generated, and others Corrupted. And, had
the Predicate [ Existent], been Essential to any of them; then, since Essential
Predicates are always predicated of their Subjects [ Existent] could always
with truth be predicated of Peter or every Individual Entity; which put, we
could never say, with Truth, that Peter, or (...) other Thing which once was,
and is now corrupted, is not Existent, or is not; which Common Sense, and the
very Notion of the word [ was] or [ Fuit,] makes it Self-evident we can do.
lastly, To clinch the Truth of this Point, it is an Identical Proposition, and
one of the First Truths, that [ Every thing is what it is, or, is it is self.]
Wherefore, in case [ Existent] were an Essential Predicate of any of those
Corruptible or Finite Things; then, since what is Essential to any thing does
(at least as a necessary and intrinsecal part) constitute it, and what wants
it is Essence is not that Thing, or is not it is self; it would be against an
Identical Proposition, (on which the Metaphysical Verity, that is, all the
Truth we can imagine depends,) if those Things which they put to be the
Successive Causes of Actual Being should at any time not be; which yet
Experience tells us, do sometime cease to be, or are not. As certain, then, as
an Identical Proposition is True; so Certain it is, that the Natures of all
Finite Things are no more but only Capable of Being; that is, Potential and
Indifferent to Being and not-Being; and, therefore, that they had no Being from
any Finite Cause; but from some Infinite First Cause, (or Causes,) which is
Essentially Actual Being, or a Pure Actuality of Being.

12. Fourthly, Their Assertion, relying on the Supposition of an Infinite
Number of Successive Causes, is utterly Ans. IV. That this Pretense, or
Voluntary Assertion is shown to be an absolute Impossibility.
overthrown, by proving, that An Infinite Number is absolutely Impossible;
which I thus show out of the Nature of the Subject about which we are
Discoursing, [ Number.] For, all Number, even though Infinite, is compounded,
made up, or consists of Units or Ones; So that, as Twenty is Twenty Ones; and a
Million, is a Million of Ones, so an Infinite Number is Infinite Ones; nor can
it (as it has the Notion of Number) consist of any thing else. Nor can
themselves find any thing in it is Composition but Ones. Regarding then the
Subject of our Discourse, this Infinite Collection of Ones, we can find or
imagine nothing in it, by which it can be conceived to grow up, or rather
become, Infinite, but One still successively following the foregoing Ones.
Wherefore it must become formally Infinite by some One added to, or taken with
the rest; there being in it nothing else (as was said) imaginable, by which it
could formally o^ integrally become Infinite: But it is an absolute
Impossibility, that a Number, or Multitude, (if that word rather please them)
should become Infinite by the Accession of some One; Therefore an Infinite
Number is absolutely Impossible. I do remember, that when I pressed this Argument
against a very Ingenious Atheist; he, to shift it o^, replied, that no Man has
or can have any Notion of an Infinite Number. I answered, That th^^ condemns
themselves, for recurring to such a Position that no Man can tell what the
Words ^. I added, That this was a strong Argument against them, that the
Position it self was Chimerical; and convinces them of being baffled in their
Cause, by their running to such a Thesis as was confessedly Unintelligible
either by themselves or their Adversary. Next, I assured him, That, waving
this, we could very easily have a Notion or Simple Apprehension of what the
word [ Infinite] means, (as is clearly shown, Solid Philosophy Asserted,
Reflection IX.) Otherwise we could not Speak or Discourse of it either pro or
con. But when we come to join it in a Proposition with Existent, and say, [An
Infinite Number is, ^t has been;] then, indeed, our Understanding i^ puzzled,
and at an utter loss to make Sense of it; and no wonder, since it implies a
Contradiction; which, being against the Nature of Ens, i^ altogether
Unintelligible. His next Answer, was, That my Argument proceeded upon a False
Supposition: For, there could be no Agent to Calculate it; or add one to one,
till it became Infinite, I replied, Those very Agents himself puts to have
produced still a New One all along, did add those Successive Ones in re, though
no Man's Arithmetic comprehended them all by Summing up their Total in his
Understanding. Besides, this drops the whole Question, and flies off to a New
Point. For the Question is not, whether an Agent or Calculator can do this;
but, whether the Nature of the Subject* [viz. An Infinite Number, which is made
up of nothing but Ones,] does not bear it, nay force it, that it must become
Infinite by One added to One; and therefore, by the Accession of s^^^ One to
the Finite Number presupposed. To which Essential or Intrinsical Nature of the
Thing, or Subject, (from which only we argue) the want of an Agent is
Accidental and Extrinsical. Thus Philosophers hold there is some least si^^ of
Bodies or Minima Naturalia, which are to farther Divisible Actually, because
there is no Agent little enough to come between the sides of it and divide it
farther; and yet the same Men hold, that, since Quantitas est Divisibilis, i^
semper Divisibilia, it is, notwithstanding, of It Is own Nature, farther
Divisible.

13. Fifthly, To beat them from this Evasion, that there wants an Agent, let
Ans. V. That the putting an Infinite Time, which in their Supposition is
absolutely Necessary, is a plain Contradiction.
us see what the Necessity of not admitting a plain Contradiction will work
with them. I argue then, thus; Those Infinite* Agents which they say do, and
eve^ did communicate Actual Being to the following Ones, must (since this was
done by way (...) Motion,) require Infinite Time to perform this (...) But such
an Infinite Antecedent Time is absolutely impossible to have been; Therefore
their ^n Position falls to the ground. To prove, (...) there could not have
been an Infinite Time, ^gue thus by way of Dilemma, which is a (...) Conclusive
Method, when the two sides of ^e Contradictory, and can have no Third, or ^dle
between them. If there has been an Infi^ Time, there must have been either an
Infinite Number of Hours antecedently, or not* an-Infinite Number of Hours, but
a Finite Number of them ^. If only a Finite Number, then that whole ^e was
Finite, and therefore had a Beginning, ^ould have been ever. If, they say, an
Infi^ Number of Hours have anteceded, or (lest ^ey should quarrel with the word
Number,) an ^ite Multitude of them, or, (which is the same (...) the Subjects
part,) a Motion correspondent to (...) Infinite Multitude of Hours; then, in
this Multitude of antecedent Hours, Either there has ^en some One Hour distant
from This Hour which ^s now, by Infinite Ones; Or no one Hour di^nt from this
present Hour by Infinite ones. Let them take which side they please, for one of
them they must take or allow, they being Con^^^dictories. If they say, there
has been no one Hour distant from this Present Hour by Infinite ^s, then, since
in this Infinite Multitude of ^ours there is nothing but Ones, for ( Multa ^ans
multa una, and can mean nothing else) (...) the whole Collection of Hours which
they pretend to be Infinite is clearly Finite, there being nothing in it which
is Infinitely distant. Again, If None of them be distant from this Present Hour
by Infinite ones, then All of them are distant by Finite ones; and so, again,
the Collection of antecedent Hours must have been Finite. And, if they choose to
take the other side, and say, There has been some One hour which is distant
from this Present by Infinite ones, then they manifestly put an Infinite Time,
or a Time which has No End, and yet has Two Ends; viz. That One Hour
terminating it long ago, and this Present Hour terminating it Now: That is,
they put an Infinite which is Finite, or not-Infinite, which is a Direct
Contradiction.

14. Lastly, To confute this Infinity, whether of antecedent Causes or of Parts
of Time, there needs no more Ans. VI. That the very Notion of the word
[Infinite] applied to our Case, is a plain Contradiction.
but to reflect upon the plain Meaning of the word [ Infinite*] and it will
tell us, that an Infinite in any kind must include All that belongs to that
kind; so that there can be nothing of that kind out of it, nor any Accession to
it, or New Particulars of that Kind which it does not comprehend. For, if the
supposed Infinity did not include them All, it fell, so far, Short; and any
Shortness is directly Opposite to the Notion of Infinity. Nothing being more
Evident than that the words [ Not-all,] do signify the same as [ only some,]
and therefore, that Notion, in whatever Kind, that does not extend it self to
All of that Kind, is Limited to some, and therefore is not-Infinite in that
Kind: Since then we see New Hours daily accrue to Antecedent Time, and New
Agents added to the former* ^^^ of Causes, which can, with no Sense, be (...)
to be comprehended in the Antecedent Collection of them; it is manifestly
against our common Notions, and Common Sense, to pre^ that the multitude of
Antecedent Causes, and ^^^ts of Time (or Motion) have been actually Infinite.
Wherefore, all these Antecedent Causes ^^d some First, or a Beginning of their
Being, which they could not have had of themselves, had their Natures been only
Potential to Being, or merely capable to be. Therefore, there must ^^ve ever
been something, or some First Cause, which of it is own Nature or Essence, is an
Actually of Being. That there can be but One such ^entially Actual Being, (though
it may be ga^^^^ed even hence) will be more exactly proved ^^^^after.

^^* Nothing can be weaker than to allege, th^^ there was only a Finite Number
of Causes which gave The Position of a Finite Number of Causes, giving Being to
one another Circularly, is as ill Nonsense as the former.
Being circularly to one another. For, this would make each of them only
Potential to Being, in ^^ard they received it from others; ^^^ yet at the same
time Actually ^^^^g, because they communica^^^ it to another: Nay, to give
Being to themselves: For, if B is because A is; and C is, because B is; and A
is because C is, it will fol^ that A is because A is. That Maxim, [ Causa
C^^sae est Causa Causati,] what restriction soever it may have in other Cases,
has here it is full fo^^e; because the Cause. does here give the (...) and
adequate Effect to it is self; the Noti^ Existence (the Act which is given)
being every way Indivisible; and, therefore, All of ^^ must be given, or not at
all.

I have been more large in refuting this Pre^ence of an Endless or Infinite
antecedent Succession of Motion and Natural Causes, it being the chief Asylum
of the Atheists. We return now to our Arguments.

16. Lemma I. The Notion we have of Ens or Thing is Different from the Notion
of Existence. This has been The Notion of [Ens] is Different from that of
[Existent;] and, consequently, Essence from Existence.
demonstrated, B. 1. Chapter 1.. 3. where it is shown, That the Notion of Essence,
which constitutes every Finite Ens, consists in a Potentiality or a mere
Possibility, of Existing; whereas Existence is the Act that answers to that
Power, and so is vastly distinguish^ or Different from it; the Power, and it is
Proper Act being counterpos'd to one another. Add, That this has also been
demonstrated here,. 2.

17. Lemma II. We cannot think or speak of the First Being, though supposed
Infinite, but by making use of such Philosophers must Discourse of the First
Being by sueh Natural Notions as they have.
Natural Notions and Words as we have. This is Self-evident; since none can
think or speak with Thoughts or Words which he has not.

18. Lemma III. Amongst all our Natural Notions, that of [ Existence] is mo^^
Actual; and being Pure from all The Notion of [Existence] is the most Actual of
any we have.
Potentiality in the Line of Being, it is deservedly called an Actuality, or
the very Formal and Whole, and Sole Nature of Act, in that Line. This has ^
Demonstrated, B. 1. Chapter 1:. 34, 35. ^o (...) the Reader is referred.

^. Of all our Natural Notions (that ^) that of Existence is the ^perest and
Best we can use And theref^r^ the Fitt^st to (...) a Pure Actua^^ty of Being;
^^d glven us by GOD Himself.
(...) we speak of a Pure Actu^y of Being, or a DEITY. This ^prov'd. 16, 17.
and is Evident ^^^m the Terms. For since Ens (...) whole Latitude abstracts
(...) Corporeal Nature, which has that Power called ^; and is clearly
Antecedent to the Third (...) of Power, since a Capacity of being it self, ^^^
antecede a Capacity of Sustaining or giving (...) to Accidents; and therefore,
the Poten^ which Ens has to it is Act is more Noble, (...) Exalted, and more
defaecated (as it were) (...) those baser and narrower sorts of Power than a^y
other: Wherefore, since Existence is the Ultimate Act of Ens in it is whole
Latitude; it ^ollows, that it is the most Abstracted or Purest sort ^^ Act in
the Line of Being; and, therefore, is ^incident with the Notion of Pure
Actuality of ^, which is the best Positive Notion we can (...) of a DEITY. And,
accordingly, the True, ^* (as will be demonstrated shortly) the ONLY ^OD,
Himself, who could best express to us (...) ow^ Divine Essence, when Moses,
(Exodus 3. ^) desired to know by what Name (which sig^ his Essence) he should
call him, when he should come to speak from Him to the Children of Israel,
answered him, Ego sum qui sum, I am who AM, or I am He who IS; and bid him tell
t^^m that He who IS has sent me unto you: Which ^inly signifies, that all Other
Things have only a Potentiality or Possibility of Existing or Being Actually;
and that it is Proper and Peculiar to GOD's Nature or Essence (which the Name is
to express) to Be Actually or Exist: And that if any Thing else has Being or
Exists, it partakes or borrows it is Being from Him who only ^^* or whose
Essence is that Pure Actuality of Being called Existence. So that the main
Ground of our Metaphysics, particularly that which discourses of the Adorable
DEITY, is, in the main, the same Sense, given to our hands by GOD Himself;
which we dilate, and on which we descant by our Reason.

20. Lemma IV: Every Abstract Word, which signifies merely any Form or Act,
includes in it is Notion the Every Abstract Word comprehends the whole Nature of
the Form or Act it signifies, without any Limitation.
whole Nature of the Act imported by that Word, without any Limitation. For,
let us take Knowledge, Virtue, Whiteness, or any other such Abstract Word, we
shall find that none of them either Express, Hint, or Connotate [ thus much, or
such a Portion or Degree of those Acts.] Wherefore, those Abstract Words
involve in them the Whole Nature of those Acts, that is, without Limitation.
Moreover, were there ( per impossible) supposed Infinite things which had
Knowledge, Virtue, or Whiteness in them, they would all partake of the Nature
of those Acts, and yet it would not be exhausted; which shows the word
signifies those Acts without Limitation.

21. Lemma V. Therefore the Limitation of all Acts must either proceed from the
Subject it affects, which being Therefore it is Limitation proceeds either from
the Subject, or from the Causes that Determine it.
a Particular or Determinate Ens, makes it This and no Other; or else from the
Causes which determined the Act to such or such a Degree of it. Hence I Argue.

22. Therefore GOD's Existence, which is his Essence, is Unlimited, and
Actually Infinite. For, since his Existence Hence GOD's Essence it self, is
absolutely Unlimited, or Actually Infinite;
includes the whole Nature of Existence by Lem. IV. nor is it, as it is found
in Him, an Act corresponding to a Potential Essence, as it is in Creatures;
this being against the Nature of a Pure Actuality; but is His Proper Name which
imports his Essence; neither is his Existence limited by any Subject, in regard
every Subject is a Power to receive advening Acts, which is against the Nature
of that Essence which is purely Actual: Hence it follows, that it is it is own
Subject, or Self-subsistent. Nor, Lastly, can ^ be Limited by the Operation of
any Cause which gave him that Act: He being the First Cause; and, incapable to
receive anything, in regard this implies Passiveness and Potentiality: It
^ollows then, that his Existence is absolutely Unlimi^ed, and (it being a Pure
Actuality) actually Infinite.

13. Therefore the DEITY is but ONE. For, ^ere there Two Infinite Existences,
^ach of them must necessarily Therefore GOD is but ONE.
^^ve something* which the other ^^ not; otherwise, they would ^re nothing to
distinguish them or make them more, they being in all respects the Same.
Therefore if there were two GODs, this would limit both of them, and make
neither of them to be Infinite; therefore there can be but One Infinite
Existence, or One GOD. Again, were there Two Self-Existences, they would agree
in that Common Notion; and the Differences that constitute them within that
Notion must be more and less of that Common Notion, [ Infinite Existence,] as
has been often proved: Which is perfect Nonsense; Infinity being beyond all
Degrees, and Incapable of them. Besides, Differences are necessarily more
Actual than the Common Notion they divide; but no Notion can be more Actual
than Existence, much less than Self-existence, which is a Pure Actulity;
therefore, since Self-Existence can admit no Differences to divide it, it is
impossible it should be more than One. To proceed:

24. Corol. I. Hence nothing could be so extravagantly Foolish and void of
Common Sense, as the Polytheism Hence Polytheism was a most Senseless
Absurdity, and a flat Contradiction.
of the Ancient Heathens: For, by making more Gods, they did by consequence,
make them all to be Finite; and, therefore none of their Essences to be Actual
Being, but Potential in order to Existence. Whence, since they could not
(having no more of their own Natures, but only a Power to Be,) give Actual
Being to themselves, they must either have it from Another whose Essence is
Existence, and therefore i^ Infinite, and One; or they could not be ^^ all,
but be (as they really were) mere Chimera's: And hence it came, that they ma^^
all the Attributes of their imaginary Gods to be Limited and Imperfect; they
represented them as subject to Squabbles among themselves, and liable to a
thousand Natural and Moral Defects: Which obliged the Wiser sort amongst them,
ashamed of their Nonsensical and Foppish Superstition, that they might in some
measure keep up the Repute of their pretended Religion, have recourse to our
Tenet of One Sovereign Being; and to allege, that they meant no more by the
rabble of their other Gods, but that they were so many Attributes, or several
Considerations of GOD's Divine Providence, overseeing such and such Parts of
the World, or performing such or such Operations. Nor were there Many of them,
who were Firm in their holding a First Being; nor any of them Clear in their
apprehension of his Nature; and none of them who placed their Eternal Felicity
in seeing his Divine Essence; nor held this was Attainable by them after this
Life; nor, who erected their Thoughts to the Hope of enjoying that Blissful
Sight; for want of which Hope, they could not raise their Affection to Him
above all things, which we have shown, Book 2. Chapter 1.. 17.. 19. is the only
Disposition which could bring them to the True End of their Nature, Eternal
Happiness. Not to speak of those besotted Heathens, who made Gods of Senseless
Creatures, though Inferior to themselves, and despicable even to Ridiculousness.

25. Coroll. II. Hence the Deists, if they be not as much besotted as those
very Heathens themselves, cannot Hence Christian Doctrine is proved to be
Divine; the Dawning of which chased away that Universal Darkness;
notwithstanding all the Opposition Human Power, Wit, and Learning could make.
but acknowledge and admire the Wisdom of the Heavenly Doctrine taught us by
our Divine Master Jesus Christ, which by Calm Reason, Good Life, joined with
Astonishing Miracles, without any External Force, has chaced and banished out of
the World this Epidemical Phrenzy, which had possessed all Mankind, but the
small Nation of the Jews; and will make them see withal how Necessary Divine
Revelation was; since Human Wit and Learning, which was, amongst many of those
Heathens, at the height, could neither enable them to rectify themselves, nor
make them capable of attaining their Summum Bonum; nor cure Mankind of that
Universal Dotage of Polytheism; nor uphold it self against the Light which
Christianity brought into the World; but that, wherever it dawned, the shades
of Error concerning the True Deity immediately vanished and disappeared.
Certainly, whoever considers what a prodigious Change, concerning the Worship
of the True GOD, Christianity has wrought in a vast part of the World, and is
still spreading it self; and by what Methods it has prevailed to the utter
Extirpation of Idolatry, must be wilfully blind if he does not clearly see,
that Digitus Dei est hic, and that it is Doctrine is truly Divine.

26. Lem. VI. Existence is the whole Perfection of every Thing that Exists.
For, ^nce whatever is in any thing Existence is the whole Perfection of every
thing that Exists.
besides Existence, (which is the L^st Actuality in the Line of Being) must be
Potential in respect of it. Again, since whatever is Actually ( a forti^ri) can
be, otherwise it would be a Contradiction a Thing can be while it is; whereas,
it is a First Principle, that A Thing cannot but be while ^^ is; It follows
evidently, that when a Power of Being, or (which is the same) an Ens, is
Actuated, nothing is lost of it but the Privation of Act which Power seems to
imply; but, all that is Positive in it, (or is that we call Ratio Entis) (...)
remains under a better state; whence, Power, is Eminently included in
Existence; and, as it were, swallowed up in it, as in a Greater or Higher
Perfection in* the Line of Being, which involves in it the Lesser or Lower.

27. Lem. VII. Much more an Existence, which is also the Essence of the Thing,
and ^^ most Actual and withal Infinite, Much more, when it is Essential, and
Actually Infinite.
includes in it Actually and For^ally, all the Perfections that can be
conceived to belong to Ens in it is whole Latitude. This is Evident, since (...)
comprehends in it all that can belong to (...), which constitutes Ens in it is
largest signification.

28. Wherefore the Divine Essence, or the DEITY, ^^cludes in it all Perfections
ima^^nable Therefore the Divine Existence, or the Deity, includes or concenters
all imaginable Perfections in it is Nature.
which can any way belong to Ens, and this Infinitely; ^^d, therefore, is
Infinitely-perfect. For, since we call that Perfect in any Kind, to which
nothing is wanting, or which has All in it that can be imagined in that kind:
It follows, that the Divine Essence, which comprizes in it all the Perfections
that can belong to Ens in it is largest Sense, and all that can belong to
Existence in an Unlimited Signification, is infinitely Perfect in All reg^s
that can belong to Ens, or which have E^^^^^ in them.

2^ Therefore GOD is Infinitely Perfect in all Intellectual and Moral
Attributes; that is, He is infinitely Therefore (...) is I^ in ^^ Intellctual
an^ Moral Attributes.
Knowing, Wise, Good, Merciful, Powerful, Veracious, Free, etc. and this in the
most perfect manner, as becomes a Pure Actuality of Being; since all these have
something of Perfection in their Notion.

30. Therefore, he is of a Spiritual Nature; as being not only a Pure Act, as
other Spirits are, but a Pure Therefore GOD is a Spirit.
Actuality of Being; which infinitely exceeds their Nature, which was Potential
in respect of Existence.

31. Therefore, for the same reason he is not Corporeal. For this includes both
the First, Second, and Third Therefore, He is not Corporeal.
sort of Potentiality mentioned at the beginning; each of which is
diametrically Opposite to the Nature of Pure Actuality.

32. Therefore, it is a strange degrading of the Divine Nature Therefore it is an
Indignity to the Divine Nature to apply such Predicates to it as belong to Body.
to apply to GOD any Corporeal Attributes; such as are Place, Space, Motion,
etc. which are quite Opposite to an Incorporeal Being.

33. Therefore, the Divine Essence is also Immutable. For, this implies a
Potentiality, or Power to be Changed, Hence also He is Immutable.
which is inconsistent with a Pure Actuality.

34. Therefore GOD is also a Self-Subsistent Being. For, since his Essence is
Actual Being, and withal, Infinite An^ a Self-Subsistent Being.
in Being, (which compre^ends the whole Nature of Be^^g;) that which supports
it in Being must have no Being.

35. Therefore the Divine Essence must be also most Simple or Uncompounded.
For, it can have no Logical Composition For the same Reason the Divine Essence
is most Simple or Uncompounded.
of Genus and Difference; because the Genus is essentially that which has more
of it is Kind under it; and, there cannot be more, where (as is demonstrated,.
23.) there is but One. Nor can it admit any Difference; for ^tis the Essence of
the Difference to make One Thing differ from Another; and, in our case, there
can be no Other, where there is but One. Nor can there be in GOD that Logical
Composition of Accidents, with their Subject; For, the Subject is Potential in
respect of the Accidents, or Modes, which affect or actuate it. Nor can there
be in GOD Physical Composition of the Second sort of Power with it is Act,
called Matter and Form; because he is Incorporeal, and Pure Actuality. Nor can
this Pure Actuality of Being, called Self-Existence, be compounded
Metaphysically; for even our low Created Existence is Indivisible, and can have
no Metaphysical Parts; and, therefore, can have no Metaphysical Divisibility or
Composition in it. Wherefore, all the Distinction of GOD's Essential Attributes
does spring wholly from the Shortness and Imperfection of our Understanding,
which is not able to reach or fathom the Whole Extent of his
every-way-Infinitely-Perfect Essence, but is forced to conceive them by diverse
Acts of ours.

36. Wherefore GOD's Duration has nothing in it of Preterit and Future, but is
one Present Indivisible on his And his Duration Eternal.
part, and therefore He is ETERNAL. For, since it is the highest of
Impossibility that Self-existence should not exist; his Essence equally
includes, nay speaks or formally signifies and expresses, to have been
formerly, and to be futurely, as it does to be now. Wherefore, since it is not
possible to imagine any Instant in which GOD has not his whole Essence, and
this (as far as is on his part) Indivisibly; it follows, that in every Instant,
(only which is Present in our Time) he has his to-have-been, and
tobe-hereafter, as much as he has to be-at-present; But this kind of
ever-present, ever-standing and unchangeably-Steady Duration, includes in it
self all the Differences of our Time, (as was now proved) and therefore
oomprehends all Time, (even though it were Infinite) Indivisibly, or without
Succession of any thing in GOD, that is, it is one E^er-permanent, Present,
Now: Wherefore, since this manner of Enduring is infinitely above that of our
^^^e, which is part after part, Fleeting, and Divisible; and we call that sort
of Duration which infinitely exceeds our Time, [ Eternity,] and GOD has this
Duration; it follows evidently, that GOD is ETERNAL.

37. Coroll. III. Wherefore it is highly Derogatory from GOD's Attribute of
Eternity. to make it consist And, therefore, not to be Explicated by a
Correspondency to our Time.
in a kind of Correspondency to our Time; For this puts his Duration, which is
Essential to Him, to have Parts, or a Capacity to be Longer or Shorter.
Whereas, we ought to reflect, that there can be no possible Proportion between
Being and Moving, (especially a Being so Actual and Permanent as is the Divine
Existenee;) the one being essentially Divisible, the other essentially, and in
every regard, indivisible. All Comparison, and consequently Proportion, can
only be conceived between those things which are of the same Kind, or have the
same Common Notion: Whereas Being and Moving, do diffet toto Genere; the one,
being the last Formality in the Line of Ens; the other only an Accident, or
Modus Entis; and are fo far from being of the same Kind, or More and Less of
it, and therefore capable of bearing any Proportion to one another; that, the
one (as was said) being most Divisible, the other most Indivisible, they are
Contradictories; that is, beyond all Degrees (only which ground Proportion)
Opposite to one another.

38. Hence also GOD's Essence is IMMENSE, or beyond all possibility of being
Measurable. Which Attribute Hence GOD is also Immense.
consists in this, that His Unlimited and Indivisible Existence comprizes or
resumes in it is self (and this after an Indivisible manner, or in a Way beyond
the the Nature of Quantity) the whole Nature of Bodily Extension and Space,
even though it were supposed Infinite; as his Duration, which is the same
Indivisible Existence, comprehends all Corporeal Motion or Time, even though Time
were Infinite. Again, as Angels are no otherwise in Place but by Operating on
Bodies, which are in Place; so GOD is no otherwise in his Creatures (at least
Immediately) but by Giving and Conserving them in Being, which is his peculiar
and immediate Operation, and every way Indivisible. Whence GOD, being in each
of his Creatures, and in the very least of them, and this wholly and
Indivisibly, by giving them this Sovereign Indivisible Effect, Being; and, of
his own Nature, able to communicate Being to them, even in case they could be
supposed to be Infinite; is neither as in Himself, nor as in them* after a
Divisible, Quantitative, Extended, Coextended, or Measurable manner; and
therefore He is absolutely IMMENSE, or beyond all Possibility of being subject
to be measured.

39. Whence, it is no less Derogatory from GOD's Attribute of Whence, it is
Derogatory to that Attribute to explicate it by Commensuration to an Infinite
Space.
IMMENSITY to explicate it so as to consist in a kind of Commensuration to an
Infinite Incom^^bensible Inanc; for this makes GOD's Essence Diffused, and
con^^quently of a Quantitative Nature; which makes acute Readers apt to suspect
that it is meant to be no better than a more sub^^le sort of Body; or, at least,
some Act or Form of a Body; and therefore, but a Compart with it. Fancy is but
a Bad Adviser, even in Ordinary Points of Philosophy; but incredibly worse,
when we are to explicase his Nature and Essential Attributes, whose Essence is
Self-Existence and most Pure Actuality of Being. Existence (even amongst us)
abstracts from all Motion, Time, Quantity, and all other Considerations
belonging to Corporeal, and even Spiritual Natures; and being Indivisible, and
signifying mere Actuality of Being, is Inexplicable by any of them; much less
GOD's Existence, which is infinitely above Ours.

We will close this Discourse concerning GOD's Attributes, by adding one more,
which I have not observed to have been mentioned by Meta^hysicians, or Divines
either.

40. From what is deduced above, it is Demonstrated, That the Divine Essence is
Infinitely Intelligible, or (of it is Lastly, The Divine Essence, is, of it is
own Nature, Infinitely Intellible*
own Nature) Easy to be known or seen. For, since we experience, that the
Unknowableness or Obscurity of any Object, springs from the Nature of
Potentiality, or some kind of Power in it; which, it being Indeterminate,
breeds Confusion; and all the Distinct and Clear Knowableness it has, arises
from it is Act; which, by Determining the Power, renders that Object Distinct
from all others, and therefore Clearly Perceptible or Intelligible: It follows,
that since the Divine Nature is infinitely more Actual than any thing found in
Creatures, it being a most Pure Actuality; and it is Essence being Existence it
self, (the Notion of which is so Self-evident to all Mankind, that it is
impossible to be Defined or made Clearer by any Explication imaginable,) it
must necessarily be, of it is own Nature, Infinitely Intelligible, or most
capable to be seen or known, even by the rudest Understanding of the Silliest
Soul when Separate; whose Will, when it leaves this World, is duly Disposed for
it.

41. Coroll. IV. This last Thesis will to a great Degree comfort the
Theological Virtue of HOPE, which is What Comfort this is to Pious, Humble, and
weak Souls.
to Erect our Souls to Heaven. For; doubtless, some Virtuous Humble Souls, when
they come to consider and seriously reflect on the Sublime and Infinitely
Glorious Majesty of our Great GOD, who, in altis habitat and humilia respicit
in Coelo and in Terra; in comparison of whose Exalted Height, all the whole
World, nay all the Greatest Angels and Purest Saints in Heaven are as nothing;
may be apt to admit the Temptation of some Despondency, and fear that it is
above the Capacity of any Created Intellect, ever to behold his
dazlingly*Bright Essence. Nay, even some Great Divines seem to have had the
same Apprehensions, when they invented a Quality called Lumen Gloriae, to
dispose and Elevate the Eye of the Mind, and fit it for the Beatifical Vision;
by which, (Glory being the Sight of GOD, and the End, or Summum Bonum of our
Nature,) they make the Light of Glory, which is the End, the Means to it self;
and withal to no purpose. GOD has made our Soul Intellective, and capable to
see Infinite Truth, that is, Himself; and Sanctifying Grace, or the Love of GOD
above all things, has already elevated that Natural Faculty above what mere
Nature could have raised it to, and GOD's Essence is Infinitely Intelligible;
And can any Power and Object be more fitted to one another? Can there be any
difficulty that Essential Truth, which is so luminously and radiantly Bright
and Clear, should be seen by a Power which was made to see Truth? But most
especially, when an over-powering and ardent Affection and Love of it, has
directed, applied and addicted the Eye of the Soul to behold that Object. Let
not then such an Irrational Solicitude trouble any pious Soul: It Is unworthy
Infinite Goodness to be backwards to communicate Himself to his Creatures, when
they are thus fitly disposed to receive his ever-ready Influence: Let our only
Care be to purify our Intellectual Eye, and purge our Soul from hankering
Affections after Unworthy Objects; which draw our squinting Sight awry, and dim
and darken it. This once secured, nothing is more Evident than that GOD will
not hide his Blissful Face from us one moment, when we are arrived into the
Region of Light. Nor is there any other Eyebright requisite for the Beatifical
Vision, but this Purity of Heart; if we may believe the Promise of our Good
Savior* Beati mundi cord quoniam ipsi Deum videbunt* Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see GOD, Mat. 5.

42. Innumerable are the Demonstrations which may be brought from diverse That
the Author confines himself here to Metaphysical Mediums.
Sciences, to prove the Existence of a DEITY, and most of the Divine
Attributes; on which I do not here insist, or mention them. It Is a Subject
Copious enough to fill whole Volumes; Nor is any Scientifical Conclusion in all
Nature half so Evident, or voucht by so many Pregnant and Unanswerable
Arguments: Against which the Atheist (as far as I have observed) offers not to
allege any one Demonstration; but only raises Difficulties and Objections, not
from Connected Reason, but Roving Fancy: Yet I judged it sufficient for me
here, (that I might keep within the Bounds of my own Province) to produce only
such Metaphysical Mediums as follow out of the forelaid Doctrine: For, besides,
that such Arguments as are fetched from the most Common, and therefore most
Evident, Notions, (which we use to call Altissimae Causae,) are more Cogent to
gain Assent; a Few Proofs, nay any one Demonstration, such Proofs being
evidently Conclusive, is as Convictive as Thousands; especially, if it be
pursued to First Principles, and maintained against the Objections and Evasions
of the adverse Party, by showing their Vanity and Insignificancy. That those I
have brought here are such, and thus maintained, I shall not be afraid to
affirm; nor civilly to challenge the Atheists to show they are Inconclusive or
Defective.

43. From the former Doctrine, assisted by ^ght Logic, it is Demonstrable,
Notwithstanding all that is said, no Notion or Word we have, is Univocally, (or
in the same Sense) applied to GOD and to Creatures.
(...) no Notion, nor, consequent^, Word we have, can be Uni^cably spoken of
GOD, as He is (...) Himself, and of Creatures. For, ^ce all Distinct Notions
which constitute any Nature This, and, consequently, all such Denomination,
come from the Form, or the Act; it would follow, that some such Act is
Univocally Common to God and Creatures; which has been ^^own to be most absurd;
the former being the Highest and Purest Actuality of Being, or Self-Existence;
the later having no Existence at all in it is Nature or Notion. Again, were
there any such Notion Common to GOD and Creatures, that Common Notion would be
restrained by it is Proper Difference to particularize or constitute the DEITY;
which puts in GOD the Composition of Genus and Difference; and, withal, some
Potentiality, which is essentially annexed to every Gene^^cal or Common Notion.
Wherefore no Notion or Word we have can be Univocally predicated of GOD and
Creatures.

44. Wherefore all the Notions we have of GOD, and the Words we use when we
speak of Him, are Metaphorical: Wherefore all the Words we use, when we speak
of GOD, are, in some sort, Metaphorical.
For, since no word spoken of GOD and Creatures are Univocal, or spoken in the
same Sense, they, must, when said of Him and them, be meant in different
Senses. *Wherefore, since, when spoken of Creatures, they express our Natural
Notions which we had from the Creatures themselves, and therefore are Proper;
it follows, that the Sense they are taken in, when they are transferred thence
to GOD, is in some sort Improper or Metaphorical.

45. This is farther confirmed, Because GOD, considered as in Himself, is a
Pure Actuality of Being, eminently Because each of them signifies some one
Perfection or Notion; whereas GOD is the Plenitude of All Being, and All
Perfections, centered in one most Simple Formality.
including in it self the whole Plenitude of Ens; and, consequently, the
Objects of All our Notions, and Infinitely more; whereas we have no Word that
signifies more than some one Notion. Again, since the word [ Existence,] which
of all our Natural Notions seems most Proper, does signify only such a
Formality or Act; but does not signify that that Act subsists, much less, that
it is Self-subsistent, as GOD is; it cannot properly signify GOD, who is a
Self-subsistent Existence.

46. Hence the Names of our Best Virtues are Metaphorically said of GOD. For,
were they Properly said of GOD, Hence even the Names of our best Virtues, are
not, in every regard, properly spoken of GOD.
there would be some Notion Univocal to GOD and Creatures, contrary to what was
proved,. 43. 44. Besides, we had the Notions of those Virtues first from
Creatures; therefore, the First Signification of those Words which express
them, was what we observed in Them; and we transferred them to GOD, because He
produces such like Effects as we had remarked those Men did who were endowed
with those Virtues.

47. Hence follows also, that GOD, as in Himself, is not without some
Impropriety denominated, Omnipotent, Nor Omnipotent, Creator, or such like;
all our Language having some tang of Imperfection Annexed to it.
^^^-knowing, etc. because Power, and Knowledge, which are included in those
Words, are with some Impropriety spoken of God, and not Properly and
Univocally. And, though Creator, Lord, and such like are thought by some to be
Extrinsecal Denominations; and therefore, refund no Imperfection upon GOD, if
spoken of Him; yet, ^s not so: for Relations are Intrinsecal Denominations;
and, as used amongst us, (which gives them their First Signification) they
signify either ^ty of Nature, or some Coordination in Acting or Suffering, (as
is shown at large, Method to Sci^, B. I. Less^ 7.) and it cannot agree to GOD
to have any Order to his Creatures, or Coordination with them, as is shown
there,. 12.

48. Lastly, Negative Notions, such as are Immense, Infinite, Immaterial, and
^^n like, seem to have the fairest Nor yet Negative Notions, as Immense,
Infine, Immaterial, etc.
^le to be properly said of GOD; in regard they distinguish Him from all other
Beings, or from (...) Creatures. But, neither are these Notions (...) from all
Impropriety; for we use these words as Differences, to distinguish the several
sorts of Things; which implies, there is some Generical Notion, common to both
Sorts, which is thus Divided or Distinguished by those Differences, ^^g* when we
say Creatures are Finite, and GOD (...) Infinite, these Differencing Notions do
suppose there is some Univocal Notion Common to both, which is thus
Distinguished or Differenced. But this puts in GOD's Essence a Composition of
Genus and Difference; and (the Generical Notion being Essentially Potential in
respect of it is Differences, and they Actual in respect of it,) is utterly
against the Nature of Pure Actuality of Being, which is GOD's Essence.
Therefore, neither are these Words or Notions of ours, with due Propriety to be
attributed to GOD, as He is in Himself.

49. Moreover, from our former Principles it follows, that there can no
Priority No Priority or Posteriority, either Real* or made by our Reason,
conceiving the least Ground for it in the Thing, can be attributed to GOD.
or Posteriority, either Rei or Rationis be put in GOD; much less any such
Respects as have the least show of inducing the want of any thing belonging to
Being for one Instant or Signum, as some call it: For, this is altogether
Repugnant to the Notion of Purest Actuality of Being, or the Godhead. Nor yet
of Formal or Virtual Distinction in his Essence; for this is against GOD's
Perfect Simplicity; and withal implies some Negation, which is an Imperfection.
Nor is either of these Positions against the Mystery of the B. Trinity rightly
explained; where the Notion of Origin, Principiation, Pr^cession, etc. do debar
both these Priorities, and imply, nay, necessitate, perfect* Simultaneousness.
Much less can any such Words be attributed to GOD, as savor, in the least of
the Notions of any thing in Him which is Cause or Effect: Nor, lastly, which is
next akin to it, which induces the Dependence of GOD's Knowledge, or of the
Decrees of his Will, on Creatures, whether Existent or Possible. Which ^^
unworthy the All-ordering Providence of the First Cause, which prevents all
such Considerations.

50. Notwithstanding what is said, all the Metaphorical Words mentioned,.
Notwithstanding that all these are with some Impropriety spoken of GOD, yet all
of them but the last are Truly said of Him.
44, 45. nay all those which frequently occurr in Holy Writ, and are designedly
made use of there in Accommodation ^o the Rude Understandings of the Vulgar,
are True, and Truly said of GOD, though they have some, and ^ivers of them a
Great Degree of Impropriety in them. For, since we know, that GOD is Infi^^tely
above the Rank of his Creatures, and that they are as Nothing in comparison of
His Sublime ^ssence, which is in every regard most Perfect; such Users of those
Words do intend* while they ^^e them, to depure and strip them of whatever is
^^perfect in their Signification; and do only ^^^an to apply them to GOD, as
far as they sure ^^me Notion of ours which by Analogy, has ^^^e Perfection
Resembling what is in Him. For ^xample: In regard we call such Persons Wise,
^^^^, Good, Merciful, etc. from whom we have ^^serv'd such Effects proceed as
are Proper to ^^ese Virtues; therefore, holding (as we do) ^^^t the same
Effects proceed from GOD, we do ^^ this reason denominate Him, or apply such
attributes to Him as we gave to such Virtuous Persons: And therefore those
Propositions are most True, because he does, indeed, and that with an
incomparably more Excellent manner, produce the same Effects; which was the
Reason of our transferring those Notions to Him. Yet, all the while we
abstracted from the manner how those Virtues are in GOD; in regard this being
utterly Unknown to us, could not enter into our Intention when we thus
Transferred them; our Intention or Meaning, and our Notion being the same
thing. Again, since, when our Savior is called a Lamb or a Lion, (which, being
taken from Animals, are some of the Worst and more Ignoble sort of Metaphors)
by reason of his Meekness and Courage, these Spiritual Qualities are the only
Consideration we intend or mean when we apply those words to Him; and therefore
those Propositions are exactly True, because our Meaning or Notion signified by
those Words was only such: Much more is he truly said to be Good, Just, Wise,
etc. Which are by far less Metaphorical, and less Unlike Him than are the other.

51. To clear this Point more fully, and withal to show, that Mystical Theology
(which some apprehend to be The Solid Ground of Mystic Theology.
nothing but E^statick Fancy) proceeds upon Solid Grounds, viz. Metaphysics,
assisted by Logic, I Discourse thus. Let us take two Perfections, which some
conceive to be Formally in GOD, viz. Mercy and Justice. Reflecting upon the
Meaning of those two Words, we shall find that we have two Forms or Acts in our
Mind, whereof one is not the other; for a Man may be Just and not Merciful, or
Merciful and not Just. If then these two Forms, thus Distinct be in GOD, then
we must put Formal Distinction in GOD, which is Repugnant to the Perfect
Simplicity of a Pure and Indivisible Actuality. Besides, by reason of the
Formal Distinction of those two Notions as they are conceived by us, we are
debarred from saying, that One of them is the Other, or that Mercy is Justice;
whereas, regarding them as they are in GOD, we not only may, but must say, his
Mercy is his Justice; because there is but one most Simple Formality in GOD,
which gives Him the Denomination of Merciful and Just. It Is plain then, that
these two Virtues cannot be in GOD, as they are thus formally Distinct, or Two,
as our Notions represent them; nor, consequently, at all, unless they be
comprised in some Formality which eminently contains them both, and may be said
to be Formally in GOD. Casting then our Thoughts about, we find in GOD another
Attribute, called Goodness, which includes justice and Mercy both; for a Good
Man must necessarily be both Just and Merciful too. But is this Form or Act, we
call Goodness Formally in GOD? Let us see. We find another Attribute ^n GOD
called Wisdom, which is formally Distinct from the Notion of Goodness, and
Goodness from it; for every Good Man is not Wise, nor is every Wise Man Good.
Wherefore, neither of these can be Formally in GOD; nor, consequently, can
either of them be predicated properly of GOD, according to those Disti^ct
Notions we have of them; for this again would put Formal Distinction in GOD,
which is a high Imperfection. But, perhaps, Wisdom and Goodness are found in
some Third Notion which is formally in GOD. Let us see. We find in GOD, Entity
or Being, and both these have (as all other Perfections also have) Entity in
them; and the same Ens or Thing may have both these in it; and if it fails of
having them when as it ought to have them, it falls so far short, or is
Imperfect under the Notion of Ens. Let Us go on, and ask: Is our Notion of Ens
predicated with Propriety of GOD? No certainly: For the Notion of an Ens
amongst us is Distinct from the Notion of Existent; and, we truly say of those
we call Entia or Things, that they sometimes Exist, and sometimes not-Exist.
Whence our Notion of Ens, not having Actual Being in it, can only be this, that
it has a Power to be, which is so far from being Properly said of GOD whose
Essence is a Pure Actuality of Being, that it is Diametrically Opposite to it.
Is our Notion of Existence at least with propriety said of GOD? No, neither:
For, [ Existence] amongst us signifies only the Act of the Thing, or somewhat
of it, but it does not signify the Exister; which yet GOD most properly is.
But, being once come to Existence, we are at the Top, and the Highest, Purest
and Best of of all our Human Notions, and can go no farther.

52. Whence is clearly deduced, that there is no Notion we have, or Word Hence
is concluded, that all the Notions and Words we have, whether Affirmative or
Negative, do full short of the Divine Nature.
we use, which, in propriety of Speech, may not be Denied of GOD, because his
Infinitely Simple, and yet All Perfect Existence, includes them all in one
All-comprehending Formality. And this is the Ground, and indeed, the Sum of
Mystic Theology, which teaches us, that we truly understand nothing of the
Divine Nature as it is in it self. Wherefore, when they would speak of his
Attributes, they are forced to use the words, (...), Supra quam Bonus, suprr
quam Infinitus; and call him, (...), That of which all things are said,
(meaning, that he is the Ple^itude of Being,) all things Denied, because of the
Ineffable Excellency of his Self-existent Being; and in this they agree with
us; so that they tell us, Nihil de Deo a nobis proprie pronunciatur quod ejus
proprietatem assequatur, neque Secundum Privationem, ^t Immortalis, and
Similia; neque secundum Positionem, ut Vita, Unum, etc. The Ground then of
Mystic Theology is Good and Solid, if the Descant upon that Ground be but as
it ought. In this they differ from Metaphysicians; that These, as becomes
Philosophers, make use of their Best Natural Notions, and improve and compound
them to express the Divine Excellencies; and content themselves with speaking
of GOD as well as they can: Acknowledging, in the mean time, with all profound
Submission, that neither our Thoughts can think, or our Words express him with
Propriety as He is in Himself: Whereas the Mysticks would speak of GOD, as He
is in Himself, if they could; but seeing they cannot, they fly to Negative
Expressions as their Best Refuge; but finding that these also fall short, they
acknowledge the Impropriety of these too; and by this means set the Divine
Essence in that Sublime height, by acknowledging none of our Words ^or Thoughts
can reach Him.

MEDITATION.
THus by Studying attentively the Book of Creatures, and reflecting heedfully
on those Natural Notions they gave us, which were the most Sublime, and most
Defaecated How by considering the Visible Things of this World, we are come to
know the Invisible Things of GOD his Essence, and Attributes.
from Matter, we have transcended Nature it self, and all the Lower Orbs of
Finite Beings; and have soared up to their Great Creator and Divine Original.
Nay, we have gained some distant Glimmerings of His Essence it self, and of all
his Glorious Attributes. An Object worthy the Contemplation of our Best
Thoughts; (Oh, may they ever fix and dwell there!) in comparison of which, our
Highest Speculations are but mere Trash, and the whole Emyclopaedia of all
Human Sciences but Empty Descants on Subjects which are next to Nothing. So
certain a Truth it is, That if we regard the true End of our Nature, we were
neither born to Love, nor to Know, any thing but Him, or in order to Him.

We have discovered, under penalty of admitting a Contradiction, (that is, most
evidently) How demonstratively this has been deduced.
that, since there can be no Notions belonging to Being, but either Power to be
and Actual Being; therefore, the Essences of all Beings we can imagine must
either of their own Nature, have Actual Being in them, or not have it; and
that, if they have it not, they must necessarily be only Potential to that Act
we call Existence, that is, they can have of themselves, only a Power to be;
and the plainest Light if Reason assures us, that what is, of it is own Nature,
only a Power to be, can neither make it Self, nor Others to be Actually. Whence
follows unavoidably, that unless there had been ever some Self-Being, ^^
something whose very Essence it was to Exist, neither it self, nor any thing
else, could have been Actually; and that, therefore, as Certain as it is, that
any Thing now is, so Certain it is that there is, and has ever been, such a
First Being to whom it is Essential to Exist, or a GOD.

Since then Existence, or Actual Being, was His Essence or Nature; and,
consequently, he was Existence it self, nor, (he being the First Ens) could
there be any Thing that could limit this Existence; it follows, that this
Essence of His (His Existence) was absolutely Unlimited, or Infinite; and,
consequently, that it did contain in it, after an Eminent manner, (as became a
Pure Actuality of Being,) all that could be comprehended in the Spacious Extent
of Being it self; Whence, he has all the Perfections ^^ Him that have Entity or
Being in them, ( Defects, such as are Sin, and other Privations, are not such)
and this in an Infinite manner; and, so, He is Infinitely Perfect. Whence
follow^, That His Essence includes all those Divine Attributes of Infinitely
Wise, Good, Just, Merciful, Veracious, Powerful, etc. and this in such a
manner, that they are all Concentered Indivisibly in this one Simplest
Formality of his Purest Actuality of Being, His SELF-EXISTENCE.

All these, and diverse other most important Truths have been Demonstrated here
(to the Honor of our Maker, and the And this with an Evidence beyond that of
the Mathematics.
Confusion of the Impugners of a Deity be it spoken) with an Evidence as far
beyond that of the Mathematics, as the Notions of Power and Act, which are
Transcendents, and therefore most Clear, (of which we have made use, and on
which our whole Discourse is grounded) are more Evident than is the Nature of
Quantity, the Object of the Mathematics; which an ordinary Reflection will show
us, is to a very Excessive Degree. For, what frequent Disputes have there been,
and still continue undecided, amongst Bad Speculaters (who will needs frame
Notions out of their Fancy and Wit which Nature never gave them) about the
Nature of Quantity? Whereas, on the other side, Who ever did, or could, raise
any Dispute concerning the Notion of the word [is,] or [can be,] which express
the Act and Power we speak of? Besides, Mathematicians give us Definitions, or,
at least, Explications, of their Lines, Figures, Angles, etc. Which confesses,
that such Notions may be made Clearer; whereas not all the Wit of Mankind can
give us either Definitions or Explications of [is] or [can be,] or make them
Clearer than they are of themselves: And, whoever attempts it, will see, that
instead of Clearing them, by Defining or Explicating them, he will blunder them,
and make them more obscure, by being forced to use such words to explain them
as are far more Obscure than what he went about to explain. Which amounts to
this, that the Notions of Power and Act, cannot possibly be made more Evident,
and, therefore, that they are Self-Evident; which cannot be said of any one
Notion the Mathematicians use, since the Knowledge of them all depends ^^ the
Knowledge of the Nature of Quantity, and this, as we experience, is liable to
dispute; which it could not be, were it Self-Evident, as are those others ^^
make use of: To be employed about such Self-Evident Notions is the Prerogative
of the Noblest Science of METAPHYSICS: These, and some ^^her such, are the
Altissimae Causae, from which she draws her most Evident Demonstrations. To
these Self-Evident Notions, and to her First Principles, ^^de up of such, she
reduces the Evidence and Truth of her Sublime Discourses; which none of the
other Sciences, her Underlings, can ever pretend to, with^^^ using her
Assistance. And, lastly, from such Notions and such Principles, (her Proper
Object being ^^s as such, and those Notions as do properly apper^^^^ to Being)
she Demonstrates a First Being, and (...) his Infinite Attributes. This,
proceeding upon her Principles, and assisted by Right Logic, we have performed
to some Degree, Weakly indeed, but yet sufficiently to convince Atheists; if,
laying aside their ^^ving Fancies, they will but use their Common Reason: I
hope also this will give hint to future Philosophers of better parts and more
Leasurely and Quiet Circumstances, how they may carry on successfully what ^^
have slightly begun.

But, what are we, my Soul, or others who read (...), the better for these
Clear Informations of our Understanding, if That this Evident Knowledge of GOD
will redound to our Disadvantage if we live not accordingly.
they make no Impression on our Wills, ^^^ improve us in Virtue and Christian
Life? Or, rather, are ^^ not much worse for our Speculative Knowledge, if it
remains in (...) still Fruitless, and buds not forth into conformable Actions?
Certainly, that Man is far worse than a Skeptical Atheist, who is Assured there
is a GOD, and lives as if there were none. Wherefore, since we are ascertained
of these most concerning Truths by as Great an Evidence as Humane Nature is
Capable of; Let us next consider, what Affections it ought deservedly to excite
in our Will, and what Duties it enjoins us in our Practice. To To which end,
let us ask our selves these Few Questions.

What Profound Adoration do we owe to so Sovereign a Majesty; before whom the
Angels tremble, and with lowest That this Knowledge obliges us to the Duties of
most profound Adoration and Attention, when we appear before Him in Prayer.
Prostrations acknowledge themselves Impure and as Nothing in his Sight? With
what Reverence and Purity of Heart ought we to approach his Divine Presence,
and appear before him when we put up o^r Petitions to him in Prayer? Or, who
can be so wickedly unmannerly, as to admit Voluntary Distractions, when he is
fixing his Eye upon such ^ Glorious Object?

What short-sighted Mortal dares presume so upon his own Shallow Wit, as to
question To a Firm Belief of what he has Revealed.
the Truth of those High Mysteries and refuse assent to them, though he has Means
to assure him, that GOD who is essentially VERACIOUS ^as Revealed them; merely,
because they suit and color not with his Dull and Low Fancies? Is not this, in
effect, to give Truth it self the Lie? And how can they expect such an Affront
will not be resented by an Infinite Majesty?

What an Encouragement is it to well-meaning Christians, to make them endeavor
to dispose themselves by frequenting* To endeavor to dispose our selves to
receive farther Influences of His Grace: and to an unwavering Hope, that he
will most certainly give us all we are Capabls of, or Disposed for.
Holy Thoughts and Pious* Ex^ises, and also to raise and com^ their Hope; that
they shall (...) such Means, assuredly attain to ^ver-ending Happiness? What
can m^re cheer our Drooping Thoughts th^n to know, that GOD is over^ingly
Bountiful and GOOD, (...) Essentially Self-determin'd to give to every Cre^t^re
all the Good they are Capable of, or Disposed (...) receive? Not the least Good
Thought we think, (...) the least Good Wish of our Will, not the least Good
Intention we mean, nor the least Good Action we perform, but it works in us
(through the Blessing of the same Goodness) a farther Degree of Sanctity; and has
it is Proportionable Reward laid (...) in Heaven. How careful then and
sollicitous ought we to be, lest, by our Uncomplying Slothfulness, ^^ Neglect
of Duties, we give the least way to Temptations, or run back in Virtue, quench
the Irradiations ^^ His Holy Spirit, and put an Obstacle to the Ef^^^ence of
his Boundless Generosity; which stands ever ready to promote us to all those
Degrees of Virtue which we heartily and affectionately wish, and with ^ humble
Confidence in the same Goodness pray for. Nay, when the former World, by reason
of Original Corruption wanted efficacious Means to dispose Mankind for Heaven,
the same Goodness did take that Concern into his own hand; and, did, by his
Providence ripen the World for Higher Knowledges, and disposed them by their
Inquisitiveness what was Man's Summum Bonum, and their Dissatisfactions about
it, for that Fullness of Time, in which his Wisdom saw it Seasonable and Fit to
send them a Divine Master to teach them such a Heavenly Doctriu^, as Rude
Nature was till then incapable to conceive ^^ aim at.

How does it overawe and terrify our Corrupt and Inconstant Nature to know He
is infinitely JUST; and will infallibly To tremble at His Justice, if we
wilfully break his Commands.
punish severely every Transgression of His Dread Command^, nay, every Idle
Word, according to the Degree of it is Demerit? Can any Man hope to Bias a
Judge, whose Impartiality and Uprightness is Essential to Him? Or, what
Obstinate Sinner d^r^^ hope to contrast with an Angry and Just GOD, wh^ is
armed with OMNIPOTENCE!

And yet, what Sinner, though never so Enormous* can Despair of Pardon, if he
heartily And to Hope of Pardon if we sincerely Repent.
repents* and humbly asks it; when he reflects, and con^^ders, that Both Faith
and Evident Reason do assure him, that GOD is Infinitely MERCIFUL? We do
scarcely allow that Man to be Good-natured or Merciful, nay, we look upon him
as Hard-hearted and Cruel, who will not forgive him that has offended him, if
he be heartily Sorry for his Fault and begs his Pardon: And is it not then, a
kind of Blasphemy to conceit, that ou^ GOD, whose MERCY is Infinite, and
withal, Essential to Him, should have less Goodness, Generosity and Mercy,
than a Wretched, Narrow-hearted and P^evish Mortal? Oh, What a Sure Anchor of
HOPE is this Divine Attribute to poor Sinners, wh^ fear the Eternal Wrack of
their Soul, and are Sinking and almost Overwhelmed with Despair? that an
Encouragement and Invitation both to Weak ^d to Wicked Souls, to repent of
their Sins hearti^ and apply to the Throne of Grace; where they ^re sure not to
fail of obtaining Pardon, if with hum^^mble Confidence and Sincere Penitence
they (...) it?

What Christian who acknowledges that GOD is ^nfinitely WISE, and therefore has
^d the Order of the World after the To Resignation, in all sinist^r
Contingencies, to the Infinitely-Wise Disposition of GOD's Providence in his
Government of the World.
Wisest and Best manner, can be Un^gn'd when Crosses happen, and (...) Success
of Temporal Affairs go not ^rding to his Wish? How Unrea^ble is it to expect
from an All^e Universal Governor that he ^ld pervert the Best Order of the
^tion, or consent that All the World should be worse for the sake of one
inconsider^ble Atome of it. Every Generous Man thinks it (...) fitting to
suffer Inconveniences, nay to hazard his life for the Common Good of his own
Country, What an odious Selfishness is it then to repine at Suffe^g much more
for the Common Good of the Universe? Especially, since the Resigned Sufferer
will gain ^^comparably greater Advantages by thus entircly Submitting to
Providence, and humbling himself under ^^ Omnipotent hand of GOD, than he can
possibly ^e from the enjoying that Temporal Good for which he was so
passionately concerned.

What Hypocrite can hope to disguise his Base Intentions and Doubling Wiles; or
to. To Sincerity, and Unpretended Virtue, and Honesty.
^ood-wink Him who is Essentially ALL-SEEING? Or what more Powerful Motive to
make False^earted Pretenders to Virtue and Honesty, leave off their Foolish
Insincerity; and to take care that their Thoughts and Actions be all of a piece?

Lastly, What Christian heart can be so Insensible of GOD's Noble Kindness and
Bounty as not to love God with the whole Bent of his Will, who desires no more
of us to Especially, to love God, who is our True Good, and Only Happiness, as
we ought; both for what he is in Himself, and what he is to us.
make us Eternally Happy, but that we would pursue our own True Interest, and
love above all things our Eternal Happiness, Himself? Who is ready to pardon
all our Sins at the first asking, if we heartily, sincerely and penitently ask
it? Who is ready to help its forward every step we take in Virtue, if we be but
willing to help our selves, and humbly beg his Assistance. How can that Man
pretend to love any thing, who loves not Him in whom are all Things? Or to love
Himself, if he loves not his own only True Happiness?

These most efficacious Motives to the Best Virtues the Consideration of the
Divine Attributes The Imitation of GOD's Moral Attributes, are, also, a most
Effectual Means to perfect us in all sorts of Virtue.
does plentifully afford us, besides what the Imitation of His Moral Attributes
give us; which will make us Perfect as He is Perfect, and by Transforming us
into His Likeness here, raise us to be Perfectly Like Him, and, in some sort,
Deifie us hereafter. Cum apparuerit, similes erimus; quoniam videbimus, eum
sicuti est. Joan. Ep. 1. Chapter 3. V. 2.

Transnatural Philosophy: OR, METAPHYSICS.
BOOK IV. Of the several OPERATIONS of Things; and of the Manner (in common)
How the First Being administers His World.
1. ALL Power of Operating or Acting springs immediately from the All Action
springs immediately from the Existence of the Cause.
^^^stence of the Thing; or (which is the same) from the Thing as it Exists.
For, since the Essence, precisely considered, i^ only a Power to Exist; and
what is only a Power to Exist, is not; and no Operation can proceed from what,
according to it is own precise Nature or Notion, is not. It follows, that all
Power of Operating or Acting must proceed from the Existence of the Thing, or
from the-Thing as it Exists.

2. Therefore, the Power of Operating thus or thus particularly, or from which
it has such or such a Power of And the Acting in such a manner, springs from
the Things being of such a Nature or Essence.
Operating, springs from the Thing as it is such, or such; or, as it is this or
that Sort of Thing. This is Evident from the Former, additis addendis. Besides,
were not this so, Every Thing might do Any Thing, which is against our Constant
Experience.

3. Therefore all Power of Operating, as it is such an Operation, proceeds
Therefore the Power of Operation, as it is such, is refunded into the Essence.
from the Essence of the Thing. Because the Essence is that which constitutes
it formally such or such a Sort of Thing.

4. Therefore all Causality whatever is the Imparting or Communicating
something, Therefore all Causality is the Imparting somewhat to the Patient
which was, some way or other, in the Cause or Agent.
or somewhat, that is in the Cause. For, since every Effect is Determinate,
that is, such o^ such; and, is made such by such an Operation; and the
Operation is such, because (by. 3.) i^ proceeds from such an Essen^^ it
follows, that the Operation carries forwa^^ that Respect, or Formality, by
which the Caus^ was denominated such, and imparts or communicates it to the
Effect or to the Subject on which it works; so that the Power of imparting it,
(...) it is such, or of determining it, is taken from (...) Essence, which is
such it self; and the Power ^ Actually Imparting it, which we call it is
Efficiency, springs from the Existence; which (as it were) stamps or imprints
somewhat which is found in the Essence, upon the Patient; according to that
Maxim, Operatio sequitur Esse.

5. Hence Motion, according to it is common Notion precisely, serves only to
apply closely the Agent to the Patient; Hence Motion, only Applies the Agent to
the Patient.
This is Evident, because it has been now demonstrated, that the whole Power or
Virtue of the Cause, enabling it to make the Effect such, or to make it
actually any Effect at all, is taken from the Essence and the Existence.

6. The First Operation among Bodies is Divi^* For, since Quantity is the The
First Operation among Bodies is DIVISION.
^t Common Affection of All Bodies, that is, of Body in common; That Operation
on Bodies must be the First that works upon Quantity as Quantity. Wherefore,
since it has been Demonstrated, that Quantity (as it is in Nature, or grounds
Natural Action and Passion) is Divisibility, or a Power to be Divided; that
Natural Operation, or Action, must be the First which puts in Act that Power of
being Divided, or is exercised upon Divisibility as such. But this (as appears
from the very terms) is Division. Therefore the First Operation among Bodies is
Division. foreover, since it is not probable there should be now-adays any
other Bodies but Mixts; and Mixture could only be made by Division of the ^^rer
Bodies made by Dense ones; it follows, that (...) this regard also the First
Operation of one Body upon another must be Division.

7. The next immediate Operations of one Body upon another, are those two
Simple Motions, called Pulsus and Tractus; The next Operations are IMPULSE and
ATTRACTION.
or Impulse and Attraction: For, since, when one Body acts upon another, it
must either Divide that Other, or not-Divide it; and Division evidently
produces the Former Effect, and Impulse and Attraction the Later; it is
manifest, that the Next, or rather (they being contradictorily Distinct,) the
Only remaining Immediate Operations of one Body on another are Impulse and
Attraction; neither of which (as is Evident) do divide the Body they work upon.
Again, since all Operation of one Body upon another is performed by Local
Motion; and all Simple, or mere Motion must either be toward or fromwards the
other Body; and therefore, in case it do not divide it, must tend to drive it
before it, or draw it after it: It Is manifest that these two Operations of
Impulse and Attraction are the only-remaining immediate Operations of one Body
on another.

8. The Reason of these two Operations cannot be fetched from Physical
Principles, but from Metaphysics. For, The Reason of which Operations cannot
be fetched from Physical Principles, but from Metaphysics.
since the reason of this Attraction cannot be any Physical Quality, such as
are Glutinousness, Tenaciousness, etc. because these are found only in a few
Bodies, whereas these Operations have their Effect on All: Nor can the
Operation of Impulse be refunded into the Primary Qualities either of Rarity
and Density; in regard we find they have Equal Effect on Rare Bodies as on
Dense ones; ^uch less, for the same reason, can this proceed from any Occult
Qualities, (as they call them) by virtue of which, some one Body flies from
another ^t of Antipathy, or out of Sympathy follows it, ^s happens in some
particular Bodies,) because, (...) was said, this happens in All Bodies
whatever: (...) is manifest, that the true Cause of these Operations must be
fetched from a Higher Cause than any Physical Principles can reach; and,
therefore, it must be fetched from Metaphysics.

9. Nor can they proceed from the Metaphysical Notion or Natures of Matter and
Form. For both those (...) in Metaphy^ from the ^tter and ^m.
Notions are terminated in compounding an Individual Body, and rendering it
Capable of Exist^ or an Ens; and therefore they formally and ^perly respect
Being only: Which is a Different ^^ct from that in Question.

10. Wherefore the true Reason of these two Operations must be drawn, as from
it is Ground, from the Common (...) from the Es^ or Nature of (...) Common
Modifi^on of Matter, ^antity.
Essence of the First Affection of Natural Entities or Bodies, which is
QUANTITY. For, since these Operations of Impel^ and Attracting, are, as
Experience teaches (...) Common to All Bodies, or to Body in Com^; they must be
refunded in the most Common ^tion that can belong to Body; that is, from (...)
Quantity. And, since they cannot proceed (...) those particular Modifications
of Quantity, (...) as are all Physical Qualities; nor yet from (...) Matter and
Form which compound those Bo^; they must necessarily be refunded into the
Essence it self of Quantity in Common; or into such Properties, of it as are
most nearly allied to it is Essence; or, rather, are diverse Respects or
Considerations of it.

11. To clear this Point more fully, I Discourse thus. Ens, and consequently,
Unum, are Transcendents, and, are This Disputable Point fully Cleared.
applied to all the Te^ Predicaments, or Common Heads of our Natural Notions:
And yet so, that they are Properly, or in their First Signification, predicated
only of Substance or Thing; and of the rest, Improperly, Analogically or
Secondarily; as is demonstrated, Method to Science, B. 1. Less. 4.. 1. and 2.
and is even known by the Goodness of Nature, and the Common Use of Human
Language, to the Rude Vulgar; as is shown there,. 4. etc. Page 39. However,
they have their Analogical Essences; and, as their Notions are distinct, so we
can discourse of each of them as distinctly, as we can of Distinct Substances,
and perhaps more. Moreover, these words [ Ens] and [ Unum,] are spoken of no
Two of those Heads Univocally, or in the same Signification: For, were it so,
En^ would be a Proper Genus to those Two, and so those Two ought to be put in
one and the same Predicament; which is against Common Sense; as will appear to
any meanest Considerer who reflects on the Distinction of the Predicaments, and
the vast difference of their respective Notions And, who sees not how
impossible it is that the meaning of Unum or One, according to Action, Place or
Habit, should have the same Common Notion with One according to Substance,
Quality, Relation, or any of the Others? These Grounds laid, the Question now
is, What is the Analogical Entity or Unity peculiar and Proper to Quantity as
Distinct from the rest? What we affirm i^* that since we see that those
Entities which are not actually Divided, are only Capable to be Divided; and
this by reason of their Quantity, and not of their Substance, Quality, or any
other Respect; therefore the Notion or Essence of Quantity is Divisibility. And
let it be noted, that we speak not here of Quantity according to a Mathematical
Consideration, but according to a Physical one; or as it is the Cause of
Natural Action or Passion, and affects it is Subject accordingly. Now
Divisibility, or a Capacity to be Divided, excludes being Actually Divided
already: Wherefore since what is Actually Divided is made more according to it is
Quantity, or more Quanta, what is only Divisible, is, eo ipso, One in Quantity.
Wherefore, since, if any two Bodies in Nature were Discontinu'd, they would be
Actually Divided according to the Notion of Quantity; It follows, that the
Unity, peculiar to Quantity is Continuity. Wherefore, all the Bodies in the
World, having Quantity in them, must have Divisibility in them which is the
Essence of Quantity; and, consequently, they must have Continuity in them,
which is its Proper Unity: Which shows, that all Quantitative things having
essentially Continuity* in them, or, which is the same, Coherence of their
Parts; It follows, that they must as necessarily cohere, as it is, that what
has Coherence of parts in it, it is parts must cohere; or which is the same,
What Coheres, does Cohere. And yet what a puzzle has ^^ cost diverse Great Wits
to find out a reason for the Coherence of the parts of Quantity; while they
sought in Physical Causes where it was not to be found, and not in
Metaphysics, which discoursing of the Essences of Things, demonstrates it ab
altissimis Causis, and gives it ascertained to their Hands? For the self-same
reason, all Vacuum within the World, which is evidently Discontinuity of
Quantity, or a Chasm or Interruption of it, is Demonstrated Impossible and
Contradictory; and amounts to these Propositions, when resolved into it is
Proper Principles, viz. Continuity is not Continuity; Quantity is not Quantity:
Quantitative Unity is Quantitative Plurality, etc. When the Natures or Essences
of Things are not attended to, and thence become Violated, the Genuine
Consequences of such Discourses must necessarily be open Contradictions. In
vain then do Ingenious Men endeavor to torture Nature by Suckers in Pumps, and
such Inventions, to find out a Vacuum. The Essences of every Thing, and of
every Mode of Thing, are Established by the First Being; and sooner may all
Nature be torn into Atoms, than they can cease to be what they are. To proceed,

12. Hence is shown the reason also of Attraction; and why, when one Body is
moved fromwards Another, that Hence is seen particularly the reason of
Attraction.
other must follow; otherwise* (except in the Case to be mentioned,. 13.) that
other would become Discontinu'd; which, a^ was said, involves a Contradiction.
And, from the same Ground follows the necessity of some Impulse, when one is
moved toward Another. For Quantity or Divisibility cannot be in a Subject
^hout rendering it Divisible: Nor could it be ^isible, unless it is Potential
Parts were out of, ^d not within one Another, which we call Pe^rated; that so
there might be space enough (...) the Dividing Body to come between it is parts;
(...) which Division formally consists: Nor could (...) be, if the parts of
Quantity were Penetrated, (...) not-Extended. Whence follows, that it must,
(...) the Motion continues, be Impelled or Driven ^wards.

13. Notwithstanding, every Impulse does, to (...) degree, Condense the
Impelled Body; and ^ry Attraction does to some de^e Rarifie that which is
Attra^; Every Impulse does at first Condense; and every Attraction, Rarefies.
at least at first. For, since ^re can be no Action in Nature ^hout it is Proper
or Formal ^ect; or can any Agent work ^on Body, but according to such or such a
pre^se Respect, in which it is Passive; and there are manifestly Two Operations
or Actions in Nature, ^ll'd Impelling and Attracting; and these have their
Formal Effects upon Quantity; and all Effects upon Quantity must either be upon
the Essence of it, as has been shown, from. 6. to. 13. (...) else according to
its Differences, that is, on Bo^, as they are more or less Divisible; or, as
they (...) Rare or Dense: It follows, that whenever any ^p^llent or Attracting
Body acts upon another, (...) will first Compress and Condense its parts, or
Di^, and Rarifie them; till the Motion being ^ommunicated through the Whole, it
drives forwards or draws after it the whole Entire Body it works upon. That the
Effect of Impulse and Attraction are Formally on Quantity, or on Body as it is
Quantitative, and not as it is Substance, or affected with any other Mode, is
demonstrated in the Appendix to my Method to Science,. 25.

14. All these Operations are either performed by Local Motion, or
concomitantly with it. For, Division, or the All these Operations are either
performed by Local Motion, or concomitantly with it.
Sliding of the parts of the Dividing Body between the parts of the Body
Divided, (which is formally Division,) is most manifestly Local Motion. Also,
the Imp^lling another Body before it, or Drawing them after it, is clearly to
make them change Place, or move Locally: And the same must be said of
Rarefaction and Condensation; which dilate the Body so as to take up a Greater
Place, or Shrink* it into a Lesser; which is, in some Degree, to chang^^ Place.

15. All Motion comes at first from the Angelical Nature. This has been
Demonstrated, B. 2. Chapter 2.. 4, 5. All Motion comes at first from the Angelical
Nature.
and Method to Science, page 299. Thesis IV. Ideae Cartefianae, p. 44.. 31. and
Raillery Defeated,. 43. In which places this Demonstration is maintained and
enforced. And it is further shown agreeable to Reason. For, since on the one
side, all Action in Nature (abating the formality of connotating or respecting
the Agent) is the same as Motion, and therefore must proceed from some Act, or
such a Thing as has the Nature of Act in it; and Angels are Pure Acts; and,
consequently, more able to Act than Bodies are; they are, therefore, in this
regard, fit Agents to produce Action or Motion; especially, since (as is seen
^. Chapter 2.. 8.) they contain all Body, and, con^ently, every Mode or Virtue of
Body in them. (...) the other side, since Motion in its precise Na^, or* as
distinguished from its Subject, is the (...) approaching to Nonentity and
Nonexistence (...) any Notion we have, (as is shown in my Me^, B. 1. Less. 8..
2.) and, for that Reason* ^ot proceed immediately from GOD, who is Es^l
EXISTENCE; it follows, that though it be such (...) Imperfect Effect, it may yet
proceed congru^y enough from an Angel; who, he being a ^r^, and as such, having
no Prerogative in ^s regard over his Fellow Creatures; has No^, (as o^ Himself)
or Nonexistence, in^ in his very Being, which fit him in every ^rd to be the
most Proper Immediate Cause of ^tion. Lastly, it is a most senseless opinion, to
think ^at GOD, as the Cartesians hold, gives all Created ^^^^es their Being,
and endows them with Facul^ and Powers to perform such or such Operati^s, and
yet will not permit them to perform them, ^t does all the lowest and meanest
Effects immediately by Himself; which is at once Derogatory (...) GOD's Supreme
Majesty, and makes those ^ow^rs themselves Useless, Frustaneous, and ^d for
Nothing; which is against the Metaphy^al* Bonity or Goodness, which is a
Property of ^eir Entity; as has been shown, B. 1. Chapter 2. (...) 11, 12, 13.

16. All Motion is a Perpetual Novelty, or a ^ontinu'd New Effect. For, since
Every part of Motion is a New Effect.
^o Succeeding part of Motion is, while the foregoing ones are ^ssing; nor can,
possibly, be any of those parts which went before; it follows that each of them
is made anew, or is a New Effect.

17. Therefore Motion requires a Continual Influx of the Moving Cause. For,
since no part of Motion can be Therefore it requires a Continual Influx of the
Moving Cause.
of it self; and every part of it is a Distinct or New Effect; also, since to
move a thing thus far is not to move it farther; and the same reason holds all
along through the whole Course of Motion: It must needs require continually
either a New Cause, or a Continually New Effort of the same Moving Cause, to
produce its Continuance, otherwise it might cease in any part of it is Flux,
were it not still helped forward.

18. This Continuance of Motion is performed by the Operation of some Chief
Angel incessantly Rarefying the Matter of the Solar Bodies; and consequently,
darting This Moving Cause is some Chief Angel Rarefying the Matter of the Solar
Bodies.
out it is Rays of Light, or Fire, to those Bulks of Matter which are within
it is Influence. For, since this Continual Rarefaction forces the preceding
Particles or Rays to fly forwards to make place for the succeeding ones; and
this with a quickness proportionable to the Penetrativeness or Tenuity of those
Particles which is Inconceiveably such; and these affecting and piercing, by
degrees, more Solid Bodies, do set all their several parts a playing, according
to their respective Natures, from which must necessarily ensue the several
Motions of Division, Impulse, Attraction, and consequently of Rarefaction and
Condensation, which are the Parents of all other more particular Operations;
from which, as even Experience tells us, do proceed all the Effects in Nature:
It follows, that this Continual Rarefaction of the Solar Matter is the Cause of
the ^tinuance of all our Motion. As Experience (...) say,) also teaches us in
the Change of the Sea^s of the year; whence Common Reason as^res us, that
should that Angelical Operation ^se for some considerable time, all the Earth
^ould be nothing but a frozen, unactive and un^oveable Mass.

19. Angels are Pre-mov'd by the First Being to love the Material World, even
to the least Atome or Circumstance Angels are Premov'd or Directed by GOD to
move Matter, as i^ most suitable to His Eternal Decrees.
of it, in such a Manner as (...) most Agreeable to his Eternal ^d Immutable
Decrees. For, ^ce it belongs to Infinite Wis^ to administer the whole ^eation,
or the Universality of his Creatures, ^ording to the Wisest and Best Manner;
and t^^ Managery of the Material World is carried ^^ by Motion; and Motion is
effected by Angels ^^ its Immediate Causes; and Angels are Intelligent Beings,
which act by Knowledge, ^d are Premov'd or Determined to act by Motives; and
the Best Motives to make Faithful Servants ^ct, is to Know their Master's Will;
Nor could ^^ey know his Will, or his most hidden and In^able Decrees by which
they were to square ^ir Actions, unless GOD had some way or other ^^nifested
them: It follows, that these Mani^tions of his Divine Pleasure are the Proper
Motives to them to move and order all Material nature as He had Decreed. Which,
(this Order ^f the World being the Best,) reaches to the ^ost Minute Parts and
Least Circumstances of ^.

20. The First or Chief Bodies, thus moved by Angels, do in their manner
Premove, that is, Determine and Continue The First moved Bodies do Determine
and Continue the Motion of the rest.
the Motion given them at first by the Angelical Nature. For, since an
Instrument is Movens Motum, or such a thing as being Moved by another has a
power to produce immediately the Effect it is Designed for; and it is evident
from what is said above, that Bodies have a Power in them to Divide, Impel,
Attract, and thence to Rarifie and Condense others, as Immediate Agents; It Is
manifest, that by the First of these Effects, the Bulk, Figure, Situation, and
consequently the Mixture or Texture of the Component Parts of the other Bodies,
which they do thus move are made; and from the other motions their Intrinsecal
Temperament, or the Rarity and Density of those Parts proceeds: All which being
Determinate Effects, proceeding from Bodies as their Immediate Movers; It Is
Evident, that this Determination and Continuance of Motion springs immediately
from the Motion of the next precedent Body, which by its Motion premoves, and
determines the Motion of the following ones.

21. Hence, Angels, and the Bodies they move, do, as Second Causes, Immediately
Determine the Individuation Hence Angels, and the Bodies they Move, do, as
Second Causes, determine the Individuation of all New-made Bodies.
of all Bodies whatever. For, since the Complexion of Accidents is the
Essential Form, which by distinguishing it from all others, does constitute
every Individual Body, by making it to be Determinately or Individually This,
as has has been ^ov'd, B. 1. Chapter 2. and, consequently, renders (...) Capable of
Existence, or an Ens; and this ^omplexion of Accidents is chiefly caused by the
^utting together Rare and Dense Parts in such a ^roportion; and the Bulk,
Figure and Situation ^f those Parts do concur also, and help in their way, to
form it into such a Constant or Coherent ^s, and to distinguish it from others;
and all these are immediately produced by the Operations mentioned in the
foregoing. which are caused by Angels as Moving Bodies, and by the Bodies
themselves, as the Instrument of Intelligences, or ^^ Moved by them: It Is
evinced, that Angels and bodies, as Second Causes, are the Immediate
Determiners of the Individuation of all new-made bodies whatever.

22. It Is beyond the Power of those Second Causes to give Existen^e to the
least Body in Nature. For, since But it is beyond their Power to give Existence.
by. 2. the Nature or Quality of the Operation follows from the Nature or
Quality of the Agent, and (as will be seen shortly) is finally refunded into
the Essence of the Cause whence it springs; and none of those Things called
Bodies, nor yet Angels which move them, have Existence in their Essence, but
are merely Capable of Being, and, as far as is of themselves, may not-be; it
follows, that however they may by their Operation impart to the new-made Ens,
Motion, Rarity, Density, or other such Effects as either were Essential to them
or sprung out of their Essence; yet they could never communicate to them
Existence, this being Extrinsecal and Accidental to them, and of an Excellency
incomparably above or beyond their Essence, as much as the Notion of Act or
Actual Being is above that of mere Power, or Possibility of Being, which is
beyond all Proportion.

23. Therefore it can belong only to GOD, the First Cause, to give Actual Which
therefore is peculiar only to GOD.
Being or Existence, because only his Nature is Essentially Existent.

24. Therefore for the same reason it belongs to Him, and to Him only, to As
also to Conserve things in Being.
Conserve them in Being. For, since the reason, (as far as is on His part) why
His Goodness gave them Being at first, was because they were Determinate Entia
or Individua; and only Capable of Being, and wanted it; and they are still, for
every moment afterward, Entia or Capable of Being, and, as far as is of
themselves, may, for every moment, not-be; it follows, that for the same reason
for which He gave them Being at first, it belongs to Him still to conserve it.
And that none else can support them in Being is hence Evident; because all
Creatures (they being of their own Nature merely capable to be) do want a
Support themselves: Besides that Actual Being, even when Creatures have it, is
Extrinsecal to their Essences, from which only the Nature or Quality of the
Effect proceeds, by. 2, 3, 4.

25. For the same Reason, if the Thing be Nobler, that is, fit for more, or
Nobler Operations, a Nobler Existence And to give to a Nobler Essence a Nobler
Existence.
must be given it, else a Contradiction would follow, viz. ^ That Thing would
be otherwise than it should be, ^d consequently, otherwise than it is Capable to
be; which is a Contradiction.

26. For the same Reason, if Matter, raised to it is highest pitch, come to ^^
so disposed, that it requires For the same Reason a Spiritual Form will be
given to Matter connaturally Disspos'd for it.
(...) Form of a higher, or Spiritual, Nature, that Capacity is Supplied by the
First Being, according to the Exigency of that Matter; and a Form of a
Spiritual Nature, or a Soul, will be in it. And, because Matter and Form
compound an Ens, o^ a Thing Capable of Existence; therefore, at the same
instant, an Existence suitable to b^th ^^ose Natures, (that is,
Corporeo-Spiritual) will (by. 25.) be given it by GOD's Redundant Goodness and
Steady Emanation of Being.

27. For the same Reason also, even in Spiritual and Supernatural Endowments,
those who are Disposed The same holds also in Supernatural Gifts, which, are
also carried on by Dispositions.
by an Ardent Desire of them, and apply to the Giver of them by Fervent and
Frequent Acts of: their Will, relying with per^^ct Confidence on his Ungrudging
Bounty, may be Infallibly sure to receive them. Which is the greatest Comfort
and Encouragement to Weak and Well-meaning Souls; and, debars rechless and
wicked Sinners from all hope of Excuse; since there had needed no more to make
them Virtuous Saints, than only to have asked it with Humility, Faith, and
Perseverance.

28. For the same Reason, GOD, who is Self-Existence, and therefore Infinitely
Perfect, cannot be the Cause Hence GOD is not the Cause of any Defect, much
less of Sin, or not-Being.
of any Defect; whether it be Natural, or Moral which we call Sin; but such
Defects are refunded into the Incapacity of Creatures that were to receive
these farther Perfections, or into their Defectiveness in Operating; Much less
can he be the Cause of the Greatest, or rather Total Defect, [ Not-being.]

29. Hence is seen, that all the several sorts of Operations that are, have
been, or can be, are finally refunded into How all these Sorts of Operations do
spring from the Respective Essences.
the Essences of the Things that operate. For the Operation must be such as the
Power to operate is, nor can be at all without it; for, otherwise, a Thing
might do what it has no Power to do; that is, might do what it cannot do. And
the Power of Acting is such as the Essence is; and among Creatures, springs
from It as it Root, being a Property of it. To show this particularly: The
Operation of Attraction, is grounded on the Unity (that is the Essence) of
Quantity, which is Continuity. The Operation of Impulse springs from the
Impenetrability of Quantitative Parts, which is either the Nature of
Divisibility, (or Quantity) or else next a kin to it; as is shown above,. 12.
The Operations of Rarefaction and Condensation, (by. 13.) clearly arise from
the former; and therefore from the Essence of the same Cause on which those
Former Operations were grounded. The First Motion or Action of all Bodies, and
the Continuance of ^^^m, is refunded into the Essence of Angels; which, on the
one side, being Pure Acts, are the ^^est Agents to be the Origin of Action,
which ^ done by Motion: On the other side, having no^^^ng of Actual Being or
Existence in their Na^^^e, they can only produce that Inferior Effect, ^^^d
Motion, in such Beings as are below them* ^^stly, the Operation of Creating, or
Giving Actual Being, springs peculiarly from the Essence of the First Being,
which is Self-Existence. By which is seen, (without need of particularizing)
^^w Wisely the FIRST BEING administers His World, by Reserving to Himself to be
the Imme^^^e Cause of the Noblest Effect, and most resem^^ng Him [ Existence;]
and appointing his Underlings and Journeymen the Angels to move every part of
the Material World according to their respective Natures. By which means the
well-compacted Frame and Course of Nature hangs together by the Indissoluble
Connection of Proper Causes with their Proper Effects. And, ^^ce all the Exact
Knowledge, or Science, we have, is built on this; His Creative Wisdom does by
this Means give Knowledge to those Cogno^^ive Creatures, which because they are
not ^ure Acts, and, consequently, have not Knowledge due to them by their
Creation; are to Ac^^re it here from Natural Objects affecting their ^oul by
means of their Senses, and by Reflection on the Notions they imprint.

30. From what has been proved hitherto, it has been demonstrated, how our
Great and Wise GOD does all That GOD does all that is Good in All; and in what
Manner, and by what Means.
that is Good, or has Being in it, in all things. For, they have their Essences
from the Ideas in his Divine Understanding; and their Existences by his
Peculiar and Immediate Act of Creation: He still conserves their Essence in
Being, by the same Continued Action; and, at the same time, all their Faculties
and Powers, by which they act on one another. He puts them forwards to exercise
those several Faculties, and actually to produce their Operations on one
another, according to their Natures, by Motion which is given them by his Chief
Officers in administering the World, Angels; and continues their Motions and
Operations by their Incessant perpetuating of that Motion. So that both their
Essences, their Actual Being, their Power to act, their Exercise of that Power;
and, consequently, whatever belongs to the Action it self, as far as it is
Positive, or has Entity and Goodness in it, (and, amongst the rest, the
Determination of our Will to what is Good and Virtuous) do all of them Entirely
depend on GOD, and are Derived from Him. -- Ip^^ Honor and Gloria in saecula
saeculorum. Amen.

MEDITATION.
THe Essences of Things, which give all Bodies their several Sorts of Operation
being esta^t by GOD; and Vacuum being own Impossible from the Conti^^ity That
GOD's Ordinary Providence carries on the Course of Nature by Proper Causes,
still producing Proper Effects, Demonstrated, a priori.
of Quantity, which is it is ^^d of Unity, or Entity; It fol^^^s, that all the
Bodies of the ^aterial World do immediately con^^ upon, or touch one another;
^^* therefore being set on work, ^pusht forward by Motion, which i^ given and
continued to them by the Angelical Nature, they must necessarily affect, or
work upon, one another; and this according to their respective Essences; or,
(as we express it in Philosophical Language) Proper Causes must still produce
proper Effects. And, seeing this Reason holds in all Bodies whatever, since the
Creation was finished and Natural Causes begun to move in a Regular Order;
^^sequently the whole Course of Nature (to show and ^^plain which is the Work
of a Natural Philosopher) ^^sists in the Production of such Effects as are
Proper ^d suitable to the Genius of their Causes.

Thus is the Providence of our Great GOD, ad^inistring the World after the
Wisest ^anner, Demonstrated a Priori. Con^irm'd, Because, otherwise Mankind
could not possibly have any Science; nor know what to do in their ordinary
Actions.
And, that this way of Governing the Material World does most become His Divine
Wisdom appears hence, that (as was lately said) all our Acquired Wisdom in
Natural things, or all our Science, is entirely grounded on our Knowing this
Connection of such Causes with such Effects; insomuch, that all Mankind would be
a pack of Ignorant Fools, if the Consequence of these later from the former
were not Certainly established; since, in that case, they could never know what
things they were to make use of, to compass any Effect they intended; nor know
what to eschew, and what to pursue: No Proportion of any Means to the End being
Possible to be known, in case such Determinate Causes were not apt to produce
such Determinate and Proper Effects; or, (which is the same) if every thing did
not Act as it Is, but that Any thing might do, or not do, Any thing.

Nor is this Connected Tenor of managing the Material World by Proper Causes
and Effects less Evident a posteriori. The same Great Truth Demonstrated a
posteriori.
For, let us pitch our thought upon any one Effect done at present; and, let it
be the Greatest, or the most Inconsiderable one, (as it may seem to us;) for
this alters not the case: Plainest Reason will tell us, that either it had some
Cause, or it had none. If it had none, and yet is; it must have been
Self-Existent: Which is both against Experience, for we see it lately produced;
and against our Reason too; because to be Self-Existent is an Incommunicable
Attribute of the DEITY. If it had a Cause, then that Cause was either
Indifferent to produce this or any other Effect; in which ca^e it could produce
Nothing; since Ex indifferenti nihil sequitur: Besides, every Effect (whether
it be a Thing, or a Mode of Thing) is Determinate; for whatever is produced,
^s, and whatever is is Determinate, since nothing in common can be; and an
Indeterminate Cause cannot produce an Determinate Effect; for in that
Supposition it would work contradictorily to it is self. It must then be
Determinately apt, or Proper, to produce this kind of Effect, and no other.
This Effect was therefore put because there was such a Determinate or Proper
Cause to produce it. This seen, let us make the same Discourse concerning that
which was the Proper Cause, as we did now concerning its Effect now mentioned;
and so, of all the Antecedent Causes in the World, since Time first started
into Motion. Each of them Existed, or was, in it is Season; None of them could
exist of themselves; therefore each of them had a Cause; and that, by our
former Discourse, a Determinate or Proper one. Nothing therefore is, or can be,
more Demonstrable, nor more immediately reducible to Self-Evidence, than it is,
that the whole Course of Nature is carried on by Proper Causes and Proper
Effects.

This Consideration made that Great Aristotelian, and truly Christian
Philosopher, Boethius, begin his Devout Rapture in Hence the Course of GOD's
Work manship, the Fabric of Nature, is Close and Indissoluble.
these Words, [O, qui perpetua Mundum Ratione gubernas!] The whole Current of
our Reason runs upon this Ground, and proceeds every step in this beaten Track,
that every Cause produces such Effects as are Agreeable and Proper to its
peculiar Nature; and this perpetually, or through the whole Course of the World.
For were the Line of Causality interrupted by Chasms and Interstices, our
Reason would be at an utter Loss. This it was also which made that Divine
Writer, the Author of Ecclesiasticus, speaking of the Manner in which the World
is Administered by the Divine Wisdom, deliver his comprehensive Thoughts in
these Emphatical Words, [Attingit a fine in finem fortiter, and disponit omnia
suaviter: It reaches from the Beginning to the End, (or carries it quite
through) Strongly; for, what stronger than the Infractile Chain of Causality,
established on this Great and Self-Evident Truth, that Nothing can make it self,
or (which is the same) Nothing that is only Potential, or merely in power to
work an Effect, can reduce it Self to Act, as to that Effect? Or, what
Disposition more Sweet, or farther from offering Violence to the Nature of any
Cause, than it is to order that it should work connaturally, or Act as it is?

Notwithstanding the Greatest and Clearest Truths can never want Enemies while
there is Error in the World; Nor will The Epicurean Tenet of CHANCE Governing
the World is most Absurd and Senseless.
there ever want Error, as long as Men, either carelessly or wilfully, decline
the only Paths that lead to Truth; which are, to bottom their Discourse at
first on Evident Principles; and to Connect orderly those Notions which GOD, as
Author of Nature, has given us by his Creatures. This Wisest Conduct of the
Divine Providence has two Capital Enemies: The one is the Epicurean Sect, and
their Followers; who put all Effects to light by CHANCE, and, therefore, make
CHANCE to be GOD's Competitour in Governing the World. The other is the
Stoics, who set up their more Ingenious, but equally Senseless Doctrine of
FATALITY. The Former of these are sufficiently confuted by their laying never a
Principle; but, instead of them, advancing the Wildest* Suppositions that Witty
Folly could ever have stumbled upon, viz. An Infinite Vacuum; that is, an
Infinite Nothing: An Infinite Number of Atoms, of Infinitely-various Figures
falling downwards perpetually; only many of them, lest they should never
^ver-take their fellows, took a Toy, Crab-like, to move sideways; by which
means clinging in accidentally with those that moved downwards perpendicularly,
they make several sorts of Bodies; and, in process of time, of those several
Bodies compound Earth, Stars, or whatever their Fancy pleases. Not me of these
Principles they undertake to Evidence; but grossly suppose, and kindly grant
them to themselves. Though I dare undertake, that a hundred Clearest
Demonstrations may be brought against them, taking them all together; though One
of them might suffice to sweep down, at one brush, that whole Cobweb Scheme.
But these Men best Confute themselves. Chance bears in it is Notion Inconstancy;
and is quite Opposite to a Continual and Settled Method. I ask then, Is it by
Chance that those Atoms were Self-Existent, as they pretend? Is it by Chance,
that they were originally, or of themselves, of so many various Figures; whence
they became apt to link so commodiously with one another for such an End? Was
it by Chance, that they, or at least the main Body of them moved downwards, and
not upwards, and this perpendicularly? From what determinate Points in that
Nothing which they call Vacuum, do they measure or rate the Perpendicularity of
this Motion of theirs? Was it by Chance, that multitudes of them were so
carefully Wise as to run aside; lest, otherwise, not overtaking their fellows,
(for there can be no reason imaginable why one of them in a Vacuum should move
faster than another) all this frame of Nature, which they fancy, should be at
an end? What made them move at all? Or what ailed them that they could not lie
still, when nothing impelled them? Certainly, this was a strange Chance that
was so Constant, and withal as wisely Contrived for Epicurus his purpose as the
best Design could order it. But the Truth is, they were only laid thus in
Epicurus his own Fancy; nor could he make any thing hang together, but by
posturing them in order to an End; now this is the plain Notion of Design;
which, since it could not proceed from mere Matter, sprung from his own
Invention; which he, to complete the Nonsense of his Voluntary Hypothesis,
Nicknames CHANCE.

This Point so nearly concerning the honor of the Worlds Great Governor, it
may seem strange that some Christian Philosophers should retain some hankering
after an Opinion which is diametrically opposite to Providence. I cannot think
the Learned and Pious Gassendus, while he received the Hypothesis of Epicurus,
and opposed Aristotle, (whom he did not understand, but apprehended some Modern
Sch^olmen gave us his True Sense;) I say, I do not think he did believe what he
writ, (much less that he held any thing happened otherwise than by GOD's
Providential Determination) but that he advanced that Scheme of Philosophy as a
Trial of Skill, and to show his Great Wit; which it must be confessed had few
Equals. Cartesius had begun that Vast and Bold exploit of contriving how the
World should be made; and it bred an Emulation in Gassendns not to be behind
him in such a Daring and Noble Projection: Besides, it was pardonable in an
Author not to regard whe^hen the Philosophy he took to were True or No, who had
the misfortune to be Sceptically inclined, and professed Nihil sciri. But, I was
heartily troubled ^o find, by discoursing with an Eminent Writer, who ^ad
deserved well of the World for his elaborate Book against Atheism; that though he
acknowledged the Order of Causes in the main, he did notwithstanding hold that
Chance had the Chief hand in many particulars. To rectify his Mistake, I
scribbled two Sheets of Paper, and read to him. Whether they had any Effect
upon him, or hindered him from publishing any of that Nature, (for I perceived
he was then writing) I have not Light to know. Only I know this, that it is my
Duty to use my best endeavor to vindicate the Providence of our Maker, and his
Wisdom in the Ordinary Administration of the World; and to show, that He is the
Adequate and Sole Governor of it, even to the least Creature, or the least
imperceptible Atome.

To come closer then; I ask, What is this Thing they call CHANCE? I hear a Word
indeed, which makes such a What Chance truly is.
Sound in my Ear, and I perceive too that those who patronize it, have a blind
Apprehension that it is a [Thing,] for they put it to act, and produce Effects;
which [Nothing] cannot do. And yet, what kind of Thing can it be? Is it a Body,
or a Spirit? If a Spirit, is it a Created one or an Angel, or is it Increated?
If a Body, where dwells it in this habitable World? Is it a Simple Body, or a
Compound one? Is it Intelligent, or not-intelligent? Again, by what Virtue or
Power does it work it is Effects, and how? To none of these, I am sure, a
Pertinent Answer can ever be given; and yet it will haunt Men's Fancies, and
bear a great part in their Discourses, though not very many have a Distinct
Conception of what they mean by that Word. Truth is, it is a strange Error in
many weak Speculaters that they are apt not only to fancy every New Conception
of ours to be a New Thing, but also that now and then they take Mere Words to
be Real Things. Notwithstanding all that is here said, the word [CHANCE] must
have some Signification; and my self must allow it, (nay all Mankind must do
the same, since we do all of us use it,) and yet I do not, in holding this,
recede at all from my former Doctrine. To look narrowly then into the meaning
of this Word, I find, that all the Words we have, or can have, must either
signify our Natural Notions, or Artificial ones; as also, that [Chance] must
express some Natural Notion, because the Vulgar use it; and it is the Common
Usage of the word which gives it it is Signification. Let us see th^n in what
Sense the Vulgar, so they be but moderately intelligent, do use that Word, and
what they can mean by it. A Servant lets fall a Glass, and breaks it; a Tyle
falls from a House and kills one who walks by in the Street; a Man climbing a
Ladder falls down and breaks his Neck* Now all these are said to be done [by
Chance.] But does any of these, who say so, hold, that there was no Cause at
all, which made the Glass, the Tyle, or the Man fall. No certainly; for every
Man of Common Sense holds, that no Effect can be without a Cause, and will deny
that a Tyle or a Glass did move themselves. Their meaning then is, and they
tell you they did not foresee, or foreknow, that any of these would fall,
being Attentive to some other Object or Business: CHANCE then is an UNADVERTED
or Unforeseen Cause; for had they foreseen that such Causes, taking them all
together would have brought those Disasters, it had been Willfulness and Design
in them, to have come in the way of such Misohievous Causes; and Design is
Opposite to the Notion of Chance: In this Sense then Christianity allows us to
say, the Chance, or an Unforeseen Cause wrought these Effect ^^ But, since
nothing is Unforeseen to GOD, who laid and ordered all those Causes; What is
Chance to Us, is Providence if we regard Him; nor is there any Thing, Distinct
from Him, called Chance, which has the least h^nd in administering the World,
but He is the only Adequate Governor of it.

It Is not without some loathness I am forced to take notice, that some of our
Modern Ideists; (though I hope with a good How groundlessly some Christian
Philosophers, the Ideists, do, in part, violate this Best Method of GOD's
Ordinary Providence, now Demonstrated.
Intention) do violate this connected course of Causes and Effects, in which
GOD's Ordinary Providence consists. Whoever (as do the Cartesians) make all
Second Causes which have Powers or Faculties given them to work such Effects,
to be Useless as to those Effects, even as Instruments: Whoever puts on the
Creature's side, only OCCASIONS, which they say are No Causes, for every Act of
Knowledge Mankind has, and perhaps for every Effect in Nature: Whoever puts
Determinate Ideas to be produced by Indeterminate, and therefore Improper
Causes, as the Soul was before she did elicit them (as they pretend) of her
self: Whoever puts such Idea's Annexed voluntarily to such Motions which were
not at all Like them, or No Causes of them; alleging gratis that GOD Wills it:
Whoever maintains the Annexing of one Thing* or Mode of Thing, to another
otherwise than by being the Proper Cause of it, does fall into the same
ill-grounded Error of interrupting the Course of GOD's Ordinary Providence by
Second Causes, and destroys the Laws of Causality: As has been over and over
Demonstrated, in my Ideae Cartesianae, Indicatio Tertia, from. 30. to. 50. and
in my Solid Philosophy Asserted, Reflection 4.: 3. and 5.

It will run in the Fancies of some less Intelligent Intelligent Readers, who
take things at the first rebound, and pass a The Folly of the Stoical FATALITY
confuted and exploded.
peremptory Judgment on what they understand but by halves; that this Settled
Order of Providence I here assert, does introduce a kind of Fatality into the
World. Now, if by the word [FATUM] they mean what is Spoken or Decreed by GOD,
I must own the Position, and stand to it as clearly demonstrated above: Which
leads me to the Other sort of the Opposers of Providenoe; I mean those who
maintain a Stoical FATALITY; a Tenet widely Different from our Thesis, or
rather perfectly Contradictory to it. For ours proceeds upon a Continued
Connection of Natural Causes with Consequent Effects which are Suitable and
Agreeable to their Natures: Theirs regards no Influence of any Causes at all;
but is built on the force of this Contradiction, [Either such a thing will be,
or will not be.] Wherefore, say they, since it inevitably follows, that both of
these cannot be True, and yet one of them must be True; it is a Folly to
endeavor to avoid any Harm, or to pursue any Good, since out of the force of
notadmitting Contradiction, what will be, will be. But this, though the Wittier
of the two, is a Pure Folly; since, as Common Experience tells us, and Common
Sense assures us, nothing is done, but by Means of Causes, nor not-done, but
because there wanted Causes able to do it: But they fancy to themselves by the
Words [will be,] and [will not be,] there is a certain kind of Self-Existence,
or Non-Self-Existenee in the Futurity of Events. Whereas none of them has, or
can have, any Existence, or Nonexistence at all, but as they stand under
Determinate Natural Causes, ^r no Causes. Whence, we, who know this to be so,
are bound in Prudence to endeavor, as much as lies in us, to put those Causes,
if we would have the Effect follow. They forget too, that We our selves are
part of the Rank of Causes; and that the using our own Reason in choosing and
applying those other Causes, is the Supreme Superintendent Cause, and the very
Best of all the rest. They reflect not also, that since Future Effects are not;
neither of those Propositions they put and rely on, has any Truth in it at all;
nor has the Futurity of it any Certainty, but as it stands under Determinate or
Proper Causes which will produce that Effect, from which only it has Title to
the name of Future. So that the Proposition, [Such a thing will be or is
future] is an imprudent saying, and not be spoke by any Man of Sense, unless he
sees the Causes will certainly make it be. These Discoursers do therefore argue
from a Logical Impossibility, found only in our Mind, considering the Nature of
Ens, and that it excludes Non-Ens out of it is Notion; to a Physical one, which
is wholly grounded on the Nature of Causes. Lastly, This Thesis is manifestly
convicted of Folly, by the Consent of all Mankind, and even of themselves too,
who do all of them lay means for the Effects they aim at. Nor could the World
continue or subsist if this whimsical Doctrine stands; as by applying it to a
Harvest next year, the using ways for Trade and Traffic, or for defending our
Country, and a thousand such particulars, does manifestly appear: For either
Success will follow or not follow; whither we endeavor or not endeavor to lay
Means for such Effects; which consideration will also help to cure those weak
Discoursers who so perplex their thought about Predestination: All which depend
on the same Principles; and can disrellish no Man, unless he be offended, that
GOD is the First Cause, and that Good comes to us from Him by Second Causes
laid in the Best Order imaginable.

But in how different a manner does our way of Philosophy discourse of GOD's
Ordinary Providence from that of those other Philosophers, and particularly
from that of the Ideists! It puts no blind Suppositions nor Conceits taken from
Fancy; but is entirely built on Principles, and such Principles as are either
Self-Evident, or so nearly removed from them, that they are easily reducible
thither, viz. [Every Thing acts as it is; and therefore is a Proper Cause to
the Effect it produces. Distinct Essences have Distinct Powers; and, those
Powers, when pusht forwards by Motion must actually work on their Immediate
Patients; and this, according to the Nature of their several Essences. Every
Thing, except the First Cause, is an Effect; and, as no Effect can be without
Something to effect it, so no Determinate, or such an Effect, can be, without a
Determinate, or Proper Cause.] Thus is the Course of GOD's Providence in
administering the World, shown to be (a^ becomes the All-wise Contriver of it,)
Orderly, Steady, Coherent, and all of a piece. From these Footsteps of the
Divine Wisdom imprinted on Creatures, we gain all our Science; either
proceeding a priori from Proper Causes to their Proper Effects, or a posteriori
from Proper Effects to their Proper Causes; only which ways of Discoursing can
beget True Science. Whence the Cartesians who decline that Method; and,
contrary to all Logic and Common Sense, (which oblige us to argue from what is
better known, to what is Unknown or less known) instead of proving their Theses
from the Nature of Things, do introduce Arbitrary and Voluntary Reasons for
Effects; and to palliate their Ignorance, pretend that GOD Wills such or such
an Effect should follow, which Will of his they neither prove nor can prove,
nor go about to prove: And when their Arguments are Destitute of Connection,
they put GOD to Annex one thing to another, as their Necessity, when they are
at a Nonplus, requires; such Men I say, who affect this way frequently, and
advance many Wild and Unprov'd Suppositions at their pleasure gratis, are hence
convicted to be no Philosophers; but to obstruct the Common Road to Science;
and seem to bid Defiance to all Principles, Connection, and Common Logic; sham
all Philosophy and Science too; and set up in their stead, a Gentile Farce of
Witty, Groundless, and Unconnected Talk.

But to leave them and return to our own Doctrine, and the consequences of it;
Hence, with an easy Reflection, may be gathered, how all Truths are necessarily
in one another, as links in the same Chain of Causes; and, therefore, may all
be seen at once by the Soul, when she comes to enjoy the Privilege of a Pure
Act, is above Time, and no longer tied to the slow Motion of Corporeal
Phantasms in performing ^er Operations.

Having thus laid open the Deviations of other Mistaking Speculaters, let us,
my Soul, recommended to our Self, and to our The Application of this Doctrine
to ou^ own Duties.
Readers to take heed lest we run counter in our Practice to the Truth we which
have Evinced and Established. Since then all Nature and Evident Reason consent
to tell us, that every Essence has such an Operation as is Peculiar and Prop^r
to it is Nature, and our Essence is Rationality; let not us be guilty of that
worst Singularity, to act contrary to our Essence, and degenerate from our
Nature by acting* Irrationally, and this in the Highest Degrce. The Chief
Powers of our Rational Being are our Understanding and our Will. The Primary
Operation of the First is to see or know TRUTH, and that of the later is to
pursue GOOD: And Metaphysics has Demonstrated to us clearly, that nothing but
the Knowledge of an Infinite Truth can satisfy the One, and the Possession of
an Infinite Good satiate the other; as also that neither of these can possibly
be had save only in the Unveiled Sight of the First-Being, the Glorious and
Glorifying DEITY. Let it then be our not only Principal, but (in Comparison)
Only care to cultivate those Dispositions of our Will, which we have
Demonstrated to be the only Steps by which we may ascend to Eternal Happiness;
and to r^^t out th^se Inordinate Affections for Creatures, which indispose us
for Heaven; and, consequently, after they have turmoil'd and vexed us here, must
render us, after this short life, Eternally most miserable: To this end, let us
make that use of our Understanding, as, by due consideration, to advance these
Speculative Knowledges we ^ve gained here, into conformable Practical
Judgments, or Virtuous Affections. Which, as it was the Chief Intention of the
Author, so it shall be ^^s Prayer it may work that Best Effect upon his Readers.

A Rational Explication OF THE MYSTERY OF THE MOST BLESSED TRINITY.
The PREFACE.
1. HAVING, as I hoped, settled the Way of Exact Reasoning in my METHOD to
Science; and reduced the Notions, of which we make use in more Sublime
Subjects, to a Distinctness in my METAPHYSICS; I cast about to find out some
Particular Point, to which, as a Proper Instance, I might apply my Speculative
Productions; and, thence, manifest that they were not high-flown Fancies, as
some incompetent Readers may imagine, but Solid and Useful Truths. Nor could
there need any Long Enquiry to make my Thoughts come to a Determination. I had,
to my great trouble, observed how rudely the Mystery of the most B. Trinity had
been attackt of late by some Witty and Fanciful Gentlemen; and had received
Information also, that the Boasts of their wonderful Performances by the way of
Reason, had given great Advantages to Deists and Atheists; who, siding with
them, did thence take occasion to ridicule Christianity, whose prime
Fundamental, was (as they pretended) a piece of Pure Nonsense. I saw very
clearly, that all their Objections proceeded upon most gross Mistakes; and
(which I am loath to say) from Unskillfulness in Logic, or the Rules of Right
Reasoning; and from perfect Ignorance in Metaphysics: The former of which, by
Distinguishing exactly our several Notions or Respects, is to give us Light to
know what is truly a Contradiction, what not; and the other, instructs us how
we are to discourse of the First Being and his Attributes. The Principles and
Deductions in which Sciences being in so high a Degree Evident, I could not but
discover clearly, and therefore, (the weight of the Circumstance requiring it,)
I dare confidently declare, and offer to maintain, that all their Objections
against that Mystery are not only perfectly Groundless, but when they come to
be sifted and examined by those Tests of True Reason, extremely Weak even to
Childishness.

2. And, indeed, they deliver those Objections of theirs in so slight a
Manner, as if themselves made account they writ to none but half-witted
Readers; who stand ready to give up their Assent, upon every Pretty and
Plausible Saying that surprises their Ignorance, or pleases their Fancy. ^or,
not so much as One Principle do they lay; ^or observe any steady Tenor in
Deducing any Determinate Conclusion. Nay, they do not so much as Distinguish
exactly those Notions which belong to the Subject in Dispute, much less Define
them; nor state the Question liquidly and clearly; but fall to work hastily,
propose the Point crudely, and descant upon it superficially, confusedly, and
^amblingly; only they take care to use some little Wit in the Expression: As if
they presumed, that either there are no Praecognoscenda, requisite to explicate
or Determine such a Sublime Point; or else, that every ordinary Reader knows
them by ^nstinct, already. Now what Man of Sense can they hope to satisfy by
such a shallow way of Discoursing; much less the Learned Divines of the
Universities, to whom they take the Boldness to address their Pamphlets.
Certainly, when the Thesis is of so Sovereign a Nature, we ought, if ever,
proceed with all the Accuracy Imaginable. Nor does only the Intrinsic Merit
and Weight of the Subject in hand demand this of them, but also the care of
their own Reputation obliges them to it.

3. For the Point it self is of that Vast Concern, that either it must (in case
it be True) render the Deniers of it most Ungrateful, Impious and Blasphemous,
in Degrading our Infinite GOD, Blessed for evermore, who, to save Mankind, so
mercifully condescended to take our Nature upon Him, into the Abject condition
of a mere Creature, made of Nothing, and therefore Next to Nothing; or else, if
it be, (as they pretend) False, it must lay the Horrible Blemish of being
Idolatrous in the Highest Degree, upon the Christian Church for so many Ages:
Nay, farther, it must Unchurch her absolutely, and make her no better than a
Synagogue of Satan; since she builds the main Body of all her Faith on the
Profession of Christ's Divinity; whom she adores daily and most Devoutly; and
this, not with a Relative but a Terminative Divine Worship; nay makes Him the
Alpha and Omega, the First Beginning and Last End of all things. Whence
follows, that the most Loose Lati^ndinarian cannot, with any show of Sense,
clap both these two Parties, Ours, and Theirs, i^to one Compound Christian
Church. It Is true, we do both of us acknowledge the Word [CHRIST;] but the
Thing we mean by that Word or the Sense of it, as it is taken by us both
respectively, is as Infinitely Distant as is the Meaning of those words [GOD]
and a [ mere Man,] or those of a Creator and a Creature; and certainly, Faith,
signifying our Tene^s, is not a mere Sound, but Sense. I say not this to widen
any Breaches, which I have been ever ready and zealous to close and heal; but
to let the Anti-Trinitarians see how vast a Division they have made in the
Christian Church; or rather, how absolutely they have by Schism and Heresy cut
off themselves from it: And no Balm of Charity, or Surgery of Discipline, are
able to cure such wide Wounds, or reunite such Members to the Body, which are
not only Separated from a Vital Communication with it, but Mortified by
Obstinacy. For the True Church of Christ acknowledges no Other Means, nor any
other Name under Heaven, by which she hopes for Salvation, but that of Jesus
Christ, GOD- and-Man; which these Men do utterly re^^unce and abominate.

4. I am not to doubt, but diverse of those Gentlemen who impugn this Article of
Christian Faith ^^ant well; nothing being more contrary to my Genius, than to
pass Judgment upon Men's Intentions when I see not their Hearts. Wherefore, I
am to hope, that since they have appealed to the Way of Reason, they will
submit the Trial and Decision of their Cause to the Umpire Themselves have
chosen. Which if they please to do, I dare assure my Readers it will be
impossible the Controversy should hover, or be long Depending. I have set them
a Sample what Method they may take, if they sincerely and impartially aim at
Truth. To this end, I lay my Principles; which I will vouch and maintain to be
Evident, and far from Gratuitous Suppositions. I state the Question; I clear
the words, of which we are to make use, from Ambiguity; and, by this means, I
make a Clear Stage for both Parties: Let them do the same, and it will be
impossible that Endless Wrangle should defeat the Expectation of our Readers,
or the Victory of Truth hang long in Suspense.

5. If any blame me for being too Exact: First, I am not ashamed to declare,
that it was my Full Intention to bend my utmost endeavors to settle this Point
so Unanswerably, as far as it depends on the Way of Reason, that the Opposition
against it may never rise again to pester and divide the Church, nor prejudice
the Eternal Salvation of Mankind. Next, I must own, that it is Uneasy to me,
when I am to maintain any Truth, not to lay my Principles first, and take care
they be Evident: And, unless I do this, I am still dissatisfied with my self;
and afraid lest some Plausible Fancy should lead me astray from the Truth, and
make me stumble into some Error. The greatest Wits and most Learned Scholars
living are liable to fall, if they want these Supports; which, and only which,
can enable our Reason to take Firm Steps, and keep it on it is Legs Upright.
Whence if be a Fault, I hope it is a good one: At least, I have been since my
riper years, so enured to it, that I must confess I cannot help it; nor would
I, if I could.

5. Indeed, were there none that Impugn'd Revealed Faith, it would be Needless
in that case to be at the Expense of so much Time and Pains to Defend it. It
would argue a Quarrelsome and Vapouring humor, in any Man, to begin a
Polemical Contest when none opposed him; and in a Bravado to arm himself
Cap-a-pee, and bid Defiance to all the World when he has never an Enemy. In
such a Happy State of the Church, Christian Faith would descend peaceably and
undisturbedly, there being none who opposed it; and all Disputes about it would
be superseded, or rather prevented. But, when (as is our Unhappy Condition)
Witty and Acute Men do exert their utmost Efforts, and employ all the Skill,
Art and Learning they are Masters of, to overthrow the most Fundamental
Articles of Christian Faith; and Others make use of their Errors and
Objections, to subvert the Whole Body of Revealed Religion; and pretend to
maintain that the most Sacred Truths which GOD Himself has told us, are Perfect
Nonsense, Lies and Contradictions; it is a most necessary Duty in us to make use
of the Maxims of Right Reason to confute their Paralogisms, and to apply the
most Solid and Deep Principles of True ^rning, to baffle the Attempts of that
Vain and ^allow Philosophy, which they make us of to ^ack those Divine Oracles.
None can show ^^^t Faith is not Contradictory to Reason, (which is ^hat's
objected) but by using those Knowledges which show it is Conformable to it.
And, since Faith cannot explicate Faith; it must either be Explicated, that is,
(in our case) Defended by the Clear Principles of Reflecting Reason, (or by
True Philosophy;) or it cannot, by the way of Reason, be Defended at all.

6. Each single word in which Faith was delivered, must, indeed, have been
Clearly Intelligible to the Faithful, and enable them to know what it is they
are to believe. But a Believer and an Explicater are very Distinct Things. The
former has no more to do but to submit to an Authority which he either knows or
judges will not deceive him; pretending no Skill or Knowledge, more than to
understand the bare signification of the words in which Faith is conceived; But
an Explicater is to use all the Skill and Art he has to show the Points of
Faith Agreeable to such Other Truths as indifferent Mankind admits; at least,
such as he can, by Dint of Reason, force his Adversary to grant; that, so, he
may comfort and strengthen Faith, and make it more Lively and Operative in the
Hearts of the more Intelligent Believers; and withal, Defend it from being
Opposite to Right Reason, against the Cavils of Unbelievers who impugn it upon
that score. But the main Advantage which an Explicater of Faith, who follows
the Principles of True Reason, or True Philosophy, will gain by this Exact way
of Discoursing, is this; that, Let him settle his Principles first, and show
them to be Evident; Let him state the Question clearly, and explain the Meaning
of the Terms or Words, which concern that Question, or are made use of in
Discoursing of it; and then applying them to the Point in hand, show it is
Consonancy to those Principles; (all which I shall here endeavor;) and, when
he has done this, let him peremptorily Challenge his Adversary to take the same
Decisive Method to prove his Negative Tenet; and it will quickly appear, that
the Maintainer of Falsehood (his Cause not bearing such a Test) will either
decline this only-satisfactory Manner of Discourse; in which case, he will, in
effect, plainly confess that what he maintains is not True; Or, if he happens
to be so Adventurous as to Attempt it, his Principles will easily be seen to be
so Unlike what they pretended to be, and so Unworthy that Name, that all Men of
Sense will quickly discern that his Cause has only Superficial Fancy, and not
True and Solid Reason to support it.

SECT. I.
Preliminaries Fore-lay'd, as Principles, to the Explication of this Mystery.

. 1. Pr^^. I. CLearness being the most necessary Qualification of all others
for an Explication, we are first to reflect, that All our Clear and Distinct
Knowledges of any thing whatever depend on this Principle, that Our Soul works
by Abstracted or Inadequate Conceptions; which she frames, or ^as, of the whole
Thing. This is granted, I think, by all Men of Learning; and is, in a manner
Self-Evident. For, let us take any Whole Thing, v. g. an Orange; and we may
find that we make many Several Conceptions of it, viz. That it is Round,
Yellow, Heavy, Juicy, etc. which though they all belong Intrinsecally to that one
Thing, and therefore we mean them all Confusedly when we name That Thing; yet,
we cannot discourse Clearly and Distinctly of any one of them, while we
conceive them as Joined with great Multitudes of others, no, not so much as
with one of those Others. For, how can we know that Object Distinctly which is
not Distinct it self, as being not yet Distinguished. Now, it is only our
Understanding that Distinguishes it into those Distinct Parts or Inadequate
Conceptions of it. Wherefore, we cannot Discourse of any Thing Clearly, or
Distinctly, until we have first represented it to our Minds with such a
Distinction, by making many Distinct, Abstracted, or Inadequate Notions of it.

2. Prel. II. Having found or made those Inadequate Conceptions, we are next to
Discourse consequently of each of those Considerations of the Thing, without
mingling them with Others. For to what end should we Distinguish our Notions in
order to discourse Clearly, if we do not keep them Distinct; but, by
Confounding them afterward, Distract our Thoughts, and draw them (in despite
both of Nature and Art) into Different Considerations at once; which must needs
hinder us from seeing any one of them Clearly? Whence all the most Exact
Discoursers do carefully observe and follow this Rule. For, the Mathematicians
treat of Bodies as Long, (or of Lines) without considering them, at the same
time, as Broad; and of their Breadth, without considering them as Deep, or
according to all the Three Dimensions; though, in Nature, no One of them is found
without all the rest: And, in case they did otherwise, their Discourses could
never proceed endways, nor be Clear and Evident; being, indeed, in that case,
nothing but a mere Ramble from one Question to another, while they speak
sometimes of one, sometimes of Another Notion or Subject.

3. Prel. III. Therefore, when we Affirm and Deny, according to Different
Abstract Notions, there can be no show of a Contradiction. For these Abstract
Notions being Different Respects, according to which we conceive the Thing
diversely; and, the weakest Logician, and every Man of Common Sense, being so
wise as to know that there cannot possibly be any Contradiction unless we
Affirm and Deny, according to the Same Respect; thing can be more Weak than to
pretend, (...) in such a case, there is the least show of a ^tradiction.

4. Prel. IV. Hence one of those Respects or Consi^^^ations of the Thing may be
Denied of the other; (...) which is Equivalent, (all our Predications when we
speak True, being of the Thing) the Thing ^^ considered according to One of
those Respects, ^ay be Denied of it self considered according to Another
Respect. V. G. The Same Man may be both a Father and a Son; but that Same Man
as ^^ is a Father, is not that Man as he is a Son. Otherwise (the Abstractive
Particle [ as] cutting ^^ that precise Respect from all Others) it would
^^llow, that the Notions of Father and Son are the ^ry Self-same Notion or
Respect. Whence we ^^e obliged to affirm, that That Man as he is a Father, is
some way Different from Himself as he ^^ ^ Son, or according to some Notion or
Respect, viz. That of Relation: Though he be still the same according to the
Notion of Ens or Thing, that is* the same Man.

5. Prel. V. Though the Truth of the Propositions, or Points of Faith are made
known to us by Supernatural Means, or by Revelation; yet, each single word, in
which they were delivered or Preached at first, must be such as was in use then
and there, to signify our Natural Notions. This is very Evident: Because,
unless Faith had been delivered o^ Preached to the First Faithful in such
Language a^ every one understood, or, as suited with their Natural Notions, the
Hearers having as yet no Notions but what were Natural, could not have
understood what had been told them, nor could have known what it was they were
to believe. By [ Natural Notions] I mean those which we have by Direct
Impressions on the Senses; or by such Reflection as the Generality of Mankind
naturally have. Though this be True, and Faith was thus de^^ver'd at first, yet
it does not follow that an Explicater may not be allowed to use some words of
Art; since he writes to Learned Men.

6. Prel. VI. Hence, those words being Proper to express Men's Natural Notions,
which they had from Creatures, to signify which they were Agreed on, and Used
by Mankind in that place; it follows, that when we apply them to the Divine
Nature, they must be, in some sort, Metaphorical, or Transferred thence to GOD.
This is equally Evident as the Former. For, since their Sense and Meaning which
Men imposed on them at first, and, in which they Used them all along, was some
Created Being or Perfection; it is manifest, that That was their First or Proper
Signification; and, consequently, if they Applied them to GOD afterward,
(without which, as was shown we could not speak of GOD at all, nor know any
thing of Him) they must necessarily be Transferred from Creatures to GOD; which
is to be Metaphorical.

7. Prel. VII. Yet, when Divines apply such Words to GOD, whom they hold to be
Infinitely Perfect; they cannot be thought to Intend to Transfer them to Him,
together with the Imperfection found in Creatures which is annexed to their
First Signification; and, consequently, ( Intention and Meaning being the same
Sense,) they cannot mean to apply them otherwise than as divested of their
Imperfections: So that the Meaning or Signification of those Words, thus
Applied, debars all those Imperfections from being any ^art of our Notion, when
we thus apply them. ^uch are the Imperfections of Corporeity, and (...) Notions
which arise from Matter, or belong (...) it: As also all Limitedness; which,
though Essen^ial to Creatures, is Repugnant to the Divine Nature.

8. Prelim. VIII. Hence all such Words, thus understood, notwithstanding their
Metaphoricalness, are Truly said of GOD. For, since by. 7. we do not Intend to
Transfer to GOD what is Imperfect in the Notion or Meaning of these Words, but
only what signifies some Perfection; and All Perfection must be Truly
attributed to Him who is Infinitely Perfect; it follows, that all such words,
thus understood, are Truly Applied to the Divine Nature. Thus, when our
Savior CHRIST ^^ called, [ The Lamb of GOD,] or, [ The Lion of the Tribe of
Judah,] we do not take or understand those Words under any other Notion
signified by [ Lamb] or [ Lion,] than under those of Meekness and Fortitude.
Thus, when Metaphysicians apply to GOD, Mercy, Justice, Power, Wisdom, etc.
which, as found in our Understanding, are Distinct Formalities, of which One is
not the other; they, being well aware that the Divine Nature is One most Simple
Formality, which includes and verif^es all those Attributes, do therefore strip
them of that Limitation or Imperfection when they apply them to GOD; and do not
intend to signify they are thus distinct in GOD as they are in our
Understanding; but they only mean that such Effects do proceed from GOD as do
proceed from a Just, Mer^iful, Powerful or Wise Man; which is most cer^ainly
True. Which Rule, and Reason, obtains in all other Metaphorical Expressions, or
in all our Words whatever, used by us when we speak of GOD.

9. Prel. IX. For the same Reason all Words which, amongst us, conno^ate
Motion, as all Active Verbs and Verbals do, must be understood of the Action
formally as Terminated, or of the Terminus of an Action, and must be explicated
and understood to mean [ is.] For, since GOD is a Pure Actuality of Being, and
his Essence is Self-Existence; nothing can be more Opposite to His very
Essence, than is the Notion of Motion, which essentially imports both
Potentiality and Change; as consequently; does our Natural Notion of Action
that goes along with it. Wherefore, all Notions that import that a Thing is in
fieri, must be removed from GOD as far as is possible, and only those Notions
that signify it is in facto esse, can with any Sense, be applied to that
Sovereign Being. Now, this Abstraction from Motion can mean nothing but [
Being,] one way or other, or it cannot be transferred to GOD, (by Prelim. VII.)
Wherefore, when we say the Son proceeds from the Father, it can only in rigor
mean [ Est a Patre.] The properest meaning of which word, is, that GOD is in
His Divine Knowledge as His own Object. And for the same Reason, all Verbs
signifying the Time Past or Future are to be removed from GOD, and only those
which signify the present Time can be applied to Him: For, since whatever is
in Divinis, or is Intrinsecal to GOD, is Eternally such; we shall put Past and
Future, which are Differences of Time, in Eternity. But, above all, those words
that import or hi^t Efficiency are the most Unfit to be Transferred to GOD;
For, since Efficiency is impossible to be conceived without an Effect, it puts
something in GOD which is Effected or Caused; nor can such a Word (...) Notion
be depur'd from it is most Gross Imperfection as other Notions may. Nor will
that weak Distinction of Formal and Virtual Efficiency in Di^inis serve the
turn; for this is the same as to say GOD is virtually Imperfect, or, that some
Notion we have of GOD, and is verified by Him, is virtually an Effect; that is,
virtually Not Self Existent; and, consequently, virtually not GOD, but a
Creature. Indeed, our homely Language; and Low Notions, do oblige us to use
such words as, amongst us, do signify Action; but they are all to be
understood, cum grano salis, as is here declared. Nor ought it to be objected,
That these Active words cannot signify a Terminus put, or that the thing is
done ^^stantaneously, which some may think is against the Notion of Action; for
Creation is granted to be an Action, yet it is never, for so much as for one
Instant, in fieri, or a doing, being in one Instant in fecto esse, or done.

10. Prel. X. For which Reason, that we may avoid all hint of Agency, which
(since whatever Acts, must act or do Something, which is it is Effect) does
necessarily induce Efficiency; a word or Notion directly Opposite to whatever
is in GOD who is Self Existent; we shall, in our Explication, make use of the
Inexistency of the Divine Nature Known, in it is self as a Knower of it, after
the manner of a Form, as it were; which is both peculiar to a Spiritual Nature,
and has nothing in it of that Gross Imperfection, to which our Natural Notion
of Action is liable, which, amongst us is always accompanied with Motion:
Whereas, the Other implies no Imperfection at all either in the Knower or the
Thing Known. For even amongst us, the Object, (v. g. an Animal) loses nothing,
nor is less Perfect, for being Known by us; but is in it is self, the same
Unchanged Being it was. Or rather, Intelligibility being one of the Properties
of Ens, by being Naturally Known or understood, it becomes by this means (in
some Sense) Actual; whereas, before it was only Intelligible, that is,
Potential in that respect. Nor are we the worse by Knowing it, or having the
Object thus in our Knowing Power, but evidently Better, in regard all Actual
Knowledge is our Natural Perfection. Add, that this way of Inexisting does not
necessarily induce any Passiveness in the Subject in which the Object thus
Inexists. For Angels and Souls Separate have (as has been demonstrated) all
Created Being in them Intellectually; and yet are not, in reality, Passive by
receiving them, having no Passive Principle, or Matter, in them. Thus the
Essences of all Creatures did Inexist in the Divine Understanding from
Eternity: Yet none will say, this infers any Passiveness in GOD. Indeed while
our Soul is in this State, she, as being the Form of the Body, is thence in
some sort Passive, because the Suppositum, the Man, is such; but when she is a
Pure Spirit, her Knowledges are not then beat into her (as it were) by so many
dints of the Object, but are in her purely by the Formal Inexistence of all
Created Truths in one another. By which is s^en, that, for the Object Known to
be thus in the Knower after the manner of a Form, argues no Imperfection in
either of them; and therefore is with good reason Transferrible to GOD. Perhaps
some may think, that the subject is, in this case, a kind of Matter in respect
of the Form; and that this argues Imperfection. But they err in the whole
business; a ^orm that aduenes to a Material Subject, and Intrinsecally
Determines it, as Modes or Accidents do, does indeed induce Imperfection, for
it smells rank of Materiality or Corporeity; but it is quite otherwise here.
For Modes or Accidents have no Being but by means of their Subject, whereas the
Things which are known by us, have their own proper Existence out of our Soul,
notwithstanding the Intellectual Manner of Being they have in it. Their
Essences, and that which is in them, are ^ngrafted on her Nobler Stock of
Being, not as an Intrinsecal part of its peculiar Nature; to which they owe
their Being, but as Another thing, or as Distinct from it; so that both the
peculiar Essences of the One and the Other, are the same Essentially and
Intrinsecally; though the being of the Soul is Enlarged and Perfected by having
Another Being tackt to it, as an Extrinsecal Form, or by her being or becoming
Another; in which (as Aristotle, and Evident Reflection, tells us) all Knowledge
consists. There is a Conceit current amongst many Philosophers, that every
Spiritual Operation is an Action; and hence they may mean to Transfer such a
Spiritual Action to GOD; But they are in a great Error. Indeed, our Formal
Judging and Discoursing may be called Actions, because they are found in our
Soul while in the Body; and have Succession in them, being accompanied by the
Motion of the Phantasms, without which the Soul in this State cannot operate;
but Pure Acts, have no such leasurely progress of their thoughts; nor do they
Compound or Divide their Notions as we do here, but all their Knowledge is by
Simple Intuition, which has nothing of Succession or Motion in it; and
therefore, this sort of Spiritual Operation only, is that which can be Applied
to GOD; the Other, which is Part after Part, being in some respect Quantitative
or Corporeal, that i^, most Imperfect. Now, if we take away the State of
Motion, there is no Notion left us but that of Being. Whence all Knowledge that
is purely-Spiritual must be explicated by Being, or the Inexistence of the
Object in the Knower, as a kind of Form which makes the Knower be that Thing
which is known, (in case the Knower be a Created Being,) because it is the Form,
which, according to our Natural Notions, constitutes a Thing in Being such or
such. Whence such an Operation suits not with our Natural Notion of Action,
which does necessarily (at least) connotate Motion; but is better expressed by a
Neuter-Active Verb, such as are Stupeo, ardeo, and such like; which signify,
that the Affection of Amazement or Burning is in me as a kind of Accidental
Form; for it is in this manner the words, [ I know] signify that the Object is
in my Knowledge; and therefore, such a kind of Inexistence of the Object in the
Knower, may without scruple be Transferred to GOD; for it is our greatest
Spiritual Perfection, and indeed the very Notion of Knowing; so that whoever
denies this to be in the Divine Nature, must at the same time deny him to be
Knowing. For these Reasons, I do judge, that in explicating this Mystery, we
ought to decline the using any Notions that imply or cannotate Agency and
Action, and to make use of those which have ^^e Conception of a Form, which
constitutes the to be such or such. A farther Reason may be, because Essence,
Self-Existence, Subsistence, Personality, which we must necessarily attribute
to GOD, (and, indeed, all Abstract Words whatever) have that manner of
Signification.

11. Prel. XI. Because, in discoursing of this Mystery we shall only make use
of such Notions as belong to the Common Heads of Substance and Relation, (or
rather, speaking of it as in GOD, of Relatum esse) it is our Duty to set these
two Kinds of Notions in as Clear a Light as we can. To begin then with
Substance. A Natural Thing or Ens, called also an Individuum, or Substantia
Prima, (only which do exist in Nature, and, consequently, from which only we
have all our Natural Notions) does give us these Distinct or Abstracted
Conceptions of it. To take them in Order, and consider, in the First place,
what is most Potential and Imperfect in a Thing; we can conceive, that (it being
Mutable) there can another Natural Thing be made of it; and therefore, that it
has in it somewhat by which it has a Power to become Another Thing; which Power
we call Matter: For we call that MATTER, of which any Thing is made. Now, this
mere Power to be a Thing, cannot be held, by Virtue of that Sole Notion, to be
a Thing; since nothing is that which it is only a Power to be; and if it be
not, as thus conceived, a Thing, it cannot be conceived to have any Accident,
Mode, or (which is the same) Determination of Thing in it, which are Subsequent
to the Notion of Thing, for all these are apt to Determine the Thing, which is
against the Notion of a mere Power, which is utterly Indeterminate: Hence is
seen clearly why Aristotle gave this exact Description of this Matter, or Power
to be, [ viz. That which is, Nec Quid, nec Quantum, nec Qu^le, neque aliquid
aliud eorum quibus Ens determinatur.] Proceeding still forwards; we may
conceive this Individual Thing, according to That in it, which so Determines
this Power called Matter, as to Individuate it; or so distinguish it as to make
it This, and no Other: Which we have shown in our Metaphysics is performed by
such a Complexion of Accidents as is found no where but in It; which therefore
is it is Substantial or Essential Form; whence it becomes properly, or in the
First Sense of that word a Thing, or as Logicians call it, an Individuum. And,
because nothing in Common can exist, but only what is thus Ultimately
Determined, it is justly conceived to be Capable of Existing, or Possible to
be, which is to be an Ens, or to have in it the Nature or Notion of what we
call by that word. The next Consideration that occurs to us in the Order of our
Natural Notions is the Act of that Power, viz. [Existence, or Actual Being;]
whence we denominate it Existent; of which State, (as it were) of Ens we can
only say this, (for to define Existence is impossible) that it is then put Extra
Causas, meaning by those words [ Causa Naturales.] For, while the Operation of
these Causes was yet Determining, or, (as we may say) Molding or Shaping the
Matter; so long the Ens or Individuum was Potential, in fieri, or within the
Power of those Causes; but when they had once brought that Determination to
Perfection by Distinguishing it from all others, or making it This, and had by
that means Fitted it for Existence; they having now done their best, had no
more to do; but the First Being puts the last hand to ^ir Imperfect
Workmanship, and gives it to (...) or be Actually; whence it is now said to be
^ra causas Naturales, and only under GOD's ^^wer; who as the First Ens, and a
Pure Actua^y of Being, gives and conserves to all his Creatures their
Existence, or makes them be Actually. But still, the bare Notion of [
Existent,] does not express or signify that that Thing does Exist [ Alone,] or
without the Assistance of Another. For the Quantitative Parts in an Element,
the Natural Parts in a Mixed, the Metaphysical Parts, (or, as we call them,
Secundae Substantiae,) in an Individual Brute or Man, lastly, the Modes or
Accidents do all of them, some way or other, Exist; For who can say that the
whole Exists, and yet the Parts of which that whole consists, do not at ^^^
Exist? It Is most Evident then, that we do still want Another Notion, and
Another Word to Conceive and Express a farther Perfection in the Line of
Substance, than mere Existence affords us, viz. the Notion of Existing [
Alone,] which none of the other, though some way Existent, had; for Parts cannot
exist, but in the Whole, nor Accidents but in the Substance. Now this
more-perfect Notion, which is yet wanting to couceive it Existing Alone, we
call Subsistence; with which Formality when the Thing is once endowed, it is
justly conceived to have all the Perfection in the Line of Being, which our
Natural Notions can attribure to it. And hence it is truly conceived to have a
Power to make others, (whether Parts or Modes) to Exist; which otherwise, or
without Dependence on this SUBSISTER, or Reference to it, (that is merely by
virtue of their own Notion,) could not be conceived to be at all. Now the Thing
as it is Subsistent, is that which Learned Men agree to c^^^ a Suppositum; and
which, if it be an Intellige^^ Being, our Common Language, in correspondency to
our Natural Notion, calls a PERSON* That the Natural Notion of Subsistent and
Person* are distinct from* that of [ Existent,] is evident from the Vulgar and
Unanimous Use of those Words. For, let an honest Country-Fellow be asked how
many Things, or how many Persons, are in such a Room; he will not reckon Parts
or the Model; but the whole Things, and the Intelligent Animals, (which only do
properly Exist of themselves, or Alone, that is, which subsist.) And yet they
will, if put to it, acknowledge that both those Parts and those Modes do some
way Exist; Wherefore, it is Evident, that he meant to reckon only those which
Subsist, or Exist Alone, and not what he thought did exist by means of Another.
So that it is plain, he has naturally in his Mind the Distinction of Existent
and Subsistent; though, if you ask him to give an account of this Distinction
between them, he will be at a plunge; as he would be also, were he put to give
an account of the Distinction of Moist, Dry, Hard, etc. For Reflection on his
Natural Notions, or Distinguishing them formally, is not his Talent: And yet he
knows after his rude manner, what he means by those Words, and that there is a
Distinction between those Qualities. Of what exceeding Use this Distinguishing
our Notions exactly is in Philosophy, both to Discourse clearly, and to bring
the Mystical and less-intelligible Language of the Schools to a Literal and
Natural Sense, is left to the Judgment and Reflection of Learned Men: What use
we shall make of it in this present Appendix will be ^ hereafter. In the mean
time, applying this ^scourse to Prelim. II, III, and IV. it is hence ^ident,
that if the Notion of Subsistent be Diffe^^nt from the Notions or Respects of
Ens, Essence, ^^d Existence; there can be no show of Contra^^ction that the
same thing is One according to (...) Nature, or it is Existence, and yet be
Not-on^, ^^t Three, according to the Notion or Respect of ^sistence or
Personality; because the Respect is D^^erse; as also why the Second Person may
^e United or One in Respect of the Personality, and ^^t Not-one, but Two,
according the Respect of ^^'s Nature or Essence.

12. Prelim. XII. As for our Natural Notion of [ Relation,] it adds no New
Perfection to the Thing ^elated, and what is in it; but it is the very Thing it
self in our Understanding; as it gives our ^ind the Reason or Ground of
Relating it, or Re^^^^ing it to Another. For Example: The Relation of Likeness
between two Things that are White, is nothing but those very Things as they
have Whiteness in them; which our Mind com^aring according to that precise
Respect, and Con^^dering One* of them in order to the Other, apprehends there
is such a Relation between them; ^^d, accordingly, denominates them Alike. Thus
the Relation of Equality between two things, each ^^ which is a Yard Long, is
nothing but the Things which have that Quantity in them, Common to ^oth; which
our Referring Power, comparing One of them to the Other, gains thence a
Relative Notion of Equality between them, and denominates them Equal. Thus the
Relation of Identity in Nature between Two Men, is nothing but those very
Natures, Compared as aforesaid; whence we truly conceive there is a Relation of
Identity between them. Which will better appear by this, that if we ask what is
the Formal Reason why one of those Things are said to be Alike, Equal, or the
Same with the Other; the Proper and Natural Answer would be, because they are
both of them White, a Yard Long, or a Man; which shows, that the [ Ratio,] as
the Schools call it, or Essence of Relation is Intrinsecal to the Thing it
self, and, in reality, It.

13. Prel. XIII. Hence, though the Act of our Understanding is Necessary to the
Referring those Correlates actually; yet the Formal Notion [or Ratio] of those
Relations themselves is entirely taken from what is in those Subjects that are
Related; nor does that Act of ours enter into the Relation it self, or bear any
part in it. This is very Evident; because it is not the Act of the
Understanding, Comparing those Things, which is Denominated Alike, Equal, or
the Same; but the Things themselves which are Compared, or are the Objects of
that Act. Whence the Act it self is no Part of the Relation, but is Extrinsecal
to the precise Notion of it. As farther appears hence, that Relation is one of
those Notions which are called Accidental Modes or Accidents, whose whole Being
(such as it is) is to affect the Substance in their several ways, and
denominate them such as they do formally make them: Since then Relation does
not affect or denominate the Act of the Understanding, but the Things which
that Act compares; and, as has been often demonstrated, the Accidents or Modes
are Really the Same with the Thing which they modifie; it follows, that
Relation is the Thing it self in our Minds* conceived considered, as bearing in
it a Respectiveness, or ^ther as Referrible to Another. To penetrate this bet^,
we will put a kind of Parrallel in the Predica^nt of Quality. A Pint is the
same Quantity wherever it is: Yet put the same Pint of Water (...) a Round
Glass it will be Round; in a Square ^lass, and it will be of a Square Figure.
Yet, both these Figures are Identify'd with the same Quantity, and the same
Substance of the Water, whose Modes they are; and it is only the Containers and
their Difference, which gives them this Different Denomination. So Whiteness in
those Subjects, which are White, is Apprehended and Denominated by an Absolute
Name, and they are both called White; but put two such Subjects with Whiteness
in them, in our Mind, which is a Comparing kind of Container, or a Comparing
Power, and they come thence to be Apprehended by a Relative Notion, and
Denominated by a Relative Word [ Alike.] So that the Things themselves do give
themselves this Relative Notion and Denomination of being Alike; taking them as
in such a Container as our Mind is, which is apt to consider them in order to
one another, or refer them Actually. These Things considered, no Man of Reason
can imagine, that, though we use the Common Word [ Relation,] because it passes
amongst Learned Men, (as we do other Abstract Words) therefore it means
something hovering in the Air (as it were) without a Subject, like a kind of
Idea Platonica; or that it can be any thing but the very Thing it self which is
Related. And hence it is that that most Solid and Acute Distinguisher of our
Natural Notions, Aristotle, rather chooses to make use of the Concretes; and, as
he called the foregoing Predicaments, (...) so he names Relation, (...), that
is, the Things Related, or as having in them the Ground of verifying a Respect
to Another; as I have noted in my Fifth Preliminary to Solid Philosophy
Asserted.

14. Prel. XIV. It Is impossible to conceive a Real Relation, without a
Correlate answering to it, in case it be grounded on Action and Passion, or on
the Unity of the Form; nor to conceive such Correlates, without conceiving some
kind of Particularity or Difference between them. There needs no more to evince
this, but only to reflect on the Word [ Ad,] which gives us the Notion of
Relation; and, withal, imports a Rapport or Respect to that, which (as is
evident by it is Contraposition) is, in some Sense or other, Distinct from it,
or Another.

15. Prelim. XV. The Essence of GOD not only being Self-Existence, but whatever
is an Intrinsecal Attribute of Him being Eternally such; it follows, that the
word [ is] not only gives us the true Sense of what is Predicated of GOD, (as is
shown, Prelim. IX.) but it must also signify, [ is Eternally;] there being no
Temporary or Accidental Predications of any thing that is in the DEITY.
Wherefore, we must in the truest Sense, mean in all such Speeches, that GOD
Eternally (that is, from all Eternity, and to all Eternity) is Knowing and
Loving, Himself; is Generating his Son; is Generated; is Proceeding from Father
and Son, etc. So that the word [ is] signifies here the most Absolute Necessity
of His Being Eternally so as those Predicates import; and not Contingently
only, as the same Word [ is] does often signify when we Predicate or speak of
Creatures. Which (...) at first amuse the Fancy, but (as I hope) af^^^wards
upon due Reflection, it will rectify the ^dgment of some Anti-Trinitarians; who
weak^ apprehending there can be no Pre-existence but (...) of Time, imagine we
put some Instant when (...) Son did not exist; and that, after he had got
Existence, the Father ceased afterward to communicate it to Him any longer,
but left Him to stand done, as Sons do here when their Fathers Die, o^
Disregard them; and many other such Fool^^ies, with which they delude the
Ignorant: Which (as will be shown) are abhorred by us, and most Absurd in a
Discourse concerning the DEITY, and therefore most ridiculously objected by
them.

SECT. II.
The State of the Question.

1 THE Divine Nature, which is the Subject of our present Discourse, may be
considered two manner of Ways. One is, as to what GOD is in himself, as the
Mysticks treat of Him; in which Sense He Abstracts from all our Natural
Notions, because He Transcends them; and therefore He is altogether
Unconceiveable and Unnameable by us in this State; and only Intelligible by the
Angels and Saints in Heaven; to whose Intellectual Eye, purified from all
Sinful Affections, and Disposed by Perfect Charity, he reveals His Blissful and
Glorious Face, to be seen by a Clear and Simple Intuition. The other way is to
consider Him as He is the Object of our Natural Notions; which, having first
(as is said above) Refined them from their Imperfection, we transfer to Him;
and, thence, become Enabled in some sort to speak and discourse of Him, Truly,
(though with some Impropriety,) in our Low and Homely Language.

2. Since then it is manifest that we cannot Speak or Discourse of, much less
Explicate, what we cannot conceive, or of which we cannot have any Notion; it is
Evident, that the Divinity being the subject of our intended Discourse, is to
be considered and taken according to the Later manner, and not according to the
Former, in our Discourses concerning it.

This premised, since Faith (by Prelim. V.) is delivered to us in Words
expressing our Natural Notions, the True State of the Question is this; Whether
the Divine Nature, Conceived by us according to such Notions as we had from
Creatures, which being depur'd first from their ImPerfections, we Apply to GOD;
does not oblige us, as we affirm of Him that He is Just, Merciful, Wise, etc.
So, with Equal Reason and Truth, to affirm that He is ONE according to His
Nature and Essence; and withal, THREE according to Another Notion or Respect,
which we fitly call [ Person?]

To set this Question, and our ensuing Explication in a Clearer Light, we will
divide this Entire Question into Five Distinct or Particular ones, viz.

First, Whether it be not Agreeable to Rational Principles taken from our
Natural Notions, to affirm that the Divine Nature does verify some One Notion
that is Common; and some Others that are Distinct or Particulars, to which that
Common Notion is Applied?

Secondly, Whether these Particulars are not Three, and no more?

Thirdly, Whether those Three Particulars are not most fitly called [ Persons?]

Fourthly, Whether those Three Persons, be not most fitly to be called, Father,
Son, and H. Spirit.

Fifthly, and Lastly, Whether the Divine Nature, notwithstanding this Plurality
of Persons, is not still Perfectly and Equally One in Nature; or, rather more,
(that is, under more Respects,) One in it is self, than it would have been in
case this Plurality of Persons had been secluded.

Now, if it shall appear by our Explication, that the Affirmative of all these
is Consonant to Reason working upon our Natural Notions stripped of their
Imperfections, and, as such, Transferred to GOD; I hope it will satisfy
Dissenters, comfort the Faith of those who Believe already, and convince every
Intelligent Reader, that nothing can with true Reason be objected against this
Divine Mystery.

SECT. III.
The Terms or Words, of which we make use in this Explication, cleared from
Ambiguity.

1. BY the word [GOD] is meant a most Actual and Self-Subsistent Being;
Infinite in His Nature and all it is Attributes.

2. By the words [ Divine Nature] we understand the same Infinitely Perfect
Being. But we are to mind the Reader once more of that which cannot be too
often inculcated, viz. That in all Creatures (for Example in Man) there is
found what answers to diverse Notions in the Line of Substance; of which one is
more Perfect (or Imperfect) than Another. For, an Individual Man, conceived
precisely under the Superior Notions of Ens, Corpus, Mixtum, Vivens, Animal
and Homo, signifies only some Common and Inadequate Notion of Him; whence
nothing in Common being able to Exist; but only Singulars, as Peter, Paul, etc.
hence all those Former are Imperfect in the Line of Ens, which signifies
Capable of Existing: Yet, even these Singular or Individual Entities, though we
should allow them in some sort to Exist, have not thence all the Completion or
Perfection imaginable in that Line; for a Thing may be Capable to Exist, and
yet not Capable to exist Alone, or without the Support of Another, which we
call Subsisting. To be Subsistent then, (which in Intelligent Things we call to
be a PERSON,) being the most Perfect Notion of Ens, must be attributed to the
Divine Essence or Nature; (though the word [ Essence] does not express it, but
rather signifies after the manner of a kind of mere Form:) Otherwise the Divine
Nature would be conceived to want something, which according to our Natural
Notions is the utmost Perfection in the Line of Being; which is impossible to
be thought or said of GOD. who is Infinitely Perfect in Being.

3. By the word [ Father,] I mean one Particular, who communicates the Nature
of which Himself is, to Another Particular: And by [ Son,] Him to whom that
Nature is thus Communicated; but that he does or does not Communicate the same
Individual Nature, or that he is Before his Son in Time, and other
Considerations arising from Matter, spring from the Imperfection and
Limitedness of Creatures, and therefore they are not to be Transferred to GOD:
Nor are they Essential to the Notions of Father and Son; as will be plain to
any Man, who reflects, that if ( per impossible) a Man did communicate his
Individual Nature to Another, and that Other had it thus Communicated from him,
and this Instantaneously; he would not, in that Supposition, be therefore less
a Father, but more perfectly such, because the Nature Communicated is more
perfectly the Same. Nor do [ Sooner] or [ Later] [ Instantaneous] or [
Not-Instantaneous], enter into the precise Notion of Father, and Son; as
appears from the Definition of Generation; which abstracts from all those
Considerations. Moreover, it is most Evident, that in such a case, the Person
who Communicates his Individual Nature, and He to whom it is Communicated, would
have, hence, some very near Relation to one another; and what imaginable
Relation could it be but that of Father and Son?

4. I take the word [ Generation] in the Sense of that Exact and Received
Definition, viz. [Processio Viventis a Vivente, tanquam a Principio Conjuncto,
in Similitudinem Naturae,] which I shall show is perfectly Verified in the
Procession of the Eternal Word. All other Considerations are Extrinsecal and
Foreign to the Notion of Generation, as may be gathered from. 3. and, therefore
do not belong to it is precise Notion, but spring from the Imperfection of
Creatures; nor, consequently, as such, ought they be Transferred to GOD.

5. The word [ Person] signifies Perseity, (as some Schoolmen explicate it;) or
what is so Subsistent of it self, or by the merits of it is own Notion or
Expression, that it needs no other Formal Notion to complete it, nor Word to
express it better. The Etymology of that word (if such a Consideration, and not
rather the Common Use of it only, be much to be regarded) seems to be this;
that as we say a Speech is Dissona, when it varies from another in Sense, and
Consona when it agrees to it: So a Thing is called Persona, when it thoroughly or
perfectly sounds or speaks the Notion of Ens; or expresses the utmost
Completion of a Thing under the Notion of an Intelligent Being. See. 2.

6. [ Subsistent] and [ Suppositum] signify the same, and are appliable to all
Beings whatever, whether they be Intelligent (that is Persons) or no; and
express their last Completion in the Line of Ens in their several Kinds. The
Notion of the former seems more to respect it is self, or it is own Absoluteness
in the Line of Being. The Notion of the Later regards the Nature, or the
Accidents, which it sustains in our Mind, or as conceived by ^. The Literal
meaning of which kind of Say^ng, is, That, we making diverse Conceptions of ^he
same Thing, the Formal Conception of the ^^ture, or of it is Modes, is not that
Formal Conception of a Thing Existing [Alone,] without needing any other
farther Notion in our Mind, or any other Word, to mean or signify it is
standing thus Alone or without Dependency on any other Created Noti^^ to
complete or make out that Full Sense. Notwithstanding that the Notions of
[Subsistent] and [Suppositum] do bear such a nice Distinction; ^^^, in regard
that which sustains another, must (...) supposed able to subsist of it self;
hence they ^, not without reason, promiscuously used.

The Explication of the rest of those words of which we shall have occasion to
make use, will, I conceive, come in more seasonably in their ^roper Places.

SECT. IV.
That the Divine Nature does Verify some One Notion that is (some way).
Common; and some Others that are Particulars.

1. SInce all Explications (as well as Arguments) are to be taken from the
Nature of the Thing, (...) from the Subject to be Explicated; as being, in
^^ality, nothing else but the Unfolding that Nature, and the laying open what,
with a Deep Inspection, we discover to be included in it, or to belong to it
Intrinsecally; and, since the Nature of GOD, is, at present, the Subject of our
Discourse; or that which we are to explicate; our Question being, Whether GOD
is not Truly One in Nature or Essence, and Three according to the Notion of
Person? Hence, it is most fittirg we should take our Rise, and Ground our
Discourse, from the Divine Nature it self, considered as it is conceived by us
according to our Natural Notions, as is declared above.

2. And, because many Attributes are held to belong to the Divine Nature;
therefore to make our Explication more facil and succinct, we will pitch upon
One or Two Attributes, or Predicates, which are granted by all to belong to
GOD's Nature; viz. That it is Spiritual, or that GOD is an Infinitely Perfect
Spirit.

3. Moreover, seeing all we know of Spiritual Natures, or the First and most
Obvious, and, withal, the most True Conception we have of them* is, that they
are such Beings as have Understanding and Will; and therefore, that they do
Know and Love such Objects as are proportioned to their pitch, or Agreeable to
their Natures; we are thereupon to build our Explication on these Two
Operations Proper to our Soul, and to other Created Spiritual Natures; and
thence Transfer them to GOD; which we may safely do without danger of putting
any Imperfection in GOD, in regard those Attributes are the Greatest Perfection
of Spiritual Natures, and even Essential to them; so that we need no more but
only abstract from them the Limitedness or Finiteness necessarily annex^ to all
Creatures, and conceive GOD to be Infinite under these Considerations, as is
declared Prel. VII.

4. Farther, because that Knowledge and Love are Imperfect which are exercised
about Unworthy Objects; and those are most Perfect, which are employed about
the Best and Noblest Objects that can be imagined; and only the Divine Nature
is the most Excellent Object: It follows, that, since no Notion that is
Imperfect is to be Attributed to GOD; Therefore the Knowledge and Love which we
attribute to Him must be the Knowledge and Love of the Best of all Objects,
Himself; and thence we must affirm, without the least fear of Injuring the
Divine Nature, that [GOD Knows and Loves Himself,] because to deny Him this,
would make the Divine Nature most highly Imperfect; nay more Imperfect than
Created Spiritual Natures are; especially if they are Pure Acts.

5. Moreover, this Knowledge and Love of Himself, is (as it were) the Primary
Operation of the Deity, as it is a Spirit: Wherefore, since the Primary
Operation of all Creatures we converse with has been proved to be That which
constitutes their Essences; we cannot but judge, that, considering GOD
according to our Natural Notions, this Knowledge and Love of Himself, is, in
that regard, most Essential to GOD as He is a Spirit.

6. This Fundamental Principle then being laid as the Groundwork of all our
ensuing Explication; since (by Prelim. II.) and as plain Reason tells us, we
are to discourse consequently of those True Notions we have of GOD, so they
imply no Imperfection; we are to consider next what Genuine Consequences do
follow from this Position.

7. It follows, then, hence immediately, that the Divine Nature does Verify
the Notions of Knower and Thing Known, Lover and Thing Loved; and that there is
in the Divine Nature that which answers to those Distinct Notions; nay, which
obliges us to say they are Distinct. For,

8. It Is impossible to conceive, that the Notions of Knower and Thing Known,
(and the same is to said of Lover and Thing Loved) should be the same Notion;
and not Contradistinct, and (some way) Opposite to one another. First, Because
plain Sense manifests they are counterpos'd. Next, the Art of Logic, which is
entirely Grounded on our Natural Notions, and perfectly Distinguishes them,
informs us certainly that there is a Relative Opposition, and, consequently, an
unavoidable Distinction between them. Thirdly, The Thing Known and Loved do
evidently import the Object of Knowledge and Love; and, what is Objected cannot
but be Distinct, or (some way) Other from That to which it is Objected.
Fourthly, they being clearly Relatives, the very meaning of the word [ Ad,]
which formally expresses all Relation, must forcibly signify there is some
sort of Distinction between them. Lastly, They are Correlatives; which can have
no Sense but this, that they mutually respect one another. Now that Knower and
Thing Known should mutually respect one another, and yet there should not be
(in some Sense) One and Another, is perfect Nonsense and mere Contradiction.

9. Hence follows, that there must be some kind of Distinction in the Divine
Nature it self; since Predicates that do necessarily bear Distinction in their
very Notion are truly verified of it: Nor can Distinction be in any thing, but
it must make it, some way or other, Distinct.

10. Nor can this Distinction proceed from the Imperfection of our
Understanding, as it does when we distinguish other Divine Attributes; but it
proceeds from the Sovereign Perfection of the Divine Nature it self, which is
to Know and Love Himself: Nor does our Understanding in conceiving this, deform
our True Conception of the Deity but the true Conception of the Deity it self
does thus Inform our Understanding, and obliges us to affirm thus of it.

11. Hence this Distinction, which those words, [ God Knows and Loves Himself,]
do put in the Divine Nature, is Real: Not only because the Divine
Self-Knowledge does Verify it; but also, because it is not grounded on our
weak manner of Conceiving it, but, as was shown,. 4. 5. on the Perfection of
GOD's Essence.

12. Hence, as we transfer to GOD the Notions of Justice, Mercy, Power, Wisdom,
etc. which we find in Creatures, by observing such Effects proceeding from Him
as use to proceed from such like Perfections in us, or among us; so with the
same, and far better Reason we may transfer to Him the Notions of Knowing and
Loving Himself; and, consequently, of Distinction between those Relative
Notions of Knower and Known which are in Him, and objectively Him, by Priel.
10. 11.

13. To understand this more clearly, we may reflect that the Names of those
Virtues which we Transfer to GOD do not in their Notion import that one of them
is not another; nor hinder but they may all be comprised in one Eminently
Perfect Attribute. I believe, that I have shown, ( Solid Philosophy Asserted,
Reflection XV.) that all Virtues, even amongst us, are comprehended in that one
Notion, [ Right Reason] working on such or such Objects, in such and such
Occasions. Much more easily may they all be centered in that one most Perfect
Formality of GOD's Essence: Whence all the Distinction of those Attributes as
they are in GOD, must necessarily be refunded into our manner of conceiving
them by diverse Acts, or Abstracted Conceptions. But now, when we conceive that
GOD Knows Himself, (and the same may be said of his Loving Himself) the
business is quite otherwise. For the very Notion of [ Self-Knowledge] does
essentially import Distinction of Knower and Known. Even Knowledge, amongst*
us, does essentially signify, that the Thing Known is in our Knowledge as
Another, or as Distinct from the Soul as knowing it; as is shown in the Book
now cited, Prelim. II.. 22. 23. and particularly,. 26. And Reason gives it must
be so; since when I know a Tree, the Nature of a Tree which is in my Mind
intellectually, is not there as either my Essence, nor as any Intrinsecal Mode
of me, as is manifest; it must therefore necessarily be there as Distinct from
me, or as Another. Nay, when our Soul knows her self, she must, some way or
other, be Distinct from her self by that Knowledge; for it cannot with any
Sense be denied, but that she is in that case, her own Object; and that,
therefore, for that very regard, she must be distinguished, some way, from her
self as Knowing that Object, as is shown, Prelim. IV. Nor is this any
Imperfection in a Created Spirit, to have her Objects in her when she knows
them, as Other, or as Distinct from her: For it is the very Notion or Nature of
Knowledge, which if we take away from her, we must at the same time take away
her Knowing Power, and her Spirituality, and put her to be made of Matter; it
being the Property of Matter and of Material Things to have nothing in them but
such Modes which are Intrinsecal to their Subject, and Determine it is
Potentiality. Nay more, it is the highest Perfection of a Spiritual Nature to
have things in it, which are different from it; as is demonstrated in my
Metaphysics, Book II. Chapter 2.. 6, 7, 8, 9. Whence, there being no Imperfection
in this Notion, but rather it being the best Perfection of a Spiritual Nature,
we ought with far better Reason than any other, Transfer it to GOD; and to say,
that GOD, by Knowing Himself, is (in some Sense or other) in Himself as
Another, or that He is Distinct from Himself, as he is a Knower, as is seen
Prel. IV.

14. To finish this Point, we may reflect, that we may more easily be Misled
by fancying those other Attributes to be Distinct in GOD; because, according to
our manner of Conceiving they are Diverse from one another, and very Many of
them; But in our case there are but Two single Attributes, viz. Self-Knowing
and Self-Loving, and yet each of those single Attributes imports Distinction
and Aliety, (if I may use that word) in it is own Particular Notion. Which shows
plainly, that the Distinction here spoken of, does not arise out of the Number
of those Diverse Attributes, or from our Distinct Acts of Conceiving them
Abstractedly; but from each of those Single and Intrinsecal Natures or Notions
of Self-Knowing and of Self-Loving; which, unless we should impiously degrade
the Divine Nature from being Spiritual, we must be forced to Attribute to Him;
and consequently, some Distinction, as these words do most evidently import.

15. Hence is farther manifested, that since GOD Knows and Loves Himself, there
is in the Divine Nature some One Notion that is Common, and some Others that
are Particulars. For it is Evident, that Knower, and Known, Lover, and Loved,
are all distinct Notions from one another, and therefore Particulars; as also
that the word [ GOD] is Predicated, and Verified of each of them. For, since
all True Predication or Verification is made by the Identifying Particle [
Est,] it is consequent, that the Divine Nature is in them all, and really Them:
And therefore, since the single word [GOD] is but one Notion, and truly said of
them All, it must be granted to be COMMON to them all.

16. And because this Common Notion [GOD] cannot but most properly signify the
Divine Being, which is Infinite in Perfection; and to be a Suppositum, (by
Sect. 3.. 6.) is to be Complete or Perfect in the Notion of Ens: Therefore, the
Notion of a Suppositum cannot but be attributed to that Common Notion [GOD.]
Wherefore that Notion is not only Common, but also a Suppositum; there is then
a Common Suppositum in GOD, which is predicated of the Particulars truly
attributed to Him; and, as has been proved, Identify'd with Him.

17. In this Notion of the Common Suppositum, the Generality of the Jews, the
Wiser Heathens, and all those who deny a Trinity, understood the word [ GOD;]
and perhaps our selves too, when there is not in our Prayers or Discourse any
Particular Reference to any of the Persons.

18. Wherefore this Common Suppositum may not unfitly be called the Absolute
Notion of GOD, and those Particulars the Relative Notions of the same Divine
Essence; because they merely spring from those Relations.

19. Whence, because the Common Suppositum, expressed by the word [GOD,] is held,
by all who use that Word to be Infinite in all those Attributes, which we have
Demonstrated in the Third Book of our Metaphysics, to belong to the First
Being, viz. Infinitely Wise, Just, Good, Powerful, etc. as also Eternal, and
Self-Existent; it follows, that all or each of those Particulars, which are
Predicated of the Word [GOD,] and therefore are Identify'd with Him, must also
be granted to have all those Infinite Perfections in them, which are attributed
to Him; since [GOD,] who includes all those Attributes is Predicated (or
Identify'd) with them all; as is delivered accordingly in the Creed of St.
Athanasius.

20. The Difficulty is, how we can with Truth, and our due Regard to GOD, who
is essentially a most Pure Actuality of Being, make Him a Genus or a Species,
Common to more which have the Notion of Inferiors in respect of Him. For true
Metaphysics admits no Composition in GOD of Genus and Difference, as is seen,
Book III.. 35. To clear this, we are to consider all those several Manners of
Predicating, given us by Porphyrius, and allowed by all the Learned World,
called the Five Predicables. Now the Notions of Genus and Species, which are
made by Logical Abstraction, are Indeterminate and Potential in respect of the
Inferior Notions; and the Things, (that is, they, as thus considered) are
Substantiae Secundae, which reach not to the Notion of Individuum, or
Substantia Prima, only which are properly Entia or Capable of Existing; much
less do they reach to the Notion of Existence, or Actual Being. This being so,
it would be most absurd to Transfer such Notions to GOD who is Pure Existence.
Nor can we Predicate any thing of Him as a Difference, which determines the
foresaid Potentiality of the others; for in that which is essentially Pure
Actual Being, there can be no farther Determination made; since this is done by
the Act, and nothing can be more Actual than Pure Actuality of Being it self.

21. Wherefore, setting these Three Predicables aside, there remain those
Manners of Predicating called Proprium and Accidens. Now, I conceive, that it
argues no Imperfection for the Common Suppositum to be Predicated of those
Particulars, according to this Last manner. For first, This is not Abstracted
from Inferiors, or Common to them as a Potential Notion Determined by
Differences: Again, To be thus Predicated it is not required that the Predicate
be an Accident it self, or found in any of the Heads of those Modes, which are
Contr^^istinguisht from Substance; but the Predicate here may it self be a
Substante, provided it does not per se, or essentially and formally belong to
the Subject. V. g. When we say, [a Cup is Golden, or (which is the same) Gold;
a Spoon is Gold; a Ring is Gold*] the Predicate [ Gold] applied to the Cup,
Spoon, and Ring, is a Substance; and, in some Sense Common to them all; not as
a Potential Notion, Determined by Differences, is common to it is Inferiors,
and Essential to them; but, because it does not Essentially belong to Gold to
be applied to such a Figure, therefore it is Accidental or not- Essential to
it; and hence it is said to be Predicated of them Accidentally. Now in this
manner the Common Suppositum [GOD] is Predicated of Knowing, Known, and the
other Particulars without any show of Imperfection. I do not say, that Knowing,
etc. are Accidental to GOD, as it is to things of the said Figures to be Gold.
I abstract from the Matter, and take only the bare Manner of Predicating; which
is, not to be said or predicated as a Superior of Inferiors, to which it is
Potentiality is Determined by Differences, but as one Substantial Notion,
determined already as to it is own Nature, is Predicated of another, which is
either (according to it is Notion) Substantial; or formally belonging to Another
Head; as those Figures are in respect of Gold, and the Absolute Notion of the
Divine Essence, according to the Distinction of our Natural Notions, is to that
of Relation in Common.

22. Or, if we invert the Order of those Propositions, and say, [GOD is Known,
Knowing, etc.] and so make the Notion of GOD the Common Subject in those
speeches in which the Relative ones are Predicated; then they may be truly said
to be Predicated of him according to the Predicable of Proprium. Which soever
of those ways we take, no Imperfection will be refunded upon GOD, nor any
Potentiality transferred to His most Pure Actuality; which is the chief danger
to be avoided in our Predications concerning the Divine Nature.

SECT. V.
That these Particulars, are THREE, and no more.

1. SInce then this Common or Absolute Suppositum, called GOD, is justly held
to be Infinite in Being; it follows, that He has all the Positive Perfections
in the Line of Ens or Substance that can be imagined, and possesses them all
Indivisibly in One most Actual Formality of Being; whence it is impossible to
apprehend there should be any Distinction or Plurality at all in GOD, as he is
thus conceived, or under that precise Notion of merely Being; since under that
Notion He is Indivisibly One; which farther appears hence, that even our
ordinary Notion of [Existence] is Indivisible; much more must it be such when
it is Infinite. Wherefore, it being no less evidently shown, Sect. 4. that
there are some Particular Notions, or some sort of Plurality, Truly and Rightly
Transferred to GOD, and Verified of Him: This must necessarily spring from our
Conceiving GOD under some Other Notion (or some Notion that belongs to Another
Head or Predicament) than that of Substance or mere Being; and, withal, from
such a one as does not carry, along with it, when it is Transferred to Him, any
Imperfection to the Divine Nature.

2. Nor need we look far to find what kind of Notion this is. We can no sooner
consider, that GOD Knows and Loves Himself, (which is the Ground of all our
Explication, and, as it were, the Text on which our Reason descants) but we
must forcibly and immediately discover, that this Distinction in GOD must be
taken from that Head of our Notions, called [RELATION.] For the Knower cannot
be a Knower of Nothing, but of some Thing or some Object, which is Known by
him: Nor can that Thing or Object be actually Known, but there must be some
Thing which is a Knower of it; which shows those Notions are perfectly Relative
to one another.

3. Wherefore all the Distinction and Operation, which (as has been shown) is
Verified to be in the Divine Nature, and all the Distinction of the Particulars
we lately spoke of, must be taken from the Relations, according to which the
Divine Nature is Referred to its self; and not formally and immediately from
GOD' s Essence, which belongs formally to the Line of Substance.

4. Nor need we fear to attribute Distinct and (some way) Opposite Predicates
to GOD, and, consequently affirm that there is some kind of Distinction and
Opposition in Him; since the Distinction necessarily implied in that Natural
Notion we transfer to Him, does attribute to Him the Highest Perfection of His
Nature as it is Spiritual; and is not Applied to Him according to the Notion of
Ens or Being; but, according to Another Respect or Notion, which is Different
from it; and (as is shown, Prel. X. and XI.) does not induce or require any
Distinction formally of the Essence it self; Nay, when (as will be shown, Sect.
VIII.. 7.) that very Opposition, notwithstanding it forces some kind of
Plurality, does no less necessarily infer a more perfect Unity, (if possible)
in the Divine Nature, at least an Unity in more respects, than could have been
Conceived had there not been that kind of Distinction and Opposition. Nor yet
can any doubt of the Truth of this Thesis, which puts Distinct and Opposite
Notions in GOD; since His Nature verifies those Distinct Notions, and Obliges
us to Affirm them of Him, or Attribute them to Him.

5. Since then these Particulars, which (as is shown,. 2. and 3) we truly
attribute to GOD, must entirely be taken from the foresaid Relations; it is
consequent, that the Number of them also must be taken from the Number of those
Relations.

6. And, it is clearly Agreeable to Reason, that in those of the Former sort,
there must be Relation on both sides; which must, consequently, constitute, or
rather Infers, Two Particulars. For, it is very Evident from. 2. and, indeed, is
obvious to Common Sense, that (in our case) there is a Mutual Relation between
the Knower and Thing Known; as is expressed by those very Words; nor can we
Express them otherwise, while we must affirm that GOD Knows Himself. As will
yet better appear, Sect. VII.. 9.

7. Which is hence confirmed, because as GOD is essentially Infinitely-
Intellective or rather Intelligent; so He must also be Infinitely-
Intelligible, or rather actually Known; otherwise there would want an Adequate
Object of the Divine Understanding, which would also infer He is not Infinitely
Intelligent.

8. These Relations are grounded materially and ^eally on the Divine Essence it
self, considered, according to it is own Notion, or as it is conceived ^o be
Absolute; since it is His Essence it self, expressed by the word [GOD,] which
Knows and is Known, conceived as apt to ground those Relations; as it evidently
is; and not His Essence as it is conceived Relatively: For a Relation cannot be
the immediate Reason or Ground of Another Relation; otherwise there might be
processi^s in infinitum. But the main Reason why this cannot be, is, because it
is not the Relation it self which is Referred, but the Thing; and Relation must
necessarily be in th^se things which are Related.

9. Wherefore, however the Divine Lover, when GOD Loves himself, cannot but
have a Relation to the Thing Loved, because Love proceeds from the Goodness of
the Object, and it is Agreeableness to it is (that is to GOD's) Nature; yet there
is no Mutual Relation from the Thing Loved to the Lover, or to the Love of it.
For the Greatest Good and Perfection of an Intelligent or Knowing Nature is
Truth; and Truth does formally consist in this, that the Object is so in the
Understanding, as it is in it is self, which is in our case, that the Divine
Object Known is in the Divine Knowledge, or truly conceived by it: Whence Love
proceeds formally, properly and immediately, from both according to their
Relative Notions by which they are Distinguished, and not from the Absolute
Notion which is Common to them both. Wherefore, since by. 9. no Relation can be
grounded on another Relation, and in case there were a Mutual Relation to the
Lover, it must proceed or be grounded on the Relations of Knower and Known; it
follows, that there can only be Three Relations; and, consequently, (by. 4. and
5. as will be shown,) but Three Particulars in the Deity; nor can any more be
attributed to it, according to our best Reason directed by True Principles, and
proceeding upon our Natural Notions: That the Common Suppositum does not infer
a Fourth Particular, will be seen, Sect. VI.. 10.

Corollary. Since Divine Love proceeds from this that the Object is so in the
Knower as it is in it self, which is the Formal Notion of TRUTH: Hence, it is
seen, how much our Love ought to be set on Truth, which is the Natural
Perfection of our Mind; how Like GOD those Noble Souls are whose Chief
Affection is addicted to Truth, especially Divine Truths: On the other side,
how Ignoble, and Unlike GOD those Mean and Depraved Souls are who disregard
TRUTH, and think the care of Promoting it is below their Empty Temporary
Greatness.

SECT. VI.
That these Three Particulars are most fitly called PERSONS.

1. THE next Question is, What Natural Notion of ours does most properly fit
those Three Particulars, which we have been obliged to put in the Divine
Nature; and what Word of ours does most fitly, and in the Common Usage of it,
express that Notion. For, since we have granted in our Fifth Preliminary, that
Christian Faith was Delivered at first in such Language as expressed our Natural
Notions; that is, in such as was Usual in those Times and Places, and
Intelligible by the Generality in their respective Circumstances; it cannot be
denied but that we stand engaged to show that our Explication must likewise
observe the same Rule, as to those Words which we pretend do signify the Point
of Faith it self, as expressed in our Catechisms and Creeds.

2. To perform this as we ought, we will consider first of what Notion or
Nature those Particulars must be conceived to be; and because we have no
Natural Notion but either of Substance, or it is Modes; it follows, that those
Three Particulars we speak of, must either be Particular according to the first
sort of Notion [ Substance;] or else according to some of the Later. Wherefore,
to clear this Point, and determine under which of these Notions they are
Particularized, we are to consider what it is that is thus Particularized; and
our former Discourse shows, that it is the Common Suppositum, or that which is
that Absolute Notion, we call [GOD,] which is here Particularized, or has these
Particulars in it. And, indeed, there needs no more but these words, [ God
Knows and Loves Himself,] to evince this: For it is, hence, as Evident as plain
Words can make any thing, that it is GOD who is the Knower, Thing Known, and
Lover; which Notions give us, or rather are those very Particulars we speak of:
Now, since the word [GOD] cannot be thought to belong to, or be with any Sense,
referred to any other of those Heads then that of Substance or Being, (whence
as considered in an Absolute and not in a Relative Sense, he is called the
First Being,) hence it is GOD, conceived under the Notion of Being or Substance,
which is Particularized. And, though GOD be not particularized Substantially,
or according to the Manner Substances are particularized amongst us, which is
that the Common Abstracted, Indeterminate or Potential Notions of the Genus, or
Species, be Divided and Determined under the Notion of Ens, by means of
Essential or Intrinsecal Differences, and so make more Entia, (for this, as was
said lately, cannot be said of the Pure Actuality and Unity of the Divine
Nature;) Yet he may be particularized by reason of the Relative Conceptions
verified of Him, which we have shown do not induce any Imperfection at all:
Yet, as it is only the Common Suppositum or GOD, (taking that word in an
Absolute Sense) which is Related, so it is only what is signified by GOD, (or
the Primum Ens,) which is the Thing Particularized. This being then manifest,
and Particulars under the Notion of Substance, being most necessarily held to
be Particular, Supposita, and, if they be Intelligent, [PERSONS;] it follows
that these Three Particulars, or, Suppositums in GOD are fitly and properly to
be called Three Divine PERSONS. And, he who will deny any part of this
Discourse stands obliged to show either, that there are not Three Particulars
in the Divine Nature; or, that it is not the Divine Nature under the Notion of
Substance, which is the Thing Related, and thence Particularized; or that
Particulars under the Notion of Substance, are not to be called in true Speech,
Suppositums; and, if they be Intelligent, in a vulgar word, PERSONS. He must
also assign some other Notion under which we are to conceive them; and invent
some other Name, suteing with our Natural Notions, by which we may call them.
And, lastly, he stands bound to answer the Reasons I have brought in my
foregoing Explication for each of those Points. None of which, if he pleases to
go to work like a Scholar, and not Act a Banterer and Droll, he can. I am
sure, ever be able to perform.

3. This being so plain, I am sorry I must declare, that I am much dissatisfied
that any Christian Writer, speaking of the B. Trinity, should assert that the
word [PERSON] is now become a Term of Art: Whereas we have no word more Proper
or more Usual to express a Particular Subsistent Being that is withal
Intelligent, than the word [ Person] is. For, let us ask all Mankind, and even
the rudest Vulgar, how many Persons there are in such a Place? They will
heartily reckon up to us only the Men and Women, and not the Stools, Chairs, or
Irrational Animals; nor can any Man imagine, either that they answered thus
through any Skill or Art they had acquired; or that they meant to express any
Artificial Conception of ours, or any thing made by an Artificer; but that they
intended to signify by that Word, mere Natural Things, with which we were well
acquainted and daily converst; and that they, in thus answering, used the
Ordinary Speech of all Mankind, who spoke and understood the same Language.
Again, when it is said, [it is now become a Term of Art,] What means the word [
now?] Is it used by Christians now in any other Sense than it was used by S.
Athanasius, 1330 years ago; or by the Christian Church both then, before, and
ever since? Or do our Catechisms nowadays teach us Artificial Conceits? For
only these are fit to be expressed by Terms of Art. I would hope that Learned Man
had a better meaning than those Words seem to have, and that I am Deceived in
him; however, I thought fit to take notice of it lest it should Deceive others.

4. Nor ought it be objected, that the word [ Person] is not found in
Scripture. It Is a Necessary Liberty the Christian Church ever took to declare
the Faith which she had in her Heart, by more-Emphatical Words, to keep her
Thoughts and Tenets from being misunderstood; provided those Words express more
fully and clearly the same Sense, as is found in the Holy Scripture; as appears
in the word [ Consubstantial] made use of in the Nicene Creed; though it be no
more found in Scripture than the word [Person] is.

5. Yet, though we must put Three Persons in GOD, does not therefore follow that
there are Tria ^^^ or Three Things in Him. For the Proper ^otion of Ens,
amongst us, is That which is Ca^^le of Existence; whence, though we should de^ite
that Notion from the Potentiality signified ^^ the word [ Capable,] which would
cost us ^^me straining the signification of words; yet ^^ cannot conceive Three
Entities in GOD without conceiving there are Three Existences, or ^^ther
Self-Existences, in Him; which it is Impos^^ble there should be: For [
Self-Existence] necessarily implies [ Infinite in Being;] and there can be ^o
more but One Infinite in the same kind; as has been Demonstrated in our
Metaphysics: Nor can it be said that there may be Three Relative Existences in
GOD; the Notion of [ Existence] being the most Absolute, and most Irrespective
or Unrelative that can be imagined. Add, That the Formal Constituent of Ens is
Essence: Wherefore, ^f we put three Entia in GOD, we must also put Three Divine
Essences in Him: Of which, since each must be Infinite, we shall be obliged to
put Three Infinites under the same Notion: Which, seeing each must be distinct
from the other; and therefore must, to distinguish them, have some^hing in it
which the other had not; they would, consequently, limit one another; and, so,
none of them would be Infinite. Whence, it was not amiss, which an acute School
Divine put in his Public Theses; viz. In Deo sunt Tres Entes, non Tria Entia:
Ignoscant Grammatici, perpendant Th^ologi.

6. But, to give a farther Reason, why these Three Particulars in GOD cannot be
said to b^ Three Things or Entia, and yet must be call^^ Three Persons; and,
withal to set this pre^^^^ Point in a clearer Light, I discourse thus. The
Common Notion of Ens or Substance is Divided and Subdivided, descending
downwards by ^^trinsecal Differences, till we come at the foot of the Scala
Predicamentalis, or the Lowest Notions called by Logicians Individuums: which
are constituted and distinguish^ by such a Complexion of Accidents, as is found
in no other; whence it becomes This, that is, a Substantia Prima, which only is
properly a Thing; in which the Matter being thus ultimately Determined, it is
hence made Capable of Being, that is, an Ens. Whereas, the Former, which were
Common Notions, are not, by virtue of those Common or Universal Natures, or as
thus expressed by a General Word, Capable of Existing or Entia, (since nothing in
Common can exist) and therefore must either exist in the Substantia Prim^, or
Suppositum, as Metaphysical Parts (or Inadequate Conceptions) of it, or not at
all. Wherefore the Individuum includes all those Common Notions in it self as
Parts of it is Essence; whence they are all predicated essentially of it. Nor
can our Natural Notion of Ens, be divested of this Imperfection that it is
compounded of such Metaphysical Parts, which are Superior and Inferior in
respect of one another. Whence that Notion cannot fitly be Transferred to GOD,
in whose most Simple Essence there can be no Compositions; no, not even that
called Metaphysical. Moreover, were this waved, yet the Notion of Ens being
Essentially That which has a Power to ^^* it can never forego that
Potentiality, nor, con^^^uently, be Transferred to GOD. For, were ^^^
Potentiality of Being abstracted from it, it ^ould either signify nothing that
any way relates ^o Being at all; or else it would signify Actual ^eing or
Existence. Now Existence may indeed be most fitly applied to GOD; but in that
case, ^^^^e the Notion of Ens and Existence are as widely Different as Power
and Act, it would not be the Notion of [ Ens,] which is Applied, but Another
very Different Notion, viz. that of Existence. Wherefore, though we call GOD an
Ens, when the Question is not precisely (as here it is) about the Perfection or
Imperfection of our Notion or Expression; yet, in our case, where we nicely
examine what Natural Notions of ours are properly fit to be transferred to Him;
it is manifest, that both by reason of it is Metaphysical Composition, and also
of it is Potentiality, it is utterly incompetent to be applied to God; since in
both respects it carries along with it an Unavoidable Imperfection; and,
consequently, much less can we say there are in GOD Three Things, or Tria
Entia. The word [ Substance] is with much more Reason transferred to GOD,
because it formally imports a Distinct Notion from Accidents, and a Sustainer
of them in Being; whence it is in a manner the same Notion as a Suppositum or
Subsister.

7. On the other side, taking these Words according to their most formal
Signification, the Notion of the words [ Person] and [ Subsistent], with which
later, the Common Use among Learned Men, does now confound [ Suppositum,] does
neither speak Potentiality, nor Composition, but barely signifies the ultimate
Completion in the Line of Rational Being, or Independency on any other Created
Thing of Notion for their Existing: And thence they have a just Title to be
Transferrible to the Divine Nature. And hence it is, that the Distinction of
those Three Particulars, which the Divine Essence verisies, ought not to be
taken from the manner in which Things in the Line of Substance use to be
Distinguished, that is, by Intrinsecal Differences; nor ought the Common
Suppositum be apprehended to be Distinguished or Particularized by such a gross
way* yet, (as was shown) Distinguished it must be, and there is no other way,
nor any other Notion, according to which it can be conceived to be
Particularized or Distinguished, but that of Relation; the formal Notion of
which is Ad Aliquid, (or, some way or other) Ad Aliud; by which too we have
seen GOD's Knowing and Loving Himself obliges us to distinguish Him: whence
follows, that the Divine Nature is Distinguished Relatiuely. Nor does this
Notion multiply the Common Nature Essentially, as did the former way which
distinguished the Common Notion by Essential Differences: Both because the
Relation by Prelim. X. and XI. is not Distinguished from the Divine Essence it
self which is the Reason and Ground of Referring it diversely; as also, because
it springs from a most High Perfection in GOD as He is a Spirit; I add, and
terminates also in a High Perfection under the Notion of Being, viz. in that of
Personality or Person. In a word, it is the Divine Essence which is Distinguished
or Particularized, there being nothing else in GOD to be Distinguished: Yet it
is not Distinguished Essentially or according to the precise Notion of Essence
or Being, but Relatively; because it is Infinite in Being, and so can be, in
that Absolute Re^^ct, but One.

8. For the same Reason, I avoid using the word * ^^dividuum,] though I do not
blame others that do. ^erhaps I am too scrupulous in it, yet I cannot ^^t think
it is something liable to exception, at ^ast comparatively. My Reasons are:
First, It Is ^^o Logical and Artificial; and, consequently, though it has got, I
know not how, out of the Schools into the Language of some well-bred Men to
say, ['tis the same Individual Man,] yet, for all that, it is not the Vulgar
Speech, nor so Natural. Secondly, Because it is made Particularly such by it is
Difference too, ( viz. by the Complexion of it is Accidents;) and, subsuming
under the Specific Notion, it is only a Negation of the Superior Notions, and
signifies the same as Ungenerical or Unspecifical. Whereas, the Word [ Person]
has a Positive Signification, nor has any reference to the Genus and Species,
as is seen in Angels: And, moreover, it directly imports the highest Perfection
in the Line of [ Substance;] and therefore it is fitly Transferrible to GOD.
Again, the word [ Individuum] being a Logical Term, is more subject to wrangle.
For Artists being the Imposers, and (as it were) Creators of the Words which
themselves use; and such Men seldom Agreeing in their Thoughts and Meanings;
nor consenting universally that such a word shall stand for such a Meaning or
Notion; it happens that some of them do take the Word in one Sense others in
another; and very frequently ampliate or restrain the Signification of it at
pleasure. Hence perpetual, and (if this Inconvenience be not remedied by Clear
Definitions of such Words) Eternal Dissentions must needs ensue. And, indeed,
most of the Li^ig^^^ Disputes and Controversies among Learned M^^ (in case the
Contesters be Sincere and Disintere^^ed do arise from this Defect now
mentioned. From which mischief the Words used by the General^^ to express our
Natural Notions, are Free; for we find by Experience that the Vulgar understand
one another very well and easily; nor are subject to perpetual Word-skirmishes
in their Common Conversation, as the Others are.

9. Nor can it be inferred from this Explication* that, by the same reason,
there would be a Trinity of Persons in Angels and Souls Separated when they
Know and Love themselves. For Self-Knowledge formally consisting in this, that
the Thing known does Inexist in it is own Knowing Power as an Object, or after
an Intellectual manner; and the Existence, and consequently, Inexistence of all
Creatures being Extrinsecal o^ Acoidental to them, (as being given them by
Another) and not Essential to them, or their very Essence, as it is in GOD* it
being one of his Peculiar Attributes: Hence i^ follows, that the Relation of
Knower and Known is in them Accidental to them, as being Grounded on what is
Accidental to their Essences; and consequently, by Prelim. X. is Identify'd
with the Object accidentally only: Whence it can make only an Accidental
Distinction in them, and not a Distinction in their Substance, or a Distinction
of that most perfect* Substantial Notion, [ Person;] as, for the contrary
reason, it must make in GOD. Add, that GOD's Self-Knowledge is properly and
perfectly Essential to Him as He is an Infinite Spirit; and (as it were) his
Primary Operation; by which (according to our manner of Conceiving) he is
Constituted such; or rather, (...) E^^ence, as He is a Spirit, does consist in
it* ^^ereas, in Angels and Souls, the Knowing the ^le Extent of Entity and even
GOD Himself, (...) the Primary Operation for which Nature in^^nded them; and to
Know themselves was only (...) Means or First-Step to bring them to the
^nowledge of all other Things, and thence of GOD: And therefore Self-Knowledge
is far from being their Primary Operation; or that, by respect ^o* which their
Essence was Constituted; nor, consequently, can it distinguish their Substance,
as it does and must in GOD.

10. Nor, lastly, can it be thought, that the Common Suppositum, having all
Perfections that can ^^ in the Line of Being, and therefore, amongst the rest,
Personality, in it, does constitute a Fourth Person; for since GOD, or the
Common Suppositum, as has been shown, is Common to the three Relative Persons,
or in them all, it carries along with it all the Perfections of the Divinity,
and among the rest the Personality too, and communicates it to the Relative
Persons, as it does all the other Positive or Absolute Perfections in the
Godhead. Whence they have all of them to subsist or Absolutely to be Persons
from the Godhead, or the Common Suppositum; and that they are Different Persons
comes wholly and solely from their Distinct Relations, as was proved above. So
that there is no show that the Common Suppositum can make a Fourth or Distinct
Person; since what is Common to All, or each, cannot be Particular or
Contradistinguisht to any; Nor is there any Opposition of the Common Person to
the Relative ones; both because it has an Absolute and not a Relative Notion*
as also, because it is so far from being Opposite, that it is coincident with
them all or with each of them.

SECT. VII.
That this Distinction of Three Persons puts no Imperfection in the Divine
Nature; and that they are most-^itly called, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

1. GOD being the Author of Order and not of Confusion, it is most worthy His
Divine Nature, and most Consonant to True Reason, that there should be some
Order amongst those Thre^ Divine Persons, and some Solid Ground for that Order.
And, since all Order amongst More, must begin from some One, or some First; it
follows, that there must be some One amongst them, which is the First or
Beginning of that Order; and that therefore the Notion of the word [
Beginning,] must be Transferred to GOD, or be Peculiar to some One of those
Persons who is GOD; provided it can be done without attributing to Him any
Imperfection: Which waving our Proofs brought hereafter to the contrary) is
even hence Incredible it should; ^ince, as was now shown, and will farther
appear, it is Absolutely Necessary there should be some First, or some
Beginning amongst them; and, certainly, there can be no Absolute Necessity to
attribute any Imperfection to GOD.

2. And, that it ought to be so, this Plain Reason farther evinces; because,
since we cannot name them all at once; we must, in recounting them, forcibly
name some One of them First: Nor could we give any good reason why we did this,
unless there were some Consideration in that Person it self, which obliged us
to it; otherwise we must be forced to say we did it without reason, or named
them at random.

3. It remains then to show which of the Three Persons is the First; to give
the reason why we put Him first; and, in what Sense, He is a First, or
Principium, in that Order.

4. Reflecting then on those Relations of Known and Knowing, we find that the
F^rmer of these, the Divine Essence, as Known, has the Nature or Notion of an
Object; and the Later, (there being no Potentiality in GOD) the Nature of
Actual Knowledge* and that our Natural Notions ascertain us that the Knowledge
proceeds from the Object; for this is that which determines the Indifferency of
our Knowing Power by Informing it, and produces the Act of Knowledge; or, as
the Schools phrase it, Specifies it. Whence, abstracting this way of producing
Knowledge in us from all Potentiality and Causality, (as is most ^it,) and only
Applying to GOD what is Essential to the Notion of an Object; (in the being of
which in our Understanding, Knowledge does necessarily consist,) we must
rationally conceive and affirm, that the Divine Nature as Knowledge, or as
Knowing Himself, does pr^ceed from the Divine Nature as an Object, or as Known:
and that therefore this Later is the Origin, Principium, or First of those
Three Persons; and Divine Knowledge, the Second; it being Evident, that Love,
which proceeds from the Goodness of the Object in our Knowledge, and,
therefore, in this Order of our Natural Notions, necessarily presupposes the
other Two, is with good Reason to be accounted the Third.

5. For, in regard there can be no Adequate or Proper Object of the Divine
Understanding, but the Divine Essence it self, and that all Others do fall
Infinitely short of being worthy of it; hence, it is equally argumentative to
say, that His Knowledge as it is Divine, proceeds from the Divine Essence as an
Object; as it is, that our Knowledge of Nature does proceed from Nasural
Objects; since, according to our most Natural and Necessary Notions, it as
unavoidably follows, that GOD's Knowledge is therefore Divine, because the
Object of it is GOD; as it follows that our Knowledge is therefore Natural
because the Object of it is of Natural Notions; or Mathematical, because it has
for it is Object those Notions which are Mathematical; nay, it would be Perfect
Nonsense to affirm the contrary, or assign any other reason for it. So
evidently Consonant it is to True Reason, and to our Natural Notions, to affirm
that the Knowledge, even though Divine, does proceed from the Divine Object; or,
which is the same, that the Divine Nature as an Object is the First that we can
possibly conceive in the Order of those Notions which we use when we say, [GOD
Knows and Loves Himself;] or is the Beginning and Origin of Divine Knowledge,
and, consequently, of Divine Love.

6. To Explicate this yet more fully, and to clear our Natural Notion of
Knowing, let us reflect on that passage of St. Austin at the end of his
Confessions, [ Nos ista quae fecisti videmus quia sunt: Tu autem quia vides ea,
sunt.] We see, (or know) the things which thou have made, because they are; but
when thou see them, thy Seeing them makes them be. These last words show
that when any Created Being proceeds from GOD, His Understanding does begin
that a^fair, and by Knowing it, makes them be, or Creates them; but, in all
other cases, our Knowledge comes from the Being of the Object. It Is then this
Nature of Knowledge, thus Explicated, which is our Natural Notion of it, and
which is Proper to our Soul as it is Spiritual. Wherefore we must either
Transfer This to GOD, and say that His Knowledge comes from the Object; or else
(having no Other Notion of it) we can never Understand the Meaning of those
Words, [GOD Knows Himself,] nor, consequently Affirm that He does so.
Certainly, nothing can be plainer than it is, that we cannot conceive this
Knowledge to be of GOD, but because the Object of it is GOD. Wherefore, it is
even hence most Evident, that the Procession of the Knowledge begins from the
Object, or is originiz'd by it; So that the Knower, as such, has nothing but
what he has from that which is Known. Whence follows, That this Priority of
Order, spoken of above, must be a Priority of Origin, and has the Notion of
Principiation to what is principiated or proceeds from it: Nor does this kind of
Priority put any Imperfection, or less Perfection in the Divine Nature as
Knowing, more than it does in the same Nature as Known; because it is equally
Essential to the Divine Nature to be Knowing as it is to be Known; and
consequently, it is impossible to conceive that one of the Correlates,
considering them purely as Related, (as is our case) should more depend on the
Other, than that the Other should depend on It. Lastly, since, as appears by
the words, [GOD Knows Himself,] both the Correlates are GOD, in whom is all
Perfection imaginable; it is impossible, that either GOD as Known, or as Knower,
should be in any sort Imperfect, notwithstanding the Priority of Origin between
them; since this Priority arises out of that most Perfect Notion of Knowing,
which necessitates, that the Knowledge must proceed, or be originiz'd from the
Object Known; as has been shown,. 5.

7. But to put it past contest, that, notwithstanding we must be forced to
allow that Knowledge is thus Originiz'd from the Object, yet there is not less
Perfection in one than in the other, we lay this Position; viz. That the DEITY
being Infinitely Perfect, where ever the Deity is, there must also be all the
Perfections imaginable. Since then, when we say, [GOD Knows Himself,] both the
Knower and Thing Known are GOD; there is found in each of them all the Absolute
Attributes which belong to the DEITY, with the Connotate of [ Infinite] annexed
to them; that is, all Imaginable Perfections are both in the One and the Other.
Moreover, amongst those Attributes, Self-Existence is one; if, indeed, it may
be called an Attribute, and not rather, (as Metaphysics demonstrate) according
to our manner of conceiving, the very Essence of GOD; whence all* His Divine
Attributes (according to our way of Discoursing) spring. Since then
Self-Existence is found in both, and the Notion of Self-existence bars all
Imperfection or Dependence in Being, and all the ^orts of other Priorities but
that of Origin; it is impossible to conceive that either of them should be
Imperfect, or Dependent on the other. Again, since it is equally Essential to
GOD to be Known, as it is to Know; and GOD cannot be Known without a Knower; if
this Method of Objecting were Allowable where both are Infinite, we might with
Equal Reason say, That the First Person, who is the Divine Object Known,
depends on the Second, as that the Second, who is Divine Knowledge, depends on
the First. It Is a Common Maxim, That Relationes mutuo se ponunt and auferunt;
and yet neither of them is said to be Dependent on the Other; since Mutual
Dependence as to the Same Common Notion is direct Nonsense. But the main point
is, that this Principiation or Origination does not formally respect the DEITY
it self, or the Common Suppositum, any more in One than in the Other; but only,
the DEITY as Related; that is, the Divine Personalities; wherefore, the
Relation, (by Prelim. X. XI.) not being really Distinguished from, but
Identify'd with, the Ground of Referring; cannot, out of their formal Notion,
add any New Perfection unto it; especially, since the Common Suppositum,
expressed by the Absolute word [GOD,] which is the Ground of all the Divine
Relations, has in it the whole Perfection of them All.

8. From this Discourse we see how the Trinity is in the Unity, because the
Ground of all these Relations, that is, the Relations themselves; and,
consequently, all the Three Persons, which are constituted by those Relations,
are in that One Deity, or in the Unity of the Godhead: and, withal, how the
Unity of the GODHEAD is in the Trinity of Persons, because one and the same
Divine Nature is in them all; as is evident from these very Terms; [ GOD Knows
and Loves Himself.] Which, though Mysterious to the Rude and Unelevated
Conceptions of Vulgar Discoursers, is, notwithstanding, (as has been shown) if
we take each single consideration of it asunder by our Abstractive or Natural
way of conceiving, and discourse upon each of them distinctly, or as thus
aparted, is perfectly Consonant to Reason working upon our Natural Notions.

9. We come next to consider by what Names this First and Second Person, the
Divine Nature Known and Knower are to be called. In order to which we lay these
Positions, viz. That GOD, who is in them both, is Living, (or rather
Essentially Life;) and, consequently, those two Persons in whom the Godhead is,
must be Living also. Next, Knowledge cannot be otherwise conceived but to come,
or (as we use to say) pr^ceed from the Object; and therefore the Second Person
must proceed from the First. Thirdly, The Divinity communicates it is own Nature
to the Knower, as appears by the words [ Knows himself.] and also by Reason;
for, otherwise, we could not say, [ It is Known,] if It were not in the
Knowledge or C^njoyn'd with it Spiritually or intellectually. Now, if we spell
these necessary Truths together, all which are implied in these words, [GOD
Knows Himself,] we shall find they compound, and (not barely imply, but) fully
express that the Definition of a SON is appropriated to the Second Person, viz.
That He is a Living Person Proceeding from a Living Person, whose Nature is of
the same Kind as the others, and is Conjoined with him, or remains in him;]
whence follows, that His Correlate must properly and necessarily be called a
FATHER; and lastly, that the Procession of Him from His Father can therefore
have no other Notion, or Word which we have, that can ^it it, but that of
GENERATION.

10. Hence it is, that Knowledge is Appropriated to the Second Person the SON;
for which reason He particularly took our Flesh upon Him, and came to be our
Master, and to instruct us in His Holy Law. Hence He is called Sapientia
Patris, or Verbum, because Knowing does intellectually speak or express the
Divine Nature Known by Him; as our Conception or Verbum Mentis does the Thing,
or Truth, we conceive. Hence, He is truly said to be Deus de Deo, Lumen de
Lumine, Deus verus de Deo vero: Because the Common Suppositum, the GODHEAD, is
in both; and the Divine Nature as He is precisely a Knower is Originiz'd from
it self, as it is own Object. Hence, lastly, Because of the Common Nature in
both, and the Proceeding of One from the Other, He is called Imago Patris,
Figura Substantiae ejus, etc. All which, and many other such Expressions are
exactly verified by the Principles here laid, and our Consonant Deductions from
them.

11. Since then the Notion of Father and Son a^e truly attributed to the Common
Suppositum expressed by the Absolute word [GOD;] it is not only Fitting but
Necessary, that those Notions should be the most perfectly such, as is Possible
to be imagined. Wherefore, since Sons amongst us, do proceed from their Fathers
according to Specifical Likeness in Nature; it is most becoming GOD's Infinite
Perfection, and His most ultimately Determih'd Essence; that is, indeed the
most Perfect Unity of the GODHEAD it self, that His Coeternal Son should
proceed from His Eternal Father according to the most Perfect IDENTITY of
Nature that can be conceived; that is, according to the self-same Numerical
Nature. Wherefore this Divine Procession ought not to be explicated by Analogy
to the Specifical Nature of Man, and it is being Common to more Individuals: For
the Species does necessarily imply some Potentiality, though the Genus does more;
and is Determinable (as was said) by Differences which are Intrin^^cal in the
Line of Ens; and, therefore, (as was proved) do constitute formally more Entia,
that is, more Things which have diverse Essences; all which is Inconsistent
with the Divine Nature: Nor ought any Composition of such Superior (or
Potential) Notions be Transferred to GOD. And much less, since the Common
Suppositum, (however it be predicated of more Particulars in the Manner
explicated above,) has in it self, by virtue of it is own Infinite
Self-Existence, the utmost Perfection in the Line of Substance; and is, by
reason of it is Purest Actuality, more perfectly One Singular Absolute Being,
than any Suppositum or Individuum is or can be amongst us Creatures.

12. And the same, partly for the same reason, is, ( Mutatis Mutandis) to be
said of the Third Particular verified of GOD, or of the Third Person of the
most B. Trinity. For, since it must be granted, that GOD Loves Himself, and the
word [ Himself,] in the Predicate of that Proposition, signifies the same as
the word [GOD,] which is the Subject of it; it is as Evident, that the Divine
Nature Loving is the same with the Divine Nature Loved, as it is that GOD is
GOD. But, besides, that this is Evident from the very Terms, or the plain Sense
of Words, there is Another very Peculiar Reason springing out of the particular
Nature of LOVE, which according to our Natural and Vulgar Notions, (by which we
are here to guide our selves) signifies to be Spiritually Unitive of the Lover
to the Thing Loved. Our Common Unstudy'd Thoughts and Language gives this to be
True: If two Friends Love one another dearly, all Mankind uses to say, They are
all One; and our B. Savior prays to His Heavenly Father that He and His
Disciples may be One, as Himself and his Father are One; that is, by Mutual
Love; it being impossible those Words can there bear any other Signification.

13. We have seen above, That Divine Love, which is the Third Person, proceeds
from the Goodness of the Divine Object, or from the Divine Essence Known, (that
is, the Father) in His own Divine Knowledge, in which consists Essential Truth;
that this Truth is therefore GOD's Greatest Good; because this Infinite Truth
is the Best Perfection of His Nature as it is Intelligent or Spiritual: That,
because it does thus proceed from the Divine Object in the Divine Knowledge,
this Third Person does, therefore, proceed from the Father and the Son
immediately and formally according to their Distinct Personalities or
Relations; and that, therefore, because no Relation can be grounded on Another
Relation, but can only Refer what is Absolute, there can be no Reciprocal,
Opposite or Distinct Relation of the Divine Object-Known to the Lover; nor,
consequently, any occasion of conceiving a Fourth Person: It remains now to
show, that since Love (by. 12.) imports a Spiritual Union or Conjunction of the
Lover with that which it Loves; therefore, from the very Notion of the word [
Conjoined,] there must be some Distinction between those which are thus
Ioyn'd-together: Since, what is in Every Respect One and the Same, cannot,
without Injury to Common Sense, be said to be Conjoined with it self in Any
Respect, that is, Conjoined at all. But in what manner does this Third Person
proceed from the other Two? Not according to Likeness (or Identity) of Nature,
as did the Son: but it presupposes this Likeness, Conformity, Agreeableness or
Identity of Nature in the Object as Known, and in the Knower as Knowing it;
for, in this consists that Greatest Good called Truth, which is the Object of
Love; and it is against all our Natural Notions to conceive Actual Love of a
thing not Supposed to be: Wherefore this Similitude of Nature is not the
Formal Motive, nor the Manner by which Divine Love proceeds; but only this,
that the other two Persons according to their Distinction of Knower and Known,
(in which consists Divine Truth) do integrate, as it were, that Bonum Dei, or
Good, which is the Adequate Object of the Divine Will. The Son, therefore,
proceeds from His Father, by having Communicated to Him the same Form, (as it
were) or the Divine Nature as an Object which formally constitutes Him a Knower
of it, and thence, a Son; The B. Spirit proceeds from the two other Persons as
they are a Good to the Divine Nature; which it Affects, Spiritually clings to,
or embraces; and so becomes or is Actually United or One with it. The Former
(according to our weak manner of Conceiving) proceeds as coming from the Object
Communicating it self to it; the Later, by it is being drawn, as it were, by the
Object and ^oving it self- forwards to, (or rather, in reality, ha^ing
actually) an Union with it. The Former, by ^ay of Informing, or being in the
Divine Under^^anding; The Later, by enamouring the Divine Will to pursue what
is conceived to be out of the Lover as such; or rather, in our case, to enjoy
it actually. Which expression though most beseeming a Pure Actuality of Being,
yet it debars not the Distinction between the Good Enjoyed and the Enjoyer of
it, but obliges us to conceive them as thus Distinct.

14. Having thus declared the Particularity or Distinction of the Three Divine
Persons, in order to one another, it is seasonable to manifest, in the ^ext
place, what Names and what Effects are peculiarly to be Attributed to each of
them, as they relate to us. Whence, it may appear, that as our Explication is
Agreeable to Right Reason, so it is no less Consonant to Holy Scripture, and to
the Sense and Language of the Christian Church. To mention a few Chief ones,
will hint to us the ^est.

15. Since then Being is the First, in Order, of all our Natural Notions, so
that we cannot conceive any thing to be Communicated, or to deserve Love unless
it is: Hence the Notion of the Divine Being, is justly conceived to be
Appropriated to* the First Person, who is the Beginning and Origin of the rest,
and communicates it to the Son; whence proceeds, (as was now said) the B.
Spirit who is Divine Love. Hence, also, since Every thing Acts as it Is, He is
said to be Author and Cause of all Created Being, or the Creator of all
things. Hence also He is said to be the Father of all his Creatures, (in a
Natural, but less Proper Sense) because He gives us our Being; and in a more
especial manner, since His Only Son, by taking our Nature upon Him, made
Himself, in some sort, our Brother: As also, in a Civil Sense; because it
belongs to Fathers to provide for their Children, as His Heavenly Providence
does for all His Creatures. Not to speak how He is a Father in a Spiritual
Sense, as we are Re-generated by His Grace, given us freely for the Merits, and
by the Means of His Eternal Son whom he sent amongst us to that end.

16. What peculiar Attributes are appropriated to the Son, is declard above,.
10. I only remark here, that when he is called Verbum, the WORD, by a Metaphor
taken from our Verbum Mentis, that is, our Conception or Notion of an Object in
our Knowing Power; we must take heed we do not understand, by those words, that
Imperfect Form of speaking Truth interiourly, which is found in Mental
Propositions, which Affirm, or Deny; for even in Angels and Separated Souls (as
has been demonstrated) Knowledge is above all* Composition of several Notions,
of which Propositions are made; but it must be meant, that the Divine Object,
in which is Essentially all the Metaphysical Verity both of GOD and of all
Creatures, is most Expressly in Him as He is the Knower of it; that is, indeed,
in the very Divine Essence; in which the most Actual, that is, the most Bright,
and most Universal Truth, is Communicated to Him from the Father, and is most
exactly in Him. We must take heed also, that when He is called Imago Patris,
and such like, some Cartesian or other Ideist, catching at the word, do not
make ^im a mere Picture or Similitude of His Father; ^d that He has not
therefore the very Divine created Essence, or the Divine Nature in Him, ^t only
some Created Similitude of it. I must ^nfess this suits well enough with the
Doctrine Ideas in our Mind, which are Spiritual Pour^itures or Resemblances of
the Things we know, ^d not the Things themselves: But that it suits ^ither with
Reason or Faith, they can never show ^s; for how can mere Fancies agree with
such Sublime Realities; or Erroneous Foundations support the Truth of Faith in
the Opinion of Doub^ers, by giving Consonant and Genuine Explications of it.

17. The Third Person, Divine Love, is called (...) Comforter, or Strengthener,
because nothing more gives our Souls such Strength to resist the Assaults of
our Spiritual Enemies, break through ^ll Difficulties, and press forwards
vigorously to at^ain our True End, Eternal Happiness, which is ^he Sight of
GOD, than does an Ardent Love of ^im; which, ( Every thing acting as it is) is
the ^^culiar Gift of the Holy Ghost; who, is, not only by His Common Essence,
(as are also the rest,) but also by the Particularity of his Person, DIVINE
LOVE. For the same reason, He is called a Spi^itual Unction; because it was
customary to Anoint those with Oil, who were to exert their Strength (...) any
Encounter or Exercise, to give their Limbs greater Force and Agility. For the
same reason, He is called [ Fire,] which in an Ordinary Metaphor is applied to
an Ardent Love; and thence he came down in Tongues of Fire; because Fire is the
most Active and Purest Body we have; and in regard Love does inflame the
Spirits to pursue the Good we affectionately long for. For this reason also, He
is called our Spiritual Life; because Life consists in Self-moving; and nothing
moves us so efficaciously as Love, which is the proper Act of the Will, that
Faculty that sets all our Inferior Powers on work. And for the same reason, He
is called particularly the Spirit; because as the Animal Spirits in the Body
give us all our Natural Motion, so Divine Love, his peculiar Name; and Nature,
gives us all our Supernatural Tendency to Heaven; so that no External or
Interior Actions we perform do avail us, or bring us the least Step nearer our
True End, Eternal Happiness, unless either out of an Immediate or Remote
Intention, it be done out of that Regard or Intuitus. Another reason why He is
called [ Spirit,] which properly signifies Breath, is, Because Breath and Life
are in common speech Equivalent: [ While I breath,] and [ while I live,] having
the same signification; as have also to Expire and to Die. Lastly, since
Heavenly Love, which Divines call Sanctifying Grace, is our Supernatural Life,
which (as was said) the Peculiar Influence of the Third Person does (as it
were) inspire or breath into our Souls; hence, He is, from this Effect, by a
Specifical Appellation, called the HOLY GHOST or Holy Spirit. For, none can
think He is called Spirit, merely because He is of a Spiritual Nature, since
this is an Attribute of the GODHEAD, and therefore Common to all the Three
Persons; nor, because He proceeds from the Father and the Son by a kind of
Imaginary Action called Spiration; of which I must, for my part, confess I can
make no Conception, nor how it comes to be Transferred to GOD.

18. I may perhaps incurr some. Censure for denying the Procession of the Holy
Ghost, is to be explicated by Spiration, of which Word many Great Men have made
use. The best way to clear my self from affecting Singularity, is to give my
Reasons why I dislike it, and submit them to the Judgment of our Peers. First,
Faith (as was shown Preliminary V.) must have been delivered in such Language
as is apt to signify our Natural Notions. Secondly, Hence, though it may be
allowed to Learned Men, in Explicating this Mystery, to make use, upon
occasion, of some Term of Art which is current in Schools; yet is it utterly
Disallowable, to use any which has not for its Sense, some Natural Notion of
Mankind; otherwise it will Blunder the Explication instead of Clearing it.
Thirdly, It is agreed, and most Consonant to Reason, that no Notion taken from
Material Beings ought to be Transferred to GOD, but by the Intervention of
Spiritual ones, to which they are Metaphosically applied; in regard He is of a
Spiritual, and not of a Corporeal Nature. Fourthly, There can be no Spiritual
Notion that respects the Internal Nature of a Spirit, but Being, Knowledge,
Will, and the Objects of these too last, which determine their Internal
Operations. Fifthly, There is none of all these that seems Proper to signify
the Procession of Divine Love, by Spiration. Not Being! for That, if Complete,
Stays in its self, as being the most Absolute Notion: nor can it respect any
other Notion conceivable in GOD otherwise than as an Object. Not Knowledge, for
that is an Immanent Act, and is completed in this, that the Object be such in
the Knower, as it is in its self; whereas Spiration has a Notion of something
Transitive to Another. Sixthly, It has too much of Action in it is Formal
Notion, which may hazard to breed a Conceit of Efficiency and Effect. And,
lastly, Because, as applied here to signify a Procession from Father and Son,
it can have no one Notion in it, and therefore it has None. For, since the Holy
Ghost does proceed from them according to their Personalities; that is, from
the Divine Essence as Known, and as the Knower of it; and there can be no one
Notion Common to Thing Known and Knower, which are so widely Different, being
toto genere Disparate and Contradistinct, but Being; my Dullness cannot
comprehend what one Notion the word [ Spiration] can signify; since it cannot
be Univocally Applied to both; nor how it suits with our Natural Notions we
have of Spiritual Natures; nor in what manner, or for what reason it is
Transferred to GOD: which makes me doubt that merely the word [ Spiritus]
applied particularly to the Holy Ghost, was the best Ground of this recourse to
Spiration, and not the Notion of any Virtue, or Operation which Nature has
given us of a Spiritual Being. Notwithstanding, I doubt not but these Great
Divines had some good meaning in it, though it colors not with my Thoughts: Nay,
that they meant the same in substance which I do, though perhaps I do more nicely
^ift the Propriety of Words in handling such a Delicate Point, than they did.
And the same, I doubt not, may be said of all those Learned Writers who have of
late Explicated this Mystery variously: of which the Anti-Trinitarians do very
frivolously make great Brags, and hope to get some Advantage by it. I say, very
frivolously: For, the Article of Faith it self Abstracts from all Explications,
and stands Firm on it is own Grounds, Divine Revelation; though both They, I, and
Others, should all of us fall short in Explicating it right in every
particular. Thus much concerning the Names and peculiar Attributes of the Three
Persons, and the Congruous Reasons why we apply such Attributes to each.

19. Notwithstanding all that is said above, concerning these Appropriations in
the performing Different Effects, belonging to the Particular Notion, and (as
it were) Genius of each Person, as such; whenever GOD does any thing ad extra,
or produces any Effect in His Creatures, the Whole Trinity concurs to that
Action. For, since nothing can work but it must have the Being or Essence
proper to it is self; nor Act, unless it have a Will, the Notion of which is to
be the Principle of Acting; nor can an Infinitely perfect Being act, without
Knowing What, and How to Act; both the Eternal Father, Son, and Spirit, must
all concur to every such Action. But it is otherwise in that which passes ad
intra, or within the Deity it self, because of their Relative Distinction and
Opposition to one another. For, (if I may be allowed to repeat so often what is
of most Importance) GOD, precisely as the Divine Object, or as Known, begets
Divine Knowledge; and the Divine Essence in the Divine Knowledge, which is
Essential Truth, and the most Proper and Best Perfection or Good of a Spiritual
Nature, is that Adequate Object from which Divine Love proceeds. Hence it is,
that since God's Essence is Self-Existence, which is Infinitely Actual, and
Infinitely Intelligible, or rather, Infinitely Known; it is Proper to say, that
the GODHEAD Self-Exists by the Father, Knows it Self by the Son who is Divine
Knowledge, and Loves it Self by the Holy Ghost who is Divine Love. Nor can any
thing be more Agreeable to Reason than that it should be so, in case (as we
ought) we will exalt GOD Infinitely above His Creatures: For, since Creatures
do Exist by an Existence which is Accidental to them, whence it comes that
their Powers by which they operate are in the Line of Quality, or are
Accidents; It is therefore most Fitting, that GOD, in whom there is nothing
that is Accidental, but the most refined or sublimed Notion of Substance,
should exercise his own Essence upon Himself; and therefore should have a
Substantial Notion that is a Person, by and in which that Particular to which
is specially appropriated Divine Essence should Exist; and, instead of Powers
which are Accidents, should have particular Substances or Persons, by which He
Knows and Loves Himself. And therefore, as is said above, GOD Self-exists or is
by the Person of the Father, Knows Himself by the Person of the Son, and Loves
Himself by the Person of the Holy Ghost.

SECT. VIII.
That, notwithstanding this Plurality of Persons, the Divine Essence is not
less perfectly Simple in it is self; or rather, it is more, (or in more
Respects,) ONE, than it would have been had there not been this Plurality of
Persons.

1. WHat the Opposers of the B. Trinity most pretend to fear, is, That this
Tenet does prejudice the UNITY of the GODHEAD. Now, though it has been already
sufficiently proved, that this has not the least show of Difficulty to a
Considering Man; yet, it were not amiss, for their farther Satisfaction, to
give this Point a farther Clearing, though it wrong the Method of Discoursing by
making Repetitions; in which I sometimes indulge my self, to inculcate it
better to my Readers, by their seeing the Coherence of this Doctrine in diverse
and several occasions. For it is not every Man's Talent to carry along with him
every Link in the Chain of a Connected Discourse, without needing to be
re-minded of it.

2. But first, I complain that these Objecters confound themselves by not
Distinguishing clearly their own Conceptions; and, therefore, neither We nor
Themselves, know well what it is they would be at. Let us try then if we can
unravel their Thoughts, which they have taken such pains to perplex. Can they
deny that GOD Knows and Loves Himself? It Is certain they will not; for this
makes GOD less Perfect than a Creature: Though, as far as I see they never think
of it, or what Consequences follow from it; notwithstanding (as was shown) this
is the Groundwork on which all true Explication of this Mystery is built. Can
they deny, that, this granted, (as it must be) we are forced to affirm that GOD
is the Knower, and Object Known; as also the Lover and Thing Loved? The very
words fly in their Faces, and tell them they deny that which is perfectly
Equivalent to what they have granted. Will they deny that the GODHEAD is One
and the Same under all the Notions, (whatever they are) which is signified by
all those Relative and Contradistinct Names or Words? It Is equally against
Common Sense, unless they will say, that by the word [ Himself] is not meant
[GOD,] which is Self-evident. Can they say, that Knower and Known, Lover and
Loved, are not Distinct, and (in some sort) Opposite Notions? All Mankind will
laugh at them, and every Junior Sophister who ever heard of the Predicament of
Relation will hiss them. Can they say that the Deity does not Verify those
Distinct Notions, or that we say False when we attribute them to GOD?
Themselves will not affirm it. Can they say, That, though GOD Verifies them, yet
there is no Distinction at all in GOD? This is pure Nonsense. For, First, These
Distinct Notions or Attributes are not Extrinsecal Denominations, but most
Intrinsecal and even Essential to GOD; to Know and Love Himself being the
Perfection of His Spiritual Nature, and one of His Chiefest Attributes. Next,
If those Notions do most formally import Distinction, and there be in GOD that
which verifies them, there is what verifies Distinction, in GOD. May they not
then with equal reason say, that Gold verifies the Notions of Yellow, and
Heavy, yet there is no Yellowness or Weightiness in Gold? Can they say, That
though there be Distinction* in GOD, yet it does not any way or under any
Respect, make GOD Distinct? This were to call Self- Evidence in question, and
arraign First Principles. For is it not Self-Known that a Form, or Abstract
Notion cannot be in any thing, but it must make and denominate it such as it
self is; and may they not as well say that Whiteness may be in a Wall and yet
not make it White, or Humanity in a thing and not make it a Man, as that
Distinction is in a thing and yet not make it Distinct? Can they find any thing
in GOD besides Substance to Distinguish; that is, will they put any thing in
GOD that ^s an Accident, or (which is the same) that is Not-Self-Existent? It Is
imp^^^ble to pretend it. Can they say, That Distinction of the Substance, does
not Particularize it, or ^ake Distinct Substances? How can they? Distinction,
wherever it is, must make something or other Distinct; and this according to
the Nature of the Thing it distinguishes: And therefore if there be only
Substance for it to affect, it must put Distinct or Particular Substances; and
this as evidently, as if a Quantitative Thing be Distinguished it must make
Distinct or more Quanta. Will they say these Distinct Substances, they being
Spiritual or Intelligent, are not to be ^all'd [ PERSONS?] They would do well
to let us know their Reason, and withal to assign us some Other Name by which
Three such Substances ought more properly be called. I wish then we knew where
their Difficulty pinches: For, otherwise, it would half persuade an
uncharitable Man that their Reason ails nothing when it knows not whereabouts
it is hurt; whence would follow, that it is only their Will which is ill at
ease. But, I rather think they are blunder'd by not- Distinguishing their
Notions Exactly, and not Proceeding upon them Orderly: Or perhaps, as Men led
by Imagination use, they fancy there must be a just parallel between Corporeal
and Spiritual Natures* and (which is worse) between a Finite and an Infinite
Being, and that they must fit one another exactly as Two Tallies do; and, if
they find they do not suit in every regard, their Fantastic Guide has lost
his way, and complains sadly of the Perplexity, in which nothing but his own
Rashness or Unskillfulness has plunged him.

3. To breed a Conceit in their Easy and Weak Proselytes that the Doctrine of
the Trinity is injurious to the Unity and P^^^ection of the GODHEAD, they amuze
them with several Objections which nothing but the Dota^^^ of Fancy could
suggest. V. G. They Will allege, That if the Son has the Divine Essence from the
Father, then the Father Preexists, and therefore the Son cannot be Eternal. By
which it is manifest, That those Men apprehend there is no Prae-istence but that
of Time; nay, they conceit that Eternity it self is a long Flux of Time, or
something Like it, whereas it is a Duration of a quite Contradictory Nature to
it; whereupon the Grossness of their Fancy is presently startled and stunned;
and their Ignorance of such Preliminary Truths does presently furnish them with
this, as it may with a thousand other such wild Objections. To meet with them I
desire them to reflect, that as there could not be any Instant in which GOD was
not; so neither could any Instant be Conceived in which He had not all His
Perfections, and amongst them that of Knowing and Loving Himself; and,
consequently, in which his Divine Essence as an Object Known did not
communicate it self to the Divine Knower of it. They may please to reflect too,
that there are even amongst us many things before one another, nay, even as
Causes and Effects, which are not so much as for one Instant before one another
in Time. For Example: Bodies are therefore Passive because they have Matter in
them; they are Passive thus, or Divisible, because they have Quantity in them;
and Corruptible because they are Divisible; nay, it is also, in proper Speech
True that the following ones proceed from those that are foregoing as their
Causes; and yet they have Passiveness, Quantity, Divisibility, Corruptibility,
nay, Extension, Measurability, Proportionability, etc. in them all at one Time;
nay, they are all so perfectly Contemporaries, that there is not so much as one
Instant in which Body has one of these and not all of them. Whence, for much
better Reason may the Son proceed from the Father though they be both Coeternal.
They will reply, That all these Effects proceed from Formal Causes, which may
be conceived not to pre-exist before one another. And I reply, That in this
present Explication all the Divine Processions are put to be by the manner of
Form, and not of Action or Efficiency; and I much fear that their Transferring
Action to GOD in their Thoughts, which implies Motion, drew them into this
Misconceit of Priority after the manner of a kind of Imaginary Time. According
to the way of discoursing which I take the Divine Object Inexists in the Divine
Knowledge; which, according to our Natural Notions is called Informing it. I
have produced many Demonstrations both in the Second Preliminary to Solid
Philosophy Asserted, and others (B. I. Chapter 6.) in my Metaphysics, to show that
our Knowledge can be only made by this, that the Object it self is in our
Understanding or informs it, when we Know; and that every Particular Knowledge
we have is Specified, nay Individually Determined to be This, by the Object;
and must proceed from it both as to its being at all, and also as to it is Being
This. And I dare affirm, That let Witty Men beat their Brains till they are
weary, they will never make any other Sense of what it is to Know, than this,
That the Object Inexists in the Knowiag Power as Another Thing, or as some way
Distinct from the Knower. Moreover, this Notion of Knowing abstracts from
sooner or later, Eternal or Not-Eternal; and therefore may, in this regard, be
sitly Applied to GOD, who Knows Himself Eternally; and because (as has been
often said) this Knowledge comes from the Divine Object from all Eternity;
hence it is, and must be also said to Proceed or be Originiz'd from it from all
Eternity: since he Formally becomes a Knower by means of that Object-Known.
This is all the Priority Christian Divines acknowledge. This abstracts even in
us Creatures (I mean in Souls Separated and Angels, who in the First Instant
Know Themselves) from all other kinds of Priority. Whence it is very weak to
infer hence, that the Father is Prae-existent, as if there were any imaginable
Instant in Eternity, in which the Father was, and the Son was not; or that the
Son for that reason, is not Self existent; since, besides the want of such a
Priority as they fancy and build their Objection upon it, all the Absolute
Attributes of the Deity, and amongst them Self-Existence, and Eternity too, are
Communicated to Him by, and in, the Divine Essence Known, or from the Father.

S. Another Bugbear to their Fancy, (for it is That and not True Reason that
gives the Ground to all their Objections) is this; That, by our Discourse, God
the Father must communicate his Essence, and his whole Essence to the Son;
which they think is sufficiently overthrown by merely asking, [How should both
have the same thing? especially, How should He have it still who has already
Communicated it, or Parted with it all?] And this looks very plausibly to those
poor Ignorant Souls who never reflected on Spiritual Natures, but think we must
discourse of them in the same manner as we do of Bodies; whereas, they being of
Contradistinct Na^ures, the quite Contrary follows. For the First, ^iz. That
the Divine Essence is Communicated, or that as Known, (that is, as it is by a
Relative Name called the Father) it communicates it self, let us see how it
agrees with other Divine Attributes, and with such acknowledged Perfections as
we find in Creatures. GOODNESS bears in it is Notion, (and Experience teaches us
the same) that it is Naturally Communicative of what it has. Since then we
ascribe INFINITE Goodness to GOD, and make it to be Essential to Him; it
follows that He is INFINITELY Communicative of the Nature or Essence which he
has, or rather he is Actually and Eternally (for he was Eternally Good)
Communicating it and this INFINITELY. Which how it can be Verified, or how his
Exuberant Goodness could have an Adequate Object, unless he did Communicate
Himself Infinitely in the manner abovesaid, is past the Wit of Man to imagine;
since all Communication of Being to Created Things, or Suppositums, though they
were never so Excellent, or so Many, (their Natures and their Number being both
of them Finite) is Infinitely short of His INFINITE Bounty or Goodness.

5. Again, Fecundity bears in it is Natural Notion a very High Perfection. We
may observe, That all Living Creatures, when grown up to a consummate pitch in
their respective Natures, are Fruitful or Prolifick; that is, are apt to
produce another of their own Kind. And Spiritual Natures, when they come to
know, are said to Conceive, and our Knowledges are called [ Conceptions,] though
few reflect on the word, or the Analogy it bears to the Verbum in the Divine
Mind, or to the Procession of the Son; only our Conceptions of Natural Objects,
are Imperfe^^ and never arrive at their utmost Perfection till (...) see them
in the First Cause. Since then these ar^ some kind of Perfection in their
several ways, (...) most Consonant to Reason that we should Transfe^ the Notion
of Fecundity too to GOD; to whom, ^^ being Infinitely Perfect, we ought to
ascribe all sorts of Perfection, after they are stripped from the Imperfections,
and from their Limitedness which necessarily accompanies all Finite Beings, as
has been often said above.

6. As for his Communicating his Whole Divine Essence, whence in Discourse with
no small Man among the Deists, I have heard it inferred, that if the Father
Communicates His WHOLE Essence, and all it is Attributes to the Son, He can
leave nothing at all for Himself; it is Evident that this Objection proceeds
from most profound and most Gross Ignorance of Spiritual Natures. A Master may
communicate all his Knowledge to His Scholar, or to such a degree as to make
Him as Learned as Himself: Does it follow thence, that he has Emptied or
Disfurnisht himself of his whole Stock of Learning, and is become now an
Ignorant Dunce? But speaking of Objects, which is more to the Point: Even
Material Objects lose nothing at all by being known. Suppose I could penetrate
so ^horowly the Individuating Complexion of Accidents of such a Body in Nature,
so that I comprehended every minute consideration that could possibly belong to
it; would that Body be ever the Worse or Diminisht in it self, because it is
Wholly Known or Understood? I desire those weak Reasoners to consider that as
Spiritual Natures are above Quantity, so they do not follow the Rules of
Material Beings, nor in discoursing of them ought we to take our Measures ^om
such Predicates or Sayings as we use when ^e speak of Bodies. Rather, [
Divisible] and [ Indi^sible] which are their Differences that constitute ^em,
being Contradictories; whatever Conceptions ^e make of the One, the quite
Opposite must be made of the Other, excepting only the Notion of the Common
Genus [Ens] in which, and which only, they do both of them agree. Nothing at
all is Defalkt from Them by their Communicating themselves; nor do they lose
any thing even by Actiag upon Bodies. The Nerves of an Angel are not
over-strain'd, nor their Spirits spent by Changing or Altering them: Nor are
Spiritual Objects impaired by their being thus Communicated. But it is
prodigiously weak to object this in our case, where the Discourse is of GOD's
Knowing Himself, and where it is granted that He does so; unless those
Gentlemen think that the Word [ Himself,] in that speech, does not signify
[GOD;] or else they conceit that GOD is the Worse by Knowing Himself; that is,
the Worse for being Infinitely Perfect; for in such Nonsense as this, all their
Objections against the most B. Trinity, when driven home to their Principles,
will be found to terminate.

7. Though I cannot but judge that enough has been said, both here, and indeed in
diverse places of this Treatise, to assert and manifest, that, notwithstanding
this Distinction or Plurality of Persons, there is not the least Show of
prejudicing the Unity of the GODHEAD; yet it were not amiss to add one
Consideration more, which will much surprise the Anti-Trinitarians, and be
looked upon by them as a most strange Paradox: which is, that the Unity of the
GODHEAD is so far from being violated by a Trinity of Persons, that it is in
diverse regards better Strengthened by that Position. To show which I premise
this Lemma; That That Unity is Best which is every manner of way such, and not
that which is not so: Whence follows that such a Complete Unity in all Regards
ought to be ascribed to the GODHEAD. Wherefore, since it has been by so many
Demonstrations (quoted and related to above) proved, I hope beyond all
possibility of Confute, that Knowledge consists in this, that the Nature Known,
(even though it be of a Material or Corporeal thing, which is of a contrary
Nature to that of the Knower) must, out of the very Notion of being Kn^wn, be
One and the Same in the Knower as it is in it self: Likewise, since our Natural
Notions do assure us, that Love is Spiritually Unitive of the Lover with the
thing Loved; and these ways of making the Divine Nature One with it self, are
clearly Different from that of being an Infinite Actuality of Being, whence we
deduced GOD's Metaphysical Unity in our Third Book of our Transnatural
Philosophy; it follows necessarily that the Deity had not been in so many
Respects One, had He not ( per impossible) Known and Loved Himself, that is,
had there not been a Trinity of Persons, by which only He could be said to Know
and Love Himself, as has been abundantly Deduced. Wherefore, since it belongs
to the Divine Unity, to be Infinitely, and, consequently, every way such; even
out of this very consideration, secluding all others, there ought to be
admitted a Trinity of Persons.

SECT. IX.
The Substance of the foregoing Explication, Recapitulated.

1. TO sum up the precedent Explication in short. Since GOD Knows and Loves
Himself, there is in the Divine Nature what does Verify both Knower and Known,
Lover and Loved. Wherefore since each of these Pairs of Notions, they being
relatively Opposite, have unavoidably some Distinction in them; and being
verified of GOD are in the Divine Nature, there is necessarily some Distinction
in the Divine Nature. Again, since these Notions, which are Verified of GOD,
and therefore (since they cannot be thought to be Extrinsecal Denominations)
are really in Him, are Distinct, and not Common Notions to Many; but each of
them singular in it is self; they must be Particulars, to which the word [GOD]
is Common, and (in some manner or other) predicated of them all: There are
therefore in GOD, (in some Sense or other) Distinct Particulars: As appears
farther, because this Predication is made by the Copula [ Est,] which
Identifies those Particulars with the Common Predicate, (GOD;) that is,
signifies these Distinct Particulars are Intrinsecal to the Divine Nature, and
not Applied to it Outwardly by our false or untoward manner of Conceiving it,
but spring out of the very Nature of the Thing (or Divine Nature) truly
Conceived. Also, since what is meant by the word [GOD,] must be conceived to
have All Perfections in it in the Line of Being, of which to be Subsistent, or
a Suppositum, is One; we must be forced to say, that what is meant by the word
[GOD] is not only Common in respect of those others, but also that it is a
Common Suppositum; and, that it is the Common Suppositum which is Verified of
all those Particulars. And, since it cannot be Verified or Predicated of them
as a Genus or Species, because These do necessarily include Indetermination and
Potentiality, which are Inconsistent with GOD's Purest Actuality; therefore it
must be Predicated of them after such a manner as is not Generical or
Specifical, but in such a way as a Notion which is in One Line is predicated of
such Notions as are conceived to be Formally in Another.

2. These Particulars can be but Three, though there seems to be two Conjugations
(as it were) of mutually Opposite Relations. Because Divine Love ought to
proceed from the Greatest GOOD that can be conceived to belong or be Connatural
to GOD as He is of a Spiritual Nature; viz. the Knowledge of Infinite Truth;
or, (which is the same) from Infinite or Divine Truth Known in the Divine
Knowledge; which amounts to this, that Divine Love proceeds from the Two other
Particulars formally according to their Relations. Whence no Correlation can be
from those other Persons to Divine Love which thus proceeds from them; because
Relation is Grounded on that which it Refers or Relates: It being then Evident,
that whatever is the Ground of Relation, or Related, must be some Absolute
Notion, and not such a one as is Relative; it follows, that there cannot be any
Correlation where the Immediate Ground is a Relative it self.

3. These Three Distinct Particulars, Verified of GOD, and therefore Truly in
the Divine Nature, are properly to be called PERSONS; because, ^here being no
Accidents in GOD, there is nothing in the Divine Nature to be Distinguished or
^articulariz'd but his Substance; and Particulars ^n an Intelligent Substance,
are properly called PERSONS. There are therefore Three Persons in GOD. Amongst
which, since Knowledge formally proceeds from an Object of the same Nature in
both the Knower and thing Known; and to communicate a Living Nature to another
Living Particular, is to GENERATE; hence this Procession is truly called
GENERATION; and therefore the Divine Object Known, from which Divine Knowledge
thus proceeds, is truly (though in a Spiritual Sense) called a FATHER, and the
Divine Knowledge a SON; and the former of these is the First by way of Origin;
because Knowledge must be conceived to proceed from the Object; and not the
Object, or Thing to proceed from the Knowledge, unless that Knowledge makes it
to be, or Creates it, as the Divine Wisdom does Creatures. The Third Person is
properly called Divine Love, because Love proceeds from that which is our
Greatest and most Connatural Good, perfectly and expressly Known, or (as we
phrase it) conceited, (or fully conceived) to be such. Now the Greatest Good of
GOD who is of a Spiritual Nature, is Essential TRUTH, which (as was said)
consists in this, that GOD knows Himself; or (which is the same) that the
Divine Object is in the Divine Knower: By which is seen How and Why the Holy
Ghost, who is Divine Love, proceeds from both the Father and the Son.

4. Wherefore, since, as appears by those oftrecited Words on which we build
our Explication, the Common Suppositum, expressed by the word [GOD] has in it All
the Perfections that can be imagined, and this Infinitely; hence all the Three
Persons having the common Suppositum, or the GODHEAD, in them, are Coeternal,
Co-omnipotent, etc. and in every respect Coequal, as is expressed in ihe Creed
of St. Athanasius. Whence all Objections of their being before one another for
some Time, or some Instant, as also of Dependence on one another; and all
Distinction in Nature, or imagined Plurality of Gods; are Diametrically
opposite to the Doctrine of the Trinity. Lastly, hence all pretended Arguments
taken from Fancy (for, from True Reason none at all can be drawn) are, by the
respective parts of this Explication, shown to be frivolous, and either
Answered, or else Forestalled and Prevented.

5. If the Anti-Trinitarians have any Objections in their Quiver, I have set
them here a fair Mark, at which they may level them. They may see here, that I
do not wrap my Discourse in Ambiguity of words; but I distinguish my Notions as
exactly as is possible, and draw my Conclusions consequently: Nor have I any
Deductions which are nor grounded on Principles. But I foresee that they will
not be able to raise any Opposition which is not built on Faneies, taken from
Material Beings, which are too grofs to be made use of when we are discoursing
of GOD, and altogether unfit to be Transferred, in their rude sense, to so
sublime a Majesty; or else that they are occasioned by perfect Ignorance of
Spiritual Natures and their Operations. The main Distinction between which and
Bodies is this, that, whereas Bodies being Divisible Entitites, can have
nothing in them (Matter supposed) but their own Accidents or Modes, which
Determine the Matter thus or thus, and thence, make it this or the other
Individuum, so that a Corporeal Suppositum or Thing can have nothing in it but
its own Nature, and its own Intrinsical Modes which have no Being but Its: A
Spiritual Being, (which is so far Superior to it, that it is constituted by
its Difference, [ Indivisible] which is of a ( Contradictory Nature to it,)
can, therefore, by its Proper Operation, [ Knowing,] have all other Essences or
Natures in it besides its own, and engraft them (as it were) on its Stoek of
Being; and in such a different manner from the former, that, as they are in It,
they are no Part, or proper Mode, of the Spiritual Nature it self, nor any
Intrinsical Accidents of it; but they are there formally as Others, or as
Distinct from it; nor are they Dependent on the Spiritual Nature that Knows
them, for their Being, as were the Corporeal Modes on their Subject; but they
have a Proper Being of their own out of the Understanding, and Independently on
it. So likewise when they have an Act of Love, they have a Propension,
Tendency, or Panting after the Object of that Love, and an endeavor to be
Conjoined and United to it by way of Attainment or Fruition of the Good they
conceive to be in it: Whence it is plain that they are carried to it as it is
Another, or as it is Distinct from themselves. So that even when an Angel, or a
Soul, Knows and Loves its self, they must, in some Respect or other, be
Distinct from themselves, as they are the Object of that Knowledge and Love; as
the very word [ Object] does Evidence; and as manifestly appears from the
Antithesis between Knower and Known, Lover and Loved. Only, because (as was
shown above) in Creatures, which are not Self-Beings, this Knowledge, (and
consequently Love) are Accidental to them, in regard that even their Existence
(which this Knowledge and Love presupposes) is Extrinsical and Accidental to
their Essence; therefore this Distinction which Self-Knowledge and Self-Love
makes in them, and which is the Immediate Ground of those Relations, cannot
make Distinction in their Substance: Whereas in GOD, in whose Essence there can
be no Accidents, nor any thing Accidental, but purely Substance; Self-Knowledge
and Self-Love must necessarily Distinguish, and, consequently, Particularize
the Substance; and hence Particulars of a Substance which is Intelligent,
being, in proper Speech, called Persons, it obliges us to put a TRINITY of
PERSONS in the same Divine Nature, or in the UNITY of the GODHEAD.

6. Perhaps it may be Objected, That I am inconsistent with my self, while I
say, that there are no Accidents in GOD; and therefore only His Substance is
Particularized* whence we infer Plurality of Persons; and yet, we put Relation
in GOD which is an Accident. I answer, (that) as appears by our State of the
Question, we do not put Relations in GOD, as He is in Himself, but only as He
is Conceived by us; and that, as we conceive Him according to our Natural
Notions, it is impossible to conceive, or speak of Him otherwise. To the
Objection it is Replied, that we do not Transfer the Notion of Relation to GOD
without stripping it first of its Imperfection which is to inhere in GOD as in
its Subject, or as a Mode of it; which implies Potentiality in the Subject, and
Dependence on it in the Form. We have already shown that Relation, (merely as
Relation) does add no Perfection or Imperfection to that on which it is
Grounded, and which has an Absolute Notion: As Likeness between two Things that
are White, adds in neither of them the least Perfection or Imperfection to
their Absolute Notion; that is, it makes neither of them more or less White.
Wherefore the Relations in GOD are as Essential to Him as is the Knowing and
Loving Himself, which Grounds these Relations. Nor is this Peculiar in the
Relative Notions we apply to GOD; for Mercy, Justice, Goodness, etc. and the
rest of such Attributes are Qualities in us, and expressed as such; and yet they
are Essential to the DEITY; and have their Natures which they had as Accidents,
Dignified to be several Inadequate Conceptions of the Divine Essence it self.

SECT. X.
Of what vast Importance and most Efficacious Influence the Belief of the
Blessed TRINITY is to Christian Life, and to the raising our Thoughts and
Affections toward Heaven.

1. I Doubt not but the Anti-Trinitarians will complain sadly of the Christian
Church as barbarously Uncharitable, for cutting off from the Body of their
Society, Excommunicating and delivering over to Satan so many well-meaning
Persons who embrace their Sentiment. They will ask why the Denying a Tenet,
which is merely Speculative, should be so hainously taken and severely
resented? They will be apt to liken Church Governors to those hotheaded
School-Divines who all-to-be-Heretick those who will not allow their Opinion.
They will pretend that, as long as Men do sincerely Worship the only True GOD,
and keep His Commandments (which they will profess they do from their Hearts
hold and intend) no more can in reason be required. Is not this enough, will
they say, for Salvation? Must the Seamless Coat of Christ be torn and shattered
to pieces, Charity and Church Communion be violated in the height, for the sake
of a Speculative Tenet; which, however it may please some, can suit with the
Fancies of very Few; perhaps None, if they would but lay aside their Customary
Belief, which Education and not Judgment has given them; and set themselves
seriously to reflect how Uncouth it is to their Reason, and how utterly
Unuseful, Ineffectual, and of no Influence at all, it is to Good Life, Piety,
and Virtuous Action. Thus they will plead for their Impious Doctrine, and
Schismatical Fact; and their Apology will be received with Applause, by all the
Latitudinarian Party. For nothing is so Cheap, and Costs so little, and withal
is so Necessary for those who are destitute of Solid Reasons, as it is to Affect
and have Recourse to Godly Cant,

2. In Answer, First, we will speak to the Persons, and their Guilt or
Innocence; then to the Point it self. We ask then those Rabbis of the
Anti-Trinitarians, Who taught them that piece of Doctrine, which they proceed
upon as if it were a a Self-evident Principle, that the way to determine what
we are to Believe, what not, is to begin our Enquiry by scanning the Articles
of Faith themselves, by our Common and Obvious Reason; and to make This the
Test of what we are to Accept, what to Reject. For, First, they cannot but see
that this takes away the very Notion of Faith out ^f the Hearts of Mankind. I
suppose by [ Reason] ^hey mean Evident Reason, for otherwise they ^ust grant
that this Rule of theirs is Uncertain, and therefore can be no Rule at all.
And, if they will not believe but upon Evident Reason, then it is Science; and
so farewell all Faith. Secondly, If they say they intend only to Evidence the
Opposite Tenet to be False, and not any Point of Faith to be True; we are but
where we were. For, where the Tenets in Question are Contradictories, as it is
here; he that Evidences the Trinity of Persons in the GODHEAD to be False,
does, with the same Labor, and at the same time, Evidence the Unity of Person
in the same GODHEAD to be True: Since then this later is a Point of Faith with
them, they must still grant that, by Evidencing this, they turn Faith into
Science. Thirdly, This Tenet, amongst others, was held by themselves, e're they
renounced it, to have come to them by Divine Revelation; wherefore, they are
convinced, by recurring to this New Rule of Humane Reason, to bid adieu to all
Divine Revelation; and, so, they fall in with the Deists; For, why should one
Point of Faith be received upon their Rule of Humane Reason, and not All.
Fourthly, They are False to their own Rule, and their own Pretense; and
therefore are not to be Credited, nor without some straining of Charity, to be
excused as to their having Sincere Intentions. An Evident Proof can be no other
but a clear Demonstration, and to this I have not observed they ever so much as
pretended. It Is easy to call any pretty probable Proof an Evidence, so it be
but suitable to Fancy: But Demonstration carries something that is Manly,
Decisive and Victorious in its Notion; to which therefore it is dangerous for
Plausible and Probable Discoursers to pretend. A True Demonstration must be
built on Principles that are Evident, and finally reducible to Self-Evidence:
So must the Consequence of it too, and the Medium must be such as is most
necessarily Connected with the two Extremes. What I affirm then is, that they
have not Produced so much as One Demonstration, (however they would have it
^hought they have,) though they cautiously mince it in the Expression. If they
have any such let us see it, let us hear of it. I will grant them that any One,
which is truly such, will conclude the Point, and carry the Cause. They have
seen my Explication, what Grounds I proceed upon, and what Principles I build
on. Wherefore, to make short work of it, I send them a flat Challenge to
produce this one Demonstration of theirs against this Mystery. Half a Sheet of
Paper will conclude the whole Controversy, as far as it depends on the way of
Humane Reason; to which they have appealed from Divine Revelation, and from the
Judgment and Doctrine of the Christian Church. If they be Sincere, they will
put it to the Trial; if they refuse, they give themselves to be Guilty of
persisting voluntarily in an Error, and manifest that they took up this
Pretense of Evident Reason for a Stale to draw after them the Ignorant and
Unstable; but that they do not think it their Interest to stand to the Rule
themselves have espoused. Fifthly, By renouncing this Fundamental of Christian
Faith, they have, by Consequence, invalidated all Christian Faith, by denying
the Certainty of the Ground of All Faith. For this was held by the Christian
Church upon some Ground; which, by their Recession as to this Point, they have
Renounced; and by consequence, have brought all Christian Faith into a
Groundless Uncertainty. Lastly, By their Denial of this Article, they accuse
the Christian Church of being Idolatrous, in the most Fundamental Article of
her Faith, and in the greatest part of her Worship, in Adoring so constantly,
heartily and devoutly, a Man for GOD, and a Creature for the Dread Creator.

3. To sum up then this whole Discourse. If the taking away the Notion of all
Faith, and turning it into Science. If to renounce, by Consesequence, Divine
Revelation, which none but Deists professedly Oppose. If the Injury done to
Humane Reason, (besides the misapplying it) and the Fourbe put upon weak Souls,
in setting up for Evident Reasoners, without offering so much as One Argument
which is in true Speech Evident, or Conclusive; If the undermining the Ground
on which all Faith is built, as to our Knowledge of it. Lastly, If the accusing
their former Superiors, the Church Governors, so many Venerable, Learned, and
Holy Fathers of the Church, and even so many General and Provincial Councils;
nay, the Christian Church it self, of most Gross Idolatry, Blasphemy and
Profaneness, may be thought sufficient Provocation and Plea for the Governors
of the Christian Church to Excommunicate and Declare, That they (who were by
their Office the Depositaries to whom the Preserving of Christ's Faith was
committed,) would have no more to do with such Men who had voluntarily gone out
from the Church; and who, should they be permitted still to remain in her,
would hazard to infect with their Contagious Doctrine and Practice the Sounder
Faithful. If these things, I say, be manifestly so, then the Church and her
Governors are Acquitted, and the Blame and Guilt lie evidently at their Doors:
This is the true Point to be Decided. Which, I believe every Man of Common
Sense, were they of the Jury, would quickly determine, without needing to go
from the Bar to debate it, or consider of it.

4. But this is not all that may be alleged against them; There seems
moreover, to be implied in their Discourses, that the most perfect Law and most
Elevating Principles of Christianity are no better than that most Imperfect
State of the Law of Nature, which raised Men to no higher a pitch than that of
mere Moral Honesty; in which diverse of the Ancient Heathens excelled many
Christians. What Necessity was there, in such a case, that Christ our Savior
should come amongst us, take such pains in Preaching and working Miracles,
Suffering a most Cruel Death on the Cross, Rising again from the Dead,
Ascending into Heaven, and Sending His H. Spirit, etc? Certainly, it had been
very Preposterous to have laid so many Supernatural, Extraordinary and
Prodigious Means, to compass such an End, as was within the Power of Nature,
without Miraculous or Supernatural Assistance, to atchieve.

5. This shows their slight Opinion of the Christian Law. the Nature of it is
Principles and the Efficacy of the Motives it proposes; which was intended by
God's Wisdom to purify in the best manner the hearts of the Faithful, and to
raise them to the Love of Heaven by the most Powerful Means Infinite Goodness
and Mercy could contrive. To apprehend better how highly GOD's Revelation of
^^e B. Trinity conduces to Mankind's Salvation, and ^o cultivate our Minds with
Theological Virtues, which are the only Dispositions to attain it; let us
consider how GOD's Revealing Himself to us, as to those Attributes of Mercy,
Justice, Goodness, Omnipotence, Holiness, etc. did and does promote Virtue, in
the Church, and thence estimate what large Accessions the Belief of the B.
Trinity does superadd to them. If GOD had not been represented to us, and
believed by us to be Just, what Sinner would not have run on in Sin, presuming
He was Unconcerned in Sublunary Actions, and would never call him to account
for his Sins? Or, if he held him severely Just and not Merciful, what poor
Creature, conscious to himself how often he had grievously Offended Him, would
not Despair of Pardon, think all was irrecoverably lost, and thence run
forwards headlong in Sinning; wanting Encouragement, or Hope of any Favor, in
case he should return, and repent? Who would at all Love Him, if he did not
think Him Good; Believe in Him if He were not Veracious; or Trust in Him if He
were not Faithful and Powerful? Or, lastly, Who would care to lead a Holy Life,
if He deemed that GOD was not Holy Himself? So that all sorts of the Best
Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, would be banished out of the Thoughts of all
Mankind, if GOD had not Revealed Himself to them under the Notions of these
several ^ivine Attributes.

4. Let us now consider what incomparably Higher Advances in Virtue the
Doctrine of the B. Trinity, and all the Train of Innumerable and most Powerful
Motives which depend on it, as on their Principle, do superadd to the Former
now mentioned, all tending, of their own Nature; to pur^ our Souls, and to
raise them to the highest pitch o^ Perfection. They are so many, and each of
them so pregnant, that I must content my self to Select only a Few, and leave
them to be meditated on at leisure. What Man, who believes that GOD the Father
sent his Only Son, Coequal and Coeternal with Himself, to take our Nature upon
Him, to teach us the True Way to Heaven; to suffer Hardships, Persecutions,
blasphemous Revilings* nay, to be Buffetted, Scourged, Crowned with Thorns, and
suffer such a cruel and ignominious Death on the Cross; and all this to pay the
ransom for our Sins, and rescue poor Wretched Mankind out of the Jaws of Hell
and Eternal Death; and by this means to court our Love, that by Loving Him we
might be Happy: What Man, I say, can seriously and thoroughly reflect on this,
and not to be Transported with Admiration and Love of so Infinite a Goodness?
What Soul* though never so Wicked and Senseless, who, with a full consideration,
lays this to Heart, will not melt with Love at such a Transcendent Mercy to a
Sinful World? Who can choose but be Astonished, even to an Ecstasy, at such a
Generous Goodness? Who can be so Ungrateful as wilfully to offend and disoblige
so kind a Benefactor? Who will not tremble at the Justice of so Pure a GOD, and
reflect on the Hatred he bears to Sin, who punished it so severely in his own
Son, who had taken upon Him to bear the Curse of it? What heart would not break
in the midst of all Temptations, rather than Crucify again so dear a Savior?
Who would stick to pardon an Enemy for his sake, who had not only pardoned us
while we were his Enemies; but, moreover, heapt all the ^^^^est Benefits of his
Mercy upon us, even while we were such, though it cost him so dear? Who would not
Love and Hope in such an Indulgent Father who so tenderly loved us; and a
Suffering GOD who, at the Infinite Expense of His most Precious Blood, Redeemed
us; and in Both of them, who to Crown all their Favors, sent the Holy Ghost,
GOD, Coequal with themselves, to Sanctify with a thousand Blessed Effects the
Hearts of the Faithful, to strengthen them in Afflictions and Temptations, to
inspire them with Charity, the Source of all heavenly Virtues, to the end of
the World; and to dwell spiritually in our Hearts for ever?

5. Here are Motives of another kind of size than either the Law of Nature, or
the Empty Elements of the Mosaic Law could afford us, or even give us a
glimpse of; Here are Means of raising Souls effectually to Love of Heaven, in
comparison of which all the rest are Flat and Dull, and, in comparison,
Trifles, or rather mere Nothing. Yet these Men who would bereave the World of
these, by Denying the Mystery of the B. Trinity on which all these are
grounded, expect they should be kindly treated as Brethren; while they, for
their Whimsies of Fancy, bereave all the Faithful in GOD's Church of these
highest Spiritual Advantages; which every sensible Man cannot but see would
both dispose them strongly for Heaven; and bring to Salvation innumerably- more
Souls; and advance those who do go thither, to higher Degrees of Bliss, and
make them more Glorious Stars in the Firmament of the Heavenly Jerusalem. What
I wonder at, is, That these Gentlemen do not plant their Batteries against the
Belief of the B. Trinity, upon the Incredibility of such wonderful
Condescensions and (as they might pretend) Debasements of the DEITY, than
against the Speculative Truth of the Point it self. None of those Prodigious
Mercies but transcend our F^ncy, whence all their other Arguments are drawn,
(for which reason the Greeks esteemed Christianity Foolishness,) and therefore
might afford them more plausible Arguments than any they have brought hitherto.
Had they employed their Talent in impugning the Trinity upon that score, and
plied that Topic, I must confess I had been to seek for any other Answer, than
to allege, that GOD is INFINITE, in all His Attributes; which he had not been,
at least we could not so well have known it, had not he given us such
Testimonies of His Mercy, Goodness, Justice, etc. as are beyond all that we are
able to conceive. Wherefore, since what is beyond what we are able to conceive
is justly held Mysterious to us, all the Mysteries of our Faith, if things be
well considered, and driven up to their First Root or Principle, do spring from
GOD's Infinity in this or some such Regard. Even the Mystery of the B. Trinity,
which chiefly consists in this, that the same Numerical Nature is in Three
Distinct Persons, is grounned on this, that His Nature being Infinite is but
One, as is shown above, B. 3. and the same may be said of all the rest of those
Articles of our Faith which we account Mysteries. Wherefore, I would recommend
it to the Author of Christianity not Mysterious, that He would bless us with a
Treatise to show us how to comprehend INFINITY; how to Define it, or give us
it is Full Dimensions; for all we know of it hitherto is to distinguish it is
Notion from [ Finite,] by a Negation; but to make a true Conception of it is
Entire Positive Perfection we fall infinitely short. Let ^im then either do
this, or else, as long as GOD, ^e Author of our Faith, is Unconceiveable by us,
or ^NFINITE, so long that Faith it self, the Product of His Infinite Being, and
His other Attributes, (especially those which concern His own Essence) ^ill
still be Impossible to be comprehended by us; and so, Christianity will still
remain Mysterious, let him scrib^le his plausibe Conceits as long as he
pleases. But, to proceed with showing the Demerit of those scarce-half-quarter
Christians.

6. Let us next consider what Powerful Authority and Majesty it must give to
the whole Doctrine of Christianity, and to every Particular of it; What
Veneration and Esteem to the Holy Sacraments instituted by Christ; to every
Sentence which is recorded in the Holy Scripture to have been spoken by our B.
Savior; and to every Action said to have been done by Him; to believe that it
was GOD Himself who came down from Heaven to teach us that Doctrine, institute
those Sacraments (from which Institution they have all their Efficacy) who
spoke those Words of Eternal Life, and did those Actions in his own Person.
Infinite are the Particular Motives of this Nature, and beyond any Man's Power
to recount and lay open at large as he ought; all of them ^ending to rectify
our Irregular Passions, to arm us against Temptations, and sanctify our Souls
by raising them to a Firm Faith, a Steadfast Hope and Ardent Charity; the only
Dispositions which can fit Mankind for Eternal Happiness. Were all these
Particulars laid open and dilated upon, to their full Energy, in Affective
Sermons, (as they are daily, to a great measure,) in the Christian Church; what
Transports of Heavenly Love, and Affectionate Devotion must they needs make in
the hearts of the Hearers, to the End of the World; what innumerable Pio^
Thoughts must they excite; how many Actions o^ all sorts of Virtue must they
produce? Not to speak how vigorously it must move People of all sorts to the
Imitation of those Heroic Virtues, which the Life and Practice of a GOD made
Man sets before their Eyes, for Patterns by which they ought to frame their
Christian Conversation; the very Notions of which, confronted with the contrary
demeanor of frail Sinners, is of force to shame them into Repentance and
Amendment of their Lives.

7. Now, the main Efficacy and Powerfulness of all these Highest Motives to
true Sanctity depends on the Belief of Three Divine Persons in the Unity of the
GODHEAD. Take this away, GOD the Father could not send his Son who was also
GOD; nor could GOD, in his own Person, come amongst us, to teach and instruct
us by His Word and Example; nor Die and Suffer for our Sins; nor Arise again
for our Justification; nor Ascend into Heaven, to draw our Hearts and
Affections after Him, etc. Let, now, the Deniers of a Trinity, put a mere Man,
(however endowed) instead of a GOD; and Common Sense will tell themselves, and
every Considering Man, how Feeble, Languid, and Ineffectual all these Motives
to Holy Life had been, in comparison of what they would be if all these most
Endearing Obligations had been laid upon us immediately by GOD Himself. And,
can they then expect the Christian Church Governors can do less than deny them
the right hand of Fellowship and Communion, who, in matters of the Highest
Concern, do thus prejudice the Common Spiritual Good of that Community?

8. If the Authors of the Letter concerning the ^inity and the Athanasian
Creed, be sincere in their Profession, that they intend no more but to get
Light and Information to promote their Eternal Hap^^^^ss, I desire they would
please to ask themselves ^^ese Questions, and let their own Consciences answer
them. Did not GOD intend that the Law of Grace should put Souls in the Purest
and Best State that can be, next to that of Glory in Heaven which immediately
succeeds it; and, consequently, that it has the Best Means in it that can be to
promote the Eternal Happiness of Mankind? Next, Is not the Belief that GOD sent
His only Son to Die for our Sins, that GOD the Son did die for us, and in his
proper Person taught us His Heavenly Doctrine, and led such a most Perfect Life
amongst us for our Example; and the many other Tenets and Motives consequent
from these; I say, Are not these Better Means of Eternal Salvation, and more
Effectual to raise our Thoughts to an Affectionate Love of Him, to Trust in His
Mercy, to follow His Dectrine, and imitate His Holy Life, than if a mere Man, a
Creature, and therefore infinitely short of His Divine Majesty, had been sent
for that purpose? Now, if they grant These, then they must acknowledge, that
the Doctrine of the Trinity, upon which all these Advantages are Grounded,
being the Best Means, or rather the Principle, on which these Best Means for
Virtue are Built, must be acknowledged to be True. I am far from thinking that
Ignorance is the Genuine Mother of Devotion: much less, that Error, especially
so shameless an Error, as is nothing but Nonsense and Contradiction; nay, such
an Idolatrous Error as gives Divine Honor to a Creature, should be so great a
Friend to Piety, and Devotion, and so Effectual and Proper (as we have seen
this is) to beget in Souls such Purity of Heart, as is apt to cultivate them
with all sorts of the Best Virtues, and raise them so effectually to Heaven;
nay, incomparably more Effectually than the Contrary Tenet, if (as they hold)
it be True, could possibly Effect. I have not time at present to pursue the
Confutation of that Pamphlet: But, if any farther Reply shall be judged Needful
than what Mr. Frankland has already given it, my Endeavors shall be ready to
Defend so Great a Fundamental of Christian Faith. In the mean time, I shall
presume that whoever peruses attentively this present Explication, shall find
that all their Objections are either Defeated or Prevented. I only remark, that
all their Opposition is built either upon their Ignorance of a Spiritual
Nature; or else on their not distinguishing exactly the Notions or Meanings of
the words of which they make use; which I have done as accurately as I could
possibly in my Method to Science, and in my Preliminaries here. For, it is very
easy to observe, that they Confound the Notion of Substance or Being with that
of Relation; Positive with Relative; Nature with Suppositum. They quarrel with
the word [ Person,] which is a plain Natural Notion; and yet themselves do not
tell us what it should mean; as if they who oppose it were not also obliged to
acquaint the Reader what it is, or signifies, as well as we; since otherwise,
they must confess they oppose they know not what. They build mainly on that
weak Topic that some Divines have differed about their Explications of it; ^s
if every Thesis whatever did not Abstract from ^ll Explications. The Tenet it
self was Antece^ent, and the Explications Superven'd; and therefore the Article
it self is still but where it was, and stands firm upon its proper Basis,
Divine Revelation, though They, I, and all other Explicators in the World were
never so Faulty. But my Appendix grows too Bulky, and it is time to close it.

SECT. Last.
That the Anti-Trinitarians cannot satisfy any Man of Common Sense.

1. BUT what shall the Unlearned Vulgar do in the mean time? On the one side
they see the Opposers of the Trinity do bear themselves high, in pretending
Evidence against it; and that they offer many plausible and seeming Reasons,
which they are not able to Solve; and the Replies of Learned Men are perhaps
too Speculative for those of their pitch. How, then, and in what manner, ought
they to bear themselves? Their Reason is startled and dissatisfied; and
consequently, their Conscience; when it is confidently Pretended, and offered
to be Proved, that the embracing this Tenet obliges them to acknowledge more
GODS than One; which both sides grant to be Perfect Idolatry. I Answer, and
offer to them these Considerations.

2. And, First, I would ask them of what Religion or Profession they were when
they first Read those Books, or listened to those Discourses which startled
them in the Belief of a Trinity* Had they any Faith at all before, or were they
mere Infidels, or Seekers: If they had any Faith; then they had some Ground for
that Faith, and held that Ground Certain, as the Ground of Faith ought to be;
and then they stand obliged by Evident Reason, either to see that Ground
invalidated and overthrown, or to continue where they are. Now, this Opposing
the Point it self by way of Pretended Reason does not at all combat their
Ground of Believing thus, but brings Foreign Objections against the Particular
Article, which is a kind of Conclusion from that Ground; that is, it lets the
Principle alone, and attacques the Conclusion, which is manifestly an Indirect
way of Proceeding, and withal Foolish: For, if the Principle stands, what is
bulit on that Principle will stand too, let Objections say what they please.
Besides Grounds and Principles, have something of Solid in their Mien and
Notion; and ought always (and generally do) subsist upon Settled Judgment, and
Right Reason; whereas Objections are almost always the Product of Fancy, which
is a Volatile, Roving and Unsettled Faculty, ever Wayward, Humours^me, and
Unsatisfied; and of so Unconstant a Nature it self, that it is incapable of
settling any Principle at all.

3. Again, a very ordinary Experience in the World will teach them* that
Lawyers plead very plausible for contrary Causes, and sometimes Preachers for
contrary Opinions; so that it is not every seeming. Reason which we cannot
readily Answer, though it may look very Plausible, that ought to shock us, or
make us entertain an ill Opinion of our Principle it self. But, it must be such
a Solid Reason as may be held more Evident than the Principle was on which
they, and the Body or Community they were in, had built their former Faith;
otherwise it cannot with any Sense be held able to cope or contrast with it,
much less to overthrow it.

4. They ought, I say, in such a Case, to consider that they were formerly in a
Christian Community, or in some Church, and were Actually Members of that Body,
from which they must separate; and so be guilty of a very Criminal Schism, if
they divide themselves by Apostasy from it: which makes it plain to the meanest
Capacity, that the Reasons which are opposed, ought to be most Evident, and
most Cogent. This ought to make them cautious and wary in admitting such
Objections for true Reasons; lest, if they hap to be proved False, they run
themselves desperately into such a dangerou^ Precipice. Wherefore they must be
Certain those Reasons were indeed most Evident, (which we call Demonstrative)
and not only Probable, by Resting on which they hazard such a Mi^chief to their
Souls. Plainest Reason tells them, that no Truth in the World could remain long
settled, nor any Government continue long on Foot, if the Subjects, or
Inferiors, may be allowed upon every Probable Reason, to break from the whole
Body, and Rebel against Superiors and Governors. Now, not to mention that
they can never bring any such Proof, as can in the Esteem of a Vulgar
Understanding be held Conclusive, or Demonstrative; it is Evident by the
Carriage of the Rabbi^s of those Dissenters, that they never did even pretend
to bring any Demonstrative Proof against the Trinity. For did they ever lay any
Self-Evident Principles, or build on them, as those to which those Proofs are
finally reducible? It Is unheard of; and yet without these, it is impossible
there can be any True Evidence, or Demonstration. For, whatever pretends to be
Evident, must either be Evident of it self, or be made Evident by something
that is moro Evident than it self is; which must either run on Endlesly, or
terminate at length in something that is Self-Evident. A Demonstration, if
truly such, and clearly proposed. obliges all Humane Nature to assent to it, if
they be Unprejudiced. If they can pretend they have any such Demonstrative
Argument that the Doctrine of the Trinity is such Nonsense, and so Impious, why
do they not produce it, stand to it, show the Principle it is grounded on, and
the Connection it has with that Principle. One such Argument would decide the
Cause, and put an end to the Whole Controversy. But, alas! they dare not so
much as say, (I am sure they never did) that they have any such kind of
Argument. They never concern themselves with examining the Qualification of
Arguments, or what Proofs Conclude, what not; but content themselves to talk
rawly, prettily, and plausibly. It Is not their Design to convince Men of
Learning, but to Overreach and work upon the Weakness of the Ignorant. Whence
follows that, since no Proof can be even pretended competent to break
Church Communion, but such as is evidenty Conclusive, or Demonstrative, and
they neither produce, nor profess to bring any sue^, their Reasons ought not to
weigh with any Man of Sense, so as to make him, for their sake, hazard the
Guilt of Schism.

5. They ought to consider next, when they have left the Particular Church in
which they were, and in which there are Church Governors, and a great Body of
Christians with whom they do join in Faith, Prayer, Sacraments, Discipline, and
other Spiritual Duties; with what Church Governors, and what Body of Men they
will join in Prayer, and such Devout Offices. Can a few Men scattered here and
there, who sculk in Corners, do not own themselves openly, nor barefacedly
protest and preach against this Doctrine, which (if False) is so manifestly
Idolatrous; can, I say, such a Rope of Sand, such an Unconnected Multitude, who
thus let GOD's Honor go to wrack, have the Face, or the least show of a
Church? With whom then will these New Proselytes join hemselves in Prayet,
Sacraments, Church Government, and other such Concerns? This is so shameful to
their pretended Church, that though it is against all Conscience and Sense, they
are content to join in Prayer and other Religious Duties with our Churches,
(though themselves must hold them most abominably Idolatrous) rather than make
a ridiculous show of their own Party alone. Perhaps too, Interest and Indemnity
are two powerful Motives to induce them to this Brotherly Compliance and
Correspondence: For such Men do not use to be guilty of such a Zeal for GOD's
Honor, or for their own Persuasion, as to hazard Martyrdom, no not the less of
any Temporal Advantages for GOD's or Truth's sake. They are cast in a new Mold
from that of other good Christians, and approach to the Deists, as in other
Prudent Methods, so in this.

6. If those Unstable and Dissatisfied Men say they are not able to Judge
whether the Reasons they bring are Conclusive or no; they plainly confess they
hanker after them out of the bewitching Humor of Singularity, and Novelty;
since they consent to alter their Former Faith upon such Reasons as they know
not whether they be Good or Bad, Solid or Aerie, fit to be yielded to or no:
That is in plain Terms, they have an Inclination to that Party, but yet they do
not well know why. If they allege that their Reasons seem more easy to them
than those brought by others: I Answer, First, That Easiness is not a sign of
Truth. The Highest Truths, especially those belonging to Spiritual Natures, are
the Hardest to conceive, and yet not a jot the less True. It Is easier to
conceive GOD to be a Body, and perform all his Actions by Motion, as we do
ours; and yet it is so far from True, that it is a damnable Error, and
destroys the Nature of the DEITY. Or rather it is a vast Prejudice against all
their Arguments, and their very Way of Arguing: For, though each single word, in
which Faith was delivered, was easy, so that the then Believers could have a
right Apprehension, or Notion of what was taught them; yet, when the Point
comes to be canvast by Disputation, and Reasons produced Pro and Con, and that
the Point is of what passes in the Divine Nature, which is not only Spiritual,
but Infinite; it is a certain sign, that, if the Reasons either Party produces
be Easy to Vulgar Fancies; it is, I say, a most certain sign, that they are
merely Superficial, and do not reach the Nature of so abstruse a Mystery, or so
High a Subject.

7. They may also be made sensible how impossible it is, that 318 Bishops of
the Eastern and Western Churches should meet together in the First Council of
Nice; (who by their Station must needs know the Sentiment of the then Christian
Church;) and there Decree and Subscribe to the Doctrine of the Trinity, and
propose a Formal Creed, what every Man ought to believe in that Article. Those
Bishops could not be thought to act herein against their Conscience; nor could
any ever impeach their Sanctity, so as to make them such a pack of Villains as
wilfully to Damn themselves, and all those Souls they had Influence over, by
Defining that a Creature was truly GOD. Add, that neither could they be
Ignorant of the Doctrine and Practice of the foregoing Church from Christ's
time. Their Session was not much more than 300 Years after the Birth of our
Savior; allowing then about 30 Years for our Savior's Lifetime, and 25 (more
or less) for the Apostles Lives after his Death, and 50 for the Lives of those
Bishops e're they met; it was easy for their Great Grandfathers; nay, diverse
of their Grandfathers, and also for the Grandfathers of many in that Age, to
have lived in the times of the Apostles; and it was utterly Incredible there
should be such a Change in Faith, so Universally and far spread, and none know
who first introduced it, and were the chiefest Instruments in propagating it;
and a thousand times harder to conceive that it should not be vigorously
opposed till Arius his time. Besides, their Devotions, and Adoration of Christ
could not but go along with their Faith; and who can without Madness imagine,
that an Universal Change of such a Practice in so high a Point as the joining a
False GOD with a True one, a Creature with a Creator, in their Adoration,
could possibly creep into the World and diffuse itself over the Church, and yet
should never be Observed and Opposed, when it first appeared.

8. Moreover, since these Doubters were brought up amongst Christians, they
cannot but know how highly Faith, Hope, and Charity, which were ever held the
Best-of Supernatural Virtues, are necessary to promote Souls in Holiness, raise
their Thoughts and Affections vigorously to Heaven, and thence conduce to their
Salvation. Wherefore, by our former Discourse, they must needs see how those
Virtues are enfeebled, and the Best Motives to erect their Souls to Heaven are
made flat and Insignificant (in comparison) by the Denying this Mystery: And,
consequently, since Error can never be a Friend to Piety, that that Tenet is
True. Nay, they must be conscious to themselves, that, by Denying it, they
bereave themselves of the most effectual Means to elevate their Souls to Hope
and Love of Heaven, which is the only Disposition that can bring them thither.
Those well-meaning Men are born in hand by their Deluders, that, by
dis-believing the B. Trinity, it is but one Point they deny; but that they may,
and do, nevertheless, stand right in all the rest. But they are Abused. Whoever
denies the Trinity, does, by consequence, deny all other Tenets, and enervates
all the Motives that are Peculiar to Christianity as such, or as it superadds
to the Law of Nature and that of Moses; as might easily be shown in every
Article of our Creed, (were it Seasonable to make so long an Excursion,) and
how it is, one way or other, influenced by This. It will be objected, That
there were as great Saints in either of the former Laws as in this Last; such
as E^^^^, Daniel, Moses, Elias, David, etc. I answer That there were great
Saints no doubt, now and then, under those former States of the Church: ^^t I
deny that that Sanctity was owing to the ^gena Elementa, or Ordinary Efficacy
and Doctrine ^^ those Laws; but that they had those Elevated ^egrees and high
Strains of Holiness which appears in their Actions and Writings, by
Extraordinary Means; viz. either from the Prophets who were Divinely Inspired;
or else from Partiiular Supernatural Providence, (not unfrequent in those
days) and not merely from the State of the Mosaical or of the Natural Law.
Their Best Dispositions for Heaven was their Faith and Hope in a Messiah to
come, which how dim and dark that was, in comparison of what GOD has Revealed
to the World after his Resurrection and Coming of the H. Ghost, every Divine
knows. I grant, indeed, That the Anti-Trinitarians keep up some faint show of
Devotion, by pretending a Creature was sent to Teach the World, and Die,
Suffer, etc. But, I say withal, that the Force and Energy of all these Motives
and Means, depending on, and going parallel to the Dignity of the Person,
especially his Dying for our Sins; it does consequently fall short of the
Efficacy it might have, as far as does the Majesty and Worthiness of an
Infinite GOD and Creator, to the Vileness and Worthlesness (in comparison) of
a Finite Creature.

9. Those Unstable Doubters may be advertised, that though they be not able to
weigh the force of the Arguments which both sides produce, yet GOD's Goodness
has not left them destitute of Means, suitable to their pitch, to preserve them
from being deluded, if they will but use them; which is, to consider the
Authority which the Writers of one Party and the other ought to have in the^^
Esteem. Now, there are two Particulars to (...) considered in Learned Authors,
viz. their N^^ber and their Weight. As for the First of these their Number, the
Anti-Trinitarians must confess that taking the Whole Extent of the Church, and
this through so many Centuries, there have been Innumerable multitudes of Bishops
and Priests, famous for their Knowledge and Sanctity; and, considering the
Number of Christian Universities, Ten thousand Doctors of Divinity, and Men
Eminent for Learning, for One of theirs; Who, for their Morals, were many of
them reputed Saints, and none of them held Impious or Careless of their
Salvation. All this Incredible Multitude of Knowing and Virtuous Persons, have
held, Adored and Glorified the H. Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the
GODHEAD; and lookt-upon it as a most Fundamental Article of all Christian
Faith. So that in Number the Anti-Trinitarians cannot pretend their Learned Men
bear any Proportion to ours. As for the Weight of their Authority, it depends
on their Knowledge and their Honesty. Allowing then both Parties to be Equal as
to their Honesty and Sincerity, and considering only their Knowledge: Though
those Unlearned Persons I speak to at present, (they not being Professors of
Knowledge themselves,) cannot be qualified to judge directly, which Party is
more Knowing; yet they are Capable of so much Sense as to reflect, that if the
Learned Men who deny a Trinity be comparatively so very Few in Number, they
must be Superabundant in Weight, that is, exceedingly more knowing than the
Christian Party was: For, otherwise, the Vast over-proportion in Number, must,
in such men's Esteem, necessa^^ly sink the Balance to the Christian's side:
Na^^re having given them so much Sense as to see ^vidently, that where the
Quality is Equal in both, the Quantity must clearly carry the Advantage* Now,
what one Man of those very Few (comparatively) which they can pretend to, can
they name, who has been such a Monster of Learning in comparison of this
Innumerable multitude of Christian Bishops, Fathers, and Professed Doctors, that
they are all to be held Dunces in comparison of Him? What are the Productions,
where are the Books that Prodigious Man has Writ, which have raised him to that
Transcendent Reputation in the World, that all our Doctors, who have been by
Indifferent men (to say no more) held to be Men very Eminent for their
Learning, ought, all of them to be accounted Block beads, if compared with his
Peerless Parts? None such was ever heard of; and I believe themselves will not
think it for the Interest of their Credit to name any such. Wherefore, it is
obvious for any man of Ordinary Prudence to discern that the Weight of the
Authority of their Learned Men is far from being considerable; and thence
conclude, that the Vast Number of our Learned Bishops, Professors, and Doctors,
ought, in their Esteem, to outweigh, beyond any comparison, the Adverse Party.

10. If they have, or ever had, any such Paragon of Learning to produce, let
them approve him to be such by bringing some one Demonstration of his against
our Doctrine of the B. Trinity. One Single Demonstration, as I told them above,
deduc't from Undeniable Principles, stood to, and maintained by Reducing it to
Evident Grounds, would do the whole Business, and save much Pro^fusion of
Ink-shed. But, alas! they are, an^ have been so far from bringing any, that I
could never discern they ever aimed at it, or so much as knew what a
Demonstration meant. Their utmost Ambition is to give their slight Discourses
a Glossy Outward Appearance, (for Superficial Talk best takes with weak People)
and if they can but make it look Probable by alluding Texts, or Sprucing it up
with a little smooth Rhetoric, and such Baubles as Nonsense needs to adorn and
recommend it, they think their work is done, and they have performed Wonders.

11. This leads us to their pretense, That Scripture is clearly for them; that
is, that they brag they hit on the right Sense of it better than the Christian
Party; And, it must be allowed, that they have a peculiar Dexterity in giving a
Plausible Turn to the Plainest Texts, by studied Allusions of one Place to
another; which, especially, if it be New, and not observed formerly, is able to
delude the Ignorant. But an easy Antidote will secure any Man of an Ordinary
size of Wit from being infected with this quaint Stratagem. It were easy to
show that he must be a Man of Universal Learning who is qualified to be a
consummate Interpreter of the several places of Scripture, as they profess
themselves to be. He must be well verst in the Oriental Languages, an Excellent
Critic, a great Chronologist, well acquainted with the Sense of Antiquity, and
even of their Customs, their Proverbs, Phrases or Manners of speaking; He must
be a good Logician to observe the Tenor or Connection of the Context, and
thence able to discern whether the Alluded places ^ taken in the same precise
Sense; without which ^he Allusion of them to one another is ridiculous,
^mproper and insignificant. He must be a good Natural Philosopher and
Metaphysician, otherwise those Passages which speak of Spiritual Natures, ^f
understood Literally, will lead them into most Dangerous Mistakes. Lastly, He
must be a good Speculative Divine, to consider the Drift and Nature of Revealed
Faith, and the End why it was told us; and thence the Proportion those Means
have to compass that End; a Point particularly Useful for Pastors who are to
guide Souls in the Paths that lead to Heaven, and breed them up so as to attain
Eternal Happiness, etc. Now, it is manifest, that those Vulgar Understandings,
to whom we address this Discourse, are not capable of any of these; nor,
consequently, can they determine who has these Qualifications, or follows these
Rules exactly: Yet, there is none of them so Ignorant, but he knows very
certainly, that No Man can compass an End without the Means to it: nor, can be
able to compass it better without having Better Means. Let then the Right
Interpretation of Scripture be the End aimed at; The Means to perform this, or
atchieve this End, must either be Supernatural or Natural; and unless they can
show their Advantage in one of these Means, they cannot pretend to persuade any
man of Common Sense to believe them. To the former of these Means they do not
pretend; and, if they did, they must show some Supernatural outward Sign to
justify their Claim: For, otherwise, since no man can see what passes within
their Souls, none can have any reason to believe they have any such. If they
say, they have Better Natural Means, it will lie upon them to pro^ it; and how
will they evince it, or make it (...) that they are so singularly furnished with
tho^^ Natural or Human Means as to out strip so clearly and surpass the
Innumerable Multitudes of Christian Doctors and Professors in many Learn^^
Universities, and for so many Ages. Our Men have been Professors of the Sacred
Languages, they have spent many years in Perusing the Fathers and Ancient
Commentators, they are most Exact Critics, nay, so far as to have writ diverse
Volumes on that Subject. They have been held Eminent in Logic, and in all
sorts of Philosophy and Divinity, etc. and the same may be said of whatever
other Humane Skill, Art or Science, the Others can pretend to. How then will
the Anti-Trinitarians make it appear, that they have better Natural Means of
Interpreting Scripture than the Christian Church and her Members have had, and
still have? And, if they cannot make out they have better Means for
interpreting Scripture, What man will be so sottish as to believe them they
better Interpret it, merely because they say they do? For it is here supposed,
those unlearned Persons are not qualified to judge of the Allegations on both
sides, which are made pro and con.

12. Lest it should be pretended, as some Deists do, That the Apostles out of
over-respect to their Master would needs make him a GOD; and, to make that
Tenet current Sense, invented a Trinity of Persons, of which each should be
GOD; or, (as the Arians and Socinians say) that the Christian Church introduced
it sinee; To beat down this Calumny, those Unlearned and Credulous Men may ask
them, how this could be, since both many Learned Jews, and even some Wiser
Heathens acknowledged a Trinity in GOD: As to ^he Jews, it is shown at large
from their own Authors, in that Excellent Treatise, Entitled, A Short and
Easy Method with the DEISTS, with a Second Part to the JEWS, from Page 209. to
224. And as for the Heathens, I hapt to reside some time at Amsterdam in the
year 1678. where I converst very frequently with Christophorus Sandii Sandius,
the famous Modern Writer for the Arians. Of whom, by the way, to give the
Reader some account. He was a Man of a quick Conceit, and nimble Wit; his
Talent lay in catching at little Expressions, snatched out of Authors here and
here, and improving them dexterously to his Advantage; but otherwise he seemed
quite destitute of Logic, or any other Philosophical Science. Hence, he was a
very Weak Reasoner, a Rash Concluder, and incapable of Arguing from any
Principles, which he quite disregarded and slighted. What concerns my purpose
is, that he showed me diverse Citations which he had picked up out of Heathen
Authors, in which they owned a Trinity; and would needs pretend that the
Christian Church had borrowed (forsooth) that Tenet, among other Superstitions,
from the Heathens. I told him, that this made against himself, and rather
argu^d that all Mankind, who reflected deeply upon the Essence of a Spiritual
Nature, especially if they held it to be Infinite, had some rude Sentiments of
a Trinity; or perhaps, that some few Jews might have it from some Persons that
were Englighten'd after a special manner, and that the Heathens had it ^^om
Them. I wish my Recommendation might prevail with some Learned Man of our
Universities, where they have plentiful Libraries, to confute that Book of his;
in compiling which, I could discern by his Discourse, he had been assisted by
his whole Party, inspecting Libraries in diverse Countries, and picking out what
they could find to their Advantage. I believe they will find it wants no
Insincerity; a judicious Friend of mine, whom I entreated to peruse it, having
(as he told me) discovered much foul Play in diverse Places.

13. The same Unlearned Readers may also be admonisht that they ought not to
read, or at least heed such Books; lest wading too rashly out of their Depth,
they come to Sink. For, since such Books pretend to show, that the Tenet of the
Trinity is full of Contradictions, and such Readers are not skilled, nor are
able to know, how many Requisites do go to a Contradiction; it is manifest they
wrong their Reason by overweening, or taking upon them to judge of a Point of
which they are Ignorant what the very Terms mean.

14. Yet, if they have good Mother-Wits, they may be made to a great degree
capable of Discerning the Folly and False Reasoning of such slight
Discoursers. It will not be hard to make such Men see there can be no
Contradiction unless we Affirm and Deny in the same Respect. V. g. That there
is no Contradiction to say, that a Table is Three according to the Notion or
Respect of such a Figure called a Corner, or Threecorner'd; and yet is but One
according to that Respect, called a Table, or but One Table: Or, that a Man who
is a Father, a Son, and a Husband may be Three according to that Respect or
Notion called Relation, or have Three Relations in him, and yet, be but One,
according to the Notion of Thing, or but One Man. Which done, let but the
several Notions or Respects that belong to this Mystery be Distinguished; (by
Confounding which those Men do pretend to show it Contradictious;) and a little
Instruction will let them see plainly, that, at least many of their Objections,
if not all, are merely Frivolous and Insignificant.

15. To make this sink better into their Apprehension, it were not amiss to
Instance in some one Paragraph of the aforesaid Letter, concerning the Trinity
and Athanasian Creed. We Will take one of the shortest, but withal the Pithiest
and Shrewdest in their way of Arguing. It Is found, p. 7. Col. 2. in these
Words, [ If the Father is an Infinite All-perfect Being; and, if the Son is
Distinct from the Father; he must, if he be a GOD, be a Distinct Infinite
All-perfect Being; for the same Being can be no way Distinct from its self:
And, certainly, two Distinct All-perfect Beings are two Distinct GODS.] How
currently and smoothly this glides over the Fancy: Yet, when examined, and
brought to the Test, it will appear by and by, that it is so incomparably Weak
and Silly, that it is scarce possible to crowd more Nonsense into so narrow a
Room. Which I show thus.

16. It Is acknowledged, the Father is an Infinite All-perfect Being; for he has
the Divine Nature in Him, which is Infinitely Perfect, or truly GOD. He
Proceeds. [ and if the Son is Distinct from the Father.] In what Sense, I
beseech him, or according to what Notion or Respect do we hold He is Distinct?
In that of Being? Not one Man in GOD's Church ever said it. What we hold and
maintain is, that He is only Distinct from Him according to that Notion or
Respect called, Relation* And what Man so stupid as not to see that what differs
only in Relation, may be the same Many or the same Being still? A Man is
Married, and has never a Child; and then he is a [ Man] but is [ not a Father]
Afterward, he has a Son, and then he is a Father; and yet he is the same Man,
or the same Being he was: though, to be a Father, and not to be a Father,
abstractedly conceived, be Contradictories. It follows, [and therefore, he must
if he be a GOD, be a Distinct All perfect Being.] And why must this follow,
when the Distinction affects the GODHEAD, only according to that Respect called
Relation; and not according to that Respect called Essence, or according to the
GODHEAD it self, or the Divine Nature. It Is strange that these Men cannot
Reflect that, when we say, [God knows Himself], or, which is the same, [GOD ^i
known by Himself] what is meant by Knower, and Known, do formally signify the
Relation; and the word [GOD,] and which is the same, [ Himself] do signify the
GODHEAD, or the same Infinite All-perfect Being in Both. But the Reason he
gives for this Consequence, expressed in the words, [ For the same Being can be
no ways Distinct from it self] is such a most Profound piece of Ignorance, that
it is Unparalleled. Indeed, a being can be no ways Distinct from it self, under
the Notion of Being; for this were to be the same Being, and not to be the same
Being; but that it can be no ways (as he says) Distinct from it self, but it
must have a Different Being, is against our Common Notions, the Common
Language, and the Common Sense of all Mankind. A Child is the same THING, or
the same BEING, when it is grown up to be a Man; wherefore this same Being
which is now a Perfect, or ^ipe Man, is now Distinct from its self, according
to its Quantity, which is One Way of being Distinct from its former self. The
same Man was yesterday in Health, and now is Sick; and therefore he is
Distinct, or Different from himself according to those Qualities; which is
Another Way. He was before no Father, and now is a Father; therefore he is
Distnct from his former self, according to the Notion or Respect of RELATION,
which is a Third Way; and yet, all this while, he is the self-same in respect
of his Being. Innumerable are the particular Ways, Endless are the Instances
that might be given, how the same Thing, or Being, might differ from its self
in some other Respect than that of Being, and therefore must still remain the
same Being. Wherefore this Universal Thesis that [The same Being can no ways be
Distinct from its self] is confutable by the dullest Sophister who ever heard
of, and understood the Ten Predicaments, which are the common Heads that
contain all the several Notions. Respects, or Considerations which we may make
of the same Thing, or the same Being. But these Gentlemen Discourse as if there
were but One Predicament, viz. that of Substance, or Being, and they have
either Cashiered or else had, for have, quite forgot the other Nine. And is
such a shallow Pamphlet, a fit Present for the Learned Divines of the
Universities!

17. Let us put a Parallel to this Discourse. Imagine then Peter were both a
Father and a Son, in respect of his Different Correlates; these Gentlemen will
undertake to prove plainly, that he must therefore be Two Men thus. [If this
Father be a Rational Creature, and the Notion of Son be Distinct from that of
Father; then Peter, if he be a Man, must be a Distinct Rational Creature, for
the same Being can be no ways Distinct from it self, and certainly two Distinct
Rational Creatures are Two Men.] The Parallel is his own Discourse put in the
very Tenor he laid it. Only we put the [ Notion] or Respect of Son to be
Distinct from that of Father, because we speak of them (as we ought) precisely
and formally according to such or such respects; and not materially; for, so
considered, they are all Identify'd with the DEITY; whence, St. Austin in his
Books De Trinitate, when he names Deus, adds immediately id est, Trinitas; and
these men know well that it is our constant Profession, that the Trinity is no
otherwise to be Worshipped than in the Unity of the Godhead.

18. Thus these Gentlemen by their New No-Logick, have proved Peter to be two
Men, and to have two Individual Natures in him, because he has two different
Relations; which kind of Respect called Relations, since (if we take the whole
Extent of that Notion and all the Particulars under it) we acquire and lose a
hundred times a day in one kind or other, no one Being in Nature would be
constantly the same, but must be perpetually multiplied into the Lord knows how
many Beings or Things.

19. But the main Point is, That our Question is not whether the same thing can
be any way Distinct from it is self; ^ut, whether the Same Thing may not, and
does not, Ground and Verify many Conceptions or Respects of diverse kinds; as is
shown in my First Preliminary; and, whether it does hence follow, that if we
affirm that it is One according to One of those Respects, and yet Three
according to Another of those Respects, there can be, in that case, any show of
a Contradiction, which is the Affirming and Denying of it according to the Same
Respect. This, is the true Point, which these Objectors never touch nor heed;
but, instead of Distinguishing those several Respects, they jumble them all
together confusedly; and then, when they have thus shuffled away the true
Question, they pretend to Decide that which they have not Touched, (perhaps
never Thought of it,) by an Untoward and Aukwa^d way of Arguing by Ifs; of
which we have here no less than Three in Four Lines.

20. My last Advice to those Dissatisfied Gentlemen, is, Than they would be so
True to their own Reason, as not to fancy themselves competent Judges of what
they cannot but know they are not able to decide; no^ undertake to sound Depths
which are beyond the Length of their short Line; nor be inveigled to apprehend
that those most sublime Points that concern what passes within the DEITY it
self, must (when it comes to be Debated or Explicated) be as plain and familiar
to every Ordinary Understanding as a piece of a Romance. It Is the greatest
Policy of those Men, in gaining Proselytes, to spread about their Pamphlets
among the Vulgar, and to persuade them that what is True must needs be Easy,
(as to which Flam every Man who has studied the Mathematics is able to
undeceive them) and so make them Judges of the Controversy; which is very
gratifying to Original Sin, and to our Innate Pride, the Effect of it. And, if
once they can bring them to swallow this bait, and embrace this Erroneous
Principle of overweening, they are sure they are caught. For, then, they have
no more to do but to propose to them some pretty superficial Tri^^es, which if
examined by True Principles, have not a grain of Sense in them; and yet, being
suitable to the pitch of weak Understandings, are very Plausible and Taking,
and they presently hold themselves well appay'd. By this means also they are
brought to undervalue and contemn all Learned Discourses which go the bottom of
the subject in hand; because they are not at the first sight so easily
intelligible to their Low Capacities.

Thus I have endeavored both to satisfy Learned Readers, how this most Holy
and Fundamental Article of Christian Faith is Explicable, according to True
Principles of Reason working upon our Natural Notions; and also to Establish
the Unlearned from the Delusions of those, who, while they oppose it, renounce
Faith and Reason both. Which done, I have no more to do but to recommend them
to GOD the FATHER who Created, and Preserves us; to GOD the SON who Redeemed
and Enlightens us; and to GOD the HOLY SPIRIT who Sanctifies and Comforts us.
To all whom, as being One GOD, Blessed for Evermore, be ascribed all Honor and
Glory.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
EP. Ded. P. 6. L. 2. these does, p. 10. l. 5. only True, Pref. p. 2. l. 27. if
she, p. 24. l. 11. by their, p, 26. l. 21. Judiciousness. Book, P. 8. l. 24.
Altered, p. 57. l. 4. Bodies, l. 24. dele at, p. 75. l. 21. Form or Act, p. 81.
l. 8. in the Margin, thence, p. 90. l. 32. is it, p. 96. l. 20. eum, p. 112. l.
33. can exist, p. 116. l. 2. Individuums, p. 123. l. 30. in the Margin, such a
Nature, p. 218. l, 15. being there, p. 131. l. 22. tuo scribuntur, p. 140. l.
23. is in a manner, p. 204. l. 20. in the Margin, Chap. 7. p. 257. l. 23. it
in, p. 310. l. 16. Encyclopaedia, p. 318. l. 29. similes ei, p. 323. l. 29.
refunded into, p. 331. l. 1. could be, p. 347. l. 5. that Chance, p. 405. l. 5.
particular Supposita, p. 407. l. 5, 6. depute, p. 427. l. 21. as does.


