A LETTER To the D. of P. IN ANSWER TO THE Arguing Part OF HIS FIRST LETTER To
Mr. G.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel. 1687.

A LETTER To the D. of P. In Answer to the Arguing Part of his First Letter.
1. THAT you may not take it unkindly the Arguing Part of your Letter to Mr. G.
should pass unregarded, I have been prevailed upon to accept of his Commission
to hold his Cards, while he is not in Circumstances to play out his Game
himself. But can assure you beforehand, since Matter of Fact is clearing by
other Hands more proper, I mean to confine my self to Matter of Right; and so
shall give you the least and most excusable trouble that can be, a short one.

2. Your Letter tells us, that the Conference was for the sake of a Gentleman,
who I heard desired to be satisfied that Protestants are absolutely certain of
what they believe, and made account you could satisfy him, and professed, if
you could not, he would quit your Communion. And you take care to inform us (
p. 2.) that he was satisfied, and declared immediately after the Conference,
that he was much more confirmed in the Communion of your Church by it, and
resolved to continue in it. But could you not have afforded to inform us
likewise by what he was satisfied? For there is many a Man who would be as
glad, and is as much concerned to be satisfied in that Point as that Gentleman;
and he would not have been a jot the less confirmed or the less resolved, if
his Neighbor had been confirmed and resolved with him. I cannot for my life
imagine why you should make a Secret of a thing, which, besides your own and
your Churches Honor, concerns the Salvation of thousands and thousands to know.

3. Your Letter I perceive would shift it off to Mr. G. whom you desire ( p. 7)
to prove that Protestants have no Absolute Certainty, etc. Of this Proposal
there will be occasion to say more by and by. At the present I pray you
consider how you deal with those Souls who rely on you. If you should move them
to trust their Estates with a Man of your naming, of whom you would give no
other satisfaction that he were able to manage them, and faithful, and
responsible, but only to bid those who doubted, prove the contrary; I fancy
there would need all the Credit you have to hinder the Motion from appearing
very strange: And yet you have the confidence to make them one as much stranger
as their Souls are more worth than their Money: For you would have them hazard
their Souls where they are not safe, for any care you take to satisfy them
that they are. Why, suppose Mr. G. could not prove that Protestants are not
Certain, are they therefore Certain? Has Peter Twenty pounds in his Purse,
because Paul cannot prove he has not? Or, ever the more Title to an Estate,
because an Adversary may have the ill luck to be Nonsuited? Must not every
body speak for himself one day, and bring in his own Account, which will pass
or not pass as it is or is not faulty in it self, whether any fault have been
found in it before or no? And will not the Happiness or Misery of their Souls
for ever depend on that Account? Can you suffer them to run that terrible
hazard, without making them able to justify their Accounts themselves, and
furnishing them with assurance that they can, and with no more to say but that
they hoped Dr. St. would make his Party good with Mr. G.? That things so
precious to God as Souls should be of no more value with those who set up for
Ministers of the Gospel! That their great and only care, as far as I see,
should be to make a show, and pass for some body here, let every one take his
chance hereafter! Besides, Truth is therefore Truth, because it is built on
Intrinsecal Grounds which prove it to be such; and not on private Men's
Abilities, or their saying this or that; wherefore till those Grounds be
produced, it cannot be with reason held Truth: And Dr. St. is more particularly
obliged to make good he has such Grounds, having had such ill fortune formerly
with the Principles to which he undertook to reduce Protestant Faith, as
appears by the Account given of them in Error Nonplust.

4. But, leaving these Matters to be Answered where we must all answer why we
have believed so and so; pray let us have fair play in the mean time. Let every
one bear his own Burden, and you not think to discharge your self by throwing
your Load on another Man's Shoulders. You affirm there is Absolute Certainty on
the Protestants side, and it is for him to prove it who affirms it. If you do it
but half so well as Mr. G. can, and has, the Infallibility which he asserts,
you will earn Thanks from one side, and Admiration from the other. But it is
for you to do it: To trick off proving the contrary upon your Adversary, is to
own that Proving is a thing which agrees not with your Constitution, and in
which your Heart misgives you.

5. Yet even so you were uneasy still, and would not venture what Mr. G. could
do, as slightly as you think, or would have others think of him. You know well
enough, that to prove Protestants have no Absolute Certainty of their Faith, is
no hard Task even for a weak Man: Dr. Tillotson's Rule of Faith, p. 117, 118.
You know any Man may find it confessed to his hand by Protestants. And
therefore you had reason to bethink your self of an Expedient to trick it off
again from that Point, Page 7.
and put Mr. G. to prove, That Protestants have no Absolute Certainty as to the
Rule of their Faith, viz. the Scripture. The Merits of this Cause too I think
will return hereafter more fitly; in this place I mind only the Art. Dr. St's
Second Letter, p. 14.
Pray, was not the very First Question at the Conference, Whether Protestants
are absolutely Certain that they hold now the same Tenets in Faith, and All
that our Savior taught to his Apostles? And your Answer that They are? Did our
Savior teach, and do Protestants believe no more, than that the Book so called
is Scripture? Is Certainty of this more, and Certainty of this Book all one?
And was not the Question plainly of the Certainty of this, and of All this
more? Here is then an Enquiry after one thing plainly turned off to another.
Yes; but this was one of the two things which the whole Conference depended
upon. As if the whole Conference did not depend on that thing which was to be
made manifest by the Conference, viz. the Absolute Certainty of Protestant
Faith. Mr. G. indeed did himself ask some Questions about your Certainty of
your Rule; Questions, whose course it was wisely done to cut off, before they
had questioned away your Certainty of Faith. For, after they had caused it to
be admitted, that the Certainty of Scripture is from Tradition, there was no
refusing to admit that Tradition causes Certainty, and makes Faith as Certain
as Scripture. And then it would have proved something difficult to satisfy
even a willing Man, that the Faith is Certain which is opposite to a Faith come
down by Tradition. But it was seen whereto it would come, and thought fit to
break off in time, and not let the Conference proceed too far. In the mean time
Absolute Certainty of Scripture was not the Point of the Conference nor is it
the Point of Concern. Besides that it is agreed on all hands, Men are Saved by
Believing and Practicing what Christ taught, not barely by believing Scripture
is Scripture: And Salvation is the thing that imports us in these Disputes, and
'twere well that nothing else were minded by Disputers. But it imported you it
seems both to shift off Proving from your self, and to stifle any further Talk
of the Certainty of Protestant Faith, and keep us from looking that way by
fixing our Eyes on another Object. And this is all you do; but with so much
Art, that I verily think many a Reader is persuaded you are talking all the
while to the purpose. The truth is, you have reason to carry it as you do; for
it is good to avoid undertaking what cannot be performed: And you cannot, and I
believe know you cannot make out, That Protestants are Absolutely Certain, that
they now hold all the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles,
as you affirmed in your Answer to Mr. G's first Question. And this I thought it
imported to tell you plainly and publicly, that it might be in your hands to
pin the Controversie-basket, and bring all Catholics to your Church; where I
will answer you will be sure to find us, if you make us sure we shall find this
Certainty there when we come.

6. In the mean time why has not Mr. G. done already as much as should be done?
It is plain that where Churches differ in Faith, Infallible Faith in one,
cannot stand with Certain Faith in the other. Wherefore if Mr. G. have fixed
Infallibility in his own Church, he has removed Certainty from all that differ
from her. Let us then take and sift Mr. G's Argument, even as you put it, who
had not, I suppose, partiality enough for him, to make it better than it was.
You put it thus, p. 4, 5.

7. All Traditionary Christians believe the same to day which they did
yesterday, and so up to the time of our Blessed Savior; and if they follow
this Rule, they can never err in Faith, therefore are Infallible. And you (Mr.
G.) proved they could not innovate in Faith, unless they did forget what they
held the day before, or out of malice alter it. And now,

That there may be no mistake, let us take each Proposition by it self.

8. The First is, [ All Traditionary Christians believe the same to day which
they did yesterday, and so up to the time of our Blessed Savior.] You have
nothing to say to this, I hope: For since Traditionary Christians are those who
proceed upon Tradition, and Tradition signifies Immediate Delivery, it follows,
that unless they believe the same to day which they did yesterday, and so
upwards, they cease to be Traditionary Christians, by proceeding not upon an
Immediate, but an Interrupted Delivery, or some other Principle. And so there
is no denying this Proposition, but by affirming that Traditionary Christians
are not Traditionary Christians.

9. The second Proposition is this. [ And if they follow this Rule, they can
never err in Faith.] This is palpably self-evident: For, to follow this Rule is
to believe still the same to day which they did yesterday: And so, if they did
this from Christ's time, and so forwards, they must still continue to believe,
to the end of the World, the self-same that Christ and his Apostles taught;
and, therefore, cannot err in Faith, unless those Authors of our Faith did:
Which that they did not, is not to be proved to Christians.

10. There follows this Inference: [ Therefore they are Infallible.] This is no
less plainly self-evident. For these words [ They can never err in Faith] in
the Antecedent, and [ They are Infallible] in the Consequent, are most
manifestly the self-same in sense, and perfectly equivalent.

11. The fourth and last (which according to you, aimed to prove, that they
could not innovate) is this. [ They could not innovate in Faith, unless they
did forget what they held the day before, or out of malice alter it.] And this
is no less unexceptionable than its Fellows. For, if they knew not they altered
Faith, when they altered it, they had forgot what they believed the day before.
If they altered it wittingly, excuse them from Malice who can; who, believing,
as all who proceed upon Tradition do, that Tradition is the certain Means to
convey the Doctrine of Christ, would notwithstanding alter the Doctrine conveyed
to them by Tradition, Pray what ails this Argument? and what wants it, save
bare Application, to conclude what was intended as fully and as rigorously as
you can desire? And, pray, what need was there to apply it to the Roman Church,
and say she followed Tradition, to you who deny it not either of the Roman or
Greek Church? As every thing is true, and every thing clear; who now besides
your self would have thought of an evasion from it? And yet you venture at one,
such as it is.

12. You tell us then, ( p. 5.) That you thought the best way to show the
vanity of this rare Demonstration, was to produce an Instance of such as
followed Tradition, and yet Mr. G. could not deny to have erred, and that was
of the Greek Church, etc. You had even as good have said, what Mr. G. says is
true, but yet he does not say true for all that. For to pitch upon nothing for
false, is, in Disputes, to own that every thing is true. The best way, say you?
I should have thought it every jot as good a way to have said nothing when one
has nothing to say. But yet the World is obliged to you for letting them know
what Scholars knew before, that Protestants think it the best way to answer
Catholic Arguments, to give them no Answer at all: For you are not to be told
that this Instance of yours is not an Answer to Mr. G.'s Argument, but a new
Argument against him of your own, which undoubtedly you might have produced as
well as my Lord Falkland, if you had been, as my Lord Falkland was, arguing.
But it is your turn now to answer. And must you be minded of what every
Smatterer in Logic knows, that an Answerer is confined to his Concedo, his
Nego, and Distinguo, as the Propositions which he is to speak to* are True,
False or Ambiguous? He may deny the Inference too, if he find more or other
Terms in the Conclusion than in the Premises. But these are his Bounds; and
Answering turns Babbling, when they are exceeded. Must you be minded that the
Business must be stopped before it come to the Conclusion, and that otherwise
there is no speaking against it? For you know that if the Premises be right,
and the Inference good, the Conclusion must be as necessarily. True, as it is
that the same thing cannot be, and not be at once; that is, must be more
certain than that England, for Example, shall not crumble into Atoms, or be
swallowed up in the Sea to morrow: For this, and a thousand such things may
happen to all material Nature; that a Contradiction should prove True, cannot.
And it is perfect Contradiction that Terms which cohere in the Premises, by
being the same with a Third, should not cohere with one another in the
Conclusion. Must you be minded that an Arguer is to prove his Conclusion, and
an Answerer to show he does not, by assigning where and how he fails? Do you do
any such matter? Do you so much as go about it? And would you have what you say
pass for an Answer? Pray consider the Case: The Church of Rome is Infallible,
says Mr. G.: She is not, say you. He brings his Argument, and you your Instance
against it. What are People the wiser now? and which shall they be for; the
Argument or the Instance? They have reason to think well of the Argument,
because you have no fault to find with it; and they may think as they please of
the Instance. You would not, I suppose, have them believe you both, and think
the Church of Rome for your sake Fallible, and, for his, Infallible at once.
Pray what assistance do you afford them to determine either way? And what do you
more than even leave them to draw Cuts, and venture their Souls as handy-dandy
shall decide, for you or Mr. G.? It Is true, when Zeno would needs be paradoxing
against the possibility of Motion, his Vanity was not ill ridiculed by the
walking of Diogenes before him. For 'twas palpably and ridiculously vain to
talk against Motion with a Tongue, that must needs move to talk against it. And
there may be vanity too in our Case, for ought I know: But where shall it be
lodged? Why more with Mr. G's. Argument than your Instance? Why is it more vain
to pretend to prove Infallibility, upon which depend the Hopes which Millions
and Millions have of a blessed Eternity, and which is proved by Arguments, to
which you think it your best way not to attempt to Answer, than it is to except
against a Conclusion, against the Premises whereof there lies no Exception?
That is, to find fault with a Sum Total, and find none in the particulars or
the casting up: For a Conclusion is a kind of Sum Total of the Premises. But it
is infinitely more vain to talk against one Infallibility, unless you will set
up another. For, if there be no Means, by which Men may be secured, that the
ways they take to arrive at their greatest and only Good will not deceive them
it cannot be expected they will take all the pains that are necessary to
compass that Good, which for ought they can tell, they may not compass with all
their pains. It Is a pleasant thing in you to talk of the vanity of Mr. G's.
Demonstration, when, by seeking to take Infallibility out of the World, you are
making the whole Creation vain. For all Material Nature was made for Rational
Nature, and Rational Nature requires Rational Satisfaction in all its
proceedings, and most of all in the pursuit of Happiness: And what Rational
Satisfaction can there be, if there may be Deceit in whatever can be proposed
for Satisfaction? In short, the Result of your Instance, whatever was the Aim,
it is to amuse and confound People, and hinder them perhaps from seeing what
otherwise would be clear; but it shows them nothing, nor can; for that Argument
of yours is not at all of a showing Nature.

13. It Is, at best, but an Argument (as they call it) ad hominem; which you
know are of the worst sort of Arguments. They serve for nothing but to stop an
Adversaries mouth, or shame him, if he cannot answer without contradicting
himself; but are of no use toward the Discovery of Truth. For a thing is not
the more or less True, because such a Man's Tongue is tied up for speaking
against it. But is it so much as an Argument ad hominem? As all the little
force of the Topic consists in the Obligation which a Man may have to grant or
deny what it supposes he does, it affords no Argument at all against the Man
who has no such Obligation. And pray where does it appear that Mr. G. is
obliged not to deny that the Greek Church has erred in matters of Faith? And
how can you, of all Men, suppose he is? You, who in your Rational Account ( p.
32.) quote these words from Peter Lombard; The Difference between the Greeks
and Latins, is in Words and not in Sense* Name Thomas a Jesus, and Azorius, and
tell us of other Roman Catholic Authors, of the same judgment, whom I suppose
you could name. Pray, how comes Mr. G. to lie under an Obligation, from which
Men of Reputation in his own Communion are exempt? And what a wise Argument ad
hominem have you made against him, whom your self have furnished with an
Argument ad hominem to confute it when he pleases? In fine, he goes to work
like a Scholar, puts his Premises, and infers his Conclusion, which you know
cannot but be True, if there be no Fault in his Premises: And it is for you to
find one when you can. You put nothing to show how the Inference you make
should be True, but barely assume, without proof, that he cannot deny it (p.
5.): As if Truth depended on his Denying or Affirming, and that what People say
or think, made things True or False. And even, for so much, you are at his
Courtesy: If he be not the better Natured, and will crossly affirm or deny in
the wrong place, you and your Argument are left in the lurch. In a word, one
may see he aimed at Truth, who takes at least the way to it: what you aimed at,
you best know; but no body shall ever discover what is, or is not True, by your
Method.

14. But that you may not complain, your Cock is not suffered to fight, let us
see what your Instance will do. You put it thus, ( p. 5.) The Greek Church went
upon Tradition from Father to Son, as much as ever the Roman did. And I desired
to know of Mr. G. whether the Greek Church notwithstanding did not err in
matters of Faith; And, if it did, then a Church holding to Tradition was not
Infallible. How! If it did? Why then it is apparent if it did not, your
Argument holds not. And will you assume that the Greek Church errs, who believe
she does not? Will you take a Premise to infer a Conclusion, upon which the
Salvation of People depends, which Premise your self in your own heart think is
not true? Can you deal thus with their Souls, who pin them upon you, persuade
them of what you are not persuaded your self, and offer them a Securiy for
their Eternity, in which your own judgment tells you there is a flaw? For you
have declared your self upon this Matter in your Rational Account, and taken
great pains to clear the Greek Church, at least upon the Article of the Holy
Ghost, in which consists their main difference with the Latins, and to which
the other two you mention were added, I suppose, for fashion sake. I know you
there propose to free that Church from the charge of Heresy. But pray what
difference betwixt Heresy and Error in matter of Faith? unless you will trifle
about Obstinacy, and such collateral considerations; which neither concern us
here nor were any part of your Defense there. I see too that you word it here
conditionally, and with reference to Mr. G's. Answer: As if his Answer made or
marred, and the Greek Church did or did not err, as he says, I, or No. Whatever
Mr. G. may say, or you have said, unless the Greek Church actually does Err,
your Instance is no Instance of a Church that goes upon Tradition and Errs; and
your Inference that then a Church holding to Tradition was not Infallible, is
wondrous pertinently inferred from the Example of a Church that errs not. Pray
take it well that I entreat you by all the care you have of your own Soul, and
should have of others, to manage Disputes about Faith a little otherwise, and
not propose Arguments, in which you must needs think your self there is no
force. For there is plainly none in this, if the Greek Church does not err; and
you at least think she does not. I am sure it is what I would not do my self for
all the World.

15. But to proceed to Mr. G's. Answer, ( p. 5.) It was say you, that the Greek
Church followed Tradition, till the Arians left that Rule and took up a new
one, etc. And why has he not answered well? You assumed that the Greek Church
erred while it went upon Tradition; If you did not, you said nothing; for, that
a Church may follow Tradition at one time, and leave it at another, is no news.
It Is the case of all erring Churches which ever followed Tradition at all. Mr.
G's Reply then that Tradition was followed till another Rule was taken up,
denies that Tradition and Error were found together, as you contended, in the
Greek Church. And pray what more direct or more full Answer can there be to an
Argument, than to deny the Premises? As slightly as you would seem to think of
him, he understood disputing better than to start aside into an Exception
against your Conclusion, but answers fair and home by denying the Assumption
from which you infer it; which now he has done, you know it rests with you to
prove it; and yet you never think on it, as far as I see; but, as if you had no
more to do, fall a complaining against Mr. G. for speaking of the Arians, and
not of the present Greek Church; and against his Copy, for leaving out the
Inference which you drew. In doing which, if he did so, he did you no small
kindness; there being no Premises to draw the Inference from, as has been shown
above; or if any, such as put you to contradict your own Doctrine ere any thing
could follow from them.

16. As for the omission of the Inference, I know not how it happened, nor mean
to meddle with matter of Fact. But I see they had reason, who observed before
me, that it is a thing of no manner of Consequence, I verily think, in your own
Judgment. Unless you think the Age we live in so dull, that, without much
hammering it into their Heads, it cannot be perceived, that if a Church has
erred which held to Tradition, a Church may err which holds to Tradition. Or,
unless you think it of mighty Consequence to have an Inference stand in the
Relation which fell with the Premises at the Conference. Mr. G. took them away
by his denial, and you must begin again, and bring something from whence you
may draw an Inference, if you will needs have an Inference; for an Inference
cannot be drawn from nothing. Pray divert us not perpetually from minding what
we are about; but remember the Question now is, Whether the Greek Church held
to Tradition and erred at once? and bethink your self, if you please of a
Medium, which will infer that Point for you; for Mr. G. you see denies it.

17. From his mentioning the Arians you take occasito speak big, and bear us in
hand he was hard put to it, and sought an occasion, and affirm ( p. 6.) you
could get no Answer at all to the Case of the present Greek Church. As if his
Answer pincht on the Arians, and were not as full to the present as past Greek
Church. It goes on this, That those who err in Faith, let them be who they
will, and the Error what it will, and in what Time and Place you will, all
leave Tradition. Whether the Case of the present Greek Church be the same with
the Arians, is matter of Fact, with which Mr. G. did well not to meddle; it is
for you to make it out, if you will make good your Argument. Modern or Ancient
Heresy is all one to his Answer, which is applicable to all Heresy: And you
complain of the want of an Answer when you have one. Pray, if a Man should put
an Objection to you about an Animal, for Example, and you answer it of all
Animals, would you think it just in him to quarrel with you for not mentioning
the Rational or Irrational in particular? And yet this is your Quarrel to Mr.
G. All your magnificent Talk ( p. 6.) of undeniably true, granted by Mr. G.
known to every one, etc. as apt as I see it is to make a Reader believe your
Instance is notoriously true, and against which Mr. G. has nothing to say,
cannot make me, or any Man of Reason, who examins the Point, believe he has any
Reason to say more, till you do. He has answered directly, and positively
denied, that Error and Tradition can be found together in the Greek Church, or
any other, modern or ancient. There it sticks, and you may drive it on farther
(it being your own Argument) if you please. Only when you tell us ( p. 6.) that
the present Greek Church in all its Differences with the Roman, still pleaded
Tradtion, and adhered to it, I wish you had told us whether you speak of
Differences in matter of Faith, or no. For Differences may be occasioned by
matters of Faith, which are not Differences in Faith. If you do not, you
support your Instance very strongly, and prove the consistence of Tradition
with Error in Faith very Learnedly, from Differences which belong not to Faith.
If you do, as Nature itches after strange Sights, I long to see by what
Differences, or any thing else, it can be made out, That an erring Church can
still plead Tradition, and adhere to it. Not but that for Pleading much may be,
there are such confident doings in the World. As certain as it is, that the
Religion in England now, is not the same which it was before Henry the Eighth,
I think there is confidence enough in England to plead Tradition for it. It Is
but finding some Expression in an ancient Writer, not couched with Prophetical
foresight enough to avoid being understood, as some will desire it should, and
it will serve turn to pretend to Antiquity, and bear the Name of Tradition. So
I suspect you take it your self, when you say the Arians insisted on Tradition:
For sure you do not think in earnest, that Doctrine contrary to
Consubstantiality, was taught by Christ, and believed from Father to Son till
the Council of Nice. This, or some such thing may perhaps have been pleaded;
but for adhering to Tradition, Your Servant. For, pray, did Christ teach any
Error? When a Father believed what Christ taught him, and the Son what the
Father believed, did not the Son too believe what Christ taught? Run it on to
the last Son that shall be born in the World, must not every one believe what
Christ taught, if every one believed what his Father believed? And will you go
about to persuade us, that there actually is a company of Men in the World who
adhered to this Method, all Sons believing always as their Fathers did, whereof
the First believed as Christ taught, and who notwithstanding erred in matters
of Faith? They would thank you for making this out, who would be glad that
Christ taught Error and were not God. But it is not plainer that Two and Three
make Five, than it is that this cannot be. And yet you would top it upon us,
and bear us in hand it is not only true, but apparent in the Greek Church, and
known to every body who knows any thing of it. The comfort is, there is nothing
for all these Assertions but your Word; in which, where you stick not to pass
it for an arrant Impossibility, I for my part do not think there is Absolute
Certainty.

18. I see not what there remains more, but to bear in mind where we are. At
the Conference, instead of answering Mr. G's Argument, you would needs make one
of your own, which was in short; The Greek Church goes upon Tradition and errs,
therefore another Church may err which goes upon Tradition. There was no need
to trouble the Greek Church for the matter: It had been altogether as
methodical, and as much to purpose, to have instanced in the Latin Church it
self, and never gone further; and shorter, to have spared Instancing too, and
have said without more ado, Mr. G's Conclusion is not true: For you do no more,
till you make it appear, that the Church you pitch upon for an Instance, does
indeed adhere to Tradition and err. But, because this had been too open, and
People would have sooner perceived that it had been to say, I know not how to
answer Mr. G's Argument, but will notwithstanding stand to it, that his
Conclusion is false, you thought the best way to divert the Reader's attention
from what is before him, was to travel into Greece; and yet when you come there,
do no more than if you had stayed at home: For you barely say there is both
Tradition and Error in the Greek Church, and you might have said as much of the
Latin; or, without mentioning either, have said, Though Mr. G. has proved a
Traditionary Church cannot err, I say it can and has. All is but Saying till
you come to Proving: Only to make a formal show with an Antecedent and a
Conclusion, you say it with the Ceremony of an Argument; of which since Mr. G.
denied the Antecedent, he had no more to do till you proved it.

19. So it stood at the Conference, and so it stands still, and for ought I
see, is like to stand: For though you have writ two Letters since, there appears
no word of Proof in either, or sign that you do so much as think on it: You
only say your Instance over again, and would have the Face you set upon it, and
great Words you give it, make it pass for plain and undeniable, when all the
while it is plainly impossible, and actually denied. Mr. G. I hope, will bide
by his Answer, because it is a good one, true in it self, and direct to the
Point: For it denies just what you assumed, That the Greek Church stood upon
Tradition, and fell at the same time into Error. And speaking as you do, or
should do, of Error in matter of Faith, Euclid never made any thing plainer
than it is, That where ever Error comes in, Tradition goes out. Of necessity
therefore, if the present Greek Church have adhered to Tradition, it has not
erred: If it have erred, it has not adhered to Tradition. Which of the two is
the Case, neither concerns Mr. G. nor can he dispute it without following bad
Example, that is, falling to Argue now it is his Part to Answer. You would pass
it upon us, that the Greek Church has erred without swerving from Tradition;
and you must either make it out, or acknowledge you have made much ado about
nothing: For your Instance is no Instance, till it appears to be true; Till you
do it, there is no Work for Mr. G.

20 At the close ( p. 7.) you desire Mr. G. to make good two things, and tell
us why you desire it, and what will follow if he accept or decline your Motion.
I neither understand how your Proposals follow from your Reasons, nor your
Consequences from your Proposals: But think it no more worth losing time upon
them, than you thought it worth boasting of the Victory. The First is, That we
[Protestants] have no Absolute Certainty as to the Rule of our Faith, viz. the
Scripture; although we have a larger and firmer Tradition for it, viz. the
Consent of all Christian Churches, than you [Catholics] can have for the Points
of Faith in difference between us.

21. I can tell you a better Reason for this Proposal than any you give. There
was no avoiding to own Absolute Certainty to a Man who talked of quitting your
Communion without it. But you knew well enough that your Absolute Certainty
would be thwittled into Sufficient Certainty, and Sufficient Certainty into no
Certainty at last; and had your Wits about you when you thought of this
Proposal: For it is in effect to say, This Certainty of Faith is a troublesome
matter, and not for my turn; Let us go to something else, leave Faith and pass
to Scripture; of which you, Mr. G. shall prove we have no Absolute Certainty:
For, if I should go about to prove we have, I foresee, that while I am seeking
harbor in my larger and firmer Tradition, I shall venture to split upon your
Infallibility, There can be no necessity supposed of any Infallible Society of
Men, either to attest or explain these Writings among Christians.
to contradict my 15th Principle for the Faith of Protestants, and fall at
unawares into the Snares laid for me in Error Nonplust, from p. 90 to p. 96,
which I have no mind to come near. But whatever Reasons you had to make this
Proposal, I see none that Mr. G. has to accept it. Do you prove, if you please,
that you have Absolute Certainty; you, who bear those in hand who consult you,
that you have; Dr. St. Principle 15.
and Absolute Certainty too of that of which you professed your self absolutely
Certain, viz. That you now hold all the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ
and his Apostles; Dr. St's Copy.
which by your own confession there, is the true Point. For you know very well,
one is not certain of his Faith by being certain of Scripture: Your self take
all who dissent from yours, to have not only an Uncertain, but a Wrong Faith,
else why do you dissent from them? And yet they have all as much Certainty of
Scripture as you. The truth is, if you were pressed to make out your Absolute
Certainty even of Scripture in your way, you would perhaps find a hard Task of
it, for all your Appeal to Tradition. But it was not the Point for which the
Conference was, nor ought it be the Point here, neither ought Mr. G. to meddle
with it, and you trust much to his good Nature to propose it: For, besides that
all the thanks he would have for his pains, would be to have the Arguments
against your Certainty, turned against the Certainty of Scripture one day, as
if he did not believe Scripture Certain: You would have him undertake a matter
in which he has no concern, to save you from an Undertaking in which you are
deeply concerned, but with which you know not how to go through; which is a very
reasonable Request. In a word, it is for you either to make manifest now, what
you should have made manifest at the Conference, viz. That Protestants have
Absolute Certainty, not only of the Scripture, which they call their Rule, but
of the Faith which they pretend to have from that Rule; or else to suffer
another thing to be manifest, viz. That I said true when I said you cannot do
it; and thither I am sure it will come.

22. However, I am glad to hear any Talk from you of Absolute Certainty, even
though it be but Talk: It Is a great Stranger, as coming from your Quarters, and
has a friendly and an accommodating look, and therefore for both regards
deserves a hearty welcome. For, this very Profession makes a fair approach
toward the Doctrine of Infallibility, or rather it is the self-same with it; it
being against Common Sense to say you judge your self Absolutely Certain of any
thing, if at the same time you judge you may be deceived in thus judging. But I
accept the Omen that you seem to grant you are thus Absolutely Certain, or
Infallible, by virtue of Tradition; for this makes Tradition to be an
Infallible Ascertainer in some things at least; and, so, unless some special
difficulty be found in other things that light into the same Channel, it must
needs bring them down infallibly too. Now I cannot for my heart discern what
great difficulty there can be to remember all along the yesterdays Faith, or to
be willing to be guided and instructed by their yesterdays Fathers, Teachers
and Pastors; especially the sense of the Points (to omit many other means)
being determined by open and daily Practice. Yet I a little fear all this your
seeming kindness for Tradition, is only for your own Interest; and that,
because you were necessitated to make use of it to abet Scripture's Letter, you
allow it in that regard, these high Complements; but in other things,
particularly in conveying down a Body of Christian Faith (which is incomparably
more easy) it will presently become useless and good for nothing. In the
former exigency you esteem it A worthy Rule, but in the later duty, A Rule
worthy --

23. Now to let the Reader plainly see that it was mere Force, and not
Inclination, which obliged you to grant an Absolute Certainty in Tradition
conveying down Scriptures Letter, we will examine what you allowed it when you
laid your Principles, and so spoke your own free thoughts unconstrained by any
Adversary: Your fifteenth Principle is put down ( p. 90.) in Error Nonplust,
and that part of it that concerns this present Point, is thus reflected upon by
your Adversary ( p. 92, 93.) [ Again, tho all this were true, and that the
Scriptures were owned as containing in them the whole Will of God so plainly
revealed, that no sober Enquirer can miss of what is necessary to Salvation, and
that therefore there needed no Church to explain them: Yet it is a strange
Consequence, that therefore there can be no necessity of any Infallible Society
of Men to Attest them, or to witness that the Letter of Scripture is right.
This is so far from following out of the former part of Dr. St's. Discourse,
that the contrary ought to follow; or, from prejudicing his own pretense, that
it conduces exceedingly to it. For certainly his Sober Enquirer would less be
in doubt to miss of what is necessary to Salvation in case the Letter, on which
all depends, be well attested, than if it be not; and most certainly an
Infallible Society of Men can better attest that Letter than a Fallible one:
and those Writings can with better show of Reason be owned to contain in them
the Will of God, if their Letter be attested beyond possibility of being wrong,
than if left in a possibility of being such; for if the Letter be wrong, All is
wrong in this case -- ] As manifest then as it is, that to be Absolutely Certain
of any thing, is not to be Fallibly Certain of it; that is, as manifest as
it is, that to be Absolutely Certain of a thing, is to be Infallibly Certain of
it; so manifest it is, that you there contradict your self here, and, that,
however you may endeavor to come off, you allow not heartily, nor without some
regret and reluctance, an Absolute Certainty to Tradition, even in Attesting
Scripture's Letter.

24. In these words of yours ( p. 7) [ As to the Rule of our Faith] give me
leave to reflect on the word [ OUR,] and thence to ask you, who are YOU? A
Question which I ask not of your Name or Surname, but of your Judgment (as you
call it) of Discretion. Are you a Socinian, an Arian, a Sabellian, an
Eutychian, etc. or what are you? Are you a whole, or a half, or a
Quarter-nine-and thirty-Article Man? Do you take them for Snares, or Fences,
and when for the one, and when for the other, and wherefore? These words [ The
Rule of OUR Faith] make you all these at once; for all these profess
unanimously Scripture's Letter is their Rule of Faith. Mr. G. when he came to
your House, imagined he was to treat with a Protestant, or something like it,
and to have learned from you what Absolute Certainty you would assign for your,
(that is, Protestant) Faith; and you give him only a Generical Latitudinarian
Rule, common to all the Heresies in the World. The Project of the Comprehension
Bill was a trifle to this: It brings into one Fold all the most enormous
Straglers that have been since Christ's time, nay Wolves, and Sheep and all. It
blends into one Mass the most heterogeneous and hitherto irreconcilable Sects.
Nay, it miraculously makes Light and Darkness very consistent, and Christ and
Belial very good Friends. For your own Credit sake then distinguish your kind
of Protestants (if you be indeed one of that Church) from that infamous Rabble
of stigmatized Heretics; and let us know what is the Proper Difference that
restrains that Notion of a Common Rule to your particular, as such a kind of
Protestant, and show us that specifical Rule to be Absolutely Certain. I say,
such a kind; for even the word Protestant too is a Subaltern Genus, and has
diverse Species, and it is doubted by many, who are no Papists, under which
Species you are to be rankt. But, why should I vex you with putting you upon
manifest Impossibilities? For the Letter being the common Rule to them all,
and, as daily experience shows us, variously explicable, that which
particularizes it to belong specially to this or that Sect, as its proper Rule,
can be only this, [ According as my self, and those of my Judgment understand
or interpret it.] The Difference then constituting your Protestant Rule, as
distinguished from that of those most abominable Heresies, can only be [ as my
own Judgment, or others of my side, thus or thus interpret Scripture's Letter]
and wriggle which way you please, there it will and must end at last. Go to
work then, distinguish your self by your Ground of Faith, and then make out
this your proper Rule to be Absolutely Certain or Infallible; and then, who
will not laugh at you for attempting it, and assuming that to your self, which
you deny to God's Church, and preferring your self as to the Gift of
Understanding Scripture right, before the whole body of those many and Learned
Churches in Communion with Rome? Nay, and before the Socinians too; without so
much as pretending to make out to the World, that you have better Means, either
Natural or Supernatural, to interpret those Sacred Oracles, than had the others.

25. My last Exception is, that you pretend the Letter of Scripture is a Rule
of Faith for your People, which not one in a Million, even of your own
Protestants relies on, or ever thinks of relying on, in order to make choice of
their Faith, or determining what to hold. This pretense of yours looks so like
a mere Jest, that I cannot persuade my self you are in earnest, when you
advance such a Paradox. For, it is manifest that while your Protestants are
under Age, and not yet at years of Discretion to judge, they simply believe
their Fathers and Teachers; that is, they follow the way of Tradition, however
misplaced. And, when they come to Maturity, pray tell us truly, how many of
your Sober Enquirers have you met with in your life, who endeavor to abstract
from all the prejudices they have imbibed in their Minoriy, and, reducing their
inclined thoughts to an equal Balance of Indifferency, do with a wise
Jealousy, lest this Popish way of believing immediate Fathers and Pastors
should delude them, as it has done the whole World formerly, resolve to examine
the Book of Scripture it self, read it attentively, pray daily and fervently,
that God's Spirit would discover to them, whether what they have learned hither
to be true or no, and what is; and, in a word, use all the Fallible means (for
you allow them no other) which your Sober Enquirers are to make use of to find
out their Faith? I doubt, if you would please to answer sincerely, you would
seriously confess you scarce ever met with such a one in your life; that is,
never met with any one who relied upon Scripture's Letter practically for his
Rule of Faith, whatever you may have taught them to talk by rote. Can any Man
of Reason imagine, that all the Reformed in Denmark or Sueden (to omit others)
did light to be so unanimously of one Religion merely by means of reading your
Letter-Rule, and your Sober Enquiry? Or can any be so blind, as not to see,
that it is the following the natural way of Tradition, or Childrens believing
Fathers (that is, indeed, of Education) that such multitudes in several places,
continue still of the same persuasion; and that you consequently owe to this
way, which you so decry in Catholics, that any considerable number of you do
voluntarily hang together at all? And that those Principles of yours, which you
take up sor a show, when you write against Catholics, would, if put in
practice, in a short time crumble to Atoms all the Churches in the World?
Perhaps, indeed, when your Protestants come at Age, they may receive some
Confirmation from their Fathers and Preachers, quoting Scripture-places against
what Catholics hold, or what they shall please to say they hold; and by the
same means come to believe a Trinity, the Godhead of Christ, Christ's Body
being absent in the Sacrament, and such like; but do the Hearers and Learners
make it their business to use all careful disquisition (for a slubbering
superficial diligence will not serve the turn in matters of such high Concern)
whether the Catholics, and those great Scripturists, who deny those other
Points, do not give more congruous explications of those places than their own
Preachers do? unless they do this, or something equivalent, it is manifest the
Letter of Scripture is not their Rule, but honest Tradition. And that they do
no such thing, is hence very apparent, that they rest easily satisfied, and
well appaid with their Parson's interpretation of Scripture, they presently
accept it for right and good, and readily swallow that sense, which some
Learned Men, of their own Judgment, assign it, without thinking themselves
obliged to observe your Method of Sober Enquiry. You may rail against the
Council of Trent, as you will, for forbidding any to interpret Scripture
against the Sense which the Church holds; but it is no more than what your
Hearers perpetually practice, and the Preachers too (for all their fair words)
expect from them. And I much doubt even your self (though your Principles are the
most pernicious for taking matters out of the Church's, and putting them into
private Hands, of any Protestant, I ever yet read) would not take it very well
if some Parishioner of yours, presuming upon his Prayers for Direction, etc.
should tell you that you erred in Interpreting Scripture, and that the Sense he
gave it, was sound and right Faith, yours wrong and Heretical; and I would be
glad to know what you would say to him, according to your Principles, if he
should hap to stand out against you, that he understands Scripture to be
plainly against a Trinity and Christ's Divinity, as John Biddle did against the
Minister of his Parish, and the whole Church of England to boot. It Is plain you
ought to cherish and commend him for standing firm to his Rule; But I am much
afraid you would be out of humor with him, and esteem your self affronted. You
may pretend what you please of high Expressions given by Antiquity, of
Scripture's incomparable Excellency, and Sufficiency for the Ends it was
intended for, which we do not deny to it; but I dare say, even your self does
not think, that either the Ancient Faithful, or the Modern Reformers, meant
that any of the Ecclesia credens, or Believing Church, should have the liberty
to Interpret Scripture against the Ecclesia docens, or Teaching Church, i. e.
Pastors; or Coin a Faith out of it, contrary to the present or former
Congregation of which he was a Member.

26. The sum is; It Is evident hence, that Tradition of your Fathers and
Teachers, and not Scriptures Letter, is indeed your Rule; That by it you
Interpret Scripture; which then only is called your Rule, and made use of as
such, when you are Disputing against us; because having thus set it up, to
avoid and counterbalance the Authority of the former Church you left, you make
account your own private Interpretation of it may come to be thought
Argumentative against the great Body of those Churches from whose Communion you
departed; and yet you judge no private Parishioner should claim the same
Privilege against you, without affronting your great Learning, and Pastoral
Authority. But I much wonder you should still venture to call Scripture's
Letter a Rule of Faith, having been beaten from that Tenet so pitifully in
Error Nonplust, from Page 59. to Page 72. where I believe you may observe
diverse Particulars requisite to be cleared e're the Letter can be in all regards
Absolutely Certain, which the Consent of all Christian Churches will never
reach to by their mere Authority, unless you will allow the Sense of Christ's
Doctrine descending by Tradition, did preserve the Copy substantially right and
entire.

27. Your pretended Rule of Faith then, being in reality the same that is
challenged by all the Heretics in the World, viz. Scripture's Letter
Interpreted by your selves; I will let you see in this following short
Discourse, how far it is from being Absolutely Certain.

I. God has left us some Way to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught.

II. Therefore this Way must be such, that they who take it, shall arrive by it
at the End it was intended for; that is, know surely what Christ and his
Apostles taught.

III. Scripture's Letter Interpretable by Private Judgments, is not that Way;
for we experience Presbyterians and Socinians (for example) both take that Way,
yet differ in such high Fundamentals, as the Trinity, and the Godhead of Christ.

IV. Therefore Scripture's Letter Interpretable by Private Judgments, is not
the Way left by God to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught, or
surely to arrive at right Faith.

V. Therefore they who take only that Way, cannot by it arrive surely at right
Faith, since it is impossible to arrive at the End, without the Means or Way
that leads to it.

28. I do not expect any Answer to this Discourse, as short as it is, and as
plain and as nearly as it touches your Copyhold; it may be served as Mr. G's
Argument is, turned off so so with an Instance, if there be one at hand; or,
with what always is at hand, an Irony or scornful Jest, your readiest, and, in
truth, most useful Servants: But you must be excused from finding any
Proposition or Inference to deny, or any thing, save the Conclusion it self:
Which, though it will not be fairly avoided, I cannot hope should be fairly
admitted, unless I could hope that Men would be more in love with Truth than
their Credit. Till Truth be taken a little more to heart, Catholic Arguments
will and must always be faulty; but they are the most unluckily and crosly
faulty of any in the World; faulty still in the wrong place. When fault is
found in other Arguments, it is always found in the Premises; in these, it is
found in the Conclusion: In which, notwithstanding, all who know any thing of a
Conclusion, know there can be no fault, if there be none in the Premises.
Indeed, they show that to be true which Men cannot endure should be true; and
that is their great and unpardonable fault. That you may not think I talk in
the Air, I declare openly, that you cannot Answer this Discourse, unless you
will call some unconcerning Return an Answer; and I engage my self to show the
Proposition true, and the Inference good, which you shall pitch upon to deny;
And the Distinction, if you will make any, not to purpose. The truth is, I
engage for no great matter; for I know beforehand you can no more Answer now,
than you could to Error Nonplust, or can prove an Absolute Certainty in
Protestant Faith.

29. To return now to Mr. G. the Second thing which you desire him to make
good, is, That the Tradition from Father to Son is an infallible Conveyance of
Matters of Faith, notwithstanding the Greek Church is charged by him with
Error, which adhered to Tradition. That is, you desire him to prove over again,
what you tell us your self he has proved once already: For you tell us ( p. 5),
he proved, That they [Traditionary Christians] could not innovate in Faith,
unless they did forget what they held the day before, or out of malice alter
it. Pray, when it is proved, that the Conveyance of Faith by Tradition,
excludes the possibility of Change in Faith, save by forgetfulness or malice,
is it not proved, That, where there could be neither forgetfulness nor malice,
there could be no change in Faith? You do not, I suppose, desire he should
prove, that Men had always Memories, or that Christians were never malicious
enough to damn themselves and Posterity wittingly; and yet it can stick no
where else: If it can, said Mr. G. assign where. Now you know very well, that a
Conveyance which makes it impossible that Faith should ever be changed, is an
Infallible Conveyance; and the very thing is proved which you desire should be
proved. What reason has Mr. G. to prove it a second time? And what reason have
you to desire it? If Proof would content you, you have it already; but a second
cannot hope to content you better than the first, unless it be worse.

30. Yes, but you would have him prove, Notwithstanding the Greek Church etc. (
p. 7.) Notwithstanding? Why do you think it is with Arguments as with Writs,
where the want of a Non obstante spoils all? When a Truth is once proved, is it
not proved, notwithstanding all Objections? And will any Notwithstanding
unprove it again? Will your Notwithstanding show us there was a time in which
Men were not Men, nor acted like Men? Will it show us, that a thing which
cannot possibly be changed, may yet possibly remain not the same? Will it show
us, that a Cause can be without its Effect, or an Effect without its Cause?
Will it show us, that a thing can be and not be at once? Unless it can do such
Feats as these, you may keep your Notwithstanding to your self, for any Service
it will do you here: For all the Notwithstandings in the world cannot hinder a
thing which is true, from being true; nor the Proof which proves it to be true,
from being a Proof. Mr. G's Proof shows, that Tradition from Father to Son is
an Infallible Conveyance of Faith as plainly as that Men are Men: And would you
persuade us with the Rhetoric of your Notwithstanding, that we do not see what
we see? Though you had brought twenty of them instead of one, we could see
nothing by them, but that you had a good Fancy; for they show us nothing of the
Object, nor offer at it. You show us not how the Operations of Human Nature
should be suspended in our present Case, nor any thing which should or could
suspend them, but would have us believe Men were prodigiously forgetful or
malicious, purely for the sake of an Imagination of yours. I pray rub up afresh
your old Logical Notions, and reflect whether it were ever heard of in
University Disputes, that when an Argument is advanced, the Defendant is
allowed to make Objections against it; and instead of Answering, bid the Arguer
prove his Conclusions to be true, Notwithstanding all his Objections? Consider
how perfectly this confounds the Offices of the Disputant and Defendent, and
makes all Regular Discourse impossible. Consider how this new Method of yours
destroys the very possibility of ever concluding any thing that is, the very
Faculty of Reasoning; For Objections being generally multipliable without end,
if all of them must be Solved e're any Argument concludes, nothing will be
concluded, nor any Conclusion admitted: And so a long so Farewell to Rational
Nature. Consider that Truth is built on its own Intrinsecal Grounds, and not on
the Solving Objections. For your own Credits sake then with Learned Men and
Logicians, do not seek to evade with Notwithstandings, but Answer fairly and
squarely to the Argument as it lies: Consider, that who has found the Cause,
has found the Effect. Mr. G. has found us a Cause of Infallible Conveyance, and
therefore has showed us an Infallible Conveyance. You pretend, that though there
was the Cause, there was not the Effect; and this it is known beforehand cannot
be, and you knew it as well as any body: But you knew likewise there was no
saving your Stakes without playing a new Game; and therefore, give you your
due, did all that could be done, in trying to divert our sight from a Matter
plain before us, and amuse us us with a Matter of Fact, which you are sure will
be obscure enough, by that time it is handled long enough. The Terms you put,
viz. Tradition, Error, and the Greek Church, must needs bring into Dispute,
whether such and so many Quotations, or some one or two Men disclaiming their
Tenet to be a Novelty, be a Proof of Tradition from Father to Son; whether the
Error be any Error; and whether, and for how much, an Error in Faith, and how
much of it belongs to Divinity; whether the Greek Church be engaged by a
Citation from a Greek Author; of two that be cited, one against another, which
shall be preferred, and thought to speak the sense of his Church; and which is
a Latiniz'd, which a frank Grecian. And who shall see through the Mists which
these Disputes will raise? More too will fall in in process of time: There will
be wrangling about the sense of Words, the propriety of Phrases, the preference
of Readings, and twenty such important quarrels; which will tire out every
body, and satisfy no body. In short, you saw that if you could persuade People
not to think the Church of Rome Infallible, till all be said, which will occur
to be said of the Greek Church, you are safe enough; For Doomsday will come
before that day. Till then you may carry it with a show of Erudition, because
there must be abundance of Greek cited. And this is all which can come of your
Instance; and I wish it were not all you had in your Eye.

31. In the mean time you have not answered Mr. G. because you have found no
fault in any Proposition, or in the Inference of his Argument; and therefore it
rests with you to answer it. He has answered you; because he has found this
fault with your Instance, which you make your Antecedent, that it is not true;
and that the Greek Church did not at once err in faith, and adhere to
Tradition: and therefore it rests again with you to prove it; and yet while you
are Debtor both ways, you call upon him to pay. Ere we part, Take this along
with you, that the Debt which you are precisely bound to satisfy, first is to
answer his Argument, and till you do this, you can claim no right to Object or
Argue.

I am SIR Your humble Servant.


