A LETTER from The Author of Sure-footing, to his Answerer.
SIR,
I Am certainly informed there is an Answer to my Book intended, and a Person
chosen out for that Employment; whose Name I am unconcerned to know, it being
only his Quality as a Writer I have to do with. I receive the Alarm with great
cheerfulness; knowing that, if my Adversary behaves himself well, it will
exceedingly conduce to the clearing and settling the main point there
controverted. But, because there is difference between being called an Answer
and being an Answer, and that it is extremely opposite to my Genius, to be task't
in laying open men's Faults even as Writers, (though it has been my unhappiness
formerly to meet with Adversaries, whose way of writing made that carriage my
only duty) wherefore to prevent, as much as I am able, all occasion of such
unsavory oppositions, and to make way to the clearing the point, that so our
Discourse may redound to the profit and satisfaction of our Readers, I make
bold to offer you these few Reflections; which in effect contain no more but a
Request you would speak to the point, and in such a way as is apt to bring the
matter nearer a clearing. This if you please to do, you will very much credit
your self and your endeavors in the opinion of all ingenuous persons. If you
refuse, and rather choose to run into Rhetorical Excursions, and such Discourses
as are apt to breed new Controversies not pertinent to the present one under
hand, you will extremely disparage both your self, your party and your Cause,
and give me an exceeding advantage against them all; I shall also have the
Satisfaction to have manifested beforehand by means of this Letter, that I
have contributed as much as in me lies to make you avoid those Faults, which I
must then be forced to lay open and severely press upon you, little to your
Credit nor your Causes neither; You being (as I am inform^d and Reason gives
it) signally chosen out as held most able to maintain it.

2. That there may be no more distance between us than what our Cause enforces,
I heartily assure you that though I highly dislike your Tenets negatively
opposite to what we hold Faith, and the Way of Writing I foresee you must take
(unless you resolve to love Candor better than your Cause) as being
Inconclusive and so apt to continue not finish debates, yet I have not the
least pique against yours or any man's Person. Nor have I any particular
aversion against the Protestant party; rather I look upon it with a better eye
than on any other Company whatever which has broke Communion with the Catholic
Church: It preserves still unrenounc't the form of Episcopacy, the
Church Government instituted by Christ; and many grave Solemnities and
Ceremonies, which make our Union less difficult: Many of their soberest Writers
acknowledge diverse of the renounced Tenets to be Truths: some of them also
profess to hold Tradition, especially for Scripture's Letter; and even for
those Points or Faith-Tenets in which they and we agree; that is, where their
Interest is not touched. I wish they would as heartily hold to it in all other
Points which descended by it, and look into the Virtue it has of ascertaining,
and declare in what that Virtue consists; I am confident, a little candor of
confessing truly what they find, joined with an endeavor of looking into
Things rather than Words, would easily make way to a fair Correspondence. I
esteem, and even honor the Protestants from my heart for their firm Allegiance
to his Sacred Majesty and his Royal Father; This uniting them already with all
sober Catholics under that excellent notion of good Subjects, and in the same
point of Faith, the Indispensableness of the duty of Allegiance we owe our
Prince by Divine Law. Lastly I declare, that for this as well as for Charitable
Considerations, I have a very particular zeal for their reconcilement to their
Mother Church; and that it is out of this love of Union I endeavor so earnestly
to beat down the wordish and dissatisfactory way of Writing, and go about to
Evidence the Ground of all our Faith; knowing, that, as wounds are never
connaturally and solidly cured, by uniting the distant sides at the surface,
and leaving them disunited and unheal'd at the bottom, but the cure must begin
there first; so, the only Way to heal the Wounds of the Church, is to begin
first to win some to acknowledge the most radical and bottom-Principle of all
Faith, as controverted between us; without which all agreement in particular
points must needs be unsound and hollow-hearted. This is my only aim in
Sure-Footing. That therefore you may not obstruct so good a work, and withal
perform the duty of a solid and candid Writer, I offer to your self and all
ingenuous Readers these few Reflections: not sprung from my Will (for what
Authority have I to prescribe you your method) but from true Reason working
upon the Thing; which makes it just duty in you, and so ought oblige you to
follow it.

3. In the first place, since the scope of my whole Book is about the First
Principle in Controversy, or the Ground of all Faith, as to our Knowledge; that
is, about a Point antecedent to all particular Points; I conceive it reasonable
you should let your Discourse stand firm to the matter in hand, and not permit
it to slide into Controversies about Particulars. For so, it is evident, we
shall be apt to multiply many words little to our present purpose. On what
conditions you may have right to allege Particulars as pretended Instances of
Traditions failing, shall be seen hereafter.

4. Next, I desire you would please to speak out Categorically, and declare
whether you hold Faith absolutely Certain to us, or else Possible to be false
for any thing we know. To explicate my self better, that so I may void some
common and frivolous Distinctions, my intent is to demand of you in behalf of
the Christian Reader and his due satisfaction, whether you hold Gods Providence
has laid in the whole Creation any Certain means, by way of Proper Causes to
such an Effect, to bring down Faith truly to us, and whether we can arrive at
Certain Knowledge of those means, that is, come to see or know the Connection
between such Causes and their Effect spoken of. I make bold to press you
earnestly to this declaration; and my reason is, because nothing will more
conduce to the Conclusion of our present Debate: For, in case such Causes be
laid and can be seen by us, then they are Evident or Demonstrative Reasons for
the Ground of our Faith's Certainty: But, if no such Causes be laid, or being
laid, cannot be seen by us, then all the Wit of man can never avoid the
consequence, but that we can have only Probability for all our Faith; that is,
for any thing we absolutely know, it is all as false as an old wife's tale;
since there are no degrees in Truths and Falsehoods. If you advance this Civil
piece of Atheistry, you must pardon me if I be smart with you in opposition to
so damnable and Fundamental an Error: I love Christianity and Mankind too
well to suffer that Position which destroys effectually the Root of all their
Eternal Happiness, and the Substance of all their Hope, to pass unstigmatiz'd,
as it deserves. Nor think to avail your self by some Discoursers in our
Schools, It will be shown, when pressed, that they are still preserved good
Christians through the virtue of Tradition which they all hold to,
notwithstanding their private speculations: but you not, because of your want
of Certain Grounds, to make you rationally hold Christ's Faith. They only
mistook a Word, whereas you will be found to err in the whole Thing, or the
ordinary Means to true Christianity.

Again, if such Causes be fitting to be laid by God's Providence, it is
impossible to avoid the Doctrine proposed in Sure-Footing, because it is
absolutely Impossible to invent any thing that looks like such Causes, but
those which are delivered there; nor did any other Way ever attempt to show any
such. Whence I foresee your Cause will force you to fly for refuge to the
actual Uncertainty, or possible Falsehood of all our Faith for any thing any man
living knows by ordinary means. A sad consequence of an erroneous tenet! But
it is connatural, and, so to be expected, such Effects should follow the
renouncing the Rule of Faith.

5. Thirdly, I conceive it very reasonable that you would please to declare
whether Controversy ought to have any First Principle or no; If none then to
speak heartily out, and confess that Controvertists are Certain of nothing they
say, since their discourse has no Ground or First Principle to rely on. If any,
whether Tradition be It; or, if it be not, what else is; and then vouch (as
plain reason tells us you ought) that what you assign has truly in it the
nature of a First Principle, which common Reason gives to be self-evidence. Or,
lastly, to profess (if you judge it your best play) that, what you substitute
in stead of Tradition, though it be a First Principle, yet it need not be at
all self-evident. Any thing shall content me, so you will but please to speak
out, and to the point.

6. Again, since it is evidently your task to argue against Tradition's
Certainty, it is as Evident that while you argue against it, you must bear your
self as holding It uncertain; I conceive then plain Reason obliges you not to
produce any thing against Tradition which depends upon Tradition for its
Certainty; for, in doing so you would invalidate and even nullify all your own
proofs: Since, if Tradition be held by you uncertain, and they have no
certainty but by means of It, they must be confessed Uncertain too; and so they
would be incompetent to be produced as proofs, and your self very dis-ingenuous
to produce them: I add self-contradicting too, and Unskillful; Nature and
Aristotle teaching us, that a Discourser ought not sustain contrary to himself.
Hence plainest Reason excludes you from alleging any kind of Testimony, either
from Scripture, Councils, Fathers, or History, till you answer my Corollaries
12, 15, 16. which pretend to demonstrate the Certainty of all these dependent
on Tradition's; and the only way to show my discourses there to be weak, is to
manifest my mistake by declaring into what other thing your Certainty of those
Testimonies is finally resolvable, which is not coincident with Tradition* When
you produce such a Principle, and prove it such, you have right to allege the
foresaid Testimonies, for then you can make good their Authority: Till then,
you can have no right in true reason to do it. Not only, because till then you
are to be held a Renouncer of that Thing's Certainty upon which there are
pretended demonstratious against you Theirs is built; and those presumed true
ones, because you let such strongest Attempts pass unanswered; but very
particularly for this Consideration that our present matter restrains you from
it: For, our discourse is about the Ground of that Authority which ascertains
to us Faith; which therefore is antecedent to the notions of Faith, Faithful,
Church, Councils, Fathers, nay and creditable History-books too; since those
rely on Tradition (taken at large) for their Certainty, as is evident by plain
reason, Coroll. 16, 24. which devolves into this, that Tradition is FIRST
AUTHORITY, and so not proovable or disproovable by any other secondary
Authorities, but ought to be impugn'd by pure Reason. But, if you think fit to
grant this Certainty to Tradition taken at large, yet deny it to Christian
Tradition, which has, besides its Human force, most powerful Divine Motives
also to strengthen it; please to speak it out, and the strange unreasonableness
of the position will quickly be made appear. Or, if you grant Christian
Tradition Certain in bringing down those common Points in which we agree, yet
Fallible, nay actually erring, in bringing down to us those other points which
we were found holding upon Tradition when you left us, and for which, as
grievous Errors, you pretended to leave us; please to declare in what you hold
the virtue of Tradition consists, ascertaining to us both those common points,
and how we come to know Tradition is engaged for them; which done, it will
quickly appear whether its ascertaining virtue has its Effect upon some, and
not others; or on all. Unless you do this, your very admittance of Tradition's
Certainty in some, overthrows you without more ado: for, to acknowledge it
argumentative for the Certainty of some, grants it a virtue of Ascertaining,
which therefore you are obliged to grant in all, unless you give the reason of
your Exception: otherwise to admit it when your Interest is not touched, and
reject it when it opposes you, is plainly to confess that Tradition is able to
certify, yet that you admit it when you list, and reject it when you list.

7. Being informed then by Evident Reason, that no kind of Authority but only
the way of Reason is a competent Weapon to fight against Tradition with; I have
three things to propose to your Thoughts on this occasion, which I hope will
sound reasonable to any intelligent man by the very mentioning. First, that you
would not allege such Argumments as strike as well at the Constancy of every
Species in Nature, especially Rational Nature; that is, such natural Mediums as
tend to destroy all Natural Certainty. Secondly, that your objections be not
foreign, or fetched from afar of; for these are multipliable without End, and
apt to be suggested by Fancy upon every not-seeing the coherence of some other
remote (whether real or conceited) Truth, with the Tenet we aim to impugn; but
that they be immediate and close, that is, taken out of the Intrinsecal Nature
of the Thing; For so, they will be more forcible and by consequence be apt to
do your Cause much service; and unless they be such, they will do it none: For,
in regard my whole process is grounded on the nature of the Thing, as appears
by my Transition, and every Logician knows that remote and common
considerations are liable, for any thing we know, to be connected or
not-connected with the point we would apply them to, because we see no
Connection but what is Immediate; it follows that it is a very incompetent and
dissatisfactory way to impugn an Adversary who endeavors all along to frame
his discourse out of the Intrinsecal Nature of the Thing, by remote, or
unimmediate, that is, indeed, Unconnected Mediums. The third thing I request
is, that you either grant that no Argument or Reason is Conclusive,
Obliging-to-Assent, or Satisfactory, but what is either Proper (at least
Necessary) Cause or Effect; or else show us out of Logic that other Mediums
have this virtue, and how they come to have it. This way of procedure will give
me a great respect for you as taking honestly the Way which is apt to clear
Truth; and you will have this Satisfaction to your Conscience that you have
endeavored it to your power by following the best method you could imagine to
give your Cause its due advantage, in case it can bear that Test; that is, in
case it be Truth. And, if it cannot bear it, that is, if it be no Truth, it is
your own best Advantage by this strict procedure to have discovered it. Your
Judicious Readers also that look seriously for satisfaction, will rest much
edified and thankful for your pursuing that Method which is likely to save
them a great deal of fruitless pains in reading multitudes of books writ in a
loose way, whence no Conclusion or Satisfaction is likely to result.

8. My fifth request, and I hope it is just and reasonable, is this; that, if
you conceive your Discourse has made good the Certainty of Written Authorities
or quoted Testimonies, without Tradition, (which I see is impossible,) and
hence you make account you have title to produce them against Tradition's
Certainty, (That being the matter in hand) and therefore you resolve to pursue
the way of Citing Authors; you would then be pleas^d to vouch your Citations
to have truly in them the nature of Testimonies; that is, to be built on
Sensible Knowledge, and not on Speculative, or Opinion in the Author alleged,
and that they fall under none of Dr. Pierce's faulty or Inconclusive Heads; or
else show they are Conclusive though thus Faulty, which is done by confuting my
Grounds laid in my First Appendix.. 6, 7, 8. Or, lastly, to declare, that
though thus Faulty and Inconclusive they ought still to be alledg^d; and to
give your reason for it; which, heartily spoken out, I am sure will be this,
that you must either produce such, or none. I hope all our ingenuous Readers
will think me very reasonable, who am well contented with any thing which is
spoke out expressly and declaratively of what method or way of Satisfying you
take; and only desire you would not quote and speak confusedly and in common,
as if you meant to persuade your Readers that your discourse has in it some
strange force taken in the bulk, though you will vouch no one particular piece
of it to be Certain; or, as if you supposed their reasons were to be amazed and
stupify'd merely at the venerable Names of Authors and the solemnity of a
diverse-letter'd, or diverse-languag'd quotation, without clearing to their
Judgments the virtue by which such Citations can pretend to have force able to
subdue their understandings to Assent, or (which is all one) satisfy them. If
you refuse to do me reason in this point, and still resolve to pursue the
huddling together Testimonies without warranting their Certainty by showing
upon rational grounds they must be such, I shall declare beforehand to my
Readers, that I must be forced to do right to my self; which is, to rank all
your Testimonies under Dr. Pierce's Faulty Heads, and so let them go as they
are.

9. Particularly, I beg the Justice of you not to think to over-bear me with
the conceived Authority of other Divines resolving Faith in their Speculative
Thoughts after another manner than I do: since this can only tend to stir up
Invidiousness against my person (which yet their charity secures me from) and
not any ways to invalidate my discourse. For, every one knows it is no news
Divines should differ in their way of explicating their Tenet, which they both
notwithstanding hold never the less firmly; and every learned man understands
that the word Divine, importing a man of Skill or Knowledge in such a matter,
no Divine has any Authority but from the Goodness of the Proofs or Reasons he
brings and on which he builds that Skill. Please then to bring, not the empty
pretense of a Divines Authority or Name to oppose me with, and I shall freely
give you leave to make use of the Virtue of their Authorities, that is their
Reasons against me as much as you will. I easily yield to those great
discoursers, whoever they be, a precedence in other Speculations and
Knowledges, to which they have been more addicted, and for which they have been
better circumstanc't; In this one of the Ground of Faith, both my much
Practice, my particular Application, my Discourses with our nations best Wits
of all sorts, my perusing our late acute Adversaries and the Answers to them,
with other Circumstances; and lastly, my serious and industrious studying the
Point, joined with the clearing Method God's Providence has led me to, have
left me (as far as I know) in no disadvantage. What would avail you against me
and our Church too (for my Interest as defending Tradition is indissolubly
linkt with Hers) is, to show that our Church proceeds not on Tradition, or that
in Her Definitions She professes to resolve Faith another way rather than mine,
or (which is equivalent) to rely on something else more firmly and fundamentally
than on Tradition. But the most express and manifold Profession of the Council
of Trent to rely constantly on Tradition, has so put this beyond all possible
Cavil on my side, that I neither fear your Skill can show my Grounds in the
least subcontrary to hers, nor the Goodness of any Learned and considering
Catholic (however some may conceive the Infallibility of the Church placed ad
abundantiam in something else) will or can ever dislike it. I expect you may go
about to disgrace my Way as new: But I must ask, whether you mean the substance
of it is new, or only that it is now deeper looked into and farther explicated
than formerly: If you say the former, my Consent of Authorities (p. 126, 127,
etc.) has clearly shown the contrary; and common sense tells us no other way
was or could be possibly taken (for the Generality of the Church at least) in
Primitive times till Scripture was published universally and collected: If the
later, please to reflect, that every farther Explication or Declaration, as far
as it is farther, must needs be new; and so, instead of disgracing us, you most
highly commend our reasons for drawing consequences farther than others had
done before us. Again, if it be only a farther Explication, it is for that very
reason not-new; since the Sense of the Explication is the same with the thing
explicated; As it is only an Explication, then it is not-new; as farther, it is
indeed new, but withal innocent, nay commendable. But there are three things
more to be said on occasion of this objecting Catholic Divines; One is, that,
taking Tradition for the living voice of the present Church as I constantly
declare my self to do, not one Catholic does or can deny it; for he would eo
ipso become no-Catholick but an Arch-heretick; and this all acknowledge. In the
thing explicated then, that is, in the notion of Tradition all agree with me
(and consequently in the Substance of my Explication) nor can any do otherwise,
except they be equivocated in the Word Tradition and mistake my meaning, which
I conceive none will do wilfully after they have read here my declaration of it
so unmistakably laid down. The second thing is, that an Alledger of those
Divines will only quote their Words as Speculaters, not those in which they
deliver themselves naturally as Christians or Believers; which Sayings were
they collected, we should find them unanimously sounding to my advantage, and
not one of them oppositely. And, lastly, speaking of our Explication as to its
manner, Divines contradict one another in other kinds of Explications, but not
one Author can be alleged that expressly contradict^ this which I follow.

10. My sixth request is, that you would speak to the main of my Book, and not
catch at some odd words, on the by as it were: Otherwise, understanding Readers
will see this is not to answer* but to cavil.

11. And, because we are (I hope) both of u^ endeavoring to clear Truth (I am
sure we ough^ to be so) therefore, to acquit your self to you^ Readers that you
ingenuously aim at it, I conceive you will do your self a great deal of right
and me but reason, nay (which is yet weightier) do the common Cause best
service, if you will join with me to retrench our Controversy a^ much as we
can. Let us then avoid all Rhetorical Digressions and Affectations of Witty and
fine Language; which I have declined in my whole Book, and chosen a plain
downright manner of Expression, as most suitable and connatutural to express
Truth. Likewise all Repetitions of what particulars others have said or
answered before us, such as are the Objections made by that ingenious person,
the L. Faukland, and the Answers given them in the Apology for Tradition;
unless it be conceived those Solutions are insufficient, and Reasons be offered
why they are judged so. For I conceive it an endless folly to transcribe and
reprint any thing others have done before us, except it be Grounds which ought
to be often inculcated and stuck to; and those particulars which we show to be
not yet invalidated, but to preserve still their strength. Much less do I
suspect it can fall under the thought of one who aims to discourse rationally
(such my Answerer ought to be) to rake together all the filth and froth of the
unwarrantable Actions or Opinions of some in the Church, or to run on endlesly
with multitudes of invective and invidious sayings on his own head without
proof; and then apply them to the Church, as does the Disswader. It would also
very much conduce to the bringing our differences to a narrower compass if you
would heartily take my Book endwayes, and declare what in it is evident, and so
to be allowed, what not: What Principles are well laid or Consequences right
drawn; and what are otherwise: To requite which favors, I promise the same
Carriage in my Reply to you. By this means it will be quickly discovered
whether or no you have overthrown my Discourse by showing it ill coherent, and
how far it is faulty; that, if I cannot clear it to be connected, I may confess
my fault and endeavor to amend it. For, however I see my Grounds Evident, yet
I am far from judging my self Infallible in drawing my Consequences; though I
see withal the method I take, will not let me err much; Or, if I do, my Error
will be easily discoverable; because I go not about to cloud my self in words,
but to speak out as plain as I can from the nature of the Thing.

12. In the next place I earnestly request you, as you love Truth, not to
shuffle of the giving me a full Answer, nor to desist from your Enterprise (as
I hear a Certain person of great esteem for his learning and prudence has
already done) though you find some difficulty where to fasten upon the
Substantial part of my discourse. There are perhaps many difficult passages
which my Shortness forced me to leave Obscure; These will naturally occasion
mistake, and Mistake will breed Objections to impugn me with. Please, if others
fail, to make use of those at least. It Is no discredit in you to mistake what is
obscure; rather it argues a fault in me (did not my circumstance of writing
Grounds, and only to Scholars, excuse me) that I left it so; To make amends
for which I promise you to render it clear when I see where it pinches you or
others. And on this score, I owe very particular thanks to Mr Stilling-fleet,
that by speaking clearly out his thoughts, he gave me a fair occasion to open
that point he impugn'd, I think, upon mistake of our Tenet.

13. If you think fit sometimes to argue ad hominem, be sure what you build on
be either our Churches Tenet or mine; for I am bound to defend nothing else. If
then you quote Fathers, first, see they speak as Fathers, that is as Believers
and Witnessers; for so it is evident our Church means them by her Expressions in
the Council of Trent; as also did Antiquity. For both of them constantly
allege and stand upon Traditio Patrum, not Opinio Patrum: Next, see you bring
Consensus Patrum, or an agreement at least of very many of them speaking as
Witnesses, otherwise you will not touch me nor our Church; for she never
abetted them further. In case you bring Councils, it would be very efficacious
you would choose such Testimonies (if you can find them) as I brought from the
Council of Trent; that is, such in which they declare themselves (or the
Circumstances give it) they proceed upon their Rule of Faith: For, otherwise,
every one knows that Bishops in a Council have in them, besides the Quality of
Faith Definers, those also of Governors, and of the most Eminent and solid
Divines in God's Church. If Scripture, you must make Evident the Certainty of
your way of arguing from it, ere I or our Church shall allow it argumenative.
Thus much for Authority. If you oppose me by my own Principles or Discourses of
my Reason, I must defend my self as well as I can. One thing on this occasion,
I must mind you of; it is this, that though you should conquer in this way of
arguing ad hominem, you only conquer me as a Discourser, by showing that I
contradict my self; not my Tenet: for to prove that false, you must fix your
foot and build your discourse on some Certain Ground; which barely my holding
it (on which your discourse ad hominem relies) cannot make it. You must build
then on some Grounded Truth if you will go about to overthrow a pretended one.
Indeed, if you can show Tradition contradicts her self, you will do more than
miracle, and so must conquer. But I fear not the Gates of Hell, much less Man's
wit can prevail against that impregnable Rock. Only, I beseech you bring not
as Parallels against our Tradition in hand, which is a vast and strong stream,
other little petty rivulets sprung originally from the Sensations of two or
three: For, then, as one side was liable, in a thing not known publikly, to
belly their Senses; so the conveyance down of such slight built Attestations
may easily be self-contradictory. In a word, if you will argue, take first into
your Thoughts the nature of the Thing you argue against, and then fall to work
as soon as you will. Now, if you should chance to say you hold the Sayings of
Fathers and Councils (some at least, to be Certain, my Reason tells me from
Principles, that, having renounced Tradition which only could ascertain them,
rational nature in you will not let you have any hearty conceit of their
Convictiveness, whatever you pretend; but that you rawly allege them, and so
let them go with a valiant quantum valere possunt. That therefore we may have
some security more than your bare word (which Experience tells us is now
affirmative now negative in this point, as it best suits your Interest, or,
after a pretty Indifferent manner, half-one-half-tother) that your profession
of holding to such Authorities is not hollow-hearted but rooted in your Reason,
it is just your Readers should expect you would declare in what the virtue of
Certifying consists, and that They have this virtue. This if you do, you acquit
your self to go to work solidly, and you offer us fair play in giving us some
hold of your Reason, whereas a common Expression gives none. This Procedure
also will show, when applied, whether you are Justifiable or no for admitting
some Authorities of that nature and rejecting others.

14. My last request is, that, if in the course of your Answer you think fit to
complain of me for bringing History and other Proofs heretofore commonly
without more ado admitted, into Incertainty: please to amend the fault you
find, and settle their Certainty on some better Principles than I have
endeavored. In the mean time it is Evident my whole Book ayms at settling the
Certainty of all Authority, by evidencing the Certainty of First Authority;
upon which the Assuredness of History, Fathers, Councils, Church, Faith, nay
Virtue or Christian Life must all be built. This is my way; if you judge it
incompetent to do the Effect spoken of, be pleased to manifest it Unfit and
show us a Better.

15. Perhaps I may have demanded more of you in some particulars than is due
from the strict duty of merely answering: in the Schools, a bare denial, or
distinction is enough for a Respondent. But I conceive we are not on these
terms: in regard we are not met face to face, where the returns of the one to
the other can be quick on every occasion. This obliges us, for the Readers
satisfaction, to enlarge our selves and bring reason for every thing we affirm
or deny, lest we should be thought to do it gratis. And, your case here, is
particularly disadvantageous: For, if you go about to overthrow that on which I
aim to show the Certainty of all Authority built, and yet declare not on what
your self hold them built, and, by your faithful promise to show it shortly,
give them strong hopes you will perform it; you send them away very much
dissatisfied either with you or with all the Authority in the world, though
built on Sensitive Knowledge: Of which it being impossible Rational Nature
should permit them to doubt, they must needs dislike your attempt, and have an
ill conceit of your performance.

SIR, I understand, to my exceeding Satisfaction, that multitudes of the most
Eminent, Solid and Ingenuous Wits of our Nation have been diligent perusers of
my Book. Consider, their eyes are upon you while you Answer; I am confident
they will judge I have requested no more of you in this Letter, but what is
reasonably due to their and my satisfaction; and so, will look your Answer
should be correspondent. They are weary of endless Contests about Faith; and,
seeing we are not now controverting the signification of some ambiguous
Testimony, but penetrating deep into the very bowels of a point which is of the
greatest concern in the whole world; and pursuing (in a method likely to
decide) the clearing of it, their expectations are very much erected and
attentively observing what will be the issue of this rational combat. Frustrate
not their desires to see Truth manifested by bringing the Question back from
the plain open field of Evidence-in-our-method, to a Logomachy or word-skirmish
in a Wilderness of Talk, out of which the Thread of Grounds or Principles had
disentangled it. To them therefore as well as your self I address this;
requesting those of them who are acquainted with my Answerer, to press him to
do himself, me, the world (his Cause too, if it can bear it) the right due in
Reason, and here demanded, This Sir, if you will perform, I shall lay aside the
remembrance of the Justice I have to it, and look upon it purely as a Favor
and most obliging Civility to him who is, next to Truth's,

Your Friend and well-wisher, J. S.
Feb. 6 th 1665.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF you complain of this Fore-stalling as Unusual; as long as it is rational you
can have no reason to do so: and it will appear such to him that considers it
was an unusual Circumstance occasioned it. It Is this: I had endeavored to
bring Controversy from an Endless to a Conclusive Way: and both my Reason and
Experience made me apprehend my Protestant Answerer would have such strong
Inclinations to bring it bac^ into the way of quoting and glossing Testimonies
(that is, into a wordish scanning a great part of all the Libraries in the
World) that a slender touch at it in my Book was not forcible and express
enough to oblige him to take notice of it. Having communicated therefore my
thoughts with intelligent and ingenuous persons, both Catholics and
Protestants, and received their approbation, I resolved, and pursued it as you
see; And I hope the manifold Usefulness of it (as shall be seen what way soever
now you take upon you of answering) will sufficiently justify my Action.

FINIS.

