TWO TREATISES. The First of the VENEREAL POCKS: Wherein is showed, I. The Name
and Original of this Disease. II. Histories thereof. III. The Nature thereof.
IV. Its Causes. V. Its Differences. VI. Several sorts of Signs thereof. VII.
Several ways of the Cure thereof. VIII. How to Cure such Diseases, as are wont
to accompany the Whores Pocks.


THE SECOND TREATISE OF THE GOUT, 1. Of the Nature of the Gout. 2. Of the
Causes thereof. 3. Of the Signs thereof. 4. Of the Cure thereof. 5. Of the
Hip-Gout or Sciatica. 6. The way to prevent the Gout


Written in Latin and English.

By Daniel Sennert, Doctor of Physic. Nicholas Culpeper, Physician and
Astrologer. Abdiah Cole, Doctor of Physic, and the Liberal Arts.


LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the Sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1660.

Culpepers WORKS

SENNERTUS WORKS.

Sennertus of the Gout and Pocks.

Sennertus Natural Philosophy.

OF THE FRENCH POX.
CHAP. I. Of the Name and original of the Veneral Disease.
AMongst contagious diseases, next to the Pestilence, and Leprosy of Arabians,
the French Pox does challenge the first place; but it is called by several
names: The Names of the french disease;
the most common name is the French Pox, which was therefore imposed, because
it first of al in Europe appeared amongst the French. For in the year of our
Lord 1493. and 1494. When Charles the Eighth, King of France, waried with King
Alphonsus at Naples, this disease first appeared and began to rage in the Camps
of the French, and therefore by the Italians was first of al named the French
disease. For whereas Antonius Benivenius de abdit. morb. cause. cap. 1. relates
that it happened in the year of our Lord 1496. that doubtless is thus to be
understood, That now this disease did no longer contain it self in Italy, but
as he speaks, had almost spread over al Europe, and began to diffuse it self
abroad through the rest of its provinces; for all other Authors agree in this,
that this disease did first of al appear at the foresaid time in the French
Camp at Naples, The French Disease. The Italian. The Neapolitan. The Spanish
The Indian.
and there was called the French disease. But the French that they may remove
this disgrace from themselves, and retort the injury upon the Italian, call it
the Italian, and Neapolitan disease, because it was first known in Italy at
Naples. Others because it was brought by the Spaniards into the Fench Camp, call
it the Spanish disease, and others the Indian, for the writers of the Indies do
report that in that part of America, whose longitude ends toward the North,
and which they call Florida, this disease many ages ago was epidemical; and they
write that it did generally invade, and suddenly seize on many without any
manifest cause, without contagion, and especially if any one had copulation
with a woman in the time of her Courses. Fracastorius calls it Syphilis, some
the gout of the privicies, Syphilis; Pudendagra. The great Pox. The Veneral
Diseawses Whether it be a new Disease.
some the great Pox, because pustles and swellings do every where break forth
like those of the small Pox. Most men now adays without any injury or disgrace
to any Nation, do call it the Veneral disease, because it is chiefly contracted
by a contagion from Venery, and lying with unwholesome bodies.

But Authors are wont here to make this Quaerie, Whether that diseawse sprung
up at Naples about the year 1494. were a new disease, or whether it were known
to the Ancients? Franciscus Vallesius. 1. Epidem. com. 1. And Hieron Rusnerus
de Scorbuto exercit. 1. and the some other moderns, are of opinion this disease
was unknown to the ancients, and they think that Hippocrates did not shadow it
out by his pencil, but set it forth to the life in 3 Epid. Sect. 3. (they are
the words of Reusner) whenas he reckons up there diverse symptoms, which are
seen in the veneral disease; as imposthumations and suppurations of the flesh,
the lying bare of the nerves and bones, and great fallings forth, fluxions
collected not like unto matter, but far worse, a baldness of the head and chin,
with and without a Fever, St. Anthonies fire with small Ulcers and inflammation,
filthy and putrid fluxes, pains of the limbs, swellings about the jaws,
inflammations of the tongue, impostumations, about the teeth, stammering,
corrupt, and perplexed speech, enterings into consumptions, burning Fevers, and
which is worst of al, ulcers about the pubes and privities.

But Hippocrates in that place never so much as dreamed of the Veneral disease,
but describes a most grievous pestilence, according to the judgment of Galen
and al interpreters, and the evidence of the History it self witnessing the
same. For that disease for the most part invaded with a Fever, which is not so
in the Veneral disease and was epidemical, whenas the Veneral disease is
disseminated only by contagion, and no other way, and the method of curing that
disease was far different from the cure of the veneral.

Dodoneus also has observed upon the alleged place of Benivenius, that a long
time ago some men have contracted some hurts from unclean and filthy women,
as Guilielmus Salicetus, Gordonius, and Vallescus de Taranta, do testify, the
last of which lived in the year 1418. but Salicetus flourisht in the year
1270. Gordonius in the time between them both. Nay holy writ does testefy that
he that follows harlots, shall have worms and moths for his reward: but I do
not think that those diseases were the same with the Veneral disease of this
time which first of al appeared at the aforesaid time in Italy in the Camp of
the French. Therefore though Paracelsus, lib. de tumorib. et ulcer. morb. Gal.
cap. 3. Writes that this happened in the year 1478. The Original of the Veneral
disease.
and lib. 1. de causa luis Gal. cap. 3. In the year 1480. yet he differs from
the relations of al others, since al agree in this, that this disease was not
known in Europe, before the year of our Lord 1493. although it were endemious
in the west Indies a long while before, and was brought by the Spaniards out of
India into Italy. For when Christopher Columbus in the year 1492. in the month
of September undertook his first voyage into the west Indies, and spent almost
two years in that expedition, he returned into Spain in the year 1494. whose
Soldiers being infected with that disease in India, and afterward serving in
the Italian expedition, did sow amongst them this disease. For as Gabriel
Falopius writes of this business de morb. Gal. lib. 1. (Who reports his Father
was in that war) whenas the Spaniards by reason of the deareness of provisin
did drive out the unserviceable multitude, the French did privately entertain
their harlots, being allured by their beauty, and so infected with their
contagion contracted this disease, which afterward was first of al spread
through their camps, and hence throughout Europe.

Yet in some Countries it has and does yet spread more frequently, in others
it is more rare, to enquire into the cause whereof, it being a thing hateful we
shall forbear; yet this I think is certain, that there are fewer sick of this
disease in Germany, than in some other Countries. Gabriel Fallopius makes
mention de morb. Gal. cap. 76. Of Jacob Carpus, who was the first almost that
used the way of cure by unction of Quicksilver, who by this cure alone grew so
rich, that he left befides Silver, 40000. Golden A Coin.
Scutatces. And Capivaccius reports in tractat: de lue Vener. cap. 12. In fine,
that he has gotten by the cure of the French Pox only above 18000 Crowns of
Gold. And L. Septal. l. 7. animad: n. 186. writes that at Millaine in Brolius
Hospital, there is oftentimes cured seventy in the spring only, and at other
seasons always two hundred. But I confess ingeniously, that within these 34
years which I have practiced at Witeberge, and by Gods blessing I do it not
without profit, that I have not gained by the cure of this disease so many
Crowns, as Capivaccius has got thousands of them, by reason of the fewness of
them that are sick of this disease in this place.

Yet others differ concerning its original, and think that this disease was not
only disseminated by contagion from the Spaniards, but think it was contracted
by the fault of the Air, as epidemick diseases are; when as many every where in
diverse countries began to be sick of this disease without any contagion; of
which hereafter.

Chap. II. A History of the Veneral Disease.
BUt concerning the original of this disease we shall speak more hereafter when
we shall treat of its causes: now let us enquire into its nature, which that it
may succeed more happily, and that it may appear, where lies the controversy,
i^ will first propound its description and history out of creditable Authors
which then lived especially Hieron Fracastorius, and Anton. Benivenius. When
this disease was first made known, there rose pustles of diverse kinds in the
genital parts, sometimes also the head, principally in the hairy part, sometimes
also the forehead, neck, breast, duggs, arms, and other parts, and from thence
did spread over the whole body, in some indeed they were flat and low, but rough
on their surface, when the scales were fallen off, of a color somewhat red, and
the flesh under them appeared callous; in others they were like to warts, of a
round figure, which grew to the magnitude of an acorn cup whose figure also
they resembled, and from these the lighter scales fulling off did hang forth a
more tuddy flesh, from which did flow forth a virulent in^^r and of a strong
smell; but some were taken with larger pustles, which did ^otswel above the
skin, which had thicker scales, from which also did flow a more pleu^^ful
virulent matter, and the scales being cast, the flesh appeared more dark and
somewhat livid. Some having white scales taken off there remained somewhat like
unto a skar, from which blood sometimes flowing, did show the difficulty of the
cure, and it represented the likeness of a dry scabb, a disease worse than all the rest. For though it did corrode less, yet for spreading it was worse than
the rest, and was diffused into diverse places. Besides those external pustles
there did rise others in internal places, as in the mouth, jaws, nose, and the
obscene parts, which turned to malignant and creeping ulcers which eat away the
parts under them, and in some eat up the Nose, in others the lips, in others
consumed the Uvula, and perforated the palate, which caused their voice to be
hoarse; neither did this evil spare the bones, but caused rottenness in them,
whence some had their skul, others other bones full of holes. Neither did those
pustles and signs of the disease appear only in the external parts obvious to
the eye, but it was observed in some, that those pustles and filthy ulcers had
possessed their very bowels. They that had this evil about their upper parts, had
vicious distillations, which did sometimes eat their palate, sometimes the jaws
and consills, in some their nose, and in others their eyes. Furthermore for the
most part certain gummosities grew on their limbs in great deformity. For
oftentimes they were prominent the bigness of an egg, oftentimes the size of a
Loare, which being opened, there appeared a white mucilagmous mucous: that
tenacious callus, happened most of al in the Arms and Thighs, in some it was
exulcerated, sometimes it continued whole until their death. There came also
cruel pains with exceeding torment, which were exasperated toward night: but
those pains did show themselves about that part of the bones where is no flesh
in the Legs, shoulder blade, about the collar-bone, in the shoulders, head,
about the forehead and temples, sometimes also in the breast bone, but not in
the very joints, but about the muscles and nerves. In which case
notwithstanding there was great variety. For some had pains without pustles,
some pustles without pain, the greatest part was affected with both, and truly
those pains sometimes went before the pustles, sometimes followed, and sometimes
rose together with them: in the interim al parts languished, the body pined
away, the appetite was dejected, watchings, sadness, and continual anger, and
desire of repose possessed them; sometimes a small Feavor accompanied them, but
seldom: their blood, if a Vein were opened, was mucous, and corrupt, their
urine thick, fat, and somewhat red without a Feavor, they went hardly to stool,
and the excrements were mucous and dry. The shedding of the Hait is frequent in
this Disease, especially in the Head, about the Temples, and the hinder part,
also of the eybrows, and of the beard in men; oftentimes also Buboes break
forth in the groin, therefore called Veneral and Gallical, which sometimes
vanish again, sometimes grow hard, sometimes suppurate; there rise also in the
privities of Women knobs, and in men in their Arie-hole, besides sometimes there
happen chops and clefts in the hands and feet, and the thick Skin in the palm
of the hands departs from the skin under it; sometimes also the nails fall off:
At last there happens sometimes, that in men a virulent matter flows through
their yard, in women through their privities, which flux of virulent matter is
commonly called the Gallical or virulent running of the reins, although indeed
it is not feed, by which flux of the y^rd, the inward passage is exulcerated,
and certain caruncles do grow in the urinary passage, whence they piss ^ot,
and there is caused a dropping of the urine with pain. And this was the face of
that disease at its first fise, which as Hieron Fracastorius relates, since that
time seems to be altered. For almost twenty years after its original there
began to appear fewer pustles, but more gumoseties, and the pustles became
dryer, and the pains more cruel. Six years after again there was another
change, for now there were very few pu^^les seen, and almost no pains, or much
gentler, but many gumoleties, and which seen^ed wonderful in all, the shedding
of the hair made men almost ridiculous, some appearing without beard, some
without hair on their eyebrowes, others with bald pates, from which change
Fracastorius had good hopes, and did think that the old age of this disease was
now entering, and that ere long it would come to pass, that it could not
propigate it self by contagion, because the matter grew daily ^^icker, in which
both fewer, and weaker seminaries are produced: but his hope did much deceive
him, and this disease last even in these times, nay as some think, it is
wel^nigh worse than it was of old.

CHAP. III. Of the Nature of the Veneral Disease.
SInce then so great a Hodge-podge of diseases and Symptoms appear in this
affect, we must diligently enquire what the nature of it is, of which diverse
Authors have their diverse opinions, and as Epiphanius Ferdinandus writes of
this business, in Hist. Med. Hist. 17. the Authors which have writ of this
Disease, although they amount to the number of eighty (and perhaps more) are al
almost differing concerning the Ess^^ce of this Disease, and every one defines
it at his own pleasure; for whenas this Disease was unknown to the Ancients,
nor described by them, nor they had not, The Veneral diseas, is from an occult
quality.
as is usually wont to be, the opinions of the Ancients to insist upon, every
Modern using his own liberty has proposed his own Opinion. Truly I think this
is not doubted, that it is a Contagious, Malignant and Venenate Affect; neither
does it seem to want any great pains to prove it, for it appears sufficiently
by this, that in so small a quantity of matter, by which this Disease is
contracted by contagion, there is so great force and power of action, as no
first quality, or the temperament made up of the first qualities can have; and
the variety of Diseases and Symptoms in this evil is so great, that it cannot
be reduced to any manifest cause; therefore as in pestilent constitutions, such
as that A^tick one was in Thucidides, and that which Hippocrates has
described, 3. Epid. there was so great a multitude of evils, that they were
forced to fly to occult qualities and a venenate cause; so also, there being so
great a filth of diseases and symptoms in the Venerous Disease, that the
original of them all cannot be referred to any manifest quality, here also we
fly to a malignant and occult quality.

But although these things be thus, yet Authors differ still of this, What it is.
whether that malignity consist only in the cause, or whether there be also
some malignant Disease present. Capivaccius, de Morb. Gal. Cap 1. thinks this
affect not to be the Disease, but the cause, while he defines the Veneral
Disease, Capivaccius opinion
that it is an excrement wholly preternatural, ab^e to hurt man many ways,
produced out of humane substance by its like.

Thus also Hercules Saxonia, de lue Vener. Cap. 1. writes, Hercules Saxony.
that the Veneral Disease is the Cause, not the Disease nor the Symptom,
therefore, because it can exist our of man's body in Linen, or other such kind
of virtues, besides in the sweat, Seed, and Blood, being separated from the
body; but within man's Body it infects and poss^sses also those parts which are
not living and are not subject to Diseases, viz the humors and spirits.

Aurelius Minadous de virulentia Vener. holds that it is neither the disease,
Aurelius Minadous.
nor the cause, nor the symptom; nor the disease for this cause cap. 17.
because it is neither a distemper, nor evil Composition, nor a solution of
unity: but he denies it to be the cause of the Disease, Cap. 9 since that is
properly the preternatural, the cause between which and the Action there falls a
medium, viz. the disease whenas the disease is that which does next of al hur
the Action, but the cause does hurt it by intervention of the Disease; but
between the Veneral virulency and the action hurt he thinks there falls no
medium, but that of it self by its own strength does promarily and immediately
vitiate and hurt the operations; but that the Veneral virulency does of it self
and primarily hurt the operations, he thinks this is confessed am^ngst
Physicians, and therefore deems it to be presupposed, and unless this virulency
did of it self and primarily hurt the operations, so many Physi^ans would no
have labored in searching out its nature. He proves it is no Symptom, Cap 18.
be^^^e it is no action hurt, nor quality changed, nor excrement altered That it
is no action hurt, he proves by this, because the veneral vitule^cy it sel^^is
that which hurts the actions; neither is it any qu^lity changed because the
qualities changed to follow the actions hurt, and besides so many diseases are
seen in this virulency which are not Symptoms. But Aurelius Minadous himself,
when he had rejected a^^ne opinions and definitio^s of others, at length he
fi^s himself to make a per^ect definition and to explain the nature of this
evil. But first of al Chap. 16 he pre^uppores this as the ground of his
opinion, viz that the French Disease ought not to be defined by a quality, but
rather by the name of a body, for this reason, because it passes from one body
to another, which is the propriety of bodies not of qualities, and because it
touches other bodies, for none but bodies can touch, and be cough^ again, as
Lucretius has it. Again, if it were a quality, it were either mani^est, or
occu^^, no manifest one, as he proves rightly by many Arguments; but that it is
no occult quality he brings no special Argument, but repeats the general one,
because it is moved from place to place, and touches other bodies.

This presupposed, afterward Chap. 30. he affirms the Veneral virulency to be
somewhat corporeal internal, and truly a spirit or a vapor, for this reason,
because it is carried, commuicated, and participated in a very short space of
time. Yet he holds it to be such a vapor which is endewed with an occult
quality and ve^^ue from its whole substance, or the whole mode of its nature, by
reason of which quality it cannot only infect any humors of the body, but also
al parts of the body, and corrup^ them and turn them to its own likeness: but
that this evil consists in a spiritual substance, he further proves, because
some are infected not only by the act of Venery, but also by a Kiss, or the use
of garments: next of al, because some have felt no other hurt from this evil,
than only the falling of their hair, because the ^oots of the hairs were gnawed
off by the acrid vapors. Thirdly, because some only by vehement exercise have
discussed this virulency. Yet he denies that vapor or spirit to be properly an
excrement, Chap. 20. whenas that is properly an excrement, which redounds from
nourishment, and which is cast off from another: although he grants there that
is commonly called an excrement, whatsoever is superfluous in the body, whether
it be a spirit, or humor, or some other solid body, whether it be usual, or
unusual, whether according to nature or preternatural; furthermore he holds
this vapor to be wandering, thin, and viscid, Chap. 21. and to be raised from a
spirituous, humorous, solid substance: but he proves Chap. 22. by many
Arguments that this vapor is contrary and preternatural by its whole substance,
of which we shall speak hereafter; and at last Chap. 27. he desines the Veneral
vitulency, that it is a vapor by its whole substance inimicous to the natural
faculty, working by degrees. And that he might unfold his mind more clearly,
and not leave the Reader doubtful, to what kind of things preternatural this
vitulency ought to be referred, when as he had said before, that it was neither
the Disease, nor the cause, nor the Symptom, yet it primarily hurt the
actions; at length Chap. 28. he holds that it is an external error, and he
endeavors to prove it by this Sylogisme, whatsoever does primarily hurt the
operation, and is not of the constitution of the body, is an external error,
but the Veneral virulency does primarily hurt the operation, and is not of the
constitution of the body, therefore it is an external error.

Some that they may briefly quit themselves, and hold with all men, say that
this disease is a heap of al evils, Diseases and symptoms.

That we may clear our selves out of this difficult controversy, The Veneral
disease depends on an occult quality.
first of al it is already proved, and shall be proved more at large hereafter,
that they are in the right, who do here admit of an occult quality, and a power
depending on the whole substance, as they commonly speak; neither can they hold
any other ways, Since it is without doubt, that it is a contagious and malignant
disease while it is such. I^ performs two things, to wit, it alters the body
by which it is received and changes it to its own similitude, and indeed it
alters it not by the first qualities: as shall be said by and by, since it is
not expeld by the first qualities; neither is that change always with
putrefaction, whenas putrefaction is not induced but by a long time, but this
change is made in a moment as it were; neither is it an adustion as John
Baptista Montanus, and some others do h old, whenas there is not always a hot
and dry distemper present, neither is it cured by cooling and moistening
things, and oftentimes there is a fordid putrefaction, in which there is no
exustion.

But whereas they hold this malignity is only in that matter seated without the
living parts, It Is a disease.
and that there is no such disease present, in this they err very much. Indeed
we willingly grant, that that contagious inquination, sent forth from the body
infected with the veneral disease, may adhere to the garments; neither do we
deny this, that the humors in our body may be tainted with the same, yet in the
interim it does scarce follow, that the living parts remain free and found; for
as in a purrid fever, though the humors and spirits do first grow not by the
feverish heat, yet afterward the living parts are seized on by the same
distemper, so though the humors in the Veneral disease are first infected by
that occult malignity, yet there is no cause why the same fault may not be
communicated to the living parts.

But though some do acknowledge that this cause cannot be idle, Not hot and dry.
yet whenas they know nothing beyond the manifest and first qualities, they
endeavor to reduce also the effects of the veneral virulency to manifest
causes. John Baptista Montanus as was said even now, thinks the essence of this
evil consists in a hot and dry distemper, but the cure tells otherwise, whenas
it is cured by hot and dry Medicines, as by the Decoction of Guajacum and the
like: besides, because there is a great putrefaction in the Humors, which does
not proceed from a hot and dry distemper.

Nicolaus Massa de Morb. Galli. Cap. 5. Not cold and dry.
says it is a coldness of the Liver, declining to a little dryness with an
occult quality: but as concerning the occult quality he writes truly, but that
it is no cold distemper, the effect does teach us, as the Ulcers, rottenness of
the bones, and the like; and what other distemper soever they allege. Yet they
produce nothing agreeable to the Diseases and Symptoms, which appear in this
Disease, nor to the Cure.

Therefore when as the action of the veneral virulency can be referred to no
manifest quality. We may well say that by that is induced an occult quality: But
occult.
For first of al every efficient cause is said to be a cause from the nature of
its efficiency, and therefore this malignant quality does not only alter and
change the humors, but also the living parts into its likeness: again, though
the morbifick cause be taken away, and this disease seem now to be overcome,
yet unless that malignant disposition be destroyed the man recovers not his
perfect health. For it has been observed that the Veneral Disease has
sometimes grown fresh after thirty years past, which doubtless happened not
because the Vicious Humors lay so long hid in the body (for these would have
sooner discovered themselves by their signs) but because that malignant
disposition impressed on the body was actually there, which afterward, by
degrees produced vicious humors, and corrupted, and so broke forth into act;
and Trincavellius, Lib. 11. de curand. rat. particul. affect. cap. 11. reports,
that a certain Woman brought forth a Child sick of the French Disease, and
every whereful of crusty Ulcers, whenas she her self never had any sign of that
Disease contracted, but was always wholly well, and on the contrary it may
happen, that one may have a French Ulcer, which yet, when that Malignity is
distroyed, is no longer rightly said to be Gallical, but is cured by vulgar
Medicines as other Ulcers.

Al which being thus, we conceive the the Veneral Disease, does not only exist
in the Humors, but also in the living parts, and that it does consist not only
in the change of the first qualities, but also there is an occult malignant
quality imprinted on the parts, and therefore the veneral Disease is to be
referred to diseases, and those of occult qualities. Which are called by
Fernelius diseases of the whole substance, but not on every part rightly
explained, as we have said before, the which if Capivaccius, and Saxonia had
known, the one would not have defined this evil by the excrement, nor the other
by the cause. An examination of Aurelius Minadous opinion.
if the same also had been known to Aurelius Minadous, he would not have
endeavored to maintain that this evil was no Disease, but an external error.
For whereas he endeavors to prove that the veneral Disease is not a Disease of
the similar parts, because it is not a distemper, nor an evil composition, nor
a solution of unity, in this proof he labors to no purpose, for all this we
willingly grant; but this he ought to prove, that there is no other kind of
Disease in the similar parts besides the distemper of the first qualities; but
that there are such diseases, which Fernelius calls of the whole substance, we
more rightly, of occult qualities, is sufficiently proved above, part 1. and
this very Disease, as all other venenate Diseases do show, that it can be
referred to no other kind than to malignant qualities; and this follows from
Minadous his own supposition, and confession, which he has Cap. 20. where he
writes, that the Veneral virulency has power not only to infect al Humors, but
al parts of the body, and to corrupt and convert them to its own similitude.
The same Minadous if he had known these Diseases, had not taken so much pains,
to what kind of preternatural things the veneral virulency ought to be
referred. For first of al there was no need of excluding from the number of
causes, those vicious Humors, which are found in the bodies sick of the veneral
Disease, and have power to alter and change the Humors themselves and parts of
the body. For whereas he says, that is properly the cause, between which and
the action hurt the disease does interceed, that is true of the next cause, but
the antecedent causes also may do hurt, as they have the Nature of a vicious
object, and external Error: and in this very Disease whiles the virulent Humors
do imprint a malignant quality on he parts, between them and the action hurt
that Malignant disposition and occult quality does intercede. Therefore whereas
he thinks that Humor or venenate vapor in the veneral disease, does imediately
hurt the action, it is false, unless that humor have the nature of an external
error. For all hurt actions in the Veneral disease do happen, whiles between
them and the humor, or malignant vapor, a midling diseafe does intercede, to
wit, that of occult qualities.

But whereas he denies the Veneral virulency to be a quality, The Veneral
disease is not a Body.
and holds it to be a body, first of al he confounds the cause and the disease,
next of al he does not distinguish between the quality and its subject. For
whiles we say the Veneral evil, we understand either the disease it self, or
its cause: if the disease, that is a quality, as al diseases are, to wit a
preternatural disposition of the parts, and indeed an occult and malignant
quality: but if the veneral evil be taken for the cause, either which without,
being communicated does induce this disease; or which is in the body, which
raises diverse diseases and symptoms, and can infect others, we grant that
cause may be called a body. But we must take notice, that those humors or
vapors are not said to be causes, as they are bodies, but as they have an
occult and malignant quality, which Minadous himself cannot deny, while Cap.
20. he writes, That that vapor or spirit, which he calls the veneral virulency,
is endewed with an occult quality and virtue, depending on its whole substance,
by which it is able not only to infect any humors of the body, but al its
parts, and to corrupt and convert them to its own similitude. For what
similitude is that I pray, to which the Veneral virulency converts not only the
humors, but also the parts of the body, unless it be that occult quality with
which that vapor is endewed?

Whereas last of al, Cap. 38. he refers the Veneral virulency to external
error, because it primarily hurts the operation, and is not of the constitution
of the body. But before denied it to be either the disease, or cause of the
disease, or symptom, in vain does he multiply things, preternatural; for there
are not more preternatural things, than the disease, cause, and symptom; and
the Veneral virulency, as he describes it, does wholly belong to the causes two
manner of ways, for either it induces the like disposition into the parts of
the body, or it raises other diseases while it eats and exulcerates the parts.
But whenas he says the Veneral disease taken for the cause, Whether it be a
Vapor or a spirit.
is a vapor or a spirit, that is rightly to be understood; for indeed it can no
way be denied, that it is a humor also, whenas in copulation it is rubbed
against the body, and sticks in the clothes: yet such is its nature, as it is
also of other contagious humors, that though it be resolved into vapors and the
least bodies, yet every one of them contains its whole essence, and has power
to affect others: and this thing may be declared by musk, castor, and the like.
For those things, though they be bodies, and humorous too, yet are such, that
though they be resolved into the least bodies, nevertheless they retain their
full strength. After the same manner it is in the Veneral disease, and other
contagious diseases, in which though the malignant and contagious humor, he
resolved into the least bodies, yet every one of them obtaines the same
essence, and virtue, and power to infect others. But whereas he thinks that
humor and vapor is not to be called the cause, but an external error, in that
also he is mistaken: for an external error belongs unto the causes, from whence
the Symptoms arising from an external error, are called the symptoms of the
cause; where this also is to be observed, that Physicians do not vouchsafe the
name of the cause to the next cause only, but also to the antecedent, which do
not yet effect the disease: therefore there is bad nourishment by reason of
vicious humors, although they have not yet imprinted a distemper, and vicious
disposition on the parts: but whereas he denies the Veneral virulency,
considered as a vapor to be the cause, because it hurts the actions not by the
mediation of a disease, but next of al, and imediately, he presupposes that
which is not yet granted, and so begs the question: for this spirit or vapor
hurts the very constitution of the similar part, and imprinteth on it a
malignant quality; the which he himself cannot deny, whiles Cap. 23. he holds,
that by this disease of venery many actions are hurt, but not al in all people;
but the hurt of the natural faculty is common to al, and that there is none,
that is possessed with this disease who is not troubled with some fault in his
natural actions, and hence proceeds all that filth of excrements, and the
gummosities arising from thence, tumors, pustles, pains, running of the reins,
ulcers, rottenness, and such like evils; and that the Veneral virulency has a
peculiar enmity, and discord with the natural faculty, and is inimicous to it
by its whole kind, that is, by its form, by its specific faculty, by its whole
substance, and occult propriety: but he further describes the enmity against
the natural faculty, that it is by its nature destructive to the natural
spirit, that the Veneral virulency has unspeakable qualities, hindering the
generation of the natural spirits, and those not manifest, but occult. But
whenas there is required to a natural action, the soul, the temperament, and
the innate heat, or the implanted spirit, and the influent heat, he further
concludes rightly, that the soul is not hurt, as that which can no ways
suffer, nor the manifest temperament, as was proved hitherto, but chiefly the
implanted spirit or the innate heat: al which whenas they are so rightly spoke,
and the Veneral virulency is an enemy to the implanted spirit, and truly not
by manifest qualities, but by its form, by its specific faculty, by an occult
propriety, by which it endeavors to change not only the humors, but also the
living parts, and the implanted heat in them into its own similitude, certainly
the like malignant quality, is induced into the parts: which vicious and
malignant quality, what other thing I pray is it, than an occult and malignant
disease?

Al which being thus, we rightly conclude, The Veneral evil is an occult and
venenate Disease.
the Veneral evil is an occult and venenate disease; for it is induced by
causes of that kind, and immediately exercises such effects which cannot be
referred to any manifest distemper, but only to an occult quality; neither is
it cured by medicines that work by manifest qualities, and correct known
distempers, but by proper and specificks, which al Physicians at this day, and
especially those who lived at the beginning of this disease have restified, and
to their own and patients damage have found it true. For when they followed the
common way of cure, and could do no good for the cure of this disease, they
began to be despised by many, til the Spanish Physicians showed them
medicaments brought out of the Indies, and bold Chyrurgeons ventered upon
Quicksilver.

But that all this may be made clearer, What is the subject of the Veneral
Disease.
we must enquire what is the subject to this disease, concerning which
physicians do differ. Some have thought the privities are first insected: for
by these parts for the most part, this evil is contracted by impure copulation,
and the footsteps of this disease, unless it be perfectly cured, do chiefly
appear about the privities; the but is easily excoriated in venery, the flesh
oftentimes remains callous for a long time, with a running of the reins, and
breaking forth of buboes in the groin. But though it cannot be denied, that
oftentimes the original of this evil is from the privities, and does chiefly
discover it self in that place. Yet that does not happen always, Not the
Priveties.
but the same disease may be contracted by kissing, sweat, embraces, vestures,
nay infants also may be infected by the milk they suck from their nurse, and
they that are infected after this manner, have not this disease appearing in
their privities.

Some, as Leonicenus do hold, say that the skin is the subject of this evil, as
in the scab, tetter, and the like affects: but the skin alone is not always
affected, but other parts also, the privities, the jaws, the bones which
become rotten, Not the skin.
nay sometimes also the internal parts. Hercules Saxonia de lue Vener. Cap. 3.
maintains a threefold subject; one in the beginning; another in the middle;
another in the disease confirmed: in the beginning he holds that the natural
spirit is affected or the vaporous part of the mass of blood, then the juyces
and excrementitious humors, at last the alimentary humors, but in process of
the disease, adust humors; and the parts affected are the stomach and liver,
and thence chylification and sangification are hurt; but when the evil is old,
phlegmatic humors are the subject of it, and the parts affected are simelar,
bones, nerves, membranous bodies: but we willingly grant, that as the disease
is new, or old, so and also sometimes more, sometimes fewer parts are possessed
and corrupted; as we deny not this neither, that the excrementitious humors are
easier corrupted than the alimentary, whenas nature does always more defend
the profitable humors, than the excrementitious, into which without any
difference this evil does easily almost diffuse it self, but indeed the
question is not here, what may be infected by that virulency; but this is the
Querie, what is the subject of this disease, which we have demonstrated to be;
for as in putrid fevers the spirits and humors wax hot, yet are not the
subject of the fever; so also though a malignant quality from the Veneral
virulency be imprinted on the humors; yet they are not the subject of the
disease, but only the living parts, and which of them is the subject of this
disease is the question: and whiles that he sometimes holds the Liver and
stomach, sometimes the similar parts to be the subject of this disease, in that
he is wavering, for whether the disease be new or old, the subject is the same.

There were some others also, Not the spermatical parts.
who held those parts we call spermatical, the nervous and membranous, were the
subject of this disease; but not only the membranous and nervous parts, but
also the fleshy parts are affected in this disease.

Others hold the Liver to be the chief subject of this disease, and this
opinion is most consonant to truth, Whether the liver.
but when as many other parts are affected, it is conveniently to be explained,
as shall be said by and by.

Aurelius Minadous de virul. Vener. Cap. 34. first of al presupposes this,
that there is no peculiar member in our body, Whether all the parts.
which is always affected in the Veneral virulency, which is true in its way,
whiles sometimes this, sometimes that part is affected; next of al he holds that
this viulency is chiefly an adversary to the natural actions, or rather to
their faculties, which natural power when as it is in all parts the veneral
virulency is not an enemy to one part in speice, but to al, in which that power
is. In the third place he adds this, That that natural virtue implanted in the
natural parts, does perform its operations without any influx, and that there
is no natural faculty influent, as there is an animal influent; secondly he
confutes them in particular, who hold the Liver to be the first and perpetual
subject of this disease, for it may come to pass faith he that one after an
impure copulation may presently suffer an exulceration in his privities, whom
certainly no body will deny to be infected with the Veneral disease, whenas yet
in him the Liver is not affected: and the same reason is for other parts, which
are first affected by contagion; nay he holds, that one external part being
infected, the humors in the body may be infected without any hurt of the Liver.
In the interim he cannot deny this, that this evil does most properly and
chiefly appear, when the Liver is affected, when as the operations of the Liver
are necessary to the whole body. The same Author Cap. 4. endeavors to prove,
that the Liver is not the subject of the Veneral disease, whenas the face says
he is the index and truest glass of the internal affects of the body, yet
especially the affects of the Liver do appear in it; therefore if the Liver
were perpetually affected in the Veneral disease, also the color of the face
should always appear vicious, the which we have found false by experience;
for we have seen both men and women infected with this disease, who
notwithstanding have had a fresh color in their face, and the evil has been in
their privities: again he thinks, that by carnal copulation the privites may
first of al be affected, and from thence the evil may creep through the veins,
and by the spirits, to the other parts of the body, and as one part is more apt
and disposed than another to receive the infection, so sometimes this, sometimes
that is infected, but not always the Liver.

That we may clear our selves of this controversy, first of al we must enquire
from the actions hurt what part is affected, The Authors opinion.
and what faculty is oppressed; but though diverse actions hurt that part in the
veneral disease, yet al of them cannot bring us to the knowledge of the first
and proper subject. It happens indeed sometimes, that there are pains felt in
the head about the muscles and bones, but that is not always. Sometimes also
the hurt happens in the external and internal sense, but this also is seldom:
sometimes putrid vapors are inflamed, and hence a Fever is raised, which
somecal a French Fever, but this also happens seldom. In like manner it is in
other diseases and fymptomes. One action is hurt which is common to all that are
sick of the veneral disease, viz. nutrition is corrupted; hence we see that in
those who are possessed with this disease, the color of their body is changed and
sulled, and sometimes turns black, sometimes of a lead color, sometimes livid.
There arise every where in their body diverse kinds of swellings and bunchings
out, also ulcers, the bones rotten, the hairs fall off, al which proceed from
corrupt nutrition. From which we conclude that the veneral disease is primarily
an enemy to the natural faculty: The Veneral disease is an enemy to the natural
faculty.
but it is no wonder that this poison is only an enemy to the natural faculty,
whenas there are other poisons, which are inimicous to other faculties: thus
the poison of the pestilence and many others are enemies to the heart,
cantharides to the bladder, mad nightshade and opium to the animal faculty.

Whence that we may briefly conclude the business, this evil indeed may be
contracted by one member, yet if it be spread into more from that one, that
comes to pass because the Liver is infected: yet because this poison has
principally an enmity with the natural faculty, and the fountain of that, or
chief seat is the Liver, that also is primarily infected with this virulency,
and through that the rest of the parts contract this evil. Therefore whereas
Minadous objecteth, the color of the face is sometimes fresh, therefore the
evil is not yet communicated to the Liver, but still sticks in the privities
which were first of al infected, and the force of this virulence is sometimes
greater, sometimes less; from whence also it is sometimes sooner, sometimes
later communicated to the Liver. Besides, this evil consists not in the first
qualities, but in occult, whence it is no wonder, that that malignity may
consist in the blood, which to the appearance is good; but al those things will
be yet made clearer by the discovery of the causes.

Chap. IV. Of the Causes.
BUt concerning the causes of this disease, two things are to be explained, the
first is how at this day the Veneral disease is contracted; the other is, The
Veneral disease is contracted only by contagion.
what was its original when it first appeared. At this day indeed I think this
evil is no otherwise contracted, than by contagion, and that it is manifest that
every Veneral pox is not contagious Hercules Saxonia, lib. de lue Vener. cap.
3. Holds that every Veneral pox is not contagious, and that which is old and
confirmed is for the most part less contagious, than that which is new, and of
a middle age, Whether it be always contagious?
and that which discovers it self by knobs, is not contagious; and he endeavors
to prove it, first of al by reason, because the contagion is placed in a hot
and movable excrement, but when nothing breaths forth from the part affected,
which can be communicated to another, the disease then is not contagious, and
therefore because in the knobs there is no such excrement contained, or if it
be contained, it is not carried to the genitals, therefore that disease shall
not be contagious; next of al by experience, for he writes that a certain noble
man of Padua, who had used Guajacum almost twenty times, and was thrice
anointed with quicksilver, yet could never be cured, and though he lay with
Virgins yet he never infected them: and out of Antonius Musa he relates of one,
who had a wife possessed with the Veneral disease about her breast, yet he never
contracted the disease.

But here we cannot assent to Saxiona, but we hold that every Veneral disease
is in its manner contagious; but whereas he objects against us experience, it
does not follow, that if one sick of the Veneral disease does not actually
infect another, that the disease it self is not contagious; for that an effect
may follow, there is necessary both an agent, and a disposition required in the
patient. Hence we see that many do converse with those sick of the Plague, and
are not infected, yet we must not conclude from thence, that that Plague was
not contagious: and Gabriel Fallopius de morb. Galli. Cap. 22. makes mention of
twelve Scholars, that had to do with one whore, yet of al them, three only
were infected. And Saxonia himself affords an answer to this argument, while he
writes, That this disease is not contagious if nothing breath forth from the
part affected, which may be communicated to another, the which may happen in
the knobs and callosities; or if any thing do breath forth, and be not received
by another. Therefore though one have an ulcer in his head, or a knob in his
thigh, but the Genital parts be sound, it is not necessary he infect her he lies
with. But whereas he teaches that the inveterate Veneral disease is less
contagious, than the new, or middle aged it may in its manner be granted; and
from that very thing we may collect, that the Veneral disease is not only the
cause, but also the disease. For when as this disease is communicated by the
cause or contagion, it may come to pass, that the cause may be for the most
part taken away, which doubtless happned in him who so often used the decoction
of Guajacum, and was thrice anointed; and such men indeed, if the disease be
still upon them, but the corrupt humors being for the most part emptied by
sweaters (...), they are not so conragious, as those, who were lately infected
with this out of whom those malignant humors have not yet been emptied.

Therefore we conclude, though for certain reasons, those who are sick of this
disease do not always infect others; yet at this day there is no man taken
with this evil, but who has been infected by contagion from another, and so
this evil at this day is propagated only by contagion.

But how, The first original of the veneral Difease.
and from what causes this Disease was raised, when it first appeared in
Europe, Authors are diverse in their opinions; and whenas they themselves, who
lived about the rife of this disease, could not agree in this business, by much
less shall we which are now removed above an age from that time, be able to
reconcile them; therefore we shall only reckon up their opinions. The most
learned Leonicenus, and Fracastorius, Whether it were first of al an epidemical
disease.
and certain others, were of this opinion. That this disease at us first rise
was epidemical, and proceeded from a common cause, when at its first beginning,
boys, men, old folks, Girls, women, were infected, and as Hieron. Fracastrius
writes de morb. Gallic. cap. 7. Though the greatest part of mankind has
contracted this disease by contagion, it has been observed, that a number of
others infected by themselves without any contagion, have suffered this disease.
Besides Fracastorius thinks it impossible, that in so small a time, contagion
which of it self is slow, nor is not easily received, could spread it self over
so many lands, being first brought by one fleet of the Spaniards, when it is
plain that either at the same time, or very near it was seen in Spain and
France, in Italy and Germany, and almost al Scythia; which if it be so, there
is no reason, why we should not grant this disease to have been first of al
epidemical: yet this makes me doubtful because that no German Physician, nor of
the neighboring places, has taken notice, that this disease was known in
Germany about that time. In which it appeared in Italy, when notwithstanding
they have most diligently described, the English sweating disease, the disease
in Hungary, and the like diseases newly sprung up.

But what was the cause of that epidemious disease, if it were such a one,
those Authers themselves do differ in opinion; indeed they agree in this. That
it had its original from the fault of the air, but whence the air contracted
that fault, therein they differ. Some were of opinion, That this disease had
its original, from the great inundation of Either, and other Rivers, which
happened in the time of Adrian the sixth, Pope of Rome: for the Summer following
they think by that corruption and filth left by the waters, the air was
infected with putrefaction, and thence this disease did proceed. But truly this
evil cannot be imputed to that inundation of waters, since that happned chiefly
at Rome, but this disease first appeared at Naples: besides, those inundations
of waters are wont rather to cause pestilent diseases, and there has often
happned such inundations before, yet such a disease was never caul'd by them
before. Others do more probably (if this disease were at first epidemious)
refer the cause to the Stars. And Fracastorius writes concerning this business,
lib. 2. de morb. contag. cap. 12. That it ought not to seem wonderful, that new
and unusual diseases do appear at certain times, and he proves it by examples
and histories of diverse diseases; and to pass by others, in the memory of our
Grandfather that malignant Fever raged, which is commonly known by the name of
the English sweat, the like of which we have not read in any History before,
wherefore he thinks it is not strange, if also the French disease not known
before through many ages in our Orb, did now first of al break forth. And there
will come (says he) other new and unusual sicknesses, when time shall bring
them; as there was the thing out amongst the Ancients, which afterward was
seen no more. This same disease will dye and be extinguished, and by and by again
will be renewed, and seen again by our Nephews, even as in former Ages, it is to
be believed, it was seen by our Aucesttors, for which there are no small signs
yet evident. A certain Barber a friend of mine, had a book of certain
experiments, very ancient, amongst which was written one amongst the rest,
whose title was, For the thick scabb, which happens with the pains of the
joints; he therefore when the disease was very fresh at first, remembering this
medicine, asked counsel of some Physicians; whether he might use that medicine
in that new contagion, which he thought was signified by that thick scabb: but
the Physicians viewing the medicine, sharply forbad him, because it consisted
of quicksilver and sulphur. Happy man if he had not consulted with those
physicians, being like to be very rich with an incredible gain; but he obeyed
them, nor durst not make trial of his medicine, which at last he did try, and
finding it to be excellent good, he was very sorry, that he had used it too
late, the profit being now carried away by others. Thus far Fracastorius.

But he refers the cause of this disease newly sprung up, to the conjunction of
Saturn, Mars, and Jupiter, which happened at that time. Others hold that in the
year, 1483. In the Ides of October at two of the clock after noon, That there
was a conjunction made of Mars, Jupiter, the Sun, and Mercury in Lihra in the
right house, which is the house of Sickness, and that Jupiter was burnt; and
furthermore the same year on the Calends of November in the same house and
sign, there was a conjunction made of Mars and Venus, also of Jupiter and
Venus. Others as Nicolaus Massa de morb. Galic. cap. 6. refer that disease to
the conjunction of Saturn Mars, and Venus, which happened in Scorpio about the
rise of this disease. But as it is not impossible, for certain configurations
of the Stars to induce certain diseases, so no man is able easily to render the
specific cause of this disease, if it were epidemious. Truly all the effects of
the Stars are good and benign, and nothing evil in it self does proceed from
them; yet by accident it may come to pass, whiles they alter the air and the
bodies of men after this or that manner, that they may produce evil diseases,
whenas in their way they are Authors of the generation and corruption of
natural things, but that they could produce this disease in specie, I think is
not yet explained; and Fracastorius had hopes indeed, that this disease was in
its old age in his time, and that in a little while after it would cease in the
alleged place; as also in his Syphilis, in these Verses.

For when the Fates shall please again, you will see
Ere long, that in dark night 'twil buried be.
But his hopes has deceived him, whenas now it has lasted above a hundred and
forty years, and has bated nothing of its cruelty, as most are of opinion.

Others on the contrary think this disease was not epidemious, but sporadical
and contagious; and first of all this persuades many, because it has lasted
even unto these times, whenas epidemious diseases, which have been raised by
the influx of the Stars, have ceased a little while after. And therefore they
do not think this difease ought to be accounted for epidemical, whenas it has
already lasted above 140. years; unless perhaps this reason may be given for
the continuance of this disease, because the infection of this disease is not
shunned, as that of the pestilence. For if the Plague begin to spread any
where, al people, as much as they are able, and it is possible for them, do fly
from the conversation of the sick, and reject al infected household stuff; nay
in Italy, if the Plague begin to spread in Germany, or other neighboring
Countries, they stop up al public ways, and deny al strangers that are
suspected, any admittance into Italy; But many men knowingly and willingly have
to do with suspected Harlots, and public Stews full of infected whores are
tolerated; therefore if the same diligence and cutiosity, which is used in some
places in the time of the pestilence to exclude the infected and suspected
persons, from the society of others, were made use of to restrain that rambling
whoring, perhaps this disease also though it be contagious, might be rooted out.

Yet the same men who think this disease is not epidemous, but sporadical, and
contagious, How the Veneral disease was brought into Europe.
are again divided into diverse opinions concerning its original: For some were
of that opinion, that first of al it had its rise at Valentia, in Hispania
Tarraconensi, where one sick of an Elephantiasis, bought a nights lodging of a
noble Whore for fifty pieces of Gold, and infected her, and thence it came to
pass, that others who had to do with her were infected, and so in a short time
this evil was dissemmated amongst a many. But the Idea of an Elephantiasis is
one, and of the Veneral disease another, and therefore one sick of an
Elephantiasis could not raise this disease.

Others think this disease was first brought out of India by the Spaniards into
the French Army at Naples, who maintame that this disease was epidemical in
India, of which we spoke before, Cap. 1. But for what reason it is epidemious in
some Countries in India, whether by the fault of the air, or water, or
provision, is not yet explained by Historians.

Leonbardus Fioravanti, Leonhardus Fioravanti his opinion of the Veneral
disease.
a famous Empirick in his time in Italy, has a peculiar opinion of the
original of this disease, which I have met withal in no other writer. For he in
his book written in the Italian Tongue, which is entitled, Capricci Medicinali
di M. Leonardo Fioravanti, Libritre, writes thus of the original of this
disease, both amongst the Indians, and in the French Army at Naples, lib. 1
Cap. 26. When says he, there was War between the French and Spaniard at
Naples, and there was great want of provision, especially of flesh, those evil
employed merchants who brought victuals to the Camp, had privately prepared the
Carcasses of dead soldiers into diverse kinds of meats and dishes, and sold
them every where about to the army, which flesh, whanas they had eat of it a
long time ignorantly, most of them were taken with this disease, and became full
of pustles and pains, and many also had their hair fall off; and he writes,
that he knows the business was so, from one Paschalis Gibilotius, a
Neapolitan, an old man, of ninety eight years of age, who has told him, that
at that time when John the Son of Renatus, Duke Andegavensis waged war against
Alphonsus King of Naples, about the year 1456. that he has often heard from
his father, who was such a Merchant in the Army of King Alphonsus, that in want
and scarcity of victuals the Soldiers on both sides by eating of man's flesh,
which they fed on for a long time, contracted this disease, and the same
Fioravanti, adds, that he might be the more certain of this business, he bred
up a Sow in his house, and added to al her meat somewhat of hogs flesh, and
that within few days her bristles and hairs fell off, and she became full of
pustles; then, that he fed a dog for two months only with dogs flesh, which
afterward became full of pains and pustles, and lost his hair. From which
experiments he concludes, that every living creature if it be nourisht with the
flesh of its own species will be taken with this disease, which at this day is
called the French: and he thinks this is the very cause, that this drsease is
epidemious in the Indies, because there are those man-eaters, which do feed on
man's flesh.

But truly I do wonder that so many Italians and French, who have writ of this
disease have made no mention of this cause, neither does the relation of that
old Neapolitan seem to fit with the time. For that disease was not known in the
year 1456. at which time John the Son of Renatus, Duke Andegavensis, waged War
against Alphonsus King of Naples, but in the War which Charles the eight King
of France, waged with Alphonsus King of Naples about the year 1493 or 94. then
grant it be, that if a creature nourisht with the flesh of those of its own
kind, be taken with pustles and pains, and suffer the falling off of the hair,
yet the question still would be, whether that disease be the very Veneral
disease, and such as may be transfered by contagion to others, and especially
by Venery. For the essence of the veneral disease does not consist in pustles,
and the failling of the hair, but in an occult malignity, by which also its
ulcers do differ from other ulcers. Yet it is easy for any one to make trial,
of that which Fioravanti experienced. And if the business should be confirmed
by experience, that if an animal nourisht with the flesh of its kind, do
contract this disease, thence a reason may be rendered, why this disease is
endemious to the people of India, to wit, because its inhabitants do feed on
men's flesh: although here we meet with a doubt, for all the people of India are
not men-eaters, and therefore we must enquire out of the Histories of the
Indies, whether this disease be endemious amongst the men-eaters only, or
amongst the other people of the Indies also.

Andreas Caesalpinus, lib. 4. de morb. Cap. 3. Andreas Caesalpinus.
writes that he has another History of the original of this disease, delivered
by them who were present, to wit, from an Atetine soldier, who served in that
war; he related that there is a town in the Vesuvian Mount which is called
Suma, where there is plenty of generous wine which is called Caudy wine, which
was privately left by the Spaniards in the night, when the French had besieged
it, but they infected their wine by the mixture of blood which they drew from
them which were sick in the hospital of St. Lazarus; and the French men
entering in, when they had filled themselves with that wine, began to be sick
of diseases and symptoms, like unto the Elephantiasis. But if this were true,
rather the Elephantiasis than the veneral disease had been thus raised.
Aurelius Minadous.


Aurelius Minadous de Virul. Vener. Cap. 30. propounds a peculiar opinion, and
holds that this virulency did first break forth from the most filthy wombs, of
most impure Harlots, and for this cause, because no body that has lived
cleanly, or that has conversed with a clean woman, is taken with this evil:
but he thinks this evil proceeded first, when women were made very unclean,
when they had received a various mixture of seeds. For as says he one sort of
meat, is the cause of health in a good stomach, but variety of meats does
oppress the stomach, and breeds an acid and nidorous crudity, and every where
heaps up excrements; so one seed only is familier and wholesome for one womb,
and causes fruitfulness, on the contrary the multitude and variety of seeds,
does so affect the womb, that by its corruption it produces bad, nay the worst
of excrements, and from that sordid substance there is a corruprion hard to be
explained, or putrefaction which does generate such venenate excrements. But
when as he might easily understand, that those rambling lusts were in use not
only in the war at Naples, but long before when there was public Brothel
Houses at Rome, and yet there was no such disease raised; he would have his
opinion to be understood not of any women, but only of the Indian. For they by
the mediation of the Heaven, Air, Waters, and those places, by their peculiar
form of feeding did contract this poison, which afterward by Columbus, and the
Spanish Army was disseminated in France, and hence through the whole world. But
though it must not be denied, that the constitution of bodies is diverse in
diverse Countries, and I remember that I have read in the Histories of
Navigation, That when certain people of Europe, had found certain Ethiopian
lasses playing on the sea shore, and had layn with them, presantly some of them
died; yet how the business is in America, is worthy of further inquisition: and
if there be any such fault in those women, it is probable that comes to pass,
not so much from the commistion of diverse seeds, but rather as many Authors
report, from this, That if any one have to do with a woman in India whiles she
has her courses, he his taken with that disease; for that whenas it is every
where un wholesome, and therefore also was peculiarly and severely forbidden the
Jews by God in holy Writ, may in a special manner be hurtful in the Indies.

Therefore lecting these pass, let us hold fast this, which is granted by all,
The Veneral disease is contracted only by Contagion.
that this disease at this day is no otherwise contracted, but by contagion,
and chiefly by lying with those that are infected, whence deservedly does
Gabriel Fallopius de morb. Gallic. Cap. 13. Wittily deride those women, who
when they were sick of the Veneral disease, nevertheless did bost themselves to
be chaste, and said they contracted this disease by sprinkling themselves with
the holy water which was infected.

But this contagion, by which only now adays, How many ways the contagion may
be contracted.
we say this disease is disseminated, is received diverse ways. For sometimes
it is transferred with the seed and menstruous blood from the Parents to the
Child, Sometimes it is Haereditary.
and the Disease become Haereditary; for when the blood, out of which the Seed
is generated, is infected and vicious, the like Diseased seed is generated,
also the Mothers blood being impure, with which the Child is nourisht, it
Pollutes that, which pollution afterward in those brought into the World does
sooner or later show it self, according to the greater or lesser strength of
that virulency: which manner of original of this Disease, if any one will deny
to be properly by contagion, because it is not by the contract of two bodies,
viz. a sound and a sick, he may for all me; yet let him know this, that then
that malignity in the body of the infant is not generated, but from the
infected parents by the seed, or the Mothers blood is communicated to the
offspring.

But by those that are born into the world, the same evil may be contracted two
ways: the first is, when with the nourishment and milk, the evil is
communicated to infants by imp^ute Nurses; which way indeed is the powerfullest
of al: for whenas the milk they suck is changed into blood, and that is the
nourishment of the whole body, the poison this way is dispersed into the whole
body, and insinuates it self most intimately with it, and therefore those that
are this way infected, are seldom cured, and not without a great deal of
Difficulty.

The other way is by contagion so called properly, and in specy; where first of
al it is enquired, whether there be any contagion in the Veneral Disease at a
distance, so that if one do neither touch with his body one infected, nor the
fuel which conteins in it the contagion, yet nevertheless may be infected with
the Veneral Disease; truly there is no example given of this cause, but what
Manardus teaches, Lib. 7. Epis. 3. and also some others affirm that there is
a French Ophthalmy: but when as this Disease of the Eyes in other cases is
oftentimes contagiout, it is no wonder, if one conversing with a sick man that
is troubled with a French Ophthalmy, and earnestly look upon his Eyes, Whether
it can infect at a distance.
that he also may contract luch an Ophthalmy. Yet this cannot be granted, that
as the Plague may be transferred by the Air to others in distant places, so
also the Veneral Disease may be communicated; for daily experience does
Testesie, that Physicians and many others, do familiarly converse with those
infected with this evil, yet are not infected by them.

Therefore this evil is chiefly contracted by contact, and truly most
frequently by whorish Copulation, when that virulence is communicated to the
naked genital parts being soft, and porous, from the genitals of the other
infected person; after which manner this Disease was first brought out of the
Indies, by the Spanish Soldiers infected by the Indian Women which were sick
of this Disease, into Italy, and disseminated through the French Camp, and
hence spread throughout all Europe, as we said before according to the opinion
of many Physicians. And though some as we said even now, who have been infected
with this Disease, endeavor to renounce the Cause of it; How the Veneral
disease may be contracted.
yet many if they live not chastely, yet they live closely, and Gabriel
Fallopius, not without a Cause de Morb. Gall. cap. 10. scoffs at certain chaste
Matrons, as they boasted themselves to be, who said they contracted this
Disease by sprinkling them with holy water which was polluted; he that believes
this, let him believe that too, which Averroes writes, 2. collect. cap. 10 that
a woman was got with Child in a bath, from some seed which wicked men had spent
there: or with Vallesius let him cotrect the Aphorism, 36. Sect. 6. because
many Monks have been sick of the Gout before the use of Venery.

And truly men contract this evil from Women that are infected, How men are
infected by women in Copulation.
because in the act by reason of the concourse of spirits, and the motion, the
Womb being heated, Vapors are raised from the Malignant Humors in the womb,
which are sucked in by the man's yard being of a porous constitution, and are
received into the veins. But the man being infected, may infect a sound woman,
either by his yard, if that be infected and exulcerated, How Women by men.
or by his seed, although his yard be not ulcerated, or both ways: for though
the seed in men is not always wholly corrupt, whenas we see many men infected
with this disease do get children; yet it is altered and infected, from whence
not only the Issue contracts this evil, but also a Woman may be infected by it.

But though this evil be most frequently contracted by whorish Copulation,
Other ways of contagion
yet by contagion it may be derived to others, other manner of ways, viz. by
sweat, if any one sleep in the same bed with one infected with the Veneral
Disease, and be wet with his sweat; then by the filth and Excrements, or that
flowing from Ulcers, and sticking on the Linen, bed, or shirt, and garments,
if any one he in them, or put them on. The same Disease also may be
communicated by slaver or spittle, so lovers are infected with the Kisses of
Whores sick of this Disease, and infants by their Nurses, or if any one drink
out of a Cup, or sup out of the spoon, which one sick of this Disease did use a
little before; besides, infants may be infected another way, to wit if, they
touch the breasts of an impure Nurse with their mouth, and that for a double
reason, either because they suck the infected and corrupted milk, of which I
speak before; or because the breasts and nibbles of the Nurse are exulcerated:
on the contrary, Nurses may be infected from infected infants, especially if
they be troubled with Malignant pustles, or some Ulcer in the mouth; for the
Nepples of their breasts whiles they are sucked by the Infant, grow hot, and
their pores are more opened, whereupon they easier receive in that virulence.

But no body is easily infected by the breath, as was said before, and without
danger we may be conversant in the same chamber with those that are infected;
neither are those Chyrurgions and Physicians which cure the veneral Disease,
and daily converse with the sick, any way infected; and if this Disease were
contagious by breathing and at a distance, the whole world would ere now have
been French, and the Disease would be more than Epidemious, as one writes; yet
if any one sleep in bed with one infected, that he do receive his breath very
near, I will not promise him free from this evil; whenas I know, Wives that have
been infected by their Husbands sick of the Phthisick, and afterward died of
it.

This contagion after it is received into the body, How the Veneral virulency
does penetrate into the body.
stays not in those parts in which it was first received, but after the manner
of other poisons, penetrates into the innermost parts of the body: and truly
oftentimes discovers it self presently, within a few days, sometimes lies hid a
long while. And Fernelius writes, de abdit. rer. Cause. Lib. 2. c. 14. That it
does sometimes return and revive after thirty years past, and for so long space
the fuel of the disease does lie hid as dormant, and nevertheless they who
think themselves free from al hurt, and that they are perfectly sound, do
corrupt those with whom they lie, and beget an Issue possessed with that Disease.
The same is witnessed by John Philippus Ingrassias. And Hercules Saxonia de lue
Vener. cap. 11. relates that he cured an Illustrissimo, who had knobs of the
French Disease came out upon him, five and twenty years after he had taken the
Disease.

But what parts this virulency does principally assault, we said formerly
Authors did disagree, where we treated of its subject; many indeed do hold,
What parts are chiefly affected.
that this virulency is chiefly an adversary to the Membranes, because the
pains do most of al arise about the Periostia, and external parts, where are
many Membranes, in the head, Legs, Arms, breast bone, and in them the
periostium being eaten off, are raised knobs. But not only the Membranous parts
are affected, but others also, as the Buboes, Tumors, Uleers in diverse parts,
rottenness of the bones, falling of the hair, running of the Reins do testefie.
And therefore we must enquire for a more common subject, which we said above
was the Liver, and the similar parts dedicated to nutrition, and that have
consent with the liver; for after the contagion has pierced as far as the
Liver (though in the interim it may cortupt the parts near unto that, by which
the Contagion was received) and has imprinted a Malignant disposition on that,
Sanguification is hurt, and a Malignant quality is imprinted on that blood,
which is generated in the Liver, and so with the blood are generated Malignant
Humors, which whenas they are troublesome to Nature, they are thrust forth to
the Circumference of the body, and so not only pains are raised in the
Membranes, but diverse Diseases and Symptoms also in other parts; and whereas
the bones are not free, but they are oftentimes affected with rottenness, it is
no wonder that the neighboring periostia are affected, and most cruel pains
raised.

From al which it does easily appear, The manner of the generation of the
veneral disease.
what is the manner of the generation of this Disease, to wit, When the
contagion of this Disease is communicated from one sick of the Veneral Disease,
either by the seed and blood of the parents, or by the sucking of infected
milk, or by Copulation, or by spittle, or by meat and drink, or by garments and
Linen, to any part of a sound body, first of all the part which receives the
contagion is affected and hurt, hence through that, the evil creeps into the
Veins, and by them penetrates to the Liver, which when it has put on an evil
disposition, and contracted a Malignant Disease, it generates vicious blood,
containing in it the Seeds of the veneral Disease, which whenas it is an enemy
to the body, by the expulsive faculty it is driven from the more noble parts to
the Circumference of the body. And from thence the nourishment in the whole body
is hurt, from whence are raised spots, Tumors, and diverse bunchings out,
Ulcers, falling of the hair, pains, and other evils.

At length out of al those things which have been said hitherto of the Nature
and causes of the veneral disease, The definition of the veneral disease.
we make this definition of this Disease. The veneral evil is an occult
Disease, and peculiarly Malignant, taken by infection, and is infections,
chiefly an enemy to the Liver and nutritive faculty, and therefore nutrition
being hurt in the whole body, it raises diverse Diseases and Symptoms.

CHAP. V. Of the Differences of it.
BY some indeed there are reckoned up very many Differences of this Disease,
The Differences.
and by Brassavola, 234. but many of them unprofitable; the most necessary and
profitable are these.

First of al, as concerning the very essence of the Disease whenas that is
unknown, from that of it self, we can raise no difference: yet because its
activity depends on that essence and occult quality, these differences are
fetched from thence, because the activity of this disease is sometimes greater,
sometimes less. And Physicians have observed, that sometimes after unwholesome
Copulation, the French Symptoms have presently come upon men, but somewhat
gentle, and a little while after have ceased again, without the administration
of any remedy; but sometimes most grievous Symptoms have presenly come on them,
and the evil has been rebellious, and could by no means or very difficultly be
cured. At its first rise this disease was more grievous.
And the writers of this disease report, That this Disease when it first
appeared, had far more grievous Symptoms, than now it has: but what was the
Cause of this business, is not so clear. That might happen first of al, from
the disposition of the bodies that were infected. For whenas it appeared first
in the Camps at Naples, and there was a great scarcity of provision, and a
famine, doubtless in those bodies also, there was provision of evil Humors for
Diseases, on which when this contagion fell, there it took strength and
increased: besides this might make somewhat to that business, that in the
beginning, the cure of this Disease was not sufficiently known, whence it came
to pass, that this malignity always grew worse. This happens also in the
Plague, of which the more there die, the poison always grows the more
vehement. For the malignity is fermented as it were, and exalted in the bodies
of the sick, unless it be opposed and overcome by Alexipharmacal means.

Secondly, its Differences are taken from the causes and manner of contagion
while sometimes the Veneral Disease is haereditary, and is derived with the seed
and blood from the parents to the Issue: but sometimes after the birth, is
communicated by Copulation, Kissing, Milk, Garments, and the like.

Thirdly, the third Difference is taken from the Diseases and Symptoms
supervenient, that this Disease is sometimes with Buboes, sometimes with running
of the Reins, sometimes with falling of the hair, sometimes with pains of the
joints, sometimes which other Symptoms; neither do the Symptoms which follow
it, and shall afterward be reckoned up amongst the signs, always appear the
same in all people: and Eustachius Rudius writes, Lib. 5. de Morb. occult. Cap.
9. That he has observed a thousand times, that many young men have on the same
day copulated with one and the same whore, and yet notwithstanding one has
been taken with the running of the Reins, another with a Bubo another with
rottenness, another with pain in the Head, another with falling of the hair,
and another with another different preternatural affect; which doubtless
happens, by reason of the various indisposition of bodies, and weakness of
parts, and variety of Humors. For weak parts do more easily receive vicious
Humors, than the strong. And one body is more clean, another more foul, and
abounds with these, or those Humors, which when they are cotrupted by the
venenate Humor, do cause these or those Diseases and Symptoms: therefore if we
should number up the Differences according to the variety of Diseases, and
Symptoms, which are sometimes joined together and complicated, sometimes Fewer,
sometimes more, we might make very many indeed, of which as was said even now,
Brassavola reckons up 234. more Nicely than profitably.

Fourthly, the fourth Difference is from the time, that the Disease is sometimes
new, sometimes inveterate, one in the beginning, another in the augment, another
in the state and another in the declination.

Out of which, and especially from the Difference of time, and the variety of
Diseases, and Symptoms that accompany this Disease, Julianus Palmarius,
Degrees of the veneral disease.
does commodiously constitute four dergees of this Disease, de lue Vener. Lab
1. cap. 4. The First and lightest degree is, when only the hairs of the Head
and beard do by little and little fall off, without any other hurt of the body.
The Second degree is worse, when the whole Skin is spread over with many spots
not bunching out, and those sometimes small, like to a lentil speck; sometimes
much broader, and both, sometimes red, sometimes yellow. The Third degree is yet
more grievous, when not only spots but true pustles and bunches break forth,
first of al indeed about the forehead, and Temples, and behind the Ears, then
every where in the Head, and at length in the rest of the body. The Fourth
degree is, when now the Disease being inveterate, it assaults and corrupts the
solid parts, the bones, Ligaments, Membranes, and Nerves. In which there are
collected many thick, glutinous, and malign Excrements, which when they rest
about the tendons, or the Periostia, and prick and pull the Membranes from the
bones, there are wont to be caused implacable pains, growing worse toward the
night, from which Excrements also by degrees do grow hard knobs, with far
greater torment which are equally hard as the bones. Which if they be fixed in
the bones, they do so enlarge and distend them, that the bones oftentimes
become of a monstrous bulk and figure: moreover that malignity and Acrimony
does by degrees eat away, and with rottenness consume the bones, and for the
most part not hurting the Skin that lies over them: and Palmarius writes there,
that he has seen many in whom the Pericranium, and the Skul under it, has
been found wholly eaten away with putrefaction, and consumed with rottenness as
far as the dura matter, the Skin of the Head not being hurt at al, without any
Fever, and without vomiting, of which one or two have been seen living without
a Skul. Of which by and by shall be said more in the Diagnostick and Prognostic
signs.

CHAP. VI. Of the Diagnostick Signs.
BUt though out of those things which have been spoken before of the History of
this Disease, the Diagnostick signs of this Disease might easily be fetched, yet
in this place the same are to be propounded in specy. But first of al, we must
remember this, those sign as Galen teaches, 1. Aphor. 17. and else where,
which ought certainly to denote a Disease, which are commonly called
Pathognomonical, ought to be not only proper but inseparable, so that where
they are, there is the Disease, and they being taken away the Disease is
removed. But though as in many other diseases, The diagnostick signs of the
cause.
so in the Veneral, there is not one sign, by which the Disease may be known,
yet a concourse of signs, may do the same. Yet what that concourse is in the
Veneral Disease, is not easy to define: whenas in this Disease there is a
great Accumulation of Symptoms and Diseases, and therefore this Disease has
affinity with other Diseases. Which thing does cause, as was said before, that
many when they saw almost the same concourse of signs, in that Epidemious
disease, which Hippocrates propounds, the 3. Epid. they thought the Veneral
Disease was described there, and others referred it to the Elephantiasis, but
the reason why it is hard to define the concourse of signs in this Disease, is
this, because the Liver and nutritive faculty of the whole body is chiefly hurt.
For when the heart or brain is hurt, their hurt actions do easily appear, being
such as are simple, and restrained to few parts. But when as the Lives affords
nourishment for the whole body, from thence if nourishment be hu^^ (...) ^^ppen
^^vers Diseases and Symptoms; for though the nutriment of the whole body be
one, that is blood, yet almost an innumerable variety presents it self in every
part, according to the variety of the parts which are nourisht, whenas it is
necessary that every part do peculiarly assimilate its nourishment; yet if we
consider the precedent causes, those things which are present, and what things
are helpful, what hurtful, or the Remedies, neither can this Disease he
undiscovered.

As concerning the causes, first of al if the parents be, or have been sick of
this disease, and some signs in the infant present themselves, which argue the
Veneral disease, there is scarce any reason to doubt of the Disease. In like
manner it is, if an infanchave sucked a nurse sick of this disease.

But if any one born of sound Patents, and nourisht by the milk of a sound
Nurse, yet have diseases and some Symptoms, which give suspicion of this
Disease, we must diligently enquire, whether he has had to do with infected
persons; which if he confess, the case is plain, and there need no further
doubt of the species of the Disease; but if, as it often falls out, one to
preserve his Honor and reputation, deny that he has acted any such thing, then
we must enquire into the condition and course of the life past, of the husband
or wife, if the party be married. For from these things sometimes we have no
slight conjectures of the infection. But if there be no ground for such a
conjecture, we must further enquire, whether he has slept in the same bed with
one infected with that Disease, or has used his garments. But if out of al
these there can be had no firm conjecture of this Disease, the present state
of the patient is diligently to be considered, which indeed is one in the
beginning of the Disease, another in the increase, and another when it is
inveterate; whence also the signs of th^s Disea^e, beginning, increasing,
inveterate, are wont commonly to be delivered. And truly to know this Disease
when it is Inveterate, is not very difficult, as shall be said by and by: but
whiles it yet lies, and is in the first blade, then to know it, is not so
easy. For as plants and trees when they are at full growth, are known by the
vulgar, but to know them at their first appearance, is the part only of an
artist and good herbarist. So also this Disease, when it discovers it self by
diverse Diseases, and Symptoms, it is known even by the vulgar, but when it
lirks in obscurity, it is not discovered but by experienced Physicians.

Yet there are some signs, which may discover this Disease, The signs of the
veneral disease in its beginning.
even at the first beginning; the first is, that they who are taken with this
Disease do presently (without the appearance of any signs of a Fever imminent)
perceive a kind of weariness and heaviness in their whole body, and sometimes a
drowsiness after sleep. There is a vehement and wandering pain, which is felt
sometimes in the Head, sometimes in the Muscles, sometimes about the joints, and
this pain is more troublesome toward night than at other times of the day. The
fresh color of the Face is changed strangely, and some write, that there is a
Livid circle appears under their Eyes, such as we usually see in Women that
have their Courses: there is added to these a sadness, fear, and those that
before were merry and jesting, become sad and pensive without any cause. All
which signs are of greater force if the signs of the Veneral Disease did go
before, and vanish without any convenient, and sufficient means. And truly if
this evil be contracted by Copulation, and has not yet plainly possessed the
Liver, but sticks yet in the Privities, then chiefly this Veneral Disease at
its beginning, discovers it self by the running of the Reins, Ulcers in the
Privities, and buboes, for when that Malignant vapor, is first of al
communicated to the Testicles and genital vessels, the seed is corrupted, and
the generation of seed is depraved in the genital vessels: whence instead of
good seed there is generated a stinking and corrupt Humor, which does irritate
Nature to expulsion. From whence also the Gonorrhaea, although improperly so
called, is easily distinguished from that running of the Reins which is not
French, because this gallical is joined with a great heat, and pain, sometimes
also with an Inflammation of the Testicles, and Vessels resembling a varix; the
matter which is cast forth is far different from seed, viz. yellow, green,
Acrid, corroding the glans; neither does it yield to those Remedies, with which
a true Gonorrhaea is cured. Next of all there appear pustles in the Privities
about the bigness of a grain of Millet, and sometimes they compass the whole
Ring, which when they are broken, there remain white Ulcers which in process of
the Disease grow deep and callous, of diverse colors, and with pain joined with
them. Thirdly, also Buboes show forth themselves in this Disease; for though
sometimes the Buboes do precede an Erysipelas or a Rose, yet then there went
before those causes which do effect a Rose, as fear, frights, anger, and the
bubo is extended toward the Thighs, as it were by a red line, and a little
after the Erysipelas breaking forth, it vanishes; but if the Bubo be Veneral,
it is not extended according to the longitude of the Thigh, but rather
obliquely, and imitates the situation of the spermatick Vessels. For in
unwholesome Copulation the seminal vessels are easily first of al infected,
which whenas they have their Original from the Vena Cava not far from the Liver
it self, that virulency is easily communicated to the Liver, which being
affected drives it back again by the same ways from it self, from whence are
caused both the Buboes, and the running of the Reins. And thus these two
Diseases are for the most part complicated, and being Joined are a sure sign of
the veneral Disease, and one failing, the other is of force; but if this evil
be contracted without whorish Copulation, and if by kissing, there are Ulcers
raised about the mouth, if by giving suck to an infected infant, there are
inflammations about the breasts, pustles, and clefts; if from Garments and
common lying together, there are pustles every where raised in the Skin.

But if the evil do now increase, The signs of this disease increasing.
and grow more grievous, and the virulency it self be already communicated to
the Liver, and thence the nutrition in the whole body be depraved, diseases and
symptoms of al kinds, such as were reckoned up before, cap. 2. in the history
of this disease, do arise, which indeed though singly by themselves they afford
not a proper and inseparable sign of this disease, yet if they be taken
together, and their peculiar condition be diligently considered, they may
clearly enough detect this evil. For there is scarce another disease, in which
there is a concourse of al these, nay there are many of them so proper to the
Veneral disease, that they are found in no other disease after that manner. How
the buboes which are seen in the beginning, and sometimes in the increase of
this disease, may be distinguished from other buboes, was said even now;
theveneral pustles are some of them crusty, others without a crust, the crusty
are chiefly the signs of this disease, and sometimes they are eminent, that in
the head and forehead they resemble the horns of a Ram, under which sometimes is
contained matter. Sometimes none, and they appear in the face, head, beard,
whole body, but especially about the privities and hips, And Fallopius writes
that these kinds of Veneral tumors, may be distinguished from those which are
not Veneral after this manner; That the Veneral if they be rubbed and the skin
taken off, three days after they appear unchanged, but benign pustles if they
be rubbed, are increased by the attraction of blood, and that good, and
alimentary. So the the tumors which are commonly called Gummesities, it they be
joined with a swelling, or do firmly adhere to the parts void of flesh, and the
bones, especially if they be in the head, forehead, in the fore part of the
Legs, area most certain sign of the Veneral disease: for the Veneral matter
has an eating virulency even in a cr^^s humor, and joined with pain, the like
of which is nor in other tumots, which do proceed from a thick matter. But
though (...) do happen also in many other diseases; yet if they rise chiesly in
the yard, and especially on the for^^kin, and about the ^ut, and toward the
end of the yard, or also in the m^^th (...) palate, the (...) or jaws, and
those to putrid and stinking, and there was no inflammation of those parts
precedent, nor signs of the scurvy, they are also signs of the F^ench Disease;
also the falling of the hair causes no light evidence of the disease; for if
after childhood, no other disease foregoing, which is wont to be accompanied
with the shedding of the hair, the hairs of the head, and especially of the
beard and eyebrows fall off, and also there appear ulcerous pustles, or a
filthy Scab, this is altogether a sure sign of the French Disease. In like
manner Chapps and clefts in the Palms of the hands, and soles of the ^ee^, if
no other cause preceded, are an undoubted sign of this evil, so also those
bunches sometimes low and broad, sometimes somewhat long, and those excrescencies
which they call ficus, condy lomata, and crusts, if they appear in the privy
parts, or about the Arse-hole, do sutely enough discover this disease; pains of
the head, although they happen in many other diseases, yet if their bunchings
out, and gummo^^^es in the skin, if there was a Gonorrhea and it be stopped, if
a bubo and it be vanish^, those also are sure signs enough of this disease;
pains also in other parts may likewise discover this disease, for if the pain
be not in the very joints, ou^ in that part which is in the middle of the
bones, and near to the Joints, as upon the skin, or upon the shoulder bone,
which is between the head and the joint of the elbow, and they be most cruel
and sharp, and are exasperated toward the evening and night, they are also
sure signs of this disease. There is familiar also with this disease, such a
distillation, by which there is emptied by the mouth, and note, much phlegm and
watrish matter, by which the parts through which they pass are exulcerated; but
in the first place the sure sign of this disease is that French Gonorrhea, of
which was spoken before. Last of all this also is a sure sign of this disease,
if the aforementioned diseases and symptoms be not taken away, or made more
gentle, by medicines that do work by manifest qualities, applied according to
art, but rather do grow worse, but are mitigated by those proper and specific
remedies.

Last of al, if this evil be inveterate, diseases and symptoms of al kinds may
happen, callous, fistulous, and cancerous ulcers, knobs in diverse parts of the
body, Signs of an inveterate Pox.
rottenness of the bones in the Legs, Arms, especially in the Skul, the bone
of the Palate and Nose, a Hectic Fever, Consumption, Pthisick, evil habit of
the body, Falling Sickness, falling of their teeth, Deafness, Blindness. Vidus
Viduus, lib. 2. de curat. membrat. cap. 18. reports that he saw at Barciconia a
Spannish Soldier, who by the French Pox suffered a rottenness of Skul, and
afterward fell into an epilepsy, that filth distilling from his rotten skul,
and pricking the membranes of his brain, from which notwithstanding he was
freed by cauterizing his Skul with a hot Iron; and Forestus lib. 7. Observat.
9. in schol, relates of one infected with the French Pox, though he seemed to
be well cured, yet was afflicted with a long and continual pain of his head,
which could be cured by no remedies, til at last his Skul being opened, there
was found under it, upon the dura matter somewhat black like a wevil, which worm
when it was taken away, that pain ceased, nor returned no more. And Johannes
Schenckius ex D. Georg, Garneci observat. relates of one sick of the French
Pox, that was il cured, who was taken with a great inflammation in his palate,
in the five-like bone, in his uvula, and all the neighboring parts, which
presently turned to a Gangrene, and that to a cancer, that every day he voided
somewhat, of those corrupt and putrefied parts, and the uvula, and next parts,
being first of al cast forth, at last he spit through his mouth his very brain
with a most noisome stink. And Felix Platerus, lib. 1. observat. makes mention
of an Abbot who by the French Pox was made blind, deaf, and dumb, who could no
otherwise understand and perceive the meaning of others, but if they with their
finger or a piece of wood drew letters, expressing some sentence upon his bare
arm, from al which singly perceived he made a word, and from many words a
sentence: God the just Judge does sometimes punish wandering lust, with so
grievous and horrid a punishment.

As concerning the differences of this virulency, Signs of the differences.
although its formal essence be unknown, yet there is a certain difference.
According to its manner of acting and its vehemence, which is known from its
effects; for sometimes more, sometimes fewer: sometimes the contagion and active
power is great, sometimes less: and Eustachius Rudius reports de morb. occult.
lib. 5. cap. 10. that he knew some whores infected with so powerful a French
Poison, that al who had to do with them were not only presently infected with
the same evil, but were wholly possessed with most grievous symptoms, which
could not be removed nor mitigated, by any remedies, or art, nay some of them
not long after died. But we know the vehemence of this evil, if as was said
even now, some be presently infected, if the pain be most cruel, if the erosion
pierce to the bones, if many putrid and stinking excrements proceed every where
from the body. For by how much the evils are the more, and more grievous, by so
much the power of this virulency is the greater.

CHAP. VII. Of Prognostics.
BUt that we may know, what hopes there is concerning the event of this
disease, we must enquire whether the disease is like to be short, or long,
whether easy or hard to be cured, and at last what end it shall have.

But first of al concerning this disease, Whether this disease shall cease.
it is wont to be questioned amongst some Physicians in general, whether it shall
once have an end? Fracastorius indeed did hope for it, as was said before, and
thought, that even in his time this disease grew aged and that a little while
after it would wholly die, chiefly for this reason, because he thought it was
epidemious, and took its original from the Stars, which impressions of heaven
do not last always, but in process of time are changed, and because he saw
this disease did grow more mild. For as Jul. Palmarius writes of this subject
lib. 1. de lue Vener. Cap. 5. it was reported, that this disease at its first
rise was so filthy, that that which reigns now is scarce thought to be of the
same kind; for there were innumerable ulcers, rough and standing out, in the
figure and bulk of an acorn, a filthy humor flowing from them, and such a stink
exhaling that his nose that it reached, was believed presently to be infected.
The color of the pustles was between black and green, as much tormenting the
sick with the sight of them, as with their pain. Therefore al people did shun
the sight of them, and so abstain from touching them, as in no disease besides.
But Fracastorius his hopes deceived him, for as yet we do not see this disease
grow old, much less cease, and though the filthiness of the ulcers and pustles
be more tolerable, yet in pains and torments it is grown more cruel, as the
same Palmarius writes. It is more likely, that as long as those copulations and
conversings wi^h infected people, and wandering lusts shall endure, so long also
this disease will last, and be propagated by contagion. For such is the nature
of this poison that it does not suddenly kill a man, in the interim those who
are sick of that disease, are infect ous those ways, of which we spoke before.
Whenas therefore there are every where many, who are poluted with that disease,
and others converse with them, there is yet no hopes that this disease should
cease are long, whenas the effect does not cease, unless the cause be taken
away. Neither is that reason firm enough, which some who are of a contrary
opinion do alledg; for they say whenas this disease is a contagion
preternatural and violent, it must necessarily have an end, whenas those things
which are preternatural and violent have not perpetual causes, and therefore
must needs cease to be; but the answer is easy; nothing indeed that is
preternatural and violent, is of it self perpetual, yet if the cause be
perpetual, that also may be perpetual. Therefore though as the plague is
sometimes extinguished, so this disease also might be, if the same diligence
were used, which is in preventing and curing the plague, as was said before:
yet because there are always men, who are sick of this disease, and can infect
others, and others do not abstain from their society, even this disease shall
continue so long, as that contagion shall last. And therefore Eustachius Rudius
rightly of this subject, Lib. 5. de Morb. occult. Cap. 11. writes, if there
were one prince of the whole world, or one conspiracy of many of them against
this disease, by the help of physicians this disease might be wholly rooted
out; viz. if they who are sick of this disease, were al committed to physicians
to be cured, in the interim were removed from the society of other men, and the
same were done with the infected with this disease, as is wont to be with those
infected with the plague or leprosy, there were hopes this disease might be
extirpated; and for this cause too, because the Veneral disease is not
contagious at a distance as the plague is, but for the most part is
communicated by copulation, sometimes by kissing and garments. But here is no
diligence used, and as the same Rudius says, Thieves, robbers, and murderers,
and other wicked persons are sharply punished, but public whores full of this
disease, and who daily destroy more than a thousand men, and polute whole
Families and Cities, are cherisht, smoothed up with slateries, and kept
gallantly. But leaving these, let us see what may be foretold of every
particular diseased patient.

1. Prognostics.
The Veneral disease for the most part of it self, is a disease of long
continuance, for this reason, Because the liver principally, and the nutritive
faculty is infected in it. But Galen teaches rightly, 5. de lo. affect. Cap. 2.
That of diseases of the heart al people die most speedily, of affects of the
brain more slowly, but the life is longer protracted when the natural actions
are hurt; and though the veneral disease be also malignant, and is not
undeservedly reckoned amongst poisons in its kind, yet its power in acting is
fat slower, than that of other poisons: yet the vehemence or weakness of this
poison in this or that body, and the disposition of the body, may make somewhat
to the length or shortness of this disease; for if the poison be more vehement,
the disease is the more dangerous, as shall be said by and by: if also the body
before did abound with vicious humors, the evil is increased, and made longer:
and indeed sometimes the stubbornness of this disease is such, that though it
seem sometimes to be wholly extinct, yet it has been observed that it has
sometimes grown fresh again after many, nay, thirty years, as was said before.

2. But whether this disease will be hard or easy to cure in any patient, must
be judged from the greatness of the disease, and strength of the patient, as in
other diseases. First of al, as concerning the nature of the disease it self,
though this disease be far more gentle, than other venenate diseases, yet
because it is not of the number of them which depend on manifest distempers,
but malignant and contagious, it may infect all the humors in the whole body,
nay it may pollute all the Similar parts, and hence it is hard to be cured.

3. Yet this disease when it is new is easier to cure, than when it is
inveterate; for in that new malignant quality, it only affects those parts, by
which it is propagated and for the most part the privities, but in the
inveterate disease, that very malignant quality is imprinted also on the liver,
and from the liver again is communicated to the blood, and by the blood to al
similar parts; for it is false, as appears out of those things which have been
formerly said of the nature of this disease, that the liver here is hurt in
sanguification, by no disease, but only by reason of an evil object, which mixed
with the blood and other humors, does pollute them, deprave and make them
vicious, and convert them into its own nature: indeed it is not to be denied,
that vicious humors also do corrupt the good, in the interim from good chyle
also in a liver evil disposed is generated bad blood, which appears even from
this, that through every part the nutrition a little while after is infected
through the whole body, which could not be, unless the liver were hurt.

4. Epiph. Ferdinandus writes, Hist. 17. That he has learned by experience,
and that other physicians have observed the same, that those who being once
cured are again infected with this disease, are either never, or with a great
deal of difficulty recovered.

5. Although the nature of this virulency does not consist in any manifest
distemper, yet if it light on a body hot and dry, and especially endewed with a
hot distemper of the liver, it is more difficultly cured. For whenas pock-wood,
Sarsaparilla, and the like, are hot and dry, that hot and dry distemper is
increased, and so, though this very disease be not increased, yet another
damage is brought upon the body, and whenas those proper medicines cannot
safely be administered, unless the body before were very well purged, by these
means it is heated and dried the more.

6. For the same cause, a hot and dry season of the year, as that of the
summer is, is not so fit for the cure of this disease, whenas the strength is
then Exhausted.

7. If also the strength be seeble, that it cannot undergo those strong
medicines which are necessary, or if the sick, out of custom or peevishness,
will not admit of necessary medicaments, it is made hard to cure.

8. If also a ^eaver, or consumption, or other grievous symptom, or disease be
joined, which may hinder the cure, the disease cannot easily be removed, as was
said even now, of a hot distemper of the liver, and of the whole body.

9. If there appear in the joints, callous, Schirrous, and hard tumors, and
those commonly called gummosities, the evil is hard to be cured, and is not
rooted out, by most powerful remedies: for such tumors never appear, unless the
evil be inveterate, and has taken deep root, most of which are sixth in the
bones under them.

10. Buboes in the groins if they be hard, and are not easily suppurated, and
those which sometimes break forth, sometimes vanish, are hard of cure, because
they signify a stubborn matter, and a weakeness of nature in expelling it: but
if they be easily supputated, and the strength be firm, and especially the
liver strong, they are arguments of a more benign Disease and matter; and such
Buboes, if they be kept open along while, may bring perfect health.

11. A roughness of the jaws which is attended with hoarsness, or an obscure,
or no voice, do show the evil to be ancient and stubborn, and which will scarce
be cured.

12. Ulcers that are new in the Yard are easily Cured, but in the Arsehole, or
about it, made difficultly, for they show the evil is now inveterate: and such
Ulcers are continually moistened by the Excrements, and Medicines cannot
conveniently enough be applied to them.

13. Ulcers also in the joints and other parts are most hard to cure, because
they signify an evil now inveterate, and which has invaded the whole body.

14. Ulcers in the mouth and jaws are not easily cured, because also they argue
the evil to be ancient, neither can convenient Medicines be applied to them,
and they are continually moistened, by the Excrements falling from the brain.

15. If the bones of the nose be eaten, and there be also a slow Fever, it
signifies an evil incurable, whenas now the disease is communicated to the
brain it self, or its Membranes.

16. Bunchings cut in this disease, especially the broader, are not easily
cured, and they argue an evil hard to be cured.

17. The color of the Skin depraved, and the falling of the hair, if
convenient means be applied, are not very hard to cure.

18. Pains especially in the Head, and upon the Shins, are oftentimes very
stubborn, that they yield to no Remedies, or at least not under a long time.

19. Vertigoes and falling sicknesses are most grievous and pertinacious, for
they show that the Veneral Virulency, has now possessed the brain it self.

20. Distillations also are lasting, because they also happen, only when the
evil is inveterate, and the brain is affected; the which are more dangerous and
grievous, if they fall on the breast and Lungs, and exulcerate them.

21. Also the noise in the Ears is for the most part lasting, and scarcely
removed, whenas there are diverse windings in the Ears, and their expulsive
faculty is weak, neither can medicines penetrate thither.

22. The running of the Reins also for the most part is lasting, or if it be
stopped grievous evils are wont to follow, and most heavy pains of the Head and
Joints.

23. But chiefly the Nature of the Contagion it self, from which the sick
contracted the disease, does manifest the force and greatness of the disease;
for this poison has sometimes a greater, sometimes a less activity, and
Physicians do relate who have often had such Patients in cure, that sometimes of
ten strong young men, who have had to do with the same Whore, not one of them
has escaped, therefore if it be known, from what he or she, this evil was
contracted, the Physician may the easier judge of the event of the disease.

24. Other things being alike, this evil is easiest cured, which is contracted
by Whorish Copulation, but that is harder to Cure, which the Infant has sucked
in with the milk, whenas the virulency goes into the stomach with the milk, and
hence in the Liver there is generated a virulent blood, which afterward runs
through the whole body, and Pollutes that. But the Hereditary evil is hardest of
al to Cure, and that which is communicated from infected Parents, with the Seed
and blood.

25. As for the parts affected, if the Liver only be affected, the evil is the
easier Cured, whenas it has a strong expulsive faculty, and Medicaments can
easily penetrate unto it: but the Spleen, Kidneys, Womb, and external joints
are not so easily Cured, but hardest of all the Brain, and the Lungs, because
they have a weaker expulsive faculty, and Medicaments do not easily penetrate
thither.

26. From al which it is easily collected, what will be the event of the Disease,
for by how much the more, and more grievous diseases and Symptoms are joined
with the Veneral disease, by so much the more the sick are endangered; by how
much the fewer, and lighter, by so much the less: and those chiefly die, who to
their putrid and Malignant Veneral Disease, have supervenient those Fevers
they call Gallical; for the Veneral Virulency whiles it corrupts the Humors,
and induces a Malignant quality into them, makes the Fever worse, and also
debilitates the innate heat, whence neither the Fever, nor that Malignant
disease can be overcome by Nature.

27. Very many also die of a wasting of the body, and a hectic Fever, or
rather a slow, and putrid one: for both the Veneral virulency it self, and the
pains, watchings, and other symptoms do debilitate the innate heat, hurt
nutrition, whence follows a wasting of the whole body, to which is joined a slow
putrid Fever raised from the evil Humors.

28. Sanguification also being hurt, some die of a Dropsy.

29. Many also die by reason of Catarrhes, falling down on the jaws and Lungs,
hindering and taking away their breath; or the Vessels of the Lungs being eaten
by a sharp Catarrhe, and first of al spitting of blood being raised, then a
Phthisick, they die.

30. Sometimes the Vessels being eaten in two by the acrimony of the Humors, and
Vomiting of blood caused, the sick die by too great a Flux to the stool, or by
the Womb.

CHAP. VIII. Of Prevention.
WHenas it is safer to prevent a Disease, than to cure it, Prevention
some Physicians endeavor to teach, by what means one may keep himself clear,
though he have had to do with an infected Woman. Of which business Fallopius
treats in the whole Chapter, 89. de Morb. Galli. and he writes that he should
seem to have done nothing unless he teach, how one seeing a handsome Woman, and
lying with her though she be infected, may be preserved from the French
Disease: and he calls the immortal God to witness, that he has made trial of it
in ten thousand men, and none of them was infected: and he propounds there two
medicaments, by which the Contagion received may presently be drawn forth,
dissipated, or dried up. Hercules Saxonia, propounds the same, de lue Vener.
cap. 16. and does very much commend them, and as Aurelius Minadous speaks of
this business, many confide that being guarded with those Medicines as with a
buckler, they may enter the most infected whores, and freely ramble all the
world over. Eustachius Rudius, also proposes the like Medicaments, Lib. 5. de
morb. occult. cap. 13. But indeed I do not believe, that those things can be
taught with a good conscience, by which so many men are encouraged to lust,
whom perhaps the fear of this Disease might have frighted from it; and
therefore we will say nothing of these Medicines; but Aurelius Minadous thinks
they themselves are deceived, that teach such things, Cap. 31. de Virulentia
Venerea. Where he overthrows Fallopius foundation, who thinks that this Disease
is only communicated by the least purulent bodies, which if they be wiped away,
extracted, dissipated, this Disease may be turned off, and he teaches that the
Contagion does not only enter by the external parts of the Privities, but also
chiefly by the internal, and runs through the Body, and that the infected
Vapors, and spirits do pass through the internal porosities, and are admitted
by the Veins; and therefore no man can promise himself health and safety from
washing, which only reaches to the external parts, nor from other Medicaments
outwardly applied, neither can such external Medicaments take away the
Pollution conceived within. The safect way therefore to avoid this Disease is
to abstain from whores, and to remember that Whoremongers and Adulterers the
Lord will judge, who yet is wont also to punish them in this Life, with that most
filthy Disease.

Yet Jul. Galmarius, has another way of prevention of this Disease, to wit, by
internal Medicaments, and he writes that he has found out an antidote or a
Mullet, by the use of which men's bodies are rendered safe against this Disease,
yet he entreats and conjures al Physicians and Chyrurgeons, that they do not
communicate and make known that Medicine in obedience to lustful people, and
that they make not themselves fosterers of lusts, but to them only who must
necessarily converse with those that are suspected or defiled. But he describes
that Antidote, Lib. 1. cap. 8. and this is it.

Take of the Amulet for the Pox, and of old Mithridate, by Galens description,
of each six drams; Conserve of the flowers of Bugloss, of broom, of Rosemany,
of each three drams; mix them, give one dram, or a dram and an half, or two
drams at the most, in the morning two hours before meat, eight or ten days
together.

But if any one suspect himself to be infected, he admonishes that he
earnestly use a greater care for prevention: therefore let him take of the
Alexipharmacal Medicine even now described, swallowing a dram, or a dram and an
half in the morning and before supper, for eight or ten days together, whose
Verture that it may reach the easier to the more remote parts, when they have
swallowed it, it is expedient they drink presently after it somewhat of this
Julep, by which as its vehicle it may be carried into every part.

Take of the water of blessed thistle, burnet, Devils-bit, of each two ounces,
of Syrup of the juice of Sorrel, of Lemmons, of each an ounce and an half. Make
a Julep for two doses, to be drank presently after the taking of a dram and an
half of the Amulet, in the morning, and two hours before supper.

But whenas al those simple Medicaments, which are in that Antidote, are not
proper to this Veneral Disease, we must consult with experience, whether their
virtue be so great, as Palmarius cries it up for.

CHAP. IX. Of Indications.
THose Indications which are in other diseases, Indications
are found also in this; to wit, That which is taken from the Disease, called
in specy Curative: That which the cause does afford, Preservatory, whether also
are referred urgent Symptoms; and last of all the Vital, for they deservedly
challenge a place in this disease, yet in the explaining of them Authors vary
much, and as every one thinks of the Nature of this Disease, so also he
teaches concerning its indication and cure. We insisting on those things which
we have formerly preposed of the Nature of this Disease, and have strongly
proved, think thus of indications in this Disease.

First of al, whenas this Disease is occult, and Malignant, chief enemy to the
Liver and nutritive faculty, therefore it affords a kind of genercial
indication, but no specifical and profitable one can be had from thence, and
therefore only experience, which has found out Medicines working by an occult
quality, has administered profitable Medicines in this Disease: and unless the
Spaniards had received from the Indians such Medicaments, as Lignum Sanctum,
Sarsapartilla, China Root; and the boldness of Ciyrurgions, and especially
Jacob Carpus, had not fallen upon the use of Mercury, either by chance or by
argumentation, whiles they read that Avicen, Mesue, and Theodoricus, made use
of quicksilver, in certain pustles, and a crusty Scab, perhaps even to this day
the true Remedies of this Disease would lie hid. But though the Remedies of
this disease, were not found out so much by indication, as by experience; yet a
Method in curing of it is not wholly excluded, but has its place also, whenas
it is necessary that those Medicaments found out by experience be rightly
applied; and besides also Tumors, Ulcers, and the like Diseases springing from
the corruption of Humors, have their Method, by which they are cured. Yet in
this case we must have a care, that we do not look more on the manifest
qualities, and known diseases, than on the occult Nature of the disease, in
which business notwithstanding many do fail, who are tedious in curing of
diverse distempers, preparing the Humors, and directing their cure to these or
those diseases. Whenas yet it is plain by experience, that in a hot, and in a
dry distemper, and in an exustion of the Humors, as they speak, and in a
Consumption it self, we do most happily use pockwood, and the like hot and dry
things, and the Malignity being overcome, the rest do easily vanish.

Secondly, as concerning indication preservatory, Preservatory.
here we must chiefly have respect unto that Malignity and virulency imprinted
on the Humors, and that is to be destroyed by proper and Alexipharmacal
Medicines. Yet if there be any other faults in the Humors, it will not be
unprofitable also to mend them. And whenas the body is either burdened with a
Plenitude, or abounds with vicious Humors, the malignity is the easier
disseminated into it, and there is more plentiful matter prepared for
putrefaction, and the force of the Alexipharmacal means is dulled, it is
expedient to empty either the superfluous blood, or the vicious Humors, that
the other Medicines afterward may be administered more safely, more
commodiously, and with greater benefit.

Thirdly, the Disease and various Symptoms, Curative.
which supervene to the principal disease, and arise from the corruption of
Humors, are al to be removed in their proper manner.

Fourthly, the strength is to be preserved, for as no other disease can be
cured, Vital.
unless there be strength of body, so nor this; and al attempts are in vain,
unless at leastwise we have Nature willing.

And so there are four things chiefly to be done in this disease: First of al,
Four things to be done in the Cure of the Veneral disease.
if blood abound, that must be diminisht, and if any vicious Humors abound,
they are to be prepared and emptied, and if there be any manifest diseases,
which may be an impediment to the proper Cure, as obstructions and the like,
they must first of all be taken away. Secondly, the Malignity and virulency as
well that inherent in the humors, as that imprinted on the parts, and
principally the Liver, is to be destroyed by the proper Alexipharmaca of this
disease. Thirdly, the strength is to be preserved and confirmed, and first of
al chief care is to be had of the Liver, which suffers in this disease.
Fourthly, the diseases and Symptoms which are wont to be joined to this
disease are to be taken away.

Here we must clear a controversy, to wit, Whether the cure may be perfected
without sweating.
Whether this disease may be cured without sweating? Some are of this opinion,
That this disease may be taken away, though sweat be not provoked: And first of
al they prove it thus, Because this evil consists in a certain hidden quality
which cannot be taken away but by alteration of the body, whenas contraries are
cured by contraries: but that alteration may be affected by the proper virtue
of antidotes and decoctious administered, without sweating. Next of al they
allege experience, by which it is evident, that by the taking of such
Medicaments, some have recovered without sweating. Thirdly, they urge this,
That those that drink the decoction of the wood are sometimes happily emptied by
nature, by urine, by the stool, and not always by sweats.

Aurelius Minadous, contends against these, de Virulen. Vener. Cap. 39. And
first of al he writes that he never observed, that Physicians commanded the
decoction to be taken without sweating, to which al Alexipharmacal things of
their own Nature do incline men, neither is the matter it self unfit to be
expeld this way, being Vaporous and halituous: neither was there ever any one,
who did thoroughly and wholly overcome this disease without the help of some
sweating, especially if it were inveterate; but why he holds thus, he brings
this reason, That in his opinion, the essence of this evil does not consist in
a quality, but in the body affected with an evil quality: and therefore he
holds, as a quality does indicate alteration, so a body indicates Evacuation,
which though it may be many ways, yet most commodiously by sweating: whenas
this very thing is a Vaporous body, and is most rightly and easily discussed by
sweat; and he adds this, whenas there is a great quantity of Excrements
abounding in those bodies infected with this disease, not only in one part, but
al over the body; but sweat is an universal Evacuation, they are most
commodiously emptied by sweating: and he holds that sweats do very much profit
the Liver especially. For whenas that is the Forge of Humors, which are carried
through the whole body, and they are purged by the benefit of sweat, and freed
from al defilements, also the Liver polluted may be this way cleansed, and
though Nature sometimes do empty the virulent humors by some other part, as by
stool, or by Urine, and then her endeavor is not to be hindered, but to be
helped forward; yet he holds that without sweating the whole body cannot be
freed from that Disease, and he thinks that sweat only can empty from al places
both internal, and external, quickly, safely, and pleasantly.

But neither of these opinions does fully reach the Truth, The decision
and both delivers an imperfect Cure. For whenas the Curative indication so
called in general, is twofold; the one preservative, which is taken from the
cause; the other in specy called Curative, which is taken from the Disease;
they who think this disease may be cured without sweat, because it consists in
a certain hidden and Malignant quality, think right concerning the curative
indication, whenas that malignant quality cannot be taken away by sweating, or
other Evacuations, but by proper Alexipharmaca, yet they neglect the
preservative indication, and the cause: for whenas it is certain, that in the
Veneral disease, there is not only a vicious disposition, and Malignant, in the
parts, especially the Liver, but that all the Humors of the Body are corrupted;
there is required then an Evacuation of them, which is most commodiously done
by sweating, as Minadous rightly proves. For though something be discussed
insensibly, yet that insensible Evacuation is not sufficient, and it is too
slow. But Aurelius Minadous, thinks well concerning the taking away of the
Cause, and the Evacuation of vicious Humors, which is most rightly done by
sweating; but he neglects the disease it self, or that Malignant quality,
imprinted nor only on the Humors, but also on the Living parts: from which it
appears, which is diligently to be taken notice of, that the dispute of occult
diseases, is not amongst those which Galen calls Logical, but does conceive the
very essence of these diseases, and that the ignorance of the occult diseases,
does not only breed Errors in theory, but also in pactice. Therefore though we
do grant, that the Evacuation of Humors is well ordered by sweating, yet
Alexipharmaca are necessary also, against that malignant disposition in the
parts, especially in the Liver, and Fernelius, whom Palmarius follows, or this
very cause do add peculiar Alexipharmaca, as shall be said, that that Malignant
disposition may be pulled up by the Routs. For though all the vicious Humors be
emptied, and al other diseases and Symptoms do cease after their emptying; yet
unless that Malignant disposition be taken out of the parts, the evil grows
fresh again, and oftentimes a long while after. And this I think is the cause,
that not only the decoction of Pockwood, Sarsaparilla, and the like, is given
in the morning to provoke sweat, but also without sweating is taken as common
drink; for the very same proper Medicines, which do destroy the occult cause
and malignity in the humors, and do empty the vicious humors by sweat, are able
also to Eradicate the disposition imprinted in the parts.

Last, of all this must not be past over, that the indications proposed before,
are not necessary to be observed in every French disease, but only in that,
which has almost invaded the whole body, and especially has possessed the
Liver. But if the evil be new, there is no need either to let blood, or to give
purges, whenas the fault is not yet communicated to the humors, but it is
enough to wipe off, or call forth the contagion received, which also is
sufficient in the scab newly contracted by contagion, where yet we must
observe, whether those pustles, and French rottenness, as they call it, do
immediately proceed from contagion, and whorish copulation, for then external
medicines do suffice, or whether they do arise from the Liver now affected, for
then there is need of evacuations and alexipharmaca.

Chap. X. Of the Cure. And first of bleeding.
FIrst of al therefore as concerning indication preservative, or the removing
of the causes, and bleeding at the beginning; truly the cause of this disease
properly and next of al is not taken away by letting of blood; yet if blood do
abound in the body, and that especially be too hot, the proper remedies of this
disease, which are hot and dry, cannot be safely administered unless the
abounding blood be first diminished.

And truly if the virulent matter have no peculiar motion to any part, the
basilick vein may first of al be opened: but if the matter have motion to some
particular part, as to the groin, and nature thrust forth a bubo, bleeding is
warily to be used: for if the bubo tend to suppuration, we must not let blood,
and especially in the Arm, lest nature be troubled in her expulsion, and the
matter be recalled to the inward parts. And it has been observed, that many
from the bubo opened, and the matter a long while emptied by it, have become
perfectly found; on the contrary from unseasonable bleeding, the evil has been
prolonged; therefore in bleeding we must attend the motion of nature, and when
the tumor does not afford hopes of suppuration, a vein must be opened in the
lower parts, for so the the matter is retracted toward the lower parts, and by
reason of the efflux of hot blood, it is afterward more easily suppurated.
After the same manner a vein is to be opened in the yard, if there be
rottenness in the privities, or a running of the Reins, and wholly if the
parts below the Liver be affected: but if the matter rush to the head, and
there cause most vehement pains, filthy ulcers, falling of the hair, the
cephalic vein in the Arm is most commonly opened.

The other precepts which are propounded in general concerning the right
administration in bleeding, are here also to be observed; which whenas they are
not proper to this affect, we shall no further propose them here.

If the strength will not bear bleeding, instead thereof the hemorhoidal veins
of the Arse, may be opened, or Cupping-glasses be applied in convenient places.

Chap. XI Of the preparation, and purging of vicious humors.
NExt of al if the body be cacochymical, Preparation and purging of humors.
the vicious humors must be emptied and prepared with convenient medicaments;
whenas in an impure body alexipharmacal means, and proper remedies of this
disease, do profit little, nay they may bring hurt, and though that disease be
overcome, may tender the body obnoxious to other diseases. For vicious humors
collected about the bowels cannot al be discussed and dissipated by sweat, but
the thinner part being discussed the thicker is left, and grows dry, and is
fastened in the bowels, and oftentimes contracting an acrimony, does weaken the
substance of the vessels: from whence that disease grows sometimes more stubborn
to cure, and there arise obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and schirrous
tumors, hypochondriacal diseases, and creeping ulcers.

Nor yet is purging only to be used in the beginning, and before the proper
cure of the disease, but also the whole time of the cure, if vicious matter be
collected again, it is to be emptied by intervals: yet if the evil be now
inveterate, and stick principally in the external parts, the vicious matter is
not rashly to be recalled to the inward parts by strong purgers, least the
Liver, Stomach, and other bowels be hurt and weakened, but it is to be emptied by
convenient places, where nature tends.

But concerning the preparation and purging of humors, though many Authors are
large enough, yet whenas those things which are spoke by them, concerning an
universal preparation and purging of humors, are not proper to this disease,
but are common to al depending on a cacochymy: it seems not worth our labor, to
dwell upon those generals, which are already known by the cure of many other
diseases. We shall only admonish you of these things; first of al when the
disease is new, we must observe, what vicious humors abound in the body, and
especially in the second region, and those must be prepared and emptied. But if
the evil be now inveterate, because in that for the most part, thick and adust
humors are collected, the medicines are first of al to be directed against them.
Next of all this is to be observed, that we have respect also to the distemper
of the bowels, and if they have contracted any distemper, that must be
corrected, and they must be strengthened with proper medicaments. Thirdly, it
is necessary, that we always ad somewhat to our preparatives and purgers, which
does resist the Veneral virulency by a specific faculty; and therefore
concerning common purging medicines we wilad nothing, whenas they are every
where obvious and known, but this that many physicians do testify, That
Mechcacan, to which belongs Jallop, is given not only for its purging faculty
with benefit in this disease, but also because it is an enemy to this evil by a
peculiar power, so that it is numbered by some amongst the antidotes of this
disease. Then by the Chemists mercury prepared is chiefly commended for the
curing and purging of this disease, of which shall be spoken hereafter in
particular.

Chap. XII. Of the proper remedies and antidotes and alexipharmaca of the
Veneral Disease in general.
AFter the body is emptied in convenient manner, the greatest hopes of this
cure is in the proper antidotes of this disease, as from which only perfect
health can be hoped for so indeed, that though diverse other diseases, arising
from the corruption of humors, be often joined with this disease; yet if that
malignity be taken away, a little while after either they vanish of their own
accord, or are easily cured, but without the help of these remedies, no perfect
cure can be hoped for by other medicines, under what name soever: and this too
is observed by many that these kind of medicaments though by their manifest
qualities they seem to be adversaries to a hot and dry distemper, yet these hot
and dry medicaments have been used with most happy success by many who were
endewed with a hot and dry distemper of the Liver, nay of the whole body, and
who had a lean habit of body, nay were almost plainly consumptive, from which
very thing appears, that in this disease, we ought rather to take care of the
occult malignity, than of the manifest distemper. And therefore as soon as the
body is in some sort prepared and emptied, we must maturely hasten to those
Alexipharmaca of the Veneral disease.

But though some Physicians would advance and extol the virtues of those
medicaments which shall presently be reckoned up, Alexipharmaca of the Veneral
disease are necessary.
whiles they hold, that the decoction of Juniper wood, of the Olive tree, Box,
Beech, and other trees may perform the same, as the decoction of Guajacum, so
that a most slender course of diet be used, as is wont to be observed with the
decoction of Pock-wood: yet experience has long since taught that that is
false: for though it be certain that by a most slender diet some symptoms of
this disease do grow more gentle, yet unless proper remedies be administered, a
little while after the disease is seen to grow fresh again, and return more
cruel: for such medicines indeed with a slender diet, may consume the vicious
humors, but they cannot overcome the malignity: as therefore this disease is
occult, and is not known but by its effects, so also the remedies which cure
this disease, are not found out by reason, but only by experience.

But what those medicaments are, Physicians again do not fully agree. What they
are.
Many put their greatest hopes in Quicksilver, and think that the only and
proper Alexipharmacum of the Veneral disease; others do wholly reject it, of
which business shall be spoke hereafter. Others, and most men indeed, undertake
the cure of this disease with the use of Guajacum, Sarsaparilla, China root,
Sassafras wood; and others doubt of these very things, nay some deny that this
disease can be overcome by the use of Guajacum only and the like, and therefore
they think their virtue ought to be quickened and increased by the mixture of
other things. Jul. Palmarius lib. de lue Vener. cap. 13. distinguishes and
thinks that Guajacum is not of so great force that that alone can wholly
extinguish the root, and all the deadliness of the veneral poison; neither that
it is so weak, that it can do nothing without the help and conjunction of other
things; he writes indeed that by the use of that alone, the humors being
consumed, all the symptoms of the disease will at length be allaied, and wholly
lie hid, but yet the virulent taint of the disease, which is already in the
solid parts, is not overcome, and wholly extinguished in most people by that
remedy; but that the deadliness of the latent poison be wholly extinguished, and
that the return of the disease be prevented, he thinks other alexipharmaca
ought to be administered, which opinion doubtless he received from his Master
Fernelius, for he writes that he, as in lib. 1. de. lue Vener. cap. 7. did
first dare to promise a perfect cure of the French Disease without the use of
Quicksilver, and that he took care for the Composition of many Alexipharmaca
at his House, which he gave against this poison with Guajacum, and sometimes
without it, and as he writes in the alleged Cap. 7. two of these medicines
which he found to be most excellent and efficacious, he by the addition of
other medicines has reduced into one, which hitherto never failed any man.

But whenas these medicaments are compounded of common Alexpharmaca not proper
to this disease, we shall not propose them in the first place, but hereafter we
shall speak somewhat of them. But in the first place, we shall treat of those
things which most Physicians have hitherto used, and which long experience has
now confirmed to be alexipharmaca of this disease, by the use of which it has
been a long time observed, that not only the vicious humors have been emptied,
and the symptoms destroyed; but the very roots of the disease have been pulled
up, that it could no more return. Of which sort are your pock^wood,
sarsaparilla, China root, Sassafras-wood, of which we will now speak.

Chap. XIII. Of the Indian Wood, and Guajacum.
ANd first of al we will treat of the Indian wood, The Indian wood.
as being that which challenges the chief place amongst the remedies of this
disease. For whenas this disease is reported to be endemious in the Indies, the
chief remedy is also fetched from thence, which they call the Indian wood; but
this sort of wood, Two fold. Guajacum. The holy wood.
as appears by Consalvus Oviedus a noble Spaniard, who writes of things in the
Indies, is two fold; the one which is commonly known, called Guajacum, the
other which is called the holy wood. For though by many these two woods are
taken for one and the same, yet the forementioned Author, does distinguish them
both by their marks and places, concerning which see Fallopius de morb. Gal.
cap. 39. yet whenas both woods have the same force to overcome the French
disease, (though it be reported that the holy wood be of greater force against
articular diseases, and others, and the holy wood is now a days seldom brought
over to us) we shall only speak of Guajacum.

Amongst other new Islands found out in former Ages, there is one also, which
the Spaniards the discoverers have called by the name of Hispaniola: whenas the
Veneral disease was reported to be indemious there, and the decoction of a
certain wood is esteemed there the only remedy of that disease, which at this
day is called guajacum, and by the inhabitants is pronounced with gaping
Huajacum. The Spaniards infected with the same disease, having found the same
decoction to be helpful, did afterward discover its virtue to others: the tree
is reported to be leaved like ash, the color of the wood within is blackish,
the wood it self is heavy and ponderous, it floates not in water, but sinks;
it is full of rozin, and while it burns, it sends forth no ungrateful scent, its
taste is somewhat bitter, with a light accrimony, pricking the tongue.

There is some doubt amongst physicians concerning the choice of it; The Choice
of Guajacum.
some are of opinion, that which is whitish, is to be preferred before the
rest; whenas by how much the lesser it is in years, by so much the whiter it is,
but the older it is, by so much the blacker it is: but that which is older is
dryer, and that which is younger is more moist, and more abounding with juice,
and therefore more powerful. But indeed whenas there is a two fould humor in
living things, the one primogenious, the subject of innate heat, or the
implanted spirit, apt to take fire; the other alimentary, more watrish, and
less apt to be set on fire: the virtues of this wood, as also of other plants,
are not to be judged from the alimentary and more watrish humor, but from that
implanted heat, and primogenious humidity; which whenas in 'its tender age,
both in infants, and in plants, it is overwhelmed and obscured by much moisture,
many actions in that age are infirm and weak, which afterward that moisture
being somewhat wasted, and the heat become more vigorous, in progress of time
they become more strong, and this heat the chief instrument ofal actions is
wont to consist unchanged til it comes to its full age, and height: and
therefore though the same innate heat and radical moisture be always in
Guajacum, on which its virtues do depend, yet because in the young and tender
wood, that virtue is as it were over whelmed, and restrained by the abundance
of moisture, that wood which is the younger is less efficacious, than that which
is now of a full confirmed growth: and therefore for the cure of this disease,
we must not choose that wood which is yellowish, or that is of a box color, or
that which is cut of a tree not full grown, or from the boughs, as being less
efficacious; but rather that which is somewhat black, because that is more
roziny, and abounds with that fat and balsomy substance, How the age of this
wood is to be discerned
in which does chiefly reside that virtue opposite to veneral virulency. It is
good therefore to know the age of this wood, that we may choose the most
effectual. For that indeed which has the inward part black, and is long ways
divided with clefts as it were with certain lines of a duskish color, gathered
into blackish rounds, that is efficacious, but yet it is such as is cut off
either from the arms of trees, or certainly has not yet attained its full
maturity, and therefore it is of less efficacy: for those kind of Lines do
therefore appear because that fatty substance, which does chiefly reside in
the middle trunk of the tree, is not yet so plentiful, as to fill up all the
internal parts of the wood: but that which is black al over the internal parts,
the superficies only being whitish, that if it be sound, weighty, and odorous,
and prick the tongue with a light acrimony, and either is not divided with any
lines, or else with those full of rozin, and therefore while it burns besides
the grateful smell it sends forth, it also yields a blackish rozin that has
attained the highest degree of maturity, and is cut off from the body of the
tree, and is therefore most effectual, but if it be divided with lines, and full
of holes, and neither weighty, nor odorous, nor acrimonious, and being lighted
yields no rozin, it is a sign that that is now old, and therefore its virtues
are grown dull.

L. Septalius also does admonish us here, that there is a certain sort of
Guajacum, which is never to be brought into use, which has no true blackness
in the middle of it, but is of a somewhat dark and greenish color, which
makes the decoction very thick, that it will never be clear, and by its
exceeding acrimony, it causes a heat both in the throat and jaws, and by
reason of its thick and earthy parts, for the most part it causes obstructions
in the spleen, sometimes also in the liver, Empiricks call it the wild holy
wood: but whereas he finds no where in Authors this twofould difference of
domestic, and wild; he rather thinks it acquires these qualities from the
nature of the soil.

Also if the bark be thick, and cleave so to the wood, that it can scarce be
pulled and parted from it, the wood is good: but if the Bark be easily
separated from the wood, either it is old, or perished by salt water: also if the
wood appear fatty whiles it is rasped, and that being masticated does bite, and
leave a bitterness behind it; and whiles it is cut, it appear solid with an
even superficies, not rough and full of holes, the wood is good.

The Bark of this wood is endewed with great acrimony and bitterness, The bark
of Guajacum.
and therefore dries, attenuates, and digests more powerfully than the wood;
but because that occult virtue which is opposite to this disease, is rather in
that fatty and moist, and balsamical substance, the wood is always preferred
before the bark; and besides the bark is not so conveniently given in hot and
dry bodies.

As concerning the virtues of Guajacum, it is hot and dry, as may be perceived
from its taste, smell, and acrimony, and that in the second degree, The virtues
of Guajacum.
and it is also of thin parts, whence it has power to attenuate crass things,
to cut and cleanse clammy humors, to open obstructions, to move sweat and
urine, and to dissipate and wast superfluous cold humors: but this pockwood is
not chiefly given for those qualities (whenas there are found in Europe
medicaments endewed with those qualities, that there was no need to transport
them out of the Indies) but principally for that peculiar and occult power. By
which it is opposed to the Veneral virulency: and truly al physicians almost
do agree that pockwood does deserve the first place amongst the alexiplarmaca
of the veneral disease: for though Fernelius would somewhat lessen its virtue,
because all that are affected with this disease are not cured by the use of it,
yet this is no sufficient cause, since there is found no such alexipharmacum,
or other medicine which can cure diseases past hope. But this wood is by an
occult quality and propriety opposite to the Veneral virulency it self, and is
a friend to the radical moisture, and natural balsom, which does most of al
suffer by this virulency inimicous to the nutritive faculty; and does so
strengthen it, that it has been observed, that those also, who had a liver,
and whole habit of body hot and dry, and who have been almost consumed with the
veneral disease, as was said before, by the use of the decoction of this wood,
though by its heat and dryness adverse to them have been restored, and become
better habited and more corpulent. Some indeed have dared to write, that the
decoction of this wood does nourish as much as chicken broth: but these seem
to me, to be excessive in the praise of this wood: for though it be a
vegetable, and perhaps may leave some alimental juice in the decoction, yet I
think no body that is in his right mind will easily deny, that a chicken has
not more convenient nourishment for a man, than Guajacum, Whether pock-wood do
nourish.
but that some after this disease become more corpulent, is accidental; for
whenas by reason of the Veneral virulency nutrition was hurt in the whole body,
when that is discussed and extinguished, the body begins again to be nourisht
well, and to be augmented: the like of which happens also in some other
diseases, especially in fevers, before which whenas men were not well flesht by
reason of evil nourishment, the vicious humors being waisted by the disease
afterward they begin to be nourisht well, and become more corpulent.

Fr. Arcaeus also lib. de curand. vulner. rat. gives the Whether the decoction
of Guajacum, sarsaparilla, sassafras China root, do fatten.
Decoction of Guajacum for ulcers of the Lungs, and the ptisick; and he writes,
that bodies, though they be wasted, are not offended by it, but rather grow fat
upon it: nay there are some, who attribute a nutritive power to Guajacum, and
write that it is no less nourishing than chicken broth. The same virtues also
others do attribute, The decoction of Guajacum, Sarsa, Sassasras, China root,
nourish not but by accident
to Sarsaparilla, Sassafras, and especially to China root, but indeed though it
be found by experience, that in the ptisick, Veneral disease, scab and other
diseases, bodies extenuated, have been restored again, and made fat by the use
of these decoctions, yet this comes to pass not of it self, because these
decoctions have a nutritive faculty, as other nourishments, but by accident, in
as much as they take away the cause of leanness. In ptisick bodies the case is
plain; for whenas that wasting of the body proceeds from an ulcer of the Lungs,
the ulcer being dried up by the use of Guajacum, the body begins to be well
nourisht again: the same happens in other diseases, as the French, the Scab,
and the like. For whenas that leanness, and consumption does proceed from bad
nourishment, but bad nourishment for the most part from acrid and falt humors,
which do both consume the good blood, and hinder the agglutination of it to the
body, those vicious humors being wasted by the decoctions, and discussed by
sweats, the bodies begin to be nourisht well again, nay grow fat.

But this wood has not only an alterative power, and by its occult quality to
extinguish that malignity of the Veneral virulency, imprinted both on the
humors, and the solid parts, but also to evacuate, both sensibly by sweating,
and insensibly by insensible transpiration: and therefore the way of curing the
French disease by Guajacum, and medicines of affinity with that is most in use.
For though by reason of the length of the cure, and the pains of sweating, and
the slender diet, it cause some trouble to them: yet it is far safer than that
way, which is by quicksilver, where if there be an error, the patient is in no
small danger.

But there are prepared out of Guajacum diverse medicaments, Medicines made out
of Guajacum.
and those either in a liquid form, or in a solid, and in substance: but those
given in a liquid form, are most effectual, whenas they are easily deduced
into act and penetrate into the whole body, and do irritae the expulsive faculty
of al parts to cast off what is hurtful: but in a solid form, whenas that part
in which the virtue of the medicine does chiefly reside, is not yet separated
from the earthy and thick part, it is not so easily deduced into act. The
decoction therefore as most convenient is most in use: yet if any by reason of
the continued use of this medicine be weary of it, and nevertheless do fear
least there be some relics of the evil humor remaining, or their course of
life will no longer admit of the use of the decoction as it ought to be taken,
to such, medicines made out of this wood, may be given in another form. Amongst
which extracts and spirits, as shall be said, are most efficacious, and far more
excellent than pouders.

But the manner of boy ling this wood is various, The manner of preparing a
decoction of the wood. Whether it ought to be boiled in Wine.
both in respect of the liquor in which the decoction is made, and of the
quality of the liquor: for some boil the wood in water, some in Barley water,
some in distilled waters, others in wine, others in Whey, and others in broth
of Flesh. L. Septalius lib. 7. adnimadu. nu. 204. reprehends those who deny,
that the decoction of this wood may be made in wine only, when as nothing is
more fit to extract the faculties of medicines, than wine, and the water of
wine (he had spoke righter than the spirit of wine) and therefore he prepares
his decoction with wine, which he uses when the disease is inveterate with an
evil habit of body, and a cold matter predominant: after this manner eight
ounces of the bark of the best holy wood grossly poudered being infused in
forty two physical pints of the best white wine, for two days, the wine being
first heated and always kept hot those two days in a double vessel, or in the
ashes; afterward with a slow fire boil it away in a double vessel, to the
consumption of the third part, which let the sick make use of, both in the
morning instead of a syrup, and for his drink at meals, let him take in the
morning seven ounces, and an hour after move sweat: but at dinner, and supper
let him not exceed fourteen ounces. But though we grant that wine is most
commodious to extract the virtues of vegetables, yet this cannot be denied that
by boiling the strength of wine does vanish, and when the spirit is exhaled,
there is left a nauseous phlegm less profitable than plain simple water. And
therefore I am of that opinion that either the wood is to be boiled in water,
and toward the end, the wine is to be added, or else the wood is only to be a
long while infused in wine, or to be boiled in a double vessel, that nothing be
lost, but by no means to the Consumption of the third part.

Therefore most commonly and rightly the decoction is made in pure water, which
does both a little correct the Heat and dryness of the Medicine, and further
the distribution, and provocation of sweat, yet if the body, and especially the
stomach be cold and weak, and the Patient accustomed to wine, Wine is not
unprofitably mixed with it, as was said even now, and shall be said hereafter;
for by the admistion of Wine the stomach is less hurt, and the virtue of the
Medicine does the easier penetrate to all the parts.

And a different proportion of the wood to the water is observed according to
the age, constitution of the body, and season of the year, The proportion of
wood to the water.
and they take to twelve pound of water, from three ounces of the wood to
twelve: for if the season of the year and the body be hot, it is safest, to take
a less quantity of the wood, and in a longer time to perfect the Cure, than by
too strong a Medicine to damnesie the patient, especially at the beginning of
the cure, and before the superfluous Humors in the body be abated, and sweat
begin to flow easily and exquisitly, and the patient be accustomed to the
Decoction, afterward by degrees you may take more of the Wood, which unless it
be observed, the Patient is easily brought into danger. And Eustachius Rudius
writes, Lib. 5. de Morb. occult. Cap. 13. That he has seen patients who by
this error, viz. too great a quantity of the wood given on the first days,
have fallen into a Fever, that afterward they have been forced to abstain
from the use of the decoction, to their great detriment: but where there is no
such thing to be feared, in those of ripe years, we commonly add to one pound
of the wood rasped or turned small, twelve pound of water, in an earthen Vessel
glased, and let it infuse twenty four hours in a warm place, afterward the
vessel being well covered boil it with a gentle fire, til half, or the third
part remain, and let the decoction cool in this vessel still covered, afterward
strain it.

Fallopius Lib. de morb Galli. cap. 46. After what manner it is to be boiled.
disputes whether it be better to boil it with an open fire, or in a double
vessel as was said, or in Balneo Mariae, and reprehends them who hold that the
decoction made in Balneo is more dilute, or less powerful: and that the
decoction made in Balneo, is more excellent than that which is made with an
open fire, he endeavors to prove by the example of distilled waters, which by
the balneum are made most excellent, when as there is no adustion in them, but
the greater eliquation which is made in that hot and moist, does render the
decoction more excellent; but experience teaches otherwise, which reason also
does confirm. For though out of some moister plants, as Roses, Violets, Lilly
of the valleys, and the like, being fresh, whose virtue consists in the
volatile part, as the Chemists speak, the best waters are made in balneo
without the affusion of water: yet in hotter plants, especially in Roots and
woods, whose virtue consists in the oily part, their virtue can never be
extracted by the too gentle heat of a Balneum, as happens also in many seeds,
but they must be distilled by a Vesica through which by the vehicle of the
water, A chemical Vessel.
those more fixed parts may be elevated: when as then the whole virtue of
Guajacum does consist in that oily and rozeny part, and there is need of strong
boiling that that may be extracted, the gentle heat of a Bolneum cannot do it,
but it must be boiled in an open fire, which nevertheless causes no adustion,
if there be added a sufficient quantity of water.

Some for the better gust, and that the bitterness and acrimony may be abated,
a little before it is boiled enough add of Raison and Liquorish, of each one
ounce; and you may add Sugar, or some Julep to relish it, Aurelius Minadous,
de virulen. Vener. Cap. 4. holds the Decoction ought chiefly to be Dulcorated
with Honey; for he thinks that a small quantity of Honey, if it be boiled with
it and Skimmed, will rebate all the bitterness, and the Decoction acquire a
greater power to cleanse, attenuate, open, and make fusil the Humors, and
strengthen the parts: which we grant may take place in phlegmatic bodies, and
especially in a cold stomach; so whenas honey does easily turn to Choler, we
think it cannot safely be used, in chollerick bodies, hot and dry, but more
conveniently and safely Raisons, Liquorish, or Sugar.

Some also in those who have a hot and dry Liver, do add toward the end of the
decoction a root or two of Succory, one or two handfuls of Endive, Sowthistle:
but whenas such decoctions are to be continued along while, we must have a care
least by the admistion of such things they be made ungrateful, and provoke
nauseousness in the Patient: besides whenas for the most part there is boiled
at one time Decoction enough for many days, but the addition of such Herbs
does cause, that the Decoction will not last so long, to prevent this, such
herbs are to be added not to the whole decoction, but to about one pound of it.

Some not unprofitably, especially to those accustomed to it, and whose stomach
is weak, do add toward the end of the decoction three pound of a sweetish
white wine; some prepare the whole decoction in wine, but not so rightly: for
the best part of the wine does evaporate in boiling, and there is left an
ungrateful Phlegm as was said before.

Aurelius Minadous, also does admonish, that the decoction of the wood is to be
given with a vehicle, which may direct the virtue of the Medicine to the parts
principally affected; and the Head most of al affected we must mix Cephalic
things; the Reins affected, things Nephtitical; the Liver, Hepatical; the
Spleen, things Splenitick. Which as we do not wholly disallow of, so we do not
always think it necessary, whenas the virtue of the decoction does easily of
it self penetrate into the whole body: but we must chiefly have a care, least by
the admistion of such Medicines, the decoction be rendered nauseous and
ungrateful to the Patient; which when he himself also considers, he admonishes
rightly, that such Medicines are more commodiously taken by themselves reduced
into a powder, or Bolus, or some other form, than mixed with the decoction; but
we shall speak hereafter of compound decoctions.

The Chemists whenas they fear least by the long boiling, Distilled water from
Guajaum.
which is to the half, or a third part, the Spirituous and subtle parts should
exhale and be dissipated, and so the virtue of the Medicine be diminished,
prepare this decoction another way, so that it loses nothing of its strength,
they take the powder of Guajacum and put it into a retort, and pouring a
sufficient quantity of water, they place the retort in the ashes, and apply the
receiving vessel, and making a fire under it, first they make a digestion, then
distill it, to the Consumption of one half of the water they give of the
distilled water four ounces; yet it were most commodious if the distilled water
were mixed with the rest of the decoction in the retort being strained; for so
they would have all the virtue; to that decoction remaining in the retort may be
poured more water, and let it digest twelve hours, afterward distill it; and
the liquor distilled may be given for common drink, and whenas it happens
sometimes, that Infants are born infected with the Veneral disease, or are
infected by their Nurses, this distilled and sweetened with Sugar may be given
them instead of Juleps.

Also after that the first decoction prepared the common way, The second
decoction.
is strained, twelve or eighteen pound of water again is poured to the wood
remaining after the first boiling according as the Patient is wont to drink
more or less, and is boiled to the Consumption of the third part; and being
strained is given for ordinary drink at dinner and supper, if they desire a
more pleasant and sweeter drink, you may add four ounces or more of Raysons, or
instead of Raysons, one ounce or two of Coriander seed prepared, and sweeten
the decoction with two or three ounces of Sugar.

But if any Herbs have been added to the first decoction, the decoction for
drink at meals must not be made of the remainders of the first decoction
because it would be nauseous, but you must prepare another fresh decoction, but
more dilute, or a wine of Guajacum, which is made thus: Wine of Guajacum.
Take four or five pound of the wood, four pound of white Sugar, ten pound of
white Wine, and put the wood into a wooden Vessel, and heat the Wine and power
it to it.

Some boil the wood the third time, and use the decoction to boil meat in, The
third decoction.
the same decoction also may be used to wash the hands, to cleanse the Nostrils,
and mundisie Ulcers.

And some give this wood other ways, some in the form of a powder, An
Electuary of Guajacum.
others make electuaries of it. Thus Nicol. Massa. Lib. 2. de Morb. Gal. Cap.
6. he takes of the Indian wood most finely prepared one pound, and with Syrup
of Fumitory boyles it to the form of an Electuary, of which he gives half an
ounce or an ounce; or take of the wood of Guajacum, Sarlaparilla, finely
poudered, of each one ounce, of the species of the three saunders and
Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each two drams; Conserve of Succory, Roses, of each six
ounces; with Syrup of Succory make an Electuary.

Others with a convenient Syrup make pills of it.

But others not without cause do here admonish us, that such Medicines are less
effectual, and that many, who were newly infected, when as they hoped for
health by the use of such Medicaments, by that delay and lingering and weakness
of the Medicine have fallen into a most grievous evil: for as was said, such
Medicines do less penetrate into the body. Yet toward the latter end of the
Cure, when the evil is almost overcome, and it is only feared, that there may
remain some evil disposition, and the long continued drinking of the decoction
of the wood is nauseous to the patient, such Medicines may be used to consume
the relics of the disease.

An extract of this wood is more commodiously prepared, and out of that pills,
An extract of Guajacum.
or rowles: but after the use of it there is need of taking some liquor, by
whose vehicle the extract may be distributed and carried into the whole body:
nay these extracts, according to the opinion of Hercules Saxonia, have scarce
so great strength as to overcome this disease if it be very great and ancient,
but the decoction is deservedly preferred before them.

Hercules Saxonia de lue Vener. cap. 27. writes that the oil is stronger, The
oil of Guajacnm.
and he thinks the whole Alexipharmacal power of the wood is placed in this Oil,
and he relates that he has proved by experience, that by the benefit of this
oil; the greatest and ancientest disease has been overcome. But he gives it
diverse ways, in wasted bodies with milk, in others of a hotter temperament,
with Conserve of Roses, or whey of Goats; in Melancholy with conserve of
Burrage or Bugloss, in Phlegmatic with Conserve of Betony, in those that have
knobs with Turpentine, and two scruples for a dose. But doubtless it was not
oil which Saxonia gave, but a liquid extract or Tincture as they call it. For no
oil is distilled from this wood by an Alembick: but that which is distilled by
a retort, or descent by an open fire, is found to be such, that it cannot
conveniently be given into the body, nay scarce with safety.

I attribute more to the spirit of Guajacum, The spirit of Guajacum.
the preparation of which is not every bodies work, for it requires a longer
and more diligent digestion and fermentation for the preparing of it.

There are some also who think, the leaves and fruit of this tree being reduced
into Conserves and Electuaries are to be used, and they relate, that the
Indians infected with this disease, do use them as Medicines; but though the
leaves and fruit may do somewhat in a light disease, yet they are not sufficient
in that which is great and inveterate, neither are they able to perform what
the wood does. But it is observed that the fruit of this Tree has also a power
vehemently to loosen the Belly; and whenas a fresh and light disease is
sometimes cured only with purges, it is no wonder that the Indians may be cured
by these purging fruits; especial since that al Alexipharmacal virtue against
this disease cannot be denied them.

CHAP. XIV. Of Sarsaparilla.
NExt to Guajacum, Sarsaparilla.
that Root challenges the first place in curing the Veneral disease, which
some call Spartam Parillam, some Salsam Parillam; the Spaniards Sarsam
Parillam, by reason of the similitude which it has with the plant called rough
bindweed. By reason of its thorns it is cailed Sarsa (for Sarsa in Spanish
signifies Briars or Brambles) but by reason of its leaves, and boughs, Parilla,
that is to say the thorny vine. Nay Fallopius de Morb. Galli. Cap. 63. is of
that opinion, that it is truly the rough bindweed, which grows every where in
Italy, and he writes that by the use of it, he has with happy success freed
many from the French Pox. Dioscorides also Lib. 4. Cap. 139. writes thus of the
rough bindweed, its leaves and fruit being drank before, and after, are
antidotes against deadly poisons; and besides it is delivered that if somewhat of
them poudered be given to a new born infant to drink, no poison shall afterward
hurt it. But grant it be so, that the Italian rough bindweed can do somewhat
against this disease, as also against other poisons, yet he himself grants,
that there is no light difference betwixt this and the Indian.

But Sarsaparilla grows in Peru, The native place of sarsaparilla.
in the hedges, as rough bindweed, the white and black Bryony, and hops do in
Europe. The Root creeps far up and down by the Earth, that it is oftentimes
above six cubits long, which gathered into bundles is brought over to us. The
good and fresh is white, solid, but that which is reddish, and poudery when
it is broke, is less effectual.

Its virtue as I have said is very great also in curing this disease, The
virtue of it.
and it is found by experience, that many have been cured by the use of it,
without Guajacum, and because it is more Temperate; and moderatly hot, and
without any acrimony, bitterness, or astriction, or smell, but has a certain
obscure sweetness, it may safely be given to al constitutions of body, and al
Ages; besides it is of thin parts, provokes sweat, dries eminently, resists
putrefaction, wastes superfluous humidity, somwaht loosneth the body, and
therefore is wont in some sort to weaken the stomach; but though Guajacum be
more powerful and efficacious, yet Sarsa in this exceeds that wood, that it
has an eminent power to allay the French pains, though never so accute and
stubborn, by reason of its exceeding tenuity, penetrating and laxative virtue:
and Jul. Palmarius writes, that no pain can happen so contumacious and so
continual, which at length it does not lay asleep and overcome, if any one use
the decoction of it for a long time and constantly. Nay al knotty French Tumors
so they be not bony, in what part soever they are, are Rooted out by the use of
it, their matter being melted and cast forth by sweats, or at the least wasted
and emptyed by insensible perspiration: and Fallopius writes in the alleged
place, that if after the disease is overcome there remain Ulcers, Clefts about
the ARsehole, that Sarsaparilla will heal them sooner by half than the Indian
wood, and in a short time also the most hard knobs are discussed by it. Yet
some admonish here, that by Guajacum indeed this disease may be perfectly
cured, and that al things are found in Guajacum; which are necessary for the
cure of this disease, but that sarsa does not alone, but mixed with Guajacum,
China Root, and Sassafras wood cure this disease, and for this reason, because
it looseness the stomach, heats less, is void of al acrimony, and therefore is
not so abstersive, and being inodorous, has not the power to refresh the
spirits. But these accusations fetched from the manifest qualities, seem not to
be sufficient; truly that Guajacum does challenge the first place in this
disease, is not to be denied, in the interim it has been observed also by
many, that sometimes this disease has been cured by the use of this Root only;
and if perhaps it do to much lax the stomach, that may easily be prevented.

But this also is given diverse ways, The manner of giving it.
for the most part as Guajacum in the decoction concerning which we must note,
they that will not spare for cost and desire the decoction should be more
effectual, they ought to take only the bark, as which is the more effectual
part of the Root, and to cast away the inner piths as that which is less
effectual, nay as it is delivered by some it is more cold, and has a certain
astrictive faculty.

But the Root of Sarsaparilla is taken being sliced thin and to one ounce of it
is poured two pound of water, The decoction.
or to two ounces and an half of the Root four pound of Water; some pour to
four ounces of the Root feven pound of Water, others to three ounces; ten pound
of water. Neither can the quantity of the water to the Root be so strictly
prescribed, but it may be varied according to the Nature of the disease, and
the condition of the sick, and the season of the year. For in an inveterate
disease there is need of a stronger decoction, in a new, of a weaker. But it is
steeped first of al fifteen hours or twenty, and afterward boiled to the
Consumption of one half; and reasons, liquorish and other things are added to
the decoction, as need requires as in the decoction of Guajacum; and because
the decoction of Sarsa does somewhat lax the stomach, for the most part mint,
Betony, or somewhat else that strengthens the stomach is to be added, or what
seems more commodious, Guajacum, or least the mixture of diverse things may
breed nauseousness after the taking of the decoction of Sarsaparilla, they must
take somewhat that strengthens the stomach.

After the first decoction is prepared, The second decoction.
fifteen pound of water are poured again to the remainders, and are boiled til
a third is wasted, and the decoction is used at dinner and Supper; some also
add toward the end of the decoction three pound of Wine; yet this must be done
then only as Fallopius thinks, either when the sick body goes abroad, to
preserve his strength, or when the stomach is weak.

Yet there may also be prepared out of this Root, pouders, Electuaries,
extracts, as are from Guajacum.

CHAP. XV. Of China Root.
THe Portugal Merchants brought over in the former Age, China root.
from the Country of China, a certain Root for the cure of this disease, which
they called China Root; for when as the Venereal disease had invaded that
Country also, as the Americans showed the use of Guajacum for the destroying of
this disease, so the people of China used this Root to cure the same disease,
and taught others the use of it. But the Root is a handbreadth long, sometimes
pretty thick, sometimes thinner, knobbed, somewhat reddish, pretty weighty, which
being newly dug up they report is so tender, that it may be eaten raw, and
boiled, as turnep and rape Roots are with us; the which seems not to be very
credible, whenas our Turnips, Rape Roors dried never attain to so great a
hardness: they are brought to us divided.

As concerning its virtues, it is neither strong in smell, nor taste, and
therefore there is no excess of it in heat and cold, but it is rather temperate,
or if there be any excess in it, it is rather in cold; yet it is dry in the
second, of thin substance, yet with a certain astrictive power, and a kind of
substantifical moisture, so that by the use of it men do grow Fat. Whence also
the decoction of it does easily sour. When it was first brought over by the
Portugals into France and the neighboring provinces, it was wonderfully cried
up by the Merchants, as being of thin parts, and having power to digest, to
more urine and sweat, to consum Excrements of al sorts, to cleanse the Bowels,
free from obstructions, clear the blood from corruption, to cake away pains in
the Joints, to be good for the Venereal disease, and because it is temperate, it
may safely be given to any age, sex; any time of the year, and to those that
are feverish; al which faculties whenas they are not in Guajacum, by some of
that time it was made use of not only for the cure of other diseases, but also
for the cure of the pox it was preferred before Guajacum. Which very thing
caused that Charles the fifth Emperor, being sick of a most grievous Gout, was
the first almost that would make trial of the use of this Root, upon the advice
of some Physicians. But experience afterward lessened that same; and Jul.
Palmarius writes of this business de lue Vener. Cap. 14. that many to their
great detriment have preferred this root before Guajacum, and that he has
found by experience, that also in a very strict diet it has been uneffectual
against this disease, oftentimes also the stomach is seen to become so moist
with the use of its decoction, and the Native heat oppressed, that a great
Lientery, and crudity has often followed in those who had but weak Fuel for
their implanted heat. Besides these discommodities and faults, he writes also
that it does oftentimes cause swelling of the Spleen and hardness, in those
that use it long; neither does he grant it to have extraordinary virtue against
this disease either by its whole substance or occult quality, when as after the
use of it, they who thought themselves well, do daily fall into a relapse of the
same Disease. The same also is confirmed by Gabriel Fallopius Lib. de Morb.
Galli. Cap. 60. who writes that he has used this Root again and again, for the
Cure of this Disease, but could do nothing with it, in the interim he writes
that he has used it with happy success for the dropsy, to moderate the
mobility of the Humors in hot bleared Eyes, and in a hot distemper of the
stomach and Liver. And other Physicians also agree in this, that this Root for
the Cure of the French Pox is far in feriour to Guajacum and Sarsaparilla,
although it be profitable to preserve and strengthen the heat of our body, and
therefore for other diseases. And if by chance any one, who could not be cured
neither by the decoction of Guajacum nor by the unction of Quicksilver, has
recovered health by the Decoction of China Jul. Palmarius thinks this is the
Cause of it, because Nature rejoicing in the Variety of Remedies and weary of
the stronger, at length is easied by those that are less effectual. Yet Garzias
ab Horto, relates of the Root being fresh, that it does so exceedingly heat,
that if any one use the pure Decoction of it, or drink it hot, by reason of the
too great heat of the Medicine he will fall into exceeding heats of the liver,
Erysipilaes, and Phlegmons, and other most grievous Symptoms. But when as it is
brought over to us insipid and sometimes dusty, there is no cause to fear any
such thing. Neither does this only happen in this plant, but also in many
others, that the Alimental juice has far other virtues, then the dried Plants:
and therefore though perhaps this Root being fresh in China may have great
virtue to Cure the Venereal Disease, yet it is not necessary, that it retain
the same with us.

But diverse prepare the decoction of this root diversely, The decoction of China.
Jul. Palmarius writes that the common way of preparing it is this, that to two
ounces of the root, cut into rounds, and put in an earthen pot, there is poured
four pound of water and let them steep twelve hours, afterward boil with a
gentle fire to the consumption of the one half. Fallopius boyles two ounces of
the root in twelve pound of water, to the consumption of half, but according to
the nature of the disease the proportion of the root and water may be varied:
and the root may be boylled from one to three in twelve pound of water. Yet
Septalius advises us here, that this decoction is most commodiously prepared,
if one ounce of the root fresh and not rotten be boiled in ten pound of water,
and two ounces in twelve pound of water. For he writes, though many physicians,
to save charges, whenas many cannot take all that decoction in one day, and they
fear if they should keep it another day it would grow sour, do boil half the
portion of China in half the quantity of water, and boil away the half, or two
thirds, thinking that so they have both saved their purse, and prepared the
decoction as strong, yet they are very much deceived, and if they have not lost
their taste, they shall easily know, that that first decoction is much more
powerful, than the second, and the reason is ready, because it is not enough to
give a proportion of the root to the water, but the time of boiling is chiefly
to be considered, and the action of the heat of the fire, and the reaction of
the water. For whenas, four hours space, imagine, ought to be allowed, to
extract the virtue out of a most hard root, and communicate it to the water:
how much time will be spent in boiling away six or eight pints of water, if
taking but the half quantity, viz. half an ounce of China with six pints of
water, we suffer the half to wast or two thirds, which will be consumed in less
than two hours space, the water being less able to resist the action of the
fire? nor let any one dare to say that we may prevent this inconveniency, by
making a less quantity of fire, and if it he boiled by a slower fire for to
extract this virtue out of a more solid substance, there ought also to concur a
due quantity of fire.

Out of the remainders another drink is prepared by some for dinner and supper,
The Second decoction.
as out of Guajacum. Yet Palmarius thinks that all the virtue of that root is
transfused in the liquor at the first boiling, and therefore for ordinary drink
he boyles three ounces more of the root in eight pound of water til two pints
are consumed and he ads raisons and liquarish, nay some also drink the first
decoction, at dinner and supper, whenas it is not unpleasant to the taste.

Some also do admonish us, that we provide no more of the decoction at once
than may be spent in one day, whenas it quickly grows sour when it is cold,
therefore they command also that it be kept on warm ashes: but experience has
taught us that it will last four days. Yet because it grows sour, that very
thing tells us that this root has in it, somewhat spirituous and alimental,
which is the cause of fermentation, and hence of acidity.

Consult concerning this with Amatus Lusitamus centur. 1. curat. 98. and
especially centur. 2. curat. 31.

CHAP. XVI. Of Sassafras wood.
THey use also for the cure of the Veneral disease that wood which is connonly
called sassafras, which is imported form the Island called Florida:
Sassafras-Wood.
it is of an aromatical taste like fennel: it is hot and dry in the second
degree, of a thin substance and endewed with an opening, discussive, and
attenuating faculty; Its virtues.
and therefore is commended by them who have sailed to the Indies, against long
tertian fevers, evil habit of the body, and dropsy, and to strengthen the
stomach, and against nephritical pains, it is commended also for the gout, to
move the courses, and many other diseases, to treat of which is not proper to
this place; it is used also for the cure of the French pox, yet most physicians
agree that it is less effectual than Guajacum and sarsaparilla, and the
decoction of it is prepared almost as that of Sarsaparilla.

Chap. XVII. Of Sope-wort,
Last of al sopewort is commended by some physicians for the cure of this
disease which is bitter, Soapwors.
accid, and endewed with an abstersive and opening faculty, and is praised for
the French pox and contumacious pains, which cannot be over come by other
remedies. It Is reported to be the invention of Zapata a spannish Empirick: it is
used both in the decoction, and in substance, the decoction is prepared after
this manner.

Take of green sopewort two handfuls, Its decoction.
infuse them al night in eight pound of water, than boil it ^^l the s^pewort is
boiled enough, then strain one pound of it with half a pound of water and the
harbs now boiled; and squeez them, and reserve it for a mornings d^aught to
provoke sweat; taking seven or eight ounces. But that which remains sweeten
with raisons or sugar for drink at meals, in summer and Choleric bodies you
may add one handful of Sowthistle or basterd Navelwort.

But it is a remedy unpleasing to the taste, Eustachius Rudius takes of soap-wort
six pugils or more, and infuseth it in twelve pound of water, and boyles it to
the consumption of half. But as Septallius has observed, it is too great a
quantity of water to so sinal a portion of soap-wort.

But the Root Chiefly is used in substance, The powder.
and Rudius does very much commend it in ancient french pains, and out of it he
prepares this powder.

Take of ground pine two ounces; of white dittander one ounce and half; of
Zedoary six drams: of the root of soapwort three drams: of pearl prepared half
a dram.

Make a powder for 9. doses, but who can take for one dose almost four drams of
powder? and the other medicines do far exceed the soapwort, which
notwithstanding ought to be the basis.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Compound Alexipharmaca.
BUt though all the medicines hitherto reckoned up, Compouond Alexiphbrmaca in
the Veneral disease.
are good to destroy this disease, yet some are more effectual then others, and
besides some have other qualities, for the which they are useful sometimes for
this, sometimes for that end, as was said of the simples: and therefore seldom
one of these medicines is used, but for the most part, many of them together.
Indeed if the disease be simple, and none of the bowels be affected, nor there
is no eminent distemper in any part, which may hinder the use of Guajacum, that
wood is the most excellent of al, because it resists this disease both by its
occult and manifest qualities: but if any disease be joined with it, it is
oftentimes most profitable to add sarsaparilla and China and there are added by
some manny altering medicines, of which whenas we spoke before, in this place
we shall ad nothing of them, but this, that we must have a care least by the
mixture of Succories and endives and cooling medicines which are added to
moderate the heat of Guajacum which yet is not so much to be feared, they
hinder sweating which is only to be desired, and which brings more benefit,
then a little heating can do damage: next of al least by the admixtion of
other things the drink be made ungrateful and nauseous, therefore passing by
these that we may speak somewhat of the mixture of alexipharmaca, if the
nature of the patient be very hot and dry, and the humors violently fall from
the head on the lungs, breast or other parts, Guajacum wood is not commodiously
given alone, whenas it does farther heat and dry the parts, and by its heat
make the humors run and move, but then sarsaparilla is safer, and China more
comodious, which does at once moderate the heat, and has an astrictive power,
by which it stops defluxions: on the contrary if the strength be feeble, and
there be a weakness of the sight, sarsa is not commodious, whenas it loosenss
the stomach, and duls the fight, if there be a great consumption (if so be it
has not its original from the Venereal disease, for then this disease being
taken away as the cause, that wasting also cease, and the body begins to be
nourisht better) Guajacum and sarsaparilla are not safe, But then china is far
more profitable, as that which moistens substantifically, as they speak. Yet
Ludiciptalius commends Sasaparilla above all the rest against a consumption,
lib. 7. animadv. number. 214. as shall be said also hereafter in the last chapter.
So if cruel pains molest the patient, or gummous tumors, or exceeding ulcers
be joined with them, Sasaparilla is most profitable, which does discuss the
french knobs, and easier appease the pains, then Guajacum. Thus according to
the constitution of the Patients, and the Nature of the Diseases joined with
it, it is good sometimes to use Guajacum alone, sometimes Sarsaparilla, sometimes
China Root, and sometimes to mix al of them, in a greater or lesser quantity,
and sometimes the bark of Guajacum is added, sometimes three or four ounces
weight to one pound of the wood, and they are boiled in fifteen pound of water.
For examples sake.

Take Of the wood of Guajacum half a pound; of the bark of the same, of
sarsaparilla each three ounces: of China root one ounce and half. Infuse them
twenty four hours in twelve pound of water, afterward let them be boiled to
the consumption of half, for a sweating drink. Pour on the remainder twelve
pound of water, let them stand and infuse eight hours, afterward boil them to
a consumption of a third part, for drink at meals. Or.

Take of the Wood of Guajacum one pound; the bark of the same, Sarsaparilla of
each three ounces. Boil them in sixteen pound of water, to the consumption of
half. Or.

Take of the wood of Guajacum, China root each one ounce an half; Sarsaparilla
one ounce; infuse them twenty four hours in six poundof water, afterward boil
half away. Pour on the residue ten pound of water, boil it to the consumption
of three pound: Strainit and give it for drink at meals. Or,

Take of wood of Guajacum eight ounces; of the bark of the same four ounces;
sarsaparilla, sassafras wood each two ounces. Boil them in twelve pound of
water to the consumption of two thirds that there remains four pound, toward
the end ad four pound of wine. Pour to the remainder sixteen pound of water:
boil it to theconsumption of half, and toward the end ad four pound of wine,
make a drink for meals.

In this place we must not omit a question, concerning the use of purgers,
Whether purgers ought to be mixed with the decoction.
whiles the decoction is drank to wit whether they ought to be mixed with the
decoction or to be used at the same time with the decoction. For some do wholly
reject them, and hold that purgers are neither to be mixed with the decoction,
nor to be used apart, for this reason, because the bodies are wont diligently
to be purged before they come to the use of these decoctions; next of al
because purgers and sweaters do cause contrary motions. Others on the contrary
do mix purgers with these decoctions, that by benefit of them the blood may be
purefied, and the belly constantly kept loose: others do not mix purgers with
these decoctions, but purge at certain intervals, every eighth or tenth day, or
at a longer distance, as need requires. which last opinion seems to me to be
trewest. For though the body be purged before the use of these decoctions, yet
some may easily remain, and ever and anon be collected, and sweating does purge
only the thinner humors, but leaves the thick, neither after this manner are
there caused contrary motions; for that day, that purging is ordered sweaters
are not administered; but if purgers were mixed with the sweaters then there
would be contrary motions. And besides by the admistion of purgers, the
decoction being to be used so many weeks it would become nauseous and ingratful.

Hercules Saxonia also holds de lue Vener. Cap. 38. Whether purgers may serve
instead of sweaters.
That purging may be ordered every day, to wit in those, in whom sweat cannot,
or ought not to be caused: he thinks sweat cannot be provoked in them, who
either are of such a hard and thick Skin, that they can by no means sweat, or
in those who fall into fainting and swouning fits, as soon as sweaters are
administered: but he thinks they ought not to sweat, in whom the Veneral disease
possesses not the Joints, nor the Skin, nor the superficies of the body, but
has rather taken up its seat about the bowels; but this opinion seems not to
me to be agreeable to truth: for whereas he thinks, that some ought to have
purgers administered because they cannot sweat by reason of the thickness of
their Skin, or because they presently fall into swouning fits, is agreeable
neither to reason, nor experience: for scarce any one has so thick a Skin,
that the pores will no way open for sweat, and though on the first days sweat
does not prelently follow, yet after that the Humors are attenuated by the use
of the decoctions, the passages and pores are opened, then sweat succeeds;
especially if those Laconick Baths be applied as shall be said hereafter. And
the Patient may so moderate his sweating, that he need not fall into fainting or
swouning fits: and they that cannot endure sweating, will not easily endure
purging. Last of al purgers cannot perform the same, as those sweaters do. But
that in some bodies sweaters are not to be administered, is salf: for though the
disease may have its principal seat about the Liver and bowels, yet it cannot
be, but also vicious Humors do abound in the whole body, whenas the Liver
infected with this disease does generate virulent blood, and distribute it to
the whole Body.

Chap. XIX. Of the manner of using these Medicines.
AS concerning the manner of using these Medicaments, The manner of using these
Medicines. The dose of the decoction.
first of all the decoction of Guajacum is administered, for the most part in the
morning, and afternoon two hours before Supper. In the morning it is given from
five ounces to eight or nine ounces before the evening, from three ounces to
six ounces; the powder is given to two drams, the extract to two scruples. Yet
sometimes the evening drauft is omitted, especially at the beginning, before the
patient is accustomed to the Decoction. For what was said above of moderating
the quality of the decoction, that also is to be observed concerning the
quantity of the Decoction to be given, that the sick be not offended and
overcharged which too much of it; which unless it be observed, it happens
sometimes, that the sick fall into Fevers, contract Crudities, and there is
caused a looseness, ill habit of body, and a Dropsy.

After the same manner we must give the Decoction of Sarsapatilla, China Root,
and the compound decoctions. For though some do prescribe here diverse doses,
yet he shall not err, that shall administer them in the aforesaid manner.

And indeed after the mornings drauft, Sweat.
we must endeavor that the Patient sweat; for expetience teaches, that they
that sweat not upon the taking of these Medicaments, are ^carce clearly freed
from this Disease: but that sweat may flow the easier, let the Patient sleep
one hour after he has taken the Medicine, for so the Medicine is deduced into
act. The time of sweating.
As for the time of sweating, first of al it is sufficient, if the patient
sweat one hour, afterward by degrees let him rise to more. But the manner of
sweating is various; most do suffer their Patients to sweat in bed, which that
they may do the easier bottles full of warm water, or hot brick wrapped up in
Clothes, must be placed under the Armpits and sides of the Patient. Some
provide a wooden Mantle such a one as Andreas Tenzelius, has discribed and set
forth in Exeges. Chymiatre: which manner of sweating is not a little
toublesome. But not without cause most men do prefer before al kinds of
sweating in this disease, that which is in a bath or sweating place as that
which brings less trouble to the sick, when as weak Patients sweating in their
bed, may use a Bath and a sweating place, and the heat of the bath may be made
more intense or remiss at pleasure, be made dry or moist as the condition of
the sick requires: yet a moist has, and gently heated by the Vapor of hot
water is most commodious; whenas that hot vapor of the Water, does open and Lax
the pores of the Skin, that the sweat flows the easier, and without any trouble
to the sick: but dry baths are altogether laborious, and ought not to be used
in dry and Melancholy bodies.

But those sweating baths are twofold, Baths twofold.
first of al those gaeat ones in which a body may walk, such as are our baths
so commonly called in which many at once may sweat and be washed; such though
they be used for the cure of this disease by Barbers in Italy, yet they ought
to be eschewed, whenas if one that is lightly infected, receive that which
exhales from another grievously infected, he may be infected more, and it is
more commodious that every sick body sweat by himself. Then there are baths or
small sweating places in which one alone closed up may sweat: such are made of
bords of wood Joined together, which again are twofold, some which can receive
a man upright. Without bowing of his body, Jul. Palmarius discribes it de lue
Vener. Cap. 17. of a Square figure, seven Foot high, and four foot long and
broad, whose description you may see there. With us others are in use made up
of boards mutually receiving and received by one another, square, but oblong.
of that breadth, that a man may without any impediment set and extend his Arms,
but two stories high, one where the Patient sets, so high, that as he sets he
may put forth his Head, through a hole of the bords strictly fitted for the
neck, but the lower part is of that depth, that if the Patient setting stretch
forth his Feet, he cannot reach the lowest board: and it has a little door,
through which the sick may go into it, and a window behind, which may be opened
upon neceffity: and it has another little door toward the feet, through which
an Iron or brass Vessel is put in full of stones or refuse Iron red hot; and a
Pipe in the upper part of it over against the Vessel, through which either
plain hot water, or some convenient decoction is poured on the stones or dross
by degrees, as much as the Patient can endure, from whence the Vapor exhaling
diffused al through the body does provoke sweat: and though after this manner
the head be thrust forth, yet that does no hurt, neither is it unprofitable,
even where the head is affected; for though it stands forth, yet that sweats
plentifully enough: in the interim the Patient does not attract again by
drawing in his breath those filthy Vapors which do Evaporate from his body, but
the free and pure air by which he is refresht, that he does more easily and
happily endure sweating. But in what bath soever sweat is provoked, after the
sweating is over the bath ought to be opened, that those filthy Vapors may be
blown away and discussed by the free Air.

The most convenient time for sweating is the morning, When we must sweat.
yet sometimes we may sweat after noone, in which case the strength of the
Patient is to be considered for there are some who will easily endure sweating
twice a day, other who but once, others who are not able to endure sweating
once every day. But the Medicines which move sweat must be taken upon an empty
stomach, and an hour or two after the taking of the Medicine sweat must be
urged.

But we must sweat so long as the strength of the Patient will bear it, How long.
and if the patient sweat in a bath, or sweating place, and is not able to
endure any longer the heat of the bath, he must be laid in his bed, in which
afterward sweat will flow of its own accord, and without any loss of strength;
the sweat must afterward be wiped of, and after sweating the cold air must in
no wise be admitted.

But how often we must sweat, How often.
and how long the use of these Medicines is to be continued, cannot be defined
in general. They commonly teach that these decoctions are to be continued for
forty days, yet sometimes twenty five days or thirty do suffice: and sometimes
in a more grievous Disease we must persist in the use of these Medicines til
sixty days and more. For we must sweat so often and so long, til the Malignity
of the Disease is overcome, and the vicious and vitulent Humors are discussed
by sweating, and all the Symptoms cease, especially the running of the Reins
and Callous skars. For as long as these last. We must remain in the use of
these Medicines. Nay though all the Symptoms do vanish, yet it is good so to
continue the Medicines for some days, that also the Malign dispositions of
the parts may be taken away, that there be no fear of a relapse.

But after noon, though sweat be not moved, yet the same decoction given then,
may insensibly discuss the vicious Humors, and destroy the virulent
disposition impressed both on the parts and Humors.

CHAP. XX. Of other common Alexipharmaca.
BUt some trust not to those Alexipharmaca alone, Common Alexipharmaca.
as Guajacum, Sarsaparilla, China Root, and Sassafras wood, but add also common
Alexipharmaca. This was first done by Fernelius, who gave to those that were to
drink the decoction, half a dram or one dram of this Opiate, or Alexipharmacal
antidote, which is prepared thus.

Take of the Leaves of water Germander, Fernelius, his antidote.
half an ounce; Poley of the mount. Penny royal, white Hore-hound, Origanum,
Calamint, St. John's Wort, centory the less; French Lavender, ground pine,
Germander, Spikenard, of each two drams; of the Seeds of Anise, Fennel, Parsley,
wild carrot, Libistick Rue, Basile, Clary, Cresses, of the Berries of Bay,
Juniper, of the Seeds of Male Piony, of each half a dram; of the Roots of round
Birth-wort, Gentian. Dittander, Valerian, Asarabaccha, of each one dram; of
Nut-megs, Cloves, Pepper, Saffron, of each four scruples; of Cinamone, Myrrh,
Castor, Styrax Calamite, of each three drams; of good Honey as much as is
Sufficient, make an Opiate.

Jul. Palmarius, Fernelius his Scholar followed him, who, as was said before in
Lib. 1. de lue Vener. Cap. 7. writes, that Fernelius, was most averse from the
use of Quicksilver, and first dared to promise the Cure of this Disease
without the help of that, and did take care for the compounding of many
Alexiphatmaca at his House, which he administered against the Mischief of this
Disease, with Guajacum and also without it, two of the which, which he found to
be most excellent and efficatious, he describes, the first was discribed even
now, the other is this.

Take of Divils-bit, Scabious, Burnet, flowers of Marigold, Mullein, Plantane,
Balm, Rue, Broom, Origanum, Rosemary flowers, Red Roses, of each three drams;
of the Seeds of Citron, Sorrel, Fennel, blessed Thistle, of the Roots of
Dittander, Gilliflowers, Tormentil, round Birthwort, Gentian, Zedoary, Roman
Woolfesbane, of each two drams; Hartshorn, shavings of Ivory, Wood of Aloes,
Yellow Saunders, Choice Cinamome, of each half an ounce; Saffron, Cloves,
Nutmeg, of each two drams.

And he relates that he called the first composition, the greatet Opiate, the
other the less, and that he gave for a dose half a dram of either with the like
quantity of conserve of Bugloss and half a scruple of Mithridate, and sometime
without Mithridate; but that he, after Fernelius departed this life, out of
them both did complete one, adding also certain other Medicines, which he found
to be prevalent against poisons, and most fit to provoke sweat, the description
of which is this.

Take of water germander half an ounce; of divels-bit, scabious, burnet,
Palmarius his antidote
Poley Mount, peneroyal, calamint, white sweet smelling Horehound, origanum,
mint, St. John's Wort, centory the less, French Lavender, Germander, Ground
Pine, Plantane, Balm, rue, Time, Elder, each two drams; of Hyssop, the lesser
Sage, Oak Fern, vervin, both speedwels each two drams; Flowers of Betony,
Marigould, Mullen, Broom, Rosemary, Jasmin, Sage, Red Roses, St. John's wort,
Bugloss, Burrage, Violets, Water Lilies of each three drams; Seeds of Anis,
both Parsleys, wild Carot, Scarlet Grains, St John's Wort, Libistick, Rue,
Lovage, Basil, Berries of Bay, Juniper, seeds of both Pionies, Hartwort of each
on dram and half; Seeds of citron, Sorel, Blessed Thistle, Fennel, of each
three drams; of the roots of male Piony, Round Birthwort, Gentian, Sweet cane,
Flowerdeluce of Florence, Sweet Cyprus, each one dram; of Angelico, Dittander,
Gilliflowers, tormentil, Zedoary, Roman Woolfesbane, of each three drams and
an half; of choice perle three drams and hal; of Hearts horn, Shavings of Ivory
each one ounce; wood of aloes, yellow saunders, bone of the heart of a heart,
both currals each half an ounce; choice cinnamon one dram and half; Balsome
wood, if it may be had one ounce; of al precious stones, each half a dram; of
Nutmeg, mace, loves, myrrh, styrax, Calamite, Benjamin, Saffron, Castor, each
half a dram; juice of liquorish one ounce; oil of the seeds of Fennel, Anise,
of Sage, mint, juniper, Nutmeg, Cloves, red opobalsamum brought out of America
if it be to be had of each one dram.

Let all the the herbs, flowers, and roots be gathered at that time they are of
greatest strength, let them be dried, and kept in paper cases, then al of them
being reduced into a most fine powder, let them be mixed with wine and honey,
and be boiled into an electuary, til it comes to the thickness of well prepared
mithridate: yet the flowers may be candied and kept with sugar, that they may
be mixed with the other things toward the end of their boiling, to one pound of
honey mix two ounces of the powder. Let it be kept in a most large earthen
vessel, whose third part may be empty, least it swel up, and grow hot, neither
let it come to that use we shall by and by speak of, before it be three years
old. He ads there also a cordial water, and an alexipharmacal powder, their
discriptions are these; the Cordial water.

Take Of the leaves of sage, mint, marioram, rue, hysop, origanum, Galmarius
his Cordiol water.
the tops of betony each one handful. Bruise them al and put them in a great
earthen vessel in a warm place and cover them with the water of blessed
thistle, that they be under it, every day stir them with a stick, and before
they sour, (which will he the fourth or fifth day after) Strein out the liquor
and keep it, casting away the Faeces. Again.

Take of plantane leaves, marigold, balm, mullein, St. Johnswort centory the
less, burnet, each two handfuls. After they have beensteeped four days and
streined cast them away, and take again of water germander, Bivels-bit, fennel,
parsley, bugloss, burage, angelico of each one handful. Which also being
steeped, so many days streined and then cast away.

Take of the roots of angelico, dittander, tormentil, betony, Zedoary, each
half an ounce; of galangal, three drams; Nutmegs, Cloves, each one dram; seeds
of Fenel, Citron, Sorrel, Blessed thistle, Juniper berries each two drams;
Shavings of Ivory, hearts horn, wood of aloes, Yellow Saunders, cinnamon each one
dram; Safforn half a dram; make a powder of it and mix it with the Liquor
streined, then weigh out of the amulet against this disease, and of choice
mithridate each one pound and half; of old treacle four drams; and being mixed
with the said liquor and powder, and put up in a glass alembick, or an earthen
one glazed, expose them six or eight days to the heat of June, til they grow
hot, and be perfectly fermented, and at length distill them in a double vessel
with a most gentle fire. If the same simples be put into a new pot with the
water of bastard saffron and be heated fifteen days in warm horse-dung, there
will be extracted a more excellent Water.

Take of the aforesaid water three ounces; Syrup of Lemmons and Violets, of
each six drams; Make a dose.

A Description of the Powder.
Take of the shavings of Ivory, Palmarius his Alexipharmacal Powder.
the younger Hartshorn, Choice Pearls of each half a dram; wood of Aloes,
Yellow Saunders, the bone of the heart of a Heart, of each one scruple; Seeds of
Fennel, Coriander prepared, of each one dram; the Leaves of Mint, Plantane,
Vervin, Burnet, of each two scruples; the Roots of Tormentil, Betony, Zedoary,
of each half a dram; the dried flowers of Betony, Marigold, Broom, of each half
a dram; Sugar of Roses three times as much. Make a fine Powder.

The dose is one spoonful beforemeat, and before a drauft of the sweating
drink, if the Patient refuse the use of the Opiate.

And in cap. 13. Lib. de lue Vener. where he disputes, whether this Disease may
be perfectly cured by the use of Guajacum alone, or whether there be need of
the assistance of other Medicines joined with it, at last he concludes with a
distinction, that the virtue of Guajacum is neither so great, that that alone
can wholly Extirpate, the Roots and whole malice of the Venereal poison, nor so
weak, that it can perform nothing without the help of others; that by the use
of that only, the Humors be wasted, al Symptoms will at length be allaied, and
wholly lie hid, but yet the taint of the disease, which has already taken
possession of the solid parts, cannot in most bodies be wholly overcome, and
extinguished by that remedy.

Rondeletius, Rondeletius his Treacle Water.
doubtless followed these men also, who de morb. Itali. commend his Treacle
water, which provokes sweat in the inveterate Italian Disease, and takes away
the pains, the description of which is this.

Take of Treacle, one pound; of Sorrel, three handfuls; of the flowers of
Chamomel, Peny-royal, Pomegranates, blessed Thistle, of each two ounces. Mix
them al in white wine and distill them.

Of which water give three ounces to drink with three ounces of Sorrel and
Bugloss water, when the Patient goes into his bed or hot house.

Platerus also thinks that it is confirmed by experience, that the decoctions
of other plants, besides Guajacum, Sarsaparilla, China, Sassafras; can perform
the same in this disease as they do, and therefore falls into this opinion, but
evilly. That the late mentioned Medicines which are accounted alexipharmaca of
this disease, do work rather in the cure of this disease, by moving sweat, then
by an occult quality, and therefore he thinks that not only a decoction of box
wood, Juniper, Cedar, Cypress, and Savin, Agallochus, Rose-wood, but also the
decoction, and Treacle water, which are given in Pestilent Fevers, are
profitable also here.

Aurelius Minadous de lue Vener. cap. 53. Whether treacle be good in the
Venereal disease.
when he had spoken many things in the praise of Treacle at length concludes,
that Treacle also may be used against the venereal virulency, as a most
excellent Alexiterum, not as if it were to be numbered amongst them, which of
themselves are said to expel this virulency, but amongst them, which expel it
by accident, in as much as it does strengthen the spirits, by a Conformable
proportion to them, so that they being now made strong, are able as the
principal agent, together with the Treacle as their instrument to overcome the
malignity of the venereal virulency.

The same Author cap. 44. Trochisks Cypheos.
commends Trochisks Cypheos in this Disease, as being such, which do
principally strengthen the Liver, which in this Disease is chiefly affected,
and free it from Excrementitious Humors, which are collected in this Disease,
being powerful to concoct, cleanse, and dry up the Excrement and therefore as
Galen thought this Composition was to be preferred before al other Medicines
written by Asclepias, Andromachus, and other most Famous Physicians for the
affects of the Liver, so he thinks the same is to be used and Magnified beyond
al others in this Disease.

But as I will not dissuade any one from the use of such common Alexipharmaca in
the cure of this Disease, whenas in other cases it is a custom, when any one
has drank poison, or any ways taken it, and knows not what it is, to give
treacle and common Alexipharmaca: so I will counsel no body. that he confide
only in these Medicines, and neglect those proper ones. And I see it done by
very few Physicians, as being taught by experience, that this Disease cannot
wholly be extirpated without Guajacum, Sarsaparilla and the like, neither does
it follow, that therefore, because some sick of an incurable French Pox, could
not be cured by Guajacum wood, that we must place more hope in these
Medicaments. For they that could not be cured by those proper Alexipharmaca,
will much less be cured by these common ones.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Cure by Quicksilver.
ANd this is the chief kind of Medicine for the cure of the Venereal disease,
Of the cure by Quicksilver.
and this is the chief manner of curing it. For there is also another way of
curing the same Disease by quicksilver, which was first brought into use by
Chyrurgions and barbers, afterward also was applied by learned Physicians. For
whenas, as was said before by Fracastorius, certain Barbars had found out
amongst the Medicines of our ancestors for the filthy scab joined with the
pains of the joints, unguents compounded of Mercury and Sulphur, other
Medicines profiting little, they began to use them. The use of which being not
altogether unsuccessful, afterward quicksilver was used in the cure of this
Disease by many learned Physicians.

But though it be not my purpose in this place to treat of quicksilver, which
the Chemists call Mercury, but rather of the use of it in curing this disease,
yet I shall admonish you of a few things in general. Quicksilver is reckoned
amongst the metals, and it is called Silver from its color in which it
resembles silver, Quicksilver whence so called. Its wonderful Nature.
but quick because it is always moveable: and its Nature is altogether
wonderful, which many learned men admire, and which has tortered the wits of
many Chemists, and deluded their pains. For though it be mortified, fixed, or
what way soever it oftentimes seems to be changed, yet it is easily reduced to
its former quick Nature. And though it be reduced into the smallest bodies, and
transmitted through leather, or be otherwise reduced into atoms, and a strong
form, yet it retains in them its whole Nature and essence, and returns to its
former quick body.

Naturalists and Physicians differ concerning its temperament, Whether
Quicksilver be hot or cold.
whiles some hold it to be cold others hot. Matthias Vnzerus, has collected
the arguments of both in Anatom. Spagyr. Mercu. to allege al which at large in
this place, is not our intent, for you may consult with him on that business in
the alleged place; yet by and by we shall make mention of some of them: but
Vnzerus himself, cap. 12. goes the middle way, and holds, Matthias Vnzerus his
opinion.
that some natural things have oftentimes in them diverse, and wholly contrary
virtues and faculties, and some of them are manifest, others occult, and that
these depend on the specific form, those on the first qualities of the
Elements, which he proves by the examples of Wormwood, Rhubarb, Vinegar, and
others: and he thinks Mercury is to be reckoned in the number of these which
may be considered both as crude, and as prepared: the crude he thinks has mixed
qualities, and is partly hot, partly cold, and that diversity is to be
attributed to the diverse parts of the matter of which it consists, some of
which are very thin, Subtle, pure, and Spirituous, but some are thick, earthy
and feculent: but he thinks that Mercury prepared has no longer any cold
quality, but they are wholly taken away by the outward help of fire, or by the
Application of the menstrua, and therefore that it is very hot

Hercules Saxonia, Hercules Saxonia.
holds the same de lue Vener. Cap. 39. Whiles he teaches, that this Medicine
does exulcerate, and cause heat and inflammation; on the other side it causes
numness, Palsies, and other cold affects, and that it proceeds from the
inequality of its temperament, and because it is an imperfect mixed body, and if
it be prepared by calcination, that the cold substance does fly away, and that
which is left, is fire,

But these authors err very much, The authors opinion.
indeed it cannot be denied, that there are many Medicines, which have
Heterogeneous parts, by virtue of which, they produce diverse effects, which
parts also may be separated by the help of art: But that Quicksilver has such
parts, is false, neither was there yet ever found any Chemist, who could show
the diverse parts in it, and separate them by art: for the whole is Homogeneous,
if there be any thing so in Nature, and either it al flies away, or al
remains, and what way soever it is prepared, Quicksilver is Homogeneous.
at last it al revives wholly Homogeneous: and whatsoever Chemist can show any
Heterogeneous parts in Quicksilver, as in Rhubatb, shall be in my esteem a
great Apollo. Neither is precipitate of another Nature then that which is
crude, neither does Quicksilver loose any thing by its preparation, and that
prepared does differ from the crude only in external form which is caured by
the admistion of other things, which sometimes are Salt parts as happens in
Mercury Sublimate and Precipitate, sometimes only watery as when Mercury is
reduced into water by a retort without the admistion of any other thing, as the
same Vnzerits teaches Lib. 2. de Anatom. Mercu. cap. 2. n. 4. for this water
is nothing else but the Quicksilver resolved into the smallest bodies or
Atoms by the strength of the fire, and mixed with watery Vapors, or the moist
Air. Yet in that there appear no effects of cold, but rather of heat, and that
very water, as other mercurial waters, will dissolve gold in like manner,
Saxonia is mistaken, for Quick-filver is no imperfect mixed body, but a body
that has the most perfect mistion, and cannot be destroyed, by any art of the
Chemists, but every where retains its form, neither whiles it is calcined (or
rather exposed to the sire, for Quicksilver cannot properly be said to be
Calcmed) do the cold parts fly away, and the fiery stay behind, but if those
parts which are raised up be received, they are of the same Nature with those
that remain, as is well known to the Chemist.

Therefore whenas this Reconcilation is of no force, Quick silver is hot.
let us see who is in the righter whether those who hold Quicksilver to be
hot, or those that say it is cold. But I think that they are altogether of the
righter judgment, who think it to be hot; for that appears by its great
penetrating and corroding virtue, so that it penetrates and Eats into Metals,
and the flesh, nay the very bones are corroded by Mercury precipitate and
sublituate. And Libavius writes in tract, de igne natu. cap. 30, that he knew
by the relation of a most learned Physician, that a certain Chyrurgion dying by
the too frequent use of Mercurial Medicines, had his bones plainly britle or
frangible.

But whenas they object first of al, The answer of the reasons against it.
that whiles it is quick and whole it does not corrode: the cause of that is,
because it cannot infinuate it self into the body, and work upon it, whenas al
its parts are most closely knit together, nor cannot be mixed with other
bodies; but the Medicines prepared out of it as Mercury sublimate, Precipitate,

Secondly,

Thirdly, Fernelius relates of a certain Goldsmith that imprudently admitting
the vapor of quicksilver only, presently became stupid, drowzy, and wholly
speechless. Ferdinandus Ponrertus relates that the same happend to another,
lib. 1. de vene. cap. 3. And Forestus, lib. 8. obser. 5. writes, That a certain
young man learning the Smiths art upon the atching of a Cup with quicksilver,
had all the hair of his head fell off, and that his face became extraordinary
pale, and all his body tremulous; and many others have observed the same. And
Jacobus Oethoeus, in his observat. reports, That a certain young Noble man
troubled with Crab-lice in his Privities, used Mercurial Ointment to drive them
away; upon which his Yard grew cold and sluggish, and unfit for Venery. But
here is a fallacy of the cause, for quicksilver does not do these things by
cooling, but because it has a peculiar and occult quality, that is an enemy to
the Nerves and Brain, as appears in many other stupifying poisons.

Fourthly, That which is Objected, is easily Answered; to wit,

But concerning the Occult Virtue and Propriety of Quicksilver, we chiefly
meet with two doubts; First of all, Whether it be poisonous: next of all,
Whether it be rightly applied for the Cure of the Venereal Disease.

Concerning the former Question, Whether Quicksilver be Poisonous, Whether
quick-filver be Poisonous.
we have already treated before, in tractat. de Chym. and Aristot. consens. and
dissens. cap. 19. where we speak of Mercury, and we said there, That Matthias
Vnzerus de anatem. spagyr. Mercu. did endeavor to prove at large, That Mercury
is not poisonous, with whom others also agree; especially those who urge
Experience and the Authority of learned Physicians. Avicen, lib. 4. Fen. 6.
tract. 1. sum. 1. cap. 2. writes, It Is denied.
That Quicksilver does not hurt many that drink it; for that with its
qualities goes forth by the stool. Haly Abbas lib 1. pract. cap. 35. Rhases in
no. ad Mansor. de potu argen. vi. do affirm the same. Brassavolus also does
testify in lib. de stirp. exami. That he has given Quicksilver to Infants to
expel Worms. And Fallopius de Metallis cap. 37. holds, That Mercury may be
taken into the body without the fear of any hurt; and he relates that Beasts do
swallow quicksilver without any harm: For when they abound with Worms, which
your Leeches know by their breath, if they swallow four several times half a
Filbert shell full of Quicksilver cast into their mouths, they are cured, no
worse Disease succeeding it. And he witnesses that he has given to Children
in extreme danger, whom (...) means have availed nothing, the quantity of two
or three grains of Millet with evident success. The same Author, de Morb.
Gallic. cap. 76. writes, That he saw a Woman which drank a pound of Mercury to
cause an Abortion, yet without any hurt. Matthiolus also reports in lib. 1.
dioscorid. cap. 170. (which also Eustachrus Rudius relates, That he has often
observed, when he practiced Physic there) That in the Town Gorritiensis the
Nurses do give Quicksilver to little Children to drink in the quantity of two
grains of Millet for the Worms in the Belly, without any trouble at al. And the
Midwives when great bellied Women lie long in labor, do presently give to drink
a scruple weight of Mercury without any inconvenience: and Georgius Agricola
relates, that a certain Woman did oftentimes fraudulently give Quicksilver to
her Husband that she might kill him, and nevertheless he continued healthful nay
it has been observed that some thirsty in the night, have in the dark taken up
Vessels full of Quicksilver instead of drinking Cups, and with a wide Throat
have taken of the Quicksilver in a great quantity, yet have cast it forth
again by the stool without any hurt. And Eustachius Rudius, add Lib. 5. de
Morb. occult. cap. 15 that he has seen this, and that others have observed it,
that some bodies have been dissected, in which no small quantity of Quicksilver
has been collected in the Cavities of the bones, from the unction in the
French Pox, who notwithstanding have lived many years after the unction. Which
seems not possible to be done, if it were poison by Nature.

But Galen, It Is affirmed.
Aetius, the reconciler, Cardan, Fernelius, Ferdinandus Ponzettus, Jul.
Palmarius, whom I alleged in the quoted place cap. 19. de. consens. et
dissens. Chymic. cum. Aristotele. do differ from these. And experience it self
has brought most eminent men into that opinion, by which it is evident, that
quicksilver does no less cause numnesses, convulsions, tremblings, palseys,
epilepsies, apoplexies, syncopes, than other poisons, nay sometimes death it
self. And some do report, that they are seldom long lived, who digg up the
veins of quicksilver; and though they be very strong bodied, and of the best
temperament, that they can scarce hold out in that work to the fifth year, but
by drawing in the venenate vapors they are taken with a trembling of al their
parts.

And the opinion of these we think altogether more consonant to truth as being
that which is confirmed by experience it self: The Authors opinion.
but as concerning the experience of those, who write that quicksilver has
often been drank and given without any hurt, that does not excuse quicksilver
from its venenosity. For to the completing of an action, there is required a
right application of the agent to the parient, and some stay, which whenas it
was wanting in the alleged examples, the quicksilver could do no hurt for
quicksilver is given either alive or prepared, if it be taken alive it is 'less
hurtful, for whenas quicksilver is a body most exactly mixed, and the least
parts of it do most pertinaceously cohere to one another, from whence also it is
continually moveable, whiles it is whole and alive it brings little or no
damage to our body, but presently is cast forth by the stool. For in like
manner as a leaden, or other mettallick bullet, if it be swallowed whole is
presently cast forth of the body, and brings no hurt, but if it be resolved
into the least parts, and contract rust, may do very much mischief, as that
history concerning lead does sufficiently teach us, which Fernelius recites de
lue Vener. cap. 7. So also if quicksilver be taken whole, moveable, and coherent
to it self, and by reason of its mobility be presently again cast forth of the
body, it brings no damage; but if it be resolved into the smallest particles,
and especially with the admistion of salts, and by their help be as it were
fixed to the body, and penetrate into it, both inwardly and outwardly applied,
it causes most grievous evils, as sublimate and precipate do sufficiently
teach us, neither is there any reason for any one to ascribe that corroding
faculty to the salts mixed; for there is no falt in the some which exhales when
Silver is gilding over, and yet that very fume is highly burtful; neither can
so little salt as is mixed with sublimate or precipitate, cause so great hurt,
whenas salt though it be given in a great quantity, does no such thing.

But as concerning prepared mercury, Mercury prepared.
I know indeed, with how great praises some do extol mercurial medicines. Some
call precipitate the angelical powder, and otherwise prepared mercury of life.
Some commend the flowers of mercury of which we spoke in consens. et. dissens.
Chym. p. 365. others mercurius dulcis, and so highly, they write if it be
rightly prepared and given it is as gentle as manna, tamarinds, cassia, and
therefore they use it in the slightest diseases, which might easily be taken
away by more benign medicines. But these commendations are too much, neither
is their rashness commendable, who give quicksilver in any disease, whenas we
have every where examples of them, who by the use of the medicaments, have not
only been cast into danger of their lives, but have plainly perished by them.
Whereupon Guish. Fabricius in Epist. ad D. Doringium lib. 3. observat. annexa.
thinks that that called mercurius vitae may sometimes be called mercurius
mortis, and mercury of lise eternal. And how much mercurius dulcis, which is
counted the gentlest of al, may sometimes prejudice, was said in the alleged
place; but that quicksilver may sometimes be given without any damage coms to
pass, either because it is crude, or retains the nature of that alive: and
therefore as was said even now, can work little on our body, of which sort is
mercurius dulcis, and the flowers of silver mercury, or because it is in its
kind fixed. For as whole metals though they be taken into the body, they do not
affect it unless they be resolved, so so also whenas fixed mercury does as it
were put on the nature of fixed mertals, so it does not hurt, as that which is
still volatile, and can easily insinuate it self into the body.

Yet prepared Mercury ought not rashly to be used and be given in every disease
or body especially at the beginning, In what disease prepared Mercury is to be
given.
but in those only in whom there is great store of vicious humors, which that
may empty, and where the body is strong, for as Mercury sublimate and
precipitate outwardly applied in sordid ulcers, does mundefie them, and
touches not the sound flesh as long as there is any filth, but if it be laid
on the sound flesh it eats that: so also if quicksilver taken into the body do
find corrupt humors on which it may work, it does not easily damnefie the more
inward parts, but it works upon the humors, and causes that they be emptied;
but if there be no such humors there, it also assailes the sound parts. But
whenas Quicksilver given inwardly is not used only for the Venereal disease,
but to drive away many other diseases, we will speak no more of that here; but
let us now inquire conconcerning it, whether it can, and how it may do good in
the Venereal disease.

As concerning one of them therefore, Whether quicksilver be to be given in
the cure of the venerealdisease. The negative opinion
to wit whether quicksilver ought to be given in the French pox, and whether
it may be safely, and by what virtue it acts, Physicians do very much differ.
Epiphanius Ferdinandus indeed, Histo. 17. thinks that amongst ninety Authors
that have writ of the Venereal disease, that there are only four, who have
disallowed of the use of Quicksilver in this disease, viz. Casparus Torellus,
Montanus, Minadous, and Fra^astorius, but there are many more, which Johannes
Baptista Silvaticus does recon up Contr. 34. which Silvaticus himself is in the
number of those, who denny Quicksilver to be an enemy to the essence of the
french pox. For Vlericus ab buten, a German knight and Physician Cap. 4. in
lib. de morb Gall: writes that in his time scarce one in a hundred that was
anointed with Quicksilver did escape a relapse, the benefit of it lasting but
for a few days. Sebastianus Aquilianus lib. de morb. Galli. Cap. 4. Calls the
cure of this disease performed by quicksilver, sophistical, and writes that al
anointed with it in his age suffered a relapse. Gaspar Torelus bishop of St.
Justa, in his declammation against unction with Quicksilver, calls it a
pernicious medicine and thanks it is to be shunned as the plague. Joh. Baptista
Montanus, tract. de morb. Gal. writes that quicksilver does indeed repress the
disease for a certain time but does induce an evil quality in the part, and in
no wise remove it, wherefore in process of time, al things become worse then
they were before. John Fernelius lib. 2. de abdit. morb. cause. cap. 14. writes
that he beleves nothing less, then that a medicine made of Quicksilver can
cure the Venereal disease, since that in his judgment it only takes away the
simproms, leaving the root behind. Victor Favintinus cap. 7. de morb. Gal.
thinks the cure of the disease with Quicksilver is false, deceitful and
daingerous. Meither does Fallopius magnesie this cure, as appears by his book
de morb. Gall. Cap. 76. Bernardus Tamiranus also has openly condemned this
cure lib. 2. de morb. Gall. cap. 13. as also some others: to whose opinion as I
said John Baptista Silvaticus joins himself, and writes that he does not
believe, that quicksilver can wholly cure this disease, and that it is an
antidote diametrically repugnant to the Venereal evil: he does not deny indeed
that this medicine may allay some evil and vehement accidents of the disease,
but that it is diametrically adverse to the essence of the french pox, which is
an occult property, inimicous to the liver, and that it can overcome that, he
does not believe. But though at the first rise of this disease, Carpus the
Chyrurgion first made use of this medicine (whom perhaps that barbor followed,
whom Fracastorius makes Mention of) being moved by this reason, because he had
observed that the ancient Arabian Physicians did make use of Quicksilver
against the contumacious scab, and many other rebellious diseases of the skin;
yet experience has no way confirmed this remedy as the best, and therefore it
has been rejected by many physicians: for if Quicksilver were one of the
antidotes of this disease it would have always and every where answered the
expectation, and there had bin no need that more effectual remedies should have
been sought for from the remotest Countries beyond the Seas, which have
hitherto be^n used with most happy success, that no man does any farther doubt
of their efficacy in this Disease; and though Quicksilver does heal French
Ulcers, yet it does not follow, that it is an Antidote against the Virulency of
it as neither those Medicines, which heal Buboes, or Carbuncles in the plague,
can for that reason be accounted for Antidotes. Aurelius Minadous agrees with
these, Lib. de Virul. Vener. cap. 39. Who wholly rejects the use of Quicksilver
in this Disease, moved thereunto by three reasons; the first is, because he
never saw any restored to health by the use of it; on the Contrary he has
rather observed many that by the use of Quicksilver have sufferred worse
Symptoms in so much that they have affirmed, they have received greater
damage from the supposed Remedy, then from the Disease: the second is, that
Quicksilver is hurtful by Reason of its excessive coldness: the third is
because no body can explain, after what manner Quicksilver does good in this
Disease. To which some add a fourth Reason, that of it self it is poison; and a
fifth that many have died by the use of it.

On the contrary many other Physicians do very much commend the use of
Quicksilver in this Disease: The affirmative opinion.
and that I may now pass by others, Epiphanius Ferdinandus, Histor. 17. writes
that he can make good by Oath, that he has perfectly cured, leaving no evil
Symptoms, a hundred and fifty people Frenchified of al Ages; Sexes, and of
diverse Temperaments, and at diverse seasons of the year; and he names another
most experienced Physician, Johan. Laurentius Protopapa, who has affirmed to
him by Oath' that he has cured above a thousand men Frenchified with the
Mercurial Unguent with most happy success, and he writes that we ought to give
God thanks, that he would make known so wonderful a remedy for so great a
disease.

That we may quit our selves of this difficult controversy, The Authors
Opinion.
First of al we think the use of Quicksilver is not wholly to be rejected in
the Cure of this Disease, neither do the reasons alleged before by Minadous,
o^others evince it: for first of al as concerning experience, here one
experience may be opposed against another, and there are many Physicians who
taught by experience it self do with wonderful praises extol Quicksilver in
this Disease. The Second reason, that Quicksilver is to be rejected because it
is cold, is false, for the effects of Quicksilver as was said before, do teach
us that it is rather hot then cold. Thirdly, concerning the manner how it
works, and cures this Disease, we shall fee hereafter. And though that manner
could not be found out, yet the experience must not therefore be denied; for
there are many Medicines that work by occulr qualities, whose manner of acting
cannot be perfectly explained. Fourthly, though Quicksilver be poisonous yet
it is not therefore wholly to be rejected in this disease, whenas other venenate
things come into Physical use, as opium, Cantharides, Oil of Scorpions and
others. But Fifthly whereas some could not be cured by mercurial Medicaments,
this is not to be ascribed to the quicksilver, but rather to the ignorance of
the Physician, who did not rightly apply this Medicine, or to the negligence or
disobedience of the patient, or to the vehemence of the Disease, which could be
overcome by no Medicine, though the best that is.

But as quicksilver is not wholly to be rejected, When quick silver is to be
used in the Venereal Disease.
so we think it is not unwarily and rashly to be used, but only upon urgent
necessity, to wit then when this disease could not be cured with Guajacum wood
or Sarsaparilla. For we must come to the use of quicksilver for two causes
especially, the first is when the Disease is so stubborn, that it will not yield
to those usual Medicines: Secondly when there is something present, which does
not admit of the use of the Decoction of the wood and Sarsaparilla, especially
the heat and inflammation of the Kidneys and Liver. And Eustachius Rudius writes
Lib. 5. Cap. 15. that he has cured some, who if they had used never so little
of Guajacum, though corrected with cold things, were presently taken so with a
heat of Urin, that an Inflammation of those parts arising, they have hardly
escaped death; and therefore in such cases sometimes, will we or nil we, we are
compelled to make use of quicksilver, as the same Rudius speaks; and that
oftentimes may be done safe enough, so that he writes he has anointed with
quicksilver even infants infected by their Nurses at suck, and has cured them.

Yet we must not come rashly and inconsiderately to this unction, Things
prohibiting unction with Quicksilver.
but first of al we must confider, whether there be any thing present that does
prohibit it: for first of al unction with quicksilver is not admitted, when
the strength is but feeble, and therefore in old men it seldom takes place.
Secondly, if the body do still abound with many vicious Humors, for then the
quicksilver does not easily penetrate: and by a commotion of the Humors it
causes grievous Diseases and Symptoms, therefore the body must first of al be
emptied. Thirdly, if the Air be too hot, and if it be dog days. Fourthly, if
the body be extenuated, if there be a Fever, Ulcers of the mouth, and
inclination to a quinsie; this kind of Medicine also is not convenient for them
who before the French Pox, suffered numness, tremblings, Palsy, and pains in
their joints.

But that quicksilver may rightly be made use of, Whether Quick silver be an
Alexipharmacum of the Venereal Disease.
we must first of al enquire after what manner it is to be given, and what it
can perform, and do in this disease, on which business the hinge of this
controversy turns. Where first of al we are not of their opinion, who think
quicksilver to be an Alexipharmacum of this Disease. Quercetan indeed affirms
it in Consil. de lue Vener. where he writes that Mercury is the only true and
sole Alexipharmacum of this Disease, especially if it be inveterate. From whom
Felix Platerus does not much dissent, who writes that Mercury by its occult
qualities and propriety contrary to this disease, does quel the Venenate
quality of that disease, but this cannot simply be admitted, for when as there
are three things in this Disease, first of all that Malignant quality imprinted
on the parts dedicated to nutrition, and especially on the Liver, or an occult
Disease; Secondly, vicious Humors, generated in the Liver evilly affected, and
polluted by this Malignity: Thirdly, Diseases and Symptoms which are raised
every where in the body by those vicious Humors, we do not deny indeed that
Quicksilver may conduce somewhat to the Evacuating of the vicious humors, as
shall be said here after, and hence also to the taking away of the Diseases and
Symptoms which do arise from them; but that it does overcome the malignant and
virulent disposition it self, which is the property of an Alexipharmacum, is
that which we deny. For first of al experience does not confirm it, neither
has that Alexipharmacal virtue of Mercury been hitherto proved by any one, by
any solid argument; but whatsoever it performs, it does by salivation and
violent purging, which is not the property of an Alexipharmacum, for otherwise
al Medicines purging vicious Humors should be called Alexipharmaca. This rather
is manifest, that some cured by mercurial Medicines, after a long interval of
time have relapsed into this Disease, that occult and Malignant disposition
being left in the body. Secondly, that quicksilver is no Alexipharmacum,
appears also by this, because it is no way friendly to our body, but rather
hurts the brain, Heart, and other Members, and causes most grievous Diseases
and Symptoms in the jaws, which Platerus endeavors in vain to remove from
Mercury, and to ascribe them to the virulency of the spittle. For thirdly,
Quicksilver causes salivation, not only in the French pox, but also in other
bodies, which are not Sick of the French Disease, and besides hurts in the
mouth, inflammation, Exulceration, Stinks, injuries of the Teeth, which is
obvious for every one to experience and observe, but that is more consonant to
truth, that quicksilver is to be numbered amongst Evacuating Medicines, whenas
it is evident by experience, that by benefit of that, many thick, tough and
virulent Humors are emptyed by the mouth, sometimes also by sweat, or other
ways, and that it does not much good in this Disease, unless salivation ensue:
therefore when it is applied, it can be used only for this end, to evacuate
virulent Humors, which being emptied, whenas the Symptoms caused by them do
vanish, it is concluded by many, that it may be administered for the Mitigation
of the symptoms, when as yet it does only mitigate or take away the Symptoms
by accident, the virulent Humors, on which they depend, being taken away. Which
cure notwithstanding, as Fernelins is of opinion, is the cruellest of al, and
so hard, that many would rather perish of the Disease, than be cured with so
great danger, so bitter hazard: but that quicksilver may be applied to
external and contumacious Ulcers, is known to every body.

But to evacuate vicious Humors it may be used three manner of ways; How many
ways quicksilver does Evacuate.
either to move by stool and vomit; or to cause sweat; or to cause Salivation
and spitting. Coneerning the giving of quicksilver to move by stool or vomit
is already spoken before, and the Chemists are large in the praise of it; and
do extol it with wonderful commendations: By stool and vomit.
and Crollius calls Mercury the Balsome of Nature, in which there is both a
virtue incarnative, and regenerative, which does wonderfully renew, and purge
from al impurities, and therefore calls it a divine Medicine: to whom Beguinus
assents, who in Lib. 2. Tyrocin. Chym. cap. 3. writes that Mercury is the
chiefest Alexipharmacum against al corruption and putrefaction: from whom
though Platerus do not wholly dissent, while he teaches, that this Disease may
easily be cured by purging with Mercury, and truly in no long time, but very
speedily, being scarce drank twice or thrice, from whence is raised a plentiful
flux of the belly, and also vomiting, sometimes also sweat and Urin is provoked:
yet he cannot deny, that it does perform this by a violent irritation of
Nature, and not without danger.

But I would have a Physician rather timorous, than bold and rash in the use of
this Medicine, It Is to be given warily.
for that which Pliny said was the poison of al things, Lib. 37. cap. 6. that
will not spare man's body, but offends the stomach, Liver, Guts, and all the
bowels, and is especiallly an enemy to the Nerves and brain: but though the
Chemists affirm that being prepared it may grow more mild, and that it may not
hurt, they precipitate it, sublime it, and prepare flowers of it, Aquilam,
Aurum vitae, and other things; yet though you expel Nature with a fork, she will
still return: for as it was said even now out of Platerus, it purges violently
and not without danger: and as Fernelius Lib. de lue Vener. cap. 17. writes of
this business, upon the giving of prepared Mercury, (doubtless he meant
precipitate) presently from the compass of the whole body, Humors of al sorts
break forth upwards and downwards, with so great force, and so violent, that
the spirits being exhausted, and the strength wasted, the sick do either die
presently, or lie some days without strength like unto dead men: sometimes all the mouth is inflamed, and contracts a Gangreen, putrid Ulcers and very
stinking, and sometimes the jaws swel, that the Patient for some days is not
able to swallow at al: although sometimes it work more gently, yet it purges
violently enough.

But if it do work more mildely, either it retains the nature of that which is
crude, or being fixed it does almost put on the nature of a fixed metal: of the
first sort is metcurius dulcis, of which Angelus Sala says in the riper aged
it works little, unless it be given in a great dose, to wit thirty five grains,
and then it easily raises salivation; and that this is true a certain
Physician well known to me, learnt to his cost and found it so by experience, as
we have said de consens. et dissen. cap. 18. but if it be more fixed, it does
not move the belly; therefore it must needs be that it have a middle nature, if
it ought to purge, that it may stimulate nature, where yet always to hold that
medium is very difficult. Yet amongst those medicines, we have nominated of
prepared mercury, that which is called mercurius vitae does easily challeng the
first place, so that I think it would be needless to make mention here of more
medicines prepared out of mercury; but we must note this concerning mercurious
vitae, that it is no pure mercurial medicine, but there is contained in it some
part of antimony as appears by the vitrum and Regulus, which may be made out of
the mercurius vitae, but can by no art be prepared out of mercury alone, but
that they may be made of antimony is well known.

Yet when we are minded to administer mercurius vitae, When it is to be given
in the Venereal disease,
and other mercurial medicines, we must diligently consider Mesues rule, that
it is a grane of wisdom, not to come to strong medicines, but where weak ones
will not satisfy. If therefore this evil be new and gentle which may be cured by
gentler purgers, and by the decoction of Guajacum or Sarsaparilla, we must not
rashly come to the use of quicksilver. But if the evil be stubborn and
inveterate, and there be many virulent humors in the body, mercurial medicines
may be given without danger: for then it is not easily to be feared, that it
should assail man's body, when it has vicious humors enough to work upon. And
oftentimes necessity compels us to come to the use of quicksilver, and some do
hope in vain, to affect the same buismess by weak medicines often repeated as
by stronger taken plentifully at once. For experience has long since taught
us, that we do oftentimes spend our time in vain in such medicines given
against pertinaceous diseases. On the contrary that strong in (...), and
amongst them quicksilver, after once or more times taking, have happ^ly
overcome pertinacious diseases, whose cause was about the stomach, the cavety
of the liver, the spleen, pancreas, the call, and from thence was communicated
to other (...). Sweating medicines made of quicksilver.


Secondly out of quicksilver are prepared sweating medicines, to wi^the
whitspirit of mercury, or the white or red oil of mercury, one drop of which or
two are given to drink in treacle water and spirits of Guajacum, or some such
like decoction to move sweat, as also other preparations and fixed medicaments
of quicks^^ver: and in case that quicksilver perform that, for which end it is
given, and move sweat, and discuss the vicious humors by it, it is not so
dangerous a medicine. Salivation by quicksilver.


The third way is by Salivation, and many indeed do place al their hopes of the
cure of this disease in Salivation, so that Platerus writes, unless that in
the cure by quicksilvet Salivation be raised by the use of it. And at last be
supervenient, the cure does not succeed, neither is it fitting so much to
condemn the use of it and wholly to reject it for the faults which happen in
the mouth in this cute, or for other accidents, amongst which convulsions are
chiefly to be feared, which are wont sometimes to happen, if there be any great
error committed in the use of it, whenas afterward in the cure the faults of
the mouth are easily corrected again. On the contrary Fernelius de lue Vener.
cap. 6. does exactly set forth this manner of cure and describes its
inconveniences: so great says he is the cruelty and harshness of this unguent,
that the patient presently begins to languish the second or third day; for by
its extraordinary tenuity it does melt and dissolve, whatsoever is in the
superficies and whole compass of the body, and at length by its extreme cooling
faculty with which it is endued, it drives them to the inward parts, from
thence into the stomach and breast, from which afterward it drives them
upwards by a continuity of parts to the throat and mouth, with so great and so
violent an injury, that the teeth, to which as also to the brain it is
peculiarly an enemy, do in all presently, grow loose, and in some become
blackish and al drop out. Some things it discusses out of the body by sweat,
some by its purgative faculty it casts forth by stool, with a great deal of
torture. And briefly to comprehend al, al certainly who are thus cured have
their jaws exulcerated, their tongue and palate swollen, their gums and teeth
loose, and spittle runs through their mouths without any intermission,
smelling worse then any stink, with so great contagion, that the lips by
touching of that contract ulcers, and the cheeks are ulcerated within: the
stomach being cooled and disturbed with the stink, the sick are destitute of
any appetite to meat, and being tormented with into lerable thirst, yet they
are scarce able to drink, their whole mouth being but one ulcer. Besides their
tongue stammers, When unction with quicksilver is to be used.
their ears grow deaf, in some incurably. All the house about stinks.

And indeed that manner of cure is bitter enough, that one ought not easily to
admit of it, and therefore it is not be used when the evil is new and light, but
when it is inveterate and contumacious, and when other remedies as the decoction
of Guajacum, Sarsaparilla, and the like, have first of al been tried in vain;
neither must we come to the use of that unless the body before be diligently
purged, least too great a quantity of virulent humors be turned rushing to the
mouth and jaws; neither is this cure convenient for old men, nor for weak
bodies, nor those that are wasted, and are sick of a weakness of the nerves,
and have weak heads, and subject to dstillations, least by the quicksilver, it
being hurtful for them, these parts be more debilitated.

Therefore as Hercules Saxonia de lue. Vener. cap. 39. writes of this subject,
they are neither to be approved of who use mercurial unctions without any
difference, neither must we hold with them, who wholly reject the use of them.
For sometimes this disease is so contumacious, that it is not cured with the
decoction of Guajacum taken fifty days, and twice or thrice a day, but grows
worse; whenas therefore the patients are weary of taking any more decoctions,
and also of sweating, How quicksilver does raise a flux.
and hungring, that they may not be left without al help, it is better to
administer a dangerous remedy then none at al.

But what way quicksilver does raise salivation, Authors do differ, Eustachius
Rudius lib. 5. de morb. occult. cap. 15. disputes at large of this business,
and first of al he worthily derides them who hold that quicksilver by its most
intense coldness, or repressing faculty does repel the humors from the external
parts into the innermost parts of the body; for repelling things are of thick
and dry parts but quicksilver is of most thin parts: neither do other repeling
medicines, nay not the most cold air, or coldest water, perform any such
thing; neither can here be given any reason, why the repulsion should be to the
mouth and not to other parts that are nearer. This therefore must be inquired,
why quicksilver is moved to the head, and is chiefly purged through the mouth.
Many are of opinion, neither does that displease Platerus, that quicksilver
does cause spitting by a peculiar virtue: but he explains not the manner;
neither does this please Rudius. For says he if quicksilver be moved to the
head by virtue of its whole substance, and by a peculiar property, it does that
either by a similitude or contrariety of substance; it cannot be by a
similitude of substance, because quicksilver does rather hurt, then befreind
the brain and nerves: and therefore as cantharides do invade and offend the
bladder, the Sea hare the lungs, so also in this manner quicksilver seems to
assault the brain. But Rudius overthrows that opinion two ways, first of al,
because he has proved before mercury, to be no poison, secondly because he
thinks he is able to render a reason from the manifest qualities, why
quicksilver does assault the head; where first of al, he supposes this that
mercury as opium has heterogeneous parts and that it is made up of parts of a
different nature, yet so, that the hot parts do predominate; and that it is
compounded of an aerie and earthy substance but very much attenuated with heat,
which like unto smoke scarce enduring the heat, flies away in fume and is
dispersed. Therefore amongst al other medicines of this faculty it does most
powerfully extenuate the humors, discuss, and convert them to motion, and
therefore does purge by sweat, by stool, by the mouth, and so partly by its
purgative virtue, partly by the heat of its thin parts does draw the humors
along with it, and that it happens so, that the thinner going to the skin are
emptied by sweat, but the thick and unfit to be emptied by sweat, being
extenuated together with the quicksilver turned into vapor are drawn up into the
head and then causing distillations do fall down again; and at length he
concludes, whenas quick silver outwardly anointed does not remain in the
stomach, as other purging medicines do, but assails the head; it is no wonder if
it principally purge by the mouth.

But indeed he does not this way satisfy the doubt, and this is a great piece
of ignorance both in things phylosophycal and Chemical. For first of all that
Quick silver cannot be cleared from venenosety, was said before, and proved,
and the reasons for the contrary answered. And Rudius himself in the chapter
even now alleged, reckons up so many and so great evils, which mercury does
cause, that they cannot al be reduced to manifest qualities: which that I may
compendiously reduce, Quick silver has a corroding faculty, The hurts of Quick
silver.
causes a trembling and weakness of the heart, hurts the animal faculty,
weakens the substance of the nerves and their proper unity, whence are raised
incurable tremblings and grievous torments, and many using of mercurial
medicines, have suffered cunvulsions, falling sickness, and apoplexy. Nay the
same Rudius reports that some after unction have fallen into raving and
madness: but whereas he endeavors to reduce that operation of mercury by which
it causes salivation, to the manifest qualities in that he labors in vain,
for first of al there are no such heterogeneous parts in mercury as he
phansieth, as was said before, neither could any Chemist ever yet show them,
and whether Quicksilver be burnt, or whether it be reduced to water, or what
other external form soever it puts on, it retains its whole essence, and with
a little labor may be reduced to its ancient form. Besides Rudius renders no
reason, why Mercury out wardly anointed on the body, is rather moved to the
head then to the stomach, and carries the humors thither with it: for whereas
he thinks, that it is resolved into vapor and carried up into the head, it is
falls, whenas it may be collected whole both in the mouth, and in other parts.

It Is more agreeable therefore to truth, Quicksilver an Enemy to the nerves
that quicksilver is offensive to the nerves and brain, as the tremblings which
it causes do sufficiently de monstrate, and therefore that it creepes up by
the nerves to the brain, and carries the vicious humors thither with it, which
together with the vicious humors whenas nature and the expulsive faculty of the
brain does expel, and cast down to the jaws, hence follows salivation: and
quicksilver whether outwardly applied, or inwardly taken, still creeps up to the
head, and causes much spitting.

But there are diverse ways of using Quicksilver to raise a flux, The ways of
ussng quick silver
to wit either it is outwardly applied to the body by unguents, plasters,
epithems and lavatories so called, by a girdle, by bracelets and Rings, by
suffumigations; or it is taken inwardly, by all which ways not withstanding there
is nothing else done, but that the Quicksilver may be reduced into the
smallest parts that it may the eafier penetrate into the body yet what way
soever it is broke into pieces, it keeps its nature, and the least parts are
easily again united to one another and return to their ancient corpulency,
that it has bin observed, that sometimes a great quantity of it has bin
collected in the veins, and cavities of the bones.

Yet the most common way of applying Quicksilver is by unction; How the
unction with quicksilver is to be ordered.
but that unction may be performed rightly, sometimes are to be observed before
unction, some in the anointing, and some after unction, before unction the
body, if need require, must be emptied either with purging medicines or
bleeding: for if very many vicious humors abound in the body, it is to be feared,
that by the use of these unctions they rush together in a heap to the jaws and
suffocate the patient, or being rapt up to the brain do cause an apoplexy, or
palsy, and therefore first of al part of them ought to be emptyed. Also if
their be plenty of blood, least the patient may suffer an inflammation of his
jaws or a fever, it is good to take away a little blood. Falopius also, that
part of the matter may be consumed, the bowels strengthened, and not be
offended by the Quicksilver, gives the decoction of Guajacum eight or ten days
before unction.

As concerning the unction it self, the basis of these unguents is
Quicksilver, which must be chosen pure, or vivified by cinnabar, and it must
be mixed with hog's grease hens-fat, butter, oil, turpentine that it appear no
longer quick to the sight, which is commonly called mortifiying of it. How
Quick silver is to be prepared.
Some also ad to six ounces of Quicksilver, four ounces of red sugar. Some do
mix diverse other things to correct the malice of Quicksilver, and indeed this
or that according to the different constitution of the disease, which
notwithstanding profit little. For those oily and unctuous things, or other
things, do stick on the skin and superficies of the body, and cannot follow the
Quicksilver into the innermost parts of the body, nor correct its malignity.
But those things which are necessarily mixed, are mixed, to that end, that the
quicksilver may be reduced into the smallest bodies and ^o may the easier
insinuate it self into the body. Some also in the composition of this unguent,
think we ought to have respect to diverse things: and therefore Hercules
Saxonia, if there be hard knobs, ads those things which do mollify, as the sat
and grease of geese, ducks, the Marrow of ox bones, butter, oil of sweet
almons; if there be ulcers he bids us ad drying pouders, Franckincense, Myrrh,
al^e, Litharge, white lead, which if they be il conditioned, he ads Cincabar
precipitated. Besides he commands us to mix medicines, which strengthen, the
parts: more over (...) bids us ad those things, which do respect the principal
parts, and those that are most hurt, and therefore if the joints be affected he
bids us ad ground pine; if the liver, hepatick means; if the stomach, things
stomachical, But besides the rest he does aprove of oil of Guajacum added to
the ointment; al which as we do not wholly disallow of, so they ought to be
explained. First of al, if the unction be ordered chiefly for tumors or ulcers,
medicines may commodiously be mixed with it, but if salivation and emptying by
spittle be chiefly intended there is no need of that laborious composition.
Secondly Quicksilver it self if it be reduced into smallest parts, does easily
penetrate, neither has it any need of helpers, and there is nothing that can
penetrate easier then that. Thirdly I can scarce be persuaded, that medicines
outwardly anointed, can penetrate to the stomach and liver, and strengthen
them; this likes me best, that he thinks oil of Guajacum ought to be added to
those unguents.

The Quantity of Quicksilver that is used, The quantity.
is sometimes more, sometimes less, according to the vehemence of the disease,
and the patients strength. Yet we must not exceed seven ounces which is
sufficient for strong bodies, in weak bodies it is sufficient to use three four
or five ounces; but every time use two or three ounces; of the unguent, or for
every dose take two scruples; in tender children for every place so much
ointment as is the bulk of a lentil is sufficient. Such ointments therefore may
be made thus.

Take of mercury six ounces; Forms of Meacurial Unguents.
of hog's grease without salt one pound; Kill the Mercury with the grease and mix
it exactly, then ad of the marrow of an ox^leg half an ounce; of Turpentine
three ounces; of the oil of it one ounce, of the oil of Guajacum two ounces;
mix them.

Or Take of venice Turpintine one pound, of Quicksilver seven ounces; mix them
diligently, then ad of hog's grease eight ounces; oil of sweet and bitter
almonds of each two ounces, powder of cinnamon two drams; Musk six granes mix it
and make an ointment.

Eustachius Rudius commends this form, which he used with most happy success
for many years at Utine, in the great hospital of that City, with so much
safety, that not one of them perished which he had in cure.

Take ache of Quicksilver one ounce and half; Fresh Sows grease three ounces;
powder of mastick one ounce; oil of mastick one ounce and half; Saffron half a
dram; two Sweet apples of a middle size. First of al let the sows grease be
most exactly mixed with the mercury, then ad the mastick finelypoudered
together with the oil of mastick and Safforn, and afterward the aples through
ripe cleansed from the parings and core.

Or, Take of mercury killed with spitle three ounces; old oil four ounces; of
Frankincense prepared as common mastick two ounces, mastick one ounce;
hogs-greese two ounces and half; oil of bays one ounce and half; virgins wax
two ounces; ointment of diaitbaea one ounce and half; sagapen one ounce; of wax
as much as is sufficient. Make an Ointment.

Or Take of mercury two ounces; of hogsgrease three ounces; turpentine one
ounce; powder of orice franqincense, mastickeach two drams; oil of chamemel,
white lillies, bays of each two aunces; Stirax half an ounce; mix them.

Or Take of hens, hogs, and bears grease each one ounce; oil of white lillies,
bays each two ounces; mercury six ounces; mix the greases in a mortar, after
wards ad the mercury, and stir them an hour in the mortar, then ad of
frankincense mastick, myrrh, amoniacum, stirax, powder of Arabic, lavinder
each half a dram make an ungnent.

The Places which are anointed are the joints and the spaces between, and the
less fleshy parts in the hands, elbows, feet, knees, sometimes in strong bodies
the emunctories of the liver are anointed, and the backbone. Fallopius expects
the hands, and first of al anoints the feet transversly about the beginning of
the feet, afterward the spaces between the joints of the leg, then the middle
of the thighs, The time for anointing.
the middle of the Elbow bones, and the middle of the Arms, afterward the
whole back.

The most commodious time for anointing, is the spring and autum, the winter
and summer are less convenient and the unction is to be performed in the
morning, upon an empty stomach, in a close and warm place, beginning at the
lower parts, and so passing to the upper unction is seldom ordered twice on the
sameday.

The patient anointed must either be ropped up in linen, or the parts anointed
be covered with course flax or hemp and so the patient be placed in his bed.
How long unction is to be continued.


But the unction is to be continued so long, til salivation or a looseness, or
some other evaccuation succeed; and the symptoms be lessened and cease; and
truly if a looseness follow, it is not suddenly to be suppressed, yet we must
have a care least the guts suffer any hurt, casting in by Clyster chaly beat
milk, or the juice of ptisan with milk, or the decoction of barley and
afterward if need require, come to astringent means.

Some think that sweat alsoought to be moved; but if nature tend to salivation,
it is not convenient to move sweat, least there be contrary motions caused; but
if nature of her own accord tend to sweat, it is not to be hindered, yet unction
is scarce to be continued above three days at one time; sometimes also there
presently follow grievous symptoms as great ulcers of the mouth, swellings and
inflammation of the tongue and jaws, the swallowing is hurt, the teeth
loosened, an extraordinary flux of virulent humors from the mouth, a dia^rhy or
dicentery, and then we must presently forbear anointing, yet sometimes it
hapens but very sildom, that no such grievous symptom follows. But only
sweats, and pustles are multeplied al over the body.

When unction is now perfected, and the spitle runs well, What is to be done
after unction.
let the parts anointed be washed with wine, in which sage, Arabic, lavender,
flowers, rosmary, grownd pine, bayleaves, calamint origanum have bin boiled,
afterward lay upon them some plaster for the nerves.

At last when the unction is past, we must use our endeavor, that the mercury
be not left in the body, and that no evil be contracted neither in the mouth
nor other parts; and therefore we must move sweat in a Laconick bath keep gold
money in the mouth, shaveings of gold must be drank, or bullets or pills made
up of lease gold must be swallowed: for the mercury is imbibed by the gold, and
with it is emptied out of the body, and so al evil that might happen is
prevented.

To assuage pain, the mouth and jaws must be washed with warm milk or the
Decoction of Barley: to hinder inflammation let the patient use the decoction of
plantaine or plantaine water, or of Vine leaves, with the syrup of Mulberries
and dry roses, the teeth must be washed with the decoction of sage, or with
Sage, columbine water, or austere wine; after unction we must not presently
desist from the cure, but the decoction of Guajacum as being the alexipharmacum
of this disease, must be drank still for certain days, which if it be
intermitted, a relapse is wont easily to follow upon it.

Secondly, Mercurial plasters.
emplasters made of mercury are wont to be applied in this disease, which
though they cause less trouble, yet they are less effectual to empty by
spitting. They are prepared of the same matter of which the ointments are, to
which also we may ad cinnabar: but quicksilver either is mixed with usual
plasters, as diachylum Ireatum, melilot, or new ones are compounded. The
plaster called de ranis with mercury, is also in use. These plasters are
spread upon linen cloth, leather, and are applied to the same places as the
ointments, especially to the hands and feet, also to the emunctories, and
sometimes to the back bone, and they are worn continually night and day, and
every third or fourth day are renewed: this cure is less troublesome, and upon
fair days the patient may go abroad, yet the cure is not so perfect, and
therefore must be continued longer.

Thirdly, Lavatoris of mercury.
Linen clothes wet in mercury water, are applied to the same places in the
form of an epitheme, and because sublimate is most commodiously dissolved in
water, the same places which are wont to be anointed, are besmeared with
mercury dissolved in this manner, which medicines are commonly called
lavatories, which are prepared of mercurius sublimate one ounce, which is
disolved in two pound of some liquor.

For Examples sake.
Take of Mercury sublimate one ounce; of Scabious, Rose, Fumitory water, each
eight ounces; Sage water four ounces. Let them boil and be mixed.

The use of it is this, with a cloth wet in this liquor, let the knees and feet
be besmeared, and the arms from the elbow toward the hands, and that must be
done in the morning and toward the evening, in a warm place and continued for
ten days, til spitting follow.

Fourthly, Mercurial girdles and bracelets.
Girdles and bracelets are made of Mercury killed with spittle and mixed with
the white of an egg, which mixture is spread upon cotton, and that is sowed into
leather or cloth, and of that girdles or bracelets are made.

Fifthly, Also this disease is cured by suffumigations made of quicksilver, but
this way of cure is more dangerous than that by unction, Suffumigations of
mercury.
nay it has been deadly to some, and therefore is not to be made use of,
unless al other means have been tried in vain, and only on very strong bodies;
for this way of cure is very violent, whenas the patients that do admit of it,
every day are wont to void ten pints of virulent spittle; but it takes not
place in those that are weak, wasted, endewed with a hot and dry distemper, not
in those, which are troubled with a difficulty of breathing, or are subject to
distillations from the head on the breast, or who spit blood, or are taken with
a lientery, or dysentery: but physicians do chiefly use those suffumigations in
a contumacious French ophthalmy, and upon an imminent shedding of the hair,
which cannot be hindered by other medicines; for this suffumigation does fasten
the hair. Yet then a particular suffumigation may be appointed.

For we must note here, Their difference.
that there is difference of suffumigations in this disease; for some are
universal which are received by the whole body, and therefore also do empty the
whole body; others partitular, which are applied only to certain parts: again
some suffumigations are prepared of benign medicines, as frankincense, myrrh,
oil, Cinnamon, Styrax calamite, spikenard, Amber, Ammoniacum, benjamin, wood of
aloes, Amber greese, Musk, Gallia moschata, and the like, which though they may
be fitted for the use of certain parts, yet they do not destroy the venereal
disease.

Those therefore which are proper to this disease, are chiefly prepared of
mercury and of those things made of Mercury, cinnabar, Mercury precipitate,
sublimate.

As concerning those universal ones, their basis as was said even now, is
mercury any way prepared; some ad the Greeks Sandarach, and yellow arsnick, but
whenas they are most pernicious poisons, they are not safe enough applied,
neither do they cure this disease in particular that we may give you some
forms.

Take Of Factitious Cinnabar three ounces; Myrrh, Frankincense, Mastich, Forms.
each one ounce; Liver colored aloe, Styrax calamite, Benjamin, each half an
ounce: make a powder.

Or Take of Cinnabar three ounces; Myrrh, Frankincence, wood of aloe, Laudanum,
Ammoniacum, each one ounce; mix them with turpentine, make pills.

Or Take, of Cinnabar three ounces, Mercury precipitate three drams;
Frankincense, Aloe, Mastick, Myrrh, Benjamin; Styrax Calamite, each half an
ounce: make a powder. Epiphanius Ferdinandus reports the following form is
much in use at Naples in the Hospital for those that are incurable.

Take, of Litharge five ounces; of antimony, Cinnabar, each one ounce; of
Pontick Rhubarb six ounces; Polipody of the oak three ounces. Sweet cane,
Cinnamon, Laudanum, Roses, Mace, Nutmegs, Alum, Verdegrece, Aloe, each three
drams; Red lead, the Greeks Sandarache, each one ounce. Gum caranna, two
drams; Water of Roses and Citron Flowers, as much as is sufficient, mix them
according to art.

But it seems to me to be a form made up without al reason which contains
many things unprofitable, and also hurtful.

That is safer which Ferdinandus himself proposes.

Take of Cinnabar, Mercury sublimate each one ounce; Gum of the Olive tree
Laudanum each half an ounce; Nutmegs, Bay and Juniper berries, each three
drams; Mar^oram, Coppras one dram and an half; Turpentine as much as is
sufficient to incorporate it, make a mass.

But those medicines whether they be reduced into pouders, or pills or
trochisks, The manne^ of preparing these suffumigations.
are used after this manner: first of all the patient that he may be able to
undergo this cure (fit sauce for him, and they are deservedly thus handled who
defile themselves with lust) you must give him two rear eggs, a morsel of bred
dipped in strong wine, and a draught of wine, and a spoonful of conserve of
roses; then let him rest quiet for a quarter of an hour; in the interim let
that Venereal bed, or rather prison, viz the sweating place be heated, and in
that hot house or dry bath prepare a tent, or a pavilion of thick linen
cloth; under which the patient may sit naked in a low seat; under the same
pavilion place a pot or vessel full of burning coals, on which by degrees cast
either the powder, or the pills, or trochisks, that the sum from thence may be
dispersed through his whole body, and be received by the naked body of the
patient; when the smoke abates, strew fresh water on the coals, and continue so
doing for a third or fourth part of an hour, for half or a whole hour, as the
strength of the patient can endure it. For we must carefully observe, that the
patient faint not, which does often happen; if it be collected by his
stammering speech, he must presently be taken forth and be refresht with
fitting medicines. But that faintings may be prevented, the patient may be
permitted to draw the cold air by intervals through a reed, and put forth his
nose without the pavilion.

But these suffumigations are applied either once or twice a day and indeed for
three, six, or nine or more days, according as the purgation does sooner or
later succeed, for when this comes, or a looseness, we must presently sease from
the suffumigation. After the patient has sweat sufficiently under his tent.
Being wrapped up in linen he must be laid in his bed, that he may there continue
his sweat for an hour or two. Particular suffumigations.


But particular suffumigations are not applied to the whole body, but only to
parts exulcerated or affected with pain; but then Salivation is not moved,
neither is that the intent, but it is used only to take away diseases and
symptoms in the external parts, viz. for the falling of the hair
suffumigatons are applied to head; to the hands and Feet for their pains, and
when they suffer Chaps and Clefts.

Last of al also a flux may be raised by taking Quicksilver inwards which
though it was not known to Fernelius, Internal Medicines causing Salivation.
yet it has been taken notice of by the more modern, and Quicksilver is used
to this end by Rondeletius, Platerus, and others. Such are those Pills called
Barbarossa which have Quicksilver in them; but Physicians give Pills made of
Mercury so, that at one dose there is given six or seven grains of Mercury, and
they give them almost every day, and so long, til a flux follows, and this
cure they continue for thirty days. Yet Platerus admonishes that this kind of
cure is not easily to be admitted, and not unless the Disease be inveterate,
when other Medicines premised avail nothing. He also thinks that it is
commodious, if it be presently cast forth by stool either by its own weight, or
by the admistion of other things; but if that be done, doubtless it will not
cause Salivation; therefore it is better that Mercury what way soever prepared,
be given in a less dose, than can cause purging either by vomit, or stool: viz.
that the half, or third, or fourth part only of that dose be given, which
otherwise is wont to be given to purge. For example sake, precipitate or
Turbith Mineral is wont to be given at other times to vomit or purge to the
weight of six grains, but if only three, or two, or one be given, by the
continued use of it a flux is raised: and therefore he that would use such
Medicines, shall do very right, if first of al he give the full dose of the
Mercurial Medicine to purge, the second day half so much, the third day a third
part, the fourth day a fourth part, and continue so, til the spittle run, yet
he need not so precisely observe it: and it is altogether safer in this disease
to give those Mercurial Medicines, which do not move the belly with great
violence, nor so great danger, yet by their continued use do provoke spitting.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Diet to be observed in the Cure of the Venereal Disease.
A Diet in the cure of this Disease is strictly to be observed; Diet. The Air.
first of al let the Air in which the Patient is conversant, be hot, that
insensible transpiration may be free, and sweating be not hindered, but rather
promoted, yet not so hot, as to make faint. Therefore if need require let the
patient keep himself in a warm chamber the whole time or his cure, and let not
him expose himself to the free Air, unless it be somewhat hot by reason of the
season of the year, and then not before noon. Yet they whose course of life will
not allow them to keep at home, let them guard themselves with Clothes against
external cold, and as much as they can shun the cold Air.

As concerning their Meat, The Meat. Whether a slender diet be convenient in
the Venereal disease.
there is much discourse indeed every where in this Disease concerning a
slender Diet: but whenas a slender Diet is that which does in some sort impair
the strength, or which does little preserve the enfeebled strength, such diet
is only convenient in acute diseases, which whenas they last not long, the
strength also somewhat debilitated is able to hold out to the end of them: but
whenas the French pox is a Chronical disease, and the Cure is extended for many
weeks, if the strength be dejected by a slender diet, it cannot hold out till
the end of the disease. But that Physicians do chiefly feed their Patients with
bread and raisons, I think this is the cause, because they would give the most
simple food, and that of good juice: for whenas variety of meats does easily
supply vicious humors, and flesh, and fish, and the like meats are more easily
corrupted, then bread and raisons they prohibit the sick variety of meats and
flesh, and would have them contented only with bread and raisons: therefore
that course and form of diet is to be observed which may suffice for the
conservation of strength, though not to increase it, but must no way oppress
Nature. The meat also must be of good juice, and simple, and which no ways
affords matter for the generation of excrements, nor may call away Nature from
resisting the Disease to the concoction of that. And therefore the patient must
not be allowed above two dishes, and meat must be given but twice aday;
therefore when the sick is prepared for the use of Medicines, let his diet be
such which may not impair his strength, but rather preserve it, nay, in some
sort increase it, that the patient may afterward be able to undergo the
evacuations that shall be ordered, and a more slender diet: but when Sweaters or
Quicksilver is administered, if the strength will bear it, we must use a more
spare diet, lest the virtue of the Medicines be hindered by plenteous
nourishment, and let the superfluous humors in the body be rather wasted, than
heaped up, and let the passages by which they ought to be expelled, be al kept
free and open: but let not the diet be too slender, lest the strength fail, but
be able to hold out til the perfect cure of the disease, which is wont to be
long first; and though somewhat is to be bated of the accustomary diet in the
cure of this disease, yet that is not to be done presently at the beginning,
nor that change is not suddenly to be made; but the first eight days by little
and little, somewhat must be subtracted from the accustomary diet; as also the
last eight days of the Cure, by degrees he must return to the former course of
diet; yet we must always have respect unto the strength, and diligently
consider what that is able to endure, and we must have a greater care of that,
than of the disease, as without which the Cure cannot be perfected.

But how much concerns the quantity of the meat, we must also respect the
strength, and the disease; for by now much the strength is stronger, by so much
it is able to suffer the less quantity of meat; but the strength is demonstrated
by the habit of the body, the temperament, custom, the age, season of the year,
the Country, and condition of the sick; of which we have spoke in its proper
place. In brief, as much as possible may be, somewhat must be bated of the
accustomary food, which also the people of India, from whom the manner of
curing this disease was derived to us, are reported to do; yet so, that always
respect be had unto the strength: For if the patient be strong, his Body of a
cold constitution, that he can easily endure hunger; flesh is not to be given
any more after eight days, but the patient must be content with bread and
raisons: but if the strength be weak, the body slender, choleric, some flesh
also may be granted, viz. the flesh of Chickens, Hens, Partridges, Veal, Kid,
and tender weather, as also Hens Eggs: but Hogs flesh which is hard of
digestion and distribution, and does increase the morbifick matter, is chiefly
to be eschewed; as also corruptible Fruits, and soft fishes: and truly the most
commodious Food in this disease, is raisons, and to be preferred before alother
meats: besides, they do not easily putrefie, and they afford good juice and
nourishment, and correct the malignity of the vicious Humors; whence some are
of Opinion, That Raisons in this Disease are not only meat, but medicine too;
and especially those greater ones called Cybebae, are most profitable, in which
there is greater plenty of nourishment, and a more abstersive and strengthening
faculty.

Concerning bread here is some doubt; many commend Biscuit, What kind of bread
is to be given.
nay admit of that only, which as we do not disallow of in strong bodies, which
are moist and abound with phlegm and excrements, being inclined rather to
putrrefaction, then adust, and in those who have strong teeth, and are
accustomed to it: so also Bread once well baked, and not too moist, may safely
be permitted, as a nourishment most familiar to al Natutes, Sexes, Ages and any
season of the year: neither must we cause any trouble to the patient, by
forbidding common bread, if he desire that rather then Biscuit: nay Biscuit seems
to have its discommodities; for it stays longer in the stomach, and is not so
easily disgested, and for the right disgesting of it there is need of a greater
strength of the stomach, which notwithstanding for the most part in those that
are sick of the French Pox is very languid: besides whenas in those sick of the
Venereal Disease for the most part adust Humors do abound, by Biscuit they are
increased, on the contrary by common bread as being more moist they are made
remperate, and at length more nourishment and good blood is afforded from it,
as being best tempered, and in meats that which is best tempered, is to be
preferred before that which is intemperate.

Many also do weigh out the quantity of the meat, and write that at one meal,
four ounces of bread, and two or three ounces of flesh will suffice; but this
cannot be so accurately observed in all men, but here there is no small regard to
be had to Natures and custom.

As concerning their drink, Their drink
Authors also do not fully agree concerning that, some think nothing is to be
given for drink but the decoction of Guaiacum and Sarsapatilla, and wholly
forbid wine, and think it is as much to be denied in this Disease, as in a
pleurisy, and are of opinion that wine is not so much as to be tasted of, the
whole course of the cure; and Fernelius writes that wine is so averse to
Guajacum, as it is to Hemlock, de lue Vener. cap. 13, But for this cause chiefly
they forbid Wine, because the body and Humors which before were adust, and
which grow hot by the use of Guajacum, by the use of wine are inflamed. But
indeed this reason seems not sufficient; for that Second decoction may heat as
much; as wine, if it be thin and dilute and moderately drank: therefore the
strength is here to be considered, and whenas wine has a notable agreement
with our body, and does strengthen the heart and al parts, and especially the
stomach, is most easily distributed into the whole body, does most speedily
nourish, and so fortify Nature, that it may the better be able to oppose the
Disease; the use of it is not simply to be rejected, especiallly in those who
are less hot, and have a phlegmatic body stuffed up with crude Humors; yet the
use of wine is so to be moderated, that it do no way inflame the body; but
those that can abstain from wine without any hurt, let them drink that second
decoction made of Guajacum and that plentifully at meals, and other times, when
they are thirsty, yet they to, may sometimes take a drauft of wine to strengthen
the stomach. After the same manner if the Cure be ordered by Quicksilver, at
that time when Evacuation is not yet made by the mouth and spitting, and the
patient can chaw meat, he must be nourisht with the best bread and good flesh,
and dilute wine must be given him: but when Salivation begins, and the Patient
can chaw no longer, by reason of the looseness of his teeth, he must be nourisht
with suppings, and Barley Ptissan, and flesh broaths with bread in it, and
whenas an Inflammation of the jaws is feared, he must abstain from wine. But
after the cure is finished, though the Patient may reurne to his accustomary
Diet, yet it is most convenient that he be nourished with meats of good juice,
from which the best blood may be generated; for whenas the body is extenuated,
and the veins emptied, we must wholly take care, that the body or Vessels be
not filled with vicious blood, but it is commodious that they be restored and
filled with good. Neither must it be granted, that upon recovery he presently
arise from a small quantity of meat, to a great, whenas al change to extremes
is dangerous. And when it may be feared, that the Liver be heated by the use,
of hot and dry Medicines, conserve of Roses, Violets, the pouders of the three
saunders, Diarrhodon Abbat. must be given for some weeks; and let the courses
of diet, especially in Summer time, be cooler, provided chiefly of Barley, the
Whey of Goats Milk also is good. But if there be any fear, that some relics
still and Malignant disposition of this disease be remaining in the body, Wine
of Guajacum.
give a Physic wine made with Guajacum and Sarsaparilla which is most
commodiously prepared at vintage time, if to every Gallon of wine one pound of
Guajacum, and three ounces of Sarsaparilla be added, and let cool with the new
wine after the accustomed manner; but out of vintage time those Medicines may
only be steeped in Wine.

Sleep is not only convenient in the night, Sleep.
but also a day times, when the Patients sweat, it may be granted.

Al violent exercise is hurtful; Exercise.
for whenas the strength is impared by it and there is a greater transpiration
and dissolution of the body, thence it comes to pass, that the patient cannot
be content with that smaller portion of nourishment, which is wont to be used,
in this Disease. But he must wholly abstain from Venery, as the greatest enemy
to this Disease: let sweating in his Chamber be instead of exercise, and
frictions which may be done with the same labor when the sweat is wiped of: let
the affection of his mind be composed to mirth.

We must use our endeavor that the belly be kept loose, Excrements
and whenas by reason of the small quantity of meat it is wont easily to be
bound, it must be loosned with Clysters, and Raisons with leaves of Seny; nay
by intervals to give some purgers is not only profitable, but also necessary:
for though those Laxatives do empty the first passages, yet because they reach
not to the more distant places, and by sweaters only the thinner parts are
Evacuated, but the thick are left behind, it is good after seven or ten days, or
after a longer space, or need requires, to give a purging Medicine agreeable to
the body of the Patient.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Cure of the Diseases and Symptoms, which are wont to be
joined with the Venereal Disease.
WHenas diverse Diseases and Symptoms are wont to be joined with the Venereal
Disease, some are very large in explaining, what way those Diseases and
Symptoms ought to be removed: but whenas those Diseases are for the most part
manifest, and we have treated of their cure in former Books, I think it not
worth my pains to treat at large of them in this place: and therefore I shall
only allege certain few things, and those principally which are proper to this
Disease, let the rest be fetched from their proper places.

Ulcers.
As concerning the Ulcers of the Yard especially, The Cure of Venereal Ulcers
in the Yard.
which are very common in this Disease, we have spoke of them in general Lib.
3. Pract. Part. 9. Cap. 11. that we may add a little, the Root of the Yard
being guarded with a defensive Ointment, the Ulcer must be washed with the
Decoction of Scabious, Horehound, and especially Soape-wort, and Guajacum:
afterward let the Ulcer be anointed with some convenient unguent; those
Ointments are chiefly profitable, which have Mercury in them, either a live, or
sublimate, or precipitate, or Cinnabar. And in Ulcers of the Yard, and
rottenness of the Nut, as they speak Hercules Saxonia writes there is no
Medicine yet found out more profitable then precipitate: yet it ought not to be
applied, but where there is a thick filth, but in clean Ulcers it is not to be
used Eustachius Rudius Lib. 5. de Morb. occult. Cap. 19. commends two Ointments
especially. The first is:

Take of Oil of Roses, sweet Almonds, of each half an ounce; The Mercurial
Unguent.
Ointment of Rozin (which is made of pure oil, Rozin of the Pine, Turpentine,
and Yellow Wax) six drams; Mercury Precipitate, one dram; a little Wax. Mix al
over the fire, except the Mercury precipitate, and taking them of the fire stir
them carefully, til they are cool, then add the precipitate; yet according to
the Nature of of the Ulcer, and the part affected with it, you may add more or
less of the mercury precipitate.

The other is this.
Take of Oil of sweet Almonds, Ointment of Roses, of each three ounces: new
wax, one ounce: Mercury precipitate half an ounce. Mix them.

And those Ointments are good not only for the Ulcers of the Yard, but for
French Ulcers of other parts, for the Disease called Ficus, swellings in the
Fundaments, and Crusts.

The Balsame of Mercury also is good, which is thus prepared.

Take of Quick silver dissolved in spirit of Nitre, to one pound of this
dissolution, pour of Oil of Olives, three ounces. Let them stand and digest
eight days, afterward separate the oil and keep it for your use.

Or, Take the Yelk of one Egg boiled hard, Honey one ounce. Mix them over a
gentle fire, let them boil, and add of Mercury Sublimate, half a dram.

After mundification this Ointment also may be used.

Take of the best aloe, half an ounce; Crocus Martis, two drams; Frankincense,
red Lead, of each one dram; Honey, half an ounce; Turpentine, two drams; the
Yelk of an Egg. Mix them.

But occult and hidden ulcers are wont to lie hid either bound up under the
foreskin, Hidden Ulcers.
or else are in the internal passage of the Yard; if the Ulcer be under the
foreskin contracted, either a convenient medicine is to be injected by a
syringe, and afterward a tent dipped in ointment is with a probe to be applied
to the part affected or the foreskin must be cut long ways, and necessary
Medicines be laid to it.

But if the ulcers be in the very passage of a man's Yard, Ulcers in the passage
of the Yard.
they are hard to be cured, and have caruncles joined with them, or fleshy
excressences, which hinder the emission of the urine, therefore in a slight
ulcer, we must inject Plantane water, in which Alum, litharge, and white Lead
have been boiled, but in more grieous ulcers use this Liniment.

Take of Mercury precipitate, one ounce; Mercury sublimate, one dram; burnt
lead, two drams. Grind them on a Marble stone, wash them often with Rosewater,
and let them dry in the shade. Afterward take of Hogs Fat, six ounces; White
Wax, two drams. Let them be dissolved over the fire, and add the powder, and
two scruples of Camphire. Make a Limment, which must be besmeared over a Candle
made of five ounces of White Wax, and one ounce of Turpentine, and let the
Candle be put up into the Vrinary passage: or let some convenient plaster
wrapped over a small probe, be thrust in: the Caruncle being taken away a drying
and consolidating ointment must be cast in.

But if there be an ulcer in the womb, In the womb
and that sordid and creeping, the evil is incurable: but the slighter are
cured by injections of Alum waters, in which Guajacum and Sarsaparilla is
boiled, or with pessaries of the juice of Plantane, with powder of Aloes, Bole
Armenick, white Lead and the like. In a very sordid ulcer the Ointment
Aegyptiacum may be added, or some Mercurial unguent: and at last a drying and
consolidating Ointment may be used, as that of Tutty, or the like.

In more grieous ulcers suffumigations of the Womb are most profitable, but
whenas the Pipes are overheated by the coals, these candels of Hercules Saxonia
are good for a fume.

Take of Styrax, Calamite, Benjamin, of each six drams; wood of Aloes, seven
scruples; white Frankincense, one ounce; Ladanum, one dram and an half; Orrice,
Cloves, of each two drams; Damask Roses. six drams; Cinnabar, two drams; coals
of Willow, half a pound; Aqua Vitae as much as is sufficient. Make Candels.

By the same Medicines the ulcers of the Guts are Cured.

But to the ulcers of the jaws whenas such Medicines cannot be applied make a
Gargarisme of the Decoction of Sarsaparilla, Ulcer of the Jaws.
the bark of Guajacum, the Leaves of plantane, scabious, mittle, red roses,
pomegranate pil, sumach, to which ad a little alume the decoction may be made
in water, and toward the end ad a little austere wine; after they are washed,
the ulcers must be cleansed with oil of sulphur, adding a convenient liquor, or
the compound water of alum, which is thus prepared.

Take of mercury sublimate, roch alum, each one ounce; The compound water of
alum.
Grind them on marble stone, then ad to them juice of Lemons three ounces,
plantane water one pound and an half; rose water nine ounces; Boil them in a
glass to the consumption of the fifth part.

But you must have a care, that no part of such medicines be swallowed down;
butter of antimony so called is very efficacious, if the ulcer be gently
touched with a piece of cotton moistened with the butter; but there is need of
the same caution here: but whenas it cannot always be prevented, but somewhat
will slide into the stomach, and so such medicines cannot be given safely
enough; but on the contrary, other more gentle medicines are of little
efficacy, these ulcers are hard to be cured, nay oftentimes are incurable; the
solution of gold is more safely applied to these ulcers, prepared after this
manner.

Take fifteen leaves of Gold, roch alume, nitere, Salt, each one ounce; grind
them on marble, and pour to it some drops of spirits of vitriol; afterward
pour on it spirits of wine two fingers breadth above it, and let them stand in
warm ashes, last of al boil, that the leaves of the gold may be dissolved, and
the spirits of wine grow yellow. Separate the Spirits of wine by distillation,
then pour more on again and digest it, and do this so often, til the spirits
of wine dissolve the gold, and the salts be left at the bottom; at last
separate the spirits of wine by distillation till it is dry, and pour on spirits
of turpintine and digest it eight days in a warm place, till the gold be
dissolved, with this solution wash the part affected twice every day.

Ulcers of the nose are cured by errhines, or infusions, by pouders strewed on
it, Of the nose.
by suffumigations made of Guajacum and cinnabar.

Clefts of the bands and feet.
If there be chaps and clefts in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet,
Clefts of the hands and feet.
let them be washed with the decoction of Guajacum, its bark, scabious water,
germander, cinquefoile; and if there be hardness with it, take also marsh
mallows, or the root of wild cowcumber, afterward use an ointment of butter,
goose-grease or hens, ammoniacum, bdellium, apples, to which ad alittle of
unflaked loome, or precipitate, or the ointment proposed before.

Or Take of hog's grease as much as you please, and put as much oil of tartar to
it, that by it the ointment may be made sharp.

If the evil yield not to these, apply a particular suffumigation of cinnabar;
Hercules Saxonia de lue vener. Cap. 30. writes that he has observed a certain
woman who for eight years together had clefts in her hands, and had used the
help of all the Venetian and Padua doctors to no purpose, was in a short time
easily cured with the juce of an herb, which some call mugwort, others tansie,
being carefully dropped with a feather into all the clefts, and forbearing to wash
her hands at al, and that he has found the same juice profitable in ringworms
and Crusty Uloers.

Buboes.
Concerning buboes which are wont often to break forth in the groines in the
Venereal disease, we must hold fast this in general, that we do our endeavor,
The cure of buboes.
to help the expulsion of that matter, which nature assayes and endeavors to
thrust forth to the more ignoble parts; whenas sometimes by this evacuation
nature is wont to free her self from all that disease; therefore if a buboe
break not forth enough, and increases but tends not to suppuration, we must
use our endeavor to draw it forth and suppurate it. Therefore the thigh of the
same side must be rubbed, and scatified about the lower part, or else a vein
must be opened about that place; but on the bubo it self there must be laid
strong drawing medicines. As,

Take of sagapen, Ammoniacum each three drams; opoponax, Bdellium, each two
drams; mustard, pepper, Pellitory of spain of each one dram; black soap half
one ounce; mix them and with wax and pitch, make an emplaster.

Yet if nature be oppressed with the plenty of virulent matter, that it cannot
expel it al, then it is good to give a purge, that part of the butthen being
taken off, nature may the easier expel the rest.

When the tumor has broke forth enough, we must take care it be speedily
opened, and be kept open a long while; that it may suppurate we must lay on it
those maturatives, which are wont to be applied in inflammations, of the
mucilage of mallows, marshmallows, wheat and flax seed, figs, hog's grease,
goose-grease, and the like; or the simples diachyled, or that compound with
gums; when it is mattered, we must not expect that the bubo should open of it
self, but it must be opened betimes, least the virulent humor detained there do
hurt other parts; the tumor being opened the forementioned digestives and
abstersives must be laid on, to which there will be need sometimes to ad a
little of mercury precipitate, and the ulcer must be kept open a long time.

Yet in cold buboes there is no such fear, that the matter should ascend to
other parts, but if purgers and sweaters, and proper alexipharmaca be applied,
sometimes the bubo does wholly vanish without any danger.

Gummosities and Nodes.
Truly Such tumors and nodes, which do rise in places void of flesh, as the
forehead, the skul, and the outward part of the legs, do oftentimes vanish, if
the disease be perfectly cured; especially after the use of sarsaparilla, which
is most effectual in discussing of these diseases; and after the use of
mercurial unctions, which are applied to such tumors yet if after the cure is
inded such tumors and nodes remain, things emmollient, attenuating, and
digesting must be laid udon them, and that are strong, as the rootsof wild
cowcumber, bdellium, sagapen, opoponax, and chiefly ammoniacum, or diachylon
with gums, or a mercurial cerote; this is good and proved by experience.

Take Of the plaster diachylum with gums one ounce; fimple diachylum half an
ounce; mercury killed with spittle one ounce, oil of guajacum as much as is
sufficient make aplaster.

Or, Take of Ammoniacum, Opoponax, Gume of ivy dissolved in aqua vitae, hens
and goose grease each one ounce and half; the marow of a calves leg one ounce
ladanum; styrax, calamite, and liquid each two drams; the powder of hermodactil
roots orrice, each three drams; cinnabar one dram; quick silver mix with
turpintine six drams; oil of lillies and wax as much as is sfficient, make
acerote.

Also the lavatories made of mercury, mentioned before, are good in these
tumors.

If these things do not satisfy, the tumors must be opened with causticks,
especially if they be not in the joints, nerves, tendons, and the place must be
kept open, and the bone underneath, which for the most part is hurt, must be
seraped.

Small Bunchings and pustles.
Bunchings also and small pustles, thymi, verrucae, favi, Bunchings and pustles.
as in other parts of the body, so especially they are wont to rise in the
head, about the arsehole, yard and privities in the french pox: which though
sometimes after a universal cure they vanish of their own accord, yet sometimes
also they require a peculiar cure.

This sort of bunchings which are in the head, must be washed often with the
decoction of guajacum, and chiefly of the bark of it and sarsaparilla; some
use oil of scorpions and vipers: to which if they yield not, they must be
anointed with some mercurial unguent, or the compound water of alum, prepared
of roch alum and mercury sublimate, which some also prepare thus.

Take Of roch alum, Mercury sublimate each two drams: grind them, ad of
plantane and rose water each one pound: Boil them in a glass to the consumption
of half, afterward let them stand fifteen days that the alum and mercury may
sink to the bottom, and let the clear water be poured off, and kept for your
use.

If the pustles be in the mouth, use washing of the mouth with the decoction of
guajacum, or if there be an inflammation, with chalybeate whey, to which may be
added roses and plantane; and if the pustles be soul, ad scabious and ten
grains of alum to every pint of the whey or decoction. The compound alum water
even now described is most profitable; yet in pustles of the mouth, it is not
safe to use that alone, but it must be diluted with a treble or quadruple
quantity of rose and plentane water. But the pustles of the arsehole and yard,
must every day be often fomented with a linen cloth wet in the decoction of
guajacum and sarsaparila; for the same the alum water even now described is
very good: or if the evil be stubborn, some ointment must be laid upon them,
with powder of precipitate, such as were proposed before, or precipitate mixed
with four times as much of the white of an eg; which laid upon such
excrescenses of the arsehole, in 24. hours space extracts and roots them out:
after wards drying and cooling things must be laid on. Some cut off the french
warts with Scissers, and afterward take out the root with the medicines even
now proposed: also if the extreme part of the wart be touched with oil of
vitriol, it dries up and falls off.

Falling of the Hair.
The falling of the hair which is joined with this disease, does happen rather
from the knawing off, of the roots of the hair, than from other causes, Falling
af the hair.
both in the head and beard which that it may be cured, generals being premized
first the hair must be shaved off, if the patient will allow it: for all do not
admit of it, especially religious men, whose diseases must be kept private as
Hercules Saxonia writes de lue Vener. Cap. 38. then astringent things must not
be used, by the use of which the evil is made worse, and ulcers and pains of
the head do follow upon it the matter being retained: but those things rather
are to be used, which do discuss and cleanse away that vicious matter which
eats of the hairs: as a lie in which have bin boiled Guajacum and its bark,
farsaparilla, leaves of fumitory, betony, scabious, southernwood, wormwood
penyroyal, asarabaca, agrick: and if the skin be dry, mallowsmarshmallowes,
pellitory of the wall must be added: then the other medicines must be applied,
which are propounded lib. 5. pract. par. 3. sect. 2. cap. 3. and 4. al which if
they satisfy not, particular suffumigation for the head and face, must be
prepared of quicksilver and cinnabar, by which remedy in the space of six or
nine days, the falling of the hair is stayed. But for the most part, if
universal purgers, and emptiers be applied, and the matterknawing the hairs be
taken away and proper lotions be used, afterward hair does succed of its own
accord in the place of that that fell away, see more in the place alleged de
Alope. et Capil. deflu.

Pains.
Also most grievous pains do often afflict those who are sick of the Venereal
Disease; The Cure of pains.
but they are most commodiously taken away by medicines proper to this disease:
but Sarsaparilla is chiefly good to take them away; therefore if the pains be
very urgent, on the first days you must take a greater quantity of
Sarsaparilla, and a less of Guajacum: and though the matter being dissolved and
melted, the pains be increased til the second week, because Sarsa has an
extraordinary attenuating faculty, without any astriction of the bowels; yet we
must not desist from the use of it, but the patient must be told of it:
afterward when the pain is ceased, we may increase the quantity of Guajacum,
and China Root may be added also to mitigate those pains: but by intervals,
almost every week, give proper purging medicines; but to the places pained
apply fomentations of Guajacum, Leaves of Penyroyal, Sage, Rosemary, Chamomel
flowers: Oil of white Lillies also, of Rue, Scorpions* Vipers, Guajacum, are
good: if the pain be very urgent, we may give also Laudanum Opiate. Upon the
use of al which, if the pain depart not, those mercurial Unguents, which we
propounded before in the universal Cure, must be anointed on the places pained;
or by the addition of wax make Cerotes of them, and lay them on the parts
pained, or some other plasters above propounded; to which also may be added,
Castor, Hermodactil Roots, Orice, and other Arthritical Medicines; especially
Vigo's Cerote of Frogs is of good use to lay asleep those pains: and this Cerot
of Platerus is good too.

Take of Quicksilver three ounces; stir it with one ounce of Turpentine washed
with Aqua vitae; adding Bears grease, the marrow of a Calves Leg, of each an
ounce and half: Oil of white Lillies, Chamomel, Dill, bays, worms, or Foxes,
of each half an ounce: Spike or Turpentine two drams: Euphorbium, Frankincense,
of each half an ounce: Liquid Styrax six drams: Hermodactils two drams: Castor
one dram: Wax as much as is sufficient. Make a Cerote.

Also the aforesaid Lavatories prepared of Mercury, formerly propounded,
applied to the parts pained, especially the Legs, do allay the pains.

The Running of the Reins.
The Running of the Reins, The Cure of the Running of the Reins.
which also is frequent in this Disease, is not to be stopped at the beginning,
nor rashly: whenas Nature does endeavor to purge the virulent matter through
that place, which if it be suppressed flies up to the Head, nay infects the whole
Body: but if it do not stop when the decoction has been used til the third
week, let the Region of the Loins, and Perinaeum, be anointed with astringent
Oils, made of Mastich, Mint, Roses, Myrtle.

But let Medicines be given of the seed of the Chast-tree, Lettice, Hemp, to
which add a double quantity of the powder of Sarsaparilla: and those Medicines
may be given either in the form of a powder, or with Syrup of Water of Lillies,
be reduced into the form of an Electuary. It Is good also if every day there be
given two or three drams of Water Lillies, with one or two scruples of
Turpentine: Some also do give for this Running of the Reins, green Mercury
precipitate, or the Rozin of Guajacum and Turpentine, which is washed with
Violet Water, and adding the Yolk of an Egg, and the Decoction of Sarsaparilla,
it is reduced into the form of a Potion.

A Consumption.
At last it often happens, A Consumption.
that either by the violence of the Disease, or the Cure not rightly ordered,
the sick come into a deep Consumption: For the Cure of which, the common
Medicines for a Consumption will not suffice, but there is need of Specificks.
Which kind of Remedy Audovicus Septalius animadvers. Lib, 7. n. 214. does
propound, and writes that by it, he has wholly freed very many from this
disease, and from such a Consumption. But it is prepared thus.

Take of choice Sarsaparilla cut small, six ounces; infuse it twenty four hours
in fifteen pound of warm water, in a warm place, in a vessel shut: afterward
boil it with a gentle fire till five pound be wasted: then with a spoon
perforated take out the Sarsaparilla, and bruise it in a marble mortar: then
cast it into the same water again, adding two pound of lean Veal, Coriander
seed prepared one ounce, or instead of it, so much of the shavings of Guajacum,
or three drams of yellow Sanders sliced, according to the condition of the
Patients body and humors: and the vessel being covered, let it boil again with
a gentle fire, till there remain five pound; and toward the end aromatize it
with three drams of choice Cinnamon: then strain it, squeezing it hard, and
keep it for your use in a glass or glazed vessel.

Of which let the patient take in a morning four hours before meat, six or
seven ounces; but in the evening three hours before supper, four or five
ounces: And if it be Summer, or a Hectic Fever is joined with it, he adds of
Barley excoriated or husked, four ounces: and he continues the use of this
Medicine many days, sometimes to the hundredth day.

Let the rest be sought for out of the Cure of the particular Diseases, and out
of Fallopius de morb. Gal. who has writ at large concerning the Diseases and
Symptoms which are joined with this Disease.

FINIS.
Mris. Culpepers Information, Vindication, and Testimony, concerning her
Husbands Books to be Published after his Death.
SO great are the Afflictions wherewith our Heavenly Father has been pleased
to exercise me his poor Handmaid, that I have not only lived to see my dear
Husband, ( the Stay and Solace of my Life) taken from me: but it has been my
hard hap also to see his Reputation, and Memory (which will be dear to al
Posterity, for the Works he has written for the Common Good of this Nation)
blemished, and Eclipsed, by the covetous and unjust Forgeries of one, Who,
though he calls himself Nathaniel, is far from being an Israelite in whom there
is no guile; who was not content to publish a Hodgpodg of undigested
Collections, and Observations of my deer Husband deceased, under the Title of
Culpeper's last Legacy; but to make the Deceit more taking, he steeled his
Forehead so far, and brased it so hard, as not to be ashamed to forge two
Epistles, one in mine, and the other in my Husbands Name; of the penning of
which, he nor I, never so much as dreamed: And yet he impudently affirms in
my Name, that my Husband Laid a severe Injunction on me to publish them for the
general good, after his decease; and that they are his last Experiences in
Physic and Chyrurgery. And in the Title of his Book, he said, They are the
choycest, and most profitable secrets, resolved never to be published til after
his Death. At which Expressions in the Title and Epistles, are as falls as the
Father of Lies; and every word in them, forged and feigned. And he knew well
enough, that no discreet, honest man, that was a friend to my Husband, or me,
would ever have agreed to such infamous and dishonest practices; and therefore
I desire all Courteous Readers of the Writings of my Husband, to take notice of
this Deceit, and to assure themselves that it never entered into his head, to
publish such an undigested Gallimoffery, under the promising and solemn Name of
his Last Legacy, and that whereby he gained his Reputation in the World, as the
Imposter makes him speak in his forged Epistle. And I desire any in different
Reader, that has observed my Husbands lofty, and Masculine manner of
expressing himself in his Prefaces, and Epistles Dedicatory, whether in case he
had been minded or disposed to take so solemn a farewell of the world, as the
Forger makes him to do; whether, I say, he would have done it in such a whining
fashion, and so in the Style of a Balade-maker, as to say, And now, if it
please Heaven to put a period to my Life, and Studies, that I must bid al
things under the Sun farewell: Farewell to my dear Wife and Child, farewell Arts
and Sciences, farewell al worldly Glories, adieu Readers. Certainly my Husband
would have been far more serious, and material, in such a case, as any discreet
man will Judg-Neither can it be thought, that in such a solemn Valediction, he
could possibly forget his wonted respects to the College of Doctors, to whom he
did so frequently address himself, in diverse of his writings.

Courteous Reader, I shall say no more touching the abuse of the Bookseller,
only to prevent (as much as concerns me) thy being abused for the future, know,
That my Husband left seventy-nine Books of his own making, or Translating, in
my hand, and I have deposited them into the hands of his, and my much honored
Friend, Mr. Peter Cole, Bookseller, at the Printing-Press, near the Royal
Exchange (for the good of my Child) from whom thou may expect to receive in
print, such of them as shall be thought fit to serve thee in due season, without
any Disguises or Forgeries, unto which I do hereby give my attestation. Also my
Husband left seventeen Books completely perfected, in the hands of the said Mr.
Cole, for which he paid my Husband in his lifetime: And Mr. Cole is ready and
willing (on any good occasion) to show any of the said seventy-nine Books, or
the seventeen, to such as doubt thereof.

And if any Person shall question the Truth of any part of this Vindication, or
Epistle; if they will take pains to come to me, I will face to face, justify the
truth of every word thereof, as I have subscribed my Hand thereunto in the
presence of many witnesses.

I profess in the presence of the great God, the sea^ther of al hearts, before
whom Mr. Brooks and I must one day give an account of al our Actions: That I
have not published this Epistle or Vindication, out of any dis-respect to Mr.
Brooks ( for I much respect the man, and would be glad to serve him to my
power) but only to clear my Husband from the folly and weakness cast upon him
by the means above expressed. And out of tenderness to Mr. Brooks, I first
tried other means of keeping, and afterward of repairing my Husbands Credit,
and then stayed long to see if be would repair (in any measure) the wrong done
to my Husband, and my self. I desire to be,

From my House, next door to the Red Lion in Spittle-fields, October, 18. 1655.
Your Servant (in, and for the Truth) Alice Culpeper.
Mris. Culpeper did the 18. of October, subscribe this Epistle in Vindication
of her Husband's Reputation, before Ten Witnesses, as she had done another
Epistle on the ninth of October, almost in the same words with this, except
near the Conclusion.



A TREATISE OF THE GOUT.
Chap. I. Of the Nature of the Gout.
THe Gout is by the Greeks called Arthritis, Its Name.
from Arthron signifying a Joint; but by the Latins it is termed, Morbus or
Dalor Articularis; and by us in English it has its Name from the place
affected, and in general is called the Gout. The more Barbarous among the Latin
Physicians call it Gutta, because that this Malady is excited by a flux, made as
it were drop by drop. And there are likewise of the more Modern writes, who
follow these; yea they prefer this Appellation before all other whatsoever; but
yet not so rightly, as anon, in the first Question, we shall show you.

But now, Arthron what it is.
albeit that Arthron (as by the Author of the Medicinal Definitions and
Introduction it is defined,) be the Compages and Composition of the Bones,
ordained for the motion of the several parts; yet here notwithstanding in this
place, by the word Articulus, or joints, we are not to understand the very
Compages of the bones; and the Synthesis or Union of them; or the Extremities
of the Bones that are conjoined; or the space betwixt the Bones, which are
Joined together by the joint: but the parts that Join the very Joint together,
and encompass it; especially such of the parts as are endued with sense, to
wit, the Membrans, Membranous Ligaments, the extremities of the Muscles, and
the Nerves that are inserted in these parts.

But in regard that the Joints are various, from the difference of these, The
differences of the the gout, according to the variety of the Joints.
and from the variety of the parts affected, the Gout (which the Greeks call
Arthritis) has also received diverse and different Names; and if the Feet be
affected, it is called Podagra; if the Hands, Chiragra; if the Hip, Ischias; if
the Knee, Gonagra; and many other of these words, derived from the place
affected, and the Greek word Agra which signifies a taking or seizing upon; so
that Podagra is nothing else but the taking of the Feet; and Chiragra the
taking of the Hands; in regard that these members are in this Disease as it
were taken, and by it ensnared, and held fast: even as by Lucian (in his
Tragopodagra) the Gout is brought in thus speaking:

By the most of Men I am called Podagra, being the taking, and deteining of the
Feet.

But in the other Joints it has no special name, but by a common and general
name it is called Arthritis, that is, the Gout; like as also in general, it is
then called Arthritis, when at one and the same time a pain seizes upon many
of the Joints together. But the truth is, that some certain men there have been
who have feigned and made very many such like words as these; and among the
rest, Ambrose Parry, (in his first Chapter of the Gout:) and if the Malady be
in the Joint of the Jawthey call it Siagonagra; if in the Neck, Trachelagra; if
in the Spina Dorsi or Backbone, Richisagra; if in the shoulder, Omagra; and if
in the Joint of the Elbow, they term it Pechyagra. But we meet with no such
Names as these in any of the Greek Authors; neither indeed are they commonly
used; although that these Grecians themselves tell us very often that the
Arthritis may be generated in many parts of the Body.

And in Pliny also (in his 27. B. Chap. 1.) we meet with the word Mentagra, at
first invented (as he says) in sport, Mentagra what it is.
and merriment, (for it is a vicious medley Composition of a word, from a Latin
and a Greek word, and such as the learned are never wont to make use of) but
soon after notwithstanding it became common: but the truth is, that Affect
belongs not to the Arthritis or Gout; but it was a certain foulness and
nastiness of the face, and a kind of Scabbiness, perteining, and to be referred
unto the Lichenes.

The Latins have likewise retained the Greek words, since that even from them
they received the disease also. Touching which Pliny in his B. 26. Chapter, 10.
The Podagra (says he) Was wont to be a Disease more Rare, and not only a
stranger unto the memories of our Fathers and Grandfathers, but even unto our
own also. For had it been anciently known in Italy, it had ere this time
received a Latin Name.

And yet notwithstanding it is here to be observed, that although the word
Podagra be properly taken for the pain of the Feet; Yet sometimes also (as even
Crato in his 253 Consil. confesses) by an appellation borrowed from one
Member, the word Podagra is to be taken and understood for every kind of Gout
in what part soever; in regard that so it is wont to happen, that the Feet for
the most part, in the first place, and more frequently are taken, and affected
with this Disease; and they also are very seldom free, when the other joints
are affected. And hence it is also, that Lucian inscribeth that Dialogue of
his, which is touching the Arthritis or Gout in general, by the name of
Trag^podagra. And so they that have written in praise of the Gout Podagra (as
Cardanus, and others) they all of them seem to treat of Arthritis or the Gout
in general. Yea and certain Physicians there are that treat properly of
Arthritis or the Gout in General, and yet they inscribe these their Tracts, de
Podagra, or of the Gout (in special) of the Feet.

To wit, What place the Gout most frequently invadeth.
most frequently this pain invadeth the Feet; and indeed most of al, and in the
first place, the great Toe of the Foot. For Nature (as much as she is able) is
wont to drive forth the vicious Humors unto the extreme and remote parts; and
the Feet are likewise more remote from the Fountain of heat; and they are also
more in motion, by which the Humors are drawn unto them. And from hence it is
that Galen (in the sixth Sect. of the Aphorisms, Apherism. 28.) writes, that
al those that are troubled with the Gout, that is to say, with the pains of all
the Joints, they are first of all taken with the Gout Podagra, or the Gout in
the Joints of the Feet. This indeed for the most part so happens, but yet not
always. For in some the Gout begins in their Hands; and some have it first in
their Knee, and in some it begins in some other of the Joints. And albeit
that it first of al seize upon the Feet, yet notwithstanding it afterward also
for the most part invadeth the Joints of the Fingers, or those places that are
about the Hand Wrist, as also the Joints of the Arm and Elbow, and sometimes
likewise the Neck, and the Joints of the Jaw Bone. And indeed this Evil in the
first beginning of it (for the most part) seizes upon but one of the Joints,
either in the Foot, (which most usually happens) or else where; but then
afterward, (the bowels being debilitated by the thick and often returns of the
Disease, and the Native heat being much impaired, and the matter daily more and
more heaped up) it then invadeth more of the Joints; so that it often comes to
that pass, that there is scarcely any Joint or Juncture of the bones throughout
the whole Body that may be said to be free from this Malady; and as Lucian (in
his Tragopodagra) writes, This Evil tortureth and tormenteth the afflicted and
Miser able Body, from the very Fingers ends, even unto the extreme parts of the
Feet, and the ends of the Toes.

Yea, and oftentimes it comes to that, that the vicious Humor is not only
poured out into all the Joints, but likewise into other sensible parts; as it
has been often observed, that in some this Humor has been so poured forth
into the Teeth, that it has there caused a pain; and in others (in whom it
has been poured forth unto the breast) it has there excited a spurious and
bastard Pleurisy.

But now this Malady is not wont to continue long at a time, but to afflict the
party by certain intervals and Periods, whiles the matter heaped up is thrust
forth unto the Joints by certain intervals; which indeed in the beginning are
somewhat longer; so that the Diseased persons are often free for six months, and
sometimes likewise they are free from this Gout for a whole year together; but
then afterward the Bowels and the Native heat being much weakened and impaired,
and many vicious Humors being heaped up together, the Malady returns by
shorter intervals, The period of the gout
sometimes after three months, and sometimes every month; Yea and some there are,
whom it does continually afflict and make them to keep their beds.

Now Arthritis, or the Gout, is in the general defined to be, The definition of
the Gout in general.
A pain of the parts about the Joints, excited from the defluxion of a serous
and sharp Humor, and poured forth into them out of the Veins and Arteries. Or,
if it please you rather to define it in any other manner, when a swelling does
now concur with it, you may then say that it is a Tumor or Swilling about the
Joints, arising from a defluxion of the serous or wheyish, and sharp Humor by
the Veins and Arteries unto the place affected; and by reason of the extension
of the Membranes about the Joints, and the Acrimony of the Humors Twinging and
pulling them it has Joined with it a pain, and hinderance of motion.

And because that the Nature of this Disease is such, Whether it be proper to
the gout to return by intervals.
that when it has once begun to infest and trouble a person, the Body can
hardly ever be so carefully looked unto, and well ordered, but that upon every
slight cause and upon the least occasion given it will again return, and
indeed by certain Periods, (sometimes once a year, sometimes every six Months,
and now and then once every Month:) many therefore of the most learned
Physicians do likewise add this in the definition, that it is a pain or
swelling returning by certain intervals and Periods. But if there be any one
that thinks it therefore to be omitted, because that he who is at the first
troubled with the Gout, and so has not suffered many Paroxysms returning by
intervals, yet may be truly said to be affected with the Gout: yet
Notwithstanding, he cannot deny this, that the very Nature of the Disease is
such that even in the very first Paroxysm the Disease is in it self naturally
fit to return by intervals; like as he who is at first taken with a Tertian or
Quartane Fever, is truly said to be troubled with a Tertian or a Quartan,
albeit that he has not yet undergone many Paroxysms or sits returning every
Third or Fourth day.

Franciscus India indeed blames those that define the Gour by a pain, in
regard that neglecting the Disease they define this Malady by its Symptoms. But
it is no new thing, to define some certain Affects (in the which the Symptom
and the Disease concur) by the Symptoms, as more urgent, more troublesome and
grievous unto the Diseased party, and more manifest in themselves. And so the
Phrensy is defined by a Deliry, and the Pleurifie by a pain; although that
there be in both places present a Disease, to wit, an inflammation. And
therefore there are many of the ablest Physicians, both Ancient and Modern, who
inscribe their Tracts touching this Affect, of the pain of the Joints. Neither
again may be Gout be here always so fitly defined by a Tumor or swelling, in
regard that oftentimes there is no swelling evidently appearing in the External
parts; and yet nevertheless the pain is then greater and more vehement then
when there is a swelling in the part. But India himself is very much mistaken
and greatly erreth, whiles he defines this Malady by a deflux.

And moreover, Whether every pain of the joints ought to be called the Gout?
although that every Gout that happens about the Joints may be called a pain
(and in this manner this name may be also attributed unto pains that happen in
disjoyntings, Contusions, or bruises and blows, wounds, that which is in the
French Pox, that which happens unto Virgins while their Courses are flowing
from them, or such as happen unto the Hips of great Bellyed Women that are near
the time of their Travail, or in general, unto all pains whatsoever that happen
about the Joints:) yet notwithstanding, we do not here take the word Gout in so
large a sense, but in a more eminent and especial manner we here by this Name
understand that peculiar kind of pain which the Germans call Das Zipperlein,
arising from a sudden influx of a Humor into the Joints, insinuating it self
into the more hidden and inward parts of the Joints, and returning by intervals
and Periods.

The subject of the Gout (if it be defined by pain) are only the Membranous
parts, The subject of the Gout.
and those parts about the Joints that are endued with a quick sense and
feeling. For a Membrane being the Adequate subject of the Touch, even here also
those parts that are grieved with pain do suffer it as they are membranous;
Whether all the Ligaments want sense
from which nevertheless we may not exclude the Membranous Ligaments. For
although that Galen teach us that all the Ligaments want sense, yet
notwithstanding we are not to deny sense unto the Membranous Ligaments, which
(as we find by experience) are very sensible of pricking, and the Gout it self
does evidence it. Neither is that Reason they commonly alleadg to the Contrary
of any great weight and moment, to wit, that a Man should be always Obnoxious
unto pains, and never free from excruciating Tortures, if the Ligaments that
are sensible of pain should dash and strike against the bones: for Nature has
so fenced and guarded those parts, and so admirably ordered it, that no such
thing can happen. And hence it is that we daily lay hold on with our hands, and
walk upon our Feet, in which there are very many Tendons, Nerves, and
Membranes, and yet nevertheless we are not sensible of any pain. But if it be
defined by a Tumor or swelling, then all the parts that join together the
Joint, and lie round about it, may be said to be the subject of the Gout. But
now that these pains are excited more about the Joints, then elsewhere, the
Cause is this, to wit, that the Veins and Arteries pour forth in these places
(in the which there is a Concourse of the Membranes and Nerves) those Sharp
Humors which Nature endeavoreth to expel, and which cannot flow forth in the
middle Channel of the said Veins and Arteries; and because that the Humors
arriving at the seat of the Joints stick fast in these more straight and narrow
places, where all the parts that end there are joined together, and infolded
the one within the other; whereas elsewhere they might more freely be moved up
and down, and have room enough to disperse themselves hither and thither.

And indeed, the truth is, that now and then that Humor is also diffused into
other parts; and there is a certain Nameless Author, who (in the eighth Section
of his B. of the Gout, added unto the writings of the principal Physicians)
tells us, that these kind of fluxions do not only infest the Hands, Feet, and
all the joints, but that it likewise makes an impression upon the very Head,
upon the very Liver, yea and sometimes upon the very Heart it self. And
Hieronymus Capivaccius also (in his Consil. collected from Scholtzius, Consil.
226.) makes mention of the Gout pain in the side; by reason of which the sick
person was constrained to lie upon his Back, neither was he able to move his
sides. And a person of Honor once told me (as I remember) that a certain man
afflicted with the Gout, felt likewise very fore and grievous pains in his very
Yard: and it was related unto me by an Honorable Lady, that a Kinswoman of hers
being troubled with the Gout, a certain Marl (for so she called it, and indeed
not unfitly) brake forth also in her Forehead, so that it might have been even
swept off like sand, and grains of Salt. But the truth is, the Cause breeding
the Gout, if it be in great abundance, it may likewise be diffused into other
parts besides the joints, but yet notwithstanding it does not breed the Gout
any where else but in the joints.

But now it may here in this place (and that not without good cause) be
demanded how it comes to pass that those persons that are afflicted with the
Gout do yet so seldom suffer any Convulsion (but only a pain) whenas yet the
Nervous parts are here affected, Why those who are troubled with the Gout do
seldom suffer any convulsion?

The opinion of Erastus.


and indeed so twinged and pulled by the sharp Humor that there may seem to be
great cause for the exciting of a Convulsion? Thomas Erastus, in his 4.
Disputat. against Paracelsus, thinks this to be the Cause, that the Humor that
is poured forth about the Nerves is waterish and Phlegmatic, and therefore does
more loosen then extend them: and if this be not the Cause, he confesses
ingeniously that he is altogether ignorant of it, and knows not what it is.
But yet we do not acknowledge this for the only true Cause; neither is it indeed
a truth that the Humor exciting the Gout is simply waterish and Phlegmatic,
that rather looseneth then extends the parts, as we shall hereafter prove,
and as it appears even by the pain it self, which is most sharp and
intolerable. And therefore I conceive the cause hereof to be in the place
affected, to wit, that not the very Nerves themselves (as they are inserted
into the parts destined unto motion, v.z. The Muscles that serve thereunto) are
affected, but rather the Membranes, and the Membranous Ligaments, which parts
are not ordained for motion, neither serve they thereunto; and therefore
although they suffer most grievous pains, yet nevertheless they excite no
Convulsive motion, unless happily the Brain be drawn into consent; like as we may
plainly see the truth of this in the pains of the Teeth, the Eyes, the Pleura
Membrane, the Colon Intestine, and the like pains; in all which it is not the
Nerves (appointed for motion) but rather the Membranes that are affected,
without any kind of Convulsion. And the very same happens in the Gout, in
which the membranous parts that are about the Joints, and knit together the
extremities of the Joints, are either distended, or twinged and pulled by the
Humors flowing thereunto.

There are some indeed who assert, that the very Cavity or hollow space that is
between the extremities of the Bones do receive the Humors that flow thereunto,
and that this space is the true subject of the Cause breeding the Gout. But
this is false, as anon we shall show you in the Third Question.

The Proxime or next Cause of the Gout pain (as in other parts likewise) is the
solution of Continuity, which is produced by the afflux of the sharp Humors
into the Membranous parts about the Joints either by distending them, or else
by their acrimony at once both pricking and pulling them.

Now those things that accompany this pain, are First, an impotency and
weakness of the motion; Symptoms of the gout
and by the motion of the joint the pain is irritated and augmented. And then
also a swelling (and this for the most part with a redness and heat) follows
upon it, and is discerned more especially in the extreme joints; and yet
nevertheless, there appears now and then only a moist and waterish swelling
without any redness at al. In the Hip and Shoulder blade (being fleshy places)
there scarcely appears any swelling at all externally, but the Humor that
has flown thereunto lies hid and covered by the flesh. And there is also a
Fever (a continued one) that almost always with a pain invadeth in the
Arthritis, or Gout in general, and oftentimes also in the Gout of the Feet and
Knees; and the sick person is first of all taken with an extreme Chilness, and
then presently a heat follows upon it; and this is the Cause that the sick
persons are so vexed and troubled with thirst, and that the pulse is changed,
and that the Urines become very red, which oftentimes at the first beginning
are waterish. But now what kind of Fever this is that accompanies the Gout,
in this many Authors differ, as below, in the fourth Question, we shall show
you. And sometimes there are likewise other Symptoms that follow upon the said
pain; and among the rest, watchings, restlessness, and a Spasm.

If the Gout continue long, and often afflict the sick party, then at the
length there are generated in the joints hard knots and knobs, from the more
thick part of the serous or wheyish Humor, that even of its own accord tends
to a Coagulation or Clotting together; and if the Skin be opened, out there
runs a matter, sometimes fluid and white, and sometimes like unto Plaster or
white Lime; and sometimes the matter is hard, like unto gravelly stones that may
be crumbled.

This Malady is likewise known to disperse it self among the common People, the
Cause being Generated from the general and common fault and vice either of the
Air, or of the ordinary diet in many places. But now, whether it may at any
time happen by Reason of any defect of that kind of fruit we call Mulberries,
we shall further discuss this point anon, in the fifth Question.

Chap. 2. Of the Causes of the Gout.
THe Proxime or nighest Cause of this pain in the Gout, is the Solution of
Unity in the Membranous parts about the joints: The cause of the gout. Solution
of Unity in the Gout from whence it happens
Now this solution proceeds not (as Capivaccius will have it) only from a
Compression of the sensible parts about the joint, caused by a preternatural
repletion of the Ligaments with a Humor flowing thereto. For why, the Ligaments
are most solid, and most thick, in so much that (in the first place) they
themselves cannot admit of the Humors; and the pain is oftentimes in the
highest degree, (when there is scarcely any swelling appearing,) and indeed far
greater then that it should possibly be caused by compression only. This pain
is therefore rather caused by the distention, and twinging, or pricking, in the
sensible and tender parts about the Joint.

But now, what the Cause of this distention, Pulling, and Pricking, is, cannot
easily be explained, by reason of the difference in Opinions (among
Physicians,) touching the same. For some there are that teach us how that the
Gout is generated only from a distemper; others from a Wind; a third sort,
only from a Humor; and some of these will have this Humor to be phlegm, others
Choler, others Phlegm with Choler; others assert it to be Phlegm mingled with
blood; others, Crude and Watery blood; others say that it is a whey; and others
there are that admit of all these Humors. And indeed some affirm that this
Humor flows down from the Head, others again from the internal parts; others
from the external parts between the Skul and the Skin; some again will have it
to flow forth of the Veins, and others by both these ways; touching which we
intend to discourse more at large, below, in the seventh Question.

But in brief, The nearest causes of the gout
that we may here in a word state the Controversy, the immediate and nearest
Cause of the Gout is a Humor, partly distending the parts of a quick sense
about the joint, and partly pricking and lancing them, to wi^, the serous or
wheyish Humor, and yet such as is not waterish, but Salt and sharp, and (as the
Chemists call it) Tartarous; bred in the sanguification, in the Liver, and in
the Spleen, and by Nature thrust forth by the Veins and Arteries into the parts
about the joint. And indeed this Humor is altogether of a peculiar Nature, and
much different from these other Humors that breed an inflammation in other
parts; and it has its original from the same kind of Aliment that Plants draw
from the Earth. For in all sorts of Earth there is something that is saltish,
and partaking of a Mineral Nature. Which whether we call it the Salt of the
Earth, or else Tartar (with the common sort of Chemists) it matters not with
me, so that we agree in the thing it self.

And yet notwithstanding it seems not al one to me, Whether the Salt of the
Earth and Cartar differ.
whether we call it the Salt of the Earth, or else Tartar. For Salt is indeed a
simple Body of its own kind; but Tartar (as it is in truth taken here generally
in this place by the Chemists) is a compound of Salt, and Earth, yea and of
Sulphur likewise. From whence also it is that there are constituted Differences
of such like Earths; and so there arises a diversity of the Humor breeding the
Gout in diverse Bodies and places. And from either the abundance or scarcity of
this Salt, and the mixture of it with other Juyces there arise various
differences of Earths; so that some of them are dirty, others muddy, a third
sort Clayish, a fourth sandy and Crumbling, a fifth Limye; and in some Earths
there is an abundance of that we call Marle, in others Chalk, and in others
there is something else that abounds: and in some Earths (in the which
likewise Bread Corn grows very plentifully) there is so great a store of this
Salt, that even out of them there may be destilled a certain spirit that
dissolveth Metals. That Salt or Tartar is attracted from Plants (together with
their Aliment) out of the Earth; and hence it is derived into men unto whom
those Plants serve for Meat and Drink: and unless it be severed and separated
in a Convenient manner, it is at length mingled together with the blood, and
being altogether unfit for the nourishing of the Body it is in the end driven
down and thrust into the joints, for those Causes that we shall anon declare
unto you. And this Salt Humor that causes the Gout oftentimes comes very near
unto the Nature of spirits (as the Chemists call them) such as are those of
Wine, and other Vegetables, endued with a volatile Salt; as also of Salt,
Vitriol, Nitre, and Aqua Fortis; which although that they are thin, Subtle,
and Resemble the Nature of Water, yet notwithstanding they contain in them a
most sharp and biting Salt. And this Salt is contained as well in the Arteries,
as in the Veins; from whence likewise it is, that being most subtle it
exciteth very extreme, intolerable, and most acute pains. For it is not
requisite, that those Humors should always hurt the Body in a thick and gross
manner; but oftentimes they are made spiritual, as we shall afterward also (in
the Causes) show you, touching Wine. And many things there are that teach us
the truth of this. First of all the very vehemence and fiercenss of the pain it
self, which cannot possibly proceed from a Phlegmatic or watery Humor, or else
from Blood distending the parts; but from a very sharp Humor, being oftentimes
indeed but little in its quantity and bulk, but yet in power very great, and
most efficacious. And moreover it appears from this, that at length there are
generated in the Joints certain hard knobs and knots; out of which there is
taken, and goes forth a matter like unto Lime, such as also some certain Wines
before they be wrackt and taken off their Lees do yield forth; which happens
not at all in other Tumors, which are rather turned into Pus, then any such
matter as this; and therefore it sufficiently shows that the Gout has some
other peculiar cause, that the rest of the Tumors or swellings have not. And
Thirdly, the Causes do argue and prove the same; since that there is nothing
that makes more for the generation of the Gout then Wine, which most of all
abounds with such a Salt and Tartar as we mentioned before; there being no
plant (as we shall also further show you below) that does more attract that
that is Salt, Clayie, and Limye, in the Earth, then the Vine it self; although
indeed other Plants likewise, (as Wheat and Barley) do draw unto them the very
same matter as the Vine does, but in nothing near so great an abundance. Yea,
and this matter is sometimes likewise contemed in the Water; and from hence it
is, that now and then such as are Abstemious, or that otherwise by reason of
their poverty they drink no Wine, but Water, are yet troubled with the Gout;
and in some places we find that even Beer is exceeding hurtful unto those that
are subject unto the Gout, whether this happen by Reason of the Corn there
growing (of which they make their Beer) or from the Water they use for the same
purpose.

And from hence it comes to pass, that the Gout in very many places is a
Disease almost Epidemical. And in those very places where the Gout is in a
manner Epidemical (as it is in many places of Moravia) the inhabitants there,
besides the Gout, are troub^ed likewise with the Stone, Colic, and that which
arises from thence, the Pal^^ and contraction of the Members, and likewise the
Falling Sickness; which affects (all or most of them) proceed not from the
Watery Humor, but also from that which is sharp and Salt. And last of all, even
this teaches us that this Humor is serous or wheyish, that the Gout can by no
means be drawn to a suppuration. For the blood is easily turned into Pus, and
so are likewise the other Humors; but as for the serous and Salt Humors, this
is the Nature of them, that if they be altogether thin, they are then wholly
resolved; or if they have any thing that is Tartarous and thick mingled with
them, they are then converted into hard knots, and small Stones that are brittle
and crumbling.

This matter, in regard that it comes nearer unto the Nature of Minerals then
of vegetables, it cannot therefore by any means afford a good and fit Aliment
unto the Body; and so it ought either immediately in the First, or else in the
Second Concoction to be exp^lled; which when it happens, the Gout is not then
generated. And from hence it is, that many Wine-bibbers, and Gluttons, are free
from the Gout; which therefore happens, because that they have those their
Bowels that are destined for Concoction very strong and vigorous; so that they
do exactly separate all whatsoever is Excrementitious in those Meats and Drinks
that they take in, and evacuate them by convenient ways. But if this matter be
not forthwith evacuated, but be retained still in the Body, it is then thrust
forward hither and thither in the Body, until it be at the length driven unto
the Joints.

And therefore without cause or ground it is (as anon in the 5. Whether
Choler, Phlegm, or ^eleacholy, etc. be the cause of the gout
Question we shall more at large show you) that by some Choler, Phlegm,
Melancholy, and Blood, are here accused. For possibly it may be that in one
Body this Humor may abound and in another that Humor may be in great abundance,
and may together flow unto the pained Joint: yet nevertheless, that wheyish
Humor (which Nature desires to expel forth and therefore thrusts it forward
unto the Joyn^s) is the first Cause of the motion; and then afterward the pain
likewise stirs up and causes other humors to flow unto the place affected: and
therefore if the Body be Plethorical, the blood; but if Cacochymical, then
other Humors also are moved unto the place affected. Mean while, those very
Humors are not the prime cause of the Gout; and if they had been altogether
without that salt and serous Humor, it had never flown unto the joints, since
that there are many that are Plethorick and Cacochymick, who yet
notwithstanding are not troubled with the Gout. And therefore what Mercatus
writes, is a truth, to wit, that although juyces or Humors may much abound in
the Body, and become very vicious, they do not for this presently degenerate
into the Articular affects, and produce the Gout: but that Humor which ought to
produce the Gout (as we have already said) is serous, Salt, Sharp, and
Tartarous; and has a peculiar tendency unto the joints.

And now, What required unto every fluxion.
whereas unto every fluxion there is required the matter flowing, the Term from
which, and the place whitherto it tends, and the way by which; and that we
have now already spoken unto the matter, the cause of the Gout; it remains
that we proceed to speak of the Term from whence, (or the place in which the
matter is generated) the way by which it flows, and the term unto which it
tends, or the part receiving.

And that we may first of all Treat of the part receiving, (that so we may
afterward Jointly explain the Causes both internal and external: in the first
place, the parts recipient are here the Joints, (and those of the Feet
especially, from which the Gout Podagra has its original) as weaker then all the rest of the parts, in regard that they are endued with a weaker heat,
consisting (as they do) of bones, ligaments, The part receiving the fluxion in
the gout
Cartilages, Tendons, Nerves and Membrans; and are further distant from the
Fountain of heat; and are likewise greatly exposed unto the injuries of
External Causes; and are also much weakened by labor and frequent exercises, and
hereupon are rendered most apt and ready to receive the Humors that flow
thereunto. The weakness of the joints how is concureth unto the Gout.
And yet notwithstanding the alone imbecility of the joints is not sufficient
for the generating of the Gout, but there is likewise altogether necessary the
fluxion it self.

For (as Galen has it in his Sixth B. of the preservation of Health Chap. 13.)
they who Collect and Treasure up nothing within them that is superfluous, in
them these weak and infirm parts remain still in safety. Of which this is one
most evident Argument, that some have for many Months together been very weak
and infirm in diverse parts of their Body, without any such pain as the Gout
brings along with it; whereas if weakness alone would cause it, the infirm
part should perpetually be troubled, there being no Cessation at all of the
Cause of its weakness and infirmity. And now therefore, because that it is not
perpetually afflicted, (the Cause of its imbecility being still continued) we
may conclude, as a thing most manifest, that there is something else
intervening, which is the Cause of the breeding of this affect; and this most
certainly is nothing else, but that that is redundant either in quality or
quantity. And yet notwithstanding, that the imbecility of the parts is the
necessary cause of the generating of the Gout, (as the most of the ablest
Physicians do assert and determine) is denied by Carolus Piso (in his B.
touching Diseases from the affluence of the serous Humor, Consil. ^. of the
Gout) whilst he writes, that Physicians oftentimes trouble themselves to no
purpose, when they admonish us, that there is a very special regard to be had
unto the weakness of the recipient parts, seeing that the Joints do more easily
and readily of their own accord receive and admit the hot Wheyish Humor, then
the rest of the Members; this does not (says he) proceed from their
imbecility, or from any distemper, that is, looseness, or rarity, but from the
very Conformation it self, and this not placed in the Cavity, but rather in the
Conjunction with the ends of all the Vessels; which Conformation to alter and
change is not at all within our power. And he has there asserted, that the
Joints for this Reason only admit of and drink in the hot Wheyish Humor,
because that in them are terminated the external branches of the internal
Vessels. To wit, that the Ebullition or boiling out of this serous Humor does
first of all begin in the greater and the internal Vessels, and that from hence
it falls forth into the lesser, and at length into the extreme branches,
which having no other place whither they they may pour back the Humor they have
received in, it is thereupon stopped and heaped up together in the joints, in
which the external Vessels (almost al of them) are terminated. All which
although it may seem very agreeable unto the truth, yet notwithstanding two
things there are that must here be taken notice of. The former is this, that
although it be true, that those greater Trunks of the hollow Vein, and the
Arteries, (their branches being dispersed hither and thither) are for the
greatest part of them terminated in the joints: yet Nevertheless there are
likewise many of those branches which here and there are Terminated in the
Flesh, and other parts, and yet for all that they Transfuse not the matter of
the Gout into those parts. And moreover also the matter of the Gout is not
always poured forth even unto the extreme Joints, but that it oftentimes also
stops and stays in the midway, in the Hip, Knees, and Elbows. The other thing
to be taken notice of, is this, that albeit that Conformation of the Vessels
(by reason of which they are terminated into the Joints) cannot be changed; yet
notwithstanding the Laxity and weakness of the parts into which they are
ingrafted may in some measure be changed by those medicaments that cotroborate,
although it be the least part of the Cure (as has been said) that is to be
expected from these.

But besides the imbecility of the Joints, Why the humor that is the cause of
the gout is moved unto the Joints rather than to the other parts.
there is yet something else that seems to me to be the Cause why this humor
is moved unto the Joints rather than to any other parts; which conceit of mine
I submit (as a Paradox only) and leave it unto the free judgment of the
Judicious and Candid Reader; and it is this. It is most certain, that the Blood
in our Bodies is not altogether homogeneous, but obtains diverse parts, and
that diverse parts of the Body are nourished by those different parts of the
Blood; as the Flesh by the more temperate, the Bones by the thicker, the Lungs
by the more subtle, and so likewise the rest of the parts attract unto
themselves from the blood a fit and convenient Nutriment. And this seems also
to be proved by the stone called Osteocolla (so called because that it has in
it a notable virtue of Conglutinating the broken Bones) which being taken
inwardly penetrateth into the Bones, rather than into any other parts, and
causes that the Calli are generated in a very short time; yea, in those that
are young it produces an overgreat Callus; as we may see in Guilhelm. Fabricius
his first Century, Observat. 90. and 91. Neither are these things done in a
sound Body only; but even the vicious humors likewise have not an inclination
al of them, neither are they al driven unto any one part; but some of them tend
unto one part, and others of them unto other parts; and this we are taught, as
by other diseases, so more especially by the Plica Polonica above mentioned.
And therefore seeing that Hercules Saxonia in his Book of the Plica, Chap. 26.
writes nothing but the truth, when he says that the humor (the Cause of the
Plica) has a propriety not well agreeing with the Joints, Ligaments, Tendons,
Nerves, and all the Membranes; but a certain familiarity with the Hairs and the
extreme part of the skin: I conceive that I may also as rightly Assert that the
Humor the Cause of the Gout has a certain kind of familiarity and natural
alliance with the Bones; but that it is an Enemy unto the Membranous parts, if
not in an occult manner, yet certainly by its Acrimony, and by its twinging and
lancing faculty. For very probable it is, seeing that the Bones as also the
Ligaments and tendons, are nourished by a Blood that is more Earthy, as having
an alliance with the Tartarous humor; that other Tartarous humors also (as well
the thick, as the subtle) are thrust forth more unto the Joints than unto any
other parts; and more especially unto the Joints of extreme parts, since that
Nature (as much as possibly she can) is wont to thrust forth the vicious humors
from the principal places unto the most remore parts. For although it be so
sometimes that Nature does not presently thrust forth into the extreme Joints of
the Feet or the Hands the matter that is the Cause of the Gout, but that it
stops and stays in the midst of some Joint; yet notwithstanding afterward
when the pains begin Nature (if she be yet any thing strong) drives back again
into the greater Veins the Matter by the same ways by which it flowed in; and
from hence she thrusts it forward even unto the extreme Joints: touching which,
as also whether there lie any thing hid in the very Bones themselves that may
make for the exciting of the Arthritick Paroxysm, we shall speak more hereafter
in the eighth Question.

Secondly, Whether the Gout be generated by a collection of the humors.
As touching these humors (that are the Cause of the Gout) where they are
Generated, and by what ways they pass into the Joints, the Opinions of
Physicians are various and different; of which we shall speak further in the
seventh Question. But now that I may in few words comprize the sum and
substance of the thing in question; seeing that al swellings, and the
preternatural Collection of humors in any part, is done two ways; to wit,
either by Congestion by which the humor is by little and little collected and
heaped up in the part, or else by Afflux; we cannot conceive that the former of
these ways has any place in the Gout. For if by Congestion and the alone
weakness of the parts the humor should be collected in the Joints, then the
pain and swelling could not be bred so suddenly, so easily, and so evidently;
and the infirm part should perpetually labor and suffer, in regard that the
Cause of this distemper and pain should never be absent from it. But now, since
that Persons that have the Gout are not in a continual suffering condition, but
that some of them are free for six months together, and that afterward the
matter again flows unto the Joints, and that indeed suddenly, to wit, when
there is a vicious humor collected in the Body, which urges and provokes
Nature unto the expulsion thereof: it easily from hence appears that the Gout
is not generated by the collection of humors, that is not done but by degrees,
now a little, and then a little. And therefore the most learned Solenander
writes truly in his fourth Sect. Consil. 24 The humor (says he) which is by
little and little collected by the vice and fault of the particle of
Nourishing, if at any time it could excite pain, and hinder the Motion, The
long continuance of the Gout from whence it is.
yet notwithstanding there was never yet any Physician that ever told us that
it could excite the Disease we call the Gout. But this notwithstanding in the
mean time I deny not, that in those who are scarcely ever well in their Feet or
other Joints, the imbecility and weakness of the Joints may possibly conduce
very much unto the long lasting and continuation of the Malady. For the part
that is infirm and weak does not rightly assimilate the Aliment unto it self,
but collecteth the excrements, and thereupon it likewise the more easily
receives the humors flowing unto it, and the more difficultly scatters them
when they are gotten together.

Felix Platerus indeed makes mention of a certain peculiar kind of Gout;
Peculiar kinds of the Gout.
such almost as we shall likewise make mention of a little below (in the Sixth
Question) out of Erastus; which is excited, not by the matter that flows from
elsewhere, but from the excrement that is heaped up together from the Blood
about the Region of the Joints, the place affected being extremely weakened from
the many fluxions, and there heaping together new excrements, and causing a
pain that is not very grievous or intolerable, which produces a moist and
watery kind of swelling rather than any other; and he asserts it for a most
certain truth, that those who are thus affected are very seldom or never free
from the Gout; and sometimes by reason of the affluence of the humor, and
sometimes again by the congestion and he^^ing of it up; from the one or the
other of these Causes they always carry about with them certain signs and
tokens of the same, and are continually suffering something or other by reason
of it.

But the truth is, this is no peculiar kind of the Gout; and if so be that it
differ from the Gout which we have described, it is not then the Gout, but
rather a moist and watery swelling in the Feet. And hence it is that Platerus
himself confesses that it very seldom or never first begins of it self, but
that it is wont to follow some other that was caused from affluxion. To wit, by
pain, and the long continued and frequent afflux of the humors the Joints are
so weakened, that they cannot rightly concoct the Aliment that flows unto
them; much less assimilate the same unto themselves; and hence it is that there
are many Excrements collected; and these being heaped up do excite that moist
and watery swelling without any grievous pain: which swelling notwithstanding
(if the pain proper unto the Gout be not present with it) is not properly the
Gout. But if the true Arthritis or Gout be joined together with it, the
debilitated part cannot then without much difficulty, and long time, discuss
and scatter the humor that has flown unto it; and hereupon it hapenneth that
before one humor be dispersed (which as Hippocrates writes, is seldom or never
before the fortieth day) another humor flows unto it, and so the sick Person
may seem continually as it were to be afflicted with the Gout; or likewise, if
the Afflux be but by short intervals, he is in very deed perpetually troubled
therewith.

But now, From whence the Afflux proceeds.
in what manner, and from whence this afflux proceeds, here likewise Authors
seem to differ much among themselves. But if waving and laying aside Authority,
we heedfully attend and observe the thing it self, and those things that are
done about the sick person, we shall easily perceive that this Afflux is by the
Veins and Arteries. For in such as are troubled with the Gout (upon the very
first approach of the Paroxysm) the Vessels that tend unto the Hands and the
Feet, and are inserted into the extreme Joints, are wont manifestly to swel.
And then again, this Disease does suddenly invade, and the afflux is wont to be
very sudden, which cannot happen but only by the Veins and Arteries. And
moreover, How and from whence the Afflux is in the Gout.
it easily passes out of one place into another, especially if cooling and
repelling Medicaments be applied unto the part affected; and that pain that but
even now afflicted the Foot, this Foot is no sooner freed therefrom, but it
presently begins to afflict the other Foot, or the hand. Or, if Nature lie
under the burden, and be not able to expel those vicious Humors (these sticking
fast about the Bowels, and especially about the Heart) there are then excited
streightnings of the Heart, and faintings, with swounding fits (as I have
oftentimes observed) which cease not until that the vicious Humor be again
driven out into another Joint: which motion of the humor cannot be but by the
common Vessels. And furthermore, Fevers (as well continual as intermitting) are
sometimes terminated into the Gout; which could not be, unless the matter were
in the Veins. And lastly, a Fever is wont to happen, and a change in the
Pulse, which shows that the Humor is contained in the Veins and Arteries.

And therefore seeing that this Humor (the cause of the Gout) is contained
within the Veins and Arteries, and out of them poured forth into the Joints;
Where the Humor, the cause of the gout, is generated.
without doubt it must of necessity be generated in some Concoction of the
Blood, and indeed such a Concoction as out of which the Veins and Arteries
receive that Humor which they contain: and this we determine to be in the Liver
and Spleen, the Sanguification being there hurt in its own manner.

But now, the Causes (by reason of which this humor is generated) are two: For
what causes it is generated.
The former whereof is something amiss in the Liver and Spleen, and more
especially the excessive heat and dryness of those parts; and then the other
cause thereof (this being indeed the chief and principal) is such a kind of
Aliment from Meats and Drink as makes a continual supply of such a like
Tartarous matter.

As for the first of these, The Stomach may indeed likewise confer somewhat
hereunto, if in it the Chyle be not rightly elaborated; and if that after this
Concoction the Tartarous feces or dregs be not most of them instantly
separated: and hence it is also that al Physicians warn us in the preventing of
the Gout, to have a special regard unto the first Concoction: and yet
notwithstanding that hurt Concoction of the stomach does not most immediately
conduce unto the generating of the Gout, but that there is a necessity that the
Concoction in the Liver and Spleen should likewise be hurt. For if there be any
thing amiss in these (which cannot indeed very easily and determinately be
demonstrated and made to appear) it then comes to pass that the unuseful
parts, salt and tartarous (which are in the Chyle) cannot be rightly separated,
but remain mingled with the blood, and together with it are derived unto the
Veins. And by reason of this Vice and fault of these Bowels it happens that
oftentimes from Meats and Drinks in themselves not very hurtful some persons
are very easily offended; and on the contrary, others that have strong Bowels
(in whom the Concoction of the blood, and the separation of the excrements is
rightly performed) although they usually feed upon meats apt to breed the Gout,
and fill themselves also with Wine (and that likewise none of the wholsomest)
they are not yet for all this at al troubled with the Gout.

But what this distemper of the Liver and Spleen is, What kind of distemper it
is that makes for the gout.
cannot so easily be explained and unfolded. And yet nevertheless, if any one
shall determine it to be a hot and dry distemper, I shall not at al gainsay him.
But in what manner this hot and dry distemper does effect what has been said,
this is not so clear. Franciscus Vallesius tells us for a truth, That by this
distemper there is strongly pressed forth a water from the rest of the Juyces;
which is not probable, unless it be fitly explained. For this we willingly
grant, That if the Liver be more hot and dry than what naturally it should be,
instead then of a moderate Elixation or boiling there will be a certain Assation
or rosting; and so the blood that is generated must needs be sharp. Others
affirm (and indeed not unfitly) that the Liver and Spleen when they are
vehemently and intemperately hot, attract the serous and salt Juice in the
Food, which ought to have been separated and evacuated in the first Concoction,
and so it comes to be mingled together with the blood. Yea, and happily also in
the distempered Liver it self and Spleen the Blood is not well elaborated; and
something there is left remaining therein that ought by right to have been
separated, which being afterward heaped up in the Veins is the cause of the
Gout.

And I am of Opinion that the very same happens in the Liver and Spleen, that
happens in the Reins. For many there are that eat Cheese and other meats that
are very apt to breed ^he Stone, and yet notwithstanding they do not generate
the same; whereas others on the contrary, in whose Reins there is a sandy,
gravelly, and stony constitution (as Fernelius calls it) or a power in the
Reins of breeding the stone, these are easily offended by the meats aforesaid.
And I conceive that the case is the same in the Gout; and that there is a
certain vicious constitution in the Bowels of those that are troubled with the
Gout; and I am of Opinion that this vicious Constitution is the efficient cause
of that Salt, or Tartar, by reason of which that Humor which is the cause of
the Gout is produced, which when it once comes to abound, it is then
afterward thrust forth unto the Joints. And this vicious constitution is
communicated unto some from their Parents; and by others it is contracted from
the use of Meat and Drink of a like Nature, and likewise from the Errors they
commit in the whole course of their Diet.

And moreover, Although the faculty of the Bowels be well constituted; yet if
the Meat and Drink abound with such a like Tartarous matter, it cannot al of it
be evacuated by Nature, in regard that neither in the first Concoction, nor yet
in the second, it cannot be separated as it ought to be, but remains still
mingled with the Blood. But yet in the mean time (as much as may be) it is
altered by Nature, and by her spiritualized also (if I may so speak) or as
Mercatus speaks, it is attenuated, poured abroad, and changed into a thin,
spiritful, and sharp humor, which is afterward by Nature thrust unto the
Joints. For the Joints (as I said before) are parts that are weak, and extreme,
bony, and bloodless, unto which Nature is wont to thrust not only the serous
Humors, but whatsoever likewise has any alliance at al with the Humor that
flows. But now the imbecility of the Joints is either Native or acquired. The
weakness of the Joints twofold.
It may then be said to be Native, when either the Joints themselves in their
first structure are more loose, softer, and more apt to receive the Humors
flowing unto them; or else when they have either from the Parents, or from the
Grand Parents thus affected, by a right of Inheritance (as it were) contracted
this distemper and weakness. But it may then be said to be acquired, when the
Joints are weakened either by overmuch labor, excess and injuries of the Air, or
other Causes altering the Joints.

But now, Why the Humor is moved to the joints.
that the Humor which is heaped up in the Veins, and about the Bowels, should
be moved unto the Joints, this comes to pass, Because that Nature being
stirred up and forced by the abundance of vicious humors, attempteth the
expulsion of them. And yet if any thing happen that may move the humors, the
Paroxysm is then more easily excited. And this comes to pass if any one be
provoked to wrath, or stricken with terror, or any other vehement affect of the
mind, or if any shall be very hor, and then suddenly cool again on one and the
same day, or else shall exercise himself immoderately, or make use of the Bath
unseasonably. And this is likewise done by the retention of the usual and
accustomed sweat, or the excess in qualities of the Ambient Air, and the change
thereof; and more especially that change that is made at certain times of the
Year: and it is manifest by Experience, that about the beginning of the Spring,
and Autumn, the Blood is moved and stirred up and down in the Body; and if
there be any thing faulty in it, Nature is wont to expel it unto the more
ignoble parts; from whence arise scabbiness, the Erysipelas, Fevers, Gouts,
and many other Diseases, according to the various disposition of bodies.

From al which it is easy to find out the Antecedent, The Antecedent causes.
Procatartick, and altogether remote Causes, as also the external and internal
Causes; which (of what kind soever they be) either they make for the generating
of the matter and humor producing the Gout; or else they weaken the joints; or
else lastly, they so cause it that the humors are moved and excited.

But since that these are various, and that some of them do concur more ways
for the generating of the Gout than others, they may therefore be considered
according to those things we call Things not Natural.

And first of al, Air.
As for the Air, We have already said that in the Spring time the Gout is most
chiefly excited; and then again in the Autumn, by reason of the motion and
change of the Humors that happens at that time. And the truth is, the Gout is
wont in the Spring time most especially to infest the party, because that the
humors that have been all the Winter long heaping up, are wont then to be poured
abroad, and moved up and down, as Lucian tells us in most elegant Verses
making a description thereof, in his Tragopodagra.

And the very same may likewise be sometimes effected by other distempers of the
Air: and like as the moist Constitution of the Air does otherwise produce
Catarrhs and Fluxes; so it likewise oftentimes causes the Gout. And without
doubt that Epidemical Gout (of which out of Athenaeus we shall anon in the fifth
Question make mention) was at first produced by some peculiar Constitution of
the Air.

And moreover, the Course of Diet that is observed does make very much for the
generating of the Gout; and especially the drinking of strong Wines, by which
alone many have attracted the Gout unto themselves; as Quintus Serenus writes
of Ennius.

And indeed there is no one thing that is more offensive and hurtful unto
persons that are troubled with the Gout than the drinking of Wine, as we find
it to be true by common experience. For there is nothing that obtains more of
that Tartarous matter (or call it what you please) that is so apt and fit to
generate the Gout than Wine.

Which matter although (as we said a little before) it may in some stronger
bodies be separated; yet nevertheless, those that find themselves subject to
the Gout, having but weak and infirm bowels, have no reason (after the example
of other insatiable Wine-drinkers) to indulge themselves any liberty in the
drinking of Wine; but it is far more fit for them to abstain from it. And so on
the contrary, many have been freed from the Gout by their abstaining from Wine.
The gout cured by abstinence from Wine.
And Trincavel (in his twelfth Book, and second Chapter, of the way of Curing
the several parts of Man's Body) writes that he knew a very aged Physician at
Venice, who having been exceedingly troubled with the Gout al his life long,
even unto his old Age, at length by abstaining from Wine for five years only,
he came to be so freed from all those troublesome and painful fits that attend
the Gout, that he was ever after (even to the very last of his old Age, and to
the hour of his death) altogether freed from these pains. And Franciscus
Alexander (in Descriptione Diacorallii) writes likewise that one Francis
Pechius, a man fifty years of age, and troubled with the Gout, was cast into
Prison by a certain Marquess, and there kept twenty years; and that he was ever
after this freed from the Gout. And Solenander also (in his 5. Sect. Consil.
1.) relates of a certain Widow, a Spaniard both, that having omitted and left
off the use of Wine (which yet notwithstanding she had but very sparingly made
use of after the custom of her Country, and always diluting it with Water) she
was never more after that troubled with the Gout. And there are many other such
like known Histories of them that have either been cast into Prison, or else
have been reduced unto poverty, and so have of necessity abstained from Wine,
and thereby been freed from the Gout. To wit, whereas the next and most
immediate Cause of the Gout (as we likewise told ye before) is some certain
thing that has as it were the Nature of a Mineral, and this altogether unfit
for the nourishing of the body (such like as is to be found in all kind of
Earths, but yet in some more, in some less) the Vine attracteth it more
powerfully than other Plants (and that this is so, appears even from that
Tartar which is to be found more abundantly in the Vine than in any other
Plant, and in that Vines will grow and thrive in those places wherein other
Plants will not prosper, as not having aliment enough; the Vines contenting
themselves in a manner only with that very salt of the Earth) which afterward
together with the Wine (although variously changed) is derived into Man's body,
and being there heaped up it affords matter unto the Gout.

And yet notwithstanding there are likewise some kind of Meats and Drinks that
make very much for the breeding of the Gout; and there are sometimes Waters to
be found that generate the Gout; and in those places where the Gout is
Epidemical not only the rich that drink Wine, but the poor also that drink
Water, are afflicted with the Gout. And so likewise Julius Alexandrinus writes
(in his fifteenth Book of things that are wholesome, and sixth chapter) that he
knew a certain person troubled with the Gout; in whom by the eating of Carps
and Breams the Gout was perpetually bred. So that he could when he listed by
this means bring the Gout upon himself. And moreover, The gout caused by the
eating of Carps. Wholesome Wines.
Wines they are not al of them of one and the same kind. For some of them
proceed from a sandy Earth, and contain less of this Tartarous matter. And such
are those Wines that grow at Jassen (a Town hard by) called Gorubergensian
Wines; which although that they be drunk in great abundance by the Inhabitants
of that place, yet I never heard of any of them that was there troubled with
the Gout. And such Wines as these are likewise to be found in many other
places. Wines uxwholsom.
But on the contrary, those Wines that grow in an Earth that is fat, muddy,
clayish, stony, and that has in it a Mineral Marl, gravel, stones, or any
thing else that is Mineral mingled with it, are very apt and ready to generate
the Gout; and such are the Wines of Moravia, Bohemia, Hungary, and most of the
Wines of Austria. And although that the Wines that do not generate the Gout
leave oftentimes in the Vessel more Tartar than those Wines that do indeed
produce the Gout; yea, and if they be distilled, there is likewise more of the
said Tartar found in them than there is in these (like as at Vratislavia) as
that eminent and famous Physician Doctor Doringius wrote unto me, of twenty
four measures of Renish Wine there were found almost three ounces of Tartar;
whereas in the distillation of as many Measures of the Tocavian Wine, that is
accounted the strongest of all the Hungarian Wines, there were scarcely two
drams of Tartar to be found, yet nevertheless all this makes nothing against
what we have said. For those Wines have that Salt or Tartar superficially only
(as I may so say) and in a thick manner mingled together with them; or (that I
may speak with the Chemists) they have the Salt as yet fixed; but these have a
volatile Salt or Tartar most exactly mingled with them, insomuch that this Salt
and Tartar is in a manner made spiritual; whereupon it is, that the former of
these is more easily separated either in the Stomach, or in the Liver, and so
is thrust forth either by the belly with the rest of the excrements, or else it
is voided by Urine; but this other being mingled with the spirit of the Wine
passes into the very Mass of the blood, and so penetrateth into the most
inward parts of the body. And that those Salts that were fixed may be made
Volatile, the Distillations of Chemists do sufficiently prove; and that the
Tartar may be made as it were Spiritual, and elevated by the Alembick, this we
are taught by the Tartarized Spirit of Wine: yea, and Metals may also be so
dissolved in strong Waters and Spirits, that they may not only be strained
through paper, but that they may likewise be elevated into the Alem^ick: But
yet nevertheless, in regard that this Salt although it be subtle, is
altogether unfit for the nourishing of the body, as partaking of a Mineral
Nature (which is not fit for the nourishment of living Creatures) albeit it
does together with the blood penetrate into the Veins; yet not withstanding as
superfluous and useless it is at length by Nature cast forth of the Veins and
Arteries, and thrust out unto the Joints. And therefore, whether or no Wine be
apt to generate and cause the Gout, we are in the first place to judge of this
by the place where it grows, and its effect; and then next of al by the
strength thereof. For by how much the stronger Wines are, by so much the more
exactly and subtly is this Salt mingled with them, and becomes more
spiritual: like as it appears in the Spirit of Wine that is Tartarizated,
which is more strong than the simple Spirit of Wine.

All which notwithstanding is thus to be taken, if by reason of the distemper
and weakness of the Bowels (as we also said before) that which in the Wine is
Excrementitious and Tartarous, may not be separated. For if it may be
separated, the Wine will then be wholesome, and without any hurt in it. Yea, and
if any such Wine could be had that having but little of such a like Tartarous
matter in it should yet strengthen the weak Bowels that do not well separate
these Excrements, and so shall help the Concoction and promote the separation
and evacuation of the Excrements, we grant that this would prove to be not only
harmless, but likewise very useful and profitable if moderately drunk. And some
tell us that the Pucine Wine is such, and therefore they commend it for the
prevention of the Gout. But I much doubt, whether this Wine be in all respects
answerable unto what has been said; and therefore I conceive that it is good
first to make trial, and to consult with Experience.

We have indeed above spoken something as touching the cause for which certain
Wines breed and cause the Gout: wine, how it does generate the gout.
but yet nevertheless, my desire and purpose is here to explain the thing, and
so to make the matter somewhat more clearly to appear. I think it to be a very
plain and clear truth, that Wine produces the Gout, not as it is Wine, but as
it contains in it something that is unfit, and something likewise that is
extraneous, and unuseful unto our bodies, which is therefore by Nature thrust
forth unto the Joints. And this appears if by nothing else, yet by this, That
there are some certain Wines that do not generate the Gout; and such are our
Gorubergensian Wines, and many others also, that here in these Regions grow in
Sandy places. For albeit these Wines be drunk for a daily and ordinary drink,
and that not scantly, but very plentifully; yet there was never any that from
hence contracted the Gout. But on the contrary, the Moravian, Bohemian,
Austrian, Hungarian, and likewise very many more Wines of other Regions, are
most apt to breed the Gout. Yea, and not only the Wines, but even the Waters of
some places, dogenerate the Gout. And so it was related unto me by that eminent
Physician, Dn. D. Tobias Knoblochius, In certain places waters also generate
the gout.
that at Iglavia in Moravia (where he had practiced Physic there for some
years) that not only the Wealthier sort of People that drank Wine, but even the
poor who hardly ever tasted a Cup of Wine, were al of them very subject unto
the Gout, Colic, and Fallingsickness, Diseases Epidemical in that place.

But now, What that is that makes that certain wines are apt to breed the gout.
Inquiry is to be made, What that should be which makes that certain Wines are
apt to generate the Gout. Where we are first of al to take notice, that nothing
does nourish (touching which we have spoken elsewhere) but what proceeds from
things animated, or enlivened. And therefore al other things, as Minerals,
Metals, and diverse kinds of Earths, are unapt to nourish our bodies; and
thereupon if they be at any time taken in, they are again to be evacuated
either by the Urine, or else by the belly; and this if it be not done, they are
then by Nature thrust into the Joints, and so they there generate the Gout. And
therefore those Vines that grow in a sandy Earth, that is not at al fat and
rank, have nothing that they may attract and draw unto them, besides the
Alimentary Juice: but those that grow in Clayish grounds, or any other fat
Earths, do not attract unto themselves only a vegetable juice, but also a
Mineral juice as it were, and such as is wholly unuseful for our bodies, which
is not unfitly termed Tartar, a substance, to wit, that consists of a fixed
and volatile Salt, and of an Earthy and almost Mineral matter; such as not only
sticks fast unto the sides of Casks, but is likewise thoroughly mingled with
the substance of the Wine. And this is altogether the Nature of Salts, that
they reduce other bodies into the smallest Atoms, and then do associate the
Atoms unto themselves. We may see an Experiment of this in the dissolving of
Metals in strong Waters, in which the Metals (bodies otherwise thick) are so
united unto the salt of the Waters that dissolve them, that they may pass
through a Card or Paper. And the very same we likewise see in the dissolving of
Pearls, Margarites, Cerals, and Crabs Eyes, which sticking fast unto the Salt
of the Vinegar, are thoroughly mingled with the Water, and may be strained
through a Card; but being precipitated they will dissolve no further. We have
likewise an Example hereof in Vitriol, which being dissolved in Water may
likewise be strained through a Card: but when the vitriol is Calcined, and the
Salt drawn forth of it, there remains an Earth that is not dissolveable by
any liquor whatsoever. And so in hot Baths of Water there is an Earthy
substance so exactly mingled therewithal, that it cannot possily be discovered
by any sense. But yet when this afterward shall stick fast unto the wooden and
stony pipes, and shall subsist apart by it self, it is not then any further to
be dissolved in Water. From all which it appears that the Gout is not
generated without Salt; and without doubt the sharpest and most extreme pains
in the Gout are from Salt: but yet we say not that Salt alone, pure Salt does
this; since that there are Wines in many Regions that have Salt also, and yet
for all that they do not generate the Gout; but there concurreth moreover a
matter that is Clayish, Limy, Marly, or some Mineral which the Vine had
attracted out of the ground, together with the nourishment, concocted it, and
mingled it with the Alimentary matter and so communicated it unto the Grapes;
and hence the Wine also that is pressed forth of the Graps receives and
reteineth it. And hereupon it is that we see, how that in the Joints of such as
are troubled with the Gout there are sometimes generated hard knobs and knots,
and that there is as it were Lime taken forth of them; which indeed is nothing
else but that same Mineral Matter which the Salt of the Wine drew along with
it, and which at the length (as altogether unuseful and unfit for the
nourishment of the Body) is thrust forth unto the Joints. Now therefore (that
we may come unto the Question, why some Wines do generate the Gout, and others
do not so) the more any Wine has of this matter, what wines they are that do
more generate the gout, and what, less.
and this thoroughly mingled with it by the smallest Atoms, by so much the more
powerful it is for the generating of the Gout. Which comes to pass, in the
first place, by Reason of the soil, to wit, where the Wines grow, whether in a
Muddy ground, or that that is Clayish, Limy, Marly, or any other Mineral Earth.
And furthermore in the Second place, if the Wines shall not be wholly purifyed
and freed from their Tartar, but still remain as it were thick and turbid; and
this happens first of al in Wines that are new, and not yet wrackt by turning
them from Vessel to Vessel; and then Secondly in some certain Wines that will
never be altogether clear; such as are those of Hungaria, etc. And Thirdly, if
that Tartarous matter be so thoroughly mingled with the Wine in the smallest
Atoms, that it cannot be separated from our bodies, neither in the first, nor
yet in the second Concoction; which for the most part happens in Generous and
strong Wines, and such as grow in places hotter then ordinary. For Wines that
are not strong and generous, although that even these may contain in them some
of the said Tartarous matter: yet notwithstanding, in regard that the heat of
the Country was not so powerful that it was able (either in the Vine, or in the
Grapes,) to mingle this Tartarous matter with the Spirit that is in the Wine,
it is thereupon also afterward (either in the first, or in the second
Concoction) more easily separated, and driven forth either by the Belly, or by
Urine.

But if by the Air of a hotter Country, that does concoct more powerfully, that
same Tartarous matter be exactly mingled together with the Salt and spirit of
the Wine, it then refuses to be severed by the separating faculty, and so
penetrateth it self into the whole Body with the Alimentary part. But yet
because that it is altogether unfit to nourish the Body, it is at length by
Nature thrust forth unto the Joints, and there it generateth the Gout. And that
this is so, we are taught by the experience we have even of the Hungarian
Wines. For although (as experience it self testifyeth) they be most apt of
themselves to generate the Gout; yet (as we told you a little before) it is
observed in the destillation of the Hungarian, and Renish Wine, that there was
more of the Tartarous matter collected out of the Renish then out of the
Hungarian. Which happens for no other cause but this, to wit, that in the
Wines of Hungary that Tartarous matter is by the smallest Atoms so exactly
mingled with the spirit of the Wine, that together with the said spirit it may
likewise pass through by the Alembick. whether meats that are moist and
waterish do breed the gout.


Carolus Piso, amongst those Causes from which the matter of the Gout is heaped
up in the Veins, puts likewise moist and waterish meats for one, as broths,
raw fruits, and the like. But he does this upon a false Hypothesis or
Supposition, whilst he mistakingly determines that the Serum or whey is a
mere and pure Water; whereas yet notwithstanding Experience it self teaches us
the contrary; and there was never any man yet known to get the Gour from the
alone use of moist and watery meats, neither indeed can waterish humors possibly
excite such great and so sharp intolerable Pains.

That which likewise makes very much for the generating of the Gout is the
suppression of the wonted evacuations. Thesuppression of the wonted.
Evacuations.
And hence it is that Hippocrates (in the sixth of his Aphor. Aphor. 29.)
writes, that Women are never troubled with the Gout but when their Courses
fail them; of which notwithstanding we intend to speak more hereafter in the
ninth Question. And so the same Hippocrates writes ( Epid. 6. Sect. 8. text.
55.) that at Abdedera, Phaetusa the Wife of Pithous having been before (while
she was young) very fruitful in bearing Children, upon a very long absence of
her Husband from her her Monthly Courses left her, whereupon afterward pains
and rednesses arose about the Joints. And the very same (says he) happened
also unto Thaso the Wife of Namylias Gorgippus. And from hence likewise it is,
that oftentimes those Persons are wont to sal into the Gout who have had old
Ulcers in their Legs, or Fistulaes in the Arse suddenly consolidated or nealed
up, and the Fluxes likewise of other places wholly suppressed. For those humors
that are wont to excite those long lasting Ulcers of the Legs, and Fistulaes of
the A^se, are themselves also falt; and therefore if they be suppresse^, they
may produce the Gout.

And here there are very many that are wont to be long and tedious in the
^^cital of the Causes (external and internal) who will not pass over in silence
any one of those things we call not Natural. whether every Error in things not
Natural may produce the gout?

Venery one great cause of the gout.


But although that every Error wh^^^ ^et in the (...) of the things not Natural
may produce a Cacochymy; yet we deny (...) power to produce the Gout. And of
the rest (...) those things that are not nactural, there is hardly any of them
that of it self does produce the Gout, but (...) that by (...) motion, Anger,
and Fear, the Paroxysm is excited; and (...) also make very much for the
producing of the same: and if the Person^ (...), long accusto^^ unto those
sweats, the retention and suppression of them is an (...) very near at hand.
But yet we grant that excessive Venery does (...) generating of the Gout, by
weakening not only the Joints and (...), but also (...) whole Body: and hence it
is that by the Poets the Gout is said to be the Daughter of Ba^chus and Venus.

The Gout is sometimes likewise hereditary; The gout somti^^ ^eredi^ary
and a weakness not only of the Joins, but of the B^wels also breeding the
vicious humors, is from the Parents and Ancestors communicated to their
Children and Nephews; whether this happen from the vicious seed; or else that
the matter of the Blood in Persons troubled with the Gout is subject and
inclined thereunto, from whence the viral spirits are generated, and all the
parts do receive their nourishment. And yet notwithstanding it may so come to
pass that Parents that are themselves affected with the Gout may y^^^ege.
Children not subject thereunto; and yet their Nephews may notwithstanding at
the length be (...). And indeed there are some of this Opinion that those
Children (...) very Paroxysm of the Gout, these shall likewise be born
thereunto; whether Children begetten out of the Paroxysm or sis of the gout,
may yet be subject thereunto?

whether there be any necessity that the gout should be propagated unto the
issue?


whereas on the co^^tary, such as are conceived out of the fit of the Gout,
these tha^ be^afe and court. But very few perhaps there are that beget Children
in the very Parox^sm of the Gout: like as we see also that Epileptick Persons
may out of their Fit beget Epileprick Children. For the truth is, it is not so
that the very matter it self that exciteth the Paroxysm is imparted unto the
Children; but only a vicious disposition thereunto, which alone is not
sufficient for the producing of the Gout; but that there is required likewise
an Afflux of vicious humors. And therefore if those Children shall observe an
exact and careful Diet, it may then so come to pass, that the weakness which
they contracted from their Parents may be abolished, or else it may be
corrected; and humors fit for the breeding of the Gout may not be generated in
the Body. And on the contrary, it may so happen that albeit the Child may not
be troubled with the Gout, yet nevertheless the Nephew may be affected
therewithal, to wit, if he augment by errors in the Course of his Diet that
vice and weakness that was communicated from the Grandfather by the Father;
and so that vicious disposition that was well neet suppressed and might have
been wholly abolished had (...) a good dye^, is now again by the Errors of his
Diet (as it were) renewed and (...) Unto which we may likewise add this, that
the vice that is in the Fathers seed may somtimer be corrected and amended by
the goodness of the Mothers Milk. And moreover these Morbifick seeds may
likewise have their own times, in which they do at length discover themselves
(like as we see it to be in Intoxications, and the poison of a mad Dog) or
(...) they altogether lose their strength, and so they quite vanish.

From all which it will be no hard matter to render a Reason why the rich should
be obnexious and subject unto the Gout rather than the Poor; Why the Rich are
more troub^ed wit^ the gout than the (...)?
it being therefore by the Germans called also the Disease of the Rich. For it
is very rarely found, that Boore or Beggars are troubled with the Gout; and
hence it is also that the Gout is termed a Dnease hating the Poor: and Jovianus
Pontanus has likewise a Fable to this purpose (in his 5. B. de^^^mon, and Chap
1.) that on a time the Gout rambling about, and going into the Country, when it
saw there nothing but little Cottages most tudely and unhandsomly buil, and
very filthily situated; and could find there nothing but Mattocks and
Pitchforks, Rakes, and such like Rustical Instruments; she turns away from this
place as altogether unsit for her entertainment, and betakes her self to the
City, if happily she might there find better. But being brought into the City, at
her first entrance thereinto, she lights upon the Shop of a Black Smith; and
this she likewise passes by as altogether unsit for her accommodation: but at
length when she had a while rambled about in the City, she at last comes into
a certain house, before whose door was piping and Dancing, and within doors
nothing but Jellity and Feasting; and demanding what and whose house this was,
when she was answered, that ^t was the house of Ease and Idleness, and that it
was inhabited by slothful Persons that spent all their time in Sleeping,
Drinking Wine, and Feasting, she instantly enters the house, saying, This is
indeed the house, and this the Palace that is sit for my reception and
ententainment. And when at any time she saw solicitude and Labor doing their
business before the doors, she presently commands them to be set further off,
and driven quite away; and charge that all Cares whatsoever should be
banished from thence; and more especially, Sobriety and abstinence.

For Poor People and such as live in the Country are for the most part
contented with a very sparing and plain Diet: whereas on the contrary, the Rich
delight themselves with all variety of Meats, and drink their Wine most
commonly without any stint at all; yea and oltentimes wholly addict and give
themselves over to Gutting, Gluttony, and excess of Wine. And again the Boors
in the Country are continually exercised with Labor, by the which the heat of
the Bowels is stird up; and if at any time there cheme to be any vi^^ors humo^
it is immediately discussed; whereas for the most part the slich do more
indulge themselves in ease and idleness. And moreover the Rich are very seldom
so careful to on^y the (...) of their Physicians as they ought to be, but they
will have the medicaments (...) them to suit with their Fancies and Palats;
neither will they continue the use of them to long as is fitting and requisite;
neither will they have that care and regard unto the whole coutse of their Diet
which they ought to have.

And besides all this, in the last place, the Rich do indeed make use of
Physicians, but then they change them too often; and very frequently commit
themselves unto Empericks, and others that are altogether Ignorant, or have but
little knowledge of the case how it stands with them; and these do oftentimes
prescribe such remedies and medicaments as by the use of which the Disease is
rather more deeply and safter rooted, than etadicated and pulled up.

Now this Disease is wont for the most part to invade and assict men, Who they
be that are most subsect to the Gout.
rather than Women (not that these are wholly exempted from it, for we find the
contrary by experience) and this more especially between the thirtieth and
fistieth year of their Age; to wit, because about that age, by reason of the
sharpness of the heat, the salt and Tartarous humor is then more heaped up; and
then after this the older they grow, the more they are afflicted with it, by
reason of the weakness of the native heat, and the imbecility of the expulsive
faculty. For Men for the most part live not so temperatly as Women, sustain
greater Labors, are more addicted to Venery, and hurt thereby. But Women (on
the contrary) are more temperate, and besides they have likewise their monthly
Evacuations, by and with which Nature is wont to thrust forth together with
them all the vicious humors, and so to expel them out of all parts of the Body.
Whereupon likewise it is, that Hippocrates (in the sixth of his Apborism.
Aphoris. 29.) writes, that Women are not troubled with the Gout, until after
their Courses fail and leave them. But the truth is, that it is not always ^o
that either Women or Men that are above or under the aforesand age, a^e wholly
^ree them this Malady; and albeit that Hippocrates (in the 6. sect. of his
Aphorism. Aphorisin. 30.) writes, that young Men before the use of Women are
not at all troubled with the (...), and that it is a thing very rarely seen,
that Youths are herewith affected, yet (...) its sometimes found so to be, and
that even these are troubled with it: as we may likewate see many that are
above fifty years old taken oftentimes with the Gout. And I my self (...) late
saw a Learned Man that in the sixty second year of his age was (...) fits of
the Gout. Neither also are Eunuchs (although that Hippocrates in the Sixth
Sect. of his Aphorism. Aph. 28. does except them) always wholly free from this
Malady; as we shall anon show you further in the Nanth Question.

Chap. 3. Signs Diagnostick.
THe very Malady does sufficiently appear of it self; The Diagnostick signs of
the gout.
and the sick persons complain of a pain about the Joints in their Feet, Hands,
Knees, and other parts; unto which there is afterward added a swelling, a
redness, and for the most part a Fever. And indeed, when the Gout begins first
of all to invade a person, it likely takes him first in the great Toe of his
Foot, and that most commonly the left. And so in all the other joints the pain
most of all consists and staieth in the place affected, without spreading any
further. But in the Sciatica, this pain is not felt only in the Joint, (by the
which the Head of the Thigh is inserted into the Hip) but it is from hence by
the Nerves and Membranes carried unto the very Buttocks, by the way where the
Nerves spring from the Loins, and the great bone by the Latin Physicians called
the Os Sacrum, or holy Bone; and from thence the pain is also extended unto the
Calf of the Leg, and unto the Foot, according to the guidance and conduct of
the Nerve. And in other Joints also, (as lying outwardly) there is wont
manifestly to appear a swelling, and redness, and a great heat to be perceived:
but now in the Sciatick painful affect these things do not so plainly appear,
in regard the place affected lies very deep, and because that therein that
place the top of the Skin has not many Veins dispersed here and there in it.
In a word; in the Gout that which most especially troubles the sick person is
the pain he feels, and an impotency in his motion; and upon this there follow
watchings and restlesness, a dejection of the Bodies strength, and other
Symptoms; all which Lucian in his Tragop^dagra has very elegantly described.

But now in reckoning up the signs by which the differences of the Causes and
the different Humors may be discerned, The signs of the Causes.
the most of Physicians are very long and prolix; and they take much pains in
reckoning up the signs of the Gout from the blood, Choler, Phlegm, and Black
Choler or Melancholy. But since that (as we told you before) those Humors
cannot properly be said to excite the Gout, but only that they are either stird
up and down by that Humor that is the Cause of the Gout, or that being
attracted by the pain of the part affected they flow together thereunto; We
shall therefore in this regard here spare our selves the Labor, further to
treat of them.

But yet Nevertheless, if for the better ordering of the Cure the knowledge of
the affluent Humor seem to be altogether necessary and requisite; it appears
from the general discourse of an inflammation; in which we have declared what a
pure Phlegmone is, and what signs it has; as also the signs of Oedematodes, of
Erisypelatodes, and also of Schirrbodes, what signs these have; and indeed from
the signs of the Humor predominant in the Body (which we have elsewhere
explained) and likewise from the qualities of the swelling, and by the
observing of those things that benefit or hurt the sick person, it may easily
be known what humor it is that flows together with it.

And yet notwithstanding it is here acknowledged by the more learned and able
Physicians, (even those who have asserted that the Gout proceeds from diverse
humors) that there is little heed to be given, or regard to be had unto those
signs that are taken from the Color, heat, or the like Accidents; since that
very many things occur which may be the Cause, as of the Color, so likewise of
the heat and coldness of the Member, contrary unto the Nature of the peccant
Matter. For the humor (as Guainerius says) that is the true and proper cause
of the Gout, abiding in the bottom of the Member, does not for the most part
change the superficies of the said Member; and so then the Color of the Member
cannot afford us any sign or token at all: but it may possibly so happen, that
a Humor abounding in the Body may by pain be stirred up and darwn unto the
place affected, and there it may cause a swelling, and yet nevertheless it may
not be the Cause of the Gout.

Chap. 4. Prognostics.
I. THe Gout for the most part is a disease not Mortal. Prognoslicks of the
gout.
For albeit that the strength may be much impaired by pains, and for want of
rest, (insomuch that the sick persons may at length be forced to take their
Beds) yet this is not done, but in a long time. And we see that such as are
troubled with the Gout do oftentimes live long, and attain unto old age; to
wit, for this Cause, that Nature by certain intervals thrusts forth unto the
Joints those vicious Humors from which other more dangerous Diseases might have
been generated; and so by this means freeth the principal parts from vicious
Humors.

II. If yet notwithstanding there happen any dangerous inflammations, or
pernicious Fevers, or that Nature fayl and lie under the burden, so that it
can no longer expel the vicious Humors, the Patients life may then be much
endangered. And if any such dangerous Symptom be Joined together with the
vehement pain of the Joints (as suppose, a Delity, the trembling of the heart,
difficulty of breathing, cold sweats, and a weak pulse) it is then a sign that
the sick person will die the very same day, or the day following.

III. But although the Gout be for the most part a Disease not Mortal, yet
nevertheless it is very hard to cure; and it is commonly accounted the shame
and disgrace of Physicians. For albeit (if the Disease be new) it may be cured
without much difficulty: yet nevertheless, if it be long delaied, and that it
often invade the party, it may be more difficult to cure, in regard that the
soynts, yea and the very Bowels are weakened by the pains, and redlesness, and
likewise by the asslux of the Humors. And the sick persons are themselves
oftentimes the Cause that this Disease takes such deep ^^oot in them, seeing
they do not oppose and withstand the Disease at its first Invasion; yea and
oftentimes they conceal it; and some there are that will pretend other Causes
of their Disease, as loath to acknowledge it to be the Gout.

But now this Disease proves afterward very hard to cure, both in regard of
the many errors in Diet (from which the fick persons will not be persuaded to
abstain) and oftentimes also through the unskilfulness of the Physicians; who
are either ignorant of the true cause of the Disease, or else they administer
Medicaments that are very unfit and improper, by which they do rather weaken
the Joints and the Bowels then any ways strengthen them. But yet nevertheless,
in the mean time, the Gout is not a Disease that in it self is altogether
impossible to be cured; and this we are taught by the examples of many that
have been freed from the Gout; of which more anon in the Tenth Question.

IV. Whosoever they be that being thus affected are grown in age, or have
gotten about their loynts Callous and hard knobs bunching forth; or that live
an anxions and careful life; or have a dry and costive belly; these can none of
them be cured by the Art of Man, or any human means, so far as I could ever yet
find, Hippocrater in the Second of his Predictions.

V. If in the Gout there happen to be a loosening of the Joint, it is then very
difficult in the curing, or indeed altogether incurable. For although the Joint
may possibly be set back again in its proper place, yet nevertheless because
that the Ligaments of the Joints are made more loose, a perfect Cure is
scarcely to be expected. And if likewise in the loosning that follows upon
the Gout the Cavity of the ^oynt be ^illed up with a hard knotty matter, the
Disease is then altogether incuteable: for the Joint cannot be put back again
before that Tophaceous matter be taken away; and this will hardly ever be
removed.

VI. Among all the several kinds of the Gout, the Sciatick pain is of all
others the most grievous, not only in regard of the greatness of the pain it
self, but by reason also of the grievousness of the Symptoms that follow
thereupon. For by reason of the most grievous pain it canseth watching and a
restlesness, kindles fevers; and sometimes a loosning of the Joint happens,
upon which there follows a lameness and a wasting away of the whole Leg and
Thigh. For if at any time a Joint sal out of its place, by reason of the
multitude of the affluent Humors, there is then a Necessity that an halting and
lameness must follow upon it. But because that the bone being fallen out of its
proper place presses together the Muscles, Veins, and Arteries, the Aliment
and Spirits cannot possibly flow into the lower parts, whereupon there
follows a wasting and Consumption of them.

VII. But although this Sciatick pain be of all others the most vehement, yet
notwithstanding, it does in the beginning more easily admit of a Cure then any
of the other kinds of the Gout, in regard that the strength and Virtue of the
Medicaments may more easily penetrate unto the Vessels, (by which the Humor
flows into the Hip) then unto the extreme Joints; and so likewise the Humor
that flows unto them may the more easily be evacuated. But if the Humor be
once flown in, so that it has insinuated it self into the Hip, it is then very
hard to be cured; because that the Discussing Remedies by reason of the flesh
lying upon the Joint cannot penetrate whither they ought to go.

VIII. They that having been long infested with the pain in their Hips have the
Hip falling forth of its place, and again returning and falling into its place,
these have snotty Excrements following thereupon, ( as Hippocrates tells us
in the sixth Section of his Aphorism. Aphoris. 59) these Mucous and snotty
Excrements having their original from the weak heat of the Nervous parts.

IX. They that having been long infested with the pain of the Hips have the Hip
falling out of Joint, these have their Thigh wasting, and they become lame,
unless they be burnt: as Hippocrates tells us in the same place, Aphorism. 60.
The Thigh indeed consumes and wastes away, because it is but ill nourished,
by Reason of the weakness of the Native heat from the long continued afflux of
the Vicious Humors; and because that the Veins and Arteries are moved out of
their places, and pressed together, so that they cannot rightly bring the
aliment unto the Thigh. But then they become lame, and halt, because that the
Thigh for want of nourishment is destitute of strength and by Reason of the
Luxation or disjoynting is become shorter then before, and that by means of the
looseness of the Ligaments the Thigh bone is not fast and firm.

X. Those unto whom the Gout is hereditary are scarcely ever wholly freed
therefrom; and if they desire so to be, they have need to observe a far more
exact kind of Diet and a more accurate use of Medicaments, then do others that
are either not troubled at all with this affect; or if they be, the grief
descends not to them from their Parents, or any of their Ancestors.

XI. If the Varices happen unto such as are troubled with the Gout, the Gout
then cease, (as Avicen tells us, because that the Humors that were accustomed
to flow unto the Joints are now derived unto the exterior parts of the Thigh.

XII. If the Gout that was wont to keep its certain Periods cease and return no
more, it proves to be the Cause of most grievous and deadly Diseases, unless
the matter be drawn forth by way of prevention, which is most difficult to be
done. For the matter that Nature was wont to thrust into the joints, if by
Reason of the weakness of Nature it can be now no longer expelled, either it
sticks about the Bowels, and principal parts; or else being transmitted unto
the Lungs, Intestines, or other parts, it there exciteth most grievous Evils.

XIII. Whether the Gout may not be finished in less then forty days and why?
As for what concerns the very Paroxysm it self, touching this Hippocrates
writes in his sixth Sect. and 49. Aphoris. They that are troubled (says he)
with the Disease of the Gout, these may in forty days be cured of their fits,
by removing the inflammation; provided that ( as Galen adds in his Comment.)
The Physician fail nothing in the Cure, and that the Patients be obedient unto
his prescriptions. For seeing that the Humors in the Gout are dispersed by the
Ligaments, Membrans, and Nerves and that these parts are more thick, and more
cold then the fleshy parts, it is therefore no wonder at all, that there is a
longer time for the discussion of the Humor required in these parts, then in
the fleshy parts. But yet this Aphorism is here only to be understood of the
last and very utmost term; seeing that experience testifies, that many have
been Cured of the Gout within fewer then forty days. For in some the fits of
the Gout are more moderate, and shorter, and so may be made to cease in a
shorter time: but in others they are more sharp, and of longer continuance; and
therefore require the longer time. And some there are that refer the cause unto
the Humors; and those tell us for a truth, that the Gout which proceeds from
Choler is shorter, but that which is from Phlegm of longer continuance. But be
it so indeed, that sometimes the Blood, sometimes Phlegm, and sometimes Choler may
together and at once flow unto one and the same part; yet nevertheless, that
very Salt Humor which is the next and most immediate cause of the Gout is
sometimes thinner, (so that it may be the sooner and more easily discussed) and
sometimes it is more thick. Unto which we may in the Second place add, the
strength or weakness of the part affected. For the stronger the part is, the
more easily does it discuss the Humor that has flown unto it; but the weaker
it is, the more slow it is in dissipating the said Humor; and from hence it
happens that those which first begin to be troubled with fits of the Gout
have these fits shorter; and in such as have been longer troubled with this
Disease the Paroxysms are of so much the longer continuance, unless they have
the greater care of themselves. For the ofther any member is afflicted with the
Gout, the weaker still it grows. And Thirdly, the lick persons themselves also
do not observe one and the same course of Diet; whereupon it is, that such of
them as observe an accurate and exact kind of Diet, these are more easily
freed; and some of them do by the Errors of their Diet much prolong unto
themselves their Paroxysms, and give the Cause of a new fluxion.

XIV. The more, and the more frequent the Symptoms are that follow upon the
Gout, the harder is the Disease to be cured. For sometimes by Reason of the most
sharp and vebement pain, the sick persons do unseasonably desire repelling and
stupefying Medicaments; which drive back the Humor that was flowing unto the
Joints unto the more noble parts: and from hence it happens, that the sick
persons fall into the affects of the Heart by Reason of its being straightened;
into Faintings, and Swounding sits, or other mischievous Diseases: yea and they
may be cast into great peril of their lives; and then the only hope they have
of escape lies in this; to wit. that the aforesaid Humors (if it possibly may
be) be again driven back unto the joints.

XV. Now there are four manner of ways to dissolve and cure the Gout. Four
ways of dissolving the Gout.
For first of all (and more frequently) the matter is resolved, and indeed all
of it, so that there are not left so much as any footsteps thereof remaining;
or (as for the most part) nothing but the very signs and footsteps of it are
left behind: And Secondly (but this is more rare) the matter is changed into a
substance very like unto Pus. For a true and genuine Pus it is not; but a
certain Sanies, or thin Ichorous Excrement, sweateth back and Eats its way
through both the Flesh and the Skin.

But now why the Gout comes so seldom unto a suppuration, Why the Gout is so
rarely suppurated?
is well worthy our consideration, and enquity. Some are of this Opinion, that
it is therefore because that the joints are removed from the Fountain of heat,
and have not in them so much heat as is requisite for a suppuration. But that
this is not the true cause, appears by this, that sometimes there arises an
inflammation in the ends of the Fingers, which yet nevertheless comes unto a
suppuration. And therefore a more true cause seems to be this, to wit, the
Nature of this very Humor it self (as being Salt, and wheyish) which is not to
be changed into Pus; but it is either inwardly dissipated; or if any of it be
left remaining, it grows and hardneth into knots and knobs. The Third way and
manner is, when by Reason of the weakness of the place, the matter sticking
over long in the part affected, is at length turned into a knot or knob. And of
such a Gout as this it is that Galen writes (in his 10. B. of the Composit. of
Medicam. according to the place, and 2. Chaste.) after that the Calli are once
produced, (says he) there is no further hope or expectation, that the Joint
should ever exactly return unto its pristine Constitution. And of this the
Poet, Tollere Nodosam nescit, etc.

That Physic works rare effects, there is none can doubt, And yet it knows not
how to Cure the knotty Gout.
The Fourth manner is, when the Humor is transferred, and carried unto some
other place, and (as it sometimes happens) unto the more noble Members, to
wit, the Lungs, the Heart, the Brain; and this of all other the changes is the
worst, and by reason whereof the sick persons die, unless the matter be drawn
back again unto the joints; and sometimes the Humor is translated unto the more
Ignoble parts, as the varices, according to what we said before in the 11.
Prognost: and sometimes it is evacuated quite out of the Body; and as Rhases
tells us, it is oftentimes carried unto the Intestines, and there it exciteth a
flux of the Belly, and excoriateth the said Intestines; and this flux
continues sometimes all the life after, and the strength by degrees and by
little and little failing, (by reason of Fevers and pains) the sick persons
after long wasting and consuming by Marasms, at length they die.

Chap. 5. The Indications and Cure.
SInce that the perfect Cure of preternatural affects does chiefly consist in
the taking away of the Causes, The indication^ and Cure of the Gout.
and that the Authors (as we told you before) differ among themselves as
touching the Causes of the Gout, it is therefore no wonder, that there is to
great a discord among them about the Cure, some propounding one way, and some
another, for the Curing of this Disease. Which difference and variety of
opinions, (as we have sometimes already told you) has not been the least (but
indeed the greatest) cause why so few of those troubled with the Gout have
hitherto been cured thereof; each Physician here setting himself to oppose that
as an enemy which he has often to himself fancied so to be, and in the mean
time altogether negreeting that which is indeed the true enemy. Why s^ few have
(...) Cured of the Gout.
And this evidently appear (...) the Consilia or advisings of Phyfitians one
with the other (which have likewise been in the behalf of persons of the
greatest worth and quality) in the must of which (opinions being asked, and
resolves sent from one to the other) the whole result of the business for the
most part came to this, that the Cure was chiefly to be directed to the head,
as the commanding Member; and unto the Joints, as the recipient Member. And so
the authority of Fernelius alone (a Physician otherwise of great learning and
experience) has drawn very many into the same error with him, and kept them
from searching after the truth; and has likewise caused that many sick of this
grief have taken such Physic, and several sorts of Medicaments that were very
unfit, and altogether improper for them. We therefore (leaving unto every man
his Judgment and Opinion) insisting upon those Fundamentals which we have above
propounded, will here briefly declare our Opinion as touching the way and
Method of Curing the Disease we are now treating of.

Now the Cure so called in general consists in two things: The Cure of the
gout
the former whereof is, that the present Paroxysm (whether Pain, Swelling,
Impediment of the motion, and all other things that are wont to be troublesome
unto such as are afflicted with the Gout) be taken away. And the other is, that
a course be taken to prevent the return of the Paroxysm being once removed.

And in the first place indeed for the manner of Curing the Gout that is
present, there are three things especially, which (in the Paroxysm) the Patient
desires a speedy removal of, viz. the Pain, Swelling, and the Impediment of
his motion. And now seeing that all these three have their original from a
preternatural Humor fallen into the joint, the total removing of the Paroxysm
confisteth in this, that the influx of the Humor be withstood, and that the
Humor already fallen in be taken away. For that Humor being removed, there
follows both a cessation of the Pain, and a vanishing of the swelling, and
the motion of the part again returns. But yet nevertheless, in regard that
the pain does oftentimes so extremely excruciate and Torture the sick Person,
that he cannot well beat it (until the Humor the Cause thereof be taken away)
the pain is therefore sometimes first of all to be moderated, yea even before
the Cause be wholly removed. And so then the whole Cure of the Gout afflicting
the sick Person consists in the taking away of the Cause, and the mitigation
of the pain.

As for the first of these, seeing that the flux takes its beginning from the
motion and boiling as it were of the blood and Humors in the Veins, that motion
and boiling of the Humors is first of all to be stopped; and the Humors that with
violence rush unto the part affected are not only to be turned another way, but
they are also to be wholly evacuated, and emptied forth out of the Body; for
unless this be done, the pain will be but the more exasperated. And afterward
the humor that has flown in is to be discussed and scattered. And because that
pain is the thing that chiefly grieveth the sick Person, this is sometimes also
to be mitigated even before the Cause be taken away.

And therefore if any Cause, either external (to wit, the distemper of the
Ambient Air) or the thickness of the body shall have given the occasion, it is
forthwith to be removed, yea and also to be corrected after a quite contrary
manner.

Venesection.
And secondly, Venesection.
If Blood abound in the Body (which may be also so moved by the violent motion
of the humor that it may as it were boil, and by the pain be attracted unto the
part affected, and so concur as a Joint Cause of the Gout, and may possibly
likewise augment the Malady) and that moreover a Fever be threatened as near at
hand, or else if it shall accompany it; then in this case (if the Patients
strength will bear it) Blood-letting is to be instituted, that so the afflux
unto the part affected may be diminished, and that that somenteth and adds
sewel unto the approaching Fever may be withdrawn, and yet notwithstanding so
that there be not too great a quantity of the Blood evacuated. But if there
shall be no danger at al threatened by the abounding of the Blood, or that also a
phlegmatic humor abounds, Venesection is in this case rather hurtful than any
ways usesul and profitable, in regard that then by the evacuation of the Blood
the Spirits may be dissipated and the Native heat wasted; whereupon the heat in
the part affected may be so weakened, that it may not be able to overcome the
humors in the part affected, and so easily to scatter them; and hence it is
that the Patients are longer ere they can recover their strength and health:
yea and sometimes also there are by this means hard knobs and knots generated in
the Joints. And if all or most part of the Joints be affected, then the
basilique Vein (either in the right or left Arm) is to be opened. But if one
only Joint be affected, then the opposite Vein is to be opened. As for example,
if the Joints in the right Arm be affected, the Vein in the left Arm is to be
opened: and so on the contrary. If the right Foot be troubled with this grief,
then the Vein of the right Arm is to be opened; if the left Foot, then the Vein
in the Arm is to be opened on the same side. For this is more commodious, than
to open the Vein in the Foot of the opposite side: for by that former
Venesection the fluent humors are drawn back; whereas by this latter they are
only derived unto some other part. And the like is to be done if the pain be in
the Hip.

Venesection in the Arm (in the Sciatica pain) being premised for derivation, a
Vein may afterward very fitly be opened in the Ham, or near unto the interior
Anckle (or also the exterior) in the Vein there appearing, which (by reason of
the great benefit it brings unto the sick Person, if it be then, and that in
due time opened) they call the Ischiadick or Seratick Vein, which (and that very
often) alone cures this Affect. But yet for the most part it is opened in the
pained Thigh; although that Platerus writes, that upon the opening of a Vein
also in the sound and unpained Thigh very great benefit has followed
thereupon, and that all the pain has thereby been suddenly and unexpectedly
taken away.

But in regard of the urgency of the Malady, and that the Flux comes very
speedily, therefore even forthwith (if there be occasion) Venesection is to be
instituted, and as much of the Blood as is needful (if the strength of the
Patient will bear it) to be taken forth at once opening of the Vein. But if the
Patients strength will not bear nor allow of a more large evacuation of the
Blood all at once; then at several times, and by intervals so much of the Blood
is to be drawn forth as may answer unto the Bodies fullness thereof.
Cuppingglasses, and Leeches.
Instead of this Venefection Cupping-glasses may also be applied, which are
wont to be affixed (in the very first beginning of the Pains) unto the sound
opposite part with Scarification. And so likewise Leeches applied in the
accustomed places for the Hemorrhoids bring some kind of benefit unto the sick
Person by their drawing forth the Blood.

Purgation.
These Revulsions by the Evacuation of the Blood being thus made, Purgation.
purging is then next of all to be appointed unto the Patient; touching which
although there be some that think otherwise (as we shall afterward further show
you in the 11. Question) yet for the most part it is very fitly and
successfully administered. But it is instantly to be ordained (even in the very
beginning of the pains, or if occasion be, when they are suspected as nigh at
hand) before such time as by the said pains, as also by restlessness and want
of sleep; or by the augmentation of the Fever the strength be too much
impaired; neither need we here to expect any Concoction, or use any preparation
before; which most of the Physicians of former Agee were wont to do, who first
of all made use of Lenitives, and then Secondly, Preparatives (or Digestives as
they calthem) for some certain days; and Lastly, of Purgers that draw the
humors from the Joints. For even then when the humors have already before been
in their motion, and are become thin, and that Nature her self endeavoreth the
separation of them, as burdensome to her, from the good Blood, (and that there
is cause to fear left that, as we said before, ere ever any such things as
these can be done and finished the humors may rush unto the Joints, and that by
pain and want of rest the strength be too much dejected, and that a Fever
following thereupon forbid a Purgation) even then the Purgation is forthwith to
be instituted. And the exhibition of one only Purge does for the most part less
hurt and offend the stomach than those so often repeated digestive Potions,
which resolve and weaken the Stomach, so that the Crudities being afterward
augmented, there is caused a greater afflux of humors unto the Joints.

Altering Medicaments.
Yet nevertheless, Alterers.
if the humors be over-hot and sharp, they may be attempered by Broths altered
by Cichory, Endive, Sowthistle, Purslane, Sorrel, and Medicaments made out of
these: neither are we to omit the administering of the Conserve of Roses with
the species Diatrion santalon, it being of singular use in the altering of the
humors. As,

Take Conserve of Roses three ounces, Spec. Diatrion sant. one dram, Red Coral
one scruple, and with the Syrup of Pomegranates make an Electuary. Or,

Take Margarites prepared one dram, Red Coral prepared, and all the Sanders, of
each one dram and half, Red Roses one dram, the Bone taken out of the Staggs
heart one Scruple, and make a Powder. Or else with Sugar dissolved in Rose
Water make little Ro^^s.

But now as touching Purgation, we are to advise you in these two things
especially. First, that a fit time be made choice of (as we gave notice before)
and that the Purgation be not too long deferred. For if dready the whole humor
be flown in unto the Joints, it is easily called back. And there^^^s, that the
humor which is now ready to flow into the Joints may be turned (...) the ^elly
and by it be evacuated presently in the very beginning of the Paroxysm ((...)
also so soon ^s ever we do but suspect it to be nigh at hand) the Purgation is
to be ocdaine^, and ad^^isired; for by this means the humor that is now
flowing, and that which was after toss^^, i^ evacuated by convenient places,
and hindered that it rush not to the part affected, and the increase of the pain
and swelling is hereby prevented; and so that which has already flown in unto
the part affected is easily dissolved. And experience it self testifies that
this kind of Cure has profited very many. And so Petrus Bayrus writes of
himself, that he himvelf being by tour men carried to the Close Stool. after
that he had four times eased his Belly (having before taken his own
Caryocostin. Electuary) he was freed from all his pains; and that he could then
go without help from any other.

And then Secondly, It is to be considered, by what Medicaments the Purgation
is to be inftituted and begun. Some think that we ought to abftain from the
stronger sort of Medicaments, and to make use only of those that are more mild
and gentle (or of the stronger in the smallest quantity) because that a strong
purge may draw store of humors from the more ignoble and external parts unto
the more noble; and so it may sometimes happen that some of these sick Persons
may by a vehement and strong Purge fall into burning Fevers, as also Fevers
Malignant and Mortal. Which as we willingly grant, and think that the humors
that were ho^ before are not by vehement Purgers to be more inflamed; and that
the motion of Nature is not altogether to be disturbed: so also on the other
hand we conceive that great care ought to be taken, that the humors be not only
stirred and moved up and down in the Veins, and not wholly drawn forth, and
sufficiently evacuated. Which when it happens, they afterward rush with a
greater violence unto the part affected, as unto the which they are withal
attracted by the pain. And therefore in the beginning of the Paroxysm, or when
it is nigh at hand, we ought to make choice of Medicaments that are somewhat
stronger than ordinary; and yet notwithstanding such as do no way offend the
Stomach. For (as we said before) if we make use of those that are too gentle
and weak in their operation, the humors are then only moved up and down in the
Body, and nothing worth speaking of is evacuated; whereupon there is afterward
a greater Conflux unto the part affected.

But now, that during the purgation there may be no Conflux unto the part
affected, and that the Humor being moved by the Purgation may not rush unto the
part affected, this we ought carefully to prevent; and it is done by placing
the part affected in a higher place in the Bed, until the Purgation shall be
fully (...); or (which is the more sure and certain way) by imposing a
defensive Medicament (after the administering of the purge) upon the head of the
part affected. As for example, if the pain be in the Hand, the defensive is to
be placed upon the Shoulder; and this may be made and provided of the Flowers
of Roser, Pom^granate flowers. Roots of Bistort, Tormentill, the greater
Consound, the Rinds of Pomegra^ate^. ^ole-Armenick, mingled with the white of
an Egg, and Rose water, or Vinegar. A^d^ner this Cataplasm being dried, and so
made hard, may not excite Pains, and thereby further provoke the flux, a little
of the Countesses Unguent, or of the Oil of (...) Omphacine, is to be added
thereto. Or else instead of the Cataplasm, a swathe that is long enough may be
wet in posset (in which Oak-moss, Red Roses, or other Astringents even now
mentioned have been boiled) and drawn over the upper part; as for instance, (in
the Gout of the Feet) upon the part above the Knees. And those Defensives are
to be continued so long as the Purgation lasts, yea for the whole day, as we
see occasion.

But now we cannot in general desine, with what kind of Medicaments this
purgation is to be performed, in regard of the great variety there is in
Bodies. For although the Humor (the nighest cause of the Gout) be wheyish,
Salt, and Tartarous; yet nevertheless this very Humor is in diverse Bodies
constituted after a different manner; and hurrieth along with it other Humors
also that abound in the Body. Yea and in one and the same Body the same
Medicaments are not always fit and proper, because that the stare of the Body
is not evermore one and the same. And therefore the Physician ought to be
present with the Patient, when he prescribes such like Remedies.

Now for the Evacuating of Serous Humors, and Choleric Ichores, such as these
following ought to be provided, viz. Sir. of Roses solutive, de Spina Cervma,
(commonly called the Domestic Syrup) Manna, Mechoacan, Seen, the Seeds of wild
Saffron, and the compounds from any of these; as also Electuar. Diacatholic.
Triphera Persica, de Succo Rosarum. And so likewise in the stronger kind of
Medicaments, those are of special use that are made of Hermodactiles; and among
them the Caryocostine Electuary of Bayrus; of which we shall anon make surther
mention, when we come to speak of the Preservation from the Gout. Or,

Take The Choycest Turbith, and Hermodactiles, of each three drams, Diagridium
one dram and half, Ginger and Mastick, of each a dram; Sugar six drams; make a
Powder hereof; the Dose whereof is one dram, or a dram and half, with flesh
broth.

Or, Else let the Patient make use of the Pills of Rhases, which (as he writes
in his 9. B. to Mansor. Chap. 90.) will presently make and enable those that
keep their Beds to Rise, stir and walk up and down; and they are in this manner
to be Compounded.

Take Aloes one dram, Scammeny half a half penny weight, red Roses a double
quantity to the former, Hermodact. half a dram. Make pills thereof, and give
them all at once, and yet not without regard unto the strength of the Patient.

But now, although the serous or wheyish Humor be the nighest cause of the
Gout; yet notwithstanding because that this Humor does also violently carry
along with it other vicious Humors in the Body (and especially when the pain
comes) the Physician therefore ought to be present with the Patient, when he
is to prescribe such various purging Medicaments for the present occasion of
the sick Person.

Vomitories.
A Vomit is likewise very useful in such as are accustomed thereunto; A Vomit.
and seeing that it may Evacuate the Humor by a shorter way, there is no such
cause to fear the rushing of the Humors unto the part affected.

And yet not withstanding we dare not here give such strong Vomitories that may
evacuate the Humors out of the very Veins; but it will be sufficient if such be
administered that do evacuate the first ways and the parts near unto the
Stomach. For if there be many vicious Humors residing about the Stomach,
Spleen, and the hollow of the Liver, and in the places near thereunto, it may
very easily come to pass, that these Humors being stird up and down throughout
the whole Body, they may both penetrate unto the Veins, and rush unto the part
affected. And purges may be likewise appointed unto the sick person after his
vomiting; yea and if one purgation will not serve the turn, it is again a
Second time to be repeated. Franciscus India (in his 2 B. of the Gout, and the
Third Chapt.) does here wonderfully extol a Vomitory that he makes of Butchers
Broom, a sufficient quantity of the powder thereof, given with the defilled
Water of unripe Oranges a little warm; which (as he writes) can with special
benefit unto the sick person Evacuate both the Choler and the Phlegm, not only
upwards, but downwards also.

Sudorificks, or Sweaters.
The Body being sufficiently purged, Sweaters.
we are to endeavor that sweat may be provol^ed, either of its own accord, or
else by administering of Medicaments: For (as Crain writes truly, in his 24.
Cons.) if the sweat be at all detained within, and hindered from coming forth,
(especially if the Patient has been accustomed thereunto) it will not be long
ere a fit of the Gout come: yea and without all doubt, the Paroxysm will be
much augmented and provoked, if in it the sweat be detained, and if the
remainders of the wheyish Humor in the Veins be not discussed and Scattered;
and on the contrary, the Paroxysm will be the shorter, if the Serum or Whey be
by sweat dispersed. But since that in the first invasion of the Gout there is
as it were a certain kind of boiling of the Humors, and that for the most part
there is likewise present a Fever, Sweaters of what kind they must be.
in this regard hot sweaters (such as are Treacle, Mithridate, and the like)
are here scarcely fit and convenient, because that by them the Humors may be
the more inflamed. But yet Harts-born (either crude, or prepared without any
burning) may be very fitly exhibited, either alone, or with the Water of
Carduus Benedictus. And so likewise Diaphoretick Antimony is very useful. But
if the Constitution of the Body, and the disposition of the Humors will bear it,
the Decoction of Sassaphrass, or Sarsaparilla, or Chyna, may be administered;
which yet nevertheless we ought to temper with Succory, Endive, Sowthitle, and
Dandelion or Lions Tooth. But yet al those things that are useful in the
Paroxysms, for the discussing of the Humors either sensibly or insensibly, they
have not all of them their place here in the Cure. And so likewise the
Decoction of the greater Dock, or Burr (in regard that it cutteth, discusseth,
moves sweats and Urms) is very useful; and Forrestus relates that Vastellius,
a Pensioner at Mechlin, when he was forced to keep his Bed by reason of the
pains of his Joints (insomuch that he was not able to move or stir any one
Member) he drank warm Beer in the which there had been boiled the Root of the
greater Dock; which having drunk up, (when he could not be cured by any other
remedies of the Physicians) he made a great deal of white Water, (his Urine
being like Milk) and so was freed from all his pains. Or,

Take Sarsaparilla, one ounce, Sassafras Wood half an ounce, the Root of the
Clove Tree one ounce; Citrine Saunders two drams; Infuse all in three pints of
Water, for twenty four hours, and afterward boil the same; and give of this
Decoction one draught in the morning, either alone, or else with Hearts horn.

Topics.
The Body being thus in a due manner evacuated, Topics.
and the Antecedent cause (that would have augmented the Disease) being once
taken away, we then come to the very moderating of the pain, and the taking
away of the Containing Cause of the pain and swelling, and so unto the Topics.
But if Topics shall presently be administered, before those Universal and
General Remedies shall have been first made use of, the Patient shall receive
from thence far more hurt then benefit. For either the matter which Nature
endeavors to thrust forth to the Joints is driven back unto the more inward
parts (from whence very grievous Symptoms are excited:) or else it is impacted
into the Joints, and so the pain is exasperated: or else the part is
effeminated and made weak, and loosened; and so the flux is increased. Which
being not commonly taken notice of, and Topics being oftentimes most
unseasonably and without any caution at al administered, the sick persons do for
the most part receive more hurt then good from them; and from hence it was that
the common and received opinion had its first original, to wit, that the best
course is, to administer nothing at al unto the pained Joints. And the truth
is, that it is fir becter to apply nothing call (but to commit the whole
business to Nature,) then to make use of such Medicaments as are altogether
unfit and improper.

Now the Topics that are applied, they respect either the pain only, or else
withal the Cause of the pain, to wit, the Humor that now and formerly has
flown in, exciting both a pain and a swelling.

Mitigaters of Pain.
The Pain in this Disease for the most part is a most grievous Symptom,
Mitigaters of Pain.
and which is most troublesome to the sick parties, and which they most of all
Curse and Bann, (as Lucian has it in the beginning almost of his Tragopodagra)
and therefore also it is that they most of all desire the removal thereof. And
indeed it is altogether necessary that the Physician should have regard
thereunto, because that if it be too great, it causes a restlessness,
dejecteth the strength, and by attracting the Humors it augmenteth the Malady,
and so deservedly draws our care unto it, for its removal; (as Gaien in the
12. of his Method, C. 1.) and thereupon it shows, and points us unto the
asswaging thereof by Anodynes. Now Anodynes or Mitigaters of pain have likewise
this Good and benefit going along with them, to wit, that by loosning the parts
they make that the Humor that before flowed only unto the interior parts about
the Joints, comes now also to flow and be diffused unto the Ambient and fleshy
parts. And hence it is that the pains in the Gout, before the swelling of the
part, are most Vehement and Intolerable; and that so soon as the part affected
beings to swel, they are much Mitigated.

But now these Anodynes of what kind they are, we have told you elsewhere, (in
our Institutions) to wit, such as mollify and loosen the part affected, and
yet do not discuss the very Cause it self. And here they may be provided of
Goats Milk newly drawn out of their Dugs, as also white bread and Milk,
together with the Yelks of Eggs, and a little Saffron; as likewise of the
Leaves of Marshmallows, Mallows, Colewort, or Cabbage, laid upon the place
affected as hot as the Patient can well endure them; as also of Mallow Seeds,
Seeds of Marshmallows, Quinces, Fleabane, (and especially the Mucillages of
them) Cassia newly drawn out of the Pipe with the Decoction or Water of
Nightshade; which (as Avicen tells us) is the best Remedy that can be; unto
which (if there flow any hot Humors thereunto) we may add some of the Oil of
Roses, or Rose water; but if the flowing Humors be cold, then we are to add
thereto the Oil of Camomil: and instead of Cassa out of the Pipe, we may
likewise make use of the Rob of the Elder Tree; of white bread and Wine; and
indeed if the Humor be more hot, red Wane; but if cold, or betwixt both, then
white Wine with the powder of Camomile flowers and Oil of Roses; of Cheese new
made of sheeps Milk, and imposed upon the pained part, and often changed; of
fresh-made Ox or Cow dung in the first beginning of the Spring, as also the
Water that is distilled out of it. Amost useful Remedy also is the Mucillage of
Fleabane Seed extracted with the Water of Roses or Night shade; unto which
sometimes a little Vinegar may be added; and this Medicament is by Serapton and
others very much commended.

In the very first beginning of the Disease, Solenander takes the thick stalks
of Hendock, and sils them with Salt, and then stops them with Clay or Paste,
and puts them in a moist place that the Salt may dissolve; which liquor he
keeps in a glass, and with Clothes applies it unto the pained part.

And he oftentimes also made use of this Cataplasm:

Take Mallows, the whole Herb, Root and all, cut it into very small pieces; and
boil it in equal parts of Wine and Vinegar, in a new Earthen Vessel, until a
third part be wasted away; and then mingle therewith the thicker Bran of Rye,
as much as will suffice for the making of a Cataplasm, and apply this hot unto
the grieved part.

Forrestus relates, that he knew one that added hereunto a little Barley
flower, and that of the Water Lentile, boiled in Milk with Camomile flowers;
and so reducing them into the form of a Cataplasm, he put them upon the part
affected with miraculous success, as one could judge no other of it. And here
also very useful is the Yelk of an Egg reduced into the form of a Liniment with
the Oil of Violets; and so is also the Water of the Sperm or seed of Frogs,
which perhaps have in them some kind of Narcotick quality. Adrianus Spigelius
writes, that among the Moravians there is in use a very notable Remedy, and
noble experiment (for the speedy cuting of the Gout-pains) to wit, the Water of
Meadow Sweet, distilled with its Roots and Flowers; and this water is likewise
in frequent use among the Silefians. And it is also very convenient to foment
the part affected with the Decoction of Parietary or Pellitory of the Wall.

And very many there be likewise that make use of Oils and Fats. But here we
are to give you this Caution (and good cause there is also for it) that these
Oils and Fats are warily and carefully to be made use of. For in regard that
the Gout has often some kind of alliance with the Erysipelas as to the cause
thereof; and that it is a thing generally well known, how that all fat things
that stop up the pores in the Erysipelas do more hurt than benefit; the very
same seems likewise to be feared in the Gout, lest that the Pores being stopped
up by these fats, the humor being detained within, the pain may be augmented;
and this even very experience testifies. And it was related unto me by a
certain honest Neighbor of mine, that he himself in the asswaging of the Gout
pains in his own Body, found nothing to be better than Cheese of Sheeps Milk
new and fresh made, and laid on, but often renewed. For no sooner did the
Cheese begin (being made hot by the heat of the part) to become fat, and to
drop forth butter as it were, but (as he said) his pain was thereupon very much
increased.

Take the Pith of wheaten Bread half a pound, and boil it in as much new Milk
as will serve to make a Cataplasm: and then add of the mucilage of Marshmallow
seeds two ounces, the meal of Linseeds and Fenugreek of each two drams, Powder
of Camomil flowers and Melilote, of each one ounce, Saffron one dram, Oil of
Roses and Camomil, of each half an ounce, and mingle them well together. Or,

Take Milk newly come from the Cow one ounce and half, Crumbs of white Bread
five drams, Barley meal one ounce and half, the common Hermodactyles six drams,
Saffron one dram, Oil of Camomile as much as will suffice, and make hereof a
Cataplasm. Or,

Take white Bread six ounces, Milk as much as will suffice, and mingle them well
at the fire; and then add the Yelks of two Eggs, Electuary of Roses two ounces,
Saffron one scruple, and mingle them. Or,

Take the Meal of Barley, of Beans, of the bitter Vetch Orobus, of each one
ounce, of Linseed six drams, the Powder of Camomile flowers three drams, of
Melilote two drams, of Saffron one scruple; boil them in a sufficient quantity
of the Water of Camomile flowers; then add the Yelks of two Eggs, Oil of
Camomile and Roses of each one ounce, and mingle them. Or,

Take the soft Crumbs of Wheaten Bread one ounce, Powder of the Mullein flowers
two ounces; boil them in Milk; and then add of the flower of Cassia one ounce,
and mingle them. Or,

Take of Linseeds and Fenugreek seeds equal parts of each: let the Mucilage be
drawn out of them with Rose Water; and then add the yelks of two Eggs, and a
little Vinegar; and then sprinkle in Bean Meal, and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Meal of Barley, of Linseed, of Fenugreek, of Beans, Powder of Camomile
flowers, of each half an ounce; Marsh-mallow Roots one ounce, Oil of Roses and
Camomile, of each one ounce and half; Yelks of three Eggs, the Rob of Wine one
ounce, mingle them and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take the flowers of Mulleyn as much as you think fit; infuse them in a
sufficient quantity of Red Wine for two months, and then let them be distilled;
let the place be fomented with the distilled water, and then after anointed
with the Oil or Liquor of Mulleyn flowers that is in the Summer time collected
by the Sunbeams in a Glass close stopped. Or,

Take the young and tender buds of the Hazel Tree; press the Oil out of them
after the same manner as it is wont to be made of Linseed. The Body of it that
remains after the pressing forth of the Oil, let it be burnt; and out of the
Ashes let there be the Salt drawn forth with pure spring water, and let this be
mingled with the aforesaid Oil. The Oil when it is mingled with the Salt, let
it be clarified by pouring and passing it through a Box of Wood (as Painters
are wont to clarify the Oil of Linseed for their own use) and so it becomes a
very excellent Medicament for the mitigating of pains.

But now these very Anodynes themselves may be somewhat varied according to the
quality of the humor; and in a humor that is more hot there may be added some
certain things that are cooling, as Roses, and the Water that comes from them,
Plantane Water, and the like. But in a cold Cause the Flowers of Camomile and
Melilote, Wormwood, Linseed and Fenugreek may be added.

Narcoticks.
If Anodynes be not sufficient for the aforesaid purpose, Narcoticks.
then Narcoticks are to be made use of; which in regard that they bring a
certain kind of numness upon the part, they do not only forth with assuage the
pain; but they likewise (by their heat which they obtain) do also withal
resolve the humors, and so with benefit and safety (and without any danger at
al as it is thought) they may be made use of, as Platerus writes in the 2. B.
of his Practice: and therefore he (as likewise many others have done) much
commends the Leaves of Henbant, and Mand^ake, and Poppy, if while they be new
they be first bruised or boiled, and so laid upon the part: and their Oils are
also very useful; and so is the Juice also that is pressed forth of them and
used for a fomentation; as likewise the Root of Mandtake and Henbane seed
applied together with other things in the form of a Cataplasm. The new and
fresh Leaves likewise of Tobacco, bruised and laid upon the pained part do
assuage the pain. And the same Platerus (as likewise other Authors) have here
recourse unto Opium also, and they mingle it together with other Anodynes; and
unto two ounces of these they add a dram of Opium. And he writes also, that if
it be dissolved in the infusion of the Spirit of Wine alone, or the infusion of
Saffron (four ounces of the yellowest of it) and one scruple of Camphyre with a
dram of Opium, and the part where the pain is be well washed or bathed with the
said Liquor, it is a most efficacious and sovereign Remedy. And so likewise the
Opiate Antidores, as Treacle, Mithridate, Philonium, may be added while they
are new, especially in case the quantity of the Opium may be augmented.

And yet notwithstanding we are not to continue long in the use of these
Opiates, in regard that they are enemies unto the native heat, and Nerves.

And yet nevertheless the same Platerus tells us (in the first B. of his
Practice, Chap. 5. of the burting of the Touch) that he could never find that
the Skin could be made stupid and senseless of pain by any external Narcotick
applied thereunto, albeit (that so he might know somewhat of a certainty) he had
applied a Mass of Opium when he had first softened it, unto the part pained
with the Gout.

But the truth indeed is, that Narcoticks when they are administered do very
easily assuage the pain; but then withal it being so that they hinder the
motion of the humors unto the external parts, they may also very easily cause
some inconvenience, and make the pain longer, since that the pain is wont to
return again in a short time after. As for example.

Take Barley Meal four ounces, the Crumb of Wheaten Bread three ounces, Milk as
much as will suffice: boil them to the consistence of a Cataplasm; and then add
of the Oil of Roses one ounce, the Yelks of three Eggs, Opium one scruple, and
mingle them. Or,

Take the soft pith of white Bread as much as will suffice; pour thereon of
Cream of Tartar a sufficient quantity, and then add Saffron one dram,
Frankincense half a dram, Powder of Earthworms two drams, the Yelks of four
Eggs, Henbane and white Poppyseed, of each three drams; let them boil in a
double Vessel for half an hour, and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Leaves of Henbane three handfuls, the Berries of Nightshade one ounce;
let them be boiled til they be soft, and then bruised to a Mash; then strew
upon it one ounce and half of Barley Meal, and a little Oil of Roses, and so
make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Barley Meal, the soft Crumb of white Bread, of each half a handful; Leaves
of Henbane, Mallows, Violets, of each one handful; Flowers of Camomile, Rindes
of white Poppy, of each half a handful; Oil of Earthworms, and Poppy, of each
one ounce, and make a Cataplasm. If you think fit you may also add of Opium and
Saffron, of each one dram.

Or, Take Roots of Mand^ake, and Leaves of Henbane of each as much a^ you think
will suffice; boil and bruise them all to a Mash, and then add of Barley Meal,
and Bean meal, with Oil of Roses, a sufficient quantity of each, and make a
Cataplasm, Or,

Take Crude Vitriol two pound, Spirit of Wine three pints, the Water of the
Elder Tree one Quart. Mingle them all well together in a Glass Vessel well
Luted, and then putting to the Alembick, and the Receiver (in which there may be
put the Seeds of Henbane bruised two ounces, the flowers of Mullein, Elder, and
Camomile, of each two hand fuls;) let there be a destillation, by degrees,
until the Glass be Fire hot. After the distillation, let the spirit with the
phlegm be separated from the Seeds and flowers; and so let it be kept in a Glass
for use. Or,

Take Leaves of Henbane one handful, Nightshade, Sengreen, the Heads of Garden
Poppyes, of each half a handful, Mandrake Roots one ounce, Flowers of Camomile
and Mulleyn, of each one pugil, Seed of Fleabane one ounce and half, of Henbane
one dram: Let them be boiled in Milk for a Fomentation; then let the Remainders
be bruised to a mash; and then add of the Meal of Lin-seed one ounce, Barley
Meal and Oil of Roses, of each two ounces; and make a Cataplasm.

And there are some also that refer hither the washing of the grieved part with
cold Water; and indeed this they do by the authority of Hippocrates, who in his
5 Sect. 25. Aphorism, writes in this manner: The Gout pains of the Joints, as
also Convulsions, and many more of these kind of pains are lessened and taken
away by the large affusion of cold Water, and plentiful pouring of it upon the
part that is in pain: for a Moderate stupifying and benumming removes the
pain. And so likewife Donat. Antonius Ferrus (in his 2 Tract of the Gout, Chap.
9.) writes that he had oftentimes had experience of this Remedy; and that when
all other Remedies were to no purpose, he betook himself unto the pouring of
cold Water upon the part, as unto his last shift, and that the pain was
forthwith assuaged thereby. And the very truth is, that it cannot indeed be at
all denied, that cold Water being poured forth upon the pained part does not
only drive back, but likewise produce a kind of stupidity and benummedness, and
thereby assuage the pain: but it is to be feared lest that by this means the
innate heat of the part be destroyed, and so a weakness brought upon the part,
by reason of which the Malady may afterward be rendered more grievous, and
moreover the Humor may be impacted into the part, and there condensed and
thickened; or else happily by this violent Repulse the Humors may be made to rush
unto the more inward parts.

Repellers, or Medicaments that drive back.
But now as for Topics, Repellers.
(that are directed unto the Cause) and in the first place, touching Repelling
Medicaments we say, that although they are by some commended; yet alone they
have here scarcely any place at all. For seeing that Nature her self has
ordained this Motion, and that she endeavors to drive forth the vicious
Humors from the more internal unto the external parts that are less noble, if
this motion be hindered, and the Humors driven back again unto the internal and
more noble and principal parts, this cannot be done without the extreme hazard
of the life; and hereupon there will arise the worst and most dangerous
Symptoms, that will not cease, unless Nature again expel forth the vicious
Humor unto some other Joint.

And moreover, when the pain is a little mitigated, in regard that the matter
is diffused unto the external parts that are about the Joint, if by the
Repellers it be driven back unto the internal parts, the pain happens then to
be increased; and hence it is also, that very many cannot so much as endure the
cold Air from without (neither yet sometimes the external Air although it be not
so very cold) but that there is a Necessity of covering the affected Member, if
they expect to have their pain Mitigated. And furthermore if the matter has
already flown out of the part into the Joint, by the use of Medicaments that
drive back and Cool it is made more thick and impacted into the part, and so
the Malady rendered more difficult to be cured. But yet never the less if by the
sudden and overgreat afflux of the humors (especially such as are more hot) the
pain be much increased even in the very first beginning of the sit, (in so much
that it seems to call for all the Care, and to require that all the means that
are used may be for the removal thereof, and that therefore we have a mind to
moderate it, and somewhat to drive it back) we may then indeed make use of
Repellers, but not of them alone and by themselves, but mingled with Anodynes,
Venefection and Purgation having gone before. Like as on the Contrary, we are
not in the beginning to make use of those Medicaments that are over loosening,
since that they help forward the afflux of the Humors; but we ought in the
first place to make use of those Medicaments that do somewhat stop and stay the
afflux of the Humors. And therefore we may then lawfully add Lettice, Sengreen,
Purflaine, Violets, Plantane, Roses, (and such Compounds as are made out of
them) as also what Vinegar we think fit. As,

Take Barley Meal three ounces; boil it in Oxycrate; then add the Yelks of two
Eggs, Saffron one scruple, and mingle them. Or,

Take Mucillage of the Seed of Fleabane, extracted with Rose Water, two ounces;
Mucillage of Marsh Mallow Seeds one ounce, Barley Meal as much as will suffice,
the yelk of one Egg, and so make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take The water of the Sperm of Frogs four ounces, Water of Nightshade, of the
flowers of Elder, and of Plantane, of each two ounces; Camphire half a scruple:
and mingle them well together.

If you think fit, the Mucillage of the Seed of Fleabane, and of Quinces, of
each one ounce, may be added. Or,

Take Juice of Henbane, Sengreen, Lettice, of each two ounces, Barley Meal one
ounce, the Yelk of one Egg, and Oil of Roses two ounces. Mingle them well
together. Or,

Take Red Roses ^ne handful, the Meal of Fenugreek Seed, Beans, and Barley, of
each one ounce, Red Sanders one dram and half, Camomile flowers one pugil; when
they are boiled and thoroughly bruised, you are to add the Yelks of two Eggs,
Vinegar four ounces, Oil of Roses as much as will suffice: and make a
Cataplasm. Or.

Take Water of Nightshade, of Plantane, of the Sperm of Frogs, of each two
ounces, Oil of Roses and Camomile, of each one ounce, Cows Milk three ounces,
the Meal of Beans, Marshmallows, and Barley, of each one ounce, or as much as
will suffice, Saffron one scruple, the yelks of two Eggs, Smallage two
scruples; Make a Cataplasm.

Some there are that steep Harts-born burnt and prepared in the Water of
Mulleyn flowers; or else they boil it in the same Water; and in the streyning
they wet and soak Linen Clothes, and these they lay upon the part that is
pained. Or,

Take Mulleyn new and fresh gathered six pound, Wine one Quart: Let them be
Macerated for three whole days, and then afterward let them be destilled. Or,

Take The Flowers of Mulleyn, and fill a Glass b^ttle full of them, and then
stopping the month thereof very close, set it in the Sun: for so they dissolve
as it were into a liquor: wherein you are to wet a Linen Cloth, and lay it
upon the part affected, for the asswaging of the pain.

If you judget sitter to make use of Oils; Then,

Take Frogs five of them in Number, Earthworms washed in Wine three ounces;
boil them in the Oil of Roses, and strain them.

Discussing Medicaments.
But now when the force and violence of the fluxion is once past and gone,
Discussives.
and the part become swollen, then those things are withal to be mingled which
do call forth the Humor, and gently discuss the same and so take away some part
of the Cause. But now here Physitiaus are wont (for the most part of them) to
be very long and Tedious in reckoning up, and distinguishing the several
Medicaments; which of them are fit and proper in a hot Cause, and which of them
when the Cause is cold; yea and which of them are most convenient for all kind
of Humors. But although we deny not but that we are in some kind of manner to
have respect unto the Condition of the Humor that flows in unto the Joints;
yet nevertheless our chief and main Care ought to be, that the ferous and sharp
wheyish Humor (which is the nighest and most principal Cause of the pain,) may
be called forth of the more deep and close parts in the Joints unto the
external parts, and that they be insensibly discussed; and yet that this may
the more conveniently be so done, we may likewise (as we said but now) have
some regard unto those Humors that the aforesaid serous and sharp Humor
forcibly draws along with it, and which by Reason of the pain are together
attracted to the part that is pained, and which are very commonly taken for the
highest and most immediate Cause of the Gout. Yea and moreover that very serous
Humor it self (the prime and principal Cause of this Evil) is in some more, and
in others less hot. And therefore if the flowing Humor be more hot, then the
discussing Medicaments ought to be so ordered, that they may indeed gently
disperse the Humor; but yet so that they give no occasion at all for any new
afflux. And such a like hot Humor, inregard that it is withal moveable and
thin, is easily discussed; neither needs it any stronger Medicaments. But if
the Humor be less hot, or somewhat cold, then we may very safely administer
Medicaments that are more hot. Neither will there be any Cause to fear that
then a new flux may easily be excited; and therefore for the dispersing of such
a like Humor there are necessarily required such Medicaments as are more hot
then ordinary.

But now with what Medicaments that wheyish, and (as it is so called by the
Chemists) Tartarous Humore is to be drawn forth and discussed, we are here (and
that for very good Reason) diligently to make inquiry. For we have elsewhere
told you (viz. in our Tract of Chymic. Confil. and Diss. Chap. 15.) that the
Medicaments ought in their own kind to be like unto the Cause. For there is not
any thing that suffers from every thing; neither is there any thing that may
be united unto every thing. Gum Arabic, and Tragacanth, and the Gum of Cherry
Trees are dissolved by Water, because of the near alliance and agreement in
their Natures; but but so is not Sulphur, and other things of a Sulphurous
Nature, and those things that are Oily. Sulphur is dissolved by Oil, but not by
Aqua Fortis, although the said Water is able to dissolve silver, and other
Metals. The hands when they are all foul with Pitch or Turpentine are not to be
made clean with Water, but with Oil, or some thing else that is fat. In
burnings we use not to administer cold Water; but Linseed Oil, Vernish, and the
like (that may draw forth that fire and burning) are to be applied. And so in
the Erysipelas (or other wise called Rosa) we ought not to impose those things
that are fat, and Oily, but ley tempered with Oil; and Soap that is dissolved
in Elder Water, and the Like; which do not at al shut the pores, but yet
nevertheless they draw forth and discuss that subtle and hot Humor. And the
very same is the case in the Gout; and since that it has its Original not from
a Watery Humor, neither yet also from that which is Oily or Sulphurous (as the
Chemists speak) but from a Humor that is sharp and Salt, for the drawing forth
and dissipating of this Humor, those things that contain in them a volatile and
flitting Salt are rather to be administered, then those things that are fat and
Oily. And experience has already taught many, that the Gout pains are
increased by such things as are fat. And hence it is that the Chemists do so
much commend (and not without cause) Salt Armoniack, oftentimes sublimated,
dissolved in Wine, or some other convenient liquor, and so imposed upon the
pained part. Others commend the Salt of Urine, in like manner dissolved in
Wine, or some other liquor. And whereas Adrian Spigelius writes that he saw
when a Man's Urine (being kept till it was Stale) was laid upon the part
affected (the pains as yet abiding, and continuing even in their height) and
that it was wonderfully beneficial in giving ease; and how much rather then
must the Salt of Urine perform this? Yea and there are some that use likewise
other Salts to evacuate the aforefaid Humor. And I my self know also one that
was wont to administer the spirit of Salt tempered with other liquors, And very
fitly may it be tempered with the Water of Meadowsweet; for being then with a
Feather laid upon the part in pain, it extracteth the Humor in such a manner,
as that it may even seem to exhale in the likeness of a Vapor. Yea some there
are that commend also those things that are wont to be made use of for the
causing of redness in any part, and the raising of blisters when there is
occasion; and these they mingle with Anodynes. Neither are these things the
inventions of the latter Physicians, and the Modern Chemists; but that plants
abounding with a volatile and sharp Salt were heretofore in use likewise with
the Ancients, for the curing of the Gout, we are taught even by that one plant
which we call Lepidium or Sciatica Cresses; whose Roots (as they write) being
bruised, and mingled with old Grease, are (with singular benefit) applied unto
those that are troubled with these pains of the Gout; as it appears out of
Dioscorides, and Damocrates (whose verses upon this subject we may read in
Galen his 10. B. of the Composition of Medicaments according to the place) and
Aetius, Tetrab. 3. Sermon. 4. Chapter 2. and others. And as touching Mustard Seed,
Alexand. Tralleanus writes, That he knew a certain person who by the use only
of the said Mustard seed mingled with dried Figs (in extraordinary great pains
arising from a cold Humor) was freed from the said pain of the Gout. Some
commend the wild Radish thoroughly bruised; and I my self have seen that it has
done good to many. If we fear its Acrimony, and that from thence some heat may
be excited, we may then first boil it a little.

The Liquor of Snails is likewise very much extolled by some: as,

Take Snails taken forth of their Shells, in number twenty five: the berries of
Danewort or Dwarf-Elder, and Salt, of each as much as will suffice. These being
put into the Alembick in a clean Vessel with holes through the bottom thereof,
let there be a Vessel put under it that may receive the Liquor as it
distilleth; in the which you are to wet clothes, and apply them unto the part
affected.

This Suffumigation is likewise much commended.

Take Lign. Aloes, yellow Amber, Frankincense, Gum Juniper, Henbane seed,
Styrax Calamite, Gum Tacamabaca, of each one dram; Powder them grossly, and
cast the powder upon live coals of fire; and so for half an hour let the part
affected receive the smoke hereof. Quercetan (in the seventh Chapter of his
Pharmacop. restit.) has four Waters, al good against the Gout. The first is
this:

Take Water of the Sperm of Frogs, of white Mullein, and Sallow, of each a
quart and half a pint: the Urine of a Boy that drinks Wine, three pints:
Treacle new and fresh two drams and half: Vitriol, Salt dissolved, and Alum,
of each four ounces: Let them be distilled (till they be dry) upon the Embers:
then add Salt of Vitriol one ounce and half: Camphire and Saffron, of each two
drams, and mingle them. Let Linen clothes be thoroughly wet in this Water, and
applied unto the grieved part, and be very often renewed.

The Second Water is this:

Take Salt, Urine of a Child, of each as much as you think fit, and then distill
them.

The third is this,

Take Leaves and Flowers of green Elder, of each one pound: let them be well
bruised and macerated in a sufficient quantity of Wine (for three days
together) in Balneo, and afterward let them be distilled.

The fourth Water is this:

Take Spirit of Wine rectified one quart; the purest Honey one pound: Let them
be distilled in Balneo; and let two Liquors be gathered from hence severally
and apart, to wit, One watery, and the other Sulphurous. Add unto the
remainders, of whole Saffron one ounce and half; Venice Turpentine two ounces;
Tartar calcined to a whiteness half a pound; Salt one ounce; the phlegm of
Vitriol four ounces; Lie made of the tender shoots of the Vine two pints: Let
them be macerated for twenty four hours, and then distilled till they be dry.
Unto the feces that remain add the first Water, and let them be distilled. And
at length mingle together all the Liquors, and distill them in a Balneum where
they may evaporate.

Andreas Libavius (in the first part of his Apocalypse. Hermet. Cap. 8.)
prefers before all others that Water in which Brass and Iron have been
extinguished, and afterward Mercurius vitae has therein been macerated. Or,

Take venice Soap one ounce and half; Spirit of Wine, Water of Elder Flowers,
of each two ounces, and mingle them. Or,

Take River Crevishes eight in number; Juniper grains one handful; Myrrh and
Frankincense, of each one ounce; the best Wine one pint, let them be distilled.
Or,

Take Mastick, Frankincense, Myrrh, Ammoniacum, and Bdellium, of each two
ounces; Vitriol one pound; Honey a quart, Tartar an ounce and half; Spirit of
Wine the best, four pints: let them be distilled according to art.

Solenander (in his 24. Consil. Sect. 5.) writes, That he knew an old man that
was much troubled with the Gout, who made for himself a Medicine in this
manner. When there was a swelling, and a real pain, and the place red, he took
Salt, Cinders, the Urine of a Child, and Vinegar; in these (well mingled
together, and stirted up and down) he thoroughly moistened a white woollen
cloth, and then squeezing it he applied it now and then unto the part that was
pained. And when he had now by this means in great part assuaged the pain, and
the disease declining, he boiled live Sulphur, and the powder of white
Hellebore in the Oil of Linseed, and with it he anointed the places affected.
And the same Solenander writes also that this following was known to benefit
many that made trial thereof. There grows unto the Roots of the Oak (in the
Autumn for the most part) a certain kind of Mushrom that is red and tender, and
proportionably big enough, according to the growth of the Tree, which he
therefore calls Hypodrion (the same no doubt that we have made mention of
above in our 3. B. of Practice, Part. 2. Sect. 2. Chap. 7. touching the
Dysentery:) this when he has cut it into many small thin slices, with Salt
finely poudered he puts it into an Earthen pot; so sprinkling the aforesaid
Salt that every laying of the several pieces may receive some thereof betwixt
each other: he then puts them deep in the Earth for certain days; and as for
the brine which at length he finds melted in the pot, he gathers it all
together, and this he keeps to anoint the joints when they are pained. But
because that it vehemently dries and discusseth, and wonderfully strengthens
the part that is made loose by the Humor, he tells us therefore, that it is best
to use it in the very first beginning of the pain, and before it has gotten
unto any height; or else in the end and declining of the Paroxysm, to consume
the matter, and to add strength and firmness unto the part; and more especially
if there be now and then interposed a fomentation and washing of the parts with
the Decoction of Mulleyn, Wormwood, Camomile, Bears-ears or French Cowslips,
Sage, Ground Pine or Herb Ivy, Mugwort, Rosemary, Melilot, and others of this
kind, that have a power to cut, cleanse, discuss, meanly to dry, and strengthen.

And this Plaster is likewise very much commended.

Take Gum Caranna one ounce and half, Gum Tacamahaca six drams, the Oxycreccum
Emplaster, nine ounces, White Wax five drams, Powder of the greater Consound
two drams, With the Oil of Camomile make an Emplaster according to Art; which
being applied unto the pained part does greatly draw forth the matter, and ease
the pain.

And of such Kind of Medicaments as these there are many more in great
abundance to be found in Platerus his second Book of Practice, and elsewhere in
others.

And yet notwithstanding I think it not amiss, here to give you notice of this,
that in the applying of all manner of Topics we are diligently to heed the
signs of those that benefit, and those that hurt and offend. For albeit the
nighest Cause of the Gout be a wheyish, salt, and tartarous humor (or call it by
what name soever you please) yet nevertheless it is not for nothing that the
Chemists give us notice (as we shall further show you below in the sixth
Question) that there are in the Earth and Plants diverse kinds of Salts; or as
Platerus speaks, that the humor the Cause of the Gout is mingled with the
Ichores of the excrementitious humors, which render the same more vehement and
violent. And hence it is, that not only in diverse and several Persons, but
likewise in one and the same Person, according to his several ages, the nature
of the pain is different, and not evermore one and the same.

And then lastly, for the discussing of the Relics and Remainders there may
be made fomentations of Mugwort, Organy, Wormwood, Betony, Calamint, Flowers of
Arabian Staechas, Lavender, Camomile, Melilote, boiled in Wine and Water, which
withal strengthen the part. But here Crato does rightly advise us (in his
Consil. 240) that we we^ the Feet as little as may be, but that the vapor be
only received by the Feet. And indeed such like fomentations are most
convenient. And yet notwithstanding if there be a few more Plants boiled in the
Water, and a little salt added; or else if a Lixivium, or Ley, be poured
thereunto, there is no discommodity to be expected from the humectation; or if
we do at all fear any hurt, lest that the waterish humidity should after the
has be left in the part affected, the following Trochisks may be cast upon the
Coals of Fire, and the smoke received by the part affected.

Take Gum Juniper, and Frankincense, of each two drams; Ladanum and Benzoin, of
each one ounce; Cinnamom, Cloves, and Nutmeg, of each half a dram; make them
into a Powder, and incorporate them with Gum Tragacanth; and then make
Trochisks thereof.

There is likewise very much commended a Bath of Juniper Wood, as also of the
Decoction of a whole Fox, adding thereto Frogs and Earthworms, and the Heths
before recited.

Or else let the Feet be anointed with some convenient Liniment or Unguent.
Galen (in his 2. B. of simple Medic. Chap. 18.) as likewise many other Authors,
do much commed the Chafing and Rubbing of salted Oil into the part affected.
For in all those (says Aetius tetrab, 3. sermon. 4. Cap. 21.) that are chafed in
this manner, the Natural innate heat is augmented, that which is preternatural
is dispersed, the Excrements are consumed, and the affected Members are rendered
more strong, so that they are no further obnoxious and subject unto pains;
especially, if from day to day all their whole life long they be diligent in the
use of this Remedy every morning and evening. Touching which Philagrius very
confidently (and without doubt Hyperbolically) is bold to pronounce (as Aetius
writes in the place alleged) that even this one Remedy alone is sufficient
for them that either most of all transgress in matter of Diet, or such as are
immoderately cooled, or sick with over hard labor, or such as have been
excessive in the use of Venery, or such (lastly) as have run into any other
error and excess. But now because that the Oil and Salt are not easily mingled,
the Salt is first of all to be moistened in hot Wine, and afterward in a Mortar
to be diligently mingled with the Oil; and always before this Liniment be put
unto use, the Salt is thoroughly to be mingled with the Oil. Neither is it
sufficient only to anoint, but the Joints are also to be well ^ubbed, that so
the force and virtue of the Medicament may the better penetrate.

Take Castoreum and Frankincense of each one dram and half, Marrow of a Heart,
the fat of a Goose, of each three drams: Oil of Mastich and Mints, of each two
ounces and half: Bdellium and Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, of each half an
ounce: the meal of Linseed, and Fenugreek, of each three drams and half: Wax as
much as will suffice, and make a Cataplasm.

The Remedy of Flavius Clemens (by the use of which, as it is reparted, men
that have been destroyed in their whole body by the Gout Podagra and Chiragra
have been so well recovered that they have walked without any hurt or
hinderance) is described by Galen in his 7. B. of the Composit. of Medicam.
according to their kind, Chapt. 12. (where he has also other Receipts of this
Nature) and so likewise in his 10. B. of the Compofit. of Medicaments according
to the place, Chap. 2. Or,

Take Gum of the Pine Tree one ounce, black Pitch two ounces, Wax one ounce and
half: the fat of an old Cock two ounces, powder of Hermodactyls, and live
Sulphur, of each three ounces: Let there be an Emplaster made thereof, and
renewed the third day.

These Remedies immediately following are prescribed by Henricus Stapedius (in
Consil. Scholtzii, Consil. 238.)

Take Juniper berries, and Marshmallows, of each two ounces: the Leaves of
Laurel, Myrtil, Sage, Betony, Cassidony, or French Lavender, Organy, Calaminth,
Marjoram, and Rosemary, of each of these half a handful: Linseed and Fenugreek,
of each two ounces: Make a Decoction in the Lie of the tender shoots of the
Vine, adding thereto of common Salt one pound.

Afterward let them be anointed with the following Oil.

Take Roots of Pellitory, Nutmeg, and Cloves bruised, of each two drams;
Flowers of Sage, Hyssop, Rosemary, Arabian Lavender or Cassidony, and
Spicknard, of each one dram and half; the Root of Birthwort, and Hermodactyls,
of each one ounce: pour in hereunto of the Spirit of Wine one pint, or as much
as will suffice; let them be macerated for one whole day; and afterward add of
the best Turpentine one pound and half; and so distill them in a glass Alembick.

Alexander Trallianus and others commend this; and they assure us that by it
not only such as have had the Gout from the flowing of a phlegmatic Humor, but
that likewise many that have had the pains of the Gout from the flux of a
Cole^ick humor, have recovered their health and strength again.

Take Time, Organy, Savory, and Calaminth, of each as much as you think fit;
and boil them in the sharpest Vinegar; and with the hot Decoction often wash
and foment the parts affected.

For the Knobs or Knots.
If the matter be now grown into the wonted hard Knobs, For the Knots in the
Joints
it is indeed a most difficult business to dissolve them; but if they be not
already become old and inveterate, there may be yet some hopes left of curing
them. Now for the discussing of these knobs and knots we are not only to
administer External and Topic Remedies, but likewise Internal Remedies. The
Internal Remedies are those Antidotes above mentioned, amongst which the
Antidote of Trallianus (made of Centanty) is more especially useful. And the
same Trallianus writes likewise, That a certain person troubled with the Gout,
when the knots began first to appear, by the drinking of the Decoction of
Groundpine or Herb Ivy, he prevented the further generating of them. The
External and Topic Remedies (useful for the dissolving of the Knobs) are
Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar. Or,

Take the simple Diachylon Emplaster one ounce; Ammoniacum, Galbanum Bdellium,
Sagapenum, of each one dram, Oil of Orrace, and white Lilyes, of each half an
ounce, powder of Orrace one dram, and make an Emplaster. Or,

Take Briony Roots, Wild Cowcumber, and Orrace Roots, of each two ounces,
Roots of Marshmallows, and white lilies, roasted under the hot Embers, of each
four in number; the Seed of Nettle, Mustard, and Water Cresses, of each one
ounce. Let them all be well mingled, and stird about together with Goose Fat,
and the Oil of sweet Almonds, as much as will suffice, and make a Cataplasm.

Galen and others do much commend that which is made of old Cheese: for the
Skin being broken and divided of its own accord, without any Section, it
refreshes and comfort the Joints that are from day to day (without any hurt
at all) freed from the Stones. Viz.

Take Old and tart Cheese, three ounces, or as much as you think fit; dip it in
a sufficient quantity of the broth of Salt swines flesh, and then after you
have sufficiently pounded it in a Mortar, let it be imposed upon the part
affected. Others boil the Salt Feet of Swine in water, until they be very soft
and tender, and afterward they mingle with them of old Cheese two parts, and
Water Cresses one part, and so they make an Emplaster, which they greatly
commend. Or,

Take Juice of Tobacco three ounces, Citrine Wax two ounces; Rosin of the Pine
Tree one ounce and half, Turpentine one ounce, Oil of Camomile as much as will
suffice: and make a soft Cerote. Or,

Take Honey, Bears Grease, and sharp Vinegar, of each one pound or pint,
Mountain Snakes, and Snailes, one or two of them; boil them in a Glazed Vessel
over a soft fire, until the Vinegar be consumed; afterward strein them, and
add of Wax three ounces. Let them then beal dissolved together, and kept for
use; and with this the place affected is to be anointed, by the fire side.

The Dirt that is found in some certain Baths (having in them a power to
Mollisie and Resolve) are here likewise very useful; (such as are those of St.
Peter, and Bartholomew, in the province of Padua) with which the part affected
is to be fomented for an hour, and better, every Morning and Evening, and
afterward to be washed with the Bath-Water.

Erasistratus Sicyonius provided this excellent and effectual Remedy against
these knobs and knots.

Take Oak Missletoe, one pound and half, Frankincense, Wax, Fat Torches, and
Rosin of the Pine Tree, of each one pound. Those things that were dissolveable
he melted, and stird them well about, thoroughly mingling them with the Fat
Torches; from the which when all the Fat was flown forth, he took the Liquor
from the fire, and strained it, and then beating the Frankincense into a very
sine powder he put it ^here^nto; daily stirring it about, until he had brought
it into a Mass that would not foul, or stick to his Hands. See more of this in
Trallianus his Eleventh B.

Chap. 6. Of the Sciatick Pain.
THe pain of the Hips (commonly called the Sciatica) in indeed a kind of the
Gout; The Sciatick Pain.
so that there may nothing seem needful to be spoken as touching it, besides
what has been already said. But seeing that both in regard of the part
affected it has something peculiar, and that in the Cure there is something
that is proper thereunto to be observed; we shall therefore speak a little
further thereof.

There are indeed some, who by the Ischiadick or Sciatica pain understand some
other affect, differing from the Gout, (which is to be accounted among the
Chronical affects) and this happens also unto those that never were troubled
with the Gout, either in the Feet, or in the hands, from excrements there
heaped up together, or flowing into that part, and this for the most part a
little now and then, and by degrees. But it is not our purpose here to treat of
that affect; in regard that it pertains unto the impotency and inability in
walking, by reason of something amiss in the Hip; (and extends it self
further then the Gout; of which only our purpose is here to Treat;) and
therefore we shall here handle the Sciatica pain, only as it is Arthritick,
that is to say, a species or kind of the Gout, of which we have been hitherto
speaking.

But now as touching the place affected, there is here some kind of
Disagreement among the learned Physicians. Aetius (Tetrab. 3. Sermon. 4. Chap.
1.) out of Archigenes writes thus: They are properly (says he) to be
accounted ^schiadick or Scia^ick persons, that have a pain afflicting them
about some certain Joint of the ve^tebrae. But sometimes there goes before this
Malady, (and as it were, to Usher it in) a pain of the Muscles lying near, and
especially the Loins; but sometimes again the beginning of the affect is from
the very Joint it self: but now sometimes it so happens that the pain of the
Vertebrae being almost taken away, the grief sticks only about the Ham, and
in some near unto the Ankles, but in others the whole Leg is equally afflicted
with pain; and many also have this pain fixed about their Groyns, and then
indeed the grief and trouble being derived unto the very bladder produces a
difficulty of making Water; and then most especially it is that the whole Leg,
from the Hips (even unto the very Heel) suffers Pain.

Fernelius (in his Sixth B. of the Diseas. of the parts, and the Symptoms,
Chap. 18.) says, that the Ischias or Sciatick pain (being absolutely the most
vehement of all the rest) has not its seat in that Joint by which the head of
the Thigh is inserted and fastened into the Hip, but deeper, at the utmost of
the Buttocks, by which the Nerves that proceed from the Loins and the great
bone, called Os Sacrum, or the holy bone, are carried into the Thighs; the
great and terrible pain is not in the Hip alone, but it is likewise extended
into the Thigh, and into the Calve of the Leg, and unto the extreme part of the
Foot, to wit whithersoever that branch that is derived from the Hip affected
reaches and extends it self. But some other, (as Platerus) attribute the
Sciatick pain unto the Joint, with the Thigh.

But here we are to understand, that about the Hip (as also now and then in the
shoulder) there happens sometimes a pain, which is indeed very often most
vehement, and yet nevertheless it is not properly a pain of the Joints, in
regard that it is not in any Joint, because it seizes upon the Membrane of the
Muscles; neither again does it consist always in one and the same place, but
for the most part descends downward unto the inferior parts. And such almost
is that Ischiadick pain that Aetius has described out of Archigenes. And I
grant that this pain has its original from the Serous and sharp Humor that
flows from the Head under the Skin, and sticking about some Membrane, or some
Nerve: but now, that this pain is not properly the Gout, appears from hence;
First, because it consists not always about the Joints, but also in the
middle spaces within the Joints. And so I have here Cured a person of honor,
that suffered such a pain in the very Muscles themselves that are between the
Knees and the Hip. And the like pains often happen in the Breast, and there
excite a certain bastard Pleurisy. And then Secondly, because that they very
rarely return by intervals, and constantly at some certain times; but often
after they have afflicted a man once or twice, they return no more afterward
all the whole life long Thirdly, because those that suffer these pains are not
afflicted with the Gout in any other parts, which happens in the true Gout,
and that is properly so called. For those that are long troubled with the Gout
are very seldom afflicted with the Gout in the Feet alone; but they afterward
suffer pains likewise in their Hands, and their other Joints.

And Lastly, likewise the true Gout (for the most part, if not always) has a
Tumor or swelling Joined with it; but now these pains have no such swelling
Joined with them; not only when they are in a deep place, but also when they
are in a place that is not deep; as it often happens in the shoulder; and
this comes to pass for this Cause, to wit, that the Humor flows not out of
those Veins by which that part is nourished, as in the true Gout.

But we intend not here to treat of that pain, but only of that which is
properly the Arthritick or Gout pain But now that Ischiadick or Sciatick pain
has this proper unto it, that it is diffused more abroad then in the other
Joints, and oftentimes unto the places that lie next: and this happens, first
of all, because that the Hip bone is large; from whence it is, that we
distinguish it by three names; and when it is knit unto the sides of the Or
Sacrum, we then call it the Ileum bone; when unto the hollow part of the said
bone, we then call it Ischium; and when it is Joined with the forepart, we then
call it Os P^bis or the share bone. And then Secondly, because that the Nerves
that come from the Loins and the Os Sacrum to that Articulation are distributed
into diverse parts: and therefore the pain of the Hip does sometimes diffuse it
self into all places, and reaches even unto the Nerves that are derived from
the Hip.

But now this Malady is very difficult to be cured, by Reason of the deepness
and largness of the place, and the abundance of the matter which the wide Place
receives. They who being infested by a long continued pain of their Hips have
the Hip-bone fallen out of its place, and again returning into its place, these
have a filthiness and nastiness following thereupon; (in the fixth Section, and
59. Aphorism.) For if by the Humor flowing in the Ligaments be relaxed, the Hip
falls out of its place; and the Humor that is gotten into its Cavity is made
dull and thick; yea and oftentimes it grows there into a stony hardness;
whereupon because the Veins and Arteries are moved out of their proper places,
and are pressed down together, thence it is that an Atrophy follows in the
Legs. And if this Ischiadick pain invade any one in the time of youth, it
threateneth the shortning of the life, because that by pain and hunger the sick
person wastes and withers away; and from hence likewise the Ischiadick
Consumption has taken its Name.

As concerning the ^ure, for Revuision, the Basilick Vein in the same side is
most fitly opened; but the Ischiadick, if it be for derivation. And indeed if
the pain extend it self more externally, that Vein that is in the outward
Ankle; or the Saphena, which is at the inward Ankle, if the pain tend more
inwardly.

And Hippocrates likewise (6. Epid. Sect. 5. Text 21.) writes, that when there
are Kedma^a present (by which Galen and others understand the fluxions into the
Hip) then the Ve^ns behind the Ears are to be scarifyed. But yet these think
not that this precept of Hippocrates is true, or that it ought to be followed.
But yet nevertheless Sceggb^us defends Hippocrates; and thinks that he did
upon very good ground propound that which without doubt he had observed by
experience. For seeing that the Cause of the evil destilleth into the Hip by
the hole of the Nook, (or Fernelius his way) for the taking away the very
Fountain and source of the Malady, he rightly determines that the Remedy must
be administered about the Ears. But if all this should be granted, yet
nevertheless those Redmata are not the Ischiadick pains properly so called
(which belong unto the Gout) but those of which we made mention before.

The stronger kind of Purgations have here their place; and here the
Caryocostine Electuary is of singular use, as also the Arthritick Pills, Pill.
Faetidae, and the Pills of Hermodactyls. Crato indeed (in his 247. Consil.)
writes that the Ischiadick or Sciatick pains will not admit of, nor bear
purges; in regard that the Humors have seated themselves more in those places:
but this is to be understood of an insufficient Purgation.

And here Vomitories seem to be more commodious then Purgers by the Belly, in
regard that they evacuate the vicious Humors by a place more remote from the
part affected.

But Repellers have here no place at al, because that it may Justly be feared,
lest by the use of these the blood and other Humors may be driven back toward
the part affected, and may be there heaped up.

Having first made use of General and Universal Remedies, we come then to the
imposing of Medicaments that attract and resolve, and these ought to be of the
stronger sort, that they may call forth into the Superficies the Humor that is
gotten into a deep place; which kind of Medicaments are provided of Herbs that
discuss viz. The Leaves of Eldern, Danewort or Wallwort, Laurel, Rue, Betony,
Camomil, Ground pine, Rosemary, Melilote, Mustard Seed, and Stavesacre; as also
the flies Cantharides, Pitch, Sulphur, Turpentine, Ammoniacum, Galbanum,
Bdellium, Opopanax, and Euphorbium.

Excellent likewise is that Medicament that is made of Sciatica Cresses (of
which we made mention above,) as also of Water Cresses, and the Herb Piperites,
or Pepper-wort, as some call it. As,

Take Sciatica Cresses, Dittander or Pepperwort, and Water Cresses, of all, or
one of them four handfuls: boil them in Wine, and sprinkle upon them the Meal
of Lupines, Beans, and the bitter Vetch Orobus of each one ounce, the powder of
dry Rue two drams, Flowers of Camomile one dram, Costus Root a dram and half,
Oil of Turpentine half an ounce, Oil of Earthworms as much as will suffice,
and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Mustard seed dissolved in the sharpest Vinegar two ounces, sharp and sour
Leaven half an ounce, Powder of Hermodactyls two drams, Honey three ounces,
Turpentine four ounces, Oil of Laurel and Spike, of each two ounces, the meal
of Fenugreek seed one ounce and half; Earth of the Ant^hill with the Ants Eggs,
one pound; Leaves of Laurel, Sage, Rue, and Rosemary, of each half a handful;
Earthworms prepared half a pound: let the Ants Earth and Eggs, with the
Earthworms and Herbs, be boiled in white Wine, and then being strained let the
rest of the Ingredients be mingled therewith. Or,

Take Roots of our Ladies seal (which being cut and applied to the Hip are much
commended for the removing of the Ischiadick pain) six drams, the Emplaster
Diachylon simpl^x half an ounce; Saffron dissolved in the Spirit of Wine two
drams, Turpentine one ounce, Oil of Spike as much as is sufficient; and make a
Cataplasm. Or,

Take Citrine Wax, and Turpentine of the Fir Tree, of each three ounces; let
them dissolve together: when they shall be cold ad the Powder of Nettle seed,
and Hermodactyls, of each two drams; Roots of round Aristolochy or Birthwort,
Camomile Flowers, and Florentine Flower-de-luce, of each two drams and half;
Mirh two drams, Saffron four scruple^: let them be molded with the hands being
first anointed with Hogs Grease, and make an Emplaster. Or,

Take Wax, Missletoe of the Oak, Turpentine, dry Orrace, Mirrh, and Galbanum
and with the Oil of Earthworms make a Cerot.

Unto which it he pain give not place, but still continue, then apply
Cupping-glasses with much flame, or else Vesicatories.

But if the Malady will not yet by these be taken away, then we are according to
the counsel of Hippocrates (in the sixth Sect. of his Aphor. Aphor. 60.) to
burn the part affected; and Celsus likewise approves of this advice, whilst
(in his 4. B. and Chap. 12.) he writes in this manner:

It is (says he) the last shift, and in old diseases also a most efficacious
Remedy, with glowing hot Irons to exulcerate the Skin in three or four places
above the Hip.

This Remedy by heating the part dissolveth and evacuateth the thick and viscid
humors; and if the Ulcers be kept open (as they ought to be) the vicious matter
flows forth by them. As for the manner of burning, see more in Paul. Aegineta
his sixth Book, and Chap. 76. and Albucas. Part 1. Chap. 43.

And some there are likewise that make mention of the Gout of the Verrebrae of
the Back, in special: and we grant indeed that now and then some such kind of
Gout there is; and this has also the very same Causes and so requires the
same kind of Cure with the other Gouts. But we are here to look well about us,
and to have a care that we be not deceived, in mistaking every pain of the Back
for the Gout. For oftentimes it so happens that from the serous and wheyish
matter flowing down from the Head, and descending along the Back, and
especially according to the Conveyance of the Cucullar Muscle (and sticking at
the Spina Dorsi, in the end of the said Muscle) a pain may be excited; which
yet nevertheless is not the Gout, in regard that it happens not in the parts
pertaining to the Joint; and it is oftentimes likewise of a very short
continuance, and afflicts the sick Persons in their sleep, but when they
awake, and arise from their sleep, it leaves them and vanishes, which never
happens in the true Gout.

Chap. 7 Of the Way and Means to prevent the Gout.
MAny there are that mind only this one thing, to wit, The way to prevent the
Gout.
that they may be freed from the present pains of the Gout; but being freed
they take no care at all, how they may obtain that they be no more troubled
with the same pains; neither do they make use of those Medicaments by which
they might prevent this Evil, nor at all refrain from the Errors of their Diet;
and so they suffer the Malady again to arise, and so to continue and grow old
with them; and therefore it is no wonder, that there are so few perfectly
recovered of the Gout. But a precaution, and prevention, is altogether as
necessary as the Cure in special so called.

Now this Consists in three things: In what things it consists.
The first is this, that there be care taken that there be no matter suffered
to gather together which may flow unto the Joints. The second, that if any
matter be gotten together, it be taken away before it rush unto the Joints. And
the third is this, that the Joints may not easily receive the same. Now if (as
many do) any one shall make it his business only to strengthen the Joints, and
in the mean time shall permit the heaping up of the vicious matter in the Body;
the Patient shall hence reap more burt than good. For if there shall be a vicious
Matter present in the Body, and this not thrust forth unto the Joints, after
the usual and accustomed manner, being retained in the Body it may flow unto
other of the more noble parts, and be the Cause of most grievous Diseases.

And therefore we are here first of all to commend unto the Patient a good
course of Diet, and Medicaments that correct the distemper of the Bowels; the
first intention being best performed by this. The second thing required is
accomplished by Blood-letting, Purgings, and other things that take away the
serous and Tartarous humors. The third, by those Medicaments that strengthen
the Joints.

And first of all, The first member of prevention is the Diet
As touching the Diet, this is absolutely necessary, and may do much in the
prevention of the Gout; and indeed it is of so great consequence, that without
it the Medicaments (let them be never so excellent) will nothing avail. And that
so few are cured of the Gout, this for the most part happens by reason of the
too great liberty and license they take in point of Diet. And on the contrary,
a due course of Diet has been known it self alone oftentimes to vanquish this
Malady: and Crato (in his 161. Consil.) writes truly; I think (says he) that
there is nothing more to be taken care of for those that are troubled with the
Gout, than a right and due course of Diet. For what Medicaments are there that
can either draw forth the matter it self, or strengthen the Heat?

And to likewise Solenander (Sect. 1. Consil. 20.) We observe (says he) that
many by their care and diligence have made themselves free from the pains of
the Gout; some by their being obstemious; others by their forbearance of
Venereal embraces; a third sort, by reason of their continual using this or
that proper Medicament: And others again, by their shunning of this or that
kind of Meat, as hurtful in reference to this their Disease.

Now the course of Diet does chiefly consist in the right use of the six things
not Natural. And first of all, as touching the Air, let the excess of every Air
in its qualities be shunned; (for this may either retain, or disperse abroad the
vicious humors in the Body) and especially the cold excess that retains and
keeps in the transpiration, and that notable exhaling of the vapors; yea and
it forces the wheyish humor from the outside of the Body unto the Center,
where it afterward soon becomes over-hot (and boiling as it were) and then
begins to be stird up and down. And therefore let all those that are
troubled with the Gout very carefully sense themselves against the external
injuries of the Air, by wearing of such warm Garments as are fit for them; and
let them beware that the external Cold do not thicken the Habit of the Body,
and so hinder the flowing forth of the vapors. And if it shall so happen that
the habit of the Body shall be condensed, it is then again to be ratified by
frequent but gentle frictions.

But more especially there is an exact and accurate regard to be had unto the
Meat and Drink, and the constant Diet of the Patient. For it being so that the
Meat and Drink is wont to supply the matter of the Gout, unless the sick Person
shall abstain from all food that is hurtful for his grief, or commit any errors
in the use thereof, he shall but in vain hope for health and recovery. And
therefore when the sick Persons shall themselves come to understand and take
notice what meats are hurtful for them (as we told above of one who by the
eating of Carps evermore fell into the Gout) then let them carefully and wholly
abstain from them. The quantity of the Patients Food.
And so also for the quantity of the food that is taken, it must be no more
than what suffices for the refreshing of the Spirits, and the preservation of
the strength of the Body. And he ought not upon any occasion to take in more
food than what may rightly be concocted in the Stomach, Liver, and Spleen:
which is then done if he take only that quantity of Meat and Drink that
(according to the advice of Hippocrates) he always rise from the Table with an
Appetite, and that he never so fill himself with Meat and Drink, that he leave
remaining no desire at all, nor any further appetite thereto. For since that in
these Concoctions that which is excrementitious is wont to be separated, if
those Concoctions shall not be rightly performed, many Excrements (and those
Tartarous) are mingled with the Blood; which afterwads (as altogether useless)
are by Nature, at her own time, thrust forth unto the Joints. Or if it should
so chance that the sick Person offend by taking too much food at one meal, he
must be so much the more sparing in the meal following. And so likewise it will
be to very good purpose, if once in the week he wholly forbear, or at least
that he Eat a spare supper. And there ought likewise no new food to be taken
until the former be Concocted. His supper must always be more sparing then his
dinner: and variety likewise of Meats at one and the same Meal is to be
avoided, as being altogether as hurtful as the over great quantity and excess.

And therefore let his bread be pure, and leavened; The quality of his Food.
the flesh that he Eats let it be Wether Mutton, Kids flesh, Veal, and the
like, of a good Juice and Aliment. There is likewise allowed young Beef,
especially in such as are hotter then ordinary: and Alexander Trallianus in his
11. B. Chap. 1. writes, that he knew some who being troubled with an ext^eam
great and sharp fluxion, were chiefly helped by the eating of Beef. Hens,
Cocks, and Capons hu^^ful in the gou^.
Some there are that conceive there ought to be an abstaining from the flesh of
Hens and Capons, and this therefore, because that it yields much nourishment.
But Meats of Good and much Juice were never yet known to cast any one into the
Gout, if there were not an Error committed in the Quantity. Others there are
that think Cocks, Capons, and Hens, to be therefore hurtful for those that have
the Gout, because that they themselves are now and then troubled with the same;
which may indeed likewise happen for the Cause that we shall now show you. For
(in my Opinion) it seems most agreeable unto truth, that this comes to pass,
because that Cocks and Hens do likewise pick up and Eat Sand, and little
Stones, and concoct them in their Maws; from which there may easily be derived
into their very blood something that is Salt, Earthy, and Tartarous; and this
may afterward yield matter of the Gout unto him that eats of their flesh.
And this Opinion Crato (in his 246. Consil.) seems to favor, when he writes
that the Capon has a peculiar humor, which Nature drives forth unto the
Joints. Let him Eat fish very sparingly; but from Carps, and moist fish (as
Eeles and the like) let him altogether abstain: as also from those Meats that
have in them a power to bind the Belly, or that cool the Stomach. And so
likewise the use of much Cheese is not safe. He must abstain also from all kind
of Pulse, that contain in them much Earthy Juice. And because that (as Crato
writes in his 247. Consil.) between Wine and the Cabbage there is found to be
a certain kind of Natural Antipathy, it is thought very fit, that such as are
troubled with the Gout (as unto whom Wine is very hurtful) do often feed upon
Cabbage and Barley Bread. And Pliny in his 20. B. and 9. Chapter, writes thus:
I find (says he) that many have been freed from the Gout by eating the
Cabbage, and drinking the broth thereof being boiled. And many there are that
upon very good ground condemn the use of apples; and advise the Physicians (led
hereunto both by Reason and Observation) that they forbid the eating of Apples
unto such of their Patients as they find subject unto the Diseases of the
Joints. For Apples abound with moisture, and this for the most part partaking
of some acrimony, and such as ^^th a power of penetrating (by reason of which
it is that those spots that are caused by the Juice of Apples can so hardly be
gotten out of Linen) and therefore do very easily move the Humors. Let all fat
Meats likewise be avoided, and especially fried Meats, as such as do not only
afford an ill and vicious Nutriment, but also corrupt other Meats; as likewise
Meats overmuch seasoned with hot Spices.

But a more then ordinary Care must be had in the Choice of the Patients drink.
For it is altogether Requisite that he wholly abstain from the Moravian,
Austrian, and Hungarian Wines, and such as are like unto these, which do most
certainly breed the Gout. But as for others (which in such as are found do not
so easily generate the Gout) they may be drunk, but it must be very sparingly,
in regard that even these also contain in them some kind of Tartarous matter.

Among these Wines that are wholesome, Solenander in the 24. Consil. of his 4.
Sect. reckons up likewise the Thick, Red, Spanish Wine, which they call
Alicant, or the Wine they call Tent: and of this Wine he allows a moderate use
unto such as are troubled with the Gout, as being but little, or less hurtful
for them. Others commend and allow of the Pucine Wine; as likewise that they
bring unto us from the Vale of Telina; by reason that they have not in them so
great a power of hurting the Joints.

And if the Patient perceive that even these Wines also are naught and hurtful
for his Disease, and that they offend him; let him then (if he can) altogether
abstain from the drinking of any Wine; in regard that it may so be, that for
such as are subject unto the Gout, even those Wines may hurt and offend them,
which others drink without any hurt at all. And Paulus Aegineta (in his Third
Book of the matter of Physic, Chap. 78.) writes in this manner. I have known
many (says he) who by their altogether abstaining only from wine, have all of
them sensibly found help. For some in the very beginning of their Disease are
perfectly freed from their fits, and others of them afterward, and in these
also the fits come but seldom; and when they come they are extremely painful.
If therefore there happen (from this abstinence) nothing prejudicial, either at
present, or that nothing be feared for the future, let them abstain from Wine
al their Life long. But as for those who by this their abstinence have brought
a weakness and cold disposition upon themselves, and are thereby rendered unfit
for their employments, when they have for two years abstaine^ from Wine, after
this let them perpetually drink a little thereof at a time, and let it first be
qualified with Water. But as for those that abstain from Wine, they ought in
stead of their Wine to drink the Decoction of Aniseeds, or some such like Seed,
abstaining (as much as may be) from Fruits, Apples, and the rest of those
Cooling Fruits. Thus Aegineta.

And in very truth, that the Case thus stands, we have above, (in the Second
Chap.) proved by examples. And in our own Countries, they that will may far
more easily abstain from the drinking of Wine, then those in Greece, and
elsewhere: in regard that good beer may every where conveniently enough be had,
which may supply the place of Wine, and very well serve in stead thereof. And
although it seem very hard unto many (yea and hurtful also unto some) wholly to
abstain from Wine, Yet Nevertheless (as it is rightly said by Hippocrates, in
his 50. Aphorism) there is also sometimes a Change to be made unto that which we
have not been accustomed unto. But if there be any that will not be persuaded
wholly to abstain from Wine, (or if indeed they cannot, without great prejudice
unto their health, as it very often happens) let them then drink Rhenish
Wine, but not such as is strong, or Crude; or else the Pucine Wine also, or the
like; and yet neither these in too great abundance, but with all possible
sparingness. And therefore we like very well of Solenanders advice, who (in his
4. Sect. and 24. Consil.) persuades us, in the use of Wine, to have regard
unto the Temperament, Constitution of the Body, Age, and ^ustom; since that
there is great difference in Bodies; so that what is good and wholesome for one,
the same may to another be altogether useless and hurtful. And therefore in the
use of Wines, we are especially to observe what benefit or damage the sick
person may receive from it. For if it be found that the drinking of Wine
hurts those that are thus affected, there must then be a total abstinence
from it; or if i^ may not be wholly omitted, it must be most sparingly drunk.
And as for those who in the use of Wine cannot moderate themselves, nor observe
a mean and set bounds unto their Appetites, we think it fitter to forbid the
use of Wine unto such persons, then to allow it them. But yet however al
generally are wholly to abstain from Wine in the beginning of the Paroxysm.
Neither must wine at any time be drunk upon an Empty Stomach, but then only
when solid food is taken. It is likewise very hurtful to drink Wine betwixt
Meals, in regard that it does then easily penetrate unto the Liver and excite
fluxions.

Let the Patient content himself with so much drink only as may suffice for the
satisfying of his Thirst, The quantity of his drink.
without causing any fluctuation of the food he has Eaten.

As for his Sleep and Rest, Rest and sleep.
let them be moderate; and let him not Sleep immediately after he has Eaten
and Drunk: and when he does Sleep, let it not be above seven or eight hours at
the most; yet seven hours Sleep he may well be allowed.

Let the exercise of his Body be moderate, Exercise.
and let it always be before dinner, or supper. And if the Aphorism of
Hippocrates be true in any Disease, it is true in this: viz. The exercise of
health is this, not to be oversatiated with food, and to be active and
industrious in pains taking, and in the works of our calling. And very good it
is for those that are able, before dinner sometimes to exercise themselves even
until they sweat. But then after this motion and exercise of the Body, Let him
neither Eat nor Drink, before such time as the heat contracted by the motion be
wholly vanished. And if there be at any time an Error committed, in the excess
either of rest or motion, better it is that it should be in motion, then in
idleness and Rest. For by Idleness and slowth the heat is much diminished, and
the strength of the Body made to languish, the Concoctions to be depraved, and
the Excrements not evacuated and driven forth of the Body. Whereupon it is that
Galen (in the Sixth Sect. Ephorism 28.) tells us that ease and idleness is as
much the Cause of the Gout, as Epicurism, and Satiety. And we may see by
experience that Men addicted to labor and exercise are seldom or never taken
with the Gout. And instead of the Morning exercise the Patient may likewise
sometimes use frictions or Rubbings, so soon as he is up in the morning. To
stand much, as also to walk overmuch, or to ride long Journeys, is greatly
hurtful for such as are troubled with the Gout.

And in the like manner as Exercise and Rest, so also ought the Patients sleep
and abstinence therefrom to be moderate, and always in a mean. And yet of the
two extremes, better it is to want sleep, then to exceed therein; provided that
the strength of the Body be hereby nothing impaired, nor Crudities bred.
Neither may the Patient accustom himself to sleep presently after meals.

As for fullness and empriness, Care must be taken, Repletion, or fuln^ss.
that the Belly be made every day to discharge its office; and that the Humors
may not be heaped up in the first ways, Eccoprotick or Cutting Medicaments are
sometimes to be made use of; for these do gently case and empty the Belly.
Sweats in the morning are very useful and convenient for the prevention of the
Gout, in regard that they take out of the Body the serous or wheyish Humors.
And therefore the sick persons are by all manner of means to accustom
themselves unto these sweats; and to this end, they ought well to cover
themselves with Bed-clothes at night when they go to Bed; that so in the
morning if they sweat not, yet they may have a Moistness all over their Bodies.
The Patient ought likewise to abstain from excessive Venery, Venery.
which together with Bacchus (or Wine) is the Parent of the Gout, as begetting
and breeding it: for (as Scaliger turns it out of the Greek) of Loyn-loosening
Venus, and Loynloosening Bacchus, there is born and bred the Loyn-loosening
Gout. For by the overmuch use of Venery the whole Body is debilitated, and the
spirits and Native heat dissipated; whereupon all the Concoctions are hurt, and
many Excrements are treasured up.

The immoderate affections of the mind, Affects of the mind.
(and especially Anger and Fear) are to be shunned; and the Patient is rather
to give himself unto Mirth and Cheerfulness.

And that kind of Diet which is observed by Rich persons, Why the Rich are more
troubled with the Gout them the poor.
and people of rank and quality, is the true Cause why these are more
frequently taken with the Gout, then poor people, and such as live in the
Country. For the Rich abounds with store of al kind of Meat, and dainty
dishes; and thereupon they usually eat of many dishes at one and the same meal;
and not only so, but they also exceed in the quantity, and take too much
thereof, even more then they can Concoct; and hereupon Crudities are generated;
and especially they too much indulge themselves in the use of Wine. And then
again they want those Laborious exercises by which the excrementitious Humors
in the Body (and chiefly, the serous) might be evacuated. And moreover, for the
most part they abhor all manner of Medicaments; and they will not at all make
use of them, unless they be fitted for their Palates.

And so in general, those things that are by the Physicians (in other Cases)
commanded as touching a good and orderly Diet, they are here especially to be
observed by such as are troubled with the Gout; concerning which Alexander
Trallianus largely treats, in his Eleventh B. and 1. Chap. and so also
Andraeas Gallus, in his Consil. Collected by Scholtzius, Consil. 270. And
Petrus Andraeas Matthiolus, ibid. Consil. 220. and Antonius Ferrus, in his
Tract of the Gout.

And yet notwithstanding besides a good course of Diet, The distemper of the
bowels to be corrected.
it is likewise necessary (lest that the vicious Humors should be heaped up)
that there be no notable distemper suffered to be in the Bowels. And therefore
if there be any distemper of the Liver, or Spleen, or that the Stomach being
colder then ordinary cannot rightly Concoct, those distempers are in a fit and
convenient manner to be Corrected, as we have further shown you in its proper
place.

For unless those Bowels be well constituted (although there be little or no
Error committed in point of Diet) yet notwithstanding, good food (albeit it be
taken in a just quantity) is converted into a vicious humor, or supplieth such
a Blood that is not pure, but has likewise vicious humors mingled
therewithal. Whereas on the contrary, Those that have their Bowels well
constituted and strong (which exactly separate from the useful Blood that which
is faulty in the Meat and Drink, and evacuate it forth by convenient ways) may
overcome many Errors of Diet; as we see many greedy gluttonous Persons stuffing
themselves with abundance of food, and guzzling in daily great store of Wine
(and this not always so wholesome as it should be) and yet notwithstanding all
this they are not at all troubled, no nor so much as subject to the Gout.

But because that it is altogether impossible but that he which lives not unto
himself alone, but has his dependence for the most part upon others, and is a
Servant unto the public, or is set over and employed in other kind of
affairs, and is sometimes necessitated to live in an unhealthy Air, or to ride
Journeys, or to sojourn with others; it being impossible (I say) that they can
keep themselves from all kind of Errors in point of Diet, and that thereupon
Excrements should be collected in the Body; it ought therefore to be one main
part of the Physicians care that he prevent (in this respect) the heaping up of
those Excrements in the Body, lest that they afterward excite the Paroxysm;
which is done if they be maturely taken out of the Body.

Venesection.
And therefore in the first place, Venesection.
although the Gout does not immediately arise from the Blood, as such; yet
notwithstanding in regard that it may in its own manner concur unto the
generating of the Gout, whiles it either makes for and furthereth the extreme
and boiling beat of the wheyish humor, if it abounds; or else may be an
impediment in the exhibition and administering of those Medicaments that are
necessary; the Blood may therefore be evacuated. But as for such as have
Naturally a very weak and cold Body, such as these receive more hurt than help
from this evacuation of the Blood, as Paulus Aegineta tells us in his 3. B.
Chap. 78 and so likewise for those that have already of a long time been
troubled with a frequen fluxion; for by those often afflicting pains, and
restlessness, the Spirits are dissipated, and the strength of the Body much
dejected. But now this Evacuation of the Blood is most convenient in the Spring
and Autumn. But yet in some it is requisite that this taking of Blood from them
be not done only at once, but by often repetitions, some now, some then. For if
the sick Person be one that uses a full and free D^et (eating and drinking
liberally) upon the very first alteration of the Air there is wont to happen a
motion and boiling heat of the humors. But because that in the preservation we
are not wont to have any respect unto the part affected it self, but only our
mind and purpose is to evacuate the Blood when it abounds, it is most fitly
taken forth (not only in the Podagra or Gout in the Foot) but generally in all
Gouts whatsoever, by opening a Vein in the Arm. But if the Malady be in the Arm
alone (as it is in the Chiragra or Gout of the Hands) then the Vein in the
Thigh is most conveniently opened.

There are some who for such as are troubled with the Gout in their Feet do
prescribe the opening of the Veins in their great Toes, and that every month,
and then not all at once, but by repeating it a second or third time: and I my
self have known those that have received great benefit hereby. And this
practice of theirs is grounded upon Reason. For Nature is wont chiefly and
principally to thrust forth the vicious humors unto the extreme parts of the
Body, and to the Veins, and especially those unto which she is accustomed to
excite a fluxion. And therefore seeing it is probable, that in those who are
troubled with the Gout Nature does send the Tartarous humors in greater
abundance unto the Veins in the great Toes, than unto any other parts;
therefore they are most conveniently evacuated by opening a Vein there. Neither
can the strength and vigor of the Body be very much impaired by this
evacuation, so that it be not in the extreme. And that which Costaeus (in his
3. B. upon Avicen. Sen. 22. Tract. 2. Chap. 2.) writes, that he saw one who
having had a burning made in his Thigh by the Physician, there flowed forth
very frequently great store of a humor altogether Black (upon the evacuation of
which the Affect was wholly removed) seeme^h very much to savor this Opinion.
And others for the same and and purpose every month apply Cupping-glasses unto
the Soles of the Feet; and this must be before the new Moon, and without any
Scarification at all. And I know a certain Person of quality, who by the alone
use of these preventeth the Gout.

But as touching the e^^^^tion it self of the serious and Tartarous hu^or, The
Ev^ cuation of the se^^^s and tartarens bum^r. ^^rgation.
let this be by the Bel^y, by the supe^^^cies (...) ^he Body, sensibly, and
insensibly; by the Uri^e, and by Issues.

Purgation.
Purgation (which indeed brings with it the greatest benefit of any other) is
to he begun w^^h Medicaments that ev^^^^^^e the ^e^ous ^^^uor by the Belly. And
it has been ^ound by experience, that some (...) Persons who have been
^^^^bled with this Grief have found greater benefit by (...), than they (...)
by any other Medicament whatsoever; and (...) much with ^^t any other
Medicament whereas all (...) are altegether unavailable, ^r at least afford but
(...) any darget at all to be seared from these Purgattions, especially (...)
be not overstrong. Wherefore not without cause is it that (...) 4 Sect and 2^,
Censil.) so consi^ently assi^meth, that there is mo^e (...), ^^ins, the (...)
rength more impuited, the Limbs more weakened, (...) whole Body more al ^^ed by
the influx of the humors into the Joints (...), than by seven of these moderate
p^^ging Medicaments; as it (...) those that have made use of them.

And indeed this evacuation is m^st conveniently made in the Spring time, When
the Purgation must be administered.
and the Autumn, a little before the Equinoctial; at which time the humors are
wont to be moved of their own accord. Yea and if any will use that diligence
that i^ requisite in the prevention of the Gout, he must Purge his Body three
of four times in the yeet. Which Purgation (together with Venesection, and a
right course of Diet) makes very much for the preven^ing the Gout; touching
which Galen in his 7. Chap. of the way of Cuting by Venesection. I my self have
Cured very many (says he) Who for three or four years (by Interval^, and at
some certain seasons) had been troubled with pains of their Feet, by purging
forth in the beginning of the Spring the abounding humor, and by diminishing of
the Blood. But this ought to be known and well understood by all, that they are
to be very moderate throughout the whole course of their Diet. For as for such
as are intemperate, given to Drinking of Wine excessively, and such likewise as
are addicted to their Bellies, and indulge their Appetites, there is but little
good or help to be expected by them, either from Purgation, or Blood-letting.
For by the intemperancy of their lives they get together, and heap up great
store of vicious humors. Now as for these we are not so much as to afford them
any the least helping hand, or assistance; thus Galen.

Now it is well worth out Consideration, By what kind of Medicaments.
by what Medicaments thore Purgations are to be instituted, and carried on.
There are some indeed who here commend their Aurelii Powders, and their
Mercurial Medicaments, which do both provoke to vomiting, as also Purge by the
Belly. But for my own part I shall not pe^swade any to make use of these for his
presetvation from the Gout: Let him do i^ at his own peril who ever has a mind
to it. But much less shall I persuade any one (as I find that many have given
counsel thus to do) that he four times in a month (always after the Changes of
the Moon) take Mercurius Vitae, thereby to cause both Vomitings and Stools. For
since that those Mercurial Medicaments cause extraordinary agitations and
stirrings of the humors, and do withal weaken the Bowels, they more hurt than
benefit those that make use of them: neither let any one persuade himself, that
the said Cure of p^^servation can possibly be accomlished in one month.

There are others again who con^eive that only those most gentle and easy
Medicaments are to be used: but there are (...) at all times able to draw forth
the peccant humor. The truth is, as it is most safe, so it is likewise most
beneficial, to make use of those Medicaments that indeed hurt neither the
Sto^^ck nor the other Bowels; and yet notwithstanding they evacuate the peccant
humor as much as is needful. From which neither Scammony, nor Turbith, not
Hermodactyls are altogether to be excluded; but Seen, Ag^rick, and Rheubar^
have a chief place among them.

But besides these ordinary and yearly evacuations, there are likewise every
month (...), and oftener if need require) cerrain gentle Medicaments to be made
use or; which sensibly derive the matter unto the Bowels, and keep the belly
loose. Yea, and if every week twice, one hour before ^upper, the sick person
take either a scruple of some gentle Pills, or some other such like
Medicaments, he shall soon find no small benefit thereby. And such are the Syrup
of Roses solutive, and Honey of Roses (...), Syrup of the Hearts marrow
(commonly called the Domestic or House Syrup) the seed of Carthamus or wild
Saffron, Danewort (or Dwarf-Elder) Aloes, Agarick, Rheubarb; especially where
the Colerick Ichores abound. Yet nevertheless, seeing that these alone (as we
have already said) are not sufficient, unless the party take likewise every
year twice or thrice those Medicaments that are somewhat stronger, in the spring
therefore, and at Autumn there is to be administered a Purgation that is somewhat
stronger than ordinary.

But now here to set down the many forms of those Medicaments, I hold it not
worth the while; in regard that such as are most proper for every ones
Consturution are best of al prescribed by the Physician who is present, and may
therefore most eighthly discover the Partents Constitution. And although that
Serous and Tartarous humor be the nighest cause of this Malady; yet
notwithstanding sometimes these, and sometimes those vicious humors do mingle and
join themselves with the humor aforesaid, and they are therefore withal to be
evacurted. And there are but very few purging Medicaments that do not withal
likewise evacuate the said wheyish humor.

They here greatly extol the Caryocostine Electuary, The Caryocostine Electuary
of Bayrus.
invented and commended by Petrus Bayrus in the 18. B. and 1. Chapt. of his
Practice; although without doubt the Ancients ( Aetius, and Paulus Aegineta)
gave the first occasion for the Composition of this Electuary; and in them
there are many things to the like purpose. Now the aforesaid Electuaty is made
in this manner.

Take white Hermodactyls (their upper rind being taken off) and Diagrydium, of
each two drams: Costus, Cummin, Cloves, Ginger, of each one dram, and make a
Powder.

Of which the Dose is one dram, more or less. Or else being beaten very small
and searsed, let them be mingled with the Syrup that is made of Honey and white
Wine (boiled until they have attained the form of a Syrup well boiled) and then
make an Electuary: The Dose hereof is from two drams to half an ounce. And
Bayrus writes, that so soon as ever he perceived in himself signs of
Repletion, he took this Electuary three or four times in the year; and by this
means he kept himself (for twenty six years) altogether unmolested by those
pains with which he had been formerly assaulted. And indeed it will not be amiss
then to make use of some Medicament that is proper, when we find there is so
much of the bumors already collected, that the Paroxysm seems to be very nigh
at hand. And here we are likewise to commend unto you Rhases his Pills,
described before in the Cure: and so likewise these:

Take Groundpine or Herb Ivy, half an ounce; Germander, Arabian Lavender, of
each three drams; Hermodactyls half an ounce; St. John's wort one dram: Aloes
Hepatick half an ounce: with Turpentine of Cyprus make Pills.

But now as for those Medicaments that are made use of more frequently (every,
or every other week, Whether or no Hermodactyls be convenient in preservation
from the gout?
or three weeks, or a month together) these ought to be more mild and moderate.
And here Adrian Spigelius writes, that he in the preservation of himself from
the Gout never made use of Hermodactyls in any Purgation; since that it is not
requisite that we draw forth the Humors out of those parts into the which as
yet nothing has flown; but he advises us to content our selves with those
things that evacuate the humors out of the greater veins; unless happily it be in
the old knotty Gout (which has more frequent invasions) or that (as we said
before) the Paroxysm be now nigh at hand. Which as we grant it to be true in
those Purgations that are more frequently (and in shorter intervals)
administered: so in those Purgations that are to be twice or thrice every year,
we conceive that Hermodacty is may most fitly be mingled therewithal; and these
all the more experienced Physicians, even unto our days, have made use of; as
without doubt having al of them learned by experience, that Hermodactyls had in
them a peculiar power of evacuating those humors breeding the Gout. And the
Author of the little B. touching the Podagra or the Gout in the Feet, (whose
name we find not, and yet we find his Book among the Writings of the principal
Physicians) writes, that he himself knew by experience, That in the Gout
(whatever the peccant humor were) that Purgation that was made with
Hermodactyls in it was more useful and effectual in this case than any other.
And hence it is also that Rbases his Pills, and the Caryocostine Electuary of
Bayrus have Hermodactyls in their Composition. But now that those Medicaments
may be taken without any naus^ousness or loathing in the Stomach, their forms
are to be changed; and they may be taken sometimes in the form of a Powder,
sometimes of Pills, sometimes of Electuaries, and sometimes in the form of little
Rolls, or Morsels, as they call them.

A Vomit also is here very good, A Vomit.
and brings much benefit along with it, if Nature be able eastly to bear the
same; in regard that it does best of al exclude and evacuate Coler and Phlegm
sticking in the first ways or passages.

Antipodagrick Medicaments; Or, Medicaments against the Gout.
The Body being purged, after this Antipodagrick Antidotes are to be made use
of, Medicaments against the Gout
that so the remainders of the Humors that escaped the purgations may by those
be quite confumed; and that the body may (by once taking of them) be disposed
unto the morning sweats; or that the serous humors may insensibly be discussed,
as we shall anon show you, when we come to speak further of the power and virtue
of these Medicaments. Those kind of Medicaments were with the Ancients of very
great use; and by them they are greatly commended: and there are very many of
them extant in Aetius his Tetrab. 3. Sermon. 4. Chap. 47. Alexander Trallianus in
his 11. B. Chap. 62. And amongst the latter Physicians also such like
Medicaments are every where to be found.

And among those Medicaments, in the first place we meet with Treacle; Treacle
touching which the Author of the Book of Treacle, to Piso, in his 15. Chapter,
wrireth: But it most of all profits (faith he) when any one shall frequently
take thereof whiles he is yet well and in health; in regard that it consumes
the superfluous humors of the whole body, and changes likewise the temperament
thereof. And a little after: I advise (says he) that every man in such like
diseases would use Treacle; because that it both dries up the superfluous
humors, and permits not that any other be bred; whereupon very many from the
use of this alone in the beginning have been altogether freed from the Gout.

Aetius in the place alleged has this description of the Antidote consisting
of four things, The Antidote of four things
by some called a Mystery, viz.

Take Gentian, Bayberries, Mirrh, equal parts, and make a powder. Give hereof
every day half a spoonful in hot Water.

Oribasius in the place alleged has another description hereof.

Take Germander one pound; Gentian, round Aristolochy or Birthwort, of each two
ounces; Rue seed one sextary: Let them be well bruised and searsed. Give daily
hereof one spoonful.

That which is made of seven things, has as follows:

Take St. John's wort one ounce; Centaury, and Groundpine, of each three ounces;
The Antidote of seven things, The Antidote of Cantaury
Gentian five ounces; round Aristolochy one ounce; Agarick three ounces;
Parsley one ounce; Attick Honey sive pound. The Dose one dram in three Cyaths
of Water.

But Aetius chiefly commends the Antidote of Centaury; and he writes that he
knew many cured by the use thereof; and that it was so wholesome for such as were
troubled with the Gout, that the use thereof had enabled many that had been
affected herewith fifteen years, and so well recovered them that they went
journeys on foot; and that it was grateful to the stomach, convenient for the
belly, and provoking much urine. The manner of making it is thus:

Take the tops of Centaury the less, Roots of Centaury the Greater, Germander,
Gentian, round Aristolochy, of each alike, as suppose one pound. Let one dram
hereof be given (for forty days) out of hot water; and in the other three
hundred twenty five following days of the year, let half a dram be administered
after the same manner.

And the same Aetius likewise very highly commends the Antidote of St. John's
wort, The Axtidote of St. John's wort
as that which cures al manner of Gouts, the Disease of the Hips, and al
diseases of the joints in general, being drunk for the space of one whole year;
that it warmeth and cherishes the stomach, makes the sight sharp and quick;
and that it makes the rest of the senses also mote clear, and fitter for the
discharge of their several Offices; that it gently evacuateth the Urine; and
that it is excellent good in the falling sickness, that it freeth from the
great and grievous pains of the head; and lastly, that it mollifieth the Liver
and the Spleen when they are hardened into a Schirrus.

Now the manner of making it is this:

Take Germander nine ounces; Centaury eight ounces; round Aristolochy seven
ounces; Gentian Root six ounces: the tops of St. John's wort five ounces;
Parsley four ounces; Spignel three ounces; Valerian two ounces; Agarick two
ounces; Honey well scummed three pound.

Alexander Trallianus greatly commends this Antidote of the Philosopher
Heraclitus as much approved of by many. Viz. Heraclitus his Anti^^^.


Take Spicknard two ounces; Gentian, long Aristolochy, round Aristolochy or
Birthwort, the best Myrrh, Bayberries, Rhapontick, of each half an ounce. The
Dose is one dram. The best time to take it is the beginning of the Spring, and
the Autumn; and indeed in those places and persons that are cold, the Spring
time; but in others that are more hot, the Autumn.

The same Trallianus prefers the Diacorallium Antidote before al other
Antidotes whatsoever; The Antidote Diacorallium:
which is thus made:

Take of Corals two drams; Mirrh four ounces; Cloves half an ounce; Rhapontick
one ounce; Peony Root the like quantity; long and round Aristolochy, of each
two ounces; Spicknard four ounces; and make hereof a Powder.

And of this he gives in the morning one scruple, out of warm water; and after
it he enjoyneth abstinence from al kind of food for six hours (but yer the
truth is, a shorter time of fasting may suffice) and makes the beginning
hereof about the Kalends of January, and so continues administering of it for a
hundred days (by reason of the long continued perseverance of the Indication,
as Cappivaccius explaineth it:) and then for thirty days he intermitteth the
administering of it (because of the strength and powers of the body, that they
may be recollected, as the same Cappivaccius tells us.) And then again he
administreth it for a hundred days mote; and so again, as before, he intermits
for thirty days. When the two hundred and sixty days (wherein there were two
hundred potions administered) are over and past, he then gives it again, but
now not every day, but only every other day; and so in a hundred and three
score days he administreth fourscore Potions. And afterward again in two
hundred and sixty days he administreth eighty Potions, giving them every thud
day until the three hundred sixty five Potions shall have been al taken. But he
warns them that take this Antidote. that they abstain from Anger, Venery,
Astringent and sweet Wine, al kind of bitter Pot Herbs, the heads of Fish,
Crabs, and Crevishes, Lobsters, Eels, Hares flesh, al kind of Pulse, but more
especially Beans. And many more of such like Antidotes there are to be found in
Paulus Aegineta, Aetius, and Trallianus, in the places before alleged.

Out of these afterward (in the Ages not long before ours, and in our Age
also) there arose diverse other such like Compositions. Thomas Erastus tells
us that he had two of these communicated unto him, and extolled with high
commendations: One of them that was given him by an Italian Physician (who
called it the Powder of Jupiter) and was imparted unto him by Doctor Conradus
Gesner, is made in this manner following:

Take Round Aristolochy, Jupiters Powder
such as is right, the true Rhapontick, of each one ounce; Macedonian Parsley
seed half an ounce; Germander tops, Centaury the less, and St. John's wort, of
each ten drams: make a Powder hereof.

In the first month give every day one dram hereof, out of warm Water; and
afterward half a dram, for one whole year; every month you must also order the
Patient to take a purge or two; or else (for such as are phlegmatic) you may
intermingle the Powder of Agarick with the aforesaid Powder, a little to purge
the sick person.

The other Composition bestowed on me by Dn. D. Christoph. Wirsung, an Augustan
Physician, is thus to be made:

Take the true round Aristolochy, Gentian, Rhapontick, or Centaury the greater
(but I think the true Rhapontick to be better) the tops of Germander,
Groundpine or Herb Ivy, of each alike, and make a Powder. Let there be one dram
hereof taken for the one half of the year; and for the other half of the year
half a dram.

Doctor Johannes Mattheus (out of an old Manuscript) produces this Powder, as
he there finds it prescribed, Viz.

Take Rhapontick one ounce; Agarick two ounces; Valerian three ounces;
Macedonian Parsley seed, and Spignel, of each four ounces; Gentian, and
Aristolochy, of each feven ounces; Germander nine ounces, and make a Powder.

Donzellinus his Powder is as follows:

Take Germander, Groundpine, both the Centauries (or only the lesser) Marjoram,
Sage, Betony, Gentian, and Birthwort, of each one ounce: the best Guajacum
eight ounces or one pound: and make a Powder.

And by this one Remedy alone Donzellinus writes that the Gout may be
perfectly cured, provided that a man live not like unto a Sardanapalus.

Crato his Powder is this.

Take Aristolochy one ounce, Centaury the less three drams; Gentian six drams;
Spignel, five drams; St. John's Wort, six drams, Parsley of Macedonia half an
ounce, Agarick two drams, Rhapontick, or (if that may not be had) Rheubarb one
dram; and make a Powder. Of which he gives in the morning two scruples in the
Water of Groundpine, or Betony Water (with the Syrup of either of the two
former) in January five days, in February as many, in March two, in May three,
in June one, in July two, in August one, in September, October, November, and
December, two: but it matters not much if it be oftener taken; only as he says
it will be somewhat better to take it in the manner aforefaid.

This following is Doctor Manard his Powder.

Take Germander, Dittany of Crete, Groundpine or Herb Ivy, Roots of the greater
Centaury, and round Aristolochy, of each two ounces: the inward Rinds of
Walnuts one pound: make a Powder. The Dose is one dram for forty days.

This Powder next following is attributed unto Erastus.

Take Hartshorn burnt, Beef bones burnt, the Kernels of the Citron, Dates,
Jaws of the Luce-fish or Pike, equal parts: burnt Coral, and burnt Ivory, of
each half parts: make hereof a Powder. Unto which (for the tastes sake) you may
add a little Cinnamon, Mace, and Cloves; and with Sugar make a Powder.

Johannes Anglicus greatly commends this Powder, The Sarracenick Powder
which he calls the Sarracenick Powder:

Take Herb Ivy or Groundpine one ounce: the bones of man or woman burnt two
drams: Liquoris three drams: make a Powder.

And yet nevertheless the sick person is not strictly and precisely to be tied
unto any forms of Pouders; but of the same simple Medicaments there may with
Sugar or some convenient Syrup be made Electuaries or Pills (which for the most
part are very fitly made up with Turpentine of Cyprus, since that most of those
that are troubled with the Gout are likewise obnoxious and subject unto the
Stone) or Extracts, or those Medicaments they call Essences, or liquid Extracts,
or a Wine, or a Medicate Drink; that so in this manner also the palate of the
sick person may be pleased.

Antonius Gallus (a Physician sometimes of Paris) greatly commends this
Electuary:

Take Valerian one dram: Agarick two drams: Spignel three drams: Macedonian
Parsley seed four drams: St. John's wort five drams: Gentian six drams:
Birthwort seven drams: the lesser Centaury eight drams: Groundpine nine drams:
Man's bones taken out of the Joints, and moderately dried ten drams: with Oxymel
Scillitick as much as will suffice make an Electuary: the Dose whereof is one
dram for a whole year together. Or.

Take the Conserve of Germander three ounces: of Herb Ivy, and Betony Leaves,
of each one ounce and half: Seeds of St. John's wort, Roots of round
Aristolochy, of each half an ounce; Angelica two drams: the bones of a Man
prepared, red Corals prepared, Ivory prepared, of each one dram: Cloves and
Cinnamon, of each two drams: and with the Syrup of Betony make an Electuary.

And we may likewise add the Medicaments of latter Physicians, viz. their
Magisteria, their Feculae, and their Salts; as also Margarites, and Crabs Eyes.
As,

Take Roots of Spignel or Masterwort. St. John's wort, of each one ounce: the
Feculae of Cuckowpint two drams: the Salt of Groundpine, of Germander, of
Cherfoyl, and of Masterwort, of each one scruple: Magistery of Corals, and
Crabs Eyes, of each half a dram: Margarites one scruple: Sugar as much in
weight as all of them: and make a Powder.

For the causing and provoking morning sweats there are also given Syrups of
the Berries of Eldern prepared with Sugar two spoonfuls; and if you please
there may likewise a little Hartshorn be added.

Crato commends this Distillation, of which one spoonful is to be taken every
day in the week once, if not oftener.

Take Balm, Valerian, Juniper Berries, of each what you think fit; Let them be
sprinkled with good sweet Wine; then macerated in Balm Water, and afterward
destilled.

And in cold Bodies there may also very conveniently be used that Aquae vitae
which Gilbertus Horstius Hollandus, once a famous Physician at Rome, made
frequent use of; and it is thus prepared.

Take Rosemary flowers, the lesser Centaury, Comomile flowers, Groundpine,
Gilbertus Hostius his A qua vitae
St. John's wort, Germander, Asarabacca, of each one ounce; the Rind of
Dwarf-Elder Root one handful, Orace one ounce; Treacle half an ounce,
Cinnamoin, Nutmeg, Galingal, Mace, and Ginger, of each one dram and half;
Hermodactyls, and Aloes Hepatick, of each one dram; Agarick half an ounce;
Coloquintida three drams; all the Myrobalans, of each two drams, Roots of
Polypody of the Oak one ounce and half; Leaves of Choice Seen, one ounce; Seeds
of Anise, Dauk, and Fenel, of each one dram; infuse them in the spir it of
Wine, (that so the said spirit may lie a fingers breadth above them) for two
days space; and then let them be afterward destilled in Balneo Mariae. Of
this Water he gave unto such as had the Gout, from one ounce to three ounces,
in the morning.

But now in the Judgment of very many of Decoction of Groundpine may serve in
stead of all the aforesaid Medicaments, The Decoction of Ground pine:
and will do better than any one of them; and therefore it was likewise highly
commended unto the Emperor Charles the fifth by the Physicians of Genoa: and
Solenander in his fifth Sect. Consil. 1. tells us, that it has been found by
experience, that very many which had drunk of this Decoction for the space of
threescore days, have been wholly freed from the Gout, and restored unto their
healths; whereas before they had both the Joints of their hands, and of their
feet also grievously afflicted and tortured by this Disease. And no wonder, for
it attenuateth the thick Humors, and consumes them; drives forth the
Excrements by Urine, or else by sweat evidently; or else it insensibly
discusseth them by transpiration: and it strengthens also all the internal
bowels, and every kind of Nerve, yea and the whole habit of the Body. But
because that Vesalius writes so largely and fully touching this Decoction of
Groundpine, and the advice given by the Physicians of Genoa (as we may see in
his Epistle to Joachimus Roelandus, touching the China Root, about the end
thereof) We think it not amiss, neither our time ill spent, to give you his
words at large, as we find them in the said Epistle. No man (says he) can
blame me for administering at a fit and convenient time that Medicament which I
find commended by the prime Genoa Physicians, as divine, and as if it were some
Deity; and which (with the greatest promises that might be of the perpetual
banishment of the Articular Disease) was some months since sent unto Doctor
Marsillus Colla, (Master of the Horse to the Emperor, and one that for his
many extraordinary parts, and endowments of mind, is worthy of more health then
what at present he enjoys;) and now again also so brought unto Caesar, that
for the future we may most certainly conclude, and promise him, that he shall
never more hence forward be troubled with the pain in his Joints, if he please
but to make use of this Medicaments Now in very truth the whole description
hereof is sufficiently Empirical, and contains in it nothing else but that at
the first, and in the very beginning of the Malady, a purgation is to be
administered; and then afterward, the Leaves of Groundpine (some call it Herb
Ivy, or the little and low Oak) be cut in pieces whilst they be yet green, if
they may then be had, (but I for my own part would rather have it dry; and as
in all other Herbs that have in them a faculty of drying, I prefer it before
that which is green and newly gathered) and then boiled in white wine; and of
this Decoction one Cup given in the morning, three hours before dinner:
although in the mean time however it be added, that the longer before dinner
the Decoction aforesaid be taken and drunk, so much the more benefit is to be
expected from it. In reference to the course of Diet, whosoever makes use
hereof must abstain from all meats that are sharp, sour, and Salt; and the
drinking of that Wine is prescribed for sixty days, with this addition, that
the distilled Liquor, or Water of the aforesaid Herb, will add and confer much
unto the strength of the said wine, (which seems unto me very ridiculous:)
and that therefore for such as are not pleased with the Decoction, they are to
have the Water given them. As for any thing else, we find nothing in the whole
sheet sent hither unto us, besides a great and swelling Title, and a large
Catalogue underneath of those persons who by the use thereof lived free from
the Disease of the Joints, for some years, and of such as made use thereof when
it was sent unto them; in which Catalogue we find Cardinal Dorias to be the
first, and foremost. Thus far Vesalius. From whose words it evidently
appears, that he himself gave not his full consent unto the praise and
commendation of this Decoction. And very credible it is, that it did not
benefit all that drank it: and yet notwithstanding if we shall well weigh the
virtues thereof (as they are before propounded) it will from thence manifestly
appear, that it is indeed a very excellent and precious Remedy in the Gout. But
this Vesalius rightly tells us, and gives us notice of it, that the distilled
Water cannot (in probability) add any thing unto the Decoction, in regard that
the distilled Waters (as many falsely think) have not all the faculties and
virtues of the simple; for all the parts thereof are not elevated into the
Alembick.

But now this Herb Ground Pine may be drawn into use many several ways.
Ground Pine may he used many ways
Some take a pottle of Rhenish Wine, the purest Water one pint, Honey of Roses,
the fourth or sixth part of a quart. Boil all upon the Coals in an Earthen
Vessel, and scum them: then add of Ground Pine four handfuls, Germander two
handfuls; Bears Ears or French Cowslips, one handful; boil them in a double
Vessel for three hours.

Others take of Groundpine gathered when it first begins to flourish, and
well kept, o te handful; Wine three pints; boil them in a double Vessel five
hours, and then strain them.

But it were far better; if the Herb aforesaid were tund up with the new Wine,
and there let lie; that so in this manner a Chamaedryte Wine may be provided,
without any boy ling at all.

And if any fear the Wine, he may in the like manner prepare an Hydromel, or a
Chamaedeyte beer likewise.

Now the use of this Wine is to be continued (and so likewise of the Hydromel,
or the Beer) for threescore days, the Body being first well purged; and every
day during the time one draught is to be taken in the morning.

And the like may also be made of the Essence of Ground Pine (as they call it)
and this must be made use of for many days.

But it is not here my meaning that any should be kept and held unto certain
forms; but I would have those Medicaments to be made up, and compounded, Simple
Medicaments.
according as occasion and the Constitution of the sick person shall require.
The chief and principal Simples out of which these Medicaments are compounded
(as appears by the forms hitherto prescribed) are, Germander, most useful in
all the Affects of the loynts, (and therefore by some it is also called the
Arthretick or Gout Ivy) and Lobelius of one dram hereof with Turpentine makes
Pills, and greatly commends them in all Gouts whatsoever; and then in the
next place, Groundpine, of the Virtues whereof we have before spoken; St. John's
wort, Round and long Aristolochy, the lesser Centaury, the true Rhapontick,
Gentian, Spignel; and the Root of ^lugwort, if in stead of the Parsley Roots it
be boiled with meat, (by the use of which a lone many have been freed from the
pains of the joints, as Abraham Seylerus writes in Scholtzius his Consilia,
Consil. 335.) unto which may be added the Bones of a Man, Coral, Crabs Eyes,
with the rest that have been already mentioned, according to every ones
constitution.

For Aetius does here rightly admonish us, as touching Treacle, and the like
hot Medicaments, that they do not only not benefit those that are of a more hot
Constitution and temperament; but that they likewise oftentimes produce
Resolutions that prove incureable. But here indeed there are some that
determine this to be understood only of such as are hot in the highest degree;
because that Galen also (in his fisth Book of the presentation of health,)
expounding the words of Hippocrates, (in which he forbids the drinking of
Wine unto those that are hot,) writes, that this is not intended of all
absolutely that are hot, but that Hippocrates spoke it of such as were hot in
the highest degree: but yet most certain it is, that great heed is here to be
taken unto the diversity of Bodies and temperaments; and that hot Medicantents
are more conveniently also given in Autumn, then in the spring time; and
therefore in Bodies that are more hot Succory is wont to be intermingsed with
the Mersicament: and as touching Succory, Adrian Spigelius likewise writes,
that he had been taught by experience, how that in a hot Cause there was
nothing more convenient then the Leaves of Wild Succory, gathered in the month
of May, and dried in the shade, and then given one dram thereof, for the Dose.
And yet nevertheless the Root of the said Succory are likewise very useful, if
they be pulled up in the first beginning of the Spring; and the same may also
as well as the Leaves be mingled together with those other Medicaments that we
mentioned before.

But now in what manner these pouders and Artipodagrick Medicaments (commonly
called Antidotes) do benefit those that are troubled with the Gout, is well
worth our consideration; and as touching this very thing Thomas Erastus moves
a Question; How the Antipodag^ick Medicaments do benefit such as have the Gout.
which is this, viz. how those Medicaments can correct the cold and most disten
pee of the Head, or dissipate humors bred therein. But the truth is, he moves
the Question one of an Anticipated Opinion and Hypothesis, whiles he
presurposeth that the humors (the Cause of the Gout) do fall down out of the
Head; which that it is false, we (...) thew you in the seventh Question.
Whosoever he be that righth understande^^ the Cause of the Gout may easily
perceive what the Physicians main scope is here in the (...) of the Antidotes.
For seeing that those Tartarous humors are generated in the first and secutal
Concoction, and then are derived in to the Veins, and at length in their own
time (...) forth into the Joints; in the administering of the Medicaments the
(...) the (...) here propounds unto himself is this, to wit, that he may
promote and help forward the Concoctions of the Stomach and Liver; and if there
be any excrements guterated in the Stomach (as Erastus also confesses that
there are) and in the parts here adjoining (^o wit, the Meseraick Veins, the
Spleen, and the Liver) these do cleanse them away, (...) them and dissolve them
into exhala^ons, and evacuate them by Sweats, and thines: and ^^rolus Piso
writes most truly, that the potes and breathing places of the Skin (whether
sensible, or else even insensible) is so greatly to be accounted of, that in it
alone (...) to be placed the whole business of preventing all kind of Arthrick
fluxions. And this (...) excellencly done by those Medicaments, if they be
continued.

But now here it may (not without Cause) be demanded, Whether the Decoction of
Guajacum and the like, do perform the same that the Antipodagrick Medicaments
de?
whether or no the very same may not be performed by the Drcoction of Guajacum
Wood, Sarsaparilla, China, and the like; seeing that even those also do
exceedingly provoke Sweats; whateupon the (...) these Decoctions is by many
prescribed in this Disease of the Gout. But yet leaving every man to enjoy his
own Opinion, for my own part I am altogether unsati^fied in this point. For (as
Crato says truly in his 25. Epist.) those Sudorifiques (especlally such as are
made of Guajacum Wood) if they be frequently administered, do very much consume
and wast the Radical moisture, which is not in the least done by any of the
before cited Medicaments; which do only cleanse the humors, and discuss them by
a moistness and dewiness all the Body over in the morning, or by a gentle and
light Sweat, or else also disperse them insensibly. And besides, such
Decoctions as these when they are taken in a great quantity do very much dry
the Bowels, which of themselves are for the most part over dry in those that
are afflicted with this Malady. Add to this, that those Antipodagrick
Medicaments before spoken of are most of them bitter; and thereupon they obtain
a virtue and power of cleansing away those tartarous humors, and Choleric
Ichores that are collected about the Liver and Spleen; which virtue and faculty
these Deoctions last mentioned do want; since they do only extenuate, dry,
scatter the humors, and provoke Sweats. And hence it is, that Joha^^es Crato
(in his 253. Consil.) not without good Cause tells us, that to follow the Vulgar
Opinion is no less to be deceived, than by placing any hopes and expectation in
those potions of China, Sarsaparilla, and the like Decotions. For if they at
any time seem to benefit, and yield any help, this they do by means of the
exact and strict Diet that is then observed: and the most of those Persons of
quality that have ^o often drunk those Decoctions have been greatly deceived by
the persuasions of others, and therefore they may do well to see to it, that
they may stumble no more at the same Stone. And therefore at all times it there
be any vicious Constitution in the Bowels, and a power generating that humor,
we ought carefully to look to it, lest that by the use of such like Medicaments
that aforesaid power should be augmented; as it is most certain, that that
disposition unto the Stone that is in the Reins may be greatly increased by hot
and dry Medicaments unsousonably given to break the Stone. And Monardus
likewise (in the 16. B. of his Epistles) writes that Guajacum does wonderfully
dry; and therefore must needs be very hurtful for such as are of a dry
tempetature.

The Chemists do here likewise commend their Medicaments, and some of them
write, that the Arcanum or Secret of Tartar does remove, and by the very Boots
take away the Gout: Now it is made in this manner.

Take Salt of Tartar depurated, The Arcanum of Tartar.
or partified; from this draw away a distilled Vinegar, again and again
(always receiving the new) until such time as it leave behind it no more at
all of its sharpness and Tartar. And then unto one part of this Salt add three
parts of common Bole, and so distill from thence the Spirit by a Retort of
Glass well Luted, and sitting thereunto a Vessel to receive, and let this be big
enough. Unto one part of this Spirit pour in two parts of the Spirit of Wine,
an eighth part of the Oil of Sulphur; and a sixteenth part of the Oil of red
Vitriol. All of these being well mingled together in a Glass Sealed after the
Hermetick manner, let them for three months be continually circulated.

Friar Basil Valentine does with great Praises extol the Spirit of quick or
unslaked Lime. But as the Composition of this is very difficult and troublesome;
The Spirit of quick Lime.
so we have likewise just Cause to fear, and well to consider, whether or no it
does not easily offend the Bowels; seeing that there is in the Salt of quick
Lime a notable and manifest Caustic quality; which appears even by the
potential Cauteries that are made out of the Ley that comes from the said
unslaked Lime.

And so indeed Issues do likewise daily evacuate some of the serous humor,
Issues.
or a certain kind of Sanies, and thin Excrement: but Experience does testify,
that this Remedy is not in the least to be compared with Sweats and insensible
transpiration: and it is well known that many have had some of these Issues
made, and yet nevertheless they have been afflicted with the Gout, in regard
that they are not sufficient to draw forth that whole humor that is in the
Vessels; and much less can they evacuate that which is from day to day
collected about the Bowels, and is afterward by the Veins poured forth into
the Joints; and especially if there be committed any errors in the Course of
Diet; and chiefly if there be an excess in Drinking.

But yet nevertheless, if the Gout has its Original from some old and long
continued Ulcer that is consolidated in the Thighs, and the suppressed
Evacuation of the Ichor that was wont to flow forth thereby, then in this case
it will not be amiss, but to very good purpose to make an Issue in the Thigh.
And so likewise, if upon sudden stopping and healing of an Issue in the Arm
there happen any fits of the Gout to arise, the Issue is then again to be
opened.

What things they are that strengthen the Joints.
The third head of preventing the Gout consists in the strengthening of the
Joints (as most Physicians tell us) that so they may not too readily and easily
receive the humor flowing unto them. The third Member of pre servaetion is the
strengthening of the Joints: Whether it be necessary, or not?
But Carolus Piso (as we likewise told you above) thinks that here in this
thing much pains may be taken to little or no pupose, it being not within our
power (would we never so fain) since that as he conceives, that weakness does
not consist in any distemper, or nollowness, and looseness, but in the Natural
conformation, and termination of the Vessels into the extreme Joints. And
although that even by this means also we may hinder and prevent that humor from
flowing into the Joints: yet he determines that the sick Person is so far from
receiving any benefic from hence, that he may also by this means be brought
into great peril and hazard of his life, the matter being transtated unto the
Lungs, or some other noble Bowel. But in very good earnest, it is not a thing
to be slighted and nothing accounted of, that the humors chiefly flow into the
Joints, in regard that the Vessels are terminated into them: and if the matter
that was wont to flow into the Joints be transferred into the more noble
Members, the sick Person may then be cast into great dangers; and as we told
you above (among the Prognostics) it is a very il sign, it the matter that was
wont to flow unto the Joints subsist and abide still in the Body. And therefore
we are not wholly to rest and confide in this Remedy, or manner of preventing
the Gout; without using the utmost of our endeavor that those vicious humors
may not be generated in the Body; or if they be already bred there, that they
may be frequently evacuated. And yet however this is also a certain Truth, that
if the Joints be weak and ill disposed, the sick Persons are then the more
frequently troubled with the fits, and not so easily freed from them. But now,
in what this weakness of the Joints especially consists, we have shown you
above; and we shall likewise show you further in the eighth Question. And
therefore if there be any thing in the Joints, either left there after the
Paroxysm, or collected from some vicious Nutriment, it is to be consumed; and
so the Joint has its own Constitution and Natural temperament restored; and
thus it is said to be strengthened. And therefore the Medicaments that are here
useful must be Astringent, and moderately hearing and drying. And yet
notwithstanding such Medicaments as these are not to be administered, until all the pain and swelling be wholly vanished, and that the hard knobs likewise
disappear. For whilst these are in being, Astringents do more hurt than good,
in regard that they drive the humor into the part affected, and there harden it.

But now for the strengthening of the Joints, The benefit arising from Grape
Kernels, in the strengthening of the Joints.
and the consuming of the Relics of the humors that are in them, the use of
Grape Kernels is by many commended, as that which affords much benefit;
touching which since that Antonius Donatus ab altomari has written a whole
Book, the Reader may consult the same (if he please) for his further
satisfaction. This only we shall desire him to take notice of, that they are
most convenienely used in the Vintage time, while they are new, and they must
be such as are taken out of Grapes that are thoroughly ripe: of the which seeing
that in many places there is no great store, other Medicaments may be made use
of instead of them. Yet notwithstanding there are some that likewise use these
Grape-stones dried; and they boil them in red Wine and Water; and while they
are boiling, they add to them Sage, Betony, Germander, Primrose, and other such
like Herbs; as also Earthworms.

Baths do likewise corroborate the Jovnts. Baths strengthening the Joints.
For although they be by some rejected, in regard that by their actual humidity
and heat they attract the humors unto the feet; yet nevertheless this
inconvenience may easily be prevented, if Plants that heat and dry, and
strengthen the feet, be boiled in the Water; such as are Betony, Sage,
Germander, Roses, Cranesbil, Heath, Oak Leaves, the Wood and betries of
Juniper, and the Fruit of the Mountain or wild Pine Tree.

Andemacus his washing of the Feet (which as he writes, has profited many
that have made trial thereof) is in this manner:

Take Lie made of the Ashes of the Beech, which is to be strained three or four
times; and then add thereto as much Wine, and Alum two ounces; and heat them
at the fire. Or,

Take Mugwort, Wormwood, Organy, and Camomile slowers, of each two handfuls:
Alum, and Salt, of each one handful: Lie of the ashes of Beech, as much as will
suffice; and boil them together for a bath.

And so likewise for the strengthening of the Joints, very good and useful is a
Bath of Juniper Wood, if the branches thereof be boiled in Chaly beat Water,
until the Water be dyed and colored thereby, and has even gotten the color of
the Lie. And yet nevertheless there may also be added some ounces of Salt or
Alum.

After the Bath the Joints are to be anointed with the Oil that is pressed
forth out of the Grape Ketnels, or the Oil of Myrtle, or Roses, or some other
such Oil; touching which more anon.

But hot Baths are by many most especially commended, Hot baths strengthen the
Joints
although they be disallowed of by others; of which we shall speak further in
the twelfth Question. And so likewise the Baths that proceed from Sulphur,
Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, (and partly also Baths of Alum Water) are very useful if
they be made use of in a due and right manner. For if the Alum abound, the
Baths are then to be made use of with great Caution, in regard that they shut
the pores of the Body, and render it unfit to sweat, a thing altogether
necessary in such as are troubled with the Gout; and if there remain any thing
in the part affected which may exhale, and be dispersed by insensible
transpiration, they thrust this forth unto the Nervous and Membranous parts,
and so renew the pain; the same that happened to Fabricius in his 5. Century,
Observat. 83. Among the rest, the Hirschergensian, and Laudeccensian hot Baths
in Silesia, the Caroline in Bohemia, the Badensian in Austria, the Martiate
(now called the Wisbadensian baths) the baths not far from Mentz, and those
likewise at Emsen upon the River Lanus, as also those of Aquisgran are al of
them very useful for those that have the Gout. But the Dirt or Clay of some
certain Baths is chiefly to be made use of for the wasting away of the matter
that sticks in these parts, and strengthens the said parts.

Where such baths are wanting, Fomentations and artificial baths may be made.
The Lotions or washings of Alum Water are very much commended; but yet it is
far better that there be Salt and Sulphur added unto the Alum, that so if
there be yet any of the matter left behind, it may be resolved. Or,

Take Flowers of Arabian Orrace, of Sage, Thyme, Cranesbil, of each one
handful; boil them in common Water, or (which is better) in Water wherein Iron
has been ofttimes quenched: and to the straining add Sulphur and Nitre, of
each two ounces; Alum one ounce: Let them be boiled again, and the parts
fomented with the Decoction. Or,

Take Leaves of Germander, and Betony, of each one handful: Flowers of wild
Roses, Arabian Orrace, Bears Ears or French Cowslips, the common Doves foot, of
each two handfuls; white Vitriol one ounce: boil them for a Fomentation or a
Bath.

But the most ordinary and usual Remedy (that is made use of by many) is the
Unguent we mentioned also before, Unguents and Emplasters
where we spoke of the Cure; which is made of Salt torrefied or dried to a
powder (others are rather for the Salt of Juniper) and a sufficient quantity of
common Oil, or Oil of Roles, mingled into the form of an Unguent, with which
the Joints are to be well rubbed.

Solenander makes use of this Liniment after the Lotions.

Take Oil Omphacine two ounces; Oil of Mastich one ounce; Salt dwed to a powder
two drams; Bole Armenick three drams; Dragons blood, and Hypecistis,
Frankincense, and Mastich, of each two drams and half. Let every one of these
be first beaten into a fine Powder by themselves: and then let them be mingled
together with the Oils in a Mortar into the form of a Liniment.

The Emplaster Diachalciteos, or as some call it, the Emplaster Diapalma, laid
on, is here likewise very useful. And this Emplaster is fit and proper in all
the joints, whatsoever the humor be that flows unto them. And Solenander in
his 4. Sect. Confil. 25. writes, That he knew diverse, who before were wont
very frequently to be troubled with fits of the Gout, that by the continual use
of this Emplaster, and by taking Purges now and then, were for the space of
five whole years freed from those pains. And this Emplaster it neither desrleth
the part whereon it is laid, neither does it cause any atch, or raise pushes;
nor is it at al offensive, either in its smell or any other quality. Now it is
fitted to the form of the Member. In the Feet shoes are made of thin Leather
(but the Fox skin is more approved of) which within are to be covered over with
the Emplaster Diachalcitis, and so they are fitted to the feet. The same
Leather spread over with this Emplaster may be applied unto the Knees,
Hand-wrists, and other parts. And Linen Socks likewise washed in Wine with
Water, then dried, and drawn upon the Feet, are very useful and convenient.

Thomas Erasius commends the Sand stone (the Latin Physicians call it Lapis
Sabuli) if it be mingled with the Oil of Myrtle, and Gentian Roots reduced into
a Powder, and laid on in the form of a Cataplasm. But yet the same Erastus
advises us not to use it until it shall manifestly appear that there is no
Excrement remaining in the Joints, that may be hardened into a Tophus. And
therefore he persuades us first of al (before we use it) to lay on once or
twice the Cerote of Briony, desctibed by Aetius ( tetrab. 3. Sermon. 4. chapt.
43.) that so there may be the less danger; and this Aetius very much commends.

But now as touching al manner of Topics for the strengthening of the feer,
this is to be observed, that for such as will keep no orderly not regular course
of Diet, neither use convenient purgations, and other evacuations, these
Topics if they be administered, it will be without any benefit at al, yea,
oftentimes to their great detriment and hurt: but unto such as live
temperately, and use fit and proper Evacuations, they are administered with
singular benefit and success.

Aetius (in the place alleged, Cutting out of the Veins
Chap. 24) for the preventing of the Gout, commends also the cutting forth of
the Veins that are from the superior parts cartied down into the feet, done
after the same manner as the Varices or crooked Veins in the Thighs are
sometimes wont to be cut forth. But as Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aquapendente tells
us rightly (in his B. of Chirurgical Operations) the extraction and excision of
the Varices is not only harsh and difficult; but that for the most part also it
succeeds unhappily, by teason of the blood flowing out. And moreover, from
this cutting forth of the Veins the lower parts are soon brought into a wasting
and withering condition. And besides all this, although these Veins be cut
forth; yet there is but very little benefit to be expected from thence. For if
vicious Humors be heaped up in the Body, and be accustomed to flow unto the
feet, their way and passage being shut up, they are carried unto some noble
part, and there they may excite some other affect far more dangerous.

There may likewise, for the strengthening of the Joints, internal Medicaments
be administered; to wit, those which are appropriate unto them, as Germander,
Ground Pine, or Herb Ivy, Betony, Primrose, Sage, Rosemary, and others of this
kind, as we mentioned them before.

And this is the way and means to prevent the Gout; as Rhases seems in few
words to comprise it, whilst he thus writes: If the person troubled with the
Gout shall observe a good and orderly course of Diet, and govorn himself as he
ought in the fix things not Natural, and shall sometimes use Mithridate, or
something else that may consume all the superflities, and shall likewise make
use of Stipticks about the place of the Joints, this person shall be relieved.

Chap. 8. The Physicians Consolation in the Gout.
IN regard that such as are fick and diseased desire and expect from the
Phyfitian, Comforting the patient in the gout
not Consolation, but advice, and the best of his assistance; it may seem to be
besides the Office and business of the Physician to write any thing touching
Consolation in the Gout: and indeed I should not at al have published any thing
of this Nature, had I not found the same date by that famous and most emment
Man Johannes Crato, my fellow Ciuzen, and Physician unto three Empetors, in his
Consil. collected by Scholtzius. Him therefore I now shall follow, and speak
something as touching the subject aforesaid. For oftentimes indeed Medicaments
and helps of al sorts are administered unto the sick person, and yet
nevertheless the Physician does not so obtain what he desires. And sometimes
likewise the sick party (either in telpect of the condition of his life, and
employment, or else also in regard of some other parts of his body) cannot so
exactly as he ought observe what is enjoined him by the Physician; and
therefore albeit the sick person cannot then conceive any hopes of a perfect
Cure, yet notwithstanding he may have something to comfort himself withal.

I. First of al therefore, The Gout preserves from many other Diseases and
Maladies, and it is a sure sign of the strength of Nature; which drives forth
the vicious humors in the body, out of the high way, and common road (as I may
term it) or (if you will) the principal passages, unto the extreme and more
ignoble parts of the body; and on the contrary (as we likewise acquainted you
before in the Prognostics) if Nature be weak, and sink under the burden, as
being no longer able to expel forth these humors, then Fevers and other
dangerous Diseases are wont to follow. And hence it is that Physicians (and
some of them of great note) are of Opinion that the Gout many times makes for
the lengthening of the life; and that if it be ill cured it hafteneth on death.
For Nature (as we said erewhile) drives the vicious humors unto the Joints.
But if (the body being not susi^iently purged, or when there is no exact course
of Diet observed, or by reason of the long continuance of the disease, or else
by reason of age) the strength be weak, and the Physician shall then busy
himself only in strengthening of the Joyms, it may easily happen that the
matter which Nature was wont to thrust forth unto the Joints, if it be still
retained in the body may be turned unto the principal parts, and so may excite
dangerous Diseases, yea, and hasten on death.

II. A man all the while he is troubled with the Gout is in no danger of his
life (as in other diseases he might be, to wit, but^ing Fevers, and others,
spitting of blood, the Pleurisy, Impostumation of the Lungs, Dropsy,
Epilepsie, Apoplexy, and many other) but after a short time the Man returns
unto his wonted employments, and is oftentimes so well recovered, that there is
not the least appearance of his being sick.

III. I^ likewise there be any thing in the World that may persuade Man unto
temperance and sobriery, the Gout ch^esly does this. For whenas the pain in the
Gout is most raging and incollerable, and that the Gout cannot by any thing be
better prevented or mitigated, than by a frugal Diet (and in this we find al
Physicians to agree, and we have also a testimony of it from Experience it
self) which causes that not only no matter may be supplied for the increase of
the ill humers; but it likewise best of al corrects the distempers of the
Bowels: and it is the part of a prudent man rather to obey Reason than his
Affections, and not to forget that of the Poer. Pleasure with pain
Is loss, not gain.
and he ought to consider likewise that that pleasure which he takes in a more
free and liberal Diet, is not worth, neither will it compensate those so great
pains and wrackings that must be endured in the fits of the Gout. And although
it seem indeed somewhat grievous to shun al feastings, and company-keeping, yet
this must be thought of, That none of those boon Companions can afterward
afford any the least help in this Disease; but that (as Lucian has it in his
Tragopodagra, about the end thereof) they will rather laugh at, and deride a man
in his pain and misery. Yea, moreover, whilst that for fear of the Gout a man
accustometh himself unto a good and orderly Dyer; he does not only prevent the
pains of the Gout, but he avoideth likewise many other Diseases that proceed
from the Errors in the Diet; and a Man hereby oftentimes attaineth unto old
Age. But as for such as either will not submit themselves unto the Rules of
Dyer, or else by reason of their condition of life and employment cannot
observe the same, let not these accuse either the Physician, or the Physic,
but let them blame themselves; since that (as Galen writes most cruly in his
Tract of Curing by letting blood, Chap. 7.) To prescribe Medicaments (says he)
unto that party which neither can, nor will observe an orderly and due course
of Diet, is altogether in vain, and to no purpose. But now if a man observe a
good Diet, although he be not wholly freed from this Diseale, he yet may then
comfort himself in a good conscience, and rest himself contented in the will
and good pleasure of God. And hence it is, that Crato, in the place alleadg^d,
writes, that seeing diligent observetion and prudent moderation in point of
Diet has been found to be alwases helpful, and that it never hurts or
deceives any, to neglect it therefore may well be thought not only an Argument
of the greatest folly and madness, but likewise of their (...) lecting and
being careless of themselves, which Pretty forbids. And when we have the
Testimony of our own conscience, that nothing has been done by our own fault
that might bring or increase the pain; it is then a very great Consoftion, when
we can persuade our selves that we are altogether blameless; and so can
cheerfully endeavor in a right manner to bear what is necessary and could not
be aveyded, and not to repine and minture against God.

IV. And this also may comfort such as are a^^^licted with the Gour, that as
ever, one has his proper Calamity; so likewise every man has a Commodity
proper^y belonging to him; and that the Gour is said to be the Rich man's
Diseate. (...) though those that are troubled with the Gout do indeed suffer a
great pain: ye^ most of them are such as have a plentiful Estate, or at least
they have what is sufficient; whereas on the Contrary, there are many who
although they be (...) from this pain, yet they lie under other daily press^^es
and grievances, by Reason of their poverty. The Gout (as Cardanus in his
Encomium of the Gout writes) ^melleth and is sensible of sweet Unguents,
hears Songs and Music, lies (proud as it is) in soft beds, upon Silken
Pillows, betwixt Gold, and Pearls, and painted Tables, hears Tales and
pleasant stories, tastes generous and Rich Wines, and the more delicate and
dainty kind of Meats. It has presented unto it pleasant and delightful
flowers, Embroydered garments, and whatsoever has ambitiously for many years
been heaped up by wealthy Citizens, or even by Kings themselves. And the Gout
is so far blessed, that he who is detained thereby, besides the pain it self,
has nothing to hinder him from living a happy life.

V. Those that are troubled with the Gout may likewise comfort themselves with
this, that those higher faculties of their Souls and the operations of their
minds are not corrupted and hurt in this as they are in most of the other
Diseases; but for the most part these continue safe and sound. And the very
truth is that for most of the Mon^ments of the Learned, we owe them unto the
Gout; for had these men always had their health, they had never published so
many voluminous and learned works. And (as Cardanus in the place alleged
writes) Erasinus, a man of extraordinary great parts and learning, (...),
while he lay diseased of the Gou^, and by Reason of it (...) his (...), wrote
and published is ^^atsoever of his is worth our reading.

VI. There is likewise another great benefit and commodity that the Gout
brings along with it, to wit, that it freeth a man oftentimes from many other
troubles; and keeps off much Vain and fruitless labor, as also many grievous
and disquieting Cares, (that I may use Cadans own words) so that if a man be
required to serve a Tumultuous Commonwealth, or to give his attendance upon a
pettish and froward Prince, or some imprudent friend, how can he better excuse
himself, then by his having the Gout? He that has the Gout has the greatest
part of the year at his own command: and there is no better not honester
excusing ones felt from work, then by the Gout. And when there is occasion of a
man's going abroad in public to serve his own turn, it is but saying, that the
Gout has left him.

VII. And Lastly, although by art, and a good course of Diet, much help may be
hoped for; yet nevertheless in regard that the temper of the Bo^els by the long
continuance and grievousness of the pains is so subverted, and the Jo^nts so
weakened, that there is no hopes left remaining of a perfect recovery of the
health, the sick person may yet in the mean time enjoy those (...) and comforts
that we have mentioned, and with Patience establish his mind, after the example
of that great Emperor Charles the fifth, who was wont to say, that to be
Patient, and not (...) to complain and cry out by Reason of the pain, are the
last Remedies against the Gout.

But seeing that it is not the part of a Physician, (but a thing much
unbeseeming him) to make himself merry with the Disease and pains of his
Patient, I shall forbear to add any thing more of this Nature. But if there be
any one that desires to know any Elegant and conceited Jests upon the Gout,
let him read Lucian his Tragopodagra. Which is likewise well worth the
Physicians reading, since that it does most emphatically express the vehemence
of this Disease, and show the Cause thereof (and that indeed more rightly then
many Physicians) and Elegantly describe the time of its invading the person,
the difficulty of its Cure, the bragging and vain promises of Empericks, and
lastly the Patience that is necessary and Requisite for the sick Person.

QUESTIONS Controverted Touching the Gout.
Question, 1. Whether the Name of Arthritis, or the Gout, Comprebend likewise
the Gout Podagra, Chiragra, and the rest of the pains in the Joints?
WE have told you before that Arthritis is so called by the Greeks from Arthron
(signifying a Joint) and that therefore it very fitly agrees with all the
pains of the Joints, (of which we have hitherto spoken,) but by the Barbarous
and common Practitioners it is called also Gutta, but not so properly. And yet
notwithstanding there are some even of the latter Physicians (and among the
rest, Franciscus India, one of the Physicians of Verona a City in Venice, in
his first B. of Gutta Podagrica, Chap. 1.) who deny this Name of Gutta to be
Barbarous and improper, it being as it were the general Name for all Diseases
which by destillation are produced in the Joints of the Feet, Hands, Hips, and
the like parts of the Body, and that therefore it deserves to be the general
Name; but they write that Arthritis cannot properly be applied as a general
Name unto the Gout Podagra; because that Galen tells us (in the Sixth Section of
the Aphorism. Aphoris. 28.)that almost all those that are troubled with the
pains of the Joints are first of all taken with the Gout. And there are
likewise other Physicians that make the pain of the Joints some other, and
altogether distinct from the Podagra and the Chiragra Gout. Cardanus (in
Aphorism. 29. of the Sixth Section) writes, that the Disease of the Joints and
the Podagra are not one and the same Disease: and he adds, that he had seen
many Children that were troubled with the pains of the Joints, but not one of
them that had the Gout; and that he remembereth not that he had ever read any
Author who had seen it; and he reprehendeth Galen, for that he makes no
difference between Arthritis and Podagra.

But Luc. Mercatus (in his fourth B. of the Curing of internal Diseases, Chap.
18.) handles this same subject at large, and distinguishes Arthritis or the
Disease of the Joints, from Podagra, Chiragra, and Ischias or the Sciatica; and
he teaches us that the Arthritis has a Nature peculiar unto it self, which
consists not in pain, but in this that it seizes on all or most of the
Joints; as also that Arthritis does not require that weakness of the Joints
which is necessary in Podagra, Chiragra, and Ischias, but that a far less
imbecility does suffice: and on the contrary, that it requires a far greater
store of matter; and that it is much more rare then the Gouts, Podagra,
Chiragra, and Ischias or the Sciatick Gout: and that Arthritis has likewise
this preper and peculiar unto it, that it begins with a swelling, and ends
in a pain; whereas in the Podagra, Chiragra, and Ischias the quite contrary
happens; and the part is first of all taken with pain, and then afterward it
swells: and moreover, that it does not require forty days space for its
resolution, and that because the parts are less weak and infirm, and because
that the Humor sticks in those parts that are more fit for resolution: and
Lastly, likewise, that it most seldom or never returns, in regard that all
the matter is discussed, and wholly Rooted out; unless happily that by an
intemperance and irregularity in the life, it collect a new fullness of matter.
For he determines that the cause of the Arthritis is peculiar, to wit, the
internal, a fullness of the Vessels, and more especially of the blood; but the
external is every occasion that brings labor and unwonted exercise to the
^oynts, by the which they become hot, loosened, and dilated; and the Humors
poured all abroad waxing hot, and stird up and down flow together in these
^oynts; which the part weakened and made loose does very casily draw unto it,
and receive it.

But (as for the opinion of Franciscu^ India) the very truth is, that the Word
Gutta is a ^atine Word, and not Barbarous; but yet to use it for a flux on and
Catarrh, or for Arthritis, is contrary to the use of the Latin Tongue; and
therefore he may very deservedly be accounted for no better then Barbarous that
shall use this word for Arthritis, or prefer it before the Word Arthritis. And
although that Galen (in his sixth of the Ap^oris. and 28. Apho) does indeed
affirm, that almost all that are taken with the Arthritick affection (that is
to say, the pain in the Joints) are such as have first of all been troubled
with the Gout, yet nevertheless this does not prove, that the Kame of Arthritis
sits not unto every pain of the ^oynts: for there are likewise Joints in the
Feet. And as we told you above (in the first Chapter) this Name in general is
sometimes taken in special for that Disease of the Joints, when all or most of
the Joints are affected; which happens not, unless a man be first taken with
the Gout Podagra. But more rightly Guainerius (in his Tract of the Diseases of
the Joints, Chap. 1.) I (says he) when I saw that the Arthetica (for so all
the Physi ians of that Age by Reason of their ignorance of the Greek Tongue
called this Disease) had its Name from a Limb or Joint, (in which places the
pains of the Joints are wont to be) was willing to call all such like pai^^s
(whether with a swelling, or without) Artheticz, like as also all that ever
were before me have done.

But as for Cardanus and Mercatus, I see no cause at all why they will not have
the Gouts, Podagra, Chiragra, Gonag a and the Sciatick pain, and al other the
pains of the Joints, to be comprehended under the Name Arthritis, as a Species
under its Genus; or if the most or all of the Joints be troubled with the like
affect with that wherewith the Feet, Hands, Knees, and Hip are wont to be
grieved; I know no reason (says he) why it may not be called Arthritis. But
this in the mean while we deny not, that every Disease of the Joints, or every
swelling are not properly called Arthri^is; and that it sometimes happens,
that other vicious Humors, (and not the blood, as Mercatus will have it)
altogether of another kind from those that produce Arthritis properly so
called, may be heaped up in the Body; and that they may sometimes with, and
sometimes without a fever, be driven unto the parts nigh unto the Joints, and
may there excite and cause swellings, and sometimes also pains: which swellings
notwithstanding are not properly the Arthritis, seeing that (as Mer^atus
himself has determined) they do not begin from pain, and end in a swelling;
but on the contrary, they begin with a swelling, and then afterward there
comes a pain. How much less then are these swellings alone worthy of the Name
of Arthritis; and on the contrary, this Name to be denied unto those pains of
the Joints, of which we have hitherto been treating: Especially since that
those swellings do not return (as the Gout does) by certain intervals; but
although they have once or so infested and disquieted any person, yet they may
afterward never again return all the whole life long. And therefore if
Cardanus, Me catus, or any others, will likewise have these swellings to be
called Arthritis; let them know that the Ancients were not wont to call all
kind of Tumors or Swellings, (were the cause what ^t would they sprung from)
and all kind of pains, I say, they were not wont to call all these by the Name
of Arthritis And Hippocrates (in the sixth Epidem. Comment. 4. Text 13.)
calls those in Aenos that by exceilive eating of Puise had gotten a pain in
their Knees, not Arthritick, but Gonalgick, (that is to say, persons Diseased
in their Knees) and touching this we shall speak further in the Question text
following.

Quest. 2. Whether every pain about the Joints deserve the name Arthritis.
THere are indeed some of this Opinion, that every pain that happens about
the Joints is to be called Arthritis; since that if there be any other such
like pains, they are no where expressed by any of the Physicians; neither has
any of them written of any pain of the Joints that is not Arthritick. And
although we may meet with some kind of seeming difference, either according to
the greatness, or according to the duration of them (a shorter or a longer
time) they conceive that this difference does not at all vary the species or
kind thereof.

But I think that Galen (in the third Section, Aphorism 15. and 16) writes
most truly; that if the filthiness be so great that it may dry up and consume
the moisture of the Joints, it may then indeed cause a difficulty of the
motion, by reason of the dryness in the Joints, and that it may happily cause
pain likewise; yet nevertheless it never produces that affection which is
called Arthritis; unless any one be minded to call all pains whatsoever of the
Joints by this name. For Hippocrates himself, for such as by the over-eating of
the bitter Vetch Orobus and other Pulse had contracted these kind of pains, he
does not call these Persons Arthritick, but Gonalgick Persons. And therefore
although we scarcely find any Anthor handling all such pains as these in any
one place, yet nevertheless we find them created of and mention made of them
here and there, in several places of the same Author. For it very frequently so
happens that vicious humors heaped up in the Body, may be by a Fever (or
else also without a Fever) thrust forth into the Joints, and more especially
the Knees, and may there occasion pains which may oftentimes continue a long
while; and such no doubt were those mentioned by Hippocrates in the place before
alleged; which if not always, yet when the sick Person desires to move his
Feet, they then excite Pain; unto which notwithstanding (to speak properly) the
name Arthritis properly so called, does not suit not agree. So in such as have
Dropsies and such as are Cachectick, or of an ill constitution, the ^evous
humors falling down into the Feet may indeed excite there a swelling; and those
very humors likewise when the Feet are moved may breed and cause much pain
which yet cannot be said to be the Arthritick pain. Neither does the humor then
flow into the part affected by and through the Veins, but it by little and
little descends thereinto by the Pores in the Abdomen. And if we exactly
weigh the matter, we shall find that such like humors as these do not seiz upon
the very parts themselves that constitute and knit the Joint together; but that
rather a humor from without is poured forth and flows round about these
parts, and sticks (...) between the Skin and the parts constituting the
Joint. And so in the lostening of the Joins in Wounds, and in Cot^usions, the
humors do oftentimes flow unto the Joins, and there cause a swelling and pain,
which yet is not worthy of the name Arthritis. And so those that have their
Joyn^s much dried and hardened (as it is an the Scurvy and other Diseases)
these Persons cannot stretch forth, nor move those Joints without pain, and yet
they are not to be accounted Arthritick Persons, neither do we call them so.

And therefore the Arthritis properly and in special so called, is only that
pain of the Joints, when the peculiar humor described above, bred in the Bowels
of the lower Belly, and heaped up in the Veins and Arteries, by them suddenly
flows into the Joints, and insinuates it self more especially into the
sensible and tender parts about the Joints, and there partly by twinging, and
partly by distending causes pain.

Quest. 3. In what place the humor that exciteth Arthritis consists.
MAny indeed there are of this Opinion, that the humor the Cause of Arthritis
does consist especially in that Cavity or hollow space that is betw^xt the
extremities or heads of the bones (which by Articulation are joined together)
and that the humors flowing together by the Veins do first of all flow unto
those Cavities of the Joints, and that they then afterward seiz upon all the
parts lying round about, the Bones and the Skin; from whence it happens that
the Bones sundering themselves, and departing one from the other, the
Ligaments, and Nerves, and Tendons, are all of them so extended, that from
thence there is excited a most vehement and wracking pain. And for this their
Opation they first of all alleadg that which Hippocrates writes (in Sect. 6.
Aphorism 49.) that the Arthritis is not ended before the fourtieth day, and
that the humors that have flown unto the part affected are not sooner discussed
as being such as stick in a part destitute of heat; whereas if they consisted
in fleshy parts, and such as have many Veins and Arteries, they might easily be
resolved. And secondly, they go about to prove it by this, because that from
the afflux of the humors into the Cavities of the Joint the bones are made to
divide themselves one from the other, and so by distending the Tendons and
Membranes they cause the pain. Thirdly, because that by the motion of the joint
the pain is increased. Fourthly, because that a pain is first of al perceived
in the bottom of the part affected, before ever the external parts begin to
swel; but that after wards when the humors have gotten themselves a way unto
the outward parts, the external parts are then lifted up into a swelling.

But the contrary Opinion, which determines that the fluxion is first of al
made into the very parts incumbent upon the joint (from whence they may happily
sometimes, but this is very rare, sweat through into the Cavity or space of the
joint) is altogether more agreeable unto the Truth: and this we are taught
first of al by the very breeding it self of the Arthritis. For since that the
afflux of the humor generating the Arthritis is by those Vesseis that carry
along the Aliment unto the parts (as we shall afterward prove) it is necessary
that the vicious humor that insinuates it self into the joint should first of
al flow into the parts lying upon the joints, and keeping them close together;
and that from hence (if there be any great store thereof) it may insinuate it
self into the Cavity of the joint. Secondly, the bones are so knit together by
the strongest Ligaments, that there is hardly any space at all left into which
the matter may insinuate it self. Thirdly, The Ligaments are very thick and
solid, so that they will not easily ^dmit of the humors flowing in unto them;
and much less will they permit them first of al to flow into the very Cavity of
the joint. Fourthly, if the matter should flow into the very Cavity, and the
bones thereupon divide themselves the one from the other, the Membranes would
then be made longer; which yet we see is never done. Fifthly, in the knotty
Arthritis, those hard knobs that are sometimes taken out of the joints, are not
found in the space between the bones, but about the Ligaments, and the parts
encompassing the joint. Sixthly, if the humor should first of al flow into the
very joint it self, and that it should from hence be communicated unto the
external parts, there would then be excited either no pain at al, or such as
would scarcely be perceived; in regard that the heads of the bones (in all that
space in the which they are knit the one to the other) are not covered with any
Periostium, but only with a Cartilage; and there is no Membrane or Nerve at al
in that place. Seventhly, the tumor or swelling that seizes upon the external
parts, and from the juncture of the joint is sometimes extended far abroad unto
the parts lying near unto it, it sufficiently teaches us that the humor the
cause of the Arthritis, is not contained in the very joint it self, but in the
parts about the joint. And lastly, if the humor should be contained in the very
Cavity between the bones, it could not be (which yet we see that it often so
comes to pass) that cooling and repelling Medicaments should forthwith drive
back the humor from the place affected into the Vessels, and from hence into
other places.

And as for whatsoever they alleadg and bring for the contrary Opinion, it may
be easily answered. For first of al, That the humors in Arthritis are
oftentimes long ere they can be discussed, the cause is, not that the humors
are contained in the Cavity between the bones; but because they stick in places
void of blood, and therefore having but little heat in them; and the humor it
self likewise is somewhat unfit to be perfectly discussed. Neither yet
nevertheless is this always true; for oftentimes also the matter is dispersed
and scattered in a very short space of time, to wit, when there is not much
thereof, when it is thin, when the Part is cherished with heat, and the matter
not thickened by unfit Topics.

And moreover, the pain is not therefore excited because the Joints are
stretched forth in length, and made longer, and so are separated one from the
other, but because that a sharp humor flowing into the Membranous parts does
distend, and twinge them. And thirdly, although the pain be more excited while
the joint is moved; yet this happens not therefore, because that the humor is
contained in the very joint (for as we told you but even now, this is void of
sense) but because the Membranous parts about the joint, being before
preternaturally distended by the humor, are now more stretched forth. Neither
lastly does that prove that the humor does first of al fall forth into the space
of the joint, because that the pain, when the Disease first seizes the party,
is perceived to lie deep, before the external parts swel up, which when it
happens the pain is mitigated. It is true indeed that these things do often
so come to pass, and that in the beginning there is very little or no swelling
appearing, and that yet in the mean time the pain rages in the top of the part
affected, and there becomes most grievous; which is afterward assuaged when
the external parts swel up. But this does not therefore happen, because that
the humor falls into the very Cavity of the Joint, and from hence makes it
self a way unto the exterual parts, the extreme parts of the Bones being (as we
said before) altogether destitute of sense; but it happene^h from hence, that
the whole vitions humor does first of all by the extremities of the Vessels flow
unto the Nervous and Membranous parts about the Joints, and greatly afflict
them; but afterward when part of the humor is likewise distributed into the
fleshy parts, the pain becomes more mild and moderate; when the humor is
distributed into many places, it does then act less powerfully; and those parts
are made more loose and so are distended with less pain than otherwise: like as
we see the very same to be in the pain of the Teeth, which at first is very
great and intolerable, when all the humor flows into the Teeth, and these
Nerves inserted into them; but afterward when part of this humor is
distributed into the Jaw lying near, as likewise the Gums, then the pain is
mitigated. But yet in the mean time (as we said before) we deny not this that
at length also even some of the matter may possibly sweat through into the very
Cavity of the Joint, if the afflux continue long. Neither do the two last
Aphorisms of Hippocrates make at all against our Opinion; where (in the sixth
Section) he thus writes: Those (says he) that have been long conflicting with
the pain of the Hips, if in these the top of the Thigh fall out of the
Hip-Bone, and then return and fall in again, these have in that place a Mucous
and snotty phlegm collected. And again, they that by being vexed with a long
continued Sciatica pain have the top of their Thigh fallen out of the Hip, in
these the Thigh wastes away, and unless they be burnt, they halt and become
lame. For that Joint does not therefore fall forth, because that the Bone is
thrust out of its place by the humor fallen into the Cavity: but (as Galen in
his Comm. upon the Aphorisms teaches us) because the bonds of the Articulation
being soaked and moistened by the phlegmatic humor are thereby rendered more
loose.

But now what those parts are about the Joint that receive and entertain the
humor that flows unto them, neither do they al fully agree in their Opinions
as touching this. Capivaccius and some others with him determine that this
afflux is made only unto the Ligaments, and that in the Arthritis the Ligaments
are filled full, but not so the Nerves and Tendons; since that if these parts
were filled there would then be Convulsions: for these parts come to be
affected only by the consent of the Ligaments, whiles that they are pressed
together by these Ligaments being filled with the humor. But the Ligaments are
so hard and solid, that it is not credible that these especially should receive
the humor flowing unto them, and be replenished thereby. And the pain is not
therefore excited, because that only the Nervous and Membranous parts are
pressed together by the Ligaments preternaturally filled with the humor. For if
this were the Cause, the pain could not possibly be so fierce and bitter; but
because that a sharp and gnawing humor does prick and twinge the tender and
sensible parts. For as in other parts the Membranous Periostia, and Nerves, are
the subject of the pa^^; so likewise in the Arthritis they contain the nighest
and most immediate Cause of the said pain. But now that there is no Convulsion
excited, we have already shown you the reason thereof above, to wit, because
that the parts that are by Nature assigned for motion are not affected, but
such only as are appointed for sense, as the Membranes, or the Nerves likewise
themselves (such of them as are not destined unto motion) according to the
Membranes.

Quest. 4. What kind of Fever that is that accompanies the Arrhritis.
THere are indeed very many that assert this Fever to be only symptomatical.
But since symptomatical Fevers are those properly which follow the
Inflammations of other parts (and more especially the Bowels) to wit, when that
heat that is in the affected Member, or likewise even the putrid and sooty
vapors are communicated to the heart, and kindle up the heat in it, and so the
fuel of the Fever is in another affected part: it easily from hence
appears, that the Fever which is joined with the Arthritis is not
Symptomaticall, but primary. For in the Fever that accompanies the Arthritis,
the Fuel of the Fever is not in the part affected (that is to say, the part
that laboreth under the Arthritis) but it is in the great Vessels. Yea and the
Fever either it precedeth the Arthritis, or else it invadeth together with the
invasion of the Arthritis, and does not in any wise follow the same. And
therefore this Fever is deservedly referred unto those continued primary
Fevers, which now adays we call accompanying Fevers; to wit, those that are
not solitary, but such as have some other Disease joined with them, and that
depending upon the very same cause with it; to wit, when by the motion of some
humor which Nature endeavoreth to thrust forth unto some outward part, or into
the habit of the Body, a Fever is kindled; or at least the matter that is
moved unto any part, becomes withal so putrid, that it may cause and kindle a
Fever. And as it is in the Erysipelas, Pleuresie, small Pocks and Me^se^^ and
the like Diseases; so this comes likewise to pass in the Arhtritis; which so
his like Feayer is wont oftentimes to precede, and to invade the Party a day
before; or a^ the seast, most bertainly invadeth together with it; although it
be oftentimes very small; and therefore it is not so much as taken notice of by
many sick Persons, and especially such as altogether head and mind nothing but
their pain. But now this Fever is continual; which yet nevertheless remitetth
somewhat in the morning, but about the evening returns again in its full
height; and this happens from the return of the Blood unto the inward parts;
this being either voluntary, or else such as is caused by the coldness of the
ambient Air, very familiar unto all continual Fevers.

But the very Fever it self according to the nature of the humor (which
together with the humor that is the nighest cause of Arthritis is sometimes
excited) is wont to be augmented day after day. Now that humor which kindles
the Fever is not contained in the Veins alone, but sometimes also in the
Arteries; and then the signs of pu^ridness are not so evident and apparent in
the Urines: yea in the beginning the Urines are oftentimes very thin, and like
unto clear Water, wanting a settling; which kind of Urines are likewise very
familiar in other Diseases that proceed from the motion of the serous or
wheyish Blood.

Quest. 5. Whether the failing of Mulberries may produce ihe Gout; or whether
the Fruits of the Mulberry Tree may Cure the Gout?
THe Occasion of this Question was at first given by Athenaeus, who in the
second B. of his Dipnosophist. thus writes: Pithernus (as says Hegesander)
has left it behind him for our information, that in his Age the Mulberry Trees
did not bear any fruit for twenty years together; and that then the Gout as a
common and Epidemical Disease raged so fiercely among the People, that it
seized upon not only Men, but even Children, Virgins, Eunuchs and Women: and
not only so, but this Disease became so vehemently outrageous among the smaller
Cattle, that it swept away two parts of all their Sheep. Whereupon some thought
that this happened by reason of the defect of the Mulberries for those twenty
whole years; and they attributed unto the Mulberry Fruit a Power and virtue of
curing and driving away the Gout. And true indeed it is, that Mulberties do
loosen the Belly, and that they afford much benefit unto a hot and boiling
Stomach: but that they should have in them any power, or peculiar virtue to
cure People of their Gout, this neither Reason, not Experience can persuade us
to. Neither can this be proved from hence, that when Mulberries were wanting
for twenty years, the Gout greatly raged among the common People. For it is
more probable, that by reason of some extraordinary notable faultiness in the
Air (which so continued for twenty years together, that it every year hurt the
Mulberry Trees) vicious humors fit to generate the Gout were heaped up. Which
may appear even from this, that not only Men and Women, but even the Sheep also
(which yet never eat of the Mulberry Fruit) were not free from this Disease.

Quest. 6. What the Cause of Arthritis is?
WE have told you indeed that the nighest and most immediate Cause of
Arthritis, is the solution of continuity in those parts that are about the
Joints, proceeding from a humor that has flown into them, whiles it either
distendeth those parts, or else pricketh and launceth them; or else does both
these. And yet notwithstanding as touching this thing, the Physicians do not a
little differ among themselves; and as for the nighest cause exciting the
Arthritis, some of them determine one thing, and some another. Which
disagreement among Physicians, I conceive has not been the least Cause why the
Arthritis has oftentimes been so unhappily and unsuccessfully cured. For when
the Cause of a Disease is not sufficiently agreed upon, it is not possible that
the Cure should ever be rightly performed.

And first of all, Whether a bare distemper may be the Cause of Arhritis?
there are some likewise that do indeed reckon up a naked and bare distemper
among the Causes of Arthritis, and this is also asserted by Costaeus (in his
third Book upon Avicen. Fen. 22. tractate 2. Chap. 5.) for this reason, because
that sometimes there is a pain felt, without any swelling at all, which is wont
to be joined unto a distemper with matter. But a bare distemper (let it be even
what it will) is not the nighest cause of this Affect, seeing that the distemper
that sometimes exciteth so long a continuing pain, cannot possibly subsist
alone; neither can it likewise be the cause of so great and grievous a pain.
And moreover, the very humor it self (oftentimes manifest enough) does
sufficiently show that besides the distemper there is likew ise present an
afflux of the humors.

And although in the beginning there is oftentimes no swelling at all that
appears outwardly, yet neither does this sufficiently evince that there is
therefore no humor within. Like as in the Pleurifie, the Toothach, and the many
other pains of other parts, the humor lying hid within discovers it self by
pain alone, but by no swelling at all. Moreover, purging and sweating
Medicaments are of singular use in the curing and prevention of this Disease;
which yet are no ways necessary in a pure distemper.

And although that Paraeus relates a History of his own Disease, by which he
would prove that a naked and bare distemper may produce the Arthritis; yet this
story of his does not sufficiently prove that there was no afflux at al of the
humors present; since that the qualities of the external Air may excite an
afflux of the humors. Petrus Salius Diversus indeed (in his Tract of the
affect. of the parts) makes mention of an Ischias or Arthritis from dryness;
the cause whereof was neither known to Galen, nor yet unto any of those that
came after him: but Hippocrates only knew it, as appears in his B. of the
internal Affections. But (as he writes) we are not by dryness to understand
any dry distemper of the parts constituting the joint it self (to wit, of the
bones, ligaments, and tendons) but a wasting and consumption of its glutinous
humidity, by which it is naturally nourished, and whereby the joint it self is
oyled as it were, and made the more fit for motion. For if upon any occasion
whatsoever it so happen that this humidity be wholly dried up, then the motion
of the joint is hindered; and a difficulty of the motion, and withal a pain
succeeds. And he tells us, that this Affect, if it be in the joint of the Hip,
it is then by Hippocrates called the Ischiadick or Sciatick pain; but that he
himself had likewise taken notice that it might be bred in any other joint
whatsoever.

But Galen was not ignorant of this Affect; only he denies it to be the true
Arthritis; and he tells us that it was only a certain kind of Impediment in the
motion, whilst that in the third Section, and 16. Aphorism, he thus expressly
writes: If immoderate drinesses consume the humidity of the joints, it then
indeed causes a certain difficult motion by reason of the dryness; and perhaps
likewise now and then a pain. But that this passion (which they call Arthritis)
is in no wise caused, unless any one be disposed to call all the pains whatsoever
of the joints by the name of Arthritis. And moreover (I speak it without
detracting in the least from the worth of men so eminent) be it so indeed, that
such a pain and impediment of the motion may proceed from dryness: yet I much
doubt of this, Whether or no this pain be caused only by the wasting of that
humidity whereby the heads of the bones are as it were anointed and oyled. For
in the whole space in the which they are joined together, the bones are not
covered with any Periostium, and thereupon they are wholly void of sense; and
therefore in this place pain cannot be excited. But it seems to be more
agreeable to truth (if there be any impediment of the motion, or any pain
excited in the joints by reason of dryness) that this happens by reason of
the over drying of the Tendons, the extremities of the Muscles and Ligaments;
by means of which the Members are rendered unfit for motion: and if it be so
that they ought to be moved, there is a necessity of their being violently
extended; and this violent stretching forth breeds a pain.

Seeing therefore that a naked and bare distemper cannot cause the Arthritis,
Whether a windiness may cause the Arthritis?
it remains that we make enquiry from what matter it may be excited. There
are some indeed (as Guainerius, and Matthaeus) that make mention of windiness,
and of the degrees the of. But a windiness cannot possibly excite so great a
pain, and oftentimes also of long continuance in these parts; unless by
windiness any one be minded to understand the spirit; touching which we shall
speak more hereafter. And although the pain be oftentimes movable, and flitting
from place to place; yet this is not from any windiness, but from the humor,
which is also most apt and fit for motion.

There are some likewise that unto Arthritis refer that Affect which by the
Arabians is called Nakir; Nakir what kind of Affect it is.
which Albucasis (in his second B. and 93. Chap.) thus describes: There is
(says he) in this Country of ours a certain sickness or Disease which they
call Nakir; and it is a pain that happens in some certain Members, and
afterward is changed from one Member to another: and of this disease I once
saw such an Example as this that I shall now relate. I was upon a time called
unto a certain woman being sick and weak in a Village not far from me. She
uncovered her Arm, where I beheld a small Inflation in the Vein of the Arm; and
about an hour after I saw this Inflation to proceed forward with great speed
(like as a worm creeps) and ascending upwards unto the Shoulder much sooner
than could possibly be imagined: and it was moved upwards like as Quicksilver
is moved when it runs from place to place. The pain therefore departed out of
the place where it was at first, and fixes it self in the Shoulder. And
afterward, as she her self told me, it rolled up and down throughout the whole
Body; even as I my self might very easily discover it to be so. I therefore
greatly admired the swiftness of its motion from Member to Member; for indeed I
had never until now seen any such kind of Disease as I saw in this Woman.
Indeed I have seen many that have felt the pain changing and going from one
member to another, but not after this manner, or with this celerity; neither
could I here conjecture any other cause then this to wit, that the Woman was
quite spent, and dispirited by the heat of the Sun, and her hard labor and
pains-taking, (such as they are wont to undergo that live in villages) her Body
being very dry, and her Veins uncovered. And hereupon therefore that windiness
appears to be changed even sensibly; and of necessity it is that it cannot
appear after this manner in such as live idle and delicate lives, and in moist
Bodies, and where the Veins are kept covered. And therefore whenever thou
attemptest the curing hereof, and the Patient Feel that pain, then if it be the
same, it appears to the Eyes, as we said before. Then hasten and bind both
upon it, and under it; and cut upon it, till the Windiness that is pent up and
kept in has a vent and passage made for it to go forth; and Cauterize the
place. But if it be so that thou can not see the place that is affected, and
the pain, then Cure it with the excussion of the Body, and some kind of Remedy
that expels windinesses, and extenuateth them. And for this purpose, very
necessary and useful are the Foetid Pills, the Pills de Sagapeno, and the like.
Thus far Albucas^s.

But this Disease is not Arthritis. For neither is it only about the Joints,
but it arises from a Windiness, or furious spirit poured forth out of the
Vessels, and running to and fro throughout all the external parts of the Body.
There are some who think that this motion of windinesses, and spirits, is made
in the Veins themselves. And true indeed it is, that oftentimes in the Vessels
and Bowels such like windinesses do run up and down with great violence and
rushing; like as Antonius Benivenius (in his Tract of hidden Diseases, and the
Cure of the Causes, Chap. 81.) Relates that Ludovicus Nicolinus was so
affected with a wind rushing violently into his Bowels and Stomach, that not
only his Bowels and Breast, but his shoulder-blades were likewise extended with
an incredible pain; and he was likewise forely troubled with a great and
miserable streightness of breathing; whereupon also he died the third day. But
in that History of Albucasis, it is probable, that the Flatulent and windy
spirit that he speaks of was poured forth of the Vessels into the very
superficies and outside of the Body. For seeing that the motion there spoken of
was Joined with a great pain, that spirit could not be contained only in the
Vessels, as being such that are destitute and void of all sense.

And some there are who think (and this rightly enough) that this Affect, (if
it be not one and the same, yet that it) is very near of kin unto that
described by Wierus, in a peculiar Tract, (in a Book he wrote in the German
Tongue, touching unknown Diseases:) of which likewise Henricus a Bra, wrote an
Epistle to Petrus Forestus; which Epistle is annexed unto the observations of
Forestus, in his twentyeth B. of Observations. Those of our times do for the
most part refer them to enchantment; and they tell us I know not what of Elves
and Fayries that (as they conceive) breed those pains; when yet notwithstanding
these and such like of flitting pains that run up and down in the Body may also
have their Natural Causes, and they may have their Original from a certain
sharp Flatulency, or a sharp whey bred out of a Humor almost Scorbutic, and
roving up and down the Body by the Membranous parts and Muscles. And from hence
it is also apparent, that they cannot be fitly referred neither unto the
Dracunculi of the Ancients; in regard that there is here no worm that lie^h
underneath. The Westphalian^ for the Cure hereof use (as a peculiar Remedy)
Earthworms; of which see Wierus, in the place alleged.

But we shall add no more touching this affect, in regard that it does not
properly apperrain unto Arthritis, of which we are now treating. And yet by the
way I think it not fit to pass over in silence what I find mentioned in the
H^stories of those that were troubled with the Arthritis, (which Forestus
brings in his 29. B.a nd so likewise in his 14. Observation) where we find
mention made of one Hugo Cornelius, twenty eight years of Age, who over wearied
and tired out in the employments of his Husbandry, and very sleepy as he was,
laid himself down upon the Ground, and there he slept for some certain hours;
at length awaking, in his left hand, about the wrist, he felt an intolerable
pain, which at length seized his whole Arm, insomuch that he was not able to
move his Hand, or so much as to stir his singers, which were now grown stiff as
it were: and soon after he was troubled with the same pain about the Foot, unto
which was added likewise a very strong and violent Fever, Of all which not
withstanding by purging and altering Medicaments, and by the administering of
Topics, he was cured in seven days times, or less. Where he likewise makes
mention of another, who very drunk as he was lying all night in his Garden upon
the cold ground, when he awoke was immediately taken with a violent fever, and
most intolerable pains, of which in a very short time he died. But as it seems
to me, those affects were not properly Arthritick, but rather acute fevers
contracted from Vapors exhaling out of the Earth, which they both of them
received by sleeping thereon; in which fevers Nature thrust forth part of the
vicious Humor unto the extreme parts of the Body; and so from this Humor there
were not only pains excited in the Joints, but also in the whole Arm, the
Membranes of the Muscles being there affected: and so great was the pravity of
this Humor, that it likewise snatched away one of these two by a sudden Death.

Seeing therefore that neither a naked and bare distemper, Whether a Humor, and
what kind of humor it is and whether all the four Humors may be the cause of
Atthritis.
neither yet a windiness alone can be the cause of Arthritis, most Physicians
indeed therefore agree in this, that it is some Humor that causes the
Arthritis: but what kind of Humor this is, herein they greatly differ. Some of
them think that all the four Humors (to wit, Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and
Melancholy) may be the cause of Arthritis: and this they endeavor to make
good more especially from hence, that in Arthritis there appear many different
colors of the swellings, diverse kinds of pains, and various accidents; the term
of the declination not one and the same, and a much different way and Method to
be observed in the Cure, according to the variety of the Causes. To wit, (that
I may use the very words of Petrus Salius Diversus, in his sreatise of the
Parts affected, Chap. 16.) in some the Color is much inclining to be red, in
others yellow, and in a third sort, white. The swelling is now and then of a
considerable bigness, and sometimes again it scarcely appears. And as for the
pain, it is sometimes indeed very troublesome, but yet not so but that it may
well be born; but then at other times (according to the Humor, the cause
thereof) it is most sharp and intolerable. And then again, this pain is
sometimes soon gone and vanished, but that continues a long while. But
oftentimes also diverse evil Symptoms do follow, as an extraordinary great heat
and burning in the place affected. But sometimes again, either there is present
no heat at all, or on the contrary, there is a coldness that greatly troubles
the party; some of these persons being offended by the Air when it is over hot,
and others by an Air too cool. The way and course of Curing is sometimes also
very var^ous, because in some of these such Medicaments as heat are found to be
most beneficial, and in others those benesit most that cool; the pains in those
being the more enraged by things that are cold; but in these they are
heighthened by such things as are hot. And then again, some of these pains are
appeased by the Evacuation of the Blood, some by the purging forth of Phlegm, a
third sort from the emptying forth of the Choler, and the last kind of them by
the Evacuation of Melancholy are very much mitigated and allaied. All which
seems to denote thus much unto us, that the cause of the Arthritis is
sometimes hot, and now and then cold and sometimes, the matter thereof very
various and different.

But these Reasons do not sufficiently prove that which they ought. For
although that (according to the various treasuring up of Humors) diverse kinds
of Humors may flow unto the part affected; yet these are not the prime and
principal cause of the Arthritis, but together with the Serum, or Whey, they
are foreibly carried unto the part affe^^ed; or else they are drawn thither by
the pain. And that that Humor which breeds the swelling is not the principal
Cause of Arthritis, appears even from hence, that in the beginning before the
part swells, the pain is most intense, and violent, but as the part by
degrees swells up, so the pain more and more remitteth. Neither indeed is
this opinion agreeable to the truth. For many there are who although they be
troubled with a Plethory and Cacochymy, yet notwithstanding they are not at all
taken and seized upon by the Arthritis. Whether the b^ood may cause (...) (...).
And in special, (as for what concerns the Blood) it does not at any time any
manner of way generate the Arthritis by its abundance. For the blood is the
Treasury of Nature; and therefore although it does abound, yet nevertheless
Nature does not easily and upon all occasions expel it unto any part
whatsoever, but more especially those parts that are void of blood, such as
they are that are affe^^ed in the Arthritis. And then again, if the blood
should also happen to be driven forth thither, seeing that it is mild and
harmless, it could not possibly stir up so^great and vehement pains; which yet
are always present even in the beginning of the Arthritis, before such time as
the part begin to swel, and grow red. And i^ the Arthritis were from the blood,
why should not the Tumor then be suppurated; since that there is no Humor so
easily brought to a suppuration, and converted into Pus, as is the Blood?

And as for Melancholy, the Case is likewise very plain; Whether Melancholy
may be the cause of A^thri^is.
and there are but few that will have this Humor to be the cause of Arthritis:
for it being a very thick and dull Humor, it cannot easily insinuate it self
into those most straight and narrow passages.

But as for Choler, there are some who upon very good ground will have the
Arthritis to proceed from it also, and not only from the phlegm; and this they
endeavor to prove even by those very signs that appear in the Arthritis. For
the pain is for the most part extreme sharp and violent; and not unlike unto
that pain that is pricking and shooting; and the Diet that went before was dry
and hot; or at least, very much tending thereunto: the excercises also were
over-violent; and the habit of the Body thin and spare. And the very truth is,
that this is not indeed to be denied, that those things do sometimes befall the
sick persons; and that oftentimes also the pain is so sharp, that it cannot
possibly by any means be referred unto that Crude Humor Phlegm, but argues
rather a hot Humor. But now a Question may be here made, whether or no every
preternatural hot Humor may be called Choler; and we think that we may well
deny this to be a truth: and we determine with Carolus Piso, that there may be
a Serous or Wheyish Cacochymy, (although he does not rightly explain it) and
that there may likewise be a Serous Humor that may be most hot; and that under
it there may also be comprehended those sharp Ichores, (of which we sind
Hippocrates and Galen making mention, and of which we shall have occasion to
speak more anon) or if you had rather speak as do the Chemists, that Tartarous
Salt, or the spirits of Tartarous Salts. Neither are all that are troubled with
the Arthritis of a thin and lean, or slender constitution of Body, and a
Choleric Constitution and temperament.

Fernelius (in his 6. B. of the Diseases of the parts, and the Symptoms, Chap.
19. Whether or no, Phlegm according to Fernelius may be the Cause.
) rejects all the other Humors; and he there determines, that not blood, nor
Choler, nor Melancholy, but only the cold pituitous or Phlegmatic, and Serous
Humor, may be the Cause of the Arthritis; and that every Arthritis is cold, and
proceeds from a cold Humor. And in this indeed his Opinion is right and
agreeable to the truth, that of one Disease there is but one only cause; but in
this he is very much mistaken, when he tells us that this Humor is cold; since
that almost all the Symptoms that befall Arthritick persons teach us the
Contrary; to wit, that most acute and sharp pain, burning heat, sudden motion,
and the rest of them. For although when this Humor first begins to be moved
there may arise some kind of coldness, by which the whole Body may be extremely
Chilled and made to shake; yet notwithstanding this is no sure and certain sign
of a cold matter; since that even the hot Humors also (when they are moved
through those parts that have their fense and feeling) may by little and little
produce a coldness, or chilness, and horror; as it is also very manifestly to
be seen in Choleric Fevers. And then Secondly, he erreth likewise in this,
that he accounts phlegm and the Serous Humor for all one Humor; as likewise in
this, that he will have the Serous Humor to be simply a cold Humor. For albeit
that in the Serous Humors there are many parts that are waterish; yet there are
also many parts therein that are sharp and Salt, by which it differs from
simple and pure Water.

But Fernelius seems to have taken this his Opinion from Galen, (in his tenth
Book of the Composit. of Medicaments according to the place, and 2 Chap.) where
he writes, that the Humor which exciteth the Arthritis is fomtimes indeed the
blood, but for the greatest part a Phlegmatic Humor, or mixed Humor, partly
Phlegmatic and partly Choleric, or likewise of the blood mingled together with
those aforesaid. Or if any one would speak more exactly as concerning it, he
may say that it is not a phlegmatic humor, but that the Humor which most an end
is called Crude and indigested, and is for the most part predominant about the
Joints, is now and then very thick, and like unto the thicker sort of Pus: but
when it has for a while continued in the joints, it is then rendered not only
more thick, but also viscid and clammy.

There are very many other Physicians that in this follow the Opinion of Galen
and Fernelius; and they account the Phlegmatic, Cold, Crude, and Serous Humor,
for one and the same; and withal they teach us that it is the cause of
Arthritis. But in this they are al of them mistaken; seeing that neither can so
sharp a pain proceed from such a cold and crude humor; and because that the
Arthritis invadeth the sick person suddenly; and then oftentimes lies hid
again for a while, and is removed into another place; for the doing of which
the thick and dull phlegmatic humor, and that humor likewise that so nearly
relembleth thick Pus, is altogether unfit. And moreover, seeing that even in
the very beginning (when there is no swelling as yet appearing) the pain is
most vehement and exquisite, this is sufficient to show that it is caused by a
humor both subtle and sharp (and this also penetrating into the most straight
and narrow passages, and pricking the Membranes) and that it proceeds not
from any thick and cold humor. Neither do those Tophi that are generated in
Arthr^^ick persons sufficiently evince that Phlegm is the cause of Arthritis,
because that those Tophi or hard knots before spoken of do rather proceed from
a humor that is Tartar^^s and nearly allied unto Earthy Minerals, than from a
crude and raw phlegm. Thomas Erastus indeed (in his fourth Disputat. against
Paracelsus) writes that he never but once saw the Gout bred from a pure and
mere phlegm; and this was in acertain noble person of Helms^adt, who was sick
without any pain at al, if he kept but his hands and feet quiet: there was no
redness to be seen; but a white swelling loose enough; although that his joints
were not without hard knots, but had many of them, and that for many years
before he had not been able to stand upon his feet. But that Affect at this
time was not indeed the Gout truly and properly so called, but only an
Oedematous tumor, with the which the feet (by reason of a long and lasting
afflux of the humors) were much troubled. But now that in the very beginning
the blood with the phlegm (or rather indeed a serous humor) flowed down into the
Feet, and corrupted them, this is confessed even by Erastus himself.

Carolus Piso (in his B. of Diseases from a Wheyish filthiness, Whether or no
the serous filth he the cause of Arthritis, according to Piso?
in two of his Consilia touching Arthritis) will have the serous and wheyish
uncleanness to be the one only cause of Arthritis. Which Opinion (if it be
rightly explained) is absolutely true and undeniable. But in this he is
deceived, that he thinks this Serum or Whey to be a pure Water; since that we
are taught far otherwise by the symptoms, and those things that befall
Arthritick persons.

But others there are and (among the rest Mercurialis) who both knowing and
acknowleding that such vehement and grievous pains cannot possibly be excited
from a phlegmatic and crude humor (in regard that it is certain that those most
vehement and wracking pains are from a hot cause) and that likewise the
phlegmatic and crude humor is altogether unfit for so quick and sudden a motion
as we see to be in the Arthritis; Whether phlegm mingled with choler, according
to Mercurialis?
and that it cannot possibly infinuate it self into those Membranous parts;
they therefore take the latter of the two Opinions in the place alleged out
of Galen, and determine that the Arthritis has its original from Phlegm mingled
with Choler; and that the Choler is mingled together with the thick and tough
phlegm, being unto it as a Vehicle, or Conduit-pipe, for conveyance. But yet
neither does this Opinion fatisfie us, unless that mixture of Phlegm and Choler
be understood of the serous or wheyish humor. For seeing that they themselves
do acknowledge that so sierce and cruel a pain does require a hot cause, this
cannot therefore be from Choler mingled with Phlegm, since that phlegm does dull
and blunt the acrimony of Choler, rather than increase it.

Ludovicus Mercatus whilst he acknowledges, Whether crudity according to
Mercatus may be the cause?
that the vicious humors (although they abound in the Body) do not presently
generate Arthritis, but even other Diseases; therefore he betaketh himself unto
a Crudity also; and thereupon determines that the vicious humors ought to be
Crude and undigested, before they can generate the Arthritis. But then when he
would again acknowledge, that a Crudity is not simply enough and sufficient for
the generating of Arthritis, he feigneth and inventeth diverse things as
touching Crudity; and determines that that Crudity alone is fit for the
generating of Arthritis; which proceeds from the rarity and thinness of the
heat (now whether or no he here ^peak properly I leave it unto any man's
Judgment) and that it is done three manner of wates; First of all, when the
fatter part thereof is separated and drawn out from it. Secondly, by reason of
its dissolution from an External heat. Thirdly, because that it has na^gl^^
with it somewhat that is unconcocted, but hot. And yet notwithstanding at the
len^^^ he concludes, that this Crudity of the humors is not any ordinary kind
of humor* such as the rest are that procreate and beget Fevers, Defluxions,
and many other Diseases; but that it is a Crudity which obtains something that
is peculiar and proper unto it, by reason of which it more inclines unto, and
sooner causes this Affect than any other: and this (as he tells us) is then
done when the humors are made more thin by their being pouted all abroad, and
likewise by their mordacity and corroding quality; by which they are easily
separated from, and rejected by all the other parts, until they come to the
Joints. In this indeed he rightly and most truly asserteth, that that humor
has somewhat in it that is peculiar, by which it generateth the Arthritis and
no other Diseases. But now, if we well and exactly weigh and consider this
Crudity, or rather the Condition of the humor (as he calls it; but yet every
humor that is preternatural may not rightly be called Crude) most certainly
agrees with the serous, salt, and tartarous humor before mentioned and
described by us; as such which is thin, biting, poured abroad, or (as the
Chemists speak) resolved by the tartarous salt. So that Mercatus seems to
have understood the thing well enough, but yet was not able well to express
himself in words, as concerning it. Whether a humor malignant and of an occult
quality may be the cause according to Faraeus?


Ambrose Parry (in his 17. B. and 2. Chapter) whenas he himself likewise took
notice that the humor which generateth the Arthritis was a nature altogether
different from those that are the Authors of the Phlegmone, Oedema, Erysipelas,
or Scirrhus, he for his part determines, that the nature of this humor was
neither better nor worse, but the very same with that from whence the Plague,
French Pox, or the Epilepsie have their Original; and this he endeavoreth to
prove: 1. Because this humor never comes to a suppuration, as do all the rest
of the humors. 2. Because that it produces pains far more sharp and bitter
than the other humors; insomuch that the sick Persons often complain that they
feel the part affected to burn as they think. 3. Because that it is changed
into hard knobs or knots, which does not happen unto any other of the humors.
4. because that it will very hardly give place or remove for any Remedies
whatsoever; but is rather more stird up, exasperated, and enraged by them; so
that the Patients are ready to tell us, that it is far better with them when
they are without any remedies at all than when they have them applied. 5.
Because Galen himself (in his B. of Theriaca to Piso, Chap. 15.) says that
Treacle is very useful for all Arthritick Persons whatsoever, as that (in
Paraeus his Opinion) which dulleth and blunteth the malignity of the humor. In
this indeed Paraeus his Opinion is right, that the common ordinary humors
(Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy) do not produce the Arthritis, but that the
humor which is the Cause of the Arthritis does obtain and has in it somewhat
that is proper and peculiar, and this is sufficiently proved by the Reasons
above alleged by him: but indeed there is no need at all that we should here
have recourse unto any peculiar Malignity, and occult quality; neither do the
Reasons alleged prove it. For there appears here nothing that is Malignant;
but the vehemence of the pain proceeds from the Acrimony of the humor; the
which happens likewise sometimes in the pain of the Teeth, Ears, and other
parts. And although that Galen commend Treacle as good against the Arthritis;
yet this does not at all argue, nor make that it should subdue the Malignity of
the humor, but rather that it should consume the vicious humors; and many other
Medicaments of this nature are also before propounded, in the Cure of the
Arthritis. But yet in the mean time we do not deny this, that the humor (which
is the cause of the Arthritis) may sometimes likewise obtain a peculiar
Malignity; like as we see it to be in the Scurvy, and the Polonian Plica. And
yet notwithstanding we say, that it does not produce the Arthritis, as it is a
Malignant humor, but as it has that disposition which other humors also
(exciting the Arthrtitis) do obtain; that yet are altogether void of any the
least Malignity. Whether the Ebullition of Synovia, and a salt Spirit,
according to the Chemists, be Cause of Arthritis


And lastly, (that we may likewise a little consult the Chemists) we do indeed
very much expect and hope for some light to be given us by them, for the
clearing up of the point now in controversy. But we shall hardly get any the
least light or satisfaction from Paracelsus and his followers, who for the most
part even obscure the plainest truth. For Paracelsus (as he is wont) speaks
very variously touching the thing in question: For in his Tract touching the
Podagra Gout, page 540.) he there says that the Gout is a disease, the seat
whereof is Synovia; which when it is exalted, the Gout is then excited: And
that the disease is a Mineral liquor, or a sour juice, such as are, Alum,
Vitriol, Vinegar, Barberries, Acacia, and the like; for seeing that these Salts
are contrary and opposite unto the Synovia, if they be generated in any man,
and mingled together with the Synovia, they then cause the Synovia to boil
over: and then he afterward tells us strange and wonderful things touching the
influence of Heaven (which here I scarcely think worth the relating) as
Irkewise those things which he has in his 2. B. of the Gout. In his Paramirum
he refers this Disease to Mercury precipitate: But in his B. of Tartarous
Diseases, Chap. 19. he refers it unto Tartar. Petrus Severinus (in his Idea
Medica, cap. 12.) teaches us, that the excited Roots of these Podagrick
Affects, if they have their seat in the blood, they boil up with hear, and send
spiritual and vaporous Tinctures unto the Domestic places; and that the
Matrixes of the Roots having there gotten fruit, do by a dolorous calamity of
the Symptoms absolve the revolutions of the Predestinations. But the truth is,
the differences of the pain (that I may in plain and easieterms show you what
he by an affected pomp of words obscureth) do all of them proceed from a
diversity of the Salts, of which some are more, and some less sharp and biting:
but that these spiritual and vaporous Tinctures are received by their Matrixes,
(that is, those parts that are obnoxious unto the drawings out of the Podagrick
fruits, when they are resolved; and they have in the general an affinity with
them, and therefore readily admit of, and give entertainment to the guest
coming unto it) to wit, the joints, or the Synovia of the Hands and Feet.

But here they do by their words obscure a thing that is in it self most plain,
and they likewise mingle falsities with truths. For as for what they bring
touching the Ebullition of the Synovia, and the fervent boiling heat thereof,
this Synovia of Paracelsus is a mere fiction and invention of his own; touching
which we have already spoken in our Tract. de Consens. and dis. Chymicor. cap.
15. But as for what they speak of the salt Spirits, this (if it be rightly
explained, and well understood) is very agreeable unto the truth, as we shall
show you by and by. And so likewise we may well enough bear with them in this,
that they endeavor to explain the differences of the pains in Arthritick
persons from the differences of the Salts that appear in Vegetables and
Minerals; in regard that our own ablest Phyfitians (and among the rest, that
most experienced Felix Platerus) are al of Opinion, that the humor which is the
cause of Arthritis is not simply a Water, but endued with a quality of a
different Nature, and mingled together with the Ichores and Excrements of the
Humors, by which it is rendered more vehement. And so we likewise judge this
more fit to be rejected in them (which yet Severinus delivers unto us in
words too obscure) to wit, that the other excrementitious humors are moved unto
other parts; and that the humor which is the cause of Arthritis has in it a
peculiar tendency unto the joints; as we also showed you above. The Authors
Opinion touching the cause of Arthritis.
And therefore (that we may at length conclude this controversy) it appears
from what has been hitherto said, that neither simply the blood, nor phlegm,
nor melancholy, nor yet a Water, is the nearest and immediate cause of the
Arthritis. But when I have well weighed al those things that befall Arthritick
persons, and which cannot possibly be derived from the Humors (as is manifest
by what has been hitherto said) I cannot otherwise determine, than that a
salt, sharp, subtle humor (and such as for the most part resembles the nature
of the salt spirits, is the nighest cause of Arthritis. And now, let who will
call it Choler, or Phlegm mingled with Choler, or Salt, or Tartar, or what he
please, he may do it for me, so that the thing be but rightly explained. I for
my part shall make use of the word Serum or Whey, Salt, and Tartar, that so I
may likewise by a proper and peculiar word explain a thing that differs from
Choler and the ordinary and common Phlegm. But now that the Serum or Whey is not
only a watery humor, even the Ancients have acknowledged; and Galen in the
sixth of his Epidem. Comment 3. text. 33. writes that the serous or wheyish
blood is by Hippocrates and Plato called not only a Water, and a waterish
humidity void of biting, but biting likewise and corroding; to wit, which
resembles the nature of the Sallow or Willow spirits; and therefore it is that
it pricketh and biteth those parts that are so sensible and quick of feeling,
and in these it exciteth most acute and intolerable pains. There is, to wit,
in the Earth (out of which Plants grow, whereby both Man and bruit Creatures
are nourished) something that is salt, which answers unto Minerals; and it may
not unfitly be called the salt of the Earth; which yet notwithstanding is
scarcely to be found pure and alone, but it is mingled together with other
bodies; from whence diverse kinds of Earths have their Original; and thereupon
(according to the great variety of Soyls) it is very various and different; as
Muddy, Clayie, etc. and then at the length in Plants and Animals it is called
Tartar; and so it comes to be tranfused into men. But this, albeit that in
Plants and Men it become in the many various Concoctions very subtle and
volatile (if it be not such before) as very manifestly also it appears from
the Salt of Urine, and that at length it is mingled even with the blood it
self: yet nevertheless in regard that from the very first original of it it is
altogether unfit for the nourishing of the body, and is (as Hippocrates
speaks) wholly unserviceable thereunto, at the length (unless it be
forthwith, even in the first Concoction, expelled forth by the belly or
afterward evacuated forth by sweats and Urines) it is treasured up; and being
burdensome to Nature it is thrust forth unto the Joints (as having a certain
kind of near alliance with such like matter) where by its acrimony it exciteth
most vehement and grievous pains. Neither let any be hereat moved, and wonder
that we say that this matter is one while spiritual, and sometimes also
Tartarous, and so very fit likewise for the generating of those hard knots
which they call Tophi. For (that I may speak with the Chemists) spinits may
proceed from bodies, and again bodies may be from spirits. This matter in its
original, and while it was in the Earth, was a body, and somewhat as it were
Earthy, and Mineral like: but it comes afterward to be attenuated in the
various Concections both in Plants and Men, and so it is made as it were
spiritual: which has been acknowledged by many of Galens followers; and among
the rest, by Cardanus, who upon the 47. and 49. Aphorisms of the sixth Section,
writes that the Matter, to wit, the cause of Arthritis, is as it were a
spirit. And Lucian in his Tragopodagra calls it a violent and injurious
spirit. And yet afterward this thin humor or spirit, when it has once gotten
a fit place (to wit, the bones, and the places about the joints) it again
betaketh it self into the body, and is there coagulated; like as it is a thing
generally well known unto the Chemists; and other salt spirits may again be
coagulated, and return into bodies. And yet nevertheless if any one shall assert
that there is likewise a volatile Salt in the very Earth it self (which the
Plants draw unto themselves) this does no way thwart or oppose this Opinion of
ours; but the whole result of the business and Controversy in hand comes al
unto one and the same conclusion.

Quest. 7. Where the Humor the cause of Arthritis, is generated, and by what
ways it flows into the Joints.
IN what place the Humor that is the cause of the Arthritis is bred, and by
what ways and passages it flows into the joints, in this Physicians do
greatly differ among themselves: which disagreement of theirs has much
hindered the Cure, and made it far more difficult than otherwise it would have
been; and therefore not without cause is it that Fernelius (in his sixth B. of
the Diseases of the parts, and the Symptoms, Chap. 18.) writes that from the
very ignorance of this thing the pain of the joints has hitherto been held and
left for incurable, and called the shame and disgrace of the Physicians.

We have briefly above given you our Opinion as touching this thing in
Controversy. But because there are many (and those some of them of the more
able and learned Physicians) that are of another Judgment, and differ from me
in their Opinion (as in this darkness of Man's mind it is generally wont to be
even in the greatest and most serious Controversies) I shall not think it time
misspent, nor my pains il bestowed, in laying before you (with what brevity I
can) their several Opinions; and in the recital of them I shall weigh them
accordingly.

And first I shall indeed begin with Fernelius; who asserteth that they are much
mistaken, who think that the Humor the cause of Arthritis does break forth of
the more secret and inmost parts of the body into the Joints. For how (says
he) is it possible that any pure and sincere humor can from the bowels, and the
most inward seats be carried through the Veins; or that that humor which was so
lately mingled with the blood should now (without any mixture thereof) by the
Orifices of the veins fall pure into the blood; or if there should also
together with the humor flow forth any of the blood, which being collected and
gotten together in the Joints does it not excite a Phlegmone? And why likewise
does not the crude humor which is carried into the Joints by any other passages
than by the Veins cause the Arthritis? For in the Cache^ie, the crude humors
that from the bowels fall down into the feet, and cause them to swell, do not
yet excite the Gout in them. But even Fernelius himself takes it for granted,
and plainly asserteth that the Head is the Fountain and Original of this
Malady, from whence (says he) a phlegmatic humor (and this very thin) flows
forth into the Joints. And this humor (as he tells us) is not indeed gathered
together in the Brain (as whose excrements are either purged forth by the
Nostrils, or else by the Palate fall down upon the great rough Artery, and the
Lungs, or else into the Stomach, and the more inward seats) but it is (says
he) collected in the external parts of the Head, and such as are placed without
the Skul, and by the top and superficies of the body run along downward under
the Skin. For seeing that there are many Veins running forth thither that are
derived from the external Jugular Veins, he conceives that they may there lay
up their thin and serous excrements; and that in regard the Skin of the Head is
thick and impenetrable (so that the humors cannot easily expire and breath
through the same) that therefore in progress of time they are there stored up,
and from thence by the superficies and outside of the body fall down into the
joints.

There are very many other Physicians that follow this Opinion of Fernelius; of
the which some of them will have the humor (the Cause of Arthritis) to be
collected in the Head alone, betwixt the Skul and the Skin of the Head; and
they tell us that is the one only place from whence the matter flows down unto
the Joints: but there are others of them, who although they likewise add other
ways, yet notwithstanding they do withal join this way of Fernelius: and
there are very few or none of them, who do not believe but that this matter
does withal flow down likewise from this place of the Head.

But in very truth, what Fernelius complains of touching the other Opinion
(that by reason of it it so came to pass that the Arthritis was almost lest as
a desperate and incurable Disease, and was termed the Opprobium or disgrace of
Physicians) I conceive (without disparagement unto any man's Judgment) that it
may more truly be affirmed of this his own Opinion; and I am of Opinion that
that Physician who seeks for the Spring and Fountain of this Malady in the
Head only (neglecting in the mean time the true Fountain and sourse thereof) is
scarcely ever likely to cure the Arthritis. For albeit it be indeed true, that
certain various flitting and wandering pains may be here and there excited by
the serous humor falling down from the extenal part of the Head under the Skin,
by the outside and supersicies of the Body; yet notwithstanding the Arthritis
is never from hence generated; neither is that matter wont to subsist about the
Joints, but for the most part about the membranes of the Joints. But now the
generating of the humor that is the Cause of the Arthritis is very different,
and of a far other nature. For this is generated in the sanguification, by
reason of the Errors in D^et, and the weakness of the Bowels: and sometimes
likewise it is supplied from the suppression of the Courses in Women, and the
sudden stoppage of the H^morth^ids (...) both Sexes; and then it is heaped up
in the Veins and Arteries: whereupon also so ^oon as ever i^ begins to be
moved, and to become as it were boiling hot, there is almost always a Feave^
joined with the Arthritis: yea and sometimes the Fevers are ter^^are^ in the
said Arthritis; and hence it likewise comes to pass, that in the Arthritis the
Ur^^giveth (...) and manifest signs and Tokens of the humor that is pe^^an in
the Veins. And hence it is (...) Galen himself renche^h us (in the third
Section, Ap^^^nm 20.) that in little ^^ellings and pains of the Joy^^, the
deep^^ parts of the Body are through^^ purged, the ^^tious humors being thrust
from the more princip^^ parts unto the ou^side and supersicies o^ the Body:
Neither can there any thing else be proved by firm and so^ud Rea^on^. Al which
being tru^ as is alleged, and the care standing thus; and it being most
unde^^able, that the Humor the cause of the Arthritis is contained in the Veins
and Arteries, there can no reason be rendered or any necessity (either in
Nature, or else in the Disease) why these Humors ought necessarily first of al
to asce^^ up (...) the Head before they be carried into the Feet; in regard
more especially ^^at there is an open and strait way by which themay be moved
through the Veins and A^^eries, and (...) carried into the Joints. And that the
matter, the cause of Arthritis, is carried unto the Joints through the Vessels
and not without them, appears also even from hence, that the Veins in those
joints that are like to be invaded by the Arth^^^^, swel up and grow big when
it first begins; and in that the Humor exciting the Arthritis (if Repelling
Medicaments be unseasonably applied) runs back again into the Veins and
Arteries; and is either transmitted unto the Noble parts, and there exciteth
Acute Fevers, anxieties of heart, and other dangerous and deadly Symptoms; or
else it is suddenly conveyed into another joint; whereupon the pain which but
ere while infested the Foot, instantly, (if Repellers be unadvisedly
administered) thrusts it self forth and appears in the hand; which could not
be done, were it not that the Humor were moved through the Vessels. For it is
not at all possible that the Humor which but just now was in one of the Toes,
should under the Skin be so suddenly carried up into the hand. And if the Humor
should in some space of time mount up thither under the Skin, yet it must of
necessity cause pain in all those parts through which it passes, as we may
often take notice in those pains that arise from the Serous Wheyish Humor
descending without the Skul, that the pain is first of all in the Head, and
then afterward it is excited in the Neck, and then in the shoulder blades, and
the back; and that at the length both the Humor and the pain descend even unto
the Thighs; which does not at all happen in the Arthritis. And moreover it
oftentimes comes to pass, that a man by wrath, or (...) cast into the
Arthritis; which happens most certainly from the (...) suddenly moved in the
Veins and Arteries: but if the head should (...) these Humors sensibly and by
degrees heaped up in its own Skin, this could (...) happen. And again, if the
fountain and original of this Malady were under the (...) Head, why is not then
the Cure chiefly directed to that seat, and why (...) ^^sicatories, Cauteries,
and issues applied unto the Neck; seeing that (...) a fitter place then this to
be found, whereby the matter gathered (...) the Skul and the Skin of the Head
may be evacuated. And furthermore (...) the Original of the Humor were always
in the external part of the Head; then of necessity there would be present
likewise some signs thereof heaped up there and descending; which yet in the
most are not at al taken notice of, their Heads being altogether safe and sound
when yet their Joints are invaded by the Arthritis, (...) indeed among other
the signs of the Humor heaped up, reckons the ^^avin^ss of the Head for one,
as also overmuch desire of sleep, an external pain or the Head, and which is
sti^d up only by the touching thereof, (especially if the hair be kembed back
but never so little) an Oedematous waterish swelling, like unto soft wax, lying
under the Skin, more especially in the hinder part of the Head: but he
reckons up for signs of the Humor flowing downward, a pain running up and
down from the Neck, or by the shoulders, into the Arm and Hands; or else turned
down by little and little along the back into the Hips, Knees, and feet, there
arising sometimes some kind of sense and seeling of Cold. But indeed it cannot
at all be denied, that these signs are present, when there is a Serous and
Whey^^h Humor heaped up together in the Head, and falling down by the external
parts of the Body: but they very seldom appear in the Arthritis; it being most
manifest by experience, that such as are troubled with the Arthritis are yet
for the most part very well in their Heads. Neither do such as are taken with
the Arthritis always perceive that deflux of Humors from the Head, and the
pain proceeding therefrom, as but even now we told you. And grant indeed that
it be so, that in the beginning of the Arthritis the head may likewise in some
(where it is but weak) be offended, and that there may be a kind of heaviness
and pain perceived therein, Yet nevertheless neither does this sufficiently
prove that the Humor (the cause of the Arthritis) is generated in the head, (in
regard that the very same often happens in Fevers, although the cause of the
Fever be not generated in the Head) but the head is then offended by its
consent with other parts. For when the Humors boil with heat in the Arteries
and Veins, and that they begin to be moved, they partly rove and run up and
down by their own impe^uous motion (this being proper unto them, when they
abound and swel up) and partly they are by Nature thrust forth hither and
thither; and then they more especially siez upon the weak parts, until at the
length they seat and fix themselves in one certain place. And therefore it is
not at all to be wondered at, that in such persons as have weak Heads, and
heads that are otherwise very subject to excite defluxions, in the first
invasion of the Arthritis some of the Humors (now about to ru^h forth unto the
Joints,) should be poured out by the Capillary Veins under the Skin in the
head, and there excite pain, and other Symptoms. Which yet notwithstanding does
nothing at all patronize this Opinion of Fernelius, since that even those very
Humors are not bred and collected under the Skin of the Head, (as he would have
it) but they are suddenly poured forth thither by the Veins and Arteries that
are sent unto the head from the external Jugular Veins and Arteries. And grant
it indeed to be true, that the Arthritick pains properly so called were excited
in the Neck, as he says: yet nevertheless this is not done by the matter that
by degrees is collected under the skin, and by little and little flows
thither, but because the humors are poured out thither through the Capillary
Veins by which those Joints are nourished. For like as those humors are carried
down to the Feet by the descending trunk of the great hollow Vein and Artery;
so the same may be sent upwards unto the head and the parts lying near about it
by the same trunk ascending. And that there appears some kind of difference
of the Symptoms in the sick persons, it happens from hence, that the humor
flows and is moved, sometimes by the trunk of the hollow Vein and Artery
ascending, and sometimes by the same trunk descending (this being more usual
then the other) and now and then by both. For when it is moved upwards by the
ascending, before ever it comes to the hands by the Axillar branches, something
may easily be thrust forth by the Jugulars (as well the external as the
internal) ascending up into the head, as also into the Brain, and under the
Skin; where some of these sick persons may be infested with rest lessness and
want of sleep, and others of them with a drowsiness, and excessive propension
to sleeping and slumbring, and others of them by other Symptoms. But that that
Humor which infesteth the Toes should be collected under the Skin of the Head,
or poured forth thither out of the Veins and Arteries, and from thence flow
down unto the Foot, this cannot be proved by any firm Reason. For what is that
right and straight way by the which it may suddenly flow straight down from the
head, under the Skin, unto the Feet and Toes? For when the matter destilleth
from the head under the Skin, it is dispersed hither and thither; and here and
there it exciteth pains; but it does not tend directly and straight downward
unto the extreme parts of the Feet: neither likewise if it should flow down by
this way, could it possibly (as oftentimes it happens) so suddenly ascend up
into the Hand, by changing its way.

And in special, as for what concerns the excessive sleepiness and drowsiness
we oftentimes find in the sick person, (and if there be any other Symptoms of
this kind, that arise even in the very brain it self) these do neither appear
in every Arthritis; neither if they should appear, would they at all confirm
the Opinion of Fernelius, but rather confute it, as teaching us, that the
matter is not generated and moved without the Skull, but that it is poured
forth of the very Veins themselves. For this sleepiness and drowsiness is
caused from the matter that is heaped up within the brain, and not collected
without the Skul; which if it be present in the Arthritis, it teaches us thus
much, to wit, that there is likewise some matter by the Veins and Arteries
poured forth into the brain it self.

And Lastly, it is manifest also by experience, that even other Diseases (and
especially such as are acute, whose matter sticks in the Veins, and about the
Bowels) are changed and turned into the Arthritis; and then the thick U^ins are
a sing and argument of the Arthritis nigh at hand. And Averroes (7. Collig.
Chap. 3.) testisieth that he himself became Arthritick from an acute Disease,
when Nature by the Crisis had driven forth the Humors unto the Joints, and
especially unto the Feet; which had not been, if the Arthritis were generated
from a matter flowing down from the Head: touching which we shall likewise
speak more hereafter, when we come to examine the Opinion of Platerus.

Neither are those things of any great moment that Fernelius brings against
the other Opinion, which we mentioned above, and conceive to be very agreeable
to the truth. For when he demands, how a sincere humor can flow unto the
Joints by the orifices of the Veins, he calls that in question which we may
every day see done in persons that are sick. For Nature reteineth the blood as
the treasury of life; and lest that it should be defiled and corrupted by the
vicious humors, it expels them diverse ways out of the Veins and Arteries.
And certain it is that in the fluxes and Purgations of the belly it thrusts
forth the vicious humors alone out of the Vena Cava (or great hollow Vein) unto
the Mesaraicks, and from thence unto the Intestines: and by Critical sweats it
expels the vicious Humors (and these indeed sometimes sincere, but most
commonly stinking and of a very ill color) by the orifices of the Veins ending
and terminated in the Skin. And the same it does in the Erysipelas, Scabbiness,
small Pocks and Measles, and many other Diseases; in which Nature (that so it
may preserve the Body safe and sound) separateth the vicious humors from the
good blood, and expels them by the Orifices of the Veins. And yet
notwithstanding neither does that Serous humor always slow sincere unto the
Joints, but oftentimes it likewise carries forcibly along with it the blood,
and many times also other humors. But as for what Fernelius adds, that if the
blood should flow forth together with the said humor, it must necessarily
excite a Phlegmone, this indeed often happens as he himself confesses,
whilst as touching the Chiragra, or Gout in the hand, he thus writes: There
is (says he) in this affect a beating pain, with a Swelling, Redness, Heat,
and for the most part with swollen and strutting Veins. And touching the Podagra,
or Gout in the Feet; there is (says he) a swelling present here like as in the
Chiragra; as also a Redness, Heat, and beating pain both in the part, as also
in the Veins lying round about it: al which are signs of an Inflammation.
Whereupon likewise it is that Hippocrates (in the sixth Section of his
Aphorisms, Aphor. 49.) attributes this name unto the Arthritis, when he says
that such as have the Gout are troubled likewise with a Phlegmone. And yet
nevertheless every Inflammation is not necessarily suppurated; and that in the
Arthritis the humors are not suppurated, this shows not unto us the place
from whence they flow forth, but rather argues the Nature of the humor it
self, as being altogether unfit for suppuration; to wit, such as is serous,
salt, and tartarous; the thinner part whereof is discussed, but the thicker
part thereof that is left behind is converted into hard knobs or knots. For
there is nothing suppurated but the blood, or that which partaketh of the
nature of blood, and has something thereof mingled together with it.

Neither yet does this likewise prove that the humor descends from the head,
to wit, that this Disease does sometimes invade the party with a shaking and
trembling, or at least with an ordinary and slight kind of Chilness and Cold.
For this quaking and cold is no sign at al of the humor descending from the
head under the skin, but rather of the humors being poured forth out of the
Veins, like as we see the very same to happen in fevers, and the Erysipelas.

Others also there are (as Bustachius Rudius) who think indeed that this matter
flows down from the head; but then that it does flow unto the Joints, not
only without the Skul, (between the Skin and the pericranium, by the spaces
that are under the Skin) but that it descends within the Scul also, by the
extreme superficies of the spinal Marrow: others there are also that tell us,
how that it flows down through the very middle of the substance of the spinal
Marrow. But if it were thus, as they say, there should rather a Palsy or
Convulsion be from thence excited; and in the middle space (by the which the
humors should flow) the Nerves should likewise be affected.

Others there are who Join both these Opinions together; and these tell us that
the Humor does partly flow from the head, and partly are conveyed through the
Veins; and this is indeed the most common Opinion; which therefore Platerus is
very large in the explaining thereof; who teaches us that the Humors exciting
the Arthritick pains may fall down either within or without the Veins. Within
the Veins indeed, when the bloody humor causes the hot Arthritis, (as some call
it) having the Fever Synochus Joined with it. For as by a subtle and thin
blood poured forth into the superficies of the Skin Erysipelas's (that are
accompanied with the Fever Synochus, or a continual Fever) are excited; so
likewise while it is poured forth into the seats of the Joints, the pain of the
Joints (which the same fever likewise does accompany) is bred; so that indeed
whosoever they be that are Obnoxious unto both these Diseases, when they are
siezed upon by the Gout, they may then comfort themselves with an Opinion and
conceit that it is no more then an Erysipelas: All which things are indeed most
true and certain.

And yet notwithstanding he determines likewise that the Serous or wheyish
Excrementitious humors being heaped up together may excite the Arthritis; and
that their Original is from the head, and that the Source and Spring of
defluxions has there its existence, and that from it they flow down into the
parts lying beneath: but that they are there sometimes heaped up together in its
interior seat, betwixt the Skul, the crude and impure Blood affording matter
unto it. For then that part of it that is altogether unuseful for Nutrition,
and Excrementitious, is by some and some heaped up in the brain, which when
afterward it falls down it then breeds the pains aforesaid; which are
accompanied with a heaviness of the head, and sometimes with a great pain
therein, and other accidents, the sure signs and tokens of the matter there
heaped up together. And he tells us that the Excrementitious blood is caused by
the vice and error either of the first, or the second, or even of the third
Concoction that is made in the brain; by reason, to wit, of some distemper or
weakness therein. And withal he tells us that all this filth and
excrementitious Humors that are heaped up in the head, do either by Reason of
their too great abundance, when they are stirred to and fro, flow downwards, or
else they are pressed forth, and poured all abroad by the external cold and the
moystness of the Air; or else that they are stirred up by the heat of the Sun,
or some Bath, the Pores and passages being opened, and the expulsive faculty
provoked.

And yet he determines likewise, that the very same serous and excrementitious
humor may likewise be stored up without the Skul, betwixt it and the Skin, and
that it may from thence flow down into the inferior parts.

But he teaches us that the ways and passages (by which this defluxion is
from the Head) are very various. As for the humor collected within the Skul in
the Basis of the Brain (consisting of three Cavities ending in the very bottom
of the Skul) he tells us that it is sometimes strained through by the hole of the
Bone they call Cribrosum (bearing some kind of resemblance with a Sieve) and
distilleth out of the Nostrils, and that it then exciteth that distillation we
call Coryza, or the Pose: and that sometimes likewise it is carried into the
middle Cavity, which is full of holes, and looks toward the Palate; and that
then it is either blown forth by the Nostrils, or brought forth of the Jaws,
and spit out by screaming and retching; or that descending into the seat of the
Eyes, it exstilleth forth by tears: and that sometimes it follows the
conveyance of the Nerves in the midst of this seat (of which some of them pass
through by these holes:) and that sometimes it being carried into the hinder
Cavity of the Skul (which is lower and wider) it descends through the great
hole (in the hinder part of the Head) of the Spinal Marrow, into some place of
the habit of the Body; and that it stops either in the fleshy parts any
where, or about the Region of the Joints, and there causes the aforesaid pains
of defluxions, or of the Joints.

But as for the humor collected without the Skull, and flowing downward under
the Skin (as it insinuates it self either into the Joints or the fleshy seats)
he endeavoreth to produce diverse kinds thereof: all which he explaineth at
large.

But in very truth, as we willingly admit of those things that he produces
touching the motion of the humors without the Veins (in which he agrees with
Eustachius Rudius) so we cannot be induced to believe that the Arthritis is
generated from thence. For first of all, the matter that is generated in the
Brain, and exciteth the Coryza, or abundance of spittle, and is cast forth by
the Nosethrils and the Jaws, it is of a far different nature from that which
breeds the Arthritis; and it could not possibly otherwise be, but that if a
matter so sharp and fiery, as it were, should be generated in the Brain, it
must needs produce most grievous symptoms. And moreover whether this humor
descend according to the passage of the Nerves, or according to the conveyance
of the Spinal Marrow, it could not be, but that it should first of all in its
passage cause either a Convulsion or a Palsy, or some kind of pain, before
ever it could come unto the extreme part of the Feet and Toes, and should there
excite pain; whereas notwithstanding on the contrary we oftentimes see (and
especially in the beginning of this Disease) that there is suddenly a pain
excited in the Feet, no pain at all, or symptoms elsewhere appearing. And
furthermore I likewise willingly indeed grant that from the matter heaped up
under the Skin of the Head the pains of Defluxions (as Platerus rightly calls
them, and distinguishes them from the Arthritick pains; although he be
mistaken in this that he determines that these pains and Defluctions are only
in the fleshy parts of the Muscles, whereas indeed they are equally about the
Joints) may be excited in the fleshy places and Membranes of the Muscles: but
yet I cannot persuade my self that the Arthritis properly so called, returning
by certain intervals, and having always one time of duration, should thence be
generated. For if the humor should fall down betwixt the Flesh and the Skin, it
must first of all seiz upon the parts nigh unto the Head, and upon the Joints;
seeing that (as Galen expressly teaches, in his 2. B. of the Difference of
Fevers, Chap. 11.) those fluxions that are from the Head are wont in the first
place to infest the parts near unto the Head, as the Ears, Eyes, Teeth, Gums,
and the Glandules that lie next, or the Breast and Lungs, and the Muscles of
the Back; whereupon such like pains from a Defluxion presently in the very
first beginning of the descent of the humor from the Head are perceived in the
neck (before and behind) and in the Shoulder blades; but they scarcely ever
descend into the Toes (which indeed are most of al infested by the Arthritis)
that same thin serous humor vanishing by the way; which happens not in the
Arthritis, in which the pains are wont first of all (and that very suddenly) to
be excited for the most part in the very ends of the Toes. For what Solenander
writes concerning a certain noble person (as we may find it in the 24. Consil.
of his fourth Section) who being troubled with the Arthritis about the latter
end of the Winter, had (as he says) the humors therefore moved from the Head,
because they were not suddenly augmented, but increased by little and little,
and running from Joint to Joint, from Foot to Foot, and from thence into the
Knee; and that from hence they ascended and seized upon the Hands, and after
this insinuated themselves into the Joints of the Elbow; this I say seems
unto me a thing very improbable. For if the Humor had flown from the Head, it
ought first of al to have infested the Elbows, and then the Hands; first the
Knees, and then the Feet; whereas here the quite contrary was done. It seems
more agreeable to truth, that this was done from the nature of the humor, and
the great abundance thereof. For when it was more thick in the Winter time it
is was moved the more slowly: but when once there was great store thereof
heaped up, Nature first of al drives it forth unto the extreme parts, which
when they could not possibly receive all of it, she then afterward thrust it
forth likewise unto the more near neighboring parts. Neither indeed can I see
any way, by which this humor heaped up without the Skul, should be carried down
straight and directly unto the Feet, and not ramble and rove up and down,
hither and thither, like as do those pains from Defluxions. And be it so indeed
that the Brain does likewise sometimes suffer certain symptoms; and that the
pain may first of all begin in the nook of the Neck, and may after this seiz
upon the Shoulder, afterward upon the Elbow, and lastly, upon the Hand; yet
notwithstanding that is not at all yet proved which ought to be, to wit, that
this humor descends without the Skul, betwixt the Skin and the Flesh. For
first of all how the Gout Podagra comes to be bred in the Feet, is not shown in
this manner. And moreover, albeit the humor flow within the Veins and Arteries,
there may the very same symptoms be produced in the Brain (which could not at
all be if the humor were moved without the Skul, under the Skin) and also the
same pain in the Nock, Shoulder, and Elbow. Fot while nature is endeavoring to
expel that vicious humor by the ascending Trunk of the great hollow Vein, and
Artery, there may very easily by the Jugular Veins and Arteries something flow
into the Brain, which may there excite some kind of symptoms; and before ever
it come so far as the Hands, it may easily happen, that Nature may by those
Branches that are dispersed throughout the Nook and the Shoulders thrust forth
something into those parts. And whereas all the Joints in the whole Body, as also
the parts that lie about them receive their nourishment from the Veins and
Arteries, there is no Joint in the whole Body into which likewise the humor
(the Cause of Arthritis) may not flow in by the very same Vessels, so that
there will be no need at all of seeking for blind and hidden ways and passages
even from the most remote parts. And that I may in the last place likewise
grant this, that it may possible be, that such like serous humors abounding in
the Veins may also be thrust forth into the Head, and pouted out under the
Skin, and upon the approach of the Arthritick Paroxysm, and Nature setting her
self upon the work of expulsion, they may likewise be moved, and by the Neck
may descend into the Back: yet notwithstanding these are not those humors that
breed Arthritis; but descending under the Skin, and pulling the Membranes in
the outside of the Body, they excite those roving and slitting pains; yea and
sometimes also they breed a spurious and bastard Pleurisy; but they are very
easily taken away by frictions, discussing Medicaments, and Sweats, the
Arthritis yet still temaining.

Franciscus India (a Philitian or Verona) in his first B. of the Gout, Chap 4,
renders this thing very intricate, whiles he writes that the members that
send forh these superfluities are various and very many, and especially the
Head, the Stomach, the Intestines, the Live, and the Kidneys; and that those
Fluxions are indeed more especially from the Head, and from the Brain; because
that although those humors draw their Original from the Intestines, and from
the Stomach and other Members, before they flow unto the parts of the Joints,
they first of al ascend into the Head, and from it are afterward transmitted
unto the parts lying underneath it. But yet he does not indeed deny that those
humors proceed from the whole Body. For if (faith he) the Body were altogether
free from superfluities, no humor would at al slow in. And yet nevertheless he
denies that the matter does immediately flow from the whole Body unto the
Joints, feeing it cannot possibly be, that the humor which is found in the
Stomach, or the Intestines, or in the Liver, or Spleen, should so suddenly from
these parts flow unto the Joints, unless by the incitation of Nature it were
driven forth by those ways that lead unto the Joints. Now he determines that
those ways are the Veins, Muscles, and Nerves. The Veins, to wit, that are
destined for the nourishing of the Hands and Arms, do carry the excrementitious
humors that have their existence throughout the whole Body unto the Ligaments
of the Fingers, the Tendons, and the Joints. But the Muscles that arise from
the Shoulder-blades, and the very top of the Spina and that are implanted into
the Shoulders do receive the same excrements from the inserior parts of the
Body, and derive them unto the Ligaments of the Fingers, But as for that matter
which flows from the Head, Nature thrusts it forth unto the Joints of the
Fingers by those Nerves that descend from the Head. And yet notwithstanding
afterward he denies that the humor it carried from the Head alone unto the
inferior parts of the Body; as for Instance, unto the Knees, the Thighs, and
the Ligaments and Joints of the Toes; but that by the consent of the Veins and
Nerves of the Spina or Backbone, and by reason likewise of the consent betwixt
the Kidneys and the Knees, Thighs and Feet, it is sometimes also carried from
the said Spina of the Back and from the Kidneys unto the Ligaments of the Knees
and unto the Joints of the Toes.

But in this Opinion there are contained many things that are false. For first
of all, whereat it is said that the matter flows from the whole body unto some
one place, we are not hereby to understand al and every part of the body, she
stomach, the Intestines, the Liver, the Kidneys, and other parts, but only
those kind of parts in the whole body that are filled with Veins. For although
that the excrementitious humors may be generated in the stomach, Intestines,
Liver, and Spleen: yet when they are heaped up, they are then distributed into
the great hollow Vein, as also into the Arteries, with that perpetual flux and
passage to and again of the blood; and from hence they are thrust forth unto
the external parts of the body, as in the Scabies we may see, and so likewise
in very many other Affects. And therefore if vicious humors be heaped up in
Arthritick persons, there is no need at all that they should be derived unto
the Joints by so many turnings and windings, by the Muscles, and by the Nerves;
seeing that there is a near and direct way through the Veins and Arteries, from
which as al other parts of the body, so likewise the Joints receive their
nourishment. And furthermore it is no way agreeable to truth that the humors
should flow unto the Joints by the Nerves: for neither do the Nerves easily
admit of, and receive so great an abundance of humors; neither were impossible,
if that matter were received by the Brain, and should flow unto it through the
Nerves, but that it should first of al excite most grievous Maladies, before
ever the Arthritis could arise and appear. India indeed seeks by all means to
avoid al these inconveniences, whiles in his sixth Chapt. he writes, that the
matter which flows does not fill the Nerves within; but only distend the same
cutwardly. But this is not to flow through the Nerves: neither does he in this
manner shun those inconveniences, whiles he does not show us how by a continual
passage from the Head (according to the progress of the Nerves) this matter may
flow, so that yet notwithstanding it may in its way and passage excite neither
Convulsion nor Palsy, nor any other pain. And indeed to what end is there any
need of those ambages, and turnings and windings about (this way and that way)
by the Muscles; when (as we have already often said) there lies a direct and
straight way out of the Veins and Arteries into the Joints?

Adrian Spigelius (in his B. of the Arthritis) has a peculiar Opinion as being
held by him alont: who when he would acknowledge that this afflux is altogether
made by the Veins and Arteries, and yet nevertheless would not altogether
desert that Opinion which determines that the humors flow down from the Head,
and would withal give us nonce, that that flux cannot possibly be either
without the Skul, or within it, and so from the Brain; he therefore
determines, that the fluxion is both from the Head, and from the Liver: but
then in this he dissenteth from all others. that he teaceth us that the
aforesaid fluxion (which he conceives to proceed from the Head) is very seldom
under the Skin (as Fernelius tells us it is) and never by the hole of the Spinal
Marrow (by which the Spirits are kept together) or by the hole of the Nook,
above the external Membrane of the Spinal Marrow; but that by the Veins and
Jugular Arteries (not only the external, but likewise the internal, by the
which from the lower parts, especially the Liver, the humor is carried into the
external and internal parts of the Head) it flows back again into the great
hollow Vein, and the great Artery, or its branches that have their existence
under the Throat; and that so from thence they are devolved into the Joints.

And the very truth is, that Spigelius his Opinion is indeed right, That the
flux of humors in the Arthritis is by the Veins and Arteries; which he might
well learn even from this, by observing that if before the universal evacuation
of the body there be applied unto the Foot, or the Hand, any external repelling
or cooling Medicaments, that then the matter flowed back unto the noble parts,
and excited acute Fevers, and other Maladies. But that the matter does from
the Brain first of al regurgitate into the Veins and Arteries, this he does not
at al prove, but produces it without any firm ground and reason. For on the
contrary rather, those things that happen unto Arthritick persons do testify
that this humor is neither generated in the Brain, nor heaped up there, nor
thence regurgitates into the Veins and Arteries; since that if this should
happen, a humor so sharp as this is, and able to effect so great pains, must
needs excite the most grievous Affects in the Brain. Spigelius here seeks for
shifts, seeing that many things teach us that these humors are bred in the
Liver and Spleen, the places and storehouses of Sanguification, and that from
thence they are heaped up in the Veins and Arteries, and by them at length
thrust forth into the joints; so that there is no need at al of deriving them
from the Brain.

Some there are who determine that the humors are poured forth unto the joints
from the whole body. But these by the whole can here understand nothing else but
the Veins and Arteries, dispersed throughout the whole body.

But that we may at the length conclude this long and tedious disputation, and
contract it into a few words; this in the first place is certain, that the
matter the cause of Arthritis is generated in the Bowels of the lower belly;
yea, and that oftentimes it is long stabled up (as it were) about the Spleen
the Intestines, and the Liver, until at the last it is transferred into the
great hollow Vein. And Mercatus writes most truly, that as he himself had seen
when the pains of the joints had arisen from the pains of the belly; so he
likewise found the same to be the Opinion of Authors none of the meanest; and I
my self have also observed it more than once in such persons as were
Hypochondriacal, and such as have had the scurvy: and from hence likewise it
is, that Diarrhaea fluxes unseasonably suppressed are turned into the
Arthritis. And that there may flow from the Colon Intestine a humor exciting
the Arthritis, we are taught both by Galen and Hippocrates in 6. Epidem. Com.
4. Text. 3. And as for the ways and passages the thing is very plain (as we
likewise told you before, touching the Scurvy:) to wit, that from the Colon
this humor may by the Meseraick Arteries be transserred into the Trunk of the
great Artery, and from hence be thrust unto the joints.

And Secondly, This also is true and certain, (and that which is granted by all
the most learned Physicians) that the Humor the cause of the Arthritis is moved
through the Veins and Arteries (some of these say always, but others of them
very often, and they are those that determine that the humor flows down
likewise from the Head) and the thing is altogether so plain, that Thomas
Erastus (who notwithstanding in his 4. Disputat. against Paracels. Page 261.
defends likewise another way from the Head) writes, that he only can doubt
of this thing who does not sufficiently attend, and take notice of what is
daily done, or he that has his mind prepossessed with a prejudicate Opinion.

And seeing that these things are true and certain, the doubt now lies in
this, Whether this way be not sufficient? and whether there may any other be
assigned? and whether the humors also flowing down from the Head, under the
Skin, may excite the Arthritis, yea or no? And yet notwithstanding (in the
third place) I conceive that this is also most true and certain, and
sufficiently proved above, that sometimes the beginning of the fluxion is not
from the Head. For whereas both the part transmitting, and the part receiving,
do both of them discover themselves by their several and proper symptoms; and
that in many Arthritick persons there appears no heaviness of the head, no
pain, neither any other symptoms as signs and tokens of any humor gathered
together and heaped up there; it cannot therefore be concluded that the humor
flows down from the Head. And moreover, neither has that Arthritis which is
from the Colic its original from the head, or from the brain, as before we
showed you: as likewise neither that which proceeds from a Diarrhaea
unseasonably and unduly suppressed. And therefore fourthly, this remains that
may truly be doubted of, to wit, Whether or no the Arthritis may sometimes have
its original from a matter heaped up under the Skin of the Head, and from
thence flowing down? Which indeed very many of the most learned and able
Physicians do affirm, whom I leave free unto their own judgments: but yet for
my own part I cannot be persuaded to believe it, for the reasons before
alleged; which here to repear, I hold it altogether needless, in regard
especially that I am able very well to render a reason of al those symptoms that
befall unto Arthritick persons; although I determine that the humor the cause of
Arthritis is moved only within the Vessels, and that by them it flows into
the joints; especially if this be well heeded, that this humor does sometimes
most chiefly flow through the descending Trunk of the hollow Vein, and the
great Artery, and sometimes likewise that it withal flows by the ascending
Trunk; and that from thence various symptoms are excited about the head. What
need is there therefore that neglecting those ways which Nature has ordained
as Channels for the motion and flux of the humors, we should seek for unknown
and unheard of ways? And there is one thing that I cannot but at least touch
upon; and it is this, That Erastus indeed (in the place alleged) has this
for a sure and certain sign of the humor its flowing from the head, that the
sick persons do for the most part manifestly feel and perceive the humor to
flow down from the head, by the neck, sides, and back, like unto a water, with
a kind of shaking, trembling, or a slight kind of cold. But this sign seems not
unto me any whit firm: for that shivering and quaking happens not only in the
Arthritis, but oftentimes likewise in Fevers, the Erysipelas, small Pox, and
Meazels; and it is a sign and token that these Diseases are very nigh at hand;
when from the Trunk of the hollow Vein and Artery (especially in the back) by
the branches that arise from them, and the extremities of the Veins and
Arteries, a vapor from the vicious humor, or likewise the thinner part thereof
is thrust forth into the parts of the back. For although that without doubt
also the very same happens even in other parts, yet nevertheless this
Chilness and trembling is first of al excited in the back, by reason of the
Spinal Marrow, and the very many Nerves there proceeding from the said Spinal
Marrow, and being endued with a most quick and exquisite sense; by the which
Spinal Marrow a Chilness and shivering is likewise seen sometimes to ascend, and
sometimes to descend: touching which see more in Hippocrates his fifth Section,
and 69. Aphorism. And thus much may suffice as touching this Controversy.

Quest. 8. Whether there may any thing be gathered together in the Joints that
may make any thing unto the producing of the fit.
NOt only Paracelsus and his followers (who derive the Arthritis from the
ebullition of Synovia) have given me occasion to think of this Question; but
likewise those strange and admirable Cures that have now and then been made in
the Arthritis have chiefly put me upon the debate hereof. Guilhelm. Fabricius
(in his first Century, Epist. 47. and 48.) relates that some by tortures have
been so freed from the Arthritis that they were never known afterward to
undergo any fit thereof. Indeed by affrightment, as also by joy, it is a thing
very well known that many have been freed from the Arthritick Paroxysms. But how
a man should in this manner perpetually be freed from the Arthritis or
joynt-Gout, it is not so easy a thing to render the reason thereof, unless it
be sought for in the place affected. And there are likewise other Histories of
this very thing. That famous and eminent person, Dn. D. Doringius related unto
me, that there was a Citizen of Giessa, who (through impatience by reason of
his pain) with a hatchet cut off the great Toes of both his Feet; and ever
after this he lived altogether free from the Arthritis. Andreas Libavius
likewise (in his 73. Epist. to Schinzeurs) relates such a story as this. There
was (says he) a Patient, an Host, or public Inholder: A certain Physician (a
Chevalier, a person of great quality) happening to be there, having agreed with
him for three hundred Florens, promised the Cure; and when he had received a
Writing under his hand for the said Sum he sets upon it. The Patient is
commanded to put his feet upon a Wooden Trunk. There were present the servants
of this Noble Knight (able and strong men) that were commanded to hold him down
in a sitting posture. The Knight himself being provided of an Iron Maller, with
six Nails fastened his feet unto this Trunk of Wood; and immediately with all
the speed that he could, leaving his Patient crying out in a most miserable
manner, takes his Horse, and away he rides. But in the mean time he
oftentimes privately with all the whether the Disease had ever after returned.
And having understood (after the space of three years) that the Patient had
never again been troubled with the aforesaid Disease, he returns back unto
the Inn; and there making himself merry with his Host, be came fully to know
that the Disease was cured. And thereupon he pulls forth the Writing that he had
under the Hand and Seal of his Host, and demands the Money that was promised
him, having made it appear that he was the Physician that had wrought the Cure.
His Host (although he had been most cruelly handled by him) consents to
satisfy him; and accordingly he sed him and his Followers so long, until they
had eaten and drunk out the three hundred Florens.

From al which Histories it seems that we may collect thus much; That in the
place affected there lies hid some kind of Mine, which in its own time makes
much for the exciting of the Paroxysm. But although it be very hard to
determine any thing of a certainty as touching this thing; yet notwithstanding
I will acquaint you with my own thoughts (as least in the way of a Paradox) unto
which I desire not strictly to engage any man to give his consent but shall
leave every one unto his own Judgment and Opinion.

All the parts of the Body, as they are nourished by an Aliment fit and
convenient for them; so likewise in sick and Crazy Bodies, the Humors that bear
a certain Analogy with them are carried up and down unto the other parts;
whereupon there happens a vicious and corrupt Nutrition. In those that are
sound that which is unuseful for the nourishment of the other parts is (in men)
wasted and consumed in the Nails and Hairs; and in Bruites also it is
converted into the matter of their Hoofs and Horns. In such as are unsound and
sick, the vicious Humors are also carried unto the parts appointed for them;
which as it happens in other Diseases, so we may see it more especially in
the Plica Polonica; in which that vicious Humor is not only driven forth unto
the hairs of the head, which it clammeth and as it were gleweth fast together,
but likewise unto the Nails of the Feet, which are thereupon made hard and
black. In the Fractures of the bones the stone Osteocolla being taken tends
unto the bones; and passes into a Callus, (and this sometimes overgreat) as
Guilhelmus Fabricius makes it appear unto us by examples, in his first Cent.
Observat. 90. and 91.) if therefore Humors fit for the generating of the
Arthritis be mingled with the blood; it is very probable that they are carried
unto the Joints, and that with the Aliment of the bones they insinuate
themselves into the very substance of them; and that there the Excrement proper
unto the bones is collected, as a Mineral and Rudiment of the Arthritis that is
to follow. And Galen seems to teach us this very manifestly, whiles in the
39. Aphorism. of the 5. Section, he tells us that each part of the Body as it
has its Nutriment, so it has likewise its Excrement; and that there is a
superfluous Humor left behind, like unto the Nature of the part where it
remains. And indeed it is a thing very likely and agreeable unto the truth,
that there should be such a Tartarous excrement collected, especially in the
appendances of the bones, which are more porous then the Rest of the parts of
the bones; and therefore (as Andreas Laurentius has it in his Second B. and 4.
Chap.) they are so framed, that they may be as it were the bellies of the
Bones, in the which the Aliment of the bones may be concocted, which by degrees
may be streyned through into their Caverns. If therefore any such humor, or
Excrement, shall be collected in the bones, the like humor flowing thereunto,
it boy leth as it were with heat; which being done, it is diffused into the
parts lying nearest; and there it exciteth a pain in them: and this is
especially done in the Epiphyses or additions of the bones, out of which the
Ligaments arise, and by which the sensible parts about the Joints are knit
together. But if the said Humor or Excrement, be dissipated, or poured out in
any other manner, it is credible that the sick person is then altogether freed
from the Arthritis. Whereupon also it is not without good cause that such
Medicaments as consume the humors about the Joints (and wholly dry them up) are
here greatly commended. And this might likewise have been brought for the
confirmation of this Opinion, that such as are Arthritick are prognosticators
of the weather (as they speak) and they perceive in their Feet change of Air,
and Alteration in the weather; and as the common people use to say, they have
an Almanac in their Feet. Which indeed Johannes Anglicus (in his Rosa Anglica)
thinks to happen, because that Air may enter into the Joints the more freely
by Reason of their Vacuity and Dilatation. But this Reason is of no moment, in
regard that the pain is not in the Dilatation. But this Reason is of no moment,
in regard that the pain is not in the Cavities of the Joints; and because
likewise that other parts have greater Cavities, which yet feel no such thing:
but without doubt, this pain does therefore arise, because that the near
approaching Changes of the Air do forcibly stir up and move the Excrementitious
humors sticking in the Joints.

And if any one would interpret the Opinion of Paracelsus and his followers in
the best sense, he may even here have a good ground for his so doing. For
Paracelsus, and Petrus Severinus, teach us that the Arthritis is generated from
the extraordinary heat and Ebullition of the Synovia; where if by Synovia they
understand a Humor not Natural, but something that is Excrementitious collected
in the Joints, they then teach us the very same that has hitherto been spoken
of. But Quercetan in his Consil. of the Gout in the Joints, and the Stone, does
explain the same far more clearly; where he determines, that the Tartar that
is heaped up together, and contained in the Joints is the nighest and most
immediate Cause of the Arthritis; and that it is sometimes contemed in the
Joints, and there remains idle: but so soon as there is any new fluxion,
(which for cibly moves it) it then exciteth a Paroxysm; no otherwise, then as
it is when Water is poured upon burning Lime, there is then a certain
Ebullition, and heat.

Question, 9. Whether Boys, Eunuchs, Virgins, and Women may be troubled with
the Gout.
Hippocrates indeed writes (in the Sixth Sect. of his Aphor. Aph. 28) Eunuchs
are never troubled with the Gout, neither do they ever become bald. And in the
same Sect. Aphor. 29. A Woman (says he) is not at all troubled with the Gout,
unless her monthly Courses fail her* And ibid. Aphor. 30. Boys are not
affected with the Gout, before the use of Venus. But Galen in his Comment upon
the 28. Aph. writes the very truth in this manner. It was true indeed (says
he) that in the time of Hippocrates Eunuchs were not at all troubled with the
Gout; but it is not now found to be a truth, as well in regard of the idleness,
as the intemperancy of their lives. For in the time of Hippocrates there were
very few of any condition that were affected with this Difease, by Reason of
their temperate lives, and their Extraordinary Moderation. But in this our Age,
(wherein there has been so great an augmentation of delights, Luxury, and
pleasures, that there cannot well be any further addition unto them) there is
an infinite multitude of such as are troubled with the Gout; some never so much
as exercising themselves, but ill digesting and concocting their food, and
continually distempering themselves with all sorts of drink, without raking any
Meat at all before their drinking of strong wines; and overmuch addicted to
venery; and others of them (if they offend not in all and every of these
particulars, yet) in some one or other of these excesses taking too great a
liberty. And in the 29. Aphor. touching Women, he writes: This was formerly a
truth (says he) that Women (before their monthly Courses failed them) were not
at all so much as attempted by the Gout, by Reason of those few Errors and
excesses they were guilty of in the former Age. But now adays by Reason of
those many Exorbitancies wherein they offend, there are some of these Women
afflicted with the Gout. And Seneca (in his 95. Epist.) writes notably to this
purpose. Women (says he) taking the like liberty and license with men, and
equalling them therein, have thereby also made themselves equal unto men in
their sufferings, and Diseases of their Bodies. For they come not a whit behind
men in their nightwatchings, they drink as much as men; and they even provoke
men to excess in Oils and strong Wines; they equal men in casting up at the
mouth whatsoever they had cramb'd into their surfetted Bowels; and all the Wine
they drin^ is by vomiting returned back again in full measure: and they equally
with men take delight in qualifying the boiling heat of their inflamed Stomachs
by melting of Snow in their Mouths; neither come they short of men in their
wantonness and lufls, as being born to suffer. And therefore what wonder is it
that the best of Physicians has been found in a lie, in regard that there are
so many Women troubled with the Gout? They have by their vicious lives lost the
benefit of their sex; and having put off Womanbood, they have condemned
themselves unto men's Diseases. Thus Seneca. Unto which even this also may be
added, that the Gout which at this day is so frequent and common, is from the
Grand Parents and Parents derived upon the Children and Nephews of both Sexes.
And many such examples there are every where extant, that much derogate from
the truth of what Hippocrates says in his Aphorisms. I knew a youth (a Noble
man's Son of Silesia) who not many years since coming hither to study, before he
was eighteen years of Age, (although I verily believe him to be altogether free
from Venery) he was oftentimes afflicted with fits of the Gout. Antonius Musa
(upon the 31. Aphor. of the Sixth B.) writes that he had seen one Alphonsus
Dassonius (a Noble youth and one of great note) not above fifteen years old,
and yet troubled with the Gout; who denied that he had ever excercised himself
in the School of Venus. And Hollerius (upon the same Aphor.) writes that he
had seen a Boy (not above ten years old) much troubled with the Gout. And
Michael Paschalius (in his first B. of the Meth. of Curing Diseases, Chap. 15.)
tells us that he had seen a Noble youth (not above seven or eight years of Age)
troubled not only with the Gout in his Feet, but with the Arthritis also, or
the Gout running up and down in all the Joints of his Body; and yet
notwithstanding this Disease in his Joints was not at all hereditary, his
Parents and Grand Parents having never been afflicted therewith. Antonius Musa
Brassavolus (upon the 28. Aphor. of the sixth B. of Hippocrates) relates, that
he saw at Venice an Eunuch (almost forty years of Age) a Turk, who was
extremely tortured with the pains of his Joints. And the writer of the Scholia
upon the 63. Chap. of the first B. of Hollerius, (touching internal Diseases)
tell us that he saw the same. And there is no need at all, neither is it worth
while to relate any examples of Women troubled with the Gout, since that they
are every where so obvious, and apparent before our Eyes.

Question, 10. Whether the Arthritis be Curable.
IT is the common and received Opinion of many, that the Arthritis is
altogether incurable. And the very truth is, there have been many found thus
affected, whom the aforesaid Disease has attended all their life long, and
even unto their dying day. Whereupon it likewise happens that many of these
Arthritick persons (conceiving their Disease to be desperate) will not at al
seek unto the Physician for his advice; and for the same reason also they
refuse to abstain from any Errors in Diet. But on the contrary, there are many
examples to be found of such as either by the assistance of Physicians, or by a
good Diet, or by some sudden and unexpected chance and accident have been freed
from the Gout, and have ever after lived altogether free from the same.
Porphyry (in the life of Plotinus) writes, that Rogatianus, a Senator of
Rome, a Platonist, and Scholar of Plotinus, by his frugal and sparing Diet
attained so much benefit in this affect, that when as before he was very
violently handled and vexed with the Gout, so that he could not so much as go
one step forward, but was fain to be carried in his Chair, he hereby reassumed
his strength again; and whereas before he was not able to stretch forth his
hands, he by this his frugality and temperance became so well recovered, that he
had now more command of his hands, and could upon all occasions use them more
expiditely then such as did their daily drudgery with them. And so likewise
above (out of Trincavel his 12. B. and 2. Chap. Touching the manner of curing
the affects of all the parts of Man's Body) we related a story of a certain
Physician (an old man) at Venice, who by his abstaining from wine by the space
of five years was delivered from the Arthritis or Gout during his whole life,
even unto the very day of his Death. And we likewise related unto you before
(out of Franciscus Alexander) of one Francis Pecchius (a man much troubled with
the Gout) who being cast into prison, and there detained for twenty years, was
in the end freed both from his imprisonment and all his Arthritick pains, and
so continued free from all fits of the Gout for ever after during his Natural
life: And Marcus Gattinaria (in that Chap. of his Book, touching the Cure of
the pains of the Joints from a hot Cause) writerh as concerning himself; that
when he first began to suffer the fits of the Gout, this was the Course he took
for the recovery of his health, and ease from his fits: to wit, first of all,
he imposed upon himself an abstinence from Wine for two years, and every month
he emptied his Body by Evacuations, and then he took some Pill or other for the
diverting of the Humor, (the cause of his distemper) and this he made use of
twice in the week; that so Nature might be diverted in her transmitting the
matter unto the Joints, and that so she might rather evacuate it by the way of
siege: and by using this course for a while he was so thoroughly Cured, that he
was never after that troubled with any such like pains. And Carolus Piso also (
in his Book of Diseases from Serous or Wheyish impurities, in his Consil.
touching the Arthritis) writes, that a certain man who had lived all the time
of his youth infested with perpetual pains of the Arthritis, and making his
moan and continual complaints thereof; by the counsel and advice of Nicolaus
Piso, in the flower of his Age, he wholly denies unto himself the use of Wine,
although he were the principal of those that were set over and had the charge
of a Wine-Cellar (a rare example indeed of admirable temperance) and so by thus
doing he kept himself for thirty years together (all the time of his life after)
altogether free from those pains. And Histories likewise testify, that some
even by a due and orderly regularing of their lives, and others again by their
being reduced unto poverty, and so necessitated unto a frugality in point of
Diet, have thereby been wholly freed and delivered from the Gout. And this
withal is a thing most strange and wonderful (of which Guilbelm. Fabricius
relates three examples, in his First Cent. and 79. Observat.) that some
certain Arthritick persons there have been, who upon suspicion of some
Notorious Offenses by them committed, have been oftentimes set upon the wrack,
and put upon the extremest of all exquisite Tortures; but when they have
constantly maintained their own innocence, they have at once been absolved and
for ever set free from their Crimes, and withal from the fits of the Gout, with
the which they had formerly been most grievously afflicted. And wonderful also
is that example which the same Author (in his first Cent. Epist. 47.) relates
of a certain envious and malecontented Person that lay sick of the Gout; who
though he were fastened unto his sick Bed by his painful Disease, could not yet
refrain from traducing and speaking ill of others. Which when a merry conceited
Fellow there present perceived (who had also himself been lasht by the
petulancy of the others Tongue) about the dusk of the Evening (taking his
opportunity when the sick Person was left all alone by all his Family) enters
the sick man's House privily in a strange disguise that he had gotten, like unto
an Ae^hiopian or Blackmoor, and thus disguised he goes near unto the Bedside
of the sick Person; who astonished with the unusualness of the form, his own
solitariness, and withal terrified with the darkness of the place it self that
he lay in, demands of him who he was, and from whence he came. The Whifler
answering to none of his Questions, but making his approach closer unto the
Bedside catches him by the Arms (which were likewise much troubled and pained
with the Arthritis) and having thus laid hold on him he throws him upon his
back, and to hanging upon the same and crying out with all the noise he could
make, he carries him out of the Chamber where he lay, ever and anon crushing
his Feet against the Stairs by which he was to go down. When he was come into
the Yard, he there sets down his burden, putting the sick Person upon his Feer,
speaking not a word to him all this while, only staring him full in the Face.
And then suddenly again he runs toward him and made as though he would once
more have seized upon him, and so have carried him out of the House. But now he
who before could not so much as set his Feet to the Ground, by reason of his
Disease, nor walk at all upon plain Ground, much less get up any whither by the
Steps, now runs as fast as he could up Staits, and to the top of them he gets,
and so into his Bedchamber he comes, and through the Window with the loud noise
he made all the Neighborhood was raised, and so come running in unto him to see
what the matter was. He out of Breath as he was, and half dead with
affrightment, tells them that he was by a Ghost dragged out of the Bed where he
lay, and then being carried forth of his Lodging-room he was most miserably
handled; and that had he not often called upon and ingeminated the name Jesus
he had without doubt been gone, had there been no more men in the world: And
wonderful indeed it was, that he who was before so sorely afflicted with the
Gout should hereupon recover his health and strength, and never after be
troubled with any the least fit of his former Disease. Fabricius has there
likewise another History of a certain Malefactor that had the Gout, who being
brought forth and led unto Execution (his punishment being to have his Head cut
off) by that time be was come half way to the place of execution there was
brought him an unexpected Pardon granted him by the Clemency of his Gracious
Prince. The miserable man was so affected with this good tidings, that he who
til now wanted the use of almost all his extreme Members, now on a sudden cast
himself on his Feet with a quick and speedy motion, and lived after this for
many years wholly free from all kind of pain and trouble that formerly he had
undergone by reason of the Gout. And I my self remember likewise that we had
here with us not long since a Noble Youth, much troubled with the Gout; this
Youth, the near neighboring houses happening one Night to be all on Fire, and
the House wherein he was in danger to be burnt, he suddenly for fear gets him
out of his Bed, and down a Ladder he runs; and intending to fly into another
House, he fell (with that Foot where his grief lay) into a pit which the
Winters Ice had made, it being now full of Water; and so by this means was freed
not only from the present fit, but likewise from al other pains of the Gout for
the future; and so he lived many years after. Neither have we only examples of
those who either by an exact and accurate Diet, or by affrightment, or Joy, and
the like means, have been delivered from the Gout; but we have examples of them
likewise who have been recovered by the help of Medicaments. Cardanus (in his
B. of admirable Cures, Numb. 16.) relates four examples of such as he himself
had recovered of the Gout. And we have likewise other examples mentioned; of
which we find certain of them in Schenkius his fifth Book of Observat. And
Solenander also (in his 5. Sect. Consil. 1.) writes in this manner: As we have
(says he) known many that have been cured by others, so we have also our
selves set many free from the Gout for diverse years together; and this we have
done by curing them without any great ado, who before every half year (and
sometimes oftener) were greatly afflicted with the Gout: of whom some are yet
alive to testify the truth of what I say. And very remarkable is that which
Carolus Piso (in the place alleged) relates in this manner: One Cornelius
Perdeus Picardus (a man well skilled in Rhetoric) was subject unto the Gout,
from the seventh year of his age, and so forwards, the Arthritis returning
oftentimes every year, a^^ much hindering him in the prosecution of his
studies. This Patient advising with Ca^olus Piso, and beseeching him to afford
what ease he could unto his intolerable pain, had so comfortable on answer
from him, that it much cheered the young man: for he promised him his desire, if
he would but only yield obedience unto these few Precepts of (...), to wit, If
he would indeed by degrees withold from himself a third part at the least of
his daily allowance, and more especially in that of his Drink; and in the first
(...) chief place, if he would altogether abstain from Wine; and then in the
next place, if (...) would always as carefully and exactly keep himself from
the injuries of the Air, and especially from the cord; and moreover also if in
the night be would cover himself sufficiently with (...), so that constantly
every morning, about the (...) his second s^eep (...) might appear upon his
body, if not a sweat, yet at least a (...) and (...) as it were; and if ((...))
be would with the Syrup of white Roses (taken three or four (...) out of his
body all the serous or whe^ish superfluities. The young man yields (...) unto
these Precepts for two years and somewhat more; and by this means (beyond (...)
expectations) he prevented and cut off all the matter and fowel of his Disease,
and so lived altogether free from all pain whatsoever in his joints.

And (...) certain it is from daily experience, and the observations of
Physiti^^ (...) that many there have been troubled with the Arthritis, who have
not been recovered and cured thereof; and on the contrary likewise that very
many have been perfectly recovered of the said Disease. Now who they be that
are Curable Hippocrates teaches us, (...) I am confident (says he) and I
speak it so far as I know, or ever yet (...) those that are troubled with the
Gout) that whosoever (...) them are either (...) Calious and hard knobs and
knots growing about their joints, or such (...) careful and sorrowful lives,
having their bellies hard and costive that (...) are ((...) I know) altogether
incurable by the art of man. Indeed we (...) (if it chance to happen upon it)
is the best curer of those sick persons; and so indeed also are other scourings
very beneficial and profitable in this case, if they reach unto the lower (...)
But (...) such as are young, and have no hard knots as yet growing about their
Joints; if they (...) accurately and carefully in point of Diet, if they be
such as love to stir by laboring and exercising themselves, and such as have a
good mind to obey the Prescripts of Physicians (every one as he is able,
according to his several employment and (...)) these without doubt (if they
advise with an understanding and expert Physician, may be perfectly cured. Thus
Hippocrates. Yet nevertheless we may very tightly and deservedly account the
hered^^ar. Arthritis among those Gouts that are altogether incurable. For as al
other Diseases that are Hereditary, so likewise the Hereditary Arthritis is not
to be removed and overcome without much difficulty, if ever it be done.

Now there are many Reasons to be given, why diverse of those that are of
themselves ^^able, are yet never cured. For first of all, the cause is
oftentimes in the (...) sufficiently expert in the Nature of this Disease, and
the cause thereof. For (...) are so many Physicians that think amiss of the
Nature of this Disease (...) themselves false and erroneous Opinions touching
the same; it is (...) do not rightly cure it, since that of a Disease unknown
(and the nature (...) understood) there can be no right and methodical Cure
expected. And (...) Physicians likewise that with Leaden Weapons (as I may so
say) (...) werful and obstin^^e. And then again secondly, the cause may be in
the sick (...) selves; who usually offend in three things. For most of them are
(...) these Malady is incurable; and therefore they never trouble their (...)
an or Physic, neither will they advise with the skilful Artist, but (...) (that
at first might have been cured) to take such deep root that it is (...) rabble.
And secondly, As for such of them who do consult the (...) send in three
things; the first whereof is this, That for such as are (...) they for the most
part slight these, and give credit unto Empericks, (...) Mountebank they meet
withal; by whose tempering with (...) worse, and the harder to cure. And
secondly, they (...) ments long enough. For that that vicious disposition in
the body ((...) for the augmenting and confirming of the Disease) as also that
the (...) may be taken away (after they have by degrees been collected and
(...) is not sufficient that the sick person be purged once or twice every
year; but it will be very needful to continue the use of the Medicaments
according to the Physicians prescript; and therefore we find the Ancients
giving their Arthritick Pouders for a whole year together. And thirdly, another
thing wherein they offend is this, That most of those that are Arthritick
desire only the mitigation and asswagement of their present pain; and so that
they may but be freed from the Paroxysm they lie under, they think that the
worst is now pas^; never so much as troubling themselves in advising, how and
by what means they may prevent the like fits for the future. And lastly, this
is also a chief and almost the principal cause of Arthritis its being so seldom
cured, That there are but very few who will be persuaded to keep an exquisite
and accurate Diet; and they will choose rather to endure the Arthritick pains,
unto which they have been so long accustomed and inured, than submit themselves
unto the Laws and Rules of a more strict and severe courie of Diet. And very
few there are of them that will deny themselves the use of Wine, the drinking
of which unless it be omitted, there is an very many Patients no hope at al of
a perfect cure. And from hence it happens, that there are more of the Rich,
and persons of Quality that are troubled with the Gou^, than there are of the
poorer sort of people, and Peasants; in regard that these last keep a very
spare diet, and drink no Wine at al; whereas those former guzzle in Wine too
freely; and in many other points of Diet offend far more than the poor. Neither
yet notwithstanding is this at all to be denied, That there are some, who
although they do not commit any notorious errors in the course of their Diet,
yet they can hardly be freed from the Gout, because that the greatest part of
their Aliment (by reason of the weakness of their bowels) is converted into
vicious humors, like as we see that there are in others also virtous humors
elsewhere collected. And therefore in regard that it is oftentimes impossible to
correct that weakness of the bowels, the Arthritis likewise from thence
proceeding will scarcely ever be cured.

Quest. 11. Whether it be fit to purge in the beginning of the Arthritick
Paroxysm?
THere are diverse and different Opinions of Physicians as touching this point.
For some there are who affirm that in the very first beginning of the Paroxysm
purges are therefore to be administered, that so by them the Humors may be drawn
back from the Joints, and that so the pains may be l^ssened, and the fits made
somewhat shorter. And they appeal likewise unto Experience; by which it
appears that upon the administering of Purgations in the beginning of the
Paroxysm the sick person has been delivered from all the pain that attends
the fit; like as before we told you of Petrus Bayrus, who writes of himself,
that he was so weak and impotent, that he could move no part about him but only
his Tongue; and that he was carried and put upon his Close-stool by four men;
but having taken his Caryocostine Electuary, and after that his belly had been
thereby five times loosened, and made soluble, he found such ease from al his
former pains, that now he could go and ease himself without any help at all,
and so in like manner return from the Close-stool; and that he was able also
the very same day to walk from one end of his study unto the other.

But others there are, that maintain the contrary Opinion; and these tell us,
That if the humors be moved by a purging Medicament, they then rush unto the
Joints and the part affected more vehemently, and with greater force and
violence, as also in greater abundance; and so they excite and cause the
greater pains. And these also refer themselves unto Experience, by which it will
be found, that by the use of Purging Medicaments the pains have not only been
augmented, but that likewise if the Purges were ever a whit m^^^ ^o, and
stronger than ordinary, the humors were then inflamed by them, and drawn unto
the internal and more noble parts, and there excited burning Fevers that were
both dangerous and deadly.

Ludovicus Septalius (in the 7. B. of his Animadversions, Numb. 177.) writes,
That by forty five years Experience he had found that Purga^^ons admit (...)
beginning of the Arthritis succeeded well in some, but that others again had ^o
benefit at al by them; and therefore he gives us this distinction; When there
is (says he) pre^ent in the Arthritis both a fluent matter, and a strength of
the part expelling, as also a weakness of the recipient or part receiving; If
the abundance of matter, or the strength of the part expeling shall appear to
be prevalent, then (without any further controversy) that matter is with all
speed to be evacuated, and called away from the Joints, either by a Vomit, or
else by some purging Medicament. But if the looseness and weakness of the Joints
be the cause or the fluxion, so that upon every light occasion, and whatsoever
the quantity of the matter be, Nature be still attemp^ing to thrust forth the
said matter (so soon as it is collected in the body) unto the Joints, then (as
he tells us) upon the taking of a purge, as the fluxion is thereby augmented, so
Nature is likewise thereby rendered more weak and infirm.

But in very truth, this is a thing indeed most certain. That the matter does
rush unto this or that part with sometimes a greater, and sometimes a less
violence and impe^^^^sness: but as for the cause of this fluxion, it is never
the alone weakness of the Joints (which only disposes the part for the more
easy receiving of the matter, but never ^^oweth ^^^^lureth the humor unto the
part affected) but that it sometimes rusheth (...) unto this, and sometimes unto
that part, this is rather to be ascribed unto the (...) which is accustomed now
unto this, and as soon again unto that way and part, for the expelling forth of
the peccant humor. And therefore if there be any Fear of the (...) and violent
rushing upon the part, purgation is not thereupon presently to (...) but rather
such a purge is to be administered that may not only move the humors, (...) also
wholly to evacuate them. But yet nevertheless, it is here the safe^^ (...) lius
persuades us) to consult Experience. For if we find that the pains are (...)
exasperated upon the giving of a Purge once or twice, and that thereupon they
continue the longer, we must then forbear to purge for the future. But on the
contrary, it we find the pains to be hereby diminished, and the Paroxysm made
more easy and light, we may then also even with boldness and confidence go on
to purge, as there shall be occasion. But it is most fit and convenient to
purge, even at first, in the very beginning of the Disease. For whenas the
impetuous motion of the humor unto the part affected is not as yet altogether
so great, the humor may easily be drawn another way; whereas if it already with
great violence rush unto the part affected, it is the harder to be recalled.
But lest that otherwise some Fever should be kindled, the condition of the
humors, and the nature of the purges, are well to be weighed and considered; and
they are so to be tempered, that no such thing may happen.

Quest. 12. Whether Baths be good and useful for such as are troubled with the
Gout?
BAths are by many Physicians commended unto Arthritick persons; and many also
thus affected betake themselves unto these Baths, as unto the only sacred
Anchor of their Hopes, and a most sure Refuge, as from whence they expect an
easing of al their pains and tortures. But yet on the contrary, Experience has
often taught us, that some even in those very baths have fallen into the fits
and pains of the Gout; and that others likewise by the use of the said Baths
have become much the worse. And therefore seeing that there is a Truth in both
these Assertions; to wit, That Baths are sometimes useful and good for
Arthritick persons, and now and then likewise very hurtful for them; we must
first of all know that from Baths alone there was never yet any that ever
recovered ((...) could to much as probably hope for) his perfect health and
strength. Neither also does the Arthritis (as we showed you before) proceed
only from the weakness of the jo^^^s; neither is it sufficient to strengthen
the joints, that the sick person may be (...) of the Gout. And moreover, that
the Baths do sometimes help, and sometimes hurt the person thus affected, this is
not to be ascribed merely and simply unto the Baths, but unto the constitution
of the sick person, and likewise the course of Diet by him observed whilst he
made use of those Baths. For if the Body shall be first rightly evacuated, so
that there are only the relics and remainders to be consumed, and that the
Joints be to be strengthened, Baths may then be allowed as very fit and
profitable for the sick person. For they do more powerfully dissolve and
dissipate the remainders of the Humors in the joints than do any Medicaments
whatsoever, and so strengthen the parts; and withal (if the use of them be
temperate) they cherish and preserve the Native heat of the Body. But if the
Body be still impure, and as yet full of vicious humors, the Baths melt and pour
al abroad these vicious humors; whereupon the sick persons sometimes fall into
their fits in the very Baths, and so are forced to desist from any further use
of them; or else these humors being scattered and poured abroad are carried
into the other parts, and unto the bowels; and there they cause many dangers
and mischiefs. And so we may even very truly conclude, that Baths are more
hurtful than helpful unto persons in this condition, unless they observe a
right and due course of diet, while they make use of them.

FINIS.
Books Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller of LONDON, at the
Exchange.
Several Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper and A. C^^^, etc.
1 Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books.

2 Sennerius thirteen Books of Natural Philosophy.

3 Sennertus two Treatises. 1 Of the Pox 2 Of the Gout.

4 Twenty four Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that
Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lezarus ^iverius.

5 R^^l^mus Anatomy.

6 V^^lingus (...) of the Body (...).

7 A Tr^^st (...) of the (...) by the (...) of (...) Landin. Whereunto is
added, The K^y to Galens Method of Physic.

8 The English Physician Enlarged.

9 A Direct ^y for Midwives, or a Guide for Women.

10 Gelens Art of Physic.

11 New Method both of studying and Practicing Physic.

12 A Trestise of the Rickets.

13 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the Common People.

14 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic.

The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a large Chstacter in Latin.

The London Dispensatory in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin,

Mr. Buroughs WORKS. viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Christ's call to all those that are Weary and Heavy Laden to come to him for
Re^t.

2 Christ the Great Teacher of Souls that come to him.

3 Christ the Humble Teacher of those that come to him.

4 The only Easy way to Heaven.

5 The excellency of holy Courage.

6 Gospe^ Reconciliation.

7 The Rate (...) of Christian Contentment.

8 Gospel Worship.

9 Gospel-Conversation.

10 A Treatise of Earthly-Mindedness.

11 Exposition of the Prophecy of Hoseah.

12. The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of Sin.

13 Precious Faith.

14 Of Hope.

15 Of Walking by Faith.

Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two (...). Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light.

2 Christ in (...).

3 A Lifting up for the Cast-down.

4 ^in against the Holy Ghost.

5 ^ins of Infirmity.

6 The false Apostle tried and discovered.

7 The good and means of Establishment.

8 The great things Faith can do.

9 The great things Faith can suffer.

10 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office.

11 Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Temptation.

12 Thankfulness required in every Condition.

13 Grace for Grace.

14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Imposibilities.

15 Evangelical Repentance

16 The Spiritual Life, and in-being of Christ in all Believers.

17 The Woman of Canaan.

18 The Saints Hiding place, etc.

19 Christ Coming, etc.

20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances.

21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.

New Books of Mr. Sydrach Simpson, VIZ.
1 Of Unbelief; or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by
Christ.

2 Not going to Christ for Life and Salvation is an exceeding great Sin, yet
Pardonable.

3 Of Faith, Or, That believing is receiving Christ; And receiving Christ is
Believing.

4 Of Covetousness

Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volums: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto,
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England. Are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the sevententh of John.

Ten Books of the Application of Redemption by the Effectual Work of the Word,
and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God.

Dr. Hills WORKS.

The Kings Tryar at the High Court of Justice.

Wise Virgin, Published by Mr. Thomas Weld, of New England.

Mr. Rogers on (...) the Syrian, his Disease and Cure: Discovering the Leprosy
of Sin and (...); with the Cure, viz. ^elf-denial and Faith.

A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex.

Mr. Rogers his Treatise of Marriage.

The Wonders of the Lodestone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswich.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist Sr. Matthew. By Mr. Ward.

The Discipline of the Church in New England: By the Chuches and Synod there.

Mr. Brightman on the Revelation.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinace of Baptism.

Mr Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in
New England.

A Treatise of Police Powers.

Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.

Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace.

Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow.

Pious Man's Practice in Parliament time.

Barriffs Military Discipline.

The Immortallity of Man's Soul.

The Anatomist Anatomized.

The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech Woodwards Sacred ^^liance.

Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter.

Abraham's Offer, Gods Offering: Being a Sermon by Mr. Rerle, before the Lord
Major of London.

Mr. Spurstows Sermon, being a Pattern of Repentance

Englands Deliverance. By Peter Sterry.

The Way of God with his People in these Nations. By Peter Sterry.

Mr. Sympson's sermon at Westminster

Mr. Feaks sermon before the Lord Major.

The Best and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. A sermon.

A sacred Panegytick. By Stephen Marshel. A sermon.

The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcomen of
Dedham. A sermon.

Clows Chyrurgery.

Marks of Salvation.

Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS VIZ.
1 Of Christ's Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity.

2 The high Privilege of believers, They are the Sons of God.

3 Faith the M^ans to feed on Christ

4 Self-Denial.

5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, etc.

6 The Mystery of spiritual Life.


