RAILLERY DEFEATED BY CALM REASON: OR, THE NEW CARTESIAN METHOD OF ARGUING and
ANSWERING EXPOSED. In a Letter to all Lovers of Science, Candor and Civility.

By J. S.

LONDON, Printed for D. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible, without Temple Bar;
and A. Roper, at the Black-Boy, over against St. Dunstan's Church, in
Fleet-stteet, MDCXCIX.

TO His Adversaries.
Gentlemen,
ADdresses of this nature did use, hitherto, to be made to Great Persons, for
their Protection; or else, to Special Friends, to show the Author's Respects:
But, your Way of Managing this Controversy, has been so Preposterous, that it
has obliged me to traverse those Usual Methods, and to present this Defensive
of mine to your selves, though my Adversaries. And, because I fear that, coming
from my Hand, it will not please you, I will endeavor to make it as little
Unwelcome as I can. Let me ask you then, What means all this Railing, and
Libelling? Can any Man of Common Sense think, this is the Method to promote
Truth? And, if not; pray, What was your Aim in taking this Way, so Ungrateful
to Sober Men, so Nauseous to the Learned, and so Unchristian in it self? Does
it conduce to prove TRUTH, or confute ERROR? Or, rather, Does it not expose
you to the Censure of all Lovers of Learning, and Civility; as Men, whose
Reasons are at a Nonplus. I beseech you to consider, that Reason is our True
Nature; and, therefore, whatever subsists by Reason, does naturally claim the
Assent and Acceptance of Mankind: Whereas, PASSION, if excessive, is never
Wise; and, especially, in Philosophy, where Evident Arguments ought to be the
only Managers, it is a mere Folly. It Is Scandalous to Truth, as well as to
Modesty, that Brawling should usurp the Place of Demonstrating. Indeed, no
Credit being got by Answering Squabbles, you could not have invented any better
Way to make me lose mine: And, the best Compurgator I can bring, to keep me
fair in the Opinion of the World, for Answering Books that abound in Raillery,
but are quite void of Sense, is, that I saw it was a great Good to the
Commonwealth of Learning, to lay open, once for all, such Ridiculous and Unfair
Methods; that their Insignificancy being Exposed, they may, for ever hereafter,
he held Unworthy of any other Answer, but that of Scorn, and Neglect. What I
most fear, is, that my Reader will think, that, while I am Replying to Mr. Le
Grand's CENSURA, I am rather framing an Idea of the Incredible Weakness of
Perverted Reason, than giving him a True Account of his Real and Perpetual
Failings: But, my Comfort is, his Book is extant, to justify me. Philosophers
use to say, that Nature abhors a Vacuum: I am sure, Rational Nature as much
abhors an Emptiness of Sense; yet, this is all he has allowed me to work upon,
or confute.

Now, since to talk Incoherently, is, by all Mankind, held to be Folly; and, to
do this in a High Degree, and Constantly, is that which Men call
Distractedness, or Madness; which is a Total Disabling of our Rational Faculty:
It Is manifest, hence, that REASON, which is our Nature, consists in the
Conjoyning our Thoughts rightly; and, that it is the Perfection of our Reason,
to discourse Coherently, or Connectedly. Wherefore, my only Request to you, is,
that, leaving off all those Foppish and Irrational Ways of Raillery, and
Buffoonery, you would do your selves the Favor to pursue this Way of
CONNECTION; so Natural to your Souls, so Honorable to your Credits, and so
Beneficial to the Learned Part of Mankind. This Method, besides the doing a
just Duty to Truth, will, over and above, make all Uncivil Language
Impracticable: No such Stuff can find Place, while we are Laying Principles,
and Deducing Legitimate Consequences; which are all a Philosopher has to do:
Nor, can Impertinent Babblers find Opportunity to put in a Word, while such
Serious Business is in Agitation. You have too much Disobliged and Scandalized
all Good Men, and no less Mortified me, in forcing me from this Solid Method,
by your bringing the Controversy from Evidence of Arguing, to the worst sort
of Drollery; since you neither brought against me any one Argument, the Terms
of which you would undertake to be Connected; nor went about to solve the Close
Connection of mine; but, only huddl'd together a Medly of Rambling Cavils,
tending only to blemish my Reputation: Which forced me (it being expected I
should say something, and you giving me no wiser Employment) to lose Time in
laying open your Injuriousness, Weaknesses, and Falsehoods; whereas, I do assure
you, I should, with much more Joy and Satisfaction, have commended your
Learning, and Civility, if your Carriage would have permitted me to do it with
Truth.

I beg of you, that you would not (as Lawless Assassinates and Robbers use)
thus disgrace your selves, by assaulting me with your Vizards on; but, appear
Barefaced. Why should an Honest Man, in an Honest Cause, be ashamed to show
his Face? Own your true Nature, Reason: State your Cartesian Thesis; for, our
Controversy begun about that; and, if you flinoh from it, and run to other
Subjects, you quit the Field. Then, lay Determinate Principles, and bring
Determinate Arguments to prove your Assertions; and, I will promise you to do
the same. But, I beseech you, let not the least Disrespectful Word pass between
us, under Penalty of being held to have lost our Cause. If you please to take
this Way, so Proper for Settling Truth, I shall Honor and Respect you, and
civilly Excuse whatever may hap to be Defective. But, if you resolve still to
continue these Untoward Methods, here laid open, I shall not think it worth my
while to stand Bartering Angry Repartees with you; but, will let you Rail on to
your selves. Resting confident, that all Learned and Sober Men will both
Condemn your Prevaricating Incivility; and, will also hold me Excused, if I let
you gratify your own Genius, and apply my self to better Employments, more
becoming a Scholar, and a Christian.

Your Sincere, though Undeservedly Injured, Friend, and Servant, J. S.

RAILLERY DEFEATED BY CALM REASON: OR, THE NEW CARTESIAN METHOD OF Arguing and
Answering EXPOSED: In a Letter to all Lovers of Science, Candor and Civility.
Gentlemen,
1. WHen Pretenders to Philosophy, instead of producing Arguments of their own,
or Answering those that are brought by others, do break in upon all the Rules
of Decency and Civility, and betake themselves to Railing and Libelling, it is
the Concern, not only of the Learned, but of all Mankind to declare their
Abhorrence of such an Indirect and Senseless Prevarication. Invectives cast
such a Shadow upon the clearest Truths, and introduce so pernicious a Precedent
into Disputation about Points of Philosophy, and those also of a more Sacred
Nature, that, unless this absurd Carriage be discountenanced, the best Efforts
of Exact Reason will be turned into Buffoonery. That nothing but my Opposing
Cartesianism, either by Undeniable Matter of Fact, or by my Arguments, did
force Mr. Le Grand and his Complice to this Hurry of Passion, and (as your
selves will character it when you see their manner of Writing) Madness of
Malice, will appear manifestly by a plain Stating of the Case; which is this.

2. Very many of my Learned Friends (though it was my Concern to name but one of
them) had blamed my Ignobile Otium, and had pressed me to write. To speak
heartily, I cannot perfectly remember, that they desired me, in express Terms,
to write Philosophy; but I am certain I understood them so, the Circumstances
seeming very Improper to publish any thing else. Being thus won, I cast about
how I might make my Productions as Universally Beneficial as I was able. At
first sight I Diseover'd, and had, (with many others, who aimed at True
Science,) in my Thoughts, Bewailed, that a kind of Sceptitism, or Despair of
Certain Knowledge, had insensibly crept into the World; and I had experienced
how it had corrupted many excellent Wits, and made them turn Libertines. I saw
that this dangerous Distemper of the Mind was grown very Epidemical; of which,
in my Preface to Solid Philosophy Asserted, I so heartily and feelingly
complain. I saw that this Skeptical Humor did hinder the Progress of
Scientifical Knowledge, and the Improvement of Rational Nature; nay, that it
brought a vast Prejudice to Religion it self: For, those who had only Wit
enough to raise Objections against Christian Faith, but wanted Solidity of
Judgment, and True Principles, enabling them to settle their Volatile Thoughts,
were apt to think that the Mysteries it proposed were altogether Repugnant to
Reason, and Inexplicable. But, particularly, I had observed the Increase of
Atheism, and (which is next to it) of Deism here in England. Which kind of Men,
making a Scoff at Scripture, and disregarding Church, Councils, Fathers, and
all Authority, could no way be so properly and effectually combated, or
confuted, as by REASON; to which, and which only, they appealed. Hereupon, I
resolved to bend my best Endeavors to advance the Way of Exact Reasoning; and,
thence, pitched upon the Writing and Publishing a METHOD to Science.

3. That the Regard I had to Christian Faith was the Chief Motive that
prevailed with me to write Philosophy, or that Treatise, will appear hence:
First, Because it is manifest that I took there all Occasions that could come
in my way, to apply my Discourses to the Defense of Faith; and when I had
established any Truth by way of Reason, I did, upon the Spot, make use of it to
confute some Heresy; or else some Tenet which seemed not so well consistent
with Faith, but subcontrary to it. For Example; In my METHOD, p. 6. I argue
against the Scepticks. Page 7. against the Pre-existence of Souls. Page 32. I
prove that Man is but One Thing, and not Two, as the Cartesians hold; of which
more hereafter. Page 43. I conclude against the Epicurean Hypothesis. I
demonstrate, p. 59, 60. that the World had a Beginning of Motion; and,
consequently, that there is some Spiritual Nature, which, either by its own
Virtue, or by Power derived from some Supreme and First Cause of Motion, did
move Unactive Matter. I hint, p. 80. the Grounds which show the Mystery of the
Blessed Trinity conformable to Right Reason. I prove, p. 93. that Angels are
not properly in Place. I explicate, p. 97, 98. in what GOD's Attribute of
Eternity, and the Aeviternity of Angels, do consist. I take care, p. 105, 106.
that Weak Men do not mis-interpret Scripture, by taking Metaphorical
Expressions Literally, and Dogmatically, as Mr. Le Grand does frequently, and
very rashly; from which proceeded the Heresy of the Anthropomorphites, and
diverse others. I explicate, p. 109, 110. how, and in what Sense, Religious
Honor, or Respect may be given to Creatures, without shocking any well-meaning
Christian, or breeding Disunion amongst them. I show, p. 112. the
Incomparableness of GOD's Divine Word, the Holy Scriptnres, from its having or
bearing many several sorts of Senses, and yet all of them True. I attempt, p.
137, 138, etc. by a Logical Medium, to demonstrate the Existence of a Deity. I
show, p. 153. the Way to perfect Souls in Solid Virtue. I demonstrate, p. 277,
278, etc. GOD's Providence in the whole Course of Nature, even to the very
least Effect: That he cannot be the Author of Sin: How senseless a Sin
Irresignation is: How great our Gratitude to GOD ought to be: And, how Wise the
Doctrine of Christianity is. I manifest, p. 286. how Ignorant Atheists are.
Page 299. That the World had a Beginning; and, that there are Spiritual
Natures. I demonstrate at large, p. 302. that there is a Self-existent Being,
or a Deity. I prove, p. 318. against the Origenists, how Rational it is that
there should be an Eternal Hell for the Devils, and wicked Souls. I I settle
very largely, to the End of that Lesson, the Rational Grounds, previous to
Humane and Divine Faith. And, p. 343. I show, from a Logical Medium, the
Unreasonableness of Opinionative Faith, which grounds Light Credulity, and
Bigottery. I inform my Reader, p. 360, 361, etc. how to arm himself against
being surpised by Fallacies brought against Christianity. And, Lastly, p. 373.
I demonstrate, that the Practical Judgment of a Sinner, and, consequently, all
Sin, is clearly Opposite to Right Reason; and an Evident Fallacy, according to
the Commonest Rules of True Logic.

4. I pursue the same good End in my Solid Philosophy Asserted; and take all
Occasions (even though not given me sometimes) to apply my former Grounds to
higher Subjects. I will only touch upon some Instances. I explicate, p. 174,
and 199. GOD's Immensity, and set it above those low Conceits framed by our
Fancy. As likewise, (p. 202.) his Self-Existence, and (p. 211.) his Absolute
Infinity. I show (p. 223.) the Necessity of a Supernatural Doctrine, against
the Deists. Page 225. How to conquer in our Spiritual Warfare. Page 227. That
Man, pre-determin'd by GOD, determines himself, or is Free. Page 229. Whence
Sin springs. I lay open (p. 271, 272, etc.) the Nature of Solid Virtue. I show
(p. 303, and 391.) the Clear Distinction between Corporeal and Spiritual
Natures; which is of vast Concern, both to Philosophy, Divinity, and Faith it
self; and, is the best Rule of Interpreting Scripture in such Passages as
concern Spirits, unless the known Faith of the Catholic Church has already
established the Doctrinal Point to our hand. I distinguish (p. 438, 439,) what
is due to Reason, what to Divine Revelation. And, (p. 441, 442.) that Reason is
not to be relied upon in Things above Reason. Lastly, (p. 452.) I give a
Certain Rule how we can never come to be misled by Authority, etc.

5. Secondly, That I writ Philosophy to maintain the Interest of Christian
Faith, and not out of the vain Motive of being held a mere Philosopher, does
farther appear hence, That in the Epistle Dedicatory to Solid Philosophy
Asserted, I did civilly challenge the Socinians, Deists and Atheists, that some
Learned Men of those Sects would please to send me those Reasons which they, or
their Leaders, do judge to be of most Weight why they cannot embrace the
Doctrine of the Trinity, or Christianity; which they may send privately, and
unnam'd, to the Stationer who publishes this Book: Promising them, that I would
give their Arguments their full Weight, and publish an Answer to them. Which
manifestly shows, that my Design was, to apply my Books of Philosophy to the
Explication and Defense of Revealed Faith. From some of those Sects I might
have expected a Rude Opposition; though I do not think any of them would have
thought it Prudent, or Creditable to themselves, or their Cause, to leave my
Arguments and my Books Unanswered, and let fly at me with Personal Reflections;
but, that those who bear the Name of Christians, should, instead of Answering
my Reasons, fall to Decry, Traduce and Libel those very Books, and their
Author, in the most Vile and Scurrilous manner, I could not have expected. This
plainly convinces all sober Men, that these angry Gentlemen esteem nothing so
Sacred as the Satisfaction of their private Pique. But, nothing is so Fiery,
and Furious, as Men too fond of Empty Fame, when they foresee their Ignorance
is in danger to be baffled. I dare presume, that whoever considers the several
Particulars lately mentioned, to demonstrate which, in those Treatises, I have
laid Grounds; (not to speak of many others I have omitted,) will acknowledge
they are of no small Weight; and therefore, that the Writer who advances
Positions which are so useful and serviceable to Christianity, ought (were it
but out of respect to that Best Cause) to be civilly treated, even though he had
erred. Nor could my Adversaries have shown a greater Kindness to those Sects
abovementioned, than to bend their whole Endeavors to revile and blacken an
Author, who, as they already saw, had entered the Lists against those Men; so
to fore-stall (as far as they were able) the Efficacy of all his future Labors
to defend Christian Faith! Poor Men! What Service has either of them done for
Christianity! They have spent their whole Life, or the greatest part of it, in
contemplating Groundless Fancies, coined by their own Brain; or, (as they call
it,) in Eliciting, or Producing Ideas; and in talking Voluntaries while they
explicate them, without either Principles or Connection; and that is the utmost
of their empty Performances. And then, when they should defend their Cause by
Arguments, if we will not allow their Explications for good Proof, they fall to
Railing and Libelling. But Envy is of so froward an Humor, that it will
neither do Good it self, nor let it be done by others.

6. I might add, as a Third Argument, to prove, that my chief Aim in my
Writings, was, to do my Duty to Faith, that I have opposed all the Whole Way of
Ideas; because I saw them very Unfit to Explicate or Defend it. Far be it from
me to cast in a Suspicion, that the Authors who follow that Way are Unsound in
Faith. What I affirm, is, That I can neither conceive how the Ideas of the
Cartesians can well suit with some Points of Faith, (of which more hereafter;)
nor that those of Mr. Lock, though his Simple Ideas being taken from the Things
in Nature, his Doctrine is in comparably better grounded than that of
Cartesius, do so clearly serve to explicate Faith, but that they are obnoxious
to some Exceptions. I should be better satisfied with both those Hypotheses,
could I once see a Body of Speculative Divinity; or even an Explication of two
or three Points of Revealed Faith, manifesting the Agreement of Faith with the
Principles of Right Reason; so that we may see how the Superstructure of that
Divine Doctrine does accord with those Grounds; as it must with True Science.
For, I cannot but judge, that since [Verum vero non contradicit,] Philosophical
Truths, which are Inferior ones, and lie level to our Reason, and therefore
are Clearer to our Understanding than are those Sublime Mysteries, and are more
maniable by it, ought to lend their Assistance to our weak Capacities in
Explicating and Defending them from being Contradictory to True Reason: Whence,
I cannot think Tha^ Philosophy to be True, which, like an Officious Handmaid,
is not thus Subservient to her Mistress, Faith. And, if any Writer, or
Sustainer of those Sects above mentioned, shall think fit to attack any Article
of Revealed Faith, as contrary to True Science, I doubt not but to make it
evidently appear by the Doctrine I have settled in my METHOD, how far short
their Arguments are from any Show of Concluding.

7. Lastly, It was not in me any Fondness of advancing Paradoxes, but my Zeal
of pursuing the same Good End, which made me attempt to demonstrate in my
Method diverse Points which shock the Fancy of the Vulgar, and, perhaps, of some
Learned Readers, till they well weigh their Grounds; viz. those of the
Immutability of a Pure Spirit, and the Impossibility of Annihilation by GOD's
Ordinary Power. I had observed, that the perfect Distinction between Body and
Spirit was Ill understood by most, and their Natures Confounded by diverse
Ingenious Writers. Also, that very few did penetrate thoroughly the Nature of
their State, their kind of Duration, or their manner of Operating; but
conceited them to have a kind of Commensuration to Body, Time and Corporeal
Operation. Which put, it was impossible to divest them totally of Corporeal
Predicates; or to evince clearly against Atheists, that there were any Beings
of a Nature truly and properly Spiritual, or Indivisible, unless we could prove
they were Contradictorily Different from Body, and all that belonged to it,
excepting only as to their Genus, or Common Notion, Ens, or Thing. Wherefore,
reflecting of what Importance it was to clear this main Point, both for
Philosophy, the Adequate Object of which these two Natures are; neither of
which could be clearly understood, unless they be thus perfectly, that is,
contradictorily Distinguished: As also, for Theology, which treats mostly of
Spiritual Things, and Spiritual Natures: And, Lastly, for Faith; because,
otherwise, Atheists, who deny all Spirituality, might take a Conceit, that we
meant nothing by a [Spirit,] but only some more refined sort of Matter; and,
thence, might come to deny also the Immortality of the Soul, (which is one of
the main Grounds of all Religion,) if we ascribed to Spirits any Mode, or
Manner of Operating, which appertains to Body; nay, would thence be apt to
conclude, that there is nothing above mere Matter: Hence, I saw it fit to
demonstrate the former of these Theses, viz. their Immutability, as the Best,
and most Convincing Proof of their Immortality; and, at the same time, quite
defeat Origenism, and the Denial of an Eternal Hell, which (though it be a known
Point of Christian Faith) is now creeping again into Fashion in England. And,
it was for the same good Reason, that I went about to demonstrate that Point of
the Impossibility of Annihilation; because our Modern Socinians explicate the
Spiritual Perdition of the Soul, by Annihilation. And, that the Reason why I
advanced and demonstrated those Theses, was out of my Respect to Faith, appears
yet more manifestly, because I apply them still to the Confutation of those
Sects.

8. Hitherto, then, it is not visible to the Eye of any sober Christian, how I,
or those Books of mine, could fall into the high Displeasure of Mr. Le Grand to
that degree, as to revile my self, and degrade them to the lowest degree of
Contempt. If he had dis-lik'd my Reasons which established these Particulars in
my Method, he might, in behalf of Truth, have confuted them; and he should not,
in the least, have disobliged me; nor had it broke any Friendship between us.
But, now comes my Crime: It was my necessary Duty, while I was writing my
Method to Science, to confute those Methods advanced by others, which I judged
to be False ones: Whence, I took notice of that of Malbranche, who pretends
that all Science comes by Divine Revelation; and of that of Cartesius, who, (as
the Writer of his Life tells us,) by endeavoring to bring himself to question
all the Certainty he had received from his Senses, fell into Fits of
Enthusiasm. I thought it a Duty I owed to Mankind, and to the Subject I was
writing of, to forewarn Studious Men of following such Methods as might
prejudice their Wits; and, withal, lead them into Error; and to declare, that
I could not think that God ever intended That for the only Means (as they
pretend) for Men to get Knowledge, which might make them lose their Wits in
looking after it. This highly offended those Cartesians, and transported them
into most Tragical Exclamations. But with what Reason? It lay directly in the
Road I had taken; and, What Obligation had I to either of those Authors, that I
should dissemblingly favor them, against the Duty I owed to my Readers, and
the Regard I had for Truth? It could not proceed from any private Pique against
their Persons, for they had never injured me. Again; Had I wronged either of
them, it had been easy to confure me, by showing that I either falsify'd the
Words I cited, or suppressed their own Interpretation of them. But, both these
being impossible, and Confutation by way of Reason not being their Talent,
another Way (though nothing to the purpose) was thought fit; which was, to rail
at me aloud, and bespatter my Person.

9. I had brought also some Arguments against diverse Positions of the Cartesian
Doctrine, advanced by Mr. Le Grand; but I had not one unhandsom Word against
his Person, but spoke respectfully of him: Which, from a Scholar, and a
Well-bred Man, might have merited the like Return. If the Arguments against
Cartesianism gave him too much Trouble to answer, it was too good a Fault to be
sorry for it. It seems, there was no other Crime in them, nor me; for, could
they have been Answered by Calm Reason, there had been no need to have Recourse
to Passion and Invective, which abounded in his Reply. A hundred Cavils, which
were foreign to the Matter in hand, were haled in by head and shoulders; and
fitted up by sinister Constructions, and false Representations, to lay an Odium
upon me. Not one of those Questions were stated, or fully treated of, to
benefit the Reader, by letting him see what was True, what not: But a few Words
were snatched out of my Books, here and there; and then distorted, and
perverted, to make them fit to be descanted upon with Raillery. My Conclusions,
against all Laws of Disputation, were stoutly Denied: The Proofs, by which they
subsisted, were stifled in Silence; at least, the Force of my Arguments were
scarce ever taken notice of: Whereas, the most puny Logician knows that a
Conclusion, for which a Proof is brought, is to stand firm, and be allowed,
till the Proof for it be Invalidated. Do they think I would have taken it ill
from any Man, if he showed me the Weakness of my Argument? I do assure them, I
am so far from that Humor, that I should take it for a great Favor: For, by
this means, they would either satisfy me, by convincing me of my Error; or
else, by Attempting to answer my Reasons, and not performing it, Truth would
become more Victorious; which is all an honest Man ought to aim at. On the
contrary, How civilly did I invite Mr. Le Grand, to take the Manly Way of
Arguing becoming a Scholar, and to prove what he says? Ending with these Words,
Id. Carts. p. 12, 13. Nec peto a Te, etc. Nor do I require of you to Perform
this; at least, Endeavor it, and you shall see with what Honor I will treat
you, though you do sometimes, nay, often, fail. But I was not so Fortunate, as to
meet with such a Candid Adversary. The Way of Invective was resolved on, as
more favorable to their Cause; and all Overtures that were handsome, and
becoming Learned Men, were rejected.

10. Now, Gentlemen, since I have, in my Reply, shown this Carriage of theirs
Evident by Matter of Fact, judge how strangely Imprudent (not to say, worse)
these Men are, who can persuade themselves, that this manner of Writing, never
taken by any sober Man since the World stood when he is to answer another Man's
Arguments, or to establish his own Thesis, does not perfectly convince every
Intelligent Person, that they are at an end of their Reason when they fall into
such a high Salivation of Passion; and this without any other Provocation, than
what my Arguments gave them? Can their pelting their Adversary with such
abominable Slanders, (even supposing him guilty of them all,) either Answer his
Proofs for his Doctrine, or avail in the least to prove their own? Were the
Person they impugn a Professed Atheist, it could not justify a Writer who is
to defend Truth, to run away from the Question, and fall to Impertinent
Brabbling, and bring in twenty Foreign Exceptions, and Personal Defamations,
which are nothing at all to the Point. Nay, it would, in that Case, be far more
requisite to take care to confute him with Pregnant and Solid Reasons; lest
prudent Readers, who are sagacious enough to see that Ill Language, Bawling
Exclamations, and Personal Reflections, are certain Symptoms of Nonpluss'd
Reason, should be inveigl'd by those Passionate Prevarications, and by such a
wild Management, to think that he has Truth on his side, and so come to embrace
his Errors. But, will it not look like a Jest, that he who was formerly, by
all that know him, held a good Christian, and had writ many Books for
Christianity, should immediately, upon his opposing the Cartesians, be guilty
of so many Impieties, Blasphemies and Heresies, and become as Black as the
Devil; and his Books, which found such an Universal Acceptance among Learned
Men, (except two or three Maligners,) should, all on a sudden, become stark
naught? Is it not prodigious, that Men who are at Age to have Common Sense in
them, should so foolishly and childishly hood-wink themselves, and then think
none sees them? The World, whatever they think, is wiser, than to judge that
any Credit is to be given to them who, by their Carriage, confess themselves to
be piqu'd, and exasperated, even to an Ecstasy of Fury. Their Transport of
Passion too visibly discovers, that their Souls are not acted by the Spirit of
Sober Reason, Charity, and Candid Love of Truth; but agitated by a violent
Whirlwind of Fury, Envy, and Resolute Uncharitableness. Their Demeanor being
such, that, even though they had Truth on their side, they would disgrace their
Cause by their Hotheaded Managery of it.

11. These unoccasion'd Contumelies being the most Disgraceful that could be
laid upon one of my Quality, and Rank, did a little transport me in my Ideae
Cartesianae, where I was to reply to them; and, made me use, now and then, some
smart Expressions, more than were precisely necessary for my Defense; for which
I ask Mr. Le Grand's, and my Reader's Pardon; though they were no more than such
as every Prudent Man may discern that himself, as a Writer, had given himself.
But I carefully avoided all Imputations of Irreligion, either in his
Intentions, or his Writings. And, if I saw that, in any Circumstance, my Words
might occasion such a Misconstruction, I charitably and carefully defended his
Credit in such Points, and declared him innocent. All the Reflections I used,
were on his Manner of Writing; which it was impossible to avoid, if I would do
a Just Right to my self. But he liberally requited me, in his Censura; and gave
me Pounds for my Pence: For, he tells me, in the Close of his Epistle to the
Reader, that Non quicquam per integrum Responsum suum sine mendacio dixit; that
I have not spoken any thing (that is, not one Word) throughout my whole Answer,
without a Lie. So that my Answer, which consists of two hundred seventy two
Pages, is nothing but one continued Lie. Upon my word, this was shrewd, and
home; and, if this Libel of his, which ushered in, and made way for the
following one, be but capable of Immortality, my Name will be Eternized for a
Liar, to the World's End. Certainly, these Men are the oddest sort of Writers,
that ever were guilty of Ink-shed. Other Men, when they write, do entertain
some Hope they shall be believed; but these Men never think on, nor regard that
Obvious Consideration. They press on furiously, to attain their Beloved End;
which is, to disgrace that abominable J. S. And this so totally possesses and
fills their whole Fancy, that not the least Prudential Consideration can peep
up there, to make them wisely pursue their own Design. What Man in his Wits, do
they think, will believe that a Man of known Credit, who never in his Life was
noted, or thought, to be a Liar, should, in the Twinkling of a Bed-staff, (as
their Noble Jack Pudding, in his Dialogue, p. 13. styles it,) tell a Lie in
every Line, for Two Hundred Seventy two Pages together. Logicians say, that an
Argument that proves too much is naught, and proves Nothing at all. Such will
be the Fate of their Ranting Fits of Passion; they so overstrain all Belief,
that no Credit will be given to any one thing they say; nor did I ever know
that Maxim of Machiavell, [Calumniare fortiter, etc.] more untowardly and
aukwardly applied. Yet, I must say this in their Commendation, that they are
Men of a most Magnanimous Courage and Confidence. Should I talk at this
swaggering Rate, I should fear it would spoil my whole ensuing Book; and so
utterly lose my Credit, that not a Word I said would be believed.

12. Being heartily weary of this brawling Way of theirs, so contrary to my
Genius, which, all who read my Books may see, does aim at Close and Solid
Reasoning; I published a small Treatise, settling the First Truth, or First
Principle, fundamentally on the Ideas in God's Creative Intellect; for which
Reason, I intitl'd it Non Ultra, it being impossible to go higher. Where also I
demonstrated the Shallowness of the First Principle of the Cartesians. In it I
begged of them but merely to name, or put down Categorically, any one Principle
of the Cartesian Doctrine, which they judge to be the strongest, or most
Evident; and I would undertake to Demonstrate, that, either it is no Principle,
or else, that it has no Influence at all upon their Hypothesis. I declared,
that I did this, to put an End to this Controversy, and to settle Peace. I
proposed there, p. 121. that we should confine our selves to Half a Sheet of
Paper; and, that all should be transacted by pure Dint of Reason; and, that he
who shall use the least Uncivil Word to his Adversary, and falls into Passion,
shall be held to have lost his Cause, and to be reduced to a Nonplus. Could
any Proposal, or any Overture, be more Civil, Equal, or Welcome to Men who love
Truth and Ingenuity; or be more Efficacious to Decide the Question, and stop
the Way to all Possibility of Wrangling. But that is the Fault of it; They have
a great Talent in Brabbling, but they are not at all gifted for Arguing
conclusively, Demonstrating, or Laying Principles. More than this, I offered,
that, If they can show their Cause has any Principles to support it, (without
which, by the way, none ought to hold it True,) that I would make them
Satisfaction, by acknowledging publicly, that I had foolishly over-ween'd; and
take the Shame to my self, for my Rash Presumption. By which candid and frank
Offer, I put my self upon the greatest Disadvantage imaginable; and gave them a
greater Advantage against me, than they could ever hope to gain any other Way.
Lastly, I did all this needlessly, without either being Forced, or Desired, to
do it; but merely out of my own Voluntary Motion, and out of my sincere Desire
that Truth should be made appear.

13. But, what Return, do you think, was made me, for this Fair and Candid
Proposal? While I was expecting this Half-sheet of Paper, that was to consist
of nothing but Calm Reason, and was likely to decide the whole Controversy;
out comes a Dialogue, in English, under the Name of Mr. Merry-man, A-la-mode of
our Bartholomew Fair Jack-Pudding; stuffed with Ignorance, Impudence,
Falsification, Foul-mouthed Railing, Scornful Jeers, and other Scurrilous
Language: Which, for any thing I see yet, are all the Cartesian Principles I am
to expect. The Reader will see how shrewdly he confutes me; For, he tells me
over and over, I am an Ass, a Rare Fellow, and as Proud as Lucifer: That my
Writings smell rank of the Fumes of an Intoxicated Brain: That I am a kind of
Devil Incarnate; for, he says, he begins to suspect I have a Cloven Foot; and,
that no body, but the Devil, set me on VVriting: That I run down Piety,
Religion, and GOD himself; and forty such Good Morrows. Certainly, by this
Description, I must have ten Legions in me at least: Yet, the Jest is this;
this silly Fop, who would pretend great Zeal for Faith, and GOD's Honor, dares
not appear barefaced, to write against such a Monster of Wickedness; but keeps
a Vizard on, and masks his Name under that of Merry-man; which we must suppose
he does, either because he is ashamed, and should blush if good Christians knew
he took GOD's Part against Lucifer and his Imps, which is an odd piece of
Modesty; or else, because under that Disguize, he may lie, forge, and say or do
any thing, and yet none challenge him with it, or call him to Account. He
falsifies the Places where he does not quote my Books; and when he does, he
picks out a few Words, and concealing the Tenor of the Discourse, travesties
them to any Sense he pleases. He is so impudent, that, against Matter of Fact,
known openly to great Multitudes, particularly, to the Right Reverend the
Bishop of Madaura, he objects very confidently, that some of my Pieces of
Divinity were damned (that Word pleases him, and his Friend mightily) by the
Sorbon Doctors; of which, more anon. He has a fling at the Bishops, for
Negligence in their Duty; or at me, for printing my Books without their
Approbation: I beseech him to show us, in in his Huge Wisdom, that it is an
Episcopal Duty to approve all Philosophical Books; or for Philosophy-Writers to
have Episcopal Approbations, ere they print them! Had Le Grand, had Cartesius
any such? Or, did this Libeller ask any such Approbation for his Libel, which,
by the Ancient Canons of the Church, renders him liable to Excomunication; nay,
(by Conc. Arelat. 2. Canon. 24.) he is forbidden to Communicate till his Death:
And, lest he should think a Provincial Council's Decree does not debar him from
the Sacrament, it is added there immediately; Sicut Magna Synodus, (that is, a
General Council) did formerly decree. His Ignorance is so profound, that he
understands not one of the Questions he touches upon, and defiles. As, when I
affirm that GOD is not the Immediate Cause of Motion, he runs to Creation,
which is not performed by way of Motion, but Instantaneously: Whence, since
Motion being Successive Quantity, and so Proportionate Parts may be taken of
it, (for example, Half of it,) and Creation gives Being, by this Learned
Doctrine of his, a Thing may half-be, half-not-be; and so his Miraculous
Stupidity has found out a Medium between the two Contradictions, Est, and
Non-est.

14. Who the Author of this Libel is, though he thinks he walks in a Mist, is
well enough known. He was formerly convicted of slandering a Pious and Virtuous
Ecclesiastic: And now, it seems, having the Ambition to take the Highest
Degree in that Infamous Art of Calumny he took this Occasion to Commence
Doctor-Libeller. But, too much of a Pamphlet so silly and ridiculous, that it is
below Contempt.

15. And now, Gentlemen, is not this mighty Learned? Are not these most
Profound Principles? Does not every Man, who has but half an Eye, see plainly
that Mr. Le Grand, and his Party, distrusting the Way of Laying Principles, so
unfriendly to their Cause, which has none, are forced to have Recourse to
Railing; and endeavor all they can to bring our Philosophical Contest from the
Way of Connected Reason, to Farce and Drollery? I discern, by his desire it
should be told me what he says, he thinks I should set my self to answer his
Libel: But he is mistaken. It Is too much Honor to him, that I take notice of
it at all. Nor does it spring from any Desert of his, that I do even so much;
but out of regard to some weak Persons, amongst whom, I am informed, they
spread it in hugger-mugger; and, to meet with the private Cavils of the
Triumvirate: For, I hear, they have hooked in a Third Man, to strengthen their
thin Party.

16. Notwithstanding, I must confess, I owe Satisfaction to every Reader of my
Books, if in any place I speak obscurely; and to themselves too, if their
resolute Malice would render them capable to receive it: For, I look upon Them
too as my Brethren; though, at present, being piqu'd, they are much out of
Humor; taking it to be my Duty to use all the Effectual Ways I can, Lucrari
Fratres meos. I must confess, it is not Fit that such High and Abstruse Points
should be treated in English, in regard they transcend the Fancies of the
Vulgar; who are Incompetent Readers, much less Judges, of such Speculations;
but, since they have thus forced me to it, let the Imprudence lie at their
Doors, if I treat somewhat largely, in our Vulgar Language; of the main Points
which they strive to render so Odious.

17. It Is to be noted, then, That the Perfect Distinction between Corporeal and
Spiritual Natures was formerly unknown to many, even of the Ancient Fathers;
the Doctrine of Faith, (only which was their Concern, as Fathers,) abstracting
from such particular Questions, which belong to Philosophical Speculations:
Insomuch that Joannes Thessalonicensis, in the Second Nicene Council, said,
that the Angels were, indeed, Intelligibles, (he means, Intellectuales;) Sed
non omnino Corporis expertes, verum tenui corpore praediti, and aereo, sive
igneo: That Angels were not without a Body, but had a Thin Body of Air or Fire.
Nay, this Opinion of his was approved of by the Council. And, which is yet
more, he says, that Catholica Ecclesia sic sentit; that is, It Is the Sentiment
of the Catholic Church: Which shows, that this Opinion was very Universal.
Though it ought here to be observed, that he says not that the Catholic Church
holds this as a Doctrine of Faith, or descended from Christ and his Apostles;
but only, that the Church sic sentit; that is, thinks or opines so. For, no
wise Man can doubt that the Fathers, in Council, being not only Witnesses of
the Faith delivered from the foregoing Church, which they propagate, and
transmit to the Following Age, (which gives them, properly, and formally, the
Denomination of Fathers;) but, being also Philosophers, and Divines; they do
hence, sometimes, deliver themselves, (though not in their Decrees of Faith) as
Men endowed with these later Qualifications.

18. The Reason which made so many Holy Men fall into that great Error,
contradicted now by most of the Divines of the Christian Church, was, because,
the World not having yet arrived to that Maturity of Science as to get above
Fancy, and therefore not distinguishing perfectly those two sorts of
Substances, hence they were apt to take Metaphorical Texts of Scripture, (such
as those generally are, where it speaks of Spiritual Natures, and their
Operations,) to be meant Dogmatically, and Literally: Nor, consequently, could
they conceive otherwise, but that Pure Spirits were Passive; and therefore, of
their own Nature, Mutable, by Impressions on them, as Bodies are; and,
consequently, Matter being the only Potential or Passive Principle, to have
some Materiality, or Corporeity, in their Natures. Yet were not all the Ancient
Fathers thus weakly grounded: For, one of the Antientest, Tertullian, was more
Solid, and (Lib. de Anima, cap. 2.) lays this for a kind of Principle:
[Incorporalitas nihil patitur, non habens per quod pati possit; aut sihabet,
hoc est Corpus: In quantum enim omne Corporale passibile est, in tantum omne
quod passibile est, Corporale est: An Incorporeal (that is, a Spiritual) Thing
cannot suffer (from another Agent,) having nothing in it, by means of which it
can suffer; (that is, having no Matter in it, through which only those Things,
called Bodies, are Passive:) Or, if it have any such, it is a Body; since, for
what Reason every Bodily Thing is Passive, for the same Reason every thing that
is Passive, is Corporeal.] Which Principle, so perfectly consonant to the
Aristotelian Doctrine, was, I believe, the Reason why, speaking of those in the
Intermediate State, he says, Non dimittetur nisi modico quoque delicto mora
Resurrection is expenso: He shall not be pardoned, till every little Sin be
paid for by the Delay of the Resurrection. Nor is it hard to allege many other
Ancient Fathers, of the same Sentiment, whose Works were never cenfured for it,
nor their Opinion condemned, but by such insignificant Triflers as Mer^y-man,
and his Fellow-Banterer.

19. In process of time the Christian Schools embracing the Categories of
Aristotle, which contain all our Natural Notions, reduced into Heads; which
they also Divided with more Exactness than formerly; Men's Thoughts grew to be
more Distinct, and Clear, which, if well pursued, and held to, disposed their
Reason for Demonstration. I dare affirm, the former Words of Tertullian do
contain in them a Metaphysical Demonstration; and I can as little doubt, but
that (their Principles obliging them to it) many others had held the same; but
that Impressions from Bodily Substances, with which we perpetually converse,
had so possessed their Fancies, that, though they might see it followed from
their Principles, yet they were startled at the Conclusion; and were afraid of
the Consequences which they foresaw would ensue from such a Position. As for
my self, I shall content my self at present with producing one fingle
Demonstration, (omitting many others;) which I the rather pitch upon, because I
pretended it Unanswerable; and Mr. Le Grand has undertaken to Answer it. It Is
this:

20. All Created Things are either Divisible, or Indivisible; which two
Notions, as Differences, divide the Genus, or Common Head of Ens, or Thing, and
constitute those two Sorts or Species of Things, called Body and Spirit.
Therefore, these two Kinds or Species of Things can agree only in the Genus, or
Common Notion of Thing, and differ in every Consideration else, and this
Contradictorily; Divisible and Indivisible, which are their Differences, being
clearly Contradictory to one another. Wherefore, whatever is truly and properly
Affirmed of the One, must be Denied of the Other: But, of that Divisible Thing,
or Substance, called Body, it is truly Affirmed, that it is Successive in its
Operations; Therefore, of an Indivisible Thing, or a Pure Spirit, (such as an
Angel is,) it must be Denied that it is Successive in its Operations; that is,
it must be Affirmed of it, that it is Unsuccessive, or Instantaneous, in its
Operations; and, consequently, all it can operate, is in an Instant. Whence
follows, demonstratively, that it is Immutable: For, since to be Mutable, is,
to have something in it, after another; that is, to have Part of what it is to
have, after Part; and this belongs most manifestly to Body; the Contradictory,
or, to have all it is to have at once, must properly belong to a Pure Spirit,
or an Angel. Again; Since an Instant is an Indivisible, and one Indivisible
added to another, cannot possibly make any greater Quantity, Length, or (as we
may say) Exporrection of Duration; or, (which is the same,) any Duration
corresponding to any least part of our Time; it is manifest that Angels can act
as much in One Instant, as, in Two, or more; their being more, not affording
them longer Leisure to Consider, or Resolve; whence, they are never the worse
accommodated to act thus in one Instant, than in More.

21. The Reason for this seemingly strange Position is grounded (as was now
shown) on the Essential Differences of Body and Spirit; and no less on the
Duration peculiar to Angels, which Divines call Aeviternity; which, being of a
Superior Nature to that of Time, does comprehend and concentre in it self all
the several Differences of our Fleeting Time, and, after an Eminent Manner,
includes, and is Equivalent to them all: Not by way of Commensuration, (which
can only be found among Quantitative Things,) but by the Excellency it has
above them. So that, as when an Angel operates upon any Body of a vast Extent,
it is not Diffused, or Extended, according to the Extent of the Body it works
upon; but, by its own Indivisible Nature, produces that Divisible Effect: so
neither are its Indivisible Operations, though they be Equivalent to Innumerable
ones, which are done Successively by us, performed by them Successively, or One
after Another; but, according as the Nature of an Angel requires, Indivisibly,
or Instantaneously: Yet, that Instant, being equivalent to all our Time here,
contains in it Thousands of Priorities of Nature; nay, more, perhaps, than we
can imagine; by which, one of them may be conceived by our Reason to be
Originiz'd from another. For Example; We can truly conceive them to be, or to
have their Essence and Existence; and, consequently, to be naturally Good, as
they came from GOD's Immediate Hand, ere their own depraved Will made them
Morally Bad; because, according to Priority of Nature or Reason, Being must
antecede their Operating, or making a wrong Choice. Also, for the same Reason,
we conceive them to know themselves, their own Dignity, and Man's Inferiority;
That one of these Men was to be set above them, be their Head, and Adored by
them; That they took thence, out of their Selfish Pride, an Aeversion against
GOD, as the Orderer of it; and Envy against Mankind, as their Compepetitor; and
against our Blessed Savior's Humanity, as an Usurper over them: That, hence,
they inspired other Angels to rebel; That they contested with St. Michael, and
were foiled by him, etc. as is explained more largely in my METHOD to SCIENCE,
p. 319, 320, 321, etc. where I conclude thus: [All these may be conceived to
have Certain Priorities of Nature, as those Causes have to their Effects, which
are in the same Instant. So that this single Instant of theirs, is, though not
Formally, yet Virtually, and, in order to the many Indivisible Effects
producible in it, as good as a long Series of our Time; not by way of
Quantitative Commensuration of one to the other, but by the Eminency of the
Angelical Duration, or their Aeviternity, which is of a Superior Nature to
Body, and, consequently, to Bodily Motion, or Time; and comprehends it all
Indivisibly, or Instantaneously.]

22. They who dislike this Discourse of mine, ought, if they would confute me,
to show that I do not, in it, hold Firmly to the Nature of the Thing, or
Subject, in Dispute, and thence draw my Argument; but deviate from it: And,
withal, they are to make it Evident to the Reader, that themselves do this,
while they oppose me. But, I have the Misfortune to have to do with such
Adversaries, who never in their Lives dreamt of any such Consideration; or so
much as thought of any such Solid Ground: They never attend to the Nature of
the Subject we are discoursing of, nor heed the Force of my Arguments, or my
Premises; but Manfully deny the Conclusions; deform them all they can; and
then, most learnedly oppose them with Jests, Jeers, and fulsome Railing. But to
return to the Matter in hand:

23. Lest any should think it impossible, so many several Effects should be
performed by an Angel in one Instant, and suspect it is some Whimsie of my own
head, I desire them to reflect on what St. Thomas of Aquin (Prima, Q. 62. a.
4.) positively asserts, or rather lays for a Ground, viz. That the Angels, by
one Act, and in the first Instant, did merit. Perhaps, I might here allege,
That, if in the first Instant they could merit, or choose GOD for their True
Last End, they might also, in the same Instant, choose a wrong Last End, or
Demerit, and so be damned. But I need not press it so far here: I only desire
we may consider how many distinct Acts would pass in us, successively, ere we
could be disposed for Heaven; which, in the Old Language of the Church, is
called Meriting. Several Objects are proposed to us, to choose out of: Then we
consider, or compare them; then we yield that this is more Agreeable to us,
(thus affected, and circumstanc'd,) than the other; then we make choice of the
one, and reject the other; then we resolve to pursue it; and, lastly, we set
our selves to lay Means to compass it, Now, all these are, according to this
great Divine, performed by an Angel, in one Instant; though there be evidently
Priority of Nature or Reason of the foregoing Acts; to the following ones:
and, therefore, that the Angels must necessarily, in the same Instant, (it
being supposed by us the First,) know their own Nature, their Existence, what
is Agreeable to that Nature, and all the Train of Motives that conduce to the
Determination of their Wills; without which, there can be no Merit. By which,
Mr. Le Grand (who understands no more of those hard Points, than a Child does
Algebra) may see they may have that which we call Deliberation and
Determination in in the first Instant, without needing Succession of Time to
it, as he seems to imagine. Nay, the same Learned Doctor affirms, that Angels
are happy by one only Operation; which includes, virtually, Millions, nay,
Innumerable, of our Knowledges. These are strange Paradoxes to Mr. Le Grand's
Merry man, and such Men of Fancy; yet, we see this Great and Profound
Speculater asserts them for Truths.

24. I know the same Holy Man holds the contrary Opinion to that which, in this
Point, I think most reasonable; nay, which, I see, follows out of the Grounds
lately mentioned, which himself had laid. For, if they may have so many
Operations in the First Instant, (subsequent to one another, in the Order of
Nature,) why not more? What can stint them to such a precise Number? But, it is
to be noted, First, That in the place cited, (Q. 63. Art. 5. corp.) he affirms,
with St. Austin, that this Opinion I follow does not induce the Manichaean
Heresy, because it makes them not Bad by their Nature, but by the Depravity of
their own Free Will: Which evinces, there is nothing against Faith in it; nor
would he have passed it over so unconcernedly, had it been so. Next, speaking
of the Opinion I maintain, he says, Quidam posuerunt, etc. Some Divines
maintained, etc. Which shows, that there have been diverse Learned Men of that
Opinion formerly. Thirdly, He confutes those who gave this for their Reason why
it was impossible, because two Operations could not be terminated in the same
Instant; and tells them, That this Reason holds only in those Agents which work
by Local Motion; but, that it may well be thus in Operations which are
Instantaneous; and, that in these, there may be, in one Instant, the Terminus
of the First and Second Operations. Lastly, The Reason for which only that
Great Man dissents from those who held our Opinion, is grounded on that Maxim
of Aristotle, That the Generans, or he that gives Being, gives also the First
Operation; which, in the Devils being Sinful, cannot therefore be in the First
Instant; lest it should make GOD the Author of Sin. Which Reason does not
convince me, or seem to conclude. For, First, However this may hold in Natural
Agents, for which only Aristotle did certainly intend it as a Maxim; yet, I see
not how the Parity holds in those Agents which have Free Will; for, the
Operations of such Agents are not purely refunded into GOD, but partly into
themselves, who are the Producers of them; nay, wholly, as far as they are
Defective. Secondly, The First Natural Operation of an Intellectual Creature,
is, to know her own Essence, at least (in Souls) their own Existence; and, by
them, all other Things which may be known by it, according as its Nature and
Circumstances require; and this is given her by the First Cause, who gave them
their Natures. But, there are many other Operations, subsequent to one another
in Posteriority of Nature, (as is explained above,) which may be all performed
in the First Instant, as St. Thomas himself, above cited, has declared; and,
among them, the Choice made by their Free Will: Nor does any Reason appear, why
all these thus subsequent Operations should be ingenerated in them, by the
Giver of their Being; much less, why those Defective Operations, which have a
Natural Dependence on others, should be refunded into GOD.

25. Let us pass on now to Souls separated, which die with some Venial Impurity
in them, or (as St. James calls it) with Sins not unto Death, and therefore
need Purging; nor can be saved, but by Fire. Mr. Le Grand puts it upon me, that
I hold them Immutable in their Intermediate State, as Angels are. I would ask
him, how he knows I hold that Opinion, since I have never declared in my
Writings that I hold it. Wherefore, the putting it upon me, who no where assert
it, is Unfair, Uncivil, Captious, and Invidious. I have shown, indeed, (Id.
Cart. p. 58.) that his Arguments against it, do not conclude. So did St.
Thomas, in the place now cited, oppose the Inconclusiveness of the Reason
brought against his own Opinion; and, yet, himself held that Opinion of his
notwithstanding. He will say, the same Argument concludes equally for Angels
and Them: But he will be hard put to it, to prove it. The Soul had its Being,
by reason of the Dispositions in the Embryo, requiring such a Form as Nature
could not give. It is the Form of the Body, and naturally requires, to act with
it. It had its Education (as we may say) in the Body; for it received its
Spiritual Growth in Knowledge, by means of Bodily Impressions on the Senses. It
is Unactive when the Body is out of Order. It has naturally a dear Love for it;
procures its Good, grieves when it is hurt, and has a kind of Horror to part
with it. Nay, it retains a Hankering after it, after it has parted with it;
insomuch, that even the Greatest Saints have not the perfect Consummation of
their Bliss, till they get their Bodies again at the Resurrection; and, magis
est Anima ubi amat quam ubi animat. Lastly, Those Imperfect Souls carry some
Bodily Affections along with them. Hence, F. Seraphinus Caponi, in his
Elucidationes Formales, Q 76. Art. 1. says, the Soul is always united to the
Body, vel actu, vel inclinatione naturali; either Actually, or by its Natural
Inclination: And he gives for his Reason, Aut ergo aptitudine saltem unitur
tali materiae, aut non est Anima; sed semper est Anima, ergo, etc. Either the
Soul then is, by her Aptitude at least, united to the Body, or it is not a
Soul: But it remains always a Soul, etc. The contrary to all which Particulars
is found in an Angel. Now, what Connatural Dispositions to Mutability these
Considerations may give to a Soul, rather than to an Angel, I have not
speculated so deep upon that Point, as to determine; which made me pitch upon
an Angel, rather than a Soul, when I advanced that Demonstration. And, had I
spoke of a Soul expressly, owned its Immutability as my Tenet, and gone about to
defend it, I do not doubt but so to explain my Sentiment in that Point, as will
give no Offense to any sober Man, nor any who is not resolved to remain
unsatisfied.

26. The next pretended Bugbear, is, the Impossibility of Annihilation; which
I prove thus:

27. 1. Every Cause acts according as it is, or according to its Nature; at
least, it cannot act contradictorily to its own Essence. But Annihilation is
the putting of Nothing, or Not-being; which is Diametrically Opposite to GOD's
Nature, which is Pure Existence: Therefore Annihilation cannot be caused by GOD.

28. 2. Every Active Power, (as Omnipotence is,) even though Infinite, is for
some Action: But Annihilation is no Action; therefore it cannot proceed from
GOD's Omnipotence. That Annihilation is no Action, I prove thus: That which is
no Species, or no Sort of Action, is no Action: But Annihilation is no Kind, or
Sort, of Action; for, every Scholar knows that every Action is of such a
determinate Kind, because its Terminus, or Effect, is such or such; whereas,
Nothing is no Effect at all, much less a Determinate one; but, in every
imaginable Respect, a Defect, and Indeterminate. Therefore, Annihilation is no
Action; nor, consequently, can it be performed by an Active Power, as
Omnipotence is; and, therefore, it argues no Power at all; and, which follows,
it is rather an Impotency, or Want of Active Power, than Omnipotence; because
that Active Power which can have no such Action proceeding from it; or, (which
is the same,) an Active Power which cannot Work or Act, is so far Impotent;
which cannot be said of GOD's Omnipotence.

29. 3. To be Creator of all Things, or Giver of Being, is (as our Creed
teaches) one of GOD's Attributes: But it is unheard of, that to be Uncreator,
or Destroyer, of Things, was ever attributed to GOD; or, that Contradictory
Attributes could be peculiarly Appropriated to him; as my Adversaries hold
there can, while they deny both Creating, and Uncreating, or Annihilating, to
be Possible to any, but to GOD; that is, Peculiar to him.

30. It will be said, that Annihilation is performed by Suspension of GOD's
Positive Action of Creating, or Giving Being. But this seems more Unconsonant
than the former: For,

31. 4. Suspension (if it have any Sense) means, the Action of Suspending;
especially, being put by them to be only performable by GOD's Omnipotence,
which is an Active Power; and this Action must have its Effect upon that which
is Suspended, making it, of Not-suspended, to become Suspended; that is,
Changed. But, that which is here Suspended, is GOD's Power of giving Being.
Wherefore, this Tenet of Suspension puts a kind of Passive Power in GOD,
receiving this Action, or Effect of Suspension; which makes Him, who is
Essentially Immutable, to be Mutable; Neither of which themselves will say.

32. 5. That Actuality is not Infinite, which is not actually Exercised, or
produces not actually the Effect peculiar to it, when the Subject is Disposed
to receive its Influence, and it self is intimately Applied to it. But the Ens,
or Thing, supposed to be Annihilated, was equally Disposed, or Capable to be,
in the Instant it is supposed to be Annihilated, as it was before; and the
Cause, by GOD's Omnipresence, was intimately Applied, and yet the Effect, or
Being, was not put; therefore the Cause it self was not Infinitely Actual, as
it was before; which is impossible to be thought. Note, that to an Infinite
Actuality, it is requisite, and necessary, that it be (all other Requisites
being put) actually Exercised; For, Actual Exercise being the most Formal
Notion of Pure Actuality, it follows, that it is not Infinite if it be stinted,
or fails precisely on its Part, of being Exercised, when all other Requisites
are put.

33. 6. The same may be deduced from GOD's. Infinite Goodness; which consists
in his being (as far as is of it self) Communicative of Goodness and Being when
the Subject is capable, and his Wisdom sees it best; by which only it is
stinted. This is so certain a Truth, that, in such Cases, (as Divines show,)
even in Supernaturals, it is the Incapacity of Wicked Souls, putting an Obstacle
to the ever-ready Influence of Heavenly Grace, that suspends it from working in
such Corrupt and Indisposed Hearts: Whence, as soon as, by their sincere
Repentance, that Obstacle is taken off, they receive again the Supernatural
Influence of the Holy Ghost, and the Gift of Divine Love. And this is so
constant a Doctrine of the Church, that never did the most Skeptical Divine
question or fancy that it could become GOD's Goodness to Suspend the Influence
of Grace to such Penitents; but rather, they ofttimes receive it in a greater
Measure, according to that Saying of our Savior, (Luke 7. 47.) Cui minus
dimittitur, minus diligit: He to whom less is forgiven, loves less. Whence
also, upon their hearty Repentance, (which includes a Will to do what GOD and
his Church enjoin,) the Officers of the Church are bound to Absolve them, or
admit them to the Participation of the Sacrament of Love; by which they are
spiritually restored to the Communion of Christ's true Members, Virtuous Souls.
Hence I argue: The Creature supposed to be Annihilated, was equally capable to
receive Being at the Instant in which it is supposed to be Annihilated, as
before; and GOD's Exuberant and Infinite Goodness cannot but be Equally ready
to communicate Goodness, or Being, to his poor, Indigent Creatures, as it was
formerly; therefore, the same Effect, or Continuation of Being, must follow;
and, consequently, there can be no Annihilation.

34. The same is deduced from that Supreamly wise Saying, grounded on GOD's
Infinite Actuality, and Goodness, [Dona Dei sunt absque paenitentia: The Gifts
of GOD are without Repentance.] Which signifies, that, Let not the Creature
change, and GOD is still immutably the same; and so, the same Effect must still
follow. Nay, the Diversity of the Divine Attributes that respect us, is wholly
grounded on the various Disposition of the Creatures. So that the same Ill
Accidents are Mercies to good Souls, and serve to try, purify, and improve
them in Virtue, and thence, increase their Reward in Heaven; which, to
obstinately Wicked Souls, who are not Disposed to make good Use of them, is
truly called an Effect of his Justice; vexing them here by Comfortless
Irresignation, and Sinful Repining at GOD's Chastisement; and, so, tending to
increase their Torments in the next World. Wherefore, as was said, by Parity,
the Disposition of the Creature being the same, and GOD being Unchangeably the
same also, the same Effect will follow: Nor can it be, that any Creature should
be Annihilated.

35. The same is evinced from GOD's Attribute of Wisdom, or Knowledge, by
which he made the World. To understand the following Discourse, we are to
reflect upon that admirably profound Saying of St. Austin, (Conf. cap. ult.)
Nos itaque quae fecisti videmus, quia sunt; Tu autem quia vides ea, sunt: We
see (or know) Creatures, because they are; But thy Seeing (or Knowing) them, is
the Cause, or Reason, that they are. Which amounts to this, That GOD gains not
his Knowledge of Creatures from their Being so as he sees them to be, as we do;
but his Seeing, or Knowing, them to be fit for the Best Order of the World,
which his Infinite Wisdom had Determined, gives, or makes, them to be. By which
Metaphysical, or rather Divine Maxim of this Learned and Holy Father, it
follows, that GOD leaves off to know a Creature at the Instant it is
Annihilated: And, consequently, since this Knowledge of his is not taken from
the Existence of the Creature, (which is Extrinsecal to him,) nor depends on
it, but on himself; it should follow, that GOD, by Annihilating a Creature,
becomes Intrinsecally Changed; which is impossible.

36. The same is proved from GOD's Attribute of Justice. For, if any One
Creature can be Annihilated, All of them may; since it is granted by both
Parties, that they do, all of them, Entirely and Equally depend on the Divine
Goodness, for their Existence. Let us put then two Souls to be Annihilated; the
one of which, by loving GOD heartily, is, at the Hour of Death, perfectly
Disposed for its Glorious Reward in Heaven: The other dies obstinately, and
Devilishly Wicked: It is manifest, that neither that Holy Soul will ever be
Rewarded, nor the Wicked one Punished, in case they be Annihilated. But, this
is against GOD's Justice; Therefore it cannot be done.

37. In a Word; Let them explicate Suspension as they will, and assign it for
the Cause of Annihilation, it makes GOD the Cause of no Effect; that is, to be
no Cause, which destroys their own Position: Nay, it makes him the Cause of the
worst Defect imaginable; or rather, of Pure Defect; for, Nothing, or Not-being,
is such; to put which upon GOD, who is Pure Actuality, and, therefore, a Cause
(as far as concerns himself) ever Actually Working, is (to speak with the
least) a strange Tenet. If they mean only to say, that Creatures depend every
Moment on GOD, for their Being; or, that, if, per impossible, he should
suspend his Acting, they would no longer be, I do heartily agree with them; for
this is Agreeable both to the Self-Existence of GOD, and the Nothingness of
Creatures, of themselves: But, if they contend it is an Act of his Power, or
Omnipotence, (the Notion of which is manifestly relative to its Effects, that
is Active, or Effective of Something,) actually to execute this, or, that it
consists with his Divine Attributes; they must bring very strong Arguments to
prove it, ere I shall think fit to yield it; whereas, hitherto they have
brought none at all, but Merry-man's silly Explication of a Glass falling down,
and breaking, if he takes away his Hand; which the weak Fop thinks is a rare
Argument: Whereas, it is demonstrable in Physics, that the Glass would stand
for Eternity where his Hand left it, if there were no Positive Action of a
Cause impelling it downwards, viz. (the Descent of the Atmosphere;) which kind
of Positive Action is here wanting.

38. They will object, that GOD is a Free Agent, and so may choose whether he
will sustain Creatures in Being, or no. But those weak Divines take the Notion
of Freedom from the Folly of Creatures; which is this, that we can, out of
Humor, do, and undo Things at our pleasure, whether it agrees with True
Reason, which is our Nature, or no. Whereas, True Freedom does not consist in a
foolish Humoursomeness, or in the doing and undoing Things, as the Toy takes
us; but in this, that, Unforced, and Unconstrained, by any thing which is
without us, we determine our selves according to the Inclination of our true
Nature, Reason; and, when we do otherwise, we are less Free; or Slaves to some
Passion which impels us, and makes us deviate from the Propensions we have by
our True Nature, to do what is Rational. Wherefore, GOD's Freedom consists in
this, that he is Essentially Self-determin'd to act according to his own
Nature, and to his own Attributes, which are Essential to his Nature. Since,
then, it has been shown, that to Give Being is Agreeable to GOD's Essence,
which is Self-Existence, and to his Attributes, he is more Free for his being
thus Self determined to give Being to such Creatures as his Wisdom sees fittest
for the best Order of his World; and, that, to do otherwise, or to Annihilate,
is to be less Free, because it is less according to his Essence, and
Attributes; which is, not to be every way Perfect, and Infinitely such.

39. I must confess, it seems very Indecent, and Shocking, to Pious Ears, to
say that GOD cannot do this, or cannot do the other: But the Schoolmen, in
their Disputes, first brought that Expression into Custom; and, though, following
them, I have sometimes used it, yet I have endeavored to soften and explicate
it so, as it may not breed any Offense. Hence, in my METHOD, page 363. I have
these Words, [It is generally more Safe, more Edifying, and more Proper, to
say, in such Cases, [It cannot be that GOD should will such a thing.] than
bluntly to say [GOD cannot do it:] For, This flatly limits Omnipotence; That
only restrains its Acting hic and nunc, because of some Attribute of the Divine
Nature, to which it is Disagreeable.] Hence, also, I affirm, (Id. Carts. p.
61.) That it sounds the same among Philosophers, to say, [GOD cannot do it,] as
to say, [The Thing is a Contradiction, or Impossible:] Possibility being the
Object of all Power, even though Infinite.] And, to render it still the more
Inoffensive, and to prevent all Cavil against my Doctrine, I added; [When
Philosophers affirm any thing is Possible, or Impossible, they regard only the
present State of the World, and the Order of Second Causes.] So that this
Phrase, according to my Doctrine, amounts to no more but this; That it is
beyond the Power of Second Causes, as carried on by GOD's Ordinary Providence,
to effect it; as I have also explained my self, in my METHOD, long ago, in the
place lately cited. Which Innocent and Common Doctrine my Maligners do
character to be, the Running down all Piety, Religion, and GOD himself: Which
shows, their Dregs of Common Sense run very low, though their Malice flies the
highest Pitch of Slander, and Calumny. To finish this Discourse, let them bring
Solid Arguments to prove Annihilation Agreeable to GOD's Self-Existence, his
Pure Actuality, and the rest of his Attributes; and they shall see how readily
I will embrace their otherwise-Groundless Opinion. But, alas poor Triflers!
they never set themselves to bring any Demonstrative or Conclusive Argument,
either pro, or con, in their Lives. They talk Big, and, perhaps, sprinkle their
Assertion with some Slight, Insignificant Explication, or Untoward Parallels;
and supply the Defect of Reasoning, with Jeering, and Railing against what
either their Short Capacities do not reach to understand, or their Resolute
Insincerity will not let them acknowledge, though they know it.

40. But, now comes an Objection of weight: Spondanus tells us, (he says,) that
It was one of Wickleff 's Errors, Condemned in the General Council of
Constance, by a perpetual Decree, That GOD could not Annihilate. This looks
Great, and Mighty. But, why does he not relate this Perpetual Decree of the
Council, in its own Words, if there be any such? Is not the Council it self
extant? Or, is Spondanus's Relating it more Authentic than the Words of the
Council it self? Why does he not tell us then, out of the Acts of the Council,
in what Sense, and under what Terms, Wickleff proposed it: In what Words, and
in what Sense, that Council condemned it? Or, whether it were more express than
that of Joannes Thessalonicensis, in the Second Council of Nice, That it is the
Sentiment of the Church, (that is, the General Opinion,) that Angels have thin
Bodies of Air, or Fire? The contrary to which, for all that, the best Catholic
Divines do now publicly teach. Lastly, If this be a Point of Faith, (as they
would have it thought,) why is not this pressed home against me? This would
knock me down at one Blow; and there would need no paltry Jeers, Flouts, or
Falsifications, to do that Job, which is their only Aim. The Reader may be sure
they are conscious there is some great Flaw in this Objection, that they are so
favorable to me, in thus barely and crudely Alleging it. But, what is all
this to me? It is a common Doctrine, taught openly in the Schools, That this is
not performable by GOD's Ordinary Power; and, I have already shown, out of
express Words, both in my METHOD; and in my later Books, that I speak of no
other Power. So that, either I am no Wickleffist for maintaining it; or, I have
enough of very honest Brother-Hereticks; who maintain publicly the same, and,
yet, are not ill looked upon for it by the Church: Which being manifestly so,
it would be worth our Consideration to find the Reason, why our Libelling
Merry-man, whose Ironies are Sarcasms; and, who pretends Mirth, to cloak his
Uneasy Malice, does let all those Divines alone who hold the same that I do,
and fall upon me only. But those Men had not challenged the Cartesians to
produce Principles for their New-fangl'd Doctrine; in which consists my
peculiar Heresy, which blows their Zeal for Faith into such a Flame.

41. I wish the Cartesians, who make the Soul and Body two Things, because they
are two distinct Natures, could as well clear themselves of speaking
inconsequently in Matters belonging to Faith, as I have done: For, by making
them two Things, and, consequently, Individual Things, each of those Things
must have its peculiar Determinations, Modes, or Complexion of Accidents,
constituting it an Individual Thing, which are sustained by those Things, as
their Subject; which is the very Notion of a Suppositum. There are therefore,
and must be, Two Supposita in Christ, as long as those two Natures remain in
his Humanity; that is, for ever. To which, add the Divine Suppositum, it must
follow, that there are Three Supposita in Christ; which shocks Christian Faith.
To those, Mr. Le Grand has given no Satisfactory Answer; nor can, unless he
distinguishes the Nature from the Suppositum; which, if he does, then the
Suppositum of every Man may have Two Natures in it; and so, the Soul and Body
may compound One Ens, or One Thing: And, then, since it is impossible, and
contradictory, they can be One and Two in the same Respect, or under the same
Notion, it will follow, that Man need be no more than One Thing. They will,
perhaps, say, they are One Compound Thing; but Two Simple Ones, or Two Parts of
that Compound: But I have taken off, and shown, the Weakness of that
Distinction, Id. Cart. from p. 241. to p. 248. and shown, that an Ens, or
Thing, is, That which is capable of Existing: Wherefore, each of those we call
Parts, if they be Things, are capable of Existing alone, when separated; which
cannot be be True of the Body, which is a Distinct Thing when Separated, (viz.
a Dead Carcass,) and not the same Thing, with the same Nature, much less the
same Existence it had: Nay, a Complete Thing too; because, That is completely a
Thing, which wants nothing to make it Capable of Existing; and, if it wants
that, it is not a Thing at all. But, what enforces farther, this Objection is,
That it is defined in the Council of Vienna, under Pope Clement V. that the
Rational or Intellectual Soul is the Form of the Body. The Words are these;
[Doctrinam omnem seu positionem, temere asserentem autvertentem in dubium quod
Substantia Animae Rationalis seu Intellectualis vere ac perfect Humani
Corporis non sit Forma, velut Erroneam, ac veritati Christianae Fidei inimicam,
hoc Sacro approbante Consilio, reprobamus. Definientes, ut cunctis not a sit
sincerae Fidei Veritas, quod quisquam deinceps asserere, defendere aut tenere
pertinaciter praesumpserit, quod Anima Rationalis seu Intellectiva non sit
Forma Corporis Humani per se and essentialiter, tanquam Haeretious sit
censendus. Here we see all those condemned for Heretics, who say, or hold,
that the Intellectual Soul is not the Form of the Body; and, that the Opinion
it self is stigmatized with the Brand of being an Enemy (that is, Destructive,
or Pernicious) to the Truth of Christian Faith. Now, if the Soul be the Form of
the Body, then the Body is the Matter of that Form; And then, let all the
Divines in GOD's Church judge, whether the Matter and Form can be Two Things,
since they all hold, that the Matter and Form make up One Thing. Did ever any
Solid Man hold, that the Matter or Form either, singly considered, are Things,
or any thing else than Parts of a Thing? Or, can we think that those Definers
meant by the Ward [Form.] the same that is meant by the Word [Thing?] Whenas,
all the Learned World, before Cartesius's Time, held, that the Form was no more
but that Actuating or Determining Part which, by informing the Matter,
constituted the Thing. The Cartesians will tell us, that it informs the Matter,
according to the Notion of Action: But the Council has fore-stall'd that
Evasion, as if it had foreseen it, by the Word [Essentialiter;] by which
signal and cautious Expression, it declares it to be Heresy, to say, it does
not Essentially inform the Body, or according to the Notion of Ens, or Thing,
(and not Active, or Co-active, only;) that is, it makes the Matter become
Humanum Corpus, and Homo to be One Ens, or Thing, (to use St. Athanasius's
Words) Ex Anima Rationali and Humana carne subsistens. I do not here accuse the
Intention of the Cartesians; but I see plainly, that their New Notions, or
Ideas, will never agree with the Explications which former Divines make of
Christian Faith; much less, help them with better; or, indeed, with any. But,
to return to our Subject:

42. Let us sum up this Tenet of theirs, concerning Annihilation, and see what
Work they have made of it, according to the Lights Nature and Art, working upon
our Natural Notions, have given us. First, They make it belong to GOD's
Omnipotency, for which Attribute alone they seem zealous; for, I do not see
that, in discoursing this Point, they even think of, or regard, his
Self-Existence, which is his Essence, or his Goodness, his Justice, or any
other Attribute of his; or pretend, in the least, it is Agreeable to them. Now,
Omnipotency is a Power of doing all things; and they would make it a Power of
Notdoing, or of doing Nothing, as to the Things Annihilated, to which only it
relates. 2. Omnipotency is an Infinite Power, and withal, an Active Power,
(for, I do not think they will put a Passive Power in GOD:) And, every Active
Power is essentially such, because it can have such an Action. Yet, Mr. Le
Grand, in his Preface, p. 36. seems to grant, that Annihilation is not the
Action of any Power; nor, indeed, such a Power; they being, as I alleged,
specified by their Objects: To which he answers, Rectissime! So that here we
have an Active Power working, without an Action answering to it; or an
Omnipotent Power, (to which they ascribe that Effect,) which may be Denied to
be such a Power; or, (which is the same,) he makes that a Power, which is no
Power. 3. They say, it is done by Suspension: Well then; this belonging, as they
say, to GOD's Omnipotency, which is an Active Power, this Suspension must, for
the Reason given, be an Action. No, say they; it is no Action, but a Cessation
from Action. Now, that not Acting should belong to Omnipotency; or, that the
Action of Suspending his Power, should be an Action of that Power, gives us a
Second Bull of the largest Size. 4. Suspension must either have some Effect, or
no Effect: If none, it is to no purpose; If any, it must be in GOD; for, it is
his Power that Acted before, and is now Suspended: But, this puts a Passive
Power in GOD; which is a higher Strain of Nonsense, than either of the former.
No, say they; the Effect is upon the Creature Annihilated; But this is as
nonsensical as the former; for, Common Sense tells us, that Suspension has its
proper Effect upon that which is Suspended, which is GOD's Conservative Action:
Nor is the Existence of the Creature, in good Sense, Suspended; for, that which
is only Suspended, remains still, though in Suspense; whereas, the Creature
remains not at all, being Annihilated. Yet, grant the Existence of the Creature
could be said to be Suspended; still, GOD's Conservative Action, which made it
be, must, in Priority of Nature, be suspended it self, ere its Existence could
be suspended, or it self cease to be. But, waving this, let us see where this
Effect is, which terminates this Action of Suspension. In the Creature, say
they: And, what can we conceive to be in the Creature when it is Annihilated,
which is the Effect of this Action, and terminates it? Why, to become Nothing.
Now, Nothing, or Not-being, is a pure Defect; nay, infinitely, or in every
imaginable Regard, Defective; and so can be no Effect, for this has something
Positive in its Notion. The last thing, therefore, they can possibly allege,
is, That Suspension is no Action. For Answer to which, we must turn them over
to School Boys, who can tell them, that Suspendo is a Verb Active, has a
Transitive Signification, and must have an Accusative Case after it. The
Question, then, is, What is this Accusative Case? Or (which is the same,) What
is this Thing which is Suspended? Which we have already shown, can with no
Sense either be GOD, or the Creature; that is, Nothing is suspended; and,
therefore, this Suspension is no Suspension. So that, which way soever they
turn and wind themselves, their own Contradictions still meet them in the Face,
and confound them. And so much of this Point, which is only therefore
scandalous, because it is unsuitable to Fancy; that Faculty, which, if solely
attended to, leads all its Followers into Folly and Nonsense.

43. Another Impiety of mine against GOD, is, That I will not allow that Thesis
of Cartesius, (for, we are to suppose, that all his Conceits, though never so
Groundless, are Gospel with these Men,) that GOD is the Immediate Cause of
Motion; the Denial of which does ravel the Scheme of that Hypothesis. Hence Mr.
Le Grand infers, that I deny GOD to be the First Mover: Whereas, (so short is
his Reasoning Faculty,) the direct contrary follows: For, he who only denies
that GOD is the Immediate Cause of Motion, does, even by doing this, imply that
he is the Mediate, Remote and Principal Cause of it; as giving Angels, his
Ministering Spirits, both the Power to move Matter; and, withal, moving them to
move it, by Spiritual Motives, or Manifestations, of the Wise Decrees of his
Divine Providence, how he would have it done. Thus, all Instrumental Causes are
the Immediate Causes of every Effect in Nature. Will he say, that this is
Impiety against GOD; or, that it debars Him from being the Principal Cause!
Does not Fire immediately burn us? Water wet us? Or, Will any but a Madman
say, that GOD is the Immediate Cause of that Burning, or Wetting? Or, that this
hinders Him from being the Principal Cause of all the Effects in Nature, who
gives them Power to produce those Effects, and Premoves or Applies them to
produce them? Does not the Denial of this make all Second Causes Useless? How
shallow, then, is this ridiculous Objection! Wherefore, let them either show
that Angels, which are of a Superior Nature to Matter, and are Pure Acts, have
not Power to act upon it, or move it; or, that it becomes the Sublimeness of
the Divine Majesty, to put his Immediate Hand to such mean and low Effects that
his Servants have a Power to produce them; or, that this Power was given them
by Him, to remain Useless, and Unemploy'd about its Proper Objects: or, let
them grant that Angels, or (which is the same) GOD, by his Angels, gives Motion
to Matter. Again, to omit many other Arguments; That which GOD does Immediately
by Second Causes, is according to Nature; but, what he does immediately by
Himself, is Miraculous, and Instantaneous, as coming from an Activity, whose
Infinite Power no Indisposition on the Creature's side can check, and retard.
Did GOD move Matter, when (as they hold) he divided it into greater Lumps at
first, Instantaneously; whenas, it is not Motion, unless it have part after
part; or, unless it be Successive? Would these Men but please to leave guiding
their Thoughts by the hasty Sallies of their Fancy, and regard deliberately the
Natures of the Things we are discoursing of, that is, the Nature of GOD, who is
Pure Self-Existence; the Nature of an Angel, and the Nature of Matter, and
build their Discourses from those Grounds, we might hope, in time, for some
Sense from them: But that is too Solid for them; it will not give their Fancy
Leave to range, and take Vagaries in the Air, but holds them in too strictly;
and, therefore, it is not their way. Yet, something must be said; and,
therefore, Ill Language must supply the place of Sense and Solidity.

44. But, Gentlemen, to what end were all these Objections huddl'd together, in
their Preface, and Dialogue? These Theses are (except this last) altogether
Foreign to what I opposed, and proved against Cartesius and Mr. Le Grand. What
is Annihilation to Cartesius's Method to find out First Principles, by denying
the Certainty of all his Senses? Or, What is the Immutability of a Pure Spirit,
to the Unaccountable Constitution of Cartesius's First Matter, which grounds
all his Physics; which they put neither to be Dense, nor Rare; Hard, nor Soft;
Rough, nor Smooth; Solid, nor Fluid; Moist, nor Dry? etc. Again; If they would
needs be meddling with Impertinent Questions, why were the Reasons for them
Suppressed, the Conclusions themselves most Learnedly Denied; and, this done, a
Black Mark set upon them, at the pleasure of the Painter? Who sees not that
this odd Prevarication, and untoward Management of it, does evidently bewray a
Distrust of their Cause, and a perfect Despair of maintaining it? Who sees not,
that, by their flinching thus from the Question, and haling in impertinent
Points, which were odd to Vulgar Fancies, and were denied by other Divines,
they hoped (to save their own Bacon) to get those Men on their side, to make
use of their Arguments, and of their (miscalled) Authority, to decry me,
because they wanted Arguments of their own, to uphold the Cartesian Doctrine?
Lastly, What is their Scurrilous Dialogue, to their producing, or so much as
Naming, any one Principle of theirs; to do which, I had challenged them? Or,
Why should this exasperate them to a Raving Ecstasy of Railing? Let them take
their own New Method, unheard of amongst Learned Men, hitherto: Who can hinder
them? But, if their Passion have but left them one single Grain of Prudence,
they cannot but see that all Civil Men will hate their Abusiveness; all Good
Men, their Malice; and all Learned Men, their Folly and Ignorance.

45. But, to take off the Edge, and blunt the Teeth of all their reproachful
Calumnies, I have shown, above. 39. that what they object to me, if they will
but truly represent my Doctrine, can dissatisfie no sober Man, even of their
own Party; since, in the three first Points, which their Confused and
Undistinguishing Anger strives to render so Invidious, I speak of GOD's
Ordinary Power, or, of the Course of Causes, and the Nature of Things, as they
come to our Knowledge by Natural Means, and are carried on by GOD's Ordinary
Providence. What Philosopher, but a Madman, will say, he can fathom and
comprehend all the Supernatural Methods and Ways which GOD's Infinite Wisdom
can contrive, or his Almighty Power execute, when he shall please to work
miraculously? He who is the Original Cause of those Natures, cannot he order
them as he pleases, when His Wisdom, for Reasons inscrutable to the Greatest of
his Creatures, sees it fit, to bring about those Hidden Ends designed by his
Divine Decrees? Who can say, that, though Angels have no Means to acquire New
Knowledges, and so ought, by their Nature, to have all the Knowledge they are
capable of, infused into them at first; yet, that GOD, acting miraculously,
cannot detain some Light from an Angel, and communicate it to him (as we
conceive) afterward? Who can say that GOD, if he pleases to alter the Course
and Nature of Things, or to order the Circumstances of the next World, by Ways
unknowable by us, cannot, by his Miraculous Power, effect, that Imperfect Souls
may be released from the Chains of their Captive State, and be reciev'd into
Heaven before the Last Day? Or, Who dares contend, that his Divine Goodness,
that oft-times does Stupendous Miracles for the Prayers of one single Saint on
Earth, will not do Miracles, and this frequently, for the Prayers of his
Spouse, the Church! Once more I do earnestly beg of Mr. Le Grand, it may be
considered, that all our Science is built on the Nature of Things, as they are
in themselves, and governed by GOD's Ordinary Power: It Is beyond the Skill and
Sphere of Philosophy, even to guess at how many Miracles may be wrought upon
the very least Thing in Nature: Nor did any Man, I know of, ever pretend to
determine any such Point; and I cannot but think it some kind of Neglect in
them, not to declare as much. Miracle is beyond all Humane Science; Ecce, DEVS
vincens Scientiam nostram! (Job, chapter 36. 28.) Which being my present Sentiment,
and having ever been so; and, that Philosophers have nothing at all to do with
the Subjects they treat of, as standing under GOD's Power working
Supernaturally, and Miraculously; it is manifest, that all the Expressions I
have any where, do still relate to his Ordinary Power only; nor can they be
meant, or wrested by Malice it self, to be meant, of any other: And, though I may
seem, in some extravagant Case, to doubt, because a Power that never Acted,
seemed Useless, and, so, was not an Attribute befitting GOD; yet, I no where
assert that Annihilation is Impossible to GOD's Miraculous Power. Indeed, in
case it be really against GOD's Attributes, I should not stick at all to say,
it is beyond Miracle; yet, I no where maintain, that Infinite Wisdom may not
miraculously contrive it so, if it sees it fitting to be done, that it may not
be against his Attributes; though Things being left in their Natural Condition,
it may truly be concluded to be opposite to GOD's Attributes administering the
World after the Ordinary Methods of Providence: Which being so; and, that I, as
a Philosopher, speak of GOD's Ordinary Power only; what is become of all their
Calumnies, of which they are so lavish? Why is my Foot Cloven? Why did none but
his Devil set me on writing? Why do I run down all Piety, Religion, and GOD
himself; as Merry-Andrew, their Buffoon, in his Hurry of Calumny, would assure
his Reader, if any regarded him?

46. Convicted thus of rallying me so severely, and without the least Occasion,
or Ground, since I say no more than other Divines in the Schools do, without
any Control, maintain publicly; perhaps they may, for their Excuse, pretend
very charitably, that they are heartily glad they have prevailed with me, at
length, to be a good Christian; and exult, (as their Fellow-Libeller, Lominus,
did,) that they have brought me, with much ado, to retract my Unwarrantable
Opinions. But, I am their humble Servant, and beg their Pardon; I have not seen
one Argument of theirs, as yet, that could bring a Man, endowed with Common
Reason, to retract; no, nor hold any thing; but to be a Sceptick, and apprehend
there is no Certainty in the World, seeing Men, who, as appears by their
Carriage, are mighty Ambitious to be held Men of Knowledge, produce neither
Principles to ground their Discourse, nor Connection, to make the Parts of it
hang together. What my Sentiment was formerly, as to this Point, I have told
them often, ere this, (in my 1d. Carts. p. 61.) where I say, First, Idem sonat
apud Philosophos, etc. It signifies the same among Philosophers, (especially
Scholasticks,) to say, [GOD cannot do such a thing;] as to say, [It is
impossible to be done.] Next, That, when Philosophers pronounce any thing to be
Possible, or Impossible, they have respect only to the present State of the
World, and the Order of Second Causes. Thirdly, That, therefore, a Thing may be
Contradictory, and Impossible, according to the Ordinary Course of the World,
or to the Natures of Things, by which GOD, according to his Ordinary
Providence, governs the World; which, yet, according to his Supernatural and
Miraculous Power, by which he subdues all things to himself, are Possible. Of
which, I there brought diverse Instances.

47. Perhaps too, they will say, that, by this Doctrine I abandon and give up
all my Demonstrations; and leave them to shift for themselves, or confess them
to be False. I answer; Not one jot: For, all Science regards its Objects only
as they stand in Nature, and not under GOD's Miraculous Power, which orders or
alters the Natures of Things as he sees fit. Thus, One perfectly Skilful in the
Science of Physics, might demonstrate, that it was impossible a Virgin should
Conceive; or, that Clay, tempered with Spittle, should cure Blindness; yet, by
GOD's Miraculous Power, both were done: Thus, a Speculative and Learned
Metaphysician, before the Incarnation was Revealed to the World, might have
brought most clear Demonstrations from his Altissimae Causae, and the Nature of
GOD, that it was Impossible GOD should be Changed, Suffer, or Die; (which,
amongst other things, made the Greeks esteem Christianity Foolishness;) yet,
GOD's Infinite and Miraculous Wisdom and Goodness could contrive a Way, how all
those Propositions might be Verified. Which will make it less wonderful to us,
that he can, if he sees fit, find Ways enough, which surmount our Guess, or
Imagination, how a Pure Spirit may Change; Souls in the Intermediate State be
delivered, or a Creature Annihilated, if his Incomprehensible Wisdom sees it
fit. Whoever reflects seriously on those Powerful and Emphatical Words, [Ecce,
Nova facio omnia, Apoc. 21. 5.] spoken by the Great Restorer of the World, and
Promoter of all Creatures, and, amongst the rest, Glorified Bodies, to their
Utmost Perfection, in their Future and Eternal State, will find in them Matter
enough of Contemplation; and easily apprehend that their Condition will be so
altered for the Best, that, to our Low Conceits and Notions we have of them
now, it would seem impossible for them to be such as we shall find them then.
Indeed, I have not expressly put this Distinction formerly, because it was not
necessary, nothing of that kind being then objected to me; yet, I had done this
Equivalently, and in other Terms, by telling Mr. Le Grand, (Id. Carts. p. 61.)
that, When Philosophers affirm any thing to be Possible, or Impossible, they
regard the present State of the World, and the Order of Second Causes. And, he
is aware of it; for, in his Censure, p. 63. he would wave that Distinction, and
seems willing to deny it; yet, is forced to admit it, by his Recurring to
Potentia Obedientialis in Creatures; which is the same I expressed by Qua
naturas Rerum sibi subdit. But, to fix his Cavil upon me, he tells us, that the
Question is not, Quid Philosophi pronuntiant; sed, Quid ille statuit: And, I do
statuere, it cannot be done by GOD's Ordinary Power; and, that all the Notions
we have of GOD, and his Attributes, by Natural Means, and Acquired Learning,
(or Philosophy,) seem Opposite to it: But, I hold, notwithstanding, that, if
GOD's Wisdom sees fit it should be done, the same Wisdom can contrive Ways how
it may be done Unknowable, nay, not possible to be gues'd at, by our
Unelevated, and Infinitely Short Natural Reason informed by the Lights we have
of him from Creatures; and that, what his Infinite Wisdom sees fit, and his
Will ordains, his Power can execute. Which is what (applying my Words to this
Particular) I call Potentia Miraculosa, or Extraordinaria. Nor do I any where
say, that GOD's Wisdom, if he sees it Fit, cannot bring it about that it may be
done, and yet, not be Prejudicial, or Contrary to any of those Attributes, from
which, as far as known to us by Ordinary Means, I, as a Philosopher, ought to
argue. And, it would be a Madness in either of us, to maintain, that GOD's
Power is not beyond our foolish Philosophy, or the Reach of Knowledge, which
Ordinary Means can afford us.

48. I do not doubt, but it will be denied by my Adversaries, that they have
been so wanting to their Cause, as to maintain it only by Bantering, and
Railing: They will say, (for, what will they not say, if Saying would do their
Business?) that they have produced Arguments to prove their Doctrine, and have
invalidated all mine. But, I deny that Mr. Le Grand has, in his Censura, even
so much as given an Answer to any one of my Demonstrations; unlese he thinks it
is Answer sufficient to call them (as he does in his Epistle to the Reader)
Cavils; and to tell him, according to his Way of saying any thing, that he has,
satis abunde, replied to them. I must, I say, absolutely contest against him,
that he has not produced any one Conclusive Proof for any one Tenet of his own,
nor given any one Solution to any one Argument of mine, where I pretend to
Demonstrate, as I do frequently. I know he mentions some Words picked out of
them, and reflects on them with Jeers, or Jests; but, when he should come
seriously to a Close Discourse with them, and either admit or confute the
Connection in which the Force of them consists, he is in a Hurry, and Have, to
be gone to another Business; (for, his whole Method here, is a VVild and
Distracted Leaping from one thing to another;) and so, he fairly takes a short
Leave of them, and away he is vanished. So that the Frame of his Discourse
seems to be made up of little else but Transitions. And, as for his Proofs, he
thinks it is enough to say a thing; and, it is a Favor to the Reader, now, if
he bestows so much as a slight Explication of any Point; of which, formerly, he
was more free. He sometimes cites my Words at large, even a whole Page
together; so that one would verily think he meant fully to confute me; but the
Reader may easily see, it was only to make a Show, and swell his small
Performances to the just Size of a Treatise: For, if we set aside the Sarcasms,
Ironies, sought Phrases, quaint Expressions, pretty Curiosities and
Observations, (to show how profound a Man he is at Note-Book-Learning;) if we
set aside these, with his Angry Words, and what he transcribes out of me, and
others; and his Medly of little indifferent Nothings, which do not signify any
thing, either pro, or con; and, look for what only should be expected from a
Philosopher. viz. Connected Sense, grounded on Principles; and then go about to
cast up the Account of them, the Total Sum would amount to nothing but a long
Row of Ciphers. Mediums fit for Demonstration, or any thing that, even, savours
of true Logic, are such Strangers to his Loose Talk, that the Solid Sense in
it might be comprised in a Nut-shell; as will more amply appear hereafter.

49. To give farther Satisfaction, and, perhaps, some Benefit to the Reader, I
will instance in one Demonstration of mine; and show how empty Mr. Le Grand's
Pretense is, that he has (as he phrases it,) abunde satis, answered my
Arguments; and, how frivolous it would be in me, to lay open his Incredible
Weakness in the rest of his Imaginary Solutions of my other Demonstrations:
For, since I challenged him, and the Cartesians, to give an Answer to this
Argument, we may be sure he will exert his utmost to perform it punctually, and
satisfactorily. Whence we may conclude, that if he most miserably falls flat in
doing Right to himself, and his Cause, in this; it cannot be expected, but he
will much more fail in all the rest; which is the only Reason why I pitched
upon this in particular, as a Decisive Index of all his Atchievments of this
kind. It Is mentioned above,. 20. and I will repeat it in distinct Propositions;
fetching it (perhaps, something needlessly) from Remotest Grounds; and, then,
reducing each piece of it to Self-Evidence, both that the Force of it may the
better appear to be Irresistible; as also, that Mr. Le Grand may consider which
of the Identical Propositions he will, in his great Learning, think fit to
deny. But, first; to avoid the Old Cavil, let it be remembered, that we speak
here, as Philosophers ought always to do, of the Nature of an Angel, as in it
self, and not as it may be wrought upon by GOD's Miraculous Power, by which he
disposes of all his Creatures, as he sees to be Wisest and Best for
Supernatural Reasons; which, as they are beyond the Science of Philosophers to
Know, or even to Guess at; so, it is evidently beyond their Province to meddle
with them.

THESIS: An Angel, or Pure Spirit, is naturally Immutable.
Prop. 1. BOdy and Spirit, which are supposed, by the Question, to be the
Species, or Kinds, of Ens or Thing, do agree, (or do not differ,) precisely, in
the Common Notion of Thing. This is as self-evident, as that [Every Thing is a
Thing.] Which is an Identical.

Prop. 2. Therefore, they only Disagree, or Differ, by those Notions, called,
their Differences: For, since, to have a Difference in it from another, is the
Formal Reason, why one is Different, or Differs, from another; as, Whiteness in
a Thing, is the Formal Reason which makes a Thing be white; it follows, that
[to have Differences in them, is, to Differ,] is as Self-evident, as it is, that
[to Differ, is, to Differ.] Which is an Identical.

Prop. 3. Therefore, those Things which have Greater (or more Opposite)
Differences in them, do more differ; and those which have the Greatest (or most
Opposite) Differences in them, do most differ: For, since, to have a Difference
from another, is the same as to Differ from it, by Prop. 2. this Proposition is
as Evident, as it is, that [These which do more Differ, do more Differ;] or,
[Those which do most Differ, do most Differ.] Which are Identicals.

Prop. 4. Divisible and Indivisible do Adequately Divide the Common Notion of
Thing, as its Differences. For, since [Divisible] means [Not-Divisible,] which
is Contradictory, that is, most Opposite to, or most Different from the other;
and, between Contradictories, (or, is, or is not,) there can be no Third, or
Middle Notion; this Proposition is as Self-evident, (by Prop. 3.) as it is, that
(Those which do most Differ, do most Differ.] Which is an Identical.

Prop. 5. Therefore, Body being evidently Divisible; Spirit, which differs from
it, must be necessarily Indivisible: For, since Body and Spirit Differ; and
they are formally made to differ by their Differences, by Prop. 2. and those
Differences are most Opposite, or do most differ, by Prop. 4. and every thing
is what it is Constituted, or made to be; this Proposition is as Self-evident,
as, that [A Thing is what it is;] or, that [What is Divisible, is Divisible;
and, What is Indivisible, is Indivisible.] Which are, all of them, Identicals.

Prop. 6. Therefore, whatever is Affirmed of Body, except the Generical, or
Common Notion of Thing, must be Denied of Spirit: For, since all Predicates
(except that of the Common Notion) must be taken from the Difference; and the
Difference is that which makes one of the Species different, or distinct, from
all others; that is, constitutes, or makes it to be no other; and,
consequently, (since it must be something,) makes it to be it self only; it
follows, that Body and Spirit are so, or, in such a manner, Distinct, as those
Differences make them, by Prop. 3. that is, are most Different, or most
Opposed; that is, Contradictorily Distinct; or, are of Contradictory. Natures
to one another, by Prop. 4. and 5. Wherefore, that whatever (besides the Common
Notion of Thing) is Affirmed of the One, must be Denied of the Other, is as
Self-evident, as, that [Contradiction (or, saying contradictorily, by is, and
is not,) is Contradiction.] Which is Identical.

Prop. 7. Wherefore, since we do truly and properly Affirm of BODY, that it is
Successive, or Part after Part, in its Operations; the Contradictory, viz. that
it is Unsuccessive, Simultaneous, or Instantaneous, in its Operations, must, by
Prop. 6. be Affirmed of SPIRIT. Therefore, this Proposition is as Self-evident,
as it is, that [What is not part after part, is not part after part; but all at
once.] Which is evidently Identical.

Prop. 8. Whatever is Mutable, is otherwise afterward, than it was before;
and, consequently, it is Successive: For, if it has all it had before, (neither
more, nor less,) it is manifestly the Same, or Unchanged; and, where there is no
Successiveness, there can be no possible Ground for Before, or After:
Wherefore, this is as Self-evident, as it is, that [VVhat must remain the same,
or can receive no Change, is Unchangeable.] Which is Identical.

Prop. 9. Wherefore, an Angel (being, by Prop. 6. and 7. Unsuccessive) is
naturally Unchangeable.

50. Ere I come to examine Mr. Le Grand's Solution of this Demonstration, I
desire all Ingenuous Readers to reflect what Advantage it would bring to True
Knowledge, or SCIENCE, were this Connected Way of Discoursing from Clear
Grounds brought into Fashion, and heartily pursued. It would quickly make Truth
appear; and discover, what Productions are the Genuine Effects of Right Reason,
and what is only Loose Talk. It would put an End to all Controversies, and
avoid all Occasions of Men's Catching at, and availing themselves, by those
insignificant Methods of Wrangling, Ill Language, and Prevarication; to which
Obstinate Opposers of Truth are forced to have recourse. Whence, I must
sincerely declare that (as far as I am conscious to my self of my own
Intentions) it was not any Arrogance, or Vanity of preferring my Labors, and
Thoughtful Productions, before those of some Writers, who took not this Way of
Connection but seemed wholly to dis regard it; but, that which caused me to take
that Way of expressing my self with that Assuredness, was, an Earnest Desire to
invite, and (as far as I could possibly) incite others, and breed an Emulation
in them to follow such a Method, as might set Truth in a Clear Light, advance
Science, and difcountenance and beat down Skepticism, and all its Inconclusive
Ways of Talking; which, in Philosophy, where Solid and VVell-grounded Truth is
aimed at, (let it be never so Pretty, and Witty,) amounts to no more, nor
deserves any better Name, but that of Idle Tittle-Tattle. Nay, I expressed my
self, in my Preface to Solid Philosophy Asserted, that I was aware this would
be objected to me; and, therefore, I did there (from. 8. to. 14.) allege many
Reasons, to show that this Carriage was necessary for a Writer who resolved,
without Fear or Favor of any, to pursue those Good Ends; and to put it to the
Test, what Doctrine, or Method, was True; what Sophisticate, and False. Which
Reasons, till they answer, themselves must confess, that their Objecting
Arrogance can only be built on their seeing my Heart, and penetrating my Inward
and Invisible Intentions. The plain Truth is, Mr. Le Grand would have had me
speak well of his Books, (and other Writers of the same Strain and Pitch;) for
which Reason he complains of me sadly, in his Preface to his former Treatise,
that I had not so much as read his Books, sive Latin, sive Gallice scriptos;
(there is a Quod not a been for you, now!) My Reasons why I neglected that
Expected Duty were these: First, Because (except his Volume which is a
Collection out of Descartes his Placita) they were so very Famous, and
universally taken notice of, that I never so much as heard of them. Next, I did
not apprehend I had any such great Obligation to read them. Thirdly, I read as
much of them as I had occasion to speak to; which did not so hugely please me,
as to think it worth my while to look after any more of them. Lastly, Those I
had read were like Whipped Cream; being so empty of Solid Sense and Frothy, so
void of Principles or Connection, that is, without either Head or Tail, that I
was weary of them. And, as for his last Books, he has so doubly disfigured them
with Ill Language, that the Groundwork of them is Insipid and Unconnected
Talk; and the Embroidery of them is Raillery: Which are no such great Philters,
to make me in love with their Brethren; nor could any Flattery be so fulsom
from me, as to deck them with Encomiums. But, Words from an Adversary are of no
Weight; Let us, then, come to examine how pertinently and punctually he has
Answered this Demonstration, which was so highly incumbent upon him. I
earnestly beg of the Reader, to take the pains to go along with me for this
once, so that we may get a full View of the Solution of it; which, if he does,
I am confident he will confess, that never did a weaker Writer appear in Print;
and, that he will both grant that my farther Confuting him is Needless; and,
withal, will admire I have had the Patience to lose my Time so long upon such
an Insignificant Trifler.

51. He recites my Demonstration in his Censura, p. 44. and sets himself to
answer it, p. 45. First, He says, This Demonstration is none of those he
brought formerly; but, that this is the first time he has produced it. What is
this to purpose? Let it be where it will, whose it will, or whenever first
produced, here it is; and I have challenged him, and his Cartesians, to Answer
it; and therefore, we are to expect their Performance. Yet, he is much out,
even when he talks frivolously; for, I produced it formerly, at large, (though
not in the self-same manner,) in my Method to Science, p. 316. as any one that
can read, may see. Next, He says, I durst not repeat here my former Argument,
drawn from the Immutability of GOD. He says very right; for, I dare not commit
such a Folly, as to repeat an Argument which was brought to evince Another
Point, to prove This Thesis, which is so widely Different from it. The
Immutability of GOD was my Medium, to prove, that GOD could not be the
Immediate Cause of that which is Essentially Mutable, as Motion is; his Nature
being Contradictory to it. Why must this Argument be repeated here, where we
are speaking of the Manner of Operating peculiar to Angels? Though this be
nothing to purpose, and sillily Ridiculous; yet, the Words, [He durst not bring
it here,] look Great; and would persuade his Readers, if they were Fools, that
he has frighted me from my Argument; which, though he sets a good Face on it, and
looks and talks Big, I dare say, poor Man! himself is far from hoping. Thirdly,
He talks Ironically of its Formidable and Invincible Strength. Whether it be
Invincible, will be best seen by his Answer to it: But, it seems, it is
Formidable to him; for he is loath to come up to it, but makes his Approaches
very backwardly', and cautiously. Fourthly, He calls it Garrulity, and
(afterward) Verbosity. What Reader will not smile at his Humor of saying any
thing, though never so manifestly False? Whoever reviews my Argument, put down by
himself, in the fore going Page, and in my very Words, will see there is not
one superfluous Word in it, but barely as many as sufficed to show the
Connection of my Discourse: And, of all the things in the World, Verbosity and
Garrulity in a Demonstration is the only way to blunt and spoil the Force of
the Argument; since this Looseness of much Talk, bIinds the Considerer from
seeing the Close Coherence of its Terms. But this acquaints us perfectly with
his Genius: The very Grain of his Thoughts is laid so cross to all kind of
Connection, that he thinks all Connected Discourse is nothing: but Idle
Babbling; and, that only Loose and Rambling Talk is True Demonstration.

52. But, these Avant-Guards of his, are only VVhifflers before the Show, to
make way: Now comes the Answer it self. First, He excepts against the Common
Notion of Ens, or Thing; which I had said, consisted in this, that It had a
Power to be, or could be. Upon which, he thus descants; Quasi vero Essentia
omnis Entis. Finiti, tam Creati quam Creandi, non sit quid Positivum, sed nihil
aliud quam Potentia Essendi, seu id quod Quo possit Esse. More Folly, and
Shifting Tricks, could not have been well crowded into five Lines! Where did I
speak in the Abstract of Essentia, Potentia essendi, or Quo potest esse? Does
not he see, in my Words, put down lately by himself, that I speak of Ens, or
the Concrete; and, that, in my Id. Carts. p. 244. where I demonstrate to him,
what the Notion of Ens Creatum must be, (of which he takes no notice here, but
only talks against, that is, denies, my Conclusion,) I expressed what was meant
by such an Ens, p. 245. l. 2, 3, viz. Illud quod potest existere; and, all
along, I name Ens, Corpus, Spiritus, which are all Concretes. And, surely, he
will not say that the Essence of Created Things includes Actual Existence; for,
if he does, he makes them so many GODS; for, it is the Prerogative of the Deity
only, Essentially to Exist. Let him take any Individual, Created Things, (those
being most properly Things;) For Example; Michael, Peter, a Horse, a Stone,
etc. and then examine his Thoughts, whether he finds either Actual Being, or
Not-being, in their Notions; and, if he cannot, but finds (as he must) they
Abstract from both, that all that can be said of Ens, as to what it has of it
self, or its own Nature and Essence, in order to Being, is, that it can be, or
can receive Existence, if the First Cause pleases to give it. This being so,
let us abstract the Notion of Ens from all Individuals; and we shall see that
the Notion of Ens, or Thing, in Common, is That which is Capable of Being, and
can be no other.

33. Having thus changed my Words, let us see what Advantage he makes of this
slippery Dealing. He objects, that this would make the Notion of Ens not to be
Positive. What means he? Does he think that the Notion of Quo est Res, or the
Form, or quo potest esse Res, (suppose I had said so,) is not Positive;
whereas, it is Impossible a Negative Nature can exist, or render a Thing Capable
of Existing? Indeed, Aristotle's First Matter is defined Negatively, as having
no kind of Form at all in its Notion, neither Substantial, nor Accidental; but,
that the Form which is part of the Essence, and constitutes the Thing, should
be Negative too, would make the whole Thing to be made up of Negatives; which
is such a strange Blunder in Philosophy, as admits no Parallel. The Form
determines the Potentiality, or Indifferency of the Matter, and makes it become
This, or an Individual Thing, and so fits it for Existence; because a Thing in
Common, or that which is Indeterminats, is not Capable of Existing. Now, that
the Essence that makes an Individual Thing, which is the most Positive Notion
we have, (or rather, no Notion is perfectly Positive, but it,) should not be
Positive it self, or be less Positive, because it makes the Matter capable of a
farther, and best Perfection, to wit, the last Actuality of Existence, is a
Paradox unheard of in Metaphysics. So that Mr. Le Grand has altered my Words,
and yet gets no Advantage by it, but blunders himself, while he went to blunder
the Demonstration. For, What is all this to the Argument? If he do but grant
that Body and Spirit are Species of Thing in Common, or (which is the same)
that they are both of them Things, (which it is a Madness to deny,) the
Demonstration, which consists in the Connection or Agreement of the Notions,
will go on, and proceed, whether he will or no. And, this he fore-sees very
well; and therefore, by throwing these Flim-flams, as Rubs in the way, he
endeavors to keep it off, and hinder it from going on.

54. Next, He tells us, that De Corpore and Spiritu, rebus finitis actu
existentibus, nunc sermo instituitur: This Discourse treats of Body and Spirit,
actually existent. I beseech him, who stated the Question on this fashion, or
pretended we spoke of This Body, or This Spirit, which only do actually exist?
He knows, that, when he put my Demonstration, I acknowledged, that I spoke of
Body and Spirit, which were the Species of Ens, in Common; and therefore, are
themselves the most common Notions next to it; and, not Particulars, which only
do exist actually. Yet, he tells us, Nunc Sermo instituitur: The Speech now,
is, of Things actually existing. I beseech him, Whose Speech? His, or Mine?
Not Mine, as is now shown: It must mean, then, that it is His Speech. And, by
what Rule must I needs speak as he would have me? Certainly, I have Right to
put my own Demonstration as I please my self. It lies before him; and, he is to
answer it as it lies. What wriggling is here to pervert the Sense of it,
instead of representing it in my own Words, and Solving it! Again, this is a
Sign he knows little what belongs to Science; for this treats of the Abstracted
Notions and Natures of the Subjects we handle; which, as distinctly such, exist
in our Understanding, and no where else; for, there they are concise, and
exact, even to an Indivisible; whereas, if we treat of them as they actually
exist in Matter, or in re, they are jumbl'd confusedly with innumerable other
Modes; so that there cannot possibly be any Science, nor Demonstration of them
at all. I wish him to reflect upon all the particular Sciences in the
Mathematics, whether they are of Circles, Quadrates, Triangles, etc. and he
will see they do all of them treat of those Formal Notions, or Natures,
abstractedly, from their Actual Existence in re; where, perhaps, no Figures
Mathematically so exact as our Mind frames of them, are to be found. The same
is to be said, when we treat of the Common Notions of Ens, Corpus, Spiritus,
etc. which can no where exist, but in the Understanding: Nay, it is evident, I
speak of Ens Formally, as its Notion is taken Generically, or of Ens in Common;
and, sure, he will not say, the Thing formally, as in Common, can any where
actually exist, but in our Mind.

56. He proceeds after his old rate, and tells his Reader, that all my
Verbosity, hoc solum vult, means only this, that Body has Parts, and Spirit has
none; and, that therefore, Body is Successive, and thence Mutable; and Spirit
Immutable. He puts my Reason, after a fashion, indeed; yet, only slightly, and
slubberingly: He would have more obliged me to have used my own Words, which
were more Ample, and Full, viz. That the Differences which constitute them
being Contradictory, it follows, that whatever we say of the One, (except what
belongs to the Common Notion of Thing,) the Contradictory to it must be said of
the Other; and, therefore, if Body have Succession in its Operations, Spirit
must have none, but must have all its Operations in an Instant; and,
consequently, be Immutable. However, I thank him he has put the Substance of my
Demonstration on any fashion, though not forcibly, but rawly. Here it is the
Argument presses; now let us expect his Solution. First, He says the Answer is
Easy; and, it is true; for, in his Way one may easily, without any Trouble,
Answer all Euclid: it is but altering his Words, and saying something, or
raising some extravagant Scruple against his Conclusions, and the Deed is done.
Next, He grants they may know some Things at one View, but not all. This is
said; but, still the Question is, Why not All at once, if Some? His Reason?
Does the Knowledge of those Some burden or fill the Angel's Intellect, so,
that it can hold no more? No, surely; for, we experience, even in our Souls
here, that are very much Inferior to the Intelligences, which are Pure Acts,
that the having some Knowledge, increases our Capacity to take in more; whence
it is demonstrable, that nothing can fill or satisfy them, but the Sight of an
Infinite Truth, or the Beatifical Vision of GOD. Do Angels require some Time to
have more Knowledge, because slowly-moving Corporeal Phantasms, must bring
things leisurely into their Understanding; or, Impressions on their Nerves
occasion the producing Ideas? Neither of these can be said. What hinders, then,
their having at once all they naturally can have? Are not all Truths, the
Objects of these Knowledges, Connected; but some of them stand at variance with
one another? This would disgrace GOD's Workmanship, the Product of his Wisdom,
if we make Truths Incoherent, Contradictory and Chimorical. None of these Rubs,
then, being possible, which only could hinder or retard an Angel from having
all his Intellectual Operations in an Instant, it had been but a piece of
Civility in Mr. Le Grand to have bestowed upon us some Reason for his
dissenting from us in this Point; and, not to have popt us off with a bare
voluntary Denial of the Conclusion, which is the only thing in question.

57. For, we have much more Right to expect his Reason, because (as was now
said) this Denial of his, instead of Answering the Argument, is a plain Denying
the Immediate Conclusion which followed from that Demonstration. Yet, I must
say, that (however those foolish Fellows, the Logicians, would laugh at him,
for such an Unpardonable Error in Disputation, yet) he behaves himself here
like a Civil Gentleman; for, he compounds with us, and grants very kindly, that
they do at once know some Things, but denies they have all the Operations
belonging to them at once, or know all they ought to know in an Instant. Now,
this being evidently the Conclusion of my Argument, (as far as I there pressed
it,) it is a double Injury; first, only to hint the Argument, and then slide
away from speaking to it, and deny our Conclusion; and, yet, give us no kind of
Reason why. Yet, he pretends to give us something that he would have thought a
Reason, though it is so slight, that he is shy to call it so: Which we will
hearken to; only, let it be first remembered, that he is Arguing against the
Conclusion, which he had most learnedly Denied; and, not Answering my Argument,
or showing that the Terms of it do not cohere; or, that the Conclusion does not
follow out of my Premises. His Reason (if it be one) is grounded on an
Explication of his own Doctrine, that GOD moves Matter Immediately; which,
unless he first establishes, (as he never did, nor can,) his Foundation shakes.
However, that fuppos'd, he demonstrates it after his usual sort, by bringing a
Parallel. His Discourse runs thus: Bodies are Stupid Things; nor could they
stir at all, if GOD did not give and conserve their Motion, and all the Modes
of it: And, in like manner, GOD gives and conserves Cogitation, and the Modes
of Cogitation, to Angels. Wherefore, as a Body does not therefore lose its
Essence by Moving more or less, so an Angel does not lose his Essence by
Thinking more or less. Where are we now? I am sure we are rambl'd quite out of
the Purlue of our Question. My Conclusion only says, and my Argument only aims
to prove, that if the Ordinary Laws of an Angel's Operating be observed, it
would know all it is naturally to know at once, and not successively; but, that
it would, otherwise, lose its Essence, I never said, nor thought; nor that GOD,
acting Supernaturally, cannot divest them of some Property they have, though
naturally allied to its Essence. So that, he first Denies my Conclusion,
instead of Answering my Argument: Next, brings a Parallel for an Argument; and
when he has brought it, he shoots it at Rovers, and levels it at a wrong Mark:
So far he is from knowing what belongs to any one Rule belonging to
Disputation. Add that his pretended Parallel is the most Unparallel of any he
could have invented; Divisible and Indivisible are the Essential, or
Intrinsecal Differences of Ens nor can there be any Ens, but it must be either
the One, or the Other of them. Are Moving more, or Moving less, Essential
Differences of Body? Or, cannot Body be, without being either of them? Could
not GOD's Omnipotence have kept their First Matter from Moving, when he had
first Created it? Or, are [Moving more, and Moving less,] Contradictories; as
are the Differences I put, and argue from them? Or, could an Angel, which is a
Pure Act, have been Created without Knowing at all, as a Body could without
Moving at all? What a Lame Similitude then, or Parallel, is this, which has
never a Leg to run on! And, yet, he will needs make it run on a Sleevless
Errand, and applies it to a Point which is Foreign to our Question. Add,
farther, that our Question is not here of an Angel's Simultaneous Knowledge
omnium rerum, of all things, as he puts it: It Is not the Quantity or Extension
of the Angelical Knowledges, which I do here strive to evince; but the
Unsuccessiveness of them; or, that it has them all at once, (whether they are
many or fewer, large or narrow;) from whence is deduced immediately, that it is
naturally Immutable.

58. Yet, of this Awkward Answer he is so fond, that he Crows over my
Demonstration most Triumphantly, in these Words, p. 45. [Qua simplice
solutione, etc. By which Simple Solution, all the Herculean Strength of his
Demonstration, as Sampson 's did of old, by merely cutting off his Hairs, falls
to the Ground, to his great Disgrace.] And, I must confess, it is (as he says) a
Simple Solution indeed. Were he but half as Powerful in his Arguments and
Solutions, as he is in his Confident Braggadochio Talk, he would be Invincible.
Poor Man! He thinks the Tinkling a few fine Latin Phrases is far beyond all the
strongest Reasons in the World: And, can any Man think I have nothing else to
do, but to stand laying open the Nonsense of such a perpetual Trifler?

59. This may serve for a Sample of his Solutions of my Arguments, by which
(since this concerns him more than all the others) we may judge of all the
rest: For, I am forced to take the Method of proceeding by Instances, in regard
it would require a Volume to lay open all his Follies of each kind. In the next
place, I will produce an Instance or two, of his Great Talent of Aggravating
and Perverting my Words to a Sinister and Invidious. Sense; which is an
Essential Part of this New Cartesian Method, and takes up near a quarter of his
Book; and, withal, gives it a Thousand times a greater Show of being
Victorious, than all his Arguments. An Honorable and Worthy Gentleman hapt to
say, that the Parts of the Cartesian Doctrine did cum quodam lepore sibi
consentire, agree to one another with a certain Grace, or Prettiness; than
which, I know no Expression more proper. I replied to Mr. Le Grand, who seemed
fond of this Commendation, in my Id. Cart. p. 10. and granted, it was not only
Lepida, Graceful, or Pretty; but also, Witty. Which says the same that Noble
Person said; and I added a farther Commendation to it. Upon this, Mr. Le Grand
tells his Reader, that, Nobilissimum illum Virum spiculis suis venenatis petit;
that I assault, or set upon that Noble Person with my Poisoned Darts. His Fancy
is, certainly, very fearfuly Hypochondriack: Every thing is a Spiculum, or
Dart, that he dis-likes. Thus a silly Asterisk *, casually left in the Context,
in my METHOD, was interpreted as a Design, transfigere ipsum quinque radiis
tanquam tot Spiculis; to strike him through with those Five Points, as with so
many Darts. Nay, he tells me, moreover, in that Preface,. 31. that I have
petulans ingenium ac Judicium pravum, for attempting to do him that Mischief
with those five Darts of that Asterisk; and is so afraid of being transfixed,
or run through by them, that he complains of it sadly to the Reader (it being,
as we are to conceive, a Matter of much Weight) a second time there, in. 44. Of
which, see Id. Carts. p. 30. and 72. Another Instance of his Ranting, and
shameful Exaggeration, shall be this: He had quoted Bellarmin, to say, that a
piece of Wood was turned into Stone. I replied, That it did not appear, but
Stony Particles might be interwoven with the Wooden ones, Id. Carts. p. 45.
for which I gave my Reason. What Harm, what Incivility is in this Reply? None.
Yet, let Mr. Le Grand come to represent it, (who, as Icterical Men see all
things Yellow, dies every Word, though never so Innocent, into the Color of his
own furious Choler, and renders it Hideous,) it amounts to this, in his
Language, (Cens. page 112.) Bellarmine Rationis expers es, mentiris: Bellarmin,
thou have no Sense (or Reason) in thee; Thou Lie. Hundreds of such Ingenuous
Representations of my Words garnish his Censure; to which, what Credit is to be
given, these few Instances may inform us: And the Reader may observe, that
whenever he is most Transported and Furious in Amplifying, he may be sure there
is always the least Reason. And, so much for this Exaggerating Method, so
Useful and Proper to our New Cartesians.

60. Another Method of theirs, is, to impose upon me False Tenets, to make me
look like a Monster of Folly and Impiety. These are great Sticklers in his, and
his Friend Merry-man's Pamphlets; and give the briskest Vigor to their
Invectives. For example; He tells the Reader, (p. 42.) that I say, It is
infinitely more Impossible that GOD should change an Angel, (if it were
Changeable at all,) after the First Instant, than that it self, or another
Angel, should do it. Now, What Man, reading these Words, thus industriousty
singl'd out, would not verily think I made GOD infinitely less Powerful than an
Angel, or any other Creature; and admire at my Folly, and Impiety, both? But,
read the whole Discourse there, and it is evidently quite contrary; nor could
any Man more highly magnify GOD's Attributes, than I do in that very place. My
Discourse is this: An Indivisible Effect must be put in an Instant; therefore,
it will be put in the first Instant, if all that is requisite to produce that
Effect be put: Those Requisites are, Power in the Cause, and Disposition to
exercise that Power, and Application of the Agent to the Patient; and, that, in
case the Agent be not yet Disposed to act, it must be Changed, so to be made
Disposed. Wherefore, since it is Infinitely more Impossible GOD should not have
Power to do it in the First Instant, being All-powerful, than that another
Spirit should not have such a Power; or, not be Disposed of himself to act, he
being Pure and Infinite Actuality; or, that he can be Changed, thus to be made
Disposed, he being Unchangeable; or, not be Applied, he being Omnipresent; than
it is, that an Angel should not have Power to do this Effect; or, be changed,
so to be fitted to act: Or, not be Applied most intimately to the Patient;
therefore, it is infinitely more Impossible GOD should not do it in the First
Instant, (that is, not after the First Instant,) if the Effest were feisible,
than that an Angel, which falls infinitely short in every regard, should not do
it in the First Instant; or, (which is the same,) should do it after the First
Instant. See my Demonstration, in my METHOD; from p. 307. to p. 314.
particularly, p. 313. Now, it is evident, that, in this Discourse, I bear up to
GOD's Attributes, there mentioned; and maintain them to be infinitely above
those of the best Created Beings in every regard. What do these Men? They pick
out a few Words, and purposely conceal the whole Tenor of my Discourse; and,
by this False Dealing, endeavor to impose upon me so Wicked an Impiety, as
neither any Christian, nor any Heathen, who holds a First Being, did ever
assert. How he deforms this Argument, by singling out a few other Words, may be
seen in his Censure, p. 49. Judge then, Reader, whether those poor spiteful Men
have not renounced all Shame and Conscience, who dare thus wilfully defame
their Neighbor, and fraudulently abuse their Reader. Would not a Lawyer that
used such a Dishonest Trick, in Altering the Words which concerned the Title of
an Estate, be turned over the Bar, and hated by all Honest Men? Something worse
than this as containing the same Malice, and in far worse Circumstances, is
this Other Instance. He had, in the Preface of his former Book,. 40. made me to
say, it was Vile opus and Laboriosum, for GOD to be the Immediate Cause of
Motion. He put it directly upon me, as my very Words; by introducing it with
Pergit, statimque addit; and, by printing the Word [Laboriosum] in Italick
Letter, and the same with the other Words, which were truly mine. This makes me
Impious against GOD, with a Witness; for, it represents my Opinion to be, That
GOD makes use of the Ministry of Angels, to ease himself (forsooth!) of the
Fatigue and Weariness, which, otherwise, he would have felt, had he moved the
First Matter Himself. Hereupon, I challenged him to have flatly falsify'd my
Words, and, to have added [Laboriosum,] to put upon me such an absurd Doctrine,
as never came into the Head of any Man acquainted with Christianity, or Common
Sense. I had happ'd to express it to be a Drudgery mis-becoming GOD's Essence,
who is Unchangeable, to be the Immediate Cause of Motion, or Change. Where,
it is manifest, I put it upon the Mis-becomingness, or Unsutableness to GOD's
Nature, which is Pure Actuality of Existence, to cause Change immediately;
because, Being only was the Proper Effect of Him, whose Nature was
Self-Existence. Yet, in despite of all the Concomitant Words, and the whole
Tenor of the Discourse, instead of Retracting, or Excusing his Fault, he
stands to it stoutly, p. 44. And, why? Because Drudges do use to toil and moyl,
and sweat and labor, and lead (as we say) a weary Life: As if there were not
Meanness in Drudgery, and Indignity for the Master of the Family to perform, it
being below his Function; and, as if the Concomitant Word, [Mis-becoming,] and
[Vile.] joined with it, did not restrain it manifestly to this Sense, that it
was Indignum DEO; and, not such a Toilsom Business to move Matter, which every
Angel can do. Could it be possibly thought by any Man in his Wits, that he who
holds that GOD Created Heaven and Earth, of Nothing, in an Instant, should
think he had not Power to give Motion to Bodies, without over-straining
himself? Who, but a Mad man, could hold two such Inconsistent Tenets? Or, What
Man, well in his Wits, could hope to obtain Belief that I held such a piece of
Extravagant Nonsense? But, what cannot Impotent Passion feign, and pretend,
when Reason is Nonpluss'd? Something was to be said when he was at a Plunge;
and any thing is taken up, in that Exigence, to serve a turn; and, the more
Extravagant it is, the better it pleases his Humor; which never lets him
consider whether it be Credible, or no: It serves to bespatter, and vent his
Uneasy Anger, which is still boiling in his Breast; and, that is enough for
his purpose.

61. Another piece of this New Cartesian Method, is, To cry aloud against me,
and call me Proud, Self-conceited, and Arrogant, if I will not allow such
Writers as himself to be most Excellent Philosophers: Or, if I hap to dissent
from other Learned Men, in some Opinions, (as, Who does not?) then, presently,
he complains pathetically, that I damn, contemn, and trample upon those
Authors: Or, if I do but say, I Demonstrate such a Point; or, that others do
not demonstrate; then, presently, I am as Proud as Lucifer; and, the Lord knows
what. How sincere he is in alleging this, will appear by the examining three
most signal Places he makes Choice of; where he objects it, (. 40.) In which he
makes me say, [Providentiam Divinam, ex Aliis omnibus, me, ad Rationem Dominio
suo restituendam selegisse:] that Divine Providence had chosen out Me, from All
Others, to restore Reason to her Dominion, or Sovereignty, over Fancy. This,
certainly, thus worded, sounds proudly. But, may we not fear, after so many
Trials, that Mr. Le Grand has falsify'd my Words, though he puts them all for
mine: and, that too, in a Distinct Character? To say, I would attempt or
endeavor this, is but to express, that my Zeal for Truth had put me upon such
a bold Undertaking, and, withal, to give an Encouragement to the Reader to
weigh my Argument: Or, to say, that I apprehended GOD's Providence had enabi'd
me to perform this, was no more than to say, I had writ a Method to Science,
which the Title Page had professed openly; for which too, I gave GOD the Glory.
But, to say GOD had chosen me, out of All others, can become no body but a
Proud and Imprudent Boaster. How proves he this? that is, How shows he these
Words, thus put together, in my Books? Why, he cites the very places; which, if
True, must shame me; if False, must disgrace him, as a Falsifyer. The First of
the Places he cites, is found in the Preface to my METHOD, p. 27. where I find,
in the Beginning of that, these Words; I have not enumerated these Particulars,
to boast my Performances; but, to be-speak my Reader's Pardon, if, traveling
in an Unbeaten Road, I happen now and then to stumble. Which have not the least
Show of Arrogance, but the quite Contrary. Indeed, I say, p. 27. that It is
Impossible for any Wit of Man to invent any other Way than what I have
proposed; that is, Solid and Evident: Which, I say there, is, to build on the
Nature of the Thing, and frame my Discourses by Connection of Terms. But, do I
pretend, that what I proposed was my own Invention, or that I am the Author of
it; as the Wondrously Modest Cartesius did; who opposed all the present and
past World, to set up his New-fangl'd Doctrine? Do not all Aristotelians
pretend to it, as well as I? And, Did not all the Learned World follow it, till
Cartesius's Time? With what Ingenuity, then, does he tell his Reader, in the
Margin, that this is Arrogantia J. S. non alias audita; the Unheard of
Arrogance of J. S. to propose in his Books, (in Opposition to the Ideists,)
what Ten Thousand had proposed before him? The Second Place he cites, is, from
the Epistle Dedicatory to Solid Philosophy Asserted,. 8. where I have these
Words, [I must own, I have a high Opinion of my Principles, and of my Method,
which Nature, and GOD's Good Providence, have laid, and established.] Is it
Arrogance to have a high Opinion of what GOD, and Nature (the Work of his
Divine Wisdom) have done? For, it is plain, that I do not pretend I have any
hand in establishing either of them. My Non Ultra has told them why I have a
high Opinion of my Principles, because they are built on the Metaphysical
Verity of Things, established by the Ideas in the Divine Understanding: And of
my Method, or Way of Discourse; because Nature, or (which is the same) GOD, as
Author of Nature, has made our Soul such an Inferior sort of Spirit, that it
works by Abstract or Inadequate Notions, which we compound or connect into
Propositions, (in which all Truth formally consists;) and then connect those
Propositions into Coherent Discourses. These, then, being by me ascribed to GOD
and Nature, I assume nothing to my self, but my Conclusions; and, of these I
delivered my self thus, in the Words immediately following: [But, as for my
Conclusions, and my Deductions, as I will not justify them with the same
Firmness as I did the others, so I should not think I ought to propose them to
Learned Men, unless I judged them Demonstrative.] And, now, where is all this
Unheard of Arrogance? Where is my Bragging that GOD had Selected me so
particularly, from All Others, which he most expressly puts upon me; and
pretends to show them, [tribus ex locis,] from three Places; of which, these
are Two, where not a Word is found savouring of Arrogance, or any thing like
it; but, rather, the direct Contrary? Would it be Uncivil, on this Occasion, to
ask of Mr. Le Grand, whether he has not forsworn all Sincerity, and Common
Honesty? To stander is too great a Crime for a good Christian to be Guilty of;
but, to falsisie his Adversary's Words, and Slander him too; or rather, to
pretend falsely he says thus, or thus, in such Determinate Places, (which
Particularizing makes it look Credible,) on purpose that he may slander him, is
so voluntary and wilful a Complicated Crime, that the Tenderest, and most
Indulgent Charity is at a loss to invent an Excuse for it.

62. The Third Place to which he refers his Reader, is taken out of the
Dedicatory to Solid Philosophy Asserted; where there are, indeed, some of those
Words, but not one of those haughty ones he here expressly and distinctly fixes
upon me. My Discourse in the two foregoing Pages, was, concerning the Way of
Ideas made use of by Cartesius, and others; which, I made account, did delude
their good Reason; and, by making them disregard the Nature of the Thing, led
them into Fancies, and Imaginary Conceits: I gave there for the Reason why I
writ Philosophy, That I apprehended GOD's Providence had fitted and enabled me
to redress such great Mischiefs, (viz. that Fancies should beat down Reason and
Truth;) and therefore, I thought it became me to Re-instate Reason in her
Sovereignty over Fancy; and, to assert to her the Rightful Dominion Nature had
given her, over all our Judgments.] Which amounts to this, That I thought my
self able to confute his Way of Ideas, and to show it to be Opposite to True
Reason. Is it such a piece of Arrogance to pretend to be able to confute a
piece of Novelry, so Opposite to the Way of all the former World, (especially,
ascribing, as I did, that Ability to GOD?) Or rather, (if there be any
Arrogance at all on either side,) Is it not more like Arrogance in them, to
blame the Methods of so many Thousands of Learned Men, who writ before them;
and, by introducing New Ways of Philosophizing, to accuse, by Consequence, all
the former World of Ignorance? Is it not rather Arrogance in him, to be so
haughtily and rudely Stiff in maintaining Ideas (as he says) Elicited, or
produced by Himself, without even attempting to bring any one Demonstration, or
Conclusive Proof for them? Can there be any Self-Conceit more Enormous, than to
be thus Ravingly Earnest to maintain that he has this Invisible Gift of
Producing Ideas out of his own Head, or ex se, (as he expresses it;) which he
holds to be the only Ground of all True Knowledge, without bringing any one
Argument that is able to evince it; and, then, because we will not believe him
without Proof, to foam thus at the Mouth with the foulest Language the most
Transported Rage could dictate? See his Words at the End of this. [Quis a
Luciferi lapsu, superbius unquam de Seipso senserit! What Man, since the Fall
of Lucifer, had ever such a Proud Conceit of himself!] Then follows my
never-heard-of Arrogance, my Intolerable Arrogance, my Nequissima, most Wicked
Arrogance. Poor Impotent Railer! Whose Passion will neither let him reflect how
he dishonours his Place, disgraces his Friends, scandalizes Good Christians, or
wrongs his own Conscience. But, in the Name of Wonder! How comes it that no
body but himself ever thought me thus damnably Arrogant! I do confess, I write
briskly, and smartly, when I think it Evident I write for Truth. It is my Duty:
And, I have given my Reasons for it in my Preface to Solid Philosophy; which
he, instead of Answering, tells us here only, he cannot read them without
Horror: No, nor my Arguments neither; for, he answers them both just alike. In
what, then, consists this Arrogance of mine? The plain Truth is this; and, his
Carriage confesses it: I had challenged him to bring one Principle, or one
Conclusive Proof, for his New Way of Philosophy: He has none; and, therefore,
I must be Intolerably Arrogant, because he is Obstinate in his Errors, and
pitifully Ignorant; as also, because I follow the Way, which builds Truth on
the Nature of Things, and on the Connection of Terms; which all the Learned Men
in the World had so long embraced, and Unperverted Nature teaches every Man.

63. But, we have lost our Third Citation. I beseech my Reader to re-view it,
and then to consider whether there be one Word there, that GOD had Selected me
from All Others; which he here,. 40. puts upon me, as my Express Words; and
prints in a distinct Character, as mine. That I have truly represented the
Three Places he relates to, will appear by the Preface to his former Book,. 26.
where he puts them down at large. This, then, being evident to Eyesight, I
charge him with Three Wilful Falsifications here, in citing Three Places in my
Books for these haughty Words; viz. that I said, I was selected from All
Others, etc. whereas, I only said, that I apprehended my self Able to confute
his Ideas. I demand of him, either to show me the Words in my Books, or, to
acknowledge his Error. But, I do not expect from him the Candor to retract
any of his Slanders, whatsoever he professes here, page 2. For, this would
oblige him to make Satisfaction; against which, as I have sufficiently
experienced, he is (I know not by what Case of Conscience) Church-Canon-Proof.
This, then, is Another Branch of the New Cartesian Method of Arguing, and
Answering; viz. to falsify, and impose on his Adversary, whatever Words he
pleases: And, he is very Constant, and Diligent, in pursuing that Useful Method.

64. Another Branch of this New Method, is, Without so much as one Word to
abet his Saying; nay, in despite of many Words, and, even, Avowed
Demonstrations to the contrary; to impose upon me False, Invidious, Incredible,
and Unchristian Tenets. Thus, p. 78, 79. he makes me deny that the Soul exists
when it is separated from the Body: Nay, he is afraid I deny it is Created, but
is ex Traduce; and, that it is Extinguished with the Body, and Raised again at
the Last Day. Nor is this all; but, (that we may see how his Suspicions
contradict one another,) he calls into Doubt, p. 78. whether I acknowledge a
Resurrection. I see, it is a great Favor he will let me hold some few of the
Articles of my Creed; for, he has debarred me from holding most of them. His
Reasons, (such as they are,) as well as I can collect them, or make them look
like Aiming at any Sense, are these. First, I made her incapable of Preexisting
before the Body, of which she is the Form; (of which Opinion he seems here an
Earnest Asserter:) Whence he concludes, I deny she can exist when Separate from
the Body afterward: And, yet, p. 78. l. 4. himself uses my Words; which
affirm, that, after she is separated, ex se existere apta est, she is able to
exist of her self. Next; What says he to my Discourse: Ens is only that which
is capable of Existing: But, as the Council of Vienna has told him, the Soul is
Forma hominis; and, therefore, she cannot, of her self, exist here; but the
Totum only, of which, she is a Part. Again, I argue thus; That which is
Indeterminate in any kind, cannot exist; but the Soul, before she had Knowledge
in the Body, was a mere Potentia Cognoscendi, or (as some express it) Rasa
Tabula: Therefore, she could not exist before the Body. The Major is Evident.
The Minor must be granted by Mr. Le Grand himself; for, the Soul can have no
Actual Knowledge, without Ideas; and, he denies she has any Innate Ideas, but
only an Innate Power of producing them; that is, she has, according to him,
none at all before she had elicited them out of her self: Therefore, she was,
according to some Priority, before she did elicit them, or, before she had any
Knowledge; and, consequently, she was, of her self, only a Power to have them;
or, a mere Power to have Knowledge; which is, to be utterly Indeterminate, in
Ratione Cognoscitivi: But, what is Indeterminate in any kind, is neither This,
nor That; nor, consequently, can exist: Therefore, there can be no
Pre-Existence of Souls. What answers he to these Arguments? We must excuse him;
It Is not his Custom to do such trifling Work, as to answer any Argument at all:
It Is enough for him to stand stiff to his Cartesian Tenet, that the Soul and
Body are Two Things; I, that they are, let Arguments say what they will.
However, he will do better than Answering Arguments: And, How is that? Why,
he will make them all Bad Christians, and Heretics, that speak against
Cartesius; which no sooner said, but, in his wise Opinion, down they go to the
Pit of Hell, like so many Imps of Lucifer, as they are: They deny the
Immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection; and there is an end of them.
And, Is not this Confutation enough in all Conscience!

65. His Follies here were tedious to Enumerate. He yields, with much ado, what
the Council of Vienna told him 'twas Heresy to deny; but he yields it very
faintly, in these Words; Anima (says he) Hominis Forma aliquando dici potest:
The Soul may sometimes be called a Form of Man. The Council is much bound to
him for his Civil Complement; and Cartesius is their most humble Servant, but
not so Obedient to its Decrees of Faith as he ought. But, What kind of Form is
the Soul then? The Council said, it was such, vere and essentialiter; and, if
it were Truly such, why may not a Truth, that belongs to Faith, be spoke at all
times? Why, only, [dici potest, It may be said;] as if it were some Improper
and Unusual Phrase, and not Proper Language, in which Declarations of Faith use
to be worded? Why aliquando only? May not Truth be spoke Always, as often as
there is Occasion? Well, but, all this while, what kind of Form is it? He tells
us here, p. 78. l. 18, 19, 20. Is it neither an Assistant, or Extrinsecal Form;
nor an Informing, or Intrinsecal one? Now, Intrinsecal means Not-Extrinsecal:
We should be glad, then, to see this Monster of a Form, that is neither
Extrinsecal, nor Not-Extrinsecal. What is this Midling Form then? He gives us
no Account of it, but that it is alterius Generis, Of another Kind; quo fit, ut
Hominis Formam Humanitatem esse strictius asseramus; By which it comes to pass,
that we more strictly call the Form of Man Humanity. What Gibberish is this? Is
the Soul a Form at all, or no? If not, then he must say the Council errs: If it
be, what is the Matter to this Form? Or, Is it neither Intrinsecal, nor
Not-Intrinsecal to it? A Form that is not Intrinsecal to the Matter, or Informs
it, is a strange kind of Form. Again; What Sense is it, that Humanity is, by
the Soul, more strictly made the Form of. Man! One would think, that this being
the Abstract Notion of Man, its Concrete, and that which expresses his Total
Essence, should be so more strictly allied to it, by the very Notion of it, (as
Whiteness is to that which is White,) that nothing could make a Man more
strictly called a Man, than Manhood, or Humanity, can do of it self. So that,
Insignificant Words and Contradictions are obtruded upon us, instead of Solid
Reasons; and we must be content with them, when no better can be had.

66. As for his pretending I hold, the Soul is ex traduce, and not Created, he
goes against the Light of his own Conscience: For, whoever reads my Fourth
Preliminary to Solid Philosophy,. 8, 9. (as it is evident he has, since he
cavils at that Book,) will see, I make the Soul come immediately from GOD, and
Created; tho, indeed, the whole Man not being properly Created, but, in part
(viz. according to its Body) Generated, the Infusion of the Soul is called by
the Schools, not simply Creation, but Concreation; meaning, that the Soul is
then Created, when, by Generation, the Bodily Part is brought to that
Perfection, as to be fit, in some degree, to work with it. This, then, is
another piece of their New Cartesian Method; and would serve for Arguing and
Answering both, and do mighty Execution in Running down their Adversary, if
they happen to meet with Ignorant and Credulous Readers, who are so weak, as
not to consider that Imputations of the Largest Size may as well proceed from
Confident Calumny, as from Honest Ingenuity.

67. Another New Method of my Cartesian Adversary, is, to cite Scripture, then
interpret it by his own Fancy, without giving us any Rule of interpreting it;
or, of distinguishing Metaphorical Speeches, from Literal ones; but, taking
every Word that serves his purpose, or seems to chime to the Cartesian Novelty,
in a Dogmatical Rigor; (which Method, followed home, would make mad Work with
Philosophy, and Divinity too;) and then, if we will not allow his Private and
Untoward Interpretations, presently to exclaim aloud, and tell the Reader very
sadly, that I oppose not only Cartesius, but Moses, St. John, and St. Paul;
nay, GOD himself, and (which is a worse Fault, it seems, than to oppose GOD)
the Holy Ghost too; and, p. 47. St. Jude also. Certainly, this Self conceited
Man makes account his Private Interpretation of Scripture is the Infallible
Rule of all our Faith; and, therefore, all Mankind must be Bad Christians, and
Heretics, that contradict such a Supernaturally-Gifted Interpreter. What a
clutter does he keep with the Word [stetisse?] And, that it is against all Arts
and Sciences, and Common Sense too, to say a Thing did not stand before it
fell; as we both hold of the Angels, That there was some Terminus a quo, or
some kind of State, whence they fell, is certain, and undeniable. The Question
is, What this State was? I took him to mean it was to see God; (and so did the
Learned Merry-man too;) for, to say they were in Heaven, is the same, in
Christian Language, as to say they enjoyed the Beatifical Vision. Nor do I
think any Man living will deny, but that our Savior's Words, In the House of
my Father are many Mansions, (one of which Mansions he assign here, p. 47. l.
25. as a Celestial Habitation to the Devils, before their Fall,) was meant of
the Stations, or Degrees, of Essential Happiness, in the Sight of GOD; for, no
Man will deny, but that it is there he told his Disciples, he went to prepare a
Place for them. Now, since Mr. Le Grand calls the House which our Savior calls
here his Father's, [Heavenly,] what I want to know, is, what he means by this
House, if it be not the Heaven of the Blessed Saints, who enjoy GOD. He makes
it another thing; and says, that they are thence promoted, and admitted more
fully to the Beatifical Vision. What means [promoted, and admitted more fully
to see GOD,] but, that they saw him before, though not so fully? If so, and, that
this was really his Tenet formerly, as I suspected, then my Argument proceeds
against it thus: If they saw GOD, they were Happy; If Happy, they had all they
could wish; If they had all they could wish, they could wish no more, nor love
any Created Good inordinately; nor, consequently, Sin, nor be Damned:
Therefore, they did not absolutely stare; that is, they were not absolutely in
Termino, or in Heaven. I am half afraid, that, from the Words Mansion,
Domicilium, and such like, which they left, he conceits there are certain kinds
of Upper-Rooms, and Lower-Rooms, in Heaven; and, that Lucifer, and his
Adherents, dwelt in some of the Lowest; and were there besieged, and driven
thence by St. Michael and his Angels. Some may think this is too much strained,
and looks as if I spoke in Jest: But I am very Serious; and, can see no Reason
in the World that is Solid, or taken out of the Nature of our Subject, Angels;
why he, who assigns to them, [Before and After,] which are the Proper
Differences of Time, should not assign to them Local Habitations, and Places
too: And, I should be much obliged to that Man, who would show me, out of the
Nature of the Thing, why Angels, which are Pure Acts, should not have the One,
as well as the Other; or, why they should not be Contained in, or Commensurate
to Place, which is Permanent Quantity; as well as their Operations, by being
one after another, should be Commensurate to Time, which is Successive
Quantity; both of them being equally Opposite, nay, Contradictory to the Nature
of Indivisible Beings.

68. To clear this Point, which is much blunder'd by Metaphorical Words, which
are Equivocal; First, It is Certain there was some Condition, State, or
Terminus a quo, from which they fell. Secondly, That Words which signify
Place, when applied to Spirits, are, and can only be meant, of States, or
Conditions; that is, of Exalted Knowledge; Ignorance of what they longingly
wish to know; of Extremely Tormenting Griefs, Blissful Joys, or Suspended Hope,
which is also very Penal. Thirdly, That Aquinas (Pr. Q. 62. a. 1.) maintains,
that Angels were Created by GOD Happy, Beatitudine naturali; or, in that
Happiness which they could have by the Force of their Nature, (which is, in
some sort, called Happiness, or Felicity;) in which Sense, Aristotle said, that
the Utmost Happiness of Man was, to contemplate the Optimum Intelligibile, GOD.
This Beatitude (says he) Angels have by their Creation, because they cannot
acquire it by Discourse, but it is given them for the Dignity of their Nature.
But there is another Beatitude placed in the seeing GOD's Essence, which is not
within the Limits of Nature, but is the End of Nature; which, therefore, they
had not by their Creation.. Besides, it is probable they had some Grace, and
some Gratuitous Knowledge, beyond what their mere Nature gave them; which Grace
they resisted. These Gifts made them Candidates for Heaven; in which, the First
Act of their Will would have invested them. This was their State, or Condition,
from which they fell: This Hope and fair Possibility, and (as it were) Title to
Heaven, they lost by their First wicked Choice: And, This, according to this
Learned Saint, is all that is meant by the Domicilium, (which so much puzzles
Mr. Le Grand,) which they forfeited by their Depraved Will, and Unhappy
Wilfulness.

69. But, does Mr. Le Grand imagine there goes no more to the Interpretation of
Scripture, than a hasty Fancy of our own? I know he is resolved to like nothing
that comes from me: However, I will acquaint the Readers with my Thoughts,
hoping it make some of them more Charitable, than to Censure highly, and
Condemn one another, because they interpret Scripture otherwise than themselves
do. I conceive then, that in Passages belonging to Faith, Scripture is to be
interpreted, as Mr. Thorndike (Just Weights and Measures, p. 37.) also holds,
by what the Church, from the Beginning, has received by their (the Pastors)
Hands. In Matters that belong to Natural Subjects, True Science is the best
Means to interpret it; because, Words (in a Book intended only for Faith and
Good Works, and not for Natural Speculation) may be Ambiguous; but a
Demonstration, if truly such, cannot deceive us. Thus, when it is said, that GOD
made Two Great Lights, the Words would make us think that the Moon is the
Greatest, next to the Sun, in the Firmament; but the Science of Astronomy
corrects that Thought, and assures us, it is the Least within our Ken.
Particularly, True Science of the Natures of Things enlightens us to know when
Words that relate to them are to be taken in a Literal, when in a Metaphorical
Sense; but, most especially, when the Speech is of Spiritual Natures; which, if
we should understand Literally, it would make us entertain a thousand Frantic
Conceits, unworthy GOD Almighty, or Angels either; as every one knows. This
determined, and that it is once known the Words are meant Literally, then
Criticism, which acquaints us in what Sense they used to be understood by those
who lived about the same Time and Place, will give us great Light. If
Metaphorically, then Logic will assist us to know in what Regard, and for what
Reason, the Word is transferred from one thing to another; and, to gather by
the Tenor or Consequence of the Discourse, the Sense of the whole Passage. Nor
is Grammar useless in what concerns the Congruity of the Words which compound
the Sentence and Context. This, and such other Considerations, if Mr. Le Grand
would please to lay to heart, he would not immediately pronounce, and conclude,
that every Interpretation that suits not with his Fancy, or with the Ideas of
Cartesius, (the Agreeableness or Disagreeableness to which seem to be his Rule
of Interpreting Scripture,) to be such heinous Sins (as he does, p. 15.)
against Moses, St. John, St. Paul, St. Jude, nay, against GOD himself, and
(which is an odd Addition) against the Holy Ghost too. (Had I said so, he would
have objected, that it is a Clear Case I do not hold the Holy Ghost to be GOD.)
By which Method, he assumes to himself a Prerogative to make more Decrees of
Eaith in a Moment, than all the General Councils, since the Christian Church
stood, have made in Sixteen Hundred Years, with all their Disquisitio Magna.
But, I doubt, he will find few that will subscribe to his New Symbolum Fidei,
or his New Articles of Faith, no better grounded; nor believe (however their
Science, according to Malbranche, comes by Divine Revelation) that their New
Faith has such a Supernatural and Sacred Original.

70. I had forgotten a very smart Confutation of his, put down largely, p. 125.
which is the more Victorious, because my own Words are brought to tell me to my
Face, that I eat them. The Point was this: A Syllogism being the most Exact of
Discourses, out of which some Determinate Conclusion follows, from the placing
of the Terms; hence, in my METHOD, B. 3. L. 1. where I treated of the Figure of
a Syllogism, which consists in the Placing the Two Extremes with the Middle, so
that some Determinate Conclusion might ensue thence, I advanced this
Proposition, that therefore the two last Figures were Unnatural, and Illogical.
My Reason given there,. 10, 11, 12. was, because the Place of the Predicate
being that which belongs to Superior Notions, and the Place of the Subject (as
the Word imports) being that which suits best with Inferior ones; and, it
being Natural, that that which conjoins Two, should be placed in the Middle,
between them; it was most Unnatural, that the Middle-Term should be placed so
as to be Predicated, or Above them both, as it is in the Second Figure, where
it is twice Predicated; or Below them both, as in the Third, where it is twice
the Subject: whence, the Middle-Term is, in neither of those Figures, in the
Middle. Hence, in my. 15. I advance this farther Consequence; [Hence, no
Determinate Conclusion can follow in either of the last Figures, from the
Disposal of the Parts in the Syllogism:] Which I repeat again, and farther
explicate, in the next Page; concluding thus, (The Indeterminate Conclusion
follows not from the Artificial Form of the Syllogism, but merely from the
Material Identity of all the Terms; or from this, that their Notions were found
in the same Ens.] And, in Conformity to this Doctrine, I put Two Propositions
only in each of those Figures, (which I did no where else when I came to make
Syllogisms,) because no Determinate Conclusion follows thence; as I declare my
self, expressly, in the last Line of that Page. By which, any Man of Common
Sense may see clearly, that the State of the Question is this, Whether any
Determinate Conclusion follows in the two last Figures; and this, from the
Disposal of the Parts in the Syllogism. Whence, (Id. Cart. p. 27.) I challenged
him, and all his Cartesians, (as I do now again,) Ut ostendant, etc. That they
would show, out of the Nature of the Subject we are treating of, (as they
ought;) that is, out os the Artificial Frame of a Syllogism; which would not be
such as it ought to be, (that is, Artificial,) unless all the three Terms had a
Determinate Place in it; but, chiefly, out of the Placing of the Middle-Term,
and the Laws of Predicating; why One of the Extremes ought, in the Conclusion,
to be Subject or Predicate, rather than the Other: Or, (which is the same,) why
any Determinate Conclusion follows from such a Placing of the Terms. This is
the Point truly stated from my Words, over and over repeated: This, then, he is
to answer to, and to show, that out of such a Placing of, the Middle-Term, any
Determinate Conclusion, that is, One of them rather than the Other, does
follow. Now, let us see his Answer, and reflect upon his Method.

71. It Is found in his Censura, p. 125, 126. Where we may observe, First, That
there is not one Word of either a Determinate Conclusion following thence, nor
of following out of the Placing the Extremes with the Middle-Term in the
Premises; concerning which only the whole Question proceeds, as I over and
over repeated. Whence follows that he has not spoke one Word to the purpose,
in his whole Answer. 2. He says, Turpiter lapsus est, He has fallen into a
filthy Error. That is to be tried, and determined, by the Solidity of his
Answer. In the mean time, if my Position was an Error, he has never so much as
touched it, much less confuted it; since, it is evident, he has prevaricated
from the whole Question. 3. He says, I do calcare Aristotelem, trample upon
Aristotle. Poor spiteful Trifler! Cannot I dissent from Aristotle, or any other
Author, in any one thing, but I must presently calcare, spernere contemnere,
damnare those very Authors themselves? Did Cartesius calcare, damnare,
spernere, etc. all the former World, when he introduced this New Doctrine of
his, so Different, and, in most things, so Opposite to them all? 4. He says, I
do calcare Porphyrium, trample upon Porphyrius; he means, in putting a Sixth
Predicable, or Manner of Predicating: And, in case we allow Identical
Propositions, without doing which, we must (as Non Ultra has demonstrated)
renounce First Principles, it is Evident, that the Predicating the Whole,
formally and expressly, of the Whole, is another Sort or Manner of Predicating,
from his Five. Let him know then, once for all, that I am so far from standing
Corrected, as to my Luciferian Pride and Arrogance, notwithstanding his
Casvigations, (as he calls them,) that I value not a Pin what either Aristotle,
Porphyrius, or any other Philosopher says, when I see an Evident Reason to the
contrary; Since, it is only the Goodness of their Reasons that gave them all
their Credit and Authority. 5. I had alleged I had produced no Syllogisms
there at all; since a Syllogism consists of Three Propositions, whereas, I had
manifestly put but Two; because no Determinate Conclusion followed; and, I
challenged him that himself had added a Third. What says he to this? Does not
Eyesight, and my express Words in that place, put this out of all Doubt, or
Cavil? He reflects on it thus, Quae haec hominis Impudentis Confidentia, etc.
What a strange Confidence is this of this Impudent Man, whose Mouth can by no
other means be stopped, but by citing his own Words in English! And,
immediately he puts down my very Words, in which are only Two Propositions, and
not Three; without which last, there can be no Syllogism. His Railing I pass
over, and only desire the Reader to find a Word (if he can) to express fully
the Humor of this Madman, who strives thus to cut-face Men's Eyes; and puts
down my very Words here, which evidently confute himself. 6. He cites my Words
in his Censure, p. 126. that the Conclusion may either be This, or the Other;
and, as far as I can guess, (for I am loath to fix upon him absolutely such a
prodigious piece of Nonsense) he thinks that, by these Words, I signify, some
Determinate Conclusion follows. Can any Man be so weak, as not to know that
[Either the One, or the Other,] means, [Neither the One, nor the other,
Determinatery?] I see a thing a far off, and I say, It Is either a Man, or a
Horse: Do I, in saying so, signify that it is determinately a Man, or
determinately a Horse; when as my Words expressly speak Indifferency, or
Indetermination, to either? Every Conclusion that is deduced, is some One; and,
what is One, is Determinate; and, if it be not Determinate, or One, it is None;
for, None signifies No One: Whence, I told him, (Id. Cart. p. 26.) [Consulto
abstinui ab ulla Conclusione inferenda, eo quod nullam Determinatam (seu quod
tantundem est Nullam) inde deduci aut sequi tum ostendi, tum diserte professus
sum.] What replies he to this, in which the Force of my Answer consists? Not
one Word, nor so much as mentions it; but rambles on, after his own fashion;
that is, Concealing all that is to purpose, or else Perverting it; and, then,
making a wide Mouth over it, and Railing against it. Lastly, He will needs do
Feats, and put the Syllogisms, [clarius and distinctius,] more clearly and
distinctly than I did: Which is Ridiculous Bragging, and Nonsense to boot; for,
(as Eye sight attests,) I put no no Syllogisms at all; neither Clearly, nor
Obscurely; neither Distinctly, nor Confusedly. I know he will still be doing
twenty things he should not do, to avoid the doing what he should do. If he
will be doing. let him show that any One or Determinate Conclusion follows out
of Terms no better placed in the Premises; and this, from the Disposal of the
Parts of the Syllogism; which are my very Words,. 15. But this he has not done,
nor Attempted to do, nor so much as mentioned, or taken Notice of it, though it
be the only Point; and, therefore, he has done nothing at all but prevaricate,
fool and rail, and given no kind of Answer. To make this clearer; Let the three
Terms be A B and C; of which, A is the Majus Extremum; B, the Middle Term; and
C, the Minus Extremum. If A be predicated of B, that is, be Above it; and B be
predicated of, or Above C; then it follows, a fortieri, out of the very Placing
the Terms, that A, being the Supreme Notion, must be above C, or the Predicate
in the Conclusion; and, so, a Determinate Conclusion follows, out of the
Situation of the Terms: But, if A and C stand on the same Level, and be both of
them either Above B, or both of them Below it; neither has any Title, by virtue
of their Place, to be above, or below; that is, to be Predicate, or Subject, in
the Conclusion; and, therefore, the Conclusion remains Indeterminate, or No
One; that is, None. The rest is Empty Vapouring, [turpissime lapsus est,] and
such like stuff; his constant Assistant, when he is at a Nonplus. If any one
have a Mind to have a List of his Swaggering and Ranting Vapor upon this
Occasion, he may read them in my Ideae Cartesiauae, p. 27, 28. in these modest
Terms, delivered in his own Words; [Attend, you University men; for, he would
be your Master too -- This Inventor of this New Logic, or Method to Science --
See here his Syllogism -- (whereas, Eyesight tells every Man, I put no
Syllogism at all:) -- He makes himself Ridiculous -- He errs against the most
known Rules of Syllogisms -- His Judgment, or Opinion, is Foolish -- He
contemns every Man; nay, he blots out of the Catalogue of Philosophers, and
makes a Mockery of the most Noble Sir Kenelm Digby, and Albius: (Which is most
openly and ridiculously False, and Groundless; since the Former never writ any
Logic, and the Later maintained the same Doctrine in this Particular.) -- His
Syllogisms (he means, his own; for, I brought none at all) are Erroneous in
more Respects than one -- These Rules, not only Sophisters, but almost
Fresh-men are well acquainted with -- He errs filthily -- He is a Cobbler,
beyond his Slipper -- He is an Ass, playing upon a Harp -- He bewrays his own
Ignorance -- He is, in Logic, more blind than a Mole -- He deserves to be
hissed at -- He will be Eternally famous for a Trifler.] Now, would any Man
imagine, that this Vapourer is, all this while, so utterly out, that (as has
been now shown) he has not so much as spoke one Syllable to the true Question;
which is, Whether a Determinate Conclusion follows in the Second and Third
Figures, out of the Placing of the Middle Terms with the Extremes. By the way,
observe, Gentlemen, with what meek and humble Spirits these Men are endowed:
They think, there is not the least Show of Immodesty, or Incivility, in their
Words; not, though they call me Impudent here, for saying what the very Words
they cite show to the Eye of every Reader. This Error (forsooth!) was shown me
long ago, by his Friend, and Tutor, Mr. Bisset, after my Book was printed; who,
out of his own wondrous Kindness to me, told me, he was sorry I had so
strangely mistaken; and, as I am informed, he has objected it since, to some of
my Friends; as a great Lapse: To rectify whom, I have been something larger,
in case he be not past Rectifying. But, of him, and all that has passed between
us, more hereafter, as Occasion presents.

72. I cannot omit another Method of Solving my Demonstrations, it is so very
pleasant. I had demonstrated in my METHOD, that all Intrinsecal Differences
were nothing but more or less of the Generical Notion; for, if they be
Intrinsecal, or keep within the Precincts of that Common Notion; that is, if
they be not fetched from another Head, (which is, to be Extrinsecal,) then, in
case they did equally partake the Genus, the One of the Species (they being,
both of them, constituted by their Differences) would have in it nothing
particular to it self; or, have nothing in it, but just the same the Other had;
and, so, they could not differ Intrinsecally from one another: Whence follows,
that the Intrinsecal Differences, by which they formally differ, can be no
other but an Unequal Participation of the Common Notion; that is, more and less
of it. What says he to this Clear Demonstration? Not a Word. It Is his
Prerogative, never to regard the Argument. He denies my Conclusion, as he does
almost always, quite through his whole Answer; and, he never fails of having
something or other to say against That: And, to let the Reader see here it
cannot stand, he brings no less Artillery than Omnipotence against it: What!
(says he,) Is it Impossible, then, for GOD, whose Power he is not VVilling to
Obey, (that Unchristian Slander must come in of Course,) to make two Species,
or Individuums, that Equally participate their Superior Notion? Is it
Impossible for GOD to cause two Things, or Modes, or two Eggs, not to be
Essentially unequal, since they all depend on GOD. Now, there is not one Word
in my Argument, that relates, in the least, to GOD's Omnipotence, more than
there is in any of Euclid's Demonstrations, or any other Argument whatsoever,
brought by any other Philosopher: So that, this Answer is equally applicable to
them, as to this of mine. And, is not this a most Formidable Method, and,
withal, very Expedite, to Answer all the Arguments in the World! viz. If they
who allege them, offer to say they conclude, he tells them, in short, that
they deny GOD's Omnipotence, that they are not willing to obey his Power -- on
which all things depend; and, therefore, are Impious against GOD, if they will
not grant, their Argument may, possibly, not Conclude, or be Good for Nothing!
What Man living dares deal with such an Adversary, who has Omnipotence, in all
Exigencies, still at hand, to befriend him? This is their constant Topic; and,
though he uses it never so often, it will never be worn threadbare. Certainly,
that Sacred Attribute was never so Profaned, as by these Men, who make it
perpetually an Excuse for their Ignorance, and a Cloak for their Malice.
Cartesius could dare Omnipotence to do his worst, to deceive him, Med. 2.
Nunquam (says he) efficiet Deceptor ille sum Potens ut nihil sim, quamdiu me
aliquid esse cogitabo; and, yet, is Applauded for it: But others cannot bring a
Plain Demonstration, but we are presently bobbed in the Mouth with denying
Omnipotence. But, the Question is not, whether Omnipotence can solve it; but,
whether Mr. Le Grand can. In the mean time, What Answer does he himself give to
my Argument, which, in short, is this, If the Species do not partake the
Generical Notion Unequally, One has nothing in it under that Genus, but what
the Other has: If it has nothing in it, as under that Genus, but what the Other
has, it does not differ from it, as under that Genus: If it do not differ from
it under that Genus, then it is One and the same with it under that
Consideration, and not Two; v. g. Two Yards being Equal under the Notion of
Quantity, they do not Differ, that is, they are the Self-same under the Notion
of Quantity, precisely: Which is as certain as this Identical, into which it is
refunded, viz. A Yard is a Yard. Now, would I give something to be present when
Mr. Le Grand puts on his Considering. Cap, and bethinks him what to say to this
Demonstration: I expect he will laugh at it, as mere Gibberish; (that we may be
sure of,) for, he has a perfect Antipathy against all Connected Discourse; and,
if the Connection be Close, he falls into a Paroxysm of Railing; but, if the
Evidence of it be driven to Identical Propositions, then his Reason falls into
a Swoon, and is perfectly Entranced; nor can any thing cure him, or furnish him
with any kind of Answer, but to have recourse to the Divine Omnipotence, for
Relief; and then he is Enchanted, and Proof against all the Demonstrations in
the World; and, will either pretend an Identical Proposition may be False; or
tell his Adversary, that GOD's Omnipotence can make his Argument not conclude;
and, that he is Unwilling to acknowledge and obey GOD's Power, if he will needs
stand to his Argument, Was ever Man so Nonpluss'd, and Baffled.

73. Another most remarkable Instance of his Exactness in Solving my
Demonstrations, (and it is a very Compendious and Admirable one,) shall be, his
Skipping over Multitudes of them, very Nimbly, at one Leap. In my Appendix,
which confuted his false Pretense of holding Formal Mutation, (without which,
all Physics and Metaphysics are mere Nonsense,) I had shown how he spoke
Contradictions in every Step he took; v. g. How he made [Intrinsecal] to be
[Extrinsecal;] [Substantial,] or [Esseutial,] to be the same as [Accidental;]
The Producing a new Substance, or Ens, called [Generation,] to be merely
[Location,] or [Situation] of many things orderly together, which belong to
another Head, or Predicament; and, consequently, is no Generation. How he makes
[Unum, or One,] to be [Non-Unum, or Multa;] that is, Not-One, but Many; and
Ens, or Thing, to be Entia, or Things. How he so abused the Notions of
[Simplex] and [Compositum,] that he made them to be the Same, under the same
Notion. How he made Completum, and Incompletum, to be the self-fame. How he
confounds the Commonest Notions of Actus and Potentia, and destroys both their
Natures; which contradicts all Learned, and, even, all Common Discourse. How he
makes what is] Divisible,] to be no way Divisible, or, [not-Divisible.] How he
puts that to be Physical, (which belongs to a Distinct Science from the
Mathematics,) to be Mathematical; that is, Not-Physical. How he makes [meer
Matter,] which, as such, is contradistinguish'd to Form, (as the Principle of
Potentiality and Indetermination is to that Principle which is Actuating, or
Determinative,) to be [Inform'd;] and that too Essentially. How he makes
[Suppositions] (on which Cartesius proceeds) to be [Principles,] and relies on
them as such; which are not only No Principles, but Contradictorily Opposite to
the whole Nature and Essence of Principles. All which, and much more, I
objected, and proved, against him, (at least, all but this last) by Mediums,
fetched from Metaphysics, which are next to Self-evident, and border upon the
very First Principles of all; or, on Identical Propositions, to which also I
did, by the way, reduce some of them. What Answers he to this large Discourse,
consisting of thirty five Pages, which demonstrates how he had stumbl'd into
Flat Nonsense, every Step he took? Read, Gentlemen; and admire the profound
Learning of my Adversary, and his Dexterity in Solving my Arguments. He answers
all those Demonstrations (O wonderful!) in less than a Page and a half. But,
How? Does he show they proceed upon Unevident Principles, or False and Unprov'd
Suppositions; or, that the Terms I use in my Discourse, are Unconnected? No,
no; all these are mere Fooleries with him: This is none of his Methods. How,
then, does he Answer them? Why, First, (Censura, p. 128.) he prefaces
confidently, (which is no small Part of his Method of Answering,) and says,
Expectandum erat, ut Vires suas omnes in ea (he means his Appendix) confutanda
eliceret: It was to be expected he would have exerted his whole Force, in
Answering my Appendix. Well! But, does he reply to my Answer, though never so
negligently and carelessly written? that is to be yet examined. Secondly. He
proceeds, At proh hominis Ignavi Imperitium! hic, certe, si usquam, nugatur
egregie: Oh, the Unskilfulness of this Slothful Man! Here, if eever, he trifles
egregiously. These are, hitherto, but Bold Sayings. What is his Answer? Why, he
says, that I bring a Physical Discourse to the Ten Predicaments; to Genus and
Species; to Ens and Unum, Abstractions, and Logical Trifles. Indeed, in one
Page, (235.) where I am stating the Question, I make a small Logical Discourse,
to show under what a precise Consideration we speak of our Subject; thus to
beget a Clear and Distinct Conception, what Forms or Modes are Intrinsecal,
what Extrinsecal: But, my Reader will see, that all my Mediums are either taken
from Physics, or from Metaphysics. And, it is to these Mediums, we would have
an Answer. Does he show that I deviate from the Nature of the Thing in hand? Do
I not hold to the Notions of Ens, Unum, Matter, Form? etc. Alas! he never minds
such frivolous Considerations. Thirdly, He says, I tell my Reader, my
Peripatetical Assertions are not supposed gratis, but Demonstrated. Does he go
about to prove the Contrary? He not so much as attempts it. To what end, then,
does he bring such Stuff? Oh! it is a necessary Ingredient of his Method, to
tell us at large what I say; for, that makes a Show, as if he were about to
confute me; and, when he has done, he lets it all alone, and slides away to
another thing; which is his General Trick, all over. He is true to one part of
his Title, which is, Censura; for, he Censures very Notably: But, he never
promised he would give a Reason, Why; and, he will not go beyond his Promise,
or his Bargain. Fourthly, He says, I would have the Readers believe that the
Words [Divisibility, Physical, Matter, etc.] are Abused by him. He mistakes; I
would not have any Readers of mine believe any Tittle, upon my Word; but, see
with the Eye of their own Reason, that my Arguments prove what I pretend, to be
True. But, were it so; Does he even attempt to show that my Arguments do not
conclude; and, by doing so, to preserve my Readers from the Mischief of
Assenting to my Impious Doctrine? Methinks, his Charity to his Neighbor should
oblige him to Endeavor this, at least: But, he begs their Excuse; he must not
run to New and Troublesome Methods, and leave his own, which never yet failed
him, and is, withal, so Easy. By which, every one will see, that his Policy
is much greater than his Charity. After this, he surceases his Impugnation of
my Arguments; and ends with calling them Cavils, which, he says, he has
satisfied formerly; but he neither tells his Reader, nor can tell him, Time,
nor Place, when or where, he thus satisfied the Debt he owed him; and,
therefore, the Obligation remains yet in Force. Then he says, I neglect his
Observations, (the worthy Transcriptions of his profound Note-Book-Learning,)
which may sometimes (if they be Pertinent, and Authentic) be brought against a
Conclusion; but can, with no Sense, be pretended fit to solve Arguments, or
show the Terms Unconnected. Besides, I have laid open, how Insignificant the
Way of Observations or Experiments are, (when we are laying Grounds of
Philosophy,) at the End of my Preface to my METHOD. He brings up all, with
sounding his Noble Triumph over my Demonstrations, and then concludes it with a
little Pedantick Foolery, which are great Embelishments through his whole
Books; and, tells his Reader, like a right Solid Philosopher, as he is, that
the Mountains Brought forth, and were Delivered of a Ridiculus Mus. Yet, though
he has, with a wonderful Agility, skipp'd over all those Demonstrations against
his Appendix, at once, without either touching or mentioning any one of them;
yet, he tells us, for all that, (p. 20.) very briskly, and confidently,
Appendicem meam, ab omnibus ejus ictibus sartam tectam, tuebor: I will defend
my Appendix, safe and sound, against all his Assaults. And, in one Sense, he
says very true; for, certainly, never did Man, in the World, make such a
Defense against so many Demonstrations: One would think that, to avoid them
all, and run away from them all, is a strange Way of Defending them all. But,
these Cartesian Methods of theirs can do more than Miracle. This Prevarication
of his from performing one jot of what he had so largely promised, would be
enough to make any Writer, but himself, lose his Credit utterly; and so it
would his too, but that he is Proof against it, having none to lose: For, he
has used us to it so often, that none now expects it. By the same Nimble
Method, he leaps over my whole 4th Indication, without replying one Word to
those most Important Objections: See his Censura, p. 36. where he gives them
their Quick Dispatch, in Ten Lines, by virtue of the same Method; which
deserves to be called, The New Cartesian Method of EXPEDITION.

74. In the self-same Method he answers my Demonstration, (Id. Cart. p. 127,
etc.) which proved, the Cartesians had no Principles of Knowing; my Five
Demonstrations, which showed their First Principle of Knowing (consisting in
this, That the Soul had a Power to Elicit Ideas out of her self) was
Contradictory to the First Principles of our Understanding; and Three more
against the Insignificancy of the Occasional Impression upon the Nerve, whence,
as they say, those Ideas come to be Elicited; and yet Three more, against the
Pretense of Annexing such and such Ideas to such Motions made upon the Nerve,
by GOD's mere Will, as they pretended, but never yet proved. Now, this Expedite
Way of Answering serves them as well for These, as it did for the Former; and
is equally fit to solve all the Demonstrations in the whole World: It Is but
calling them Trifles, Cavils, and Ridiculous Mice; and, immediately, all the
Connection of Terms in them, and all the Consequences deduced from them, though
never so Strict, and Close, will fly quite asunder, and they are all shattered
into Loose, Incoherent Talk, by the Miraculous Virtue of this All-answering,
All-confuting Method. Yet, he tells his Reader, in his Ad Lectorem, that
Omnibus Adversarii Objectionibus satis abunde factum inveniet; that he will
find all the Objections of his Adversary sufficiently and abundantly Answered.
Whereas, whoever reads my Ideae Cartesianae, will discern, that he has not so
much as mentioned the Tenth part of what he ought to have Replied to, and
Confuted. He tells him also, that Nihil intactum reliquit, which was not Futile
ac Ridiculum nimis; He has left nothing Untouched, but that which is very
Babbling, and Ridiculous. And, this is another Answer to all my Demonstrations;
for, these are the Things he has most carefully, and most exactly left
Untouched, (though he handles Wrangling Trifles very largely:) Or, if, by
Accident, he happ'd to Touch them, he first defiles and perverts them, as he
thinks fit; and then he musters, and brings up his little Army of his New
Methods, to Attack them.

75. But, What is become of these Categorical Propositions, all this while,
into which I had reduced his Loose Ramble, as into the Principles which, I saw,
lay at the bottom of his Respective Discourses, and grounded the several parts
of them. I had collected them with much Exactness, and referred to the Places
where it would appear, that they were the Foundations on which he built all his
Incoherent and Inartificial Superstructures. I did this, to oblige him to aim
his Random-Talk at some Certain and Determinate Mark; and, that, by seeing what
he was to prove, he might, at length, be forced to bring some Determinate
Arguments, to make them good. I was so far from Imposing them, that (Id.
Carts. page 111, 112.) I left it at his Choice, either to Grant or Deny them:
If he Granted them, then he was to maintain them; If he Denied them to be his
Sense, then I undertook to show that he would, by doing so, overthrow all his
own Doctrine which was Grounded on them: But, he will not so much as take
Notice of any one of them; only, he tells his Reader, they are Theses
Fictitiae, and Fidelitate nulla collectae: Fictitious Positions, and
Unfaithfully Collected. If so, I had given him the greatest Advantage against
me, he could ever hope to gain. However, if none of his, and, that therefore he
could not Grant them, he might have Denied them: But he foresaw the
Consequence, and, that I could easily fix them upon him; and, that those
Positions he had made use of for his Principles, were such Shameful Nonsense,
that nothing could be more Opprobrious to him, than to be Convicted to have
built all his Doctrine upon such Chimerical Grounds. He foresaw too, that
these scurvy Categorical Propositions use to have some kind of Coherence in
them, and so might hap to bring our Dispute into that abominable Way of
Connection; and, thence, might oblige him to bring Arguments to prove them;
which would require much more Trouble, and Pains, than mere Saying would do;
and, withal, would put him quite out of all his Friendly Methods, which had
supported him hitherto, and were still his only Refuge: And, therefore, he very
fairly and and prudently let them all alone; only, he tells us they are
Fictitious, and Unfaithfully Collected; and there is an end of them. For, he
thinks, Good Man! that whatever he Says, is Proved, as if he though he could
Create and Uncreate Arguments, (and Answers too,) with only saying they were
Naught. And, it is Unconscionable to expect more from a Man, who has no more to
give us.

76. In the next Rank of his New Methods, march his Follies; and, first, for
Dignity sake, come forward his Learned Ones, as those that should aim at having
some Speculative Truth in them; viz. Page 74. he puts upon me to hold, that
Creation is Essential to God; a Tenet I ever abhorred, and have laid Grounds to
confute such a Senseless Opinion in my METHOD, B. 1. L. 7.. 12. And, for what
Reason does he impose it upon me, to hold such an Impious Tenet? Because I say
there are no Different Points in Eternity, or before the World was made; by the
Distances from which, we may frame to our selves any Notion of Sooner, or
Later; alleging, that these were Differences of Time, which could not be, till
Time it self was; nor could Time be, till the World was. Which Thesis has no
more Connection with Creation's being Essential to GOD, than the Tenet of the
Extension of Body is to the First Chapter in Genesis; or, that of the Four
Elements is to Algebra. Whence, all his Discourse, page 77. by which he would
seem to oppose me, is wrong levelled. Again; Since all Common Notions have
their Original from our observing many Individuals agreeing in the same Nature;
which, when All agree in it, we call it a Summum Genus; if very many only, then
a Species; and so we descend to Inferior Kinds, or Species; which Species are
Intrinsecally Constituted by partaking Unequally the Superior, or Common
Notion; as I have Demonstrated, and shown by Instances, in my METHOD, B. 1. L.
3. to. 11. Again; Since it is not every Indeterminate, or very small Degree of
magis and minus, or of Unequal Participation of the Genus, which constitutes or
makes diverse sorts of Mankind, or denominates it to be another Kind; but, the
Distance between them must be Conspicuous, and very Notorious; and, under the
Species of Man, there are found great Multitudes that do partake the Notion of
Rational, (which is Essential to Man,) both in their Intellectuals, and Morals,
and this from their Natural Constitution, or Genius, above others; so that they
seem, in a manner, Angelical, in respect of them; and the other, Comparatively,
in a manner, Brutal. Hence, I advanced this Paradox, That there may be such
Degrees of more and less Rational found in Mankind, so that some of them may
seem to be another Species, Sort, or Kind of Men (for those three Words are
Equivalent) from the other: Nay, the Nature-taught Vulgar, following their
Genuin Thoughts, use to call them so too: As, when they say, [He is another
Kind of Man than you imagine;] meaning thereby, more Rational, or (which is the
same) a Man of better Judgment, or more Virtuous. What does Mr. Le Grand?
Instead of Confuting my Principle, or Examining my Reason, he falls to to talk
of Lunar-men, or Men in the Moon, and the other Stars; and tells me, lest (as
he says) I should be ignorant of it, (How infinitely am I bound to him for
Enlightening me!) what Authors have thought there were Men there. Then he talks
also of Planetary-men, and tells us fine things of them too. Which done, he
says, If I am too dull to understand these Astronomical Observations, (that is,
which he had not made himself, but picked them out of Books, which he thinks to
be a Work of Great Learning,) he desires I would show my self a Divine, and
answer to his Question, Whether I hold that there are any Pre-Adamites, or no?
Why, this is pure Bedlam! What have I to do with the Men in the Moon, the
Planetary Gentlemen, or the Pre-Adamites? Not a Word to this purpose is found
in any of my Books. I spoke only of our honest Neighbors here, in our Earth;
where there are many, ex ipsa natura, as Dull as Beetles; and, naturally, as
Immoral as Brutes: Others, vel ex ipsa Origin, (that is, Essentially,) of a
high pitch of Knowledge, and inclined to Virtue; and both naturally disposed to
see Truth clearly, and to pursue it in their Practice sincerely: Whereas,
Others can scarce see ^s far as their Nose; and have such weak Eyes, that they
are blear'd, and be darkened, if any Evident or Connected Truth is proposed to
them; which is the greatest Depravation of Rational Nature, (as far as it is
Intellectual,) that can be imagined, in regard all Truth consists in Connection
of our Notions: Which Men do therefore seem to be another Species, or (as we
say) another Kind of Men, as to their Rationality, than Others are. You will
say, These are only diverse Qualities in those Men, which do not infer diverse
Species. I reply, That, if they do concern their very Power of Reasoning, or
their Rationality, which is their Essence; and, that they have this from their
Primordial Constitution, in the very Instant they are made Individually such;
(which is always Essential, because it distinguishes them from other
Individuals.) Also, if Nobilitas Animarum sequitur ex Nobilitate Corporum; The
Nobility (or Excellency) of Souls follows out of the Nobility (or Excellency)
of the Body, (as St. Thomas of Aquin says, Prim. Q. 83. q. 7.) then this
Difference between such two Men is not only a Diversity in some Quality, but
Essential; and, therefore, in case there be many of each Sort, and so visibly
Different, that we can abstract a Notion from those of each Sort, which is
Common to all those under it, 'twill be a Sub-Species, or an Inferior Kind of
Man. But, could he have more discovered his own Ignorance, than to call the
Knowledge of Men in the Moon, and Planetary-Men, Astronomical Observations?
What Astronomy treats of, is, the Motion of Celestial Bodies, their Bigness,
Distance, the Times of their Appearances, their Influences, and the Respects
they have to one another: But, that any Astronomer did ever observe, (as he
says,) Men in the Moon, or in the other Planets, I confess my self too Dull to
conceive, or to apprehend; nor, how any Man, not better-half Crazed, could
imagine they should.

77. Well, But the Question is, Whether there can be abstracted a Common Notion
of a very notable Rationality from some Sort, or Kind of Men, which agrees to
all them, and does not to another Sort, which are not, by their very
Intrinsecal or Essential Constitution, near so Rational! If so, is not this all
that is requisite to make a Sub-species? This being so, What says Mr. Le Grand
to the Reason of it? Not a Word. Yet, he is never out, in his Way: For, as in
the Preface to his former Book, he did, upon this Occasion, instead of replying
to the Argument, give us a most Learned Discourse of all sorts of Dogs; of
Generous Dogs, Clownish Dogs, Degenerate Dogs, Hunting Dogs, Hawking Dogs;
which he says, (contrary to the Notion of all Mankind,) that they differ only
in some Qualities, and not in Kind; So, he tells us here, of Lunar Men,
Planetary Men, and Men before Adam. For which he had two Reasons; One is, to
talk something, lest Men should think he is Nonplus'd, though it be not one
tittle to the purpose, or, in the least concerns my Argument. The other is,
Because he had laid up in Lavender those Pretty Collections in his Note-Book;
and it was a thousand pities the World should die in Ignorance of them, or
himself lose the Credit due to the great Sweat of his Brain, and most profound
Learning, in Reading and Transcribing them.

78. But, this premised, Who can do less than admire at Mr. Le Grand's
Assertion, p. 130? Three Propositions were exibited to two Sorbon Doctors; and
so perverted, and untowardly proposed, that they seemed plainly to say, that we
must see the Connection of Terms in those Propositions which expressed the
Articles of Christian Faith; that is, that we must see the very Mysteries
themselves Demonstrated, ere we ought to believe them; and, in this Sense they
condemned them, as they clearly signified in their Censure. Now comes Mr. Le
Grand, and tells us, p. 130. Error ab Authore isto dicitur quicquid non
exhibuit damnata illa olim Parisiis Terminorum Connexio: J. S. calls every
thing an Error, whatever that Connection of Terms condemned formerly at Paris,
does not exhibit. Is not this Pleasant? They condemned not the Connection of
Terms, even in the Mysteries; for, then they must condemn the Truth of all the
Mysteries of Christian Faith: What they condemned, was, most expressly, the
Necessity of our seeing this Connection of the Terms in the Mysteries
themselves, ere we ought to believe them; for, this excludes, or evacuates, the
Divine Authority, in which only, and by relying on which, we see such
Propositions to be True, or, their Terms to be Connected. Again; Does he think
there is no Connection of Terms in other things, but only in these? Does not all
the Truth in all the Sciences in the World; nay, all the Truth, even, in all
our Discourses, consist in this, that the Terms of the Propositions do cohere
in Sense, or are Connected? Does he think that I account all these to be
Errors? Which if I do, I must deny all my own Arguments, and all my Thoughts,
which are True. No, no; that is not the Business. This would be a most
prodigious piece of Ignorance. But, his cruel Feud against All Connection, and,
particularly, that in my Demonstrations, is so Deadly, and Implacable, that he
would persuade the Reader that those Sorbon Doctors did condemn All Connection
of Terms whatsoever; nay, the very Way of Discoursing Connectedly; that is, all
the Deduced Truths, writ by all Scientifical Men in the whole World. This, I
must confess, would be (though Shameful to them, yet) of vast Advantage to
himself; for, then he need not stand Solving my Demonstrations, for, in that
Case, they would be solved to his hand; or rather, they were never Tied, Knit,
or Connected. And, it would be a Second Advantage to him, that, in that happy
Case, his Fancy might ramble at random, without any Control, or without being
fettered and shackl'd by this cruel Tyrant Connection, and by the severe Laws of
Logic; which improve, and, by virtue of First Principles, show this Connection
to be really such, and reducible to Self-Evidence. By which we see the Reason
why his Friend Merry-man and himself are so uneasy, and Piqu't at my METHOD to
Science, which advances and builds all along upon this Enemy to all these
Cartesian Methods, this most abominable Proud and Arrogant Usurper over his
Ideas, CONNECTION.

79. It were endless to reckon up all his Loarned Follies of this kind. My
Notes, which gather all his Performances into several Heads, reckon them to be
about two and forty: All which spring from his Abhorrence of Connection; which
neithe permits him (or rather, render it Impossible for him) to bring any
Arguments of his own, or to Answer mine. Whereas, I am so Arrogant, and Proud,
that I am ^o heartily contented, unless I see Self-evidens Connection of the
Terms in my Principles, and the Terms of my Conclusion to be Connected, because
the Two Extremes are clearly Connected with the Middle Term, or Medium, in the
Premises. And, now we see too what is the Reason why he does still slide over
the Premises, and never looks my Argument in the Face, but comes cowardly
behind it; and first denies, and then (after his fashion, or by some of his
awkward Methods) sets upon their Rear, my Conclusions.

80. After his Learned Follies, march, in a long Row, his Plain Fooleries: Though
Those may not seem worthy to be ranked among his New Methods, yet we are
mistaken; for, they serve to set off the others, and to stop Gaps when his
Reason is at a Loss: And, first, come his Profound Criticisms. For example, p.
68. he takes much pains to tell us what (...), or Impossible, means; and spends
above a whole Page in declaring at large no less than Four several Senses, in
which Lawyers take that Word. As if Philosophers could not understand the
Meaning of the Words themselves Use, without having recourse to Lawyers.
However, this helps to show he is an Universal Scholar, and informs the Reader,
he has peeped into Law Books too; at least, into their Indexes; and, that he
has gleaned thence some few Notes, to enrich his Common-place-book; to do
which, he thinks a high Point of Knowledge. Which puts me in mind of the Saying
of a certain Poet, concerning such Collectors:

-- Lord! how they would look, Should they but chance to lose their Table Book! 81.
The next shall be that of sentire; and of Hearing also, both in primo gradu,
and secundo gradu: The Sum of which is, that the Word is Equivocal; which is
no wonder, most Words being such: By which Method, he might make Reflections on
ten Parts of twelve of the whole Dictionary. Now, in our Way of Doctrine, how
easily are all these Speeches reconciled? For, Man being One Thing, all his
Operations are Corporeo-Spiritual; whence, our Direct Knowledge of Things
coming in by our Senses, it is natural to say when we hear, that we know; since
both are done at the same time, and by the same Compound Operation. Thus, when
we see a thing, we say, we know it; all Mankind, till Cartesius's Time, holding
firmly, that we ought to trust our Eyesight, and the other Senses, when the
Power is not disabl'd from perceiving, and the Object and the Medium are well
proposed, convenient, and well circumstanc'd. He has a worse Criticism upon the
Word [Conceptus,] Conception; and this, for two Reasons; One, because we rather
Apprehend, than Comprehend; as if we did not hold our Conceptions to be
Inadequate; and, by doing so, declare, that we do never, by any one Conception,
comprehend the whole Thing. The other Reason is, because a Conception in the
Womb is, Touched and Comprehended by it: Whence, he says, Visio suits better
with our Knowing a Thing, than Conceptio. I wish he would reflect on that Known
Maxim, that the Common Use of Words gives them their Signification, whatever
their Radix, or Derivation, Grammatically imports; and, that to be Conceived by
our Understanding, is the same as to be seen by it: So that Visio and Conceptio
fall into the self-same Notion. What a Coil does he keep with his Incoherent
Criticism upon Lepidus and Lepor. Now, it signifies, Elegancy of Speech; then,
Liberal Arts; then, Trifling and Ridiculous Sports; then, Scurrility. Then he
wonders I do not take it for Lepus, a Hare, and make the second Syllable short.
And, why so? That he might bring in his Jest of corripuit Fluvium, objected to
an old Poet, when he used the Word Euphrates so. Certainly, this bewrays such
an Emptiness of Sense, and such a Nitty Pedantick Levity, that it is below
Ridiculousness. But, what is all this to me? What is all this to Philosophy?
Lastly, What is all this to the Duty incumbent on him, and owing to his
Readers, who desire to see Truth? Does he think it becomes him to trifle away
his Time, in running thus a Wooll-gathering after petty Schoolboy Criticisms,
and hunting after Butter-flies; and let so many Demonstrations, which, if not
solved, overthrow all Cartesianism from the very Foundation, lie Unanswered,
and Untouched?

82. The last Criticism of which (omitting others) I shall take notice, is
found in his Censura, p. 130. which is such a famous one, that it deserves to
be a Pattern to all future Generations, and to entitle him King of Critics. I
had used the Word [Directus,] as a Particle of the Verb [Dirigo,] in the plain
obvious Sense for [Directed;] as we use it, when we say, We direct our Prayers
to GOD, or a Letter to a Friend: But, Mr. Le Grand, who is so little acquainted
with any kind of Principles, that he reflects not that the First Principle,
that governs the Sense and Meaning of all Words, is the Common and Obvious Use
of them, which stamps the Signification of them, and makes it Current and
Proper, finds strange Mysteries in this ordinary Word; and, as he formerly
feared a silly Asterisk, or Star, left casually in the Context, was a Plot of
mine, to run him through with those five Darts; so, now he apprehends I have
some Stratagem upon him, for taking [Directus] in that plain Sense: Whereupon,
he tells the Reader here, that I am Vir subdolus, a Crafty, or Subtle Man; and
have some pernicious Meaning; but, let him alone, he will, in the end, turn it
upon my self. Now comes his most Noble Criticism: First, he brings in the
Phrase of Plautus, the Comedian; Abi direct; Go your Ways, straight. Thence,
he carries it on still farther, I know not how, to [Dierecte;] which Adverb
comes not from Dirigo, but from an odd Obsolete Word, [Dierectus,] which his
Brother-Criticks will tell him, comes from sub Dio erectus; that is, set up in
the open Air, or Gibbeted. Where are we now? for, we are quite got out of the
Signification of the Word [Directus,] which signifies [Directed.] But our
Critic is not got half way to his Journey's end: For, from [Dierectus,] he
carries it on to the Adverb [Dierecta;] which signifies, in English, [With a
Mischief:] And, [Ito dierecta,] is an old Expression for [Go, and be hanged.]
Having brought it to Dierectus, the next thing he does, is, to bring Dierectus,
by the Alteration of a Letter, and putting in Another, to [Diarrectus:]
whereas, no such Word is to be heard of in our Common Dictionaries, nor in the
Lexicon Latino-Barbarum: Yet, he had a Learned End in it, we may be sure; and
it is this; He remembered there was a Greek Word [(...),] which signifies
[Disruptus;] that is, Burst, or Broken asunder; and, this bringing it to
[Diarrectus,] gives him Occasion to take a Leap from Italy, into Greece, that
he might make the Word [Directed,] signify [Broken in pieces,] as (...) does.
Yet, this comes not fully home to his purpose; and, therefore, he makes
[Directus,] I know not how, to signify, amongst Critics, (he means himself,)
[Disrumpi dignus, Worthy to be broken in pieces.] And, now the whole Plot is
come to Light: For, when once he had, by often scruing the Word, and shifting
the Signification of it, from one Country, to another, got the plain Word,
[Directus,] whither he would have it; that is, to signify, [Worthy to be
broken in pieces; [immediately he applies his Formidable Engine he had been
preparing, and down goes my Preface, and my Epilogue, Directed to such and
such; they, all of them, deserve to be broken, or torn in pieces. Then he
brings [Broken in pieces,] to Perishing; and, then, my poor self (he says)
perishes with them too; and, lastly, by virtue of a Greek Poet's saying, [If I
do perish, let the Earth and Fire be mingled;] Let (says he) [Universus
Terrarum Orbis,] the whole World perish too. Who could have imagined that such
a Dite and Universal Catastrophe should befall the Whole World, from my using
the Word Directus, when I expressed my self to design, send, intend or dedicate
my Books, or any piece of them, to such and such Persons. Gentlemen; What can
any sober Men think of such a kind of Writer? This is neither Levity, Folly, or
Childishness; but, plain Downright. Madness: This is something beyond Prince
Butler himself. If any one can think this Censure too harsh, let him but
parallel such a Distracted Way of Writing in any other Author extant, who is
well in his Wits and, I promise him, I will re-call my Censure. For my part, I
can liken such a Rambling Career of Criticism, to nothing but that of a merry
Sophister in Cambridge-Schools, who, Jokingly (as the Fashion was then, at some
certain times,) would needs prove his Adversary, whose Name was Cooper, to have
been Lineally Descended from King Pepin, by the like Gradation of Criticisms;
alleging, that he was called [Cooper, quasi Hooper; Hooper, quasi Haper;
Haper, quasi Naper; Naper, quasi Diaper; Diaper, quasi Napkin; Napkin, quasi
Pipkin; Pipkin, quasi King Pepin. This, I say, is its only Parallel; only, this
Youth did not ramble from one Language to another; nor did this, but only when
Mirth and Wit were expected: But, that a Grave Man (as he would be thought)
should, in a Treatise where Philosophy and Solidity were expected, let so many
pretended Demonstrations lie at his Door, demanding, and calling-out to him for
an Answer; and spend a considerable part of his Reply so unseasonably, in such
Fooleries; and, which is worse, (as appears by his Carriage,) think himself
very Learned in Criticism all the while, (which shows he does it seriously,)
makes him not reachable by that Sophister, or by any; but, to be a Phoenix, and
only Self paralleled. By this worthy Criticism, the Reader will easily see
what a rare Interpreter of Scripture this Man would make, with his Acute Art of
Criticizing, which can wire-draw quidlibet e quodlibet.

83. So far concerning his Criticisms: His other Fooleries, which, I believe,
take up the fourth part of his Book, are Innumerable: The best of them are so
ridiculous, that it is a kind of Foolery in me to take notice of them. However,
since I am to lay open all the New Cartesian Methods, I am obliged to give my
Reader some few Instances of them, by which he may guess at the rest. A Friend
of his told him, a Terrible Answer was coming out against him: This slight
Occasion serves him for an Ironical Expression all over his Book; and,
Terribilis Author, Terribile Responsum, Terribiles Falsificationes, Terribile
Argumentum, comes over and over, I believe, at least, a hundred times, in his
Censura: Which I can liken to nothing so well as to some little, apish, wanton
Schoolboy, blowing a Feather up and down in the Air, to make himself Sport.
Yet, this does him more Service than all his Answers. But, give me leave to
tell him, that the Way of showing it not Terrible, is, boldly to come close up
to my Demonstrations, and solve them: But, he is so far from showing any such
honest Courage, that whoever reflects how he avoids them all, or over-leaps
them, will see, that, though my Ideae Cartesianae was not so terrible as to
fright him quite out of his Wits, yet, it has put him quite beside them; and,
has made him skip aside into twenty Bogs and Quagmires, and Hiding-holes, to
escape meeting with them. Should a Gentleman, Challenged to the Field, instead
of Meeting and Grappling with his Adversary, run about, into all Companies,
flouting at him for a Terrible Fighter, a Terrible Hector, a Terrible
Swash-buckler; I fear, every Man would conclude, he was really, and indeed,
Terrible to him, however he called him so in Mockery; and, that this Flouting
him, without giving him the Satisfaction due, and expected, would scarce serve
his Honor, or save him from the Imputation of a Coward. Then, every Error in
the Printing is charged upon me, as if I knew not how to write true Latin. Upon
which, I am told, I break Priscian's Head, am an Ignoramus, and many such Civil
Complements. Did I think such Toys worth noting, I could requite him with enough
of such Observations, in his late Scabrous, and (in some places) Unintelligible
Piece. Then comes in Horace, to prove all my Writings are but Ridiculous Mice.
Then, Artotrogus, an Idle Fellow in Plautus, the Merry Comedian, is cited, to
prove me Perjured; [Perjuriorem hoc homine, etc. If ever any one saw a more
perjured Man than this, or more full of Vanity, let him take me to him, and I
will be his Bond slave if ever I eat a Sallad with him, though I were like to
starve.] And, to clinch this Undeniable Testimony that I am perjured; and, lest
the Reader should not believe it was Artotrogus, who thus testity'd this
Unchristian Immorality of mine, he assures him of it, by telling him, [Sunt
IPSISSIMA Artotrogi verba apud Plautum:] They are the VERY and EXPRESS Words
of Artotrogus, in Plautus. What an Emphatical Word is that same [IPSISSIMA;]
and, how Necessary to be particularly remarked! Then comes in Canis Aesopicus,
the Dog in Aesop, and admonishes him, by his Example, not to follow my Shadow:
And, he is so heartily ready to follow the Example Aesop's Dog had set him,
that he not only not catches at my Shadow, but he lets pass what is most
Substantial too, by not replying to any of my Demonstrations. Then, he talks of
a Cos Gyratilis, a VVhirling VVhet-stone, to put to my Nose: Which is a
Mystical Jeer, taken from some of his Pedantick Observations. Then comes in
Miles Gloriosus, and his Machaera quoe gestit fartum facere ex hostibus; his
Sword that longs to make a Pudding of his Enemy: I beseech the Reader to view
the 2d and 3d Pages, and then tell me, if ever he read a Man more vainly proud
of big Words, than this Empty Man is. After that, he brings in his Friend's
Pyrgopolynices in campis Gurgustidoniis is ubi Bombomachides
Cluninstaridysarchides erat Imperator summus, N^ptuni filius. What Stuff is
this? Can this Man do himself a greater Disparagement, than to tell his Reader
how fond he is of such Trash? Yet, to talk idly when he has nothing else to do,
is more excusable for an Aerie, Lightheaded Man; but, to talk at this rate,
when he has such serious Business lies upon his Hands, as Vindicating his
Cartesian Doctrine from so many Arguments; and, then, instead of Answering any
one of them, to stand Cutting Capers in the Air, and Vapouring with such
High-sounding Bombast, tells every Man he is at a scurvy Loss; and, too plainly
detects, how Insignificant he is in any thing belonging to Sense and Solidity.

84. Yet, upon Second Thoughts, however Mr. Le Grand makes me a Liar, and
Perjured; yet, I will be so civil to him, as to declare he has not, for any
thing I can say, told one single Lie in any of his Books; perhaps, never since
he followed Cartesius's Doctrine; no, nor Falsify'd neither. To understand
which thoroughly, and, that the Reader may see I neither flatter him, nor injure
my self, upon whom he has laid so many false Aspersions; I am to give him
Information of one main Point of Cartesius's Doctrine; which is, That (no
Credit being to be given to our Senses, but only to the Ideas which the Soul
frames in her self) our Judgment is not therefore True, because it is
conformable to the Things without us; but, the Things are then to be judged
True, or to be really thus or thus, when they are conformable to our Ideas:
Whereas, the Aristotelians say, That we then judge True, when the Things are
such as we judge them to be; and, that our Senses, except in some odd
Circumstances, do not deceive us. Wherefore, since to Lie, is not barely to say
a Falsehood; for, a Man may do so very innocently, and yet, since he spoke to
the best of his Judgment, be an Innocent and Good Man: but, to Lie, is to go
against his own Thoughts, or Judgment: This being so, hence Mr. Le Grand may
think, and say, (as he does in his Preface to his Reader,) that I spoke false
when I objected that he had said I was in DEUM impius, Impious against GOD;
for, his Ideas might inform him so: Whereas, I, neglecting his Way of Ideas,
and relying on this Fallacious Sense of mine, Eyesight, seemed to read those
Words very plain in his former Preface, p. 38. l. 4. Thus he might read in my
Books, by the Light of his Ideas, that I denied GOD was Primaria Causa, or the
First Cause of Motion; whereas, I believing these false Senses of mine do find
that I only denied he is the Immediate Cause of it; and, that he must therefore
be the Primary Cause, because he moves Matter by Second Causes, the Angels.
Thus my Ears informing my Common Reason, of the Language amongst Charitable and
Good People, told me, that to call one Asinus ad Lyram, Talpa Caecior,
Blasphemus, delirus, facie non satis honesta; and, that I spit at Heaven, and
twenty such like Contumelies, were Virulent Expressions; notwithstanding which,
his Ideas might, for all that, tell him that they were (as he calls them here)
Modest. So, my Eyes inform me, that I only put two Propositions in that place
lately cited, and said expressly, No Determinate Conclusion could follow, out of
them, from the Disposal of the Terms in a Syllogism: But, his Ideas might tell
him, I put three Propositions in both places, and, that there are no such Words
as those now mentioned, which directly told him the true State of the Question;
and, that therefore he had no reason to take notice of them. Lastly, By the
same means it may come about, that his Ideas might tell him that I had said
those very Words, [Providentia Divina me, ex Aliis omnibus, selegit.] And, the
like may be said of all the other Falsifications I had Charged on him, and
Multitudes of others, which (proceeding only by Instances) I had omitted;
whereas, these False and Fallacious Eyes of mine told me, there were no such
Words in the places he cited for them, but quite contrary. So that, he and I
might both of us mean to speak Truth; but, either my Senses, or his Ideas,
might delude, and deceive us: Which we ought to believe, is left to the
Reader's Judgment to determine. Besides, perhaps, he might think, as is
Malbranche's Method, (whom he so zealously defends,) that he saw all these
things I object, in the Ideas which he sees in GOD, or fancies that he has a
Divine Revelation of it; and therefore, it had been Impious against GOD, not to
believe, and do, as he did. Whence results this Corollary, That it is hard to
fix any Ill Intention upon any High-flown, Seraphick Cartesian, lest we judge
rashly of what he thinks he is assured of by Divine Inspiration.

85. But, leaving him to make out the Certainty of his Ideas, and passing over
his most Useful New Method of Saying any thing, though never so Extravagant, and
Incredible, provided it but tends to Disgrace or Jeer his Adversary; now comes
their Last Method of Arguing and Answering, which flies a higher pitch, and
aims at Blemishing all my Endeavors, by an Objection, which, though it be an
Extrinsecal one, and taken from the Authority of Learned Men, of great Repute,
(as the Sorbonists are;) yet, he is well aware it will do greater Execution,
than any Intrinsecal Arguments they can hope to bring against me. Their Design
(as their Managery of this Contest shows) is not to instruct the Reader, or
Confute me; but, merely to Despite, and Disgrace me: And, a Censure of my
Doctrine by the Sorbon-Doctors, especially, backed with Authority of the Chief
Ecclesiastical Governors in that place, will, (as they hope) lay such a Load
upon a Single Man's Credit, that it must necessarily sink under it. And, though
the pretended Censure were in a Matter quite different from that of
Cartesianism, (which was at first, and still ought to have been, the only
Question,) and therefore, is nothing at all to the Right purpose; it is, for
all that, very much to their purpose; which is, to defame me; which blessed
Project achieved, they hope, by this Means, to raise such a Hubbub, and Noise,
that the Quiet Force of my Intrinsecal Arguments will never be heard, or
regarded; but, put to Silence, and Shame, by their Clamorous Outcry. Besides;
They judged, nothing could make their Calumny more Authentic, than to relate
it confidently, as Plain Matter of Fact; and, to represent it as such a Matter
of Fact, as already transiit in rem judicatam: Nor are they much concerned
whether it be True, or False; that is Indifferent to such Resolute Men; so long
as it serves a turn to beat down my Credit, all is as well as may be. He tells
the Reader then, page 7. that I did audacter asserere tam Fidem quam Scientiam
non nisi per hoc Principium, (viz. Terminorum Connexionem,) acquiri posse.
Also, (ibid.) Authoritate publica duas Propositiones, (which he names there,)
anathematizare adactus est, neanon subscribere Censurae diconti; Illas in sensu
Catholico non posse explicari; that is, that I boldly affirmed, that neither
Faith nor Science could be attained, but by this Principle, viz. Seeing the
Connection of the Terms, or seeing Faith, or, at least, the Way to it,
Demonstrated: The First of which excludes All; the Later, Almost all the
Christians in the World, from the Means to Salvation. Also, That I was fore'd,
by Public Authority, to Anathematize two Propositions of mine; and also, to
subscribe to the Censure, That they could not be explicated in a Catholic
Sense. The Sum of which is, that the Sorbon-Doctors Censured some Doctrines of
mine; and Public Authority forced me to retract, or (as his hot Phrase runs)
to Anathematize them, and subscribe to the Censure that said, they could not be
explicated in a Catholic Sense. And, page 8. he adds farther, That it is
Printed, or Recorded, for Eternity, by an Egregious Author, in a Verissima
Historia; (meaning Lominus his Libel:) And, Lastly, That this puts me into a
Panick Fear of the Roman Inquisition. And, hence, he tells his Reader, p. 11.
that I am abunde satis notus; he means, abominably well known, both in France,
Germany, Italy, nay, to the Pope himself; which, if not True, is a Lie at large
as all England, Scotland, France and Ireland. What will become of poor me! Or,
where shall I hide my Head! I am, it seems, like Old Cain, Vagus and Profugus
in terra: Mr. Le Grand has, for my Sins against Cartesius, Excommunicated me,
and all-to-be Heretick'd me, here in England: And, his Lashing Friend
(according to his Obliging Temper) says, my Book against the Cartesians
deserves to be burnt by the Hand of the Hangman. So that here is no staying
for me here, after such a Disgrace: And, it will be hard to find any other
Country, where I can hope for Shelter; or, where my Crying Sins will not
pursue, and proclaim me. And, which is worse, should I be put to death, or
burnt, as such a complicated Lump of all Heresies deserves, I must never hope
for the Honor of a Christian Burial: And, what a lamentable Case am 1 in then?

86. But, to be serious: If what Mr. Le Grand says, in this Long-winded
Calumny, be True, I am Eternally Disgraced: But, if I manifest, by Undeniable
Testimony, that all this Rabble of Matters of Fact he charges upon me be an
Arrant Falsehood, and Calumny; and, that I make it appear, that not one tittle
of my Doctrine was ever Condemned by any Sorbon Doctor; and, that I never
retracted one tittle of it, nor was forced by Public Authority to do so, much
less to Anathematize it. Also, if I prove here, that I never held, nor said,
(what he here, in express Terms, imposes upon me, viz. [Tam Fidem quam
Scientiam non nisi per Terminorum Connexionem acquiri posse;] but ever held the
contrary Doctrine, both as to that Proposition, as also to the Ill Sense put by
Tricks upon some Words taken out of my Books, which Ill and Falsly-impos'd
Sense was the only Sense that was Condemned; then Mr. Le Grand must consult
with his own Conscience, whether he has not incurred the Penalty of
Excommunication, for Publishing in Print such notoriously False Slanders
against his Fellow-Christian; or, by what Case he will excuse, or how he will
acquit himself, when it comes to be proved upon him, that by his thus
Calumniating his Neighbor so grievously, falsely and openly, he has rendered
himself thus Criminal, and Obnoxious: Especially, when the Circumstances that
highly aggravate this Crime of his, shall come to be charged upon him.

87. To understand more fully how this Business passed, we are to premise, that
nothing is easier than to extract Words out of any Book, writ by a Christian;
and then disguizing them, (by concealing the Scope and Tendency of the whole
Book, the State of the Question, and the Immediate Antecedents and Consequents
in those very places,) to make those Words, thus Extracted, and Exhibited, to
speak perfect Heresy, or worse. Take an Example: If, out of that Verse in the
Psalmist, [The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no GOD,] any one should
extract those Words, [There is no GOD,] and propose them in a Paper, thus
singl'd out, to any Learned Man, for his Judgment, not telling him they were
found in a Book, where the Concomitant Words, or the Circumstances, might,
perhaps, give them quite another Sense; but, that it was in Theses, where every
single Proposition stands alone, unassisted by its Fellows, as to the declaring
its Sense: Would any Christian, thus surpised, stick to declare, that such a
Proposition was flat Atheism, and could not be explicated in a Christian Sense?
This was my very Case. A certain Great Ecclesiastic, who was of good Parts,
but (as we are not all of us of the same Temper) of a High Spirit, Turbulent,
(for which Reason, it is thought, he had been dismissed out of his Order,) and,
withal, a Great Pretender to Policy, hapt to be at Paris, when I was also
there. He pretended great Friendship to me, and extolled my Books highly; (as
another Gentleman, now my greatest Adversary, has also done formerly,) and this
in Print. But, it unfortunately happened, that a certain Great Person, on whose
Esteem he had set a high Value, did, very imprudently, to his Face, prefer my
Writings before his; with some Undeserved Aggravations of the One, and
Reflections on the Other. This, though without my being Accessory, in the least,
to that Affront, quite Alienated his Friendship from me; and, he would needs
make all those Books of mine, though of late so highly praised by himself, to be
Heretical. At which time, some certain Gentlemen, who love to fish in Troubled
Waters, and were not over-friendly to me, (one of whom, as I am told, had a
Hand in Penning Merry-man's Libel,) struck in with him; knowing, that a more
fitting Instrument to make Bustles could hardly be found. To carry on this
Project then, Three Propositions were picked out of my Books; and so politickly
contrived, that, partly by stifling the Knowledge that they were in any Book at
all, partly by Adding to, and Altering, my Words, they plainly signified, that
None was to believe, unless they saw the Connection of Terms, or (which is the
same) had a Demonstration, or Science, of the Mysteries of Faith themselves:
And, in this Sense, two Sorbon Doctors, thus cheated, condemned them; as my
self, had I been thus over-reached, should have done; that Sense being both
manifestly Heretical, and point blank contrary to my constantly avowed
Doctrine; as I showed manifestly, out of many signal and most express places,
cited in my Vindiciae. This Censure being, by Stratagem, obtained, he flew
about the Town, showing the Censure, and amplifying mightily upon my Imaginary
Heresies: But, no Solicitation could obtain of him a Copy of the Censure it
self; lest it might come to my hands, and so enable me to defend my self, and
detect the Falsity; so, being incapacitated to say any thing in my own
Vindication, I never troubled my self at that which I could not help. About ten
Days after, during which time his Envy took its full Swing, the two very
Reverend Persons, Dr. Godden, and Mr. Barklay, Principal, or President, of the
Scotch College, came to my Chamber, and thus, with some Resentment, accosted
me: Sir, What do you mean? Are you stupid, that you sit studying here,
Unconcerned, when you are proclaimed a Heretic all over the Town? I replied,
When I can get the Censure, and know what is Objected, I am sure I can defend
my self: In the mean time, it is Defense enough to let People know I cannot
obtain the Equity of him to know my Fault. They replied, Though you dis-regard
your Credit, we, that are known to be your Friends, resolve to be more careful
of ours. So Mr. Barklay, taking Monsieur St. Amor, a Sorbon Doctor, with him,
to make his Quality known, went to the Chamber of Monsieur de S. Beuve, the
Chief of the Censurers, and thus accosted him; Sir, you have condemned Three
Propositions in the Books of Mr. S. which may make as great Stirs in England,
as the Five Propositions have done in France. He, all amazed, replied, That he
had Censured no Proposition in any Book, nor could in Prudence, or Honesty,
unless he had perused the Book it self; to be satisfied, by comparing it with
the Scope of the Discourse, and the adjoining Words, what Sense it must
clearly and necessarily have. In the Nick comes in my Adversary, with the
Censure in his Pocket: Well met, Mr. Barklay, says he; now your great Friend,
Mr. S. is condemned of Heresy, by this Learned Man. My Lord, replies Mr. de
St. Beuve, I neither Censured his Person, nor any Proposition of his, unless he
maintained those Propositions thus singl'd out, and exhibited, as you proposed
them in your Paper. Then Mr. Barklay begged he might have a Sight of the
Censure; which was something unwillingly granted; yet, it could not be denied
in such a Presence. Having perused it; Now, my Lord, says Mr. Barclay, to let
you see, I am neither a Heretic, nor a Favourer of them, I will subscribe this
Censure: More than that, I dare swear, Mr. S. will, at first sight, subscribe
it too: For, the Sense here condemned, is quite Different from the whole Scope
of his Books; which treat only of Demonstrating Praevia ad Fidem, and not at
all of Demonstrating the Mysteries, or Points of Faith; nay, it is directly
Opposite to his Doctrine, to say, they can be Demonstrated. At these Words,
Monsieur de St. Beuve grew warmer with him; telling him roundly, Domine,
callide and artifieiose mecum egisti, adeo ut suspicer ^^^um hoc ex ^ivore
profectum: You have dealt craftily with me, and with Artifiee; so that I
suspect that all this Business springs from Pique. Mr. Barclay astipulated, and
told him, Domine, rem acu tetigisti: Sir, you are in the very right on it.
Whereupon, my Adversary rising up in a great Heat, with a Face engrain'd in
Anger, thundered out; Mentiris, Barclaie; mentiris impudentissime. Ego novi
quis sis; nempe, Haereticus ipse, and Fautor Haereticorum: Ego tibi has vices
rependam. You lie, Barclay; you lie most impudently. I know what you are; that
is, a Heretic, and a Favourer of Heretics: But, I shall be even with you. The
grave Sorbon Doctors were astonished at this furious Transport; but, Mr.
Barclay being a Man of great Prudence, and never in Passion, Nay, my Lord, says
he, I do not love to hear my self abused. So he takes a short Leave, and brings
away the Original of the Censure with him; while the other, being in a high
Passion, had forgot to re-demand it: Yet, he lingerd, unseen, not far off, till
he saw my Adversary gone by; and returned to the Doctor. and told him, he had
got the Original of the Censure; desiring him to go to the Archbishop of (...)
from me, and request of him, that I might keep the Censure, and write my (...).
He was heartily glad it was got from him, promising to go thither immediately,
and to do me all the Right I could desire; and, affiaring him, the Censure
should never come into his hands again. So my Request was granted, and I set to
write my Vindiciae. In the mean time, we sent diverse to my Adversary; desiring
to see the Censure; telling him, they would not believe such a sinister Report
concerning me, unless they saw it with their own Eyes. Which put him (loath to
say, his Passion had made him lose it) to a great Nonplus how to answer, and
gave us much Divertisement. He applied to the Archbishop, and complained to
him, that Mr. Barklay had stole the Censure from him. But his Answer was, That
he had ordered I should have it, to make my Defense. Which mortified him
exceedingly.

88. My Vindiciae, which were now finished, being in Latin, and my Books in
English, eight Divines of the greatest Quality and Worth, (who understood
English,) were deputed to examine the Sincerity of my Vindiciae; and all of
them, except one, admitted by my Adversary himself; viz. Mr. Thomas Godden,
Doctor of Divinity, Ex-President of Lisbo-College, Preacher to Her Majesty, and
Treasurer of her Chapel: Mr. Francis Gage, Doctor of the Faculty of Paris,
afterward President of the College of Doway: Mr. Robert Barclay, Principal, or
President, of the Scotch College at Paris: Mr. John Betham, and Mr. Bonaventure
Gifford, then Batchelors of Divinity in the Sorbon; afterward, Parisian
Doctors; and the latter of them now. Bishop of Madaura: Mr. Edward Carry, and
Mr. George Kempe, Canons: And Mr. Edward Lutton, Confessor to the English
Religious: Who did, first, each of them apart; afterward, met in a Body, or
Conference, give their Unanimous Attestation, subscribed by their Names, in
these Words, viz. First, That All the places, out of my Books, alleged by me,
were faithfully turned into Latin. Secondly, That From the whole Context and
Scope of the Author, in those placos brought by him, to prove that he does not
maintain the Sense condemned, it is manifest, that he does not require
Knowledge of the Mysteries, in themselves, by Evident Reason; but, professedly
maintains, that they are Incomprehensible, and above the reach of Humane
Reason. Thirdly, That the Sense assigned by him, to the three abovesaid
Propositions, is Conformable to the Scope and Tenor of his Discourse in those
very places whence they are extracted; and therefore, we judge this to be his
True and Genuine Sense. Also, we cannot but confess, that those Omissions, and
Additions, which were the Reasons why the Propositions seemed to bear another
Sense, were justly charged by him.] After this, my Adversary would needs give
them some Objections, (which, we may be sure, were the best he could make,) by
way of Instruction to their Second Thoughts, how they might make a right
Judgment of my Doctrine. They met all again, considered them maturely, and made
a Second Subscription, That they found nothing in them, which could, in the
least, make them judge otherwise than they did witness formerly. This done, the
Archbishop of Paris told me, that if I would subscribe to the Censure, he would
order the Censurers to make me Satisfaction under their Hands, by declaring, no
part of my Doctrine was Censured; alleging, that, as they were ready to clear
my Credit, so it was but fitting I should clear them; and acknowledge, those
Propositions, as they were exhibited to them, were justly Condemnable; as may
be seen in my Clypeus Septemplex, page 96. I, at first, begged his Pardon;
alleging, that my Adversary was of that Humor, that he would thence take
Occasion to Vapor, he had made me Retract. Subscribe then, says he, in what
Form you will. Hereupon, I gave in my Subscription, in these very Words; Non
Doctrinam meam Retractans; sed in eadem, utpo^te a Censura immuni, atque ab
Illustrissimo Olivero Plunketto totius Hiberniae Primate, atque a Superioribus
meis approbata, Persistens, contrariumque ubicunque repertum fuerit condemnans.
This done, the Censurers were commanded to make me Satisfaction under their
Hands; which they did, in a Formal Instrument, declaring, That they did not,
vel minimam notam inurere, blemish with the least Note, or Censure, either me,
or my Books: Adding, That If any should pretend it, they did, from their
Hearts, profess, that they made a sininister Interpretation of their Censure.
And, there was an End of that Politic Jigg; the Issue of which was very
Honorable to me, and most Shameful to my Enemies.

89. By this Relation, every Tittle of which I can justify by sufficient
Testimony, and Authentic Records, which I have now in my hands; as also, by my
Vindiciae, and Clypeus Septemplex, published immediately after the Contest,
where all these Particulars, (and many others,) to my farther Clearing, are
printed; which I durst not have published, unless they had been True to a
tittle, before the Face of all those Honorable and Learned Persons yet alive,
who would have hated me for printing Falsehoods of them; and my Chief Adversary
himself, and his Accomplices, yet living, who would have desired no more, but to
have found me tripping in the least part of my Narrative. These Things, I say,
being so, Judge, I beseech you, Gentlemen, what a prodigious Folly, as well as
Malice, it is in Mr. Le Grand, and his Libeller, to pretend that any one tittle
of my Doctrine was Condemned by Sorbon Doctors; that I was cited before any
Tribunal; that I was forced to Anathematize any part of my Doctrine, and
subscribe to the Censure of it, etc. Whereas, it is manifestly attested, I only
subscribed to my own ever-avow'd Doctrine. Nor was I forced: No Tribunal
meddl'd with me, or concerned themselves about me; and, if I would have waved
my own Satisfaction from the Censurers, none obliged me to subscribe at all.
Lastly, How Base and False a Calumny is it, to say, that by Subscribing, I
Retracted; when I expressly subscribed, as Not-retracting my Doctrine; or, that
I was forced to Anathematize it, whenas I subscribed it as Persisting in it!
Nor are any of those Propositions, thus exhibited, and extracted, in reality,
mine, (Nam male dum recitat, incipit esse sua,) any more than [Non est Deus,]
thus singl'd out, is the Scriptures: I have no Propositions, but in Books;
where many Circumstances are found, determining the Sense: And, he that
pretends this, may, by the same Reason, accuse the Scripture of Atheism. How
rash a Slander, then, is it in Mr. Le Grand, to lay these things to my Charge!
And, how lying a Fellow is his Libelling Assistant, whose Calumnies are so
notorious, and some of them so Criminal, that, were he known, he would be
liable to lose his Ears.

90. The next Stratagem of our Politicians, (for, we expected new ones every
Day,) was, to pick out of my Books no less than 37 Propositions, (with the same
Honesty, we may be sure, as they did the former,) which they carried to the
then. Nuncio at Paris, now Cardinal Spada; pretending the same Zeal for Faith,
as Mr. Le Grand does; and, as those two Idle Knaves did, who are said to have
laid their Heads together, to pen this Libel: And therefore, pressing to have
them sent to the highest Tribunal, to be Condemned with all speed, because my
Heresy (forsooth!) spread far and near in England, and infected the whole
Country. The Nuncio took them; but, being a Man of Wisdom, applied to my Lord
Abbot Montague the next Morning, to know what strange Heresy this was, which,
like a Cancer, spread so fast in England. Who, smiling, acquainted him at large
with the Undeserved Feud of my Adversary, and my Innocence. The Nuncio sends
for me the next Day, received me very kindly; told me, he understood how I was
persecuted by some Adversaries of mine, and delivered me their Objections;
desiring me to write an Answer, and he would do m the Equity to send up both
together. Both which are printed in the Second Part of my Vindiciae. So this
Second Plot was defeated; and my Maligners came off as shamefully as they did
in the former: For, they could never gain the least Advantage upon me, if they
did not surprise Great Men with False Pretenses, and prevent my Answering for
my self.

91. But, Envy is a Restless Vice. Their Third Main Plot, (omitting many petty
ones,) was, to print a Libel against me, under the Name of Lominus, (which,
some say, N. N. and T. W. have Copied, and imitated, exactly;) making me guilty
of near forty Herefies. But, this Book having neither Author, Printer, nor
Approvet's Name put to it, (which made it highly punishable by the Laws of the
Kingdom, if any did spread it,) it was glad to sneak in hugger-mugger: Which
concurring Blemishes so disgraced it, that none regarded it; For, What Man of
Common Sense will believe, that a Writer for Faith, against such a manifold
Heretic, should be afraid to own his Name, if his Accusations were not
Calumnies? Besides, the Writer of it had counterfeited the Subscriptions
against me of two Parisian Doctors, by name, of Mr. Peter Nugent, and Mr.
Thaddaeus o Brien; who, in their Letters to the Cardinal of Norfolk,
(Authentic Copies of which I have in my hands,) complained of such Impostures,
and requested they might not pass Unpunished. So that, from many Heads, it was
convicted, and held to be a plain Libet. Lastly, I complained of it to the
Sacra Congregatie; laid it open, and confuted it, in my Querimonia to Superior
Powers, and my Antidoti; as it is to be seen in my Clypeus Septemplex, and the
large Preface to my Vindiciae. And, so, the Third Plot of my Adversary, and of
the Gentlemen behind the Curtain, his Assistants, went out in a Snuff, and lest
an ill Scent behind it. And, so much for Mr. Le Grand's Egregius Author, and
Verissima Historia, which does Aeternitati pingere (as he says) my Errors.
Which none regarded, but those who helped to pen it; with one of whom Mr. Le
Grand and his Friend (as I am informed) have struck a Holy League, to carry on
their Senseless and already Baffled Slanders and Calumnies against me.

92. But, the Fourth Plot was so finely laid, they hoped it would be
prosperous, and make amends for all; and, that, being so well levelled, it
could not but hit the Mark. They sent up all my Books to Cardinal Barberin;
and, with them, one of my Lord Chancellor Hyde's, writ against Mr. Cressy, (the
Title of which they had torn out;) pretending to him, they were all writ by one
and the same Author, my self. Their Friends there pressed the Condemnation of
them with such a hurry, as if the whole Church had tottered if it were not done
quickly. To expedite the Business, they earnestly solicited him, that only
that one Book (viz. Chancellor Hyde's) should be read; and then, to determine
whether all the Books writ by such a pernicious Author, ought not to be
condemned. The Cardinal, without naming me, delivers them to a worthy Divine,
who understood English; bidding him Keep the rest, till called for, and read
only this one; (pointing to that of the Chancellors, which they had signally
particularized to him,) and give him an Account of it as speedily as was
possible; for, by that one, they could judge of the rest. What Remedy now?
Would not any Man swear now that all was Cock-sure? But, there is no Policy
against God's Providence; which directed thither an English Divine, who had
lately come out of England, and attended the now Earl of Derwent-water, and his
Brother, in their Travels. He being of Acquaintance with this Divine, came to
visit him in the very nick of Opportunity, and finding him very busy in
reading that Decretory-Book, went to his Table, and took up some Books that he
saw lie there together: Finding, to his Astonishment, they were mine, he asked
him how they came by all Mr. S's Books? The other told him, he was much
mistaken; and said, they could not be mine; telling him, they had a far other
Character of me; whereas, the Book he was reading, which was (said he) writ by
the same Author; could not possibly be writ by a Man of Mr. S's Principles. Mr.
Midford (for, that was my Friend's Name) knew the Book, and avowed it was writ
by another Author, whom he named to him. At which, the Roman Divine held held
up his Hands with Admiration, at such a Knavish Contrivance. So, they agreed
that Mr. Midford should go with him the next Morning, to Cardinal Barberin, to
inform him what a Cheat was put upon him, to hasten him to judge of all my
Books, by the Book of another, who was of another Judgment, and went upon
different Principles. This was so Shameful, and Horrid, that, after this, not
an Enemy of mine durst appear. Besides my Clypeus Septemplex, and Vindiciae, I
had sent diverse Apologeticks thither, explaining my Doctrine; which the Roman
Divines examining, desired Mr. Midford to know of me, if my Occasions would let
me come thither, to teach the same Doctrine there, I had printed in England. If
I would, they would petition for a good Pension to maintain me. But, I was a
greater Lover of my Studies in my Privacy, than I was of Courts. However, Mr.
Le Grand, and my then Opposers, may see by this, how I am Notus in Gallia, and
in Italia. The Malice of my Enemies (as GOD had ordered it) having done me more
Kindness, and gained me more Honor, than all my Friends could ever have done.
All this was writ by Mr. Midford, to my Friends, and my self, then at Paris;
diverse of whom are yet alive, to witness it.

63. I am heartily sorry to lay open such Fraudulent and Unconscionable
Carriages in any Christians much more in those of my own Persuasion it being so
perfectly contrary to Common Honesty, than a Turk would blush at it, and a good
Moral Heathen detest it. But, when my Christian Credit is thus assaulted, I am
obliged in Conscience to vindicate my self: Nor, can any Man blame me, for
doing that Just and Necessary Duty to my own Reputation. Perhaps, to revive
this Quarrel, which the Chief Church Governors have Examined, Determined, and
Composed, Mr. ^. Grand exerts himself in this Consure of his, to gratify the
Contrivers of it then, hoping it would oblige them to put them in a Capacity to
play a Book-Game. And, for the same Reason, he goes about to gratify some
Protestants too, by hazarding his Credit, to do them a Kindness. But, as I
believe, the former are too prudent to begin Squabbles with one, who meddles
not with them; so, I am very confident, the Later have too much Honor and
Candor in them, to be offended at a Man who writes for his Conscience; and in
such a Cause, as is the Settling Christian Faith upon such Grounds as are
Absolutely Certain; which is the Interest of all Christians: And, that they
will never be favorable to a Writer, that wrongs the Common Cause, and,
consequently, his own Conscience, to please his Passion; much less, to such a
Man, who, in his Censura, as appears by the Words, [ut sint,] calls the
Protestants In England, INFIDELS.

94. That the World may know of how different a Temper I was, from that of Mr.
Le Grand, (whether Natural to him, or Inspired by another, I wave at present,)
after his Censura Injustissima came out, notwithstanding his Unoccasion'd
Provocations at first, which was the Origin of all his Warmth of Opposition, so
little Edifying to Sober Christians, or Beneficial to Learned Readers; though I
saw also, there was a Pound of Gall in that Book, for a Grain of Reason; yet, I
did charitably resolve to try if I could calm his Passion, and sweeten his
Bitter Humor. To compass this, I put my self upon some great Disadvantages;
and blamed my self as much as I could with any Degree of Truth; that so I might
invite him, by my Example, to some Civil Acknowledgment of his Peevish Errors,
I had resolved to pass over all his Unsavouly Taunts, his Railing,
Falsifications, and Untrue Imputations, under the Name of Mistakes; nor to take
notice of his manifold Omissions; but, to put down barely, and clearly, my yet
Unanswered Arguments; though it was tedious to me, without any Occasion, to
repeat them. Nay, I fully purposed to give his Pretended Answers a fairer
Character than they could deserve; and, while I rectified his Errors, to
excuse, as well as I could, what was Amiss, or Defective. I had framed my
Thoughts to pen my Book in a Gay, Familiar Style, to put him in a good Humor.
And, in a Word, I was resolved to omit nothing that could become a Kind Friend,
and a Charitable Christian. Whence, I had begun my Reply on this manner; by
which, the Reader may make an Estimate, how Condescending and Obliging the
Whole had been, had they let it go forward.

VERITAS and PAX.
REsponsio mollis frangit Iram, Sermo Durus suscitat Furorem, inquit Sapiens,
(Prove. 15. v. 1.) Hortatur etiam Propheta, Dei nomine loquens, (Zach. 8. v. 9.)
ut, Veritatem ac Pacem diligamus. Utrumque hoc dictum, Vir Eximie,
nobismetipsis applicare debemus; saltem, Ego utrumque mihimet applico. Quare
iterum ad Te redeo, iterum te adorior: Non animo infenso, sed vere Amico: non,
prae Famae meae tuendae studio, forsan ultra modum effervescens; sed, ad
Amicitiam Charitatemque (heu nimis laesas!) redintegrandas paratissimus.
Perculit me, fateor, (idque non immerito,) quod nunquam a me laesus, sed uti
existimabam, mihi Amicus, Cartesianae tamen Doctrinae, quam impugnabam,
Zelantior, and, forsan, suasionibus Aliorum eodem zelo nimis flagrantium,
obsequentior, in Contumelias contra Personam ac Famam meam, effusius quam par
erat, Scripto Publico, proruperis. Venit mihi in mentem Davidicum illud (Ps.
55. 13, 14, 15.) Si Inimicus meus maledixisset mihi, sustinuissem utique -- Tu
vero homo unanimus and notus meus -- in domo Dei ambulavimus eum consensu, etc.
Hinc, commotior factus, ad Defensionem me accinxi. Atque utinam intra justae
Defensionis fines me continuissem. Perdifficile siquidem est, ut quisquam,
acerbe, idque (quantum sibi conscius erat) sine causa tractatus, modum ubique
servet. Reposuisti tu, and altioribus adhuc Convitiis fraena laxasti. Quid hic
faciendum? Number in Jurgiis ac Rixis, sine fine reciprocatis, ac nemini
profuturis, prodigendum Tempus, conspurcanda Charta? Ridiculum! Tandem,
sapiamus, and redeamus ad cor. Scilicet Homines uterque sumus, originali labe
infecti, indeque lapsu faciles; at superna (uti spero) praemuniti gratia, quo
minus malevolentiae venenum in Animae viscera se effundat. Nec rideant nos
Lectores nostri. Eadem pice inquinati sunt and ipfi, eademque farina subacti.
Et, forsan, pauci sunt, qui hoc idem non factitassent, si in iisdem
circumstantiis fuissent constituti, atque easdem cogitationes eosdemque
affectus habuissent. Solus, idque merito, ridebit nos Humani Generis Hostis
(and quos habet sequaces;) qui Homines invicem committere, rixas serere, ac
seminatas usque fovere gestit. Quin rideamus and nos, vice nostra, Incendiarium
illum; and delusum se sentiat qui foveam aliis struxit. Quicquid crepat
Metaphysica de Primu suis Principiis atque Altissimis Causis, certe Nos a
Certioribus long Principiis and Causis Altioribus, Divina Lege sancitis ac
commendatis, edocti sumus Charitatem Fraternam Dissertationibus Philosophicis,
and Magistri (quisquis ille fuerit) Placitis long anteferendam. Homines,
inquam, sumus; indeque nonnihil Humani passi; At videant omnes, nos tales
nihilominus esse Homines, qui norunt corrigere in sese quodcunque denum illud
fuerit, quo minus Homines, seu minus Rationis compotes sumus.

Vides, mi Amice multum colende, quod etiam dum de Pace loquor, Impugnationem
aggrediar ac Contentionem tecum denuo instaurem? Quare, cave s^ tibi; nam Novum
Bellum Tibi indico, Provocationem Novam ad Te mitto. Spiculis non umbratilibus,
sed vere Igneis (Cl^ritatis scilicet) te adoriri decretum mihi est; in quo
profecto praeliandi genere usque ad mortem terum decertabo. Quicquid nonnulli
ex Amicis tuis de East^ meo existiment, audacter jact^^^^ quod Priores mihi
parts, Tibi Posteriores in hac Lite Christiana cessurae sint. Quod amplius
est, palam pronuntio me Lauream in isthoc certamine reportaturum; imo
aliqualiter (quantum mihi liquet) jam reportasse. Praeripui siquidem Tibi
Honoris (non Aer^i, sed Solidi) Florem, dum Prior ad Concordiam gradum
promoveo. Nisi forsan and Tu^e hoc idem fecisses, nisi quod existimaris me,
(obsirmato utique, ut opinatus es, ad bellum animo,) Pacem de^rectaturum, Id si
prositearis, tunc enimvero fatendum est quod inter otramque partem -- dubiis
volitet Victoria pennis. Aliter, totum atque integrum Triumplum jure optimo
mihi vendicabo. Si rationem exposeas, habeto Notissimum atque Sapientissimum
Estatum illud, -- Fortior est qui se, qu^m qui fortissima vincit M^ni^ -- In
quo quidem sensu, vel a Te, vel a quovisalio, P^^gopolynices vocari non
recus^bo, im^ Honori mihi ducam.] etc.

TRUTH and PEACE.
A soft Answer breaks Anger; Harsh Speech stirs up Fury, says the Wiseman. The
Prophet also, speaking in GOD's Name, exhorts us to love TRUTH and PEACE. Both
these Sayings, Honored Sir, we ought to apply to our selves; at least, I
account it my Duty to do so. Again, then, I return to you; again, I set upon
you; not with a Mind full of Resentments, but, of real Friendship: Not out of
an earnest Desire, and, perhaps, too sensible a Concern, to defend my own Fame;
but, most ready to renew and repair Charity and Friendship a-fresh, already
(alas!) too much violated. I must confess, it struck me, and shocked me
exceedingly, (and, no wonder,) that you should, without the least Offense done
to your Person, who (as I thought) was still my Friend; but, out of a too
fervent Zeal for the Cartesian Doctrine, which I impugn'd, and, perhaps, too
easily persuaded by others transported with the same Zeal, break out, in Print,
into Contumelious Words, more than was Decent, against my Person, and my
Christian Reputation. That Saying of King David, (Psalm. 55.) came into my Mind;
[If my Enemy had reviled me, I could have born it -- But, thou, my Friend and
Acquaintance -- who did walk with me unanimously, in the House of GOD.] Thus,
causlesly provoked, I set to write my Defense: And, I wish I had contained my
self within the Bounds of a mere Defense, or Vindication: For, it is very hard
for any Man who is roughly handled, and (as far as he was conscious to himself)
without Cause, to keep himself within an Exact Mean. You replied; and, in your
CENSURA, outdid your former Self, in Affrontive Language. What is now to be
done? Must we still throw away our precious Time, and blur Paper with Angry
Repartees, reciprocated endlesly? 'Twere most Ridiculous! At length, then, let
us grow wiser, and return to our Right Temper. We are, both of us, Men; that
is, Frail, and tainted with Original Sin; but, yet, (as I hope,) so
pre-establish'd by Christian Principles that the Poison will be thrown out
before it infects the Vitals of our Soul. Nor, let our Readers laugh at us;
Themselves too have some of the same Pitch sticking to them, and are made up of
the same Mass of Corruption. And, perhaps, there are Few, who had not done the
same we did, had they been in the same Circumstances, and had had the same
Thoughts and Affections. None but the Enemy of Mankind (and his Imps) can have
just Occasion to laugh at us; who hates Peace, and delights to sow and foment
Dissension. Let us, in our turn, laugh too at that Wicked Incendiary; that he
who dug a Pit for for others, may fall into it himself. Whatever
Metaphysicians talk of their First Principles, and Highest Causes or Reasons, I
am sure we are taught by far more Certain Principles, and Higher Reasons,
established, and commended to us by the Divine Law, that Brotherly Charity is
infinitely to be preferred before Philosophical Contests, or the Tenets of any
Master, let him be who he will. We are Men, I say; and, thence, have suffered
some Humane Imperfection: But we will let the World see, that we are such Men,
as can correct in themselves whatever makes them less Men, or less Governable
by Reason.

You see then, my much-Honoured Friend, that even while I speak of Peace, I
impugn you a-fresh, and renew my Contest with you. Wherefore, look to your
self; for, I denounce a New War to you, and send you a New Challenge; in which
I will never yield the Victory. I am fully resolved to Attack you, not with
Imaginary Darts, but with Fiery ones; to wit, with those of Charity; with which
I will maintain the Combat, to my last Breath: Whatever your Friends talk of my
Pride and Arrogance, I boldly proclaim, and boast, that I will have the
Advantage in this Christian Contention. Nay, I do openly brag, that (as far as
yet appears to me) I have already won the Victory; by getting the Start of you
in this War, (the Guerdon of which is a Crown, not of Aerie, but of Solid
Honor,) by making thus the first Step to a Reconciliation: Unless, perhaps,
your self also had intended the same, had you not thought me to be Refractory.
If you profess you had the same Thoughts, then I must, indeed, confess, the
Victory hovers doubtfully between us: But, if not, the Whole and Entire Triumph
will be justly due to me. If you ask me the Reason of this forward
Condescension; take for Answer, that most Famous, and most Wise Saying, ['Tis a
greater Victory to conquer one's self, than to subdue the strongest Forts.] In
which Sense, I shall not be ashamed; but, shall think it a High Honor to be
called by your self, or any other, a Pyrgopolynices.]

95. I do not believe there is any Man in the World, who reads this Charitable
Overture of mine, and considers all the Circumstances, but will both commend,
and admire at, such an Unexpected, and Extravagant Condescension, and
Moderation, on my part. Mr. Le Grand had been the Unprovoked Aggressor; for, I
had not given him one Unhandsome Word, but only opposed some Cartesian Tenets,
by way of Argument; when he, in requital of my Civility, fell upon me with the
the most Virulent Language that ever was heard given by (I will not say any
Christian, but) even by any one Heathen, to another Though my Defense was Smart,
yet I confined my Resentments, to oppose him only as an Injurious and Weak
Writer; without imitating him, by blackening him as Impious against God, or
Unsound in Faith; but still excused him in such Occasions. He had printed
Infamous Slanders against my Books, writ for the Absolute Certainty of Faith;
making my Doctrine in them Condemned by Scrbonists, Retracted and Anathematized
by my self; and, what not? He abetted a Known Libel, as a most True History;
which makes me guilty of Twenty Heresies at least. Lastly, He had given me more
Advantages against him, as a Scholar, in his Censura, than even my self could
have wished. Yet, I was willing to pass by all these Highest Provocations, and
lose all these Advantages, and (Unconstrained) to make the First Charitable
Step to a Friendly Accommodation; Requiring only, that he would make some
Public Satisfaction, not for any Reviling Words, or Slanders, against my
Particular Person, (all which I was ready to pardon;) but, to wipe off the
False Aspersions he had laid upon my Books writ for Faith, which reflected upon
the Common Cause of Religion; to do which is the precise Duty of every Good
Man: To promise which, notwithstanding, (by the way,) I could never learn he
was Willing, or Inclined; Nor could I ever get any certain Light what he would
do, or how far he would comply on his part. I had now finished about a Third
Part of this Healing Reply, and had communicated this Exordium of it to some
Friends of his; who, I dare say, had acquainted him with my Peaceful and
Friendly Intentions; when, as if done on purpose to prevent it, out comes
Merry-man's LIBEL, contrived and framed by some Achitophel, (I leave it to the
Reader to guess whom,) to render all Reconciliation Impossible; and, Timed so,
as to be Published just in the Nick, when I was expecting that Half-Sheet,
which (as I had requested in my Non ULTRA) was to decide the whole
Controversy, by way of PRINCIPLES. This made me see, that my Charity was
requited with such a Rude Affront, that all the Malice in the World, put
together, could scarce have invented any thing more Rancorous; and, that I was
to content my self with my own good Intentions, and prepare for a Vigorous
Defense. Which, also, was the reason why (putting a Stop to my Latin Treatise)
I became obliged to reply in English, into which their Slanders were now
brought; that so my Answer might be as Universally Read, and Understood, as
Order had been taken their Calumnies should be: And, indeed, both Mr. Le Grand,
and the Libeller, very Brotherly conspire to slander my Doctrine, as Condemned;
or, which is the Word they do both of them affect, [Damn'd;] Whence, I saw
plainly, that this Writing in English was Absolutely Necessary, and most proper
to spread my Vindication, and make it more taken notice of.

96. I am to expect, that Mr. Le Grand, and his Inspirer, will stoutly deny
that they are Accessory to this Libel, or knew of it: It Is their Interest, as
well as their Credit, to do so. That they did not pen it, I am apt to believe:
Nor, is it Prudence to charge them positively with their Knowing it, Liking it,
or (in their Way) Abetting it; unless I had Positive Testimony for it. But,
yet, I must beg the Favor of them, to leave Thought Free: It Is best, in such
Cases, to give my Reasons, and remit the Decision to the Judgment of Prudent
Readers: For, First, I could never learn, that any one Man in England spoke the
least Word against those two Books of mine, till Mr. Le Grand and his Governor
did so; and, this Libel visibly abets them, and carries on the same Cause, viz.
the Defaming of me: And, it is very hard to conceive, that one who assists
another, should not let him know what Kindness he is doing him; or, that the
Assisted Person should not contribute to his Power, and help those who were so
kindly helping him; or, that a Journey-man should go to work without the
Knowledge of his Principal; especially, when he uses his Tools all the while,
as Merry-man does Mr. Le Grand's Censura; out of which, the whole Libel is
Extracted. Secondly, I was informed, ere the Libel came out, by a worthy
Gentleman (Mr. F. H.) that Mr. Le Grand had struck in with a certain
Ecclesiastic, who would join with him, in opposing me; which, all things
considered, especially, their sympathizing in their being, both of them, of a
Light, Inconsiderate Genius, and, in their Aversion against me; makes it very
Wonderful, and Unheard of, that Confederates should not communicate their
Designs, or confer their Notes, how to carry on their Common Cause. Thirdly,
That Ecclesiastic spoke of, as siding with Mr. Le Grand, is the very Person
who is universally said to be, at least, the Parcel-Author (if not the only
one) of that Libel. Now, that a Concurrence in Affections (that is, in
Disaffection to the same Person) should not produce a Concurrence in Action,
when that Person is upon the Anvil, when they are both striking at him, and
when the Resolution to run him down is already evidently, Taken by both; let
any Man believe that can. Fourthly, It Is evident, that they do Mutuas operas
tradere, or friendly assist one another. Mr. Le Grand (I fear, in this, made
Foot-of-Whelp) hazards his Credit, in defaming my Books, as Condemned; and
crying up Lominus's Libel; so, to retrieve the Credit which was lost by a
former Defeat: And, the Libeller, by taking his Matter out of his Censura, and
ecchoing aloud all those Slanders in English, manifestly abets him, and
requites his Kindness; and yet, we must believe (to the Forfeiture of Common
Sense) that all this lights by Chance, and not by Design, or Agreement. Sure,
they think all Men are Fools, but themselves; or else, they Childishly imagine,
that while they hood-wink themselves, none can see them. Fifthly, The Opposing
Cartesius would not bear the weight of an Accusation in the High Court;
whereas, the Magnifying Albius, who had given Disgust to them above, would
easily, as they hoped, if well improved, and managed, be made Criminal, if they
could but catch me in that Snare: But, it light unluckily to their Project,
that (resolving to live quietly with my Neighbors, if I could; and, to carry
on Truth, without giving Offense to any) I had not, so much as once, named Mr.
White in either of those two Books the Libeller is is so angry at; nor have I
any Position there, peculiar to him alone; as I can easily show, when put to
it. Wherefore, it was plotted to bring me, by Stratagem, to name Mr. White,
with some handsome Character. To this End, Mr. Le-Grand, in his Railing
Preface, p. 39. (by which we may see it is an Old Project,) challenged me, that
I did [eradere Albium-ex albo Philosophorum, and in ludibria vertere;] that is,
that I did blot Mr. White out of the Roll of Philosophers, and make a Mockery
of him: And, I was blamed by them, as proudly dis-regarding all others, and
assuming all to my self. I might have smelt a Design in it, it being such
Nonsense, that I should make a Mockery of a Man I had not so much as spoke of:
But, I was too Candid, to give easy way to Suspicions. Upon which, hating to
be held Guilty of such an Ungentileness, I made mention of him in my following
Books, though under no other Character, but only that of a Great Philosopher,
which his worst Enemies cannot refuse him. No sooner had I done so, and that he
had drawn me into the Noose, but the Cloak was immediately pulled off; and, the
same Man who had lately seemed so zealous for the Honor of Albius, presently
professed himself his greatest Enemy: He sets up, and abets Lominu's Libel,
which makes him Guilty of half the Heresies that have pestered the World, from
the Beginning of the Church; and, a Mark is set on every Man who has any Esteem
for him, as a Scholar: And, I was told by a Right Reverend Bishop, that I had
done my self a greater Injury, by speaking well of Albius, than I could imagine;
as foreseeing the Malicious Use they intended to make of this Fraudulent
Trappan. All which, laid together, shows the Intimate Correspondence between
Mr. Le Grand, and the Libeller; and, to think that his Old Friend, who began
all this Stir, would not join with him in this, and gather a few Twigs to help
to lash me, were, to break the Sacred Bond of Friendship between them, and
disoblige them both. Add, that Mr. Le Grand, according to his small Politics,
to gratify his New Friend, picks Quarrels with me, in his behalf, by making me
say of Bellarmin, (an Author he much esteems,) Bellarmine, Rationis experis,
mentiris. Which, and diverse such Passages, are too plain Evidences of their
strict Confederacy; and, consequently, that he could not be ignorant of this
Prop of his Cause, this Libel. His Hopes were, that the Libeller would bring in
diverse. Friends of his, to increase the Cry, and assist him with their
Interest: But, I will not think them to have so little Charity, or so little
Regard to Religion; or, to be so Imprudent, as to oppose a Veteran Writer for
Faith, who meddles not with them; against whom they have nothing to say,
Justly; and, who has already given good Proof, that, in case he be attacked
Unjustly, he is able to defend himself; nay, who is beforehand with them too,
should they attempt it.

97. Against all these strong Proofs of their being Conscious of, and (in what
they could) Abetting to this Libel, what can they bring for themselves? Oh!
they Deny it: As if, either Affirming, or Denying, were such most Valid
Arguments for Persons speaking in their own Cause! Or, as if I (who was the
Person concerned) ought, in Prudence, to give any Credit to to the Words of
those Men; one of which smiled in my Face, and pretended great Friendship, when
he was doing me all the Mischief he could: The Other so falsifies my Words, and
publishes such False and and Scandalous Slanders against my Doctrine. Whence,
that Objection is Groundless, which (for want of something else to say) is
lately given about, that Things were about Composing, and I, upon Occasion
unjustly taken at this Libel, flew off; and, so continued the Difference, when
it might have been healed. These Gentlemen are either Ill-inform'd, or very
Partial; For, 1. He never offered Peace at all: 2. I offered it (as a Judicious
Friend, meeting with my Thoughts, had advised me) on these Terms; viz. Heartily
to pardon and pass over all his Causless Revilings against my Particular; only
desiring, that the Injury done to the Common Cause should be Repaired; to which
I could never hear he would yield. Some cry [Pax, Pax; ubi non est Pax.] I had
never observed the least Ingenuity on their side; and, I had been false to my
self, to print my Condescending Treatise, and be laughed at for my Foolish
Charity; and, Advantages be made of it, against my self. Nay, I ever replied,
to those Good Men who desired it of me, that I would do any thing that could be
thought reasonable; but, that I much feared, all our Charity would be lost,
through Mr. Le Grand's being tied up by this New Engagement, and governed by a
Man who was an Enemy to all Moderation.

98. I expect, Gentlemen, you will complain you have lost your Time in Reading
this Treatise; and ask, What Benefit accrues to the Reader, by seeing the
Faults of others laid open? But, I must beg your Pardon; and maintain, that
this Procedure, though most Unpleasant to me, is, notwithstanding, most
Beneficial to the World. [Virtus est Vitium fugare, and Sapientia Prima
Stultitia caruisse -- ] And, these Idle Methods of Railing, Flouting,
Prevaricating, Bantering, Fooling, Slandering, Falsifying and Libelling, (to
which Nonplus'd Writers are forced to have recourse,) being thus Exposed; and,
by your declaring against them, Disgraced; they must either be driven to take
the Way of Discoursing Connectedly, or leave of Writing at all. To return then
to my Adversaries: I Request, or (it being my Right) Demand of them, that they
would make choice of some one Principle for the Cartesian Doctrine, which they
will maintain to be such; or, some one Argument of theirs, which they will
undertake to be Demonstrative; or, pitch upon some one Solution of theirs, to
any one Argument of mine, where I pretend to Demonstrate; and, that Principle
shall be Examined, by looking into the Self-Conexion of its Terms, or the
Reducibleness of them to Self-Connexion, or Self-Evidence; that Argument shall
be tried by the Necessary Connection of its Terms, with the Medium; and, lastly,
that Solution shall be judged of, by putting my Argument home, showing on what
the Connection of the Two Terms with a Third, was built; and, then, considering
upon what Grounds it it is pretended they are Unconnected, the Consequence of
it Slack, and the Reason of it Solved. And, let him who uses the least
Disrespectful Word to his Adversary, be held Nonplus'd, and to deserve no
Answer. By this means, in a Reply or two, Truth will be made appear, much
precious Time saved, all Wrangling avoided, the Rules of Decency and Civility
preserved Inviolate, and the Controversy decided.

99. Only, this Condition I would request, That if any Principle, Axiom,
Postulatum, or Argument, be produced, which has been solidly Refuted already;
that, then, to save Unnecessary Labor, it may be sufficient to relate to it,
unless it has been Replied to formerly: Which I desire, because I have very
lately seen and perused a Book, written by a Professor of Philosophy in Paris,
and Dedicated to the Dean and Faculty of Sorbon; in which, many of the
Principal Positions of the Cartesians are solidly Confuted. It bears for Title,
[De Existentia Dei, and Humanae Mentis Immortalitate, secundum Cartesii and
Aristotelis Doctrinam, Disputatio.] This Acute and Learned Author is thoroughly
versed in Cartesius; and has so perfectly digested Aristotle; that he seems to
have turned him in Succum and Sanguinem. He tells us, Cartesius attempted to
Demonstrate these two Points, because he was (I believe, Unjustly) suspected to
hold neither of them. He refutes his Definitions of [Cogitatio, Idea,
Sustantia, and Men's:] As also, his Notion of [Corpus, Materia, Extensio,
Physica, etc.] He shows his Definition of GOD, to be Faulty; and, his Notion of
Real Distinction, to be Groundless. He sifts all his Seven Postulatums, his Ten
Axioms, and all his pretended Demonstrations of those Two most Important
Theses; and, shows them to be Shallow, and Spurious. Lastly, In his Second
Part, he Domonstrates those main Points, by the Principles of Aristotle. Though a
School-man, (indeed, the Best of our Modern ones, I have seen,) and, for being
such, ought to have some Grains of Allowance granted him; yet, he avoids
School-Terms as much as is possible. His Style is Concise, and yet Clear. His
Oppositions and Solutions (generally) Forcible, and Full. He lights,
frequently, into the same Arguments I do; and, very often falls into my
Abominable Sin, (which so mads my two Cartesians,) of telling his Reader, and
showing, that the Cartesian Doctrine is strangely FANATICAL. I thought fit to
acquaint our Countrymen with the Just Character of that Learned Book; than
which, I know none more Proper for those of our Universities, after they have
passed their First Studies; as well for the Excellency of the two Noble Truths
it demonstrates, as for giving them great Light to look into the Nature of True
Demonstration, and and into the Right Understanding of Aristotle's Genuin
Doctrine; so much mistaken by most of our Unskilful Modern Commentators.

100. I hear, my Adversaries contend, that (Id. Cart. p. 64.) I deny
Annihilation to be Possible, even to GOD's Extraordinary or Miraculous Power. I
answer, 1. That I speak there, (. 43.) not of Annihilation it self, but of a
particular Way I was inventing, how it might be done; which Way, whether it
holds, or no, I neither know, nor care. 2. I did not seem to deny even This,
but upon Supposition that it would put an Attribute in GOD, which was unworthy
of Him. 3. That, in my whole Discourse there, it is most Evident that I only
spoke tentative, not assertive. I will not recount how many Authors have held
the same, as to this Point, which my self (if truly represented) have done: One
will suffice, ad hominem, against my Cartesian Adversaries; viz. Du Hamel; the
Best Philosopher of the Cartesian School, though he be none of the Fierce, or
Furious ones; who, in Tom 5. p. 8. says, Substantiae Annibilatio aliquid
Inconstantiae in ipso rei Conditore testari videtur: The Annibilation of a
Substance (or Thing) seems to testify some Inconstancy in the Maker of the
Thing, Himself: Which, certainly, is a Dishonor, and Imperfection; and, cannot
be attributed to GOD. The Sense of that Position, as far as concerns the
Generality of Christians, who are no Speculators, is, that Creatures should not
be held, to subsist of themselves; but, to depend entirely, every Moment, on
GOD, for their Being. Now, let us consider how I had exceeded all other
Writers, in Asserting that Substantial Truth. Others use to say, that the
Nature of Creatures is Indifferont to Being, and Not-Being: Whereas, (Method to
Science, p. 304.) I maintain, that, [Were there any Inclination in Creatures,
rather to One, than the Other, it seems to be, rather to Not-Being, than to
Being;] And, that [the Nothingness of Creatures is so radicated in their
Natures, and sticks to them, that it inclines them to Not-Being, even while
they are.]. Whether this Doctrine of mine be more for the Honor of our Great
Creator, and for our Continual Dependence on Him; or Mr. Le Grand's, in his
Censura, p. 71. who denies that Creatures would, out of their own
Defectiveness, or Indigent Condition, fall to Nothing, or be Annihilated; and
says, that every thing, as far as is of it self, would remain in the same
State; let Indifferent Divines judge. Nay, he says this, in Opposition to me,
when I affirm, that all Creatures depend on GOD, for their Continuance in
Being. Certainly, there needs many Grains of Salt, to make such Doctrine as
this sound well to a Christian's Ear: For, this destroys the Doctrine of
Suspension's being the Cause of Annihilation; in regard he makes the Creature
still, of its own Nature, able to Exist alone, after it is once put to be;
which, I am sure, takes away its Continual Dependence on GOD, for its Being;
which is both against the Language and Sense of Christianity. Yet, I doubt not,
but his Intention is very Orthodox, whatever his Ideas are.

By this time, Gentlemen, I fear I have over-weary'd you; I am sure I have my
self, with Replying, by Snatches, to Unconnected Talk. I hope, my next Present
will be more worthy of your Perusal. In the mean time, I am, with all Respect,

Your most Humble Servant, J. S.

FINIS.

