A LETTER FROM A TROOPER In Flanders, to his Comerade: SHOWING, That Luxemburg
is a Witch, and deals with the Devil.
Honest TOM,
I Know thou do remember, that while thou wast amongst us, Things went but
untowardly; and that having mighty Forces, enough one would have thought to
have conquered the World, we made nothing on it, but were still on the losing
hand: And since thy leaving us, Things have gone on after the same Rate. We are
told a Fellow called an Observator should say, That though we have a brave
Army, yet we want Conduct. But I would have him to know, That we have as good
Conduct as any is under the Copes of Heaven. What the Devil then is the Matter?
Or how come these Things about? I have been often Musing what the Matter should
be; and at last I have found it out. In plain English, Tom, we have been
bewitched. This damned Rogue Luxemburg, this crooked urchinly Rogue, and the
Devil together, have bewitched us all this while. As for the Dauphin, who
commanded the French last Summer, or at least had the Name of it, I suspect him
not: For we all know that the Dauphin is no Conjurer. But we have been
bewitched as sure as I am here; and none but Luxemburg could thus bewitch us.

Thou know, Tom, that at the beginning, we talked of nothing less than
Marching into France, and Carrying the War into France. And we had Forces
sufficient for that purpose, both then, and many times since; the French not
daring to fight us. If they had, we should have beaten them to Clouts. By our
carrying the War thus forward, we should have lived upon the Enemy; and should
have tumbled in Free Quarter, and Contributions, and Plunder. But instead of
this, we have kept still in Flanders; lying heavy upon it, and plainly
devouring it. Nor have we ever had our Foot upon French Ground. So that I
conclude we have been bewitched; and that a Spell has been laid before us,
which we had not the Power to pass over.

I meant, by French Ground, not only their own Country of France, but their
Conquests also; or generally, the French Quarters. And I say again, That we
have not been in the French Quarters ever since this War; that is, not with our
main Army. For I confess Duke Wirtenburg with a Detachment, and Count Thian
with a Party, have been in those Quarters; though their Stay and their Reign
were very short. Marry your Gazette did publish. That our main Army (upon our
late March to Rouselaer, where we encamped so long to so little purpose) was in
the Enemies Country. But that is a damned Lie. For the Enemies Country (we all
know) is that which is beyond, and within their Frontier Garrisons: Whereas this
Place is on this side their Frontier, and between their Frontier and ours; and
pays Contribution to us, as well as to them. So, I remember, three Years ago,
when our Army had passed the Sambre, and was got as far as Beaumont, Fools gave
out that we were in the Enemies Quarters. But we were but Nine or Ten Miles
from Charleroy, which was then Ours, and within the Contribution of that
Garrison. And the like may be said of Walcourt, where we had been before that
time.

Thou see now, that we can come near the Enemies Country; though even That
does seldom happen: But we cannot get into it, for the Heart-blood of us. Though
we desire it above all Things; and though we want neither Strength, nor
Courage, nor Conduct. And therefore thou may be satisfied, as well as I,
That the Devil has hindered us, and that we have been bewitched.

The French run every foot into Our Country, and why should not* We do the like
into Theirs? Are we afraid of an Action of Trespass? We had once Namur,
Charleroy, and Mons, all abreast; and it was a noble Frontier. But the French
made nothing to pass through this Frontier, and to lie in the heart of our
Country, between those Places and Brussels; where they were as safe as a Thief
in a Mill. Not a Quarter ever beaten up, or so much as attempted. And this they
would do, even when they were forced to avoid fighting, our Army being stronger
than theirs. Tom, we have been invaded Year after Year, by an Enemy that durst
not fight us: But whether this could be done without Witchcraft, I leave Thee
to judge. And I know thou art a great Judge in these Matters: We have many great
Officers, that cannot judge half so well.

Prithee Tom give me leave, for otherwise I must take it, to add one Word more.
I say then, That by these Doings poor Flanders has been sadly burdened, being
made the perpetual Seat of War: When in the mean time the French Quarters lie
fresh and untoucht. And this has made them so Rampant as they are. But if we
had lain upon their Country as long as they have done upon ours, they would
have been in a very bare and low Condition.

Ay but, thou wilt say, We cannot fall into the French Quarters, because of their
Lines. Very good. And these Lines show yet more: plainly, That there is
Witchcraft in the Case: For they could never be defended without the help of
the Devil. They reach from Dunkirk upon the Sea, to Pont Espiers upon the River
Scheld; which is near Forty English Miles. From whence to Conde (along that
River, which here serves for a Line) is near Twenty Miles more. And from Conde
to Namur, it is almost Fifty Miles. Now I leave thee to consider, whether Lines
of this length could be defended without Witchery. And herein lies the
Witchery, That we have not the Power to attempt them. For when we did attempt
them, (which we have done but twice, and that was under Wirtemberg and Thian,)
we broak through them with Ease.

Thou see, by what I have written, That I am very fond of getting into the
Enemies Country. Others are rather for besieging and taking their Frontier
Towns. And so am I, when we are able to do it. But this requires a great Odds
in Power: One Army for the Sieges, and another to confront the Enemy. Whereas
we may march into their Country, when ever we dare fight. What, go beyond their
Frontier Garrisons? Ay, beyond them. Why should not We do it as well as the
French? And Garrisons signify nothing against a Commanding Army; no more than so
many Crows Nests. An Army that dares Fight, and yet dares not March into the
Enemies Country, are the veriest Buzzards and Owls that ever were hatched.
Unless they are bewitched, as We plainly have been. For I would have thee, and
all Men to know, and thou do know, that We are neither Owls nor Buzzards.

I will now tell thee in particular of some of Luxemburg's Tricks: That thou
may see what a Rogue he is, and that he is the Rogue that has bewitched us.
One of his first Pranks, after he came in play, was at Fleury: where I saw
plainly, who he dealt with. He lay with his Army beyond the Sambre; and Prince
Waldeck was advancing toward him in fair Order. What does Luxemburg now, but
get Boufflers to him (by the help of the Devil) with his Army from a far
Country: And Prince Waldeck knew no more on it than the Pope of Rome. In the
twinkling of an Eye, abundance of Bridges were thrown over the River, by the
same help I warrant: And they caught poor Waldeck in Fleury Plains, just as
the Devil had contrived it. Would know what came on it? They gave us a
damnable Ruffle, to say no worse.

I come now to Mons; which Place we had never lost by a Winter Siege, but that
we were bewitched there twice over. First, the Devil was in it, that when we
saw vast Preparations for a Siege, and that in all likelihood Mons was aimed
at; we did not put into it one Man the more, though Thousands lay Quartered in
Flanders. So that the Place was lost for want of Men. For the Garrison was not
Five thousand strong, when the Place required Ten thousand. Secondly, the Town
being yet in Condition to hold out several Days, by Luxemburg's means the Devil
possessed the Priests, and set them in a Mutiny; and they forced the Governor
to surrender. When at the same time we were just Marching to their Relief.

Mons being lost, we fell to fortifying of Hell; which thou know is within
Seven Miles of Brussels. And we had labored several Weeks upon it. But
Luxemburg coming across the Country, we were fain to out run our new Fortress.
For, as the Devil would have it, there were but Two thousand Men in it, and no
Cannon. We thought the Loss not so great, as the Disgrace and the Baffle.

If Luxemburg could have kept this Town, it had been a sharp Thorn in our
Sides, lying so near Brussels. But our Army grew soon so strong, that he durst
not do it. And now he declined Fighting, and mainly fortified his Camp.
Whereupon we fairly left him, and marched away directly for France; to the
great Joy of the whole Army, who longed to be there. And Luxemburg soon
followed; Marching along beside us, and Coasting us at a distance. We, in our
March, were joined by several Thousands; so that our Army was increased to
Ninety thousand Men, the French being not near so many. And now we were full of
Hopes, and Resolution, and Courage; and we hugged our selves with the Thoughts
of a brave Invasion. But in the Nick, this cursed Rogue Luxemburg, fell to his
Charms and Spells, and confounded all. Methinks I see the Devil sitting upon
his Crump Shoulder, and beckning to us, and saying; Come this way, come this
way, turn your Noses this way. And as sure as thou art alive, Tom, we stopped
our March into France, and turned our Noses upon Luxemburg. And we Encamped by
him with our mighty Army a good part of the Summer; doing no kind of Thing but
eat up our own Country. Did thou not read News in the Gazette, Week after
Week, From his Majesty's Camp at Gemblours, and from the Royal Camp at
Gemblours? There it was that we Lay, just behind Charleroy and Namur, which
then were ours; while the French Army lay advanced before Mons. They said, we
staid for our heavy Cannon to come by Water from Mastricht; which were long a
coming. For the Devil dried up the Maese River, and laid Sands in our way, so
that the Boats could not pass; and we were bewitched all over. At last our
Cannon came up, and we did nothing with them. However we afterward marched on,
and passed the Sambre. But we never got Ten Miles beyond it, nor out of our own
Contribution: Nor could we ever reach the French Quarters; though they lay as
open to us, as Hartfordshire does to Middlesex. For then they had no Lines
thereabouts. But our stay was not long in these Parts: For within a while we
Marched back into Flanders, and Luxemburg after us; where we passed the rest of
the Campaigne.

All this while our Noble King was with us; who is the bravest General in
Christendom. He spares for no Pains, and he wants no Brains, and he is Metal to
the Back. Tom, it would do thee good to serve under such a General. But, at the
end of the Year, his Majesty left us, and Prince Waldeck commanded. And then it
was that Luxemburg played us another Trick, near a Town called Leuze, in a
damned thick Fogg, which the Devil had raised for him; he was with us, and upon
us, before we were in the least aware of him. I tell thee, Tom, we dreamed not
on him, till he was almost within Pistol shot. And if we had not fought like
Devils, Luxemburg's Devil had beaten us to pieces. But fighting as we did, it
proved but a Brush, or a Basting. Here the Devil did as much for Luxemburg, as
could be expected at his hands. For he raised one Mist in the Air, and cast
another over Some-body's Brains: Or else we should have had our Scouts abroad,
knowing that the Enemy was not far from us.

The Siege of Namur follows next in Order: Where we were bewitched most
confoundedly. It was a brave Town, and of mighty Importance; and we brought a
brave Army to relieve it; and our Men were in high Courage, and would have
sought Blood up to the Ears, and were mad to be at it; making no question but
to beat the French to dirt. Then, as to Conduct, I say it again, We have as
good as any in the World: But yet we suffered this Town to be taken before our
Faces, without striking a Stroke; or so much as firing a Musket. And some
think, That we lost more Men by lying still, and by the Diseases it occasioned,
than we should have done if we had fought every Day. Now can any Man imagine
that these Things could be, if the Devil had not bewitched us? If the Relief
was possible, why did we not attempt it? If it was impossible, why did we not
march away, and make a Diversion? But We could neither Fall on, nor March off;
but were perfectly enchanted. And who should do it, but that crooked Urchin,
whom I have so often mentioned? The French King was here himself; who is
likewise much suspected to deal in the Black Art. But, for my part, I am fully
satisfied, That 'twas Luxemburg, and his Devils, that brought these Things
about. It must be confessed, that the French did something out-number us; but
we feared them not. And their Army lay round a great City; their inner Line
being without Cannon shot, as it must be: So that their Quarters extended very
wide, and took up a mighty Compass: Nor had they any Circumvallation, as they
called it; only their Quarters were barricadoed, and some Works thrown up here
and there. Also the Maes and the Sambre meeting at Namur, those two Rivers run
through and divided their Quarters. So that part of their Men lay on one side
the Sambre, and part on the other, and part lay beyond the Maes. And we having
Huy upon the Maes, and Charleroy upon the Sambre, we might have marched upon
them on either side of either River. And it had been hard, if some where or
other we could not beat them up. However we might have tried what we could do:
but the Devil was in it, we never made a trial. Whereas though we had failed in
the Attempt, and been soundly banged with the Loss of Ten or Twenty thousand
Men; no Body would have blamed us, and our very Loss had been Glorious. But to
be Lookers on, was such a Thing; it makes me mad to think on it. Though an
Observator says, That we got more Honor by our mighty Attempts to relieve the
Town, than the French did by taking it.

But after Namur was lost, we fell to fighting like mad; though it would have
been better, one would have thought, to have done so before. Had we ventured
half so freely before, as we did after, Namur might have been Ours at this day.
But as to the Fight we had after, (it is called the Battle of Steenkirk, and
thou have heard much of it) I Will tell thee how it was. The French King, after
he had taken Namur, was gone to Paris; and a good part of his Army was sent
toward Germany; and our Army was much increased. So that the French Army, left
in Flanders with Luxemburg, was now clearly the weaker. Yet, for all that, he
had the Impudence to march into our Country, and there continue. But, for fear
of the worst, he encamped in a Ground of great Advantage, which he also
strongly fortified. Whereupon we took a Resolution to fall upon him in his
Camp. And we begun most bravely. Ten Battalions of Ours, who had the Van, beat
Thirty French Battalions out of their Ground; and chased them from Hedge to
Hedge, and from one Work to another; and we made them outrun their Cannon. We
showed what Rogues we could make of the French, if we had them fairly before
us. And now was Luxemburg hard put to it: He scarce had time to say a short
Prayer to the Devil. Good Devil, quoth he, help me out at this dead Lift, or I
am undone for ever. And the Devil did help him to some purpose. For he so
brought it about, that our Men were not seconded: By which means we were beaten
off with great Loss, (still Fighting stoutly) and Luxemburg escaped a Scouring.
For had our main Body secon^ed our Van, he had certainly been quite Routed.
Some said, That our main Body could not come up, because of the bad Ground. But
why could they not march the same Way, and upon the same Ground, that the Van
had done? And why did they not follow closer, but lay Lagging some Miles
behind? In short, The Devil was in it, and we were bewitched.

When this bloody Bout was over; and our Army recruited and reinforced, we
marched to attaque the French Lines. But Luxemburg, by the help of his old
Friend the Devil, got thither before us. For we, on our part, saunter'd a great
way about, and out of our way, as if Puck had led us; which I believe he did.
However, we then learned, as we had done at Hall before, That the true way to
draw the French out of Flanders, is to march into France, or toward it. For
they are very tender in this matter: And though they love to be in an Enemies
Country, yet they cannot endure that an Enemy should be in theirs.

Being bob'd at the Lines, we went with our Commanding Army and encampt at at a
Place called Grammen; which is a good snug Place, within our own Country, and
but Five or Six Miles from Gaunt. And here we were tied by the Leg (no doubt by
Sorcery and Witchcraft, it could be nothing else) for a great many Weeks; being
not able to move one way or other. But our Army increased to a Hundred thousand
Men, while Luxemburg had not half the Number; a great part of his Army being
gone to the Maes under Boufflers, to stave off an Invasion there. Nevertheless
we still kept close in our Camp at Grammen: Nor did we budg from it till we
went into Winter Quarters. During all which time you had News in the Gazette,
From the Royal Camp at Grammen.

But what could we have done, had we been disposed to be active? I answer, That
in the first Place we might still have attempted their Lines. Not their Line
between the Scheld and the Lys, where Luxemburg lay with his Army; but their
long Line between the Lys and Dunkirk. For this had but an ordinary Guard: And
if the French should have drawn their main Army to have defended it, their new
and unfinished Fortifications at Courtray, and likewise their Camp near it,
would have been in great danger. We found afterward, by Experience, that in all
likelihood it would have been no hard Matter to have sorced these Lines. But if
it had proved hard, and we had been repulsed, we might have marched up the
Scheld; and have endeavored, by throwing Bridges over it, to have gotten that
way into the French Conquests. Tom, I think in my Conscience this River Scheld
is enchanted. It is like Styx, the River of Hell; which none could pass without
the help of old Charon. Thou know it is but a paltry River, in comparison of
other Rivers. A Man (I had almost said) may leap over it with a Pike Staff: I
am sure that with Five or Six Boats, we might lay a Bridge over it any where.
And yet we stand in as much awe of it, as if it were the Rhine, or the Danube;
we dare not so much as attempt to pass it. Though the French Conquests lie
entire and untoucht behind it; at which we might have our Wills, if we durst
pass this River. If we must Encamp, why might we not have Encampt upon this
River (getting likewise a Passage over it) any where above their Lines? And
then the French must quit their Lines, we being behind them. Or if we had made
a new Garrison, methinks there were the Place. A lusty Garrison here, (I would
not have it less than Ten thousand Men) would maintain it self bravely, by
Contributions out of the French Conquests. In such a Garrison I should desire to
be; there were some Cut in such a Garrison. But suppose we could not get over
this River; must we then lie in our own Country with our Commanding Army? There
was no such Necessity. For we might have gone higher up the Scheld; and have
forced those Lines, (if they had then any Lines there) which afterward Count
Thian forced so easily, with a Party of Twelve hundred Men. Which being done,
nothing could have hindered us from Marching into France, we having such a
mighty Power as we had. And if Luxemburg had come in our way, we should have
beaten him, with all his Devils. But let us go on.

Thou have heard, I know, That Dixmude and Furnes, which we had fortified at
the end of the Campaign, were most famously lost this Winter. We outrun the
one, and the other was delivered up after a Siege of some Hours. When these
Things were done, Luxemburg was at Paris: But I warrant he had laid his Spells
before he went; for I am very sure he did bewitch us. Was it not a bewitched
Thing, that we should fortily these Places for the French? When base Things are
done, and no body in Fault, I conclude there is Witchcraft in the Case: And
when no body is Punished, I conclude that no body was in Fault. We were much
troubled at the Loss of these Places: But some think, That we were more
bewitched in Fortifying them, than we were in Losing them. Furnes is about Five
Miles forward from Newport, (which is Ours;) and Dixmude about Seven sideward.
And must we have a Garrison at every Seven Miles end? Why, a small Country, thus
Garrisoned, would drink up a great Army. And thou know, Tom, (for thou art a
cunning Dog, and have Guts i'thy Brains,) that when we fortify Places near our
own Garrisons, they do us little good if we keep them, and great Mischief if the
Enemy take them. If we had kept these Two Places, they would not have commanded
a Contribution (more than we had before) to maintain a Thousand Men; when at
least Five or Six thousand must be in them. I Will not give a Pin for a Garrison,
that has not a good Contribution. For the great End of Garrisons, let them say
what they will, is to command Contributions. Therefore our new Garrisons should
have been made Twenty or Thirty Miles forward, toward the Enemies Country; and
then they would have Contribution in abundance.

Now follows the Campaign of 93. in the Beginning of which the French Monarch
was soundly baffled. At that Season, it seems, the Devil was turned against
him, or at least forsook him. He came upon us with a greater Force than ever;
and we were to be run down forthwith, and all Flanders to be swallowed up. In
good earnest, Tom, we were in great danger. But our King Encamped so
commodiously, and so strongly, and took such Order for the Defense of all
Places, that the Monarch was quite gravelled. Yet if he had not been an arrant
Buzzard, or the Devil had not owed him a Shame, he might have left us in our
Camp, and have marched up to Brussels, and beyond it, and whither he pleased;
and have grazed up the Country as he went, and have put all Brabant under
Contribution. Which had put us in a bad Condition to maintain the War: And some
Places or other would have fallen into his hands. But instead of doing this, or
any Thing else, he sneaked back to Paris, (or to Versailles, I care not which)
and all his Court Ladies with him: Whom he had brought to be Spectators of his
famous Victories; and by Report they were no better than they should be. Soon
after the Dauphin marched toward Germany, with part of the French Army:
Luxemburg being left with the remaining Part, which was still a Force superior
to Ours. And not long after that, the Duke of Wirtemberg was detached from our
Army to attaque the French Lines. Which Design was carried so secretly, that
the Devil himself could not discover it to Luxemburg. The Lines were mastered
with little ado, and we got into brave Quarters, and we raised Contributions
amain. But then came the Battle of Landen, (another bloody Bout,) which hurried
us back to our main Army that wanted us. 'Till then we had been free from
Witchcraft during that Campaigne: But then Luxemburg bestir'd himself, and
conjured up all his Devils; and we were bewitched over and over. First, The
Devil bewitched us to let Huy be so miserably unprovided for defense, the Enemy
being so near it. And if we could not defend it, why did we not blow it up? But
it was yielded in two or three Days. Secondly, We were bewitched to lie in the
Enemies reach, who so much overpowered us. And thirdly, We were caught in a
bewitched Ground; having a River and Morass behind us, which should have been
before us. The French came up with us over Night; and we expected to Retreat
that Night, which the Gallants thought dishonorable. But some of our Troop
have read Sir Walter Rawleigh, and they tell us that he has a Saying, That it is
more honorable to Retreat by Night, than to be Beaten by Day. But we fought it
stoutly; and the King did bravely above the rest. However it was a bad
Business: And it would have been much worse, if Luxemburg (to our great good
Fortune) had not played the Beast, in not pursuing his Advantage.

We are come at last to Ninety four, or the Campaigne of last Summer: And thou will find by the Story, That the Devil does still haunt us, and bewitch us.
This Year the Dauphin did again Command the French in Chief; and the old
Magician (thou know who I mean) Commanded again under him. And they
presently fell to their old Trade: For the first Thing they did, was to come
boring into our Country, where they lay at Rack and Manger. And we suffered
this as tamely as we used to do: Wherein thou may perceive a Spice of the
old Witchery. I confess that the French at first were something too strong for
us: But in a short time we were grown stronger than they; and our Fingers
itched to be upon their Jackets. However we were content to forbear, till the
Arrival of all our Forces: Which Forces being come, and we being all together,
the Sun never shined upon a braver Army. And then we out-number'd the Enemy, by
many Thousands, both in Horse and Foot; and we had better Horses, and better
Men, and were every way superior: So that we made no more of the French Army,
than of so many Jack-daws. We being in this glorious Condition, the French, who
had lain beside us, then marched in quite beyond us; and were got between Liege
and Mastricht. But we thought them besotted, to give us such an Advantage;
making account that we had them then in a Bag (if we had but the Grace to shut
it,) and that they could not escape us. For our Army interposing between them
and home, (as we expected we should) and they having with them all their
Baggage and heavy Cannon, they could not get off without fighting; and then we
made no doubt but we should beat them to fitters. For my part, I thought the
War was near an End; a happy and glorious End: There being but two Things to
do; that is, to beat the French Army, and then to march to Paris. Thou know,
Tom, That Namur, and Huy, and Liege, and Mastricht, lie all on a Row upon the
Maese. Of which Mastricht and Liege were ours, and the French had Huy and
Namur: Huy being advanced into our Quarters, beyond all the rest of their
Frontier. These Places lying thus, and the French Army (as I told thee) being
between Liege and Mastricht, we had Orders given us to get ready to March. And
I cannot express, nor thou imagine, how joyfully we received these Orders. And
then our Business was, either to march straight upon the Enemy, or to cut off
their Retreat, by interposing between them and home; that is, between them and
Huy: For if they got to Huy, they got home. But now see and wonder how we were
Enchanted: Tom, as I hope to be saved, we turned our Noses the wrong way again.
For with mighty diligence we marched clear fromward the Enemy, and likewise
beside and beyond Huy: leaving the French a free Passage to it. And they
marched thither the very next day. Never talk now of Bungling, or Fumbling, or
making Blunders; for we scorn those Words. 'Twas Witchcraft, dear Tom, 'twas
Witchcraft, that made us do as we did; the Devil and Luxemburg did bewitch us:
And that damned Magician may brag of this, as one of his bravest-Feats. Thou will say, That we were still between the French and Namur. Ay, and so we were.
But the French had a Bridge at Huy over the River, and they made diverse other
Bridges: Whereas we had none, nor did we offer to make any. So that they could
march to Namur on the far side the River, when they pleased, without the least
danger or disturbance. But they chose rather to lie by it, that they might give
us a Baffle by making us rise first: Wherein they succeeded, as well they
might. For they Commanded the one side of the River as much as we; and the
other side they had wholly to themselves.

Yet here we staid and encamped, as long as we could get any Forage, waiting
upon the French-mens Back sides; (when thou and I are together, we use another
Word.) But, for my part, I did not think we had owed them that Duty; nor did I
know why, or wherefore we staid here so long, in the high Condition we were in.
The French, being the weaker, might with reason be willing that the time should
be spent in idle Encampments: But we, who were the stronger, if we had not been
still bewitched, methinks should rather have chosen to be doing. Well, at last
we marched away for Flanders, as hard as we could drive, to have another bout
at those Lines. And the French durst not follow us the way we went, (which was
the next way,) for fear we should turn back upon them, and fall upon their
Bones; but they were fain to go round by Namur, and beyond the Sambre. Yet, by
the Devil's help, (for no power of Man could do it) they got before us to the
Lines: By which means we were prevented and baffled.

What had we then to do, with our glorious Army, but to march presently up the
Scheld; and either force a Passage over that River, or march on directly for
France it self? We had then led the French such a Dance, who were damnably
jaded by their late long March, and hardly able to crawl,) that all the Devils
in Hell could not have enabled them to follow us. But the Devil turned our
Noses once more the wrong way: For we marched down the River, and into our own
Country; first to Oudenard, then almost to Gaunt, and at last to a Place called
Rousselaer, which now bears the Name of a Royal Camp. For here was another
Encampment, and Enchantment: And here we lay with our glorious Army all the
rest of the Summer, as it were bound Hand and Foot; and without doing any
Thing, or any prospect of it. For we were cooped up by the Enemies Lines, which
we had no Thoughts of Attempting. And was not this a bewitched Place, for such
an Army to lie in? We exceeded the Enemy by Thirty or Forty thousand: And
though after a while we sent a Detachment to the Siege of Huy, yet still we far
exceeded them. If we had Encamped all this while in the Enemies Country, it
would never have angered me, though we had been never so idle: For then, if we
had done nothing else, we had eaten up the Enemies Country. I have told thee
already, and I tell thee again, that we were not then in the Enemies Country.
In the Country between both, I confess, we were: But in these parts, the
Enemies Country is that within their Lines; whereas our Camp was without these
Lines, and Eight or Nine Miles short of them.

I said before, that we had never attempted Scheld River, but I lied; we
attempted it then, that is, we looked upon it and no more. First, one great Man
viewed the P^ace, and then another great Man viewed it, and then we came away.
It was as we came down to Oudenard, in ou^ way to ou^ Camp: And the Attempt was
made by a Detachment of about Six thousand Men. But if we had ^een in earnest,
we might have made, out of our vast Numbers, many such Detachments for that
Service: And we might have attempted several Places at once; or tried one
Place, and then another; both by Day and by Night. How did Prince Lewis of
Baden pass the Rhine this Summer? I am sure I saw it in the Paris Gazette, (for
Tom I can now read French a little,) That he made a false Attaque or Attempt in
one Place, and then passed in another; the French having drawn their Forces to
the first Place. But this Attempt of ours (such as it was) was made in one
Place only; and in a Place more likely to be provided for defense, than any
other on the River. For it was at Pont Esperies, where the French Line ends,
which is between the Lys and the Scheld, and where they always had Forts and
Guards.

Our retaking of Huy was a very good Business, as Things go: But I expected
that the Army that took it, would have entered the Duchy of Lutzenburg, which
the French now have, and which lies hard by; and so have broken that Charm that
keeps us hitherto from Entering the Enemies Country. Thou will say, They did
enter that Duchy, for all the News-books said so. Why then all the News-books
lied; for we never were in that Duchy, nor out of the Diocese of Liege: For,
by their own Story, we lay all the while between Navaigne and Franchimont, both
which Places are in this Diocese. And Navaigne is upon the Maes, almost as low
as Mastricht. And therefore I am the more confirmed that some Witchcraft lies
upon us; so that we cannot find the way into the Enemies Country.

In the close of the last Campaigne (for at last I draw to a Conclusion) we new
fortified several Places: That is, Dixmude again, (which the French had
slighted and abandoned,) Deynse, Ninove, and Tillemont; and we talk of Hall
likewise. Of these, Dixmude (as I said before) is Seven Miles from Newport;
Deynse is within Five Miles of Gaunt; Ninove lies behind Oudenard and Aeth;
Tillemont is between Lovain and Leeuwe, and very near the later; and Hall is
within Six or Seven Miles of Brussels. And the Places to which they ^ie thus
near, were our standing Garrisons before. Let us now examine between thee and
me, and according to our Rules, (and I think we Troopers should understand
these Matters as well as some of them do) whether these new Garrisons be good
ones, and will do us any Service. I say then, That if each of these new
Garrisons can command Contribution to maintain Three or Four thousand, or even
Two or Three thousand Men, we must allow these Garrisons to be good ones. But if
all these Garrisons put together, will not command any Contribution worth the
speaking of, more than we might have without them; then, according to our
Rules, all of them together are not worth a Dog-turd. And we were bewitched, by
Luxemburg and the Devil, to be at so much Charge, in fortifying and keeping
such useless Things. A little time will show what they can do. But if we had
made a new Garrison upon the Scheld, any where between Tournay and Conde, and
another upon the Sambre near Charleroy, either above or below it; I Would have
eaten Hay with a Horse, and been hanged for a Fool, if either of these two
Garrisons would not have maintained Ten thousand Men: If they were made big
enough (as they ought) to contain so many. And all this by Contributions out of
the Enemies Countries, which otherwise we cannot reach. Out of these two
Garrisons we should have scoured the French Quarters in faith.

I could write more now to thee, but I will not; for I know thou art a Man of
Business. Only I shall say This, That if this cursed Witchcraft which has so
plagued us were removed, we'd beat the French to Jericho: But if it continue
upon us, though you send us never so many Millions from England, we shall do
nothing here in Flanders that is worth one Farthing. And so, dear Tom, fare
thee well.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCV.


