A Serious and Seasonable Invective against SLEEPING in the CHURCH, Briefly
showing the Sin, the Shame, and the Danger of it.
I. THere is nothing that God is more concerned about in the World, than his
own Glory, being very Jealous of his Honor. Hence it is that God is such an
Implacable Enemy to Sin; Sin being contrary to his Holy and Pure Nature, and
consequently a stain to his Honor, and Detracting from his Glory. God looks
upon it as a great Dishonor done to his Sacred Majesty, when men are careless
of their Carriage and Deportment before him, forgetting that he is a Great and
a Terrible God. This is the sin and the shame of many Pretended Worshipers of
God in our Age, who no sooner are come into the Society and Assembly of God's
People, to wait upon him, and obtain a blessing from him [wanting a due sense
of God's Presence, and Awe of his Dreadful Name] Drowsiness posesses, and
oft-times a Dead Sleep falls upon them; so that, poor slumbring Souls being
asleep in sin, they sleep away their mercies. While God is bestowing the
gracious Doles of his Love and Grace, they are snorting in their Pews, as if
they were unconcerned, or had no Lot or Portion in the Matter. This Practice
[so common among Professors in these Days, as that a Man cannot tell where to
go to hear a Sermon Preached, but he shall find some of these miserable dull
Sots either Nodding their Heads up and down, or else fast asleep, till they
snort again] is highly displeasing to God, and deserves a sharp and severe
Reproof. And that inasmuch as

1.'It Is a very great Affront done to the Majesty of Heaven and Earth, when
there is no more Respect or Reverence shown to the Eternal God, no more Awe or
Dread upon the Spirits of Men. Did you believe the Great God was present, and
that you were speaking to him in Prayer, or he to you in the Ministry of his
Word, you would not be thus dull and sleepy. Were you convinced that you were
in the House of God, and that the Place was no other than the Gate of Heaven,
Genesis 28.17. you would be more quick and lively than to fall asleep there. This
irreverent and unbecoming Carriage would be a great Affront to the Majesty of
an Earthly King, neither could the Petitioner expect any other thing than to
have a denial, and frown, if not committed close Prisoner for his great
Offense. Earthly Kings and Princes have more and greater Respect to their
Honor; and who will be such a disingenuous Sot, as to account it no Affront to
the King of Heaven and all the Earth, thus Irreverently to behave themselves in
his Presence, even when they come to petition his glorious Majesty?

2.'It Is a Discovery of that great Insensibleness that men labor under of their
great misery and need of Mercy. Were men convinced of the sad Estate they are
in by Nature, they would be more earnest after Grace and Glory; they would
search after it, and endeavor to obtain it with more liveliness and activity.
Who could sleep, especially at an Ordinance, if he saw himself on the brink of
a bottomless Pit, or hanging by a weak Thread or Hair over Everlasting
Burnings? No man, that is well in his wits, if condemned to the Gallows, would
fall asleep while he is begging his Pardon. Dull ignorant Sots Men and Women
are to fall Snorting when they are Praying for their Immortal Souls.

3. This Practice continued in, and allowed of, demonstrates that thou art
nothing but a Cursed Hypocrite hitherto; that thou have dealt deceitfully with
God, and that in the midst of all thy Religious Pretenses. Thou fittest [or
rather Lollest] in the Presence of God, but thine Heart is far away from him.
Outward Acts discover Inward Habits, and there can be no better demonstration
of a Bad Heart, than an Evil Life. And, who can imagine that the Heart and Soul
are engaged with God in Duty, and Religious Worship, when the Body is asleep?
When the Senses are locked up, the Affections cannot be vigorous in the
Performance of their Acts.

4. All thy Religious Duties are horrible Abuses; thy Prayers are Prophanations
of the Sacred Name of God. I, says the Lord, will be sanctified in them that
come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified, Lev. 10.3. God's
Name is taken in vain, when Men Irreverently and Unbecomingly use it, without
Respect to the Greatness of his Majesty, knowing that he is a Great and a
Terrible God, and will not hold them Guiltless, viz. will certainly punish
those that take his Name into their Lips in vain. It Is a dreadful thing to have
our Duties become Sin, to have our Supplications esteemed but Execrations, our
Prayers but Curses, our Praises and Thanksgivings but as Blasphemies, Isa 66.3.

II. It is a very shameful thing, every one cries, Fie, Out upon it, as a thing
that is odious and hateful: What? to sleep at Church in the Congregation? Is it
not a shameful thing to have the Minister call out aloud to awaken you? and
then the Eyes of all the Assembly are upon you as one that is ridiculous: As
much as to say, Who is that shameless Wretch that has no more Respect to God
nor Man? let us see him, that we may set some Remarks upon him. Who would not
blush then at so shameful a thing condemned by God, reproved by the Minister,
detested and abhorred by the People?

III. It Is not only a sinful and shameful thing, but it is likewise as
dangerous, It Is dangerous to dally with a Raging Lion, or to play at the hole
of the poisonous Asp: even so it is highly dangerous to dally with God in his
Service, or to play the Hypocrite in his Presence. Is it not a dangerous thing
for a Malefactor to fall asleep when at his Trial, if he have a Pardon which
must be tendered to the Judge? Every one would say, it is as much as his Life is
worth. We are Malefactors before God, and we come into his Presence in
Ordinances, to plead our Pardon for the sake of Christ, and of his Merits: And
can any one that is in his wits, be so mad, as to run himself by his Drowsiness
into danger to have himself, and all his Pretenses to a Pardon cast out with
Scorn and Indignation? Yet such mad Fools are Men and Women, as to run
themselves into such great danger.

1. Thou art in danger of being struck dead in the very place: To be stricken
dead suddenly in any place is terrible, but to be stricken dead in the Presence
of God, when thou art abusing his Name and Ordinances, this is exceeding
terrible: What! God speaking, and thou sleeping? God may justly say to Death,
Go strike that dull drowsy Sot at the Heart, he will not hear Me, let him feel
Thee; My Words do not reach his Ears, let Thine Arrows pierce his Heart. If had
like to have cost Eutychus his Life for Sleeping while Paul Preached, Acts
20.9. And thou know not but what was like to be Eutychus his Lot, may indeed
be thine. Thou will not hear the Word of God, God may make thee feel his Rod:
Thou take no care of thy Carriage in his Presence, God may turn thee out of
his Presence into an Eternal State: Thou forgettest to Reverence him when thou
art before him, and God may refuse to preserve thee in Life while thou art
before him.

2. Thou art in danger of being sent packing to Hell from Ordinances: None but
an infinitely Merciful God can bear with such Intolerable Affronts, and thou
may assure thy self that sooner or later Divine Vengeance will take hold of
thee if thou go on thus to affront him; his Hand will not always spare thee
neither may thou think to blind the Eyes of the Almighty for ever, but thou
may forever bewail thy Abuse of Ordinances, by cursing thy self for thy
cursed Drowsiness in the Flames of Hell.

3. It is a terrible thing to sit under the Means of Grace, and not to profit
by it, as certainly thou will not as long as thou indulgest thy self in this
cursed sluggish frame of Spirit: Can thou be the better for Sermons that
sleep them away? the better for Prayers, when thou know not what is
prayed for? No, believe it, it is a very sad and dangerous thing to sit under
Gospel Ordinances, and get no good by them.

4. The danger of this is the more, in that it is the ready way to be deprived
of Gospel Ordinances. Do not think that God will always force his Gospel and
Gospel Mininisters on a dull, sleepy, sottish People; and without doubt, where
there is a scarcity of the Word of the Lord, it is for past Abuses, and former
slightings of it: And if God deprive us of his Ordinances, and cut us short of
Sermons, we may justly conclude, that among other Reasons this may be one, our
turning our Backs upon Ordinances, and sleeping away of Sermons. Let all then
remember to Repent of this great sin that is so shameful and dangerous, viz.
Sleeping in the Church when the Word of God is Preached: And let all men serve
him with Fear and Trembling, knowing that our God is a Jealous God, our God is
a Consuming Fire.

LONDON, Printed for B. Simmons, at the Three Golden Cocks, at the West End of
St. Paul's. 1683.


