SURE-FOOTING In Christianity, Or Rational Discourses On The Rule of FAITH.
With Short Animadversions on Dr Pierce's Sermon; Also on some passages in Mr
Whitby and M Stillingfleet, which concern That RULE.

Ecce nos ex Patribus ad Patres per manus traditam fuisse hanc sententiam
demonstravimus. Athanasius. By I. S.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1665.

To the QUEEN:
Madam,
THough the Faith I write for be far more firmly established then Heaven and
Earth themselves, (as the Worlds great Master has by his own word assured us)
and so needs no Support but its own Invincible Strength: Yet, I am told by my
reason, that nothing so clears and recommends Religion to the Generality, as
the virtuous Life and eminent Devotion of Them that profess it. But, where
shall I seek those happiest Effects and noblest Arguments of Truth? If I
consider them in their abstracted Idea's they are Invisible as Angels; too
subtle and delicate for vulgar eyes. Where then may I hope to meet those
excellent Forms vested with Bodies? if I consult the common Judgment; I expect
to be sent to some Hermit's Cell, or the private Oratory of some holy Votaress;
where I may find them, indeed, embodied; but withal, half-bury'd: Incomparable
Lights, but, shut up in a kind of dark Lanthorn; where they burn safely I
confess, but shine to few: while Those I seek, must be high and conspicuous, to
send forth their Beams and Influences over all the World; and in that regard,
Courts are the properest Firmament for such Illustrious Stars; and Courts are
easily seen, but where is the Star?

In this perplexity, Madam, it pleased the Goodness of Heaven to relieve me;
for, as the mention of Courts brought immediately into my memory the happiness
our Nation is blessed with by Your Majesty's Residence among us; so the
Contemplation of Your Exemplar Life filled my soul with joy to have found, at
last, those sublime and heroic Virtues; whose perfect Conformity to the Rules
of Catholic Religion is, alone, capable to convince the Certainty of its
Truth. Such an unwearied Constancy in Devotion, such a degree of Fervor in that
Constancy, cannot possibly proceed from a lukewarm Probability in Faith: such
frequent Retirements to intimate Conversations with Heaven, such
Mortifications, and contempt of Court-Entertainments, and (which is yet harder)
such Innocence and Purity amidst the necessary Admittances of them, as they all
conspire to speak Your Soul Angelical, so they clearly prove the vigorous
Activity of the Faith that breeds them, far beyond the drowsy Indifferency of a
probable Opinion. Thus, Madam, while Scholars but discourse, YOU live
Demonstrations. Permit me then to use, not Your bare Name, but Your Virtues as
a Patronage to my Endeavors; since the Motive of this my Dedicatory meant
These for its Substance, and Your Temporal Supremeness only for a
Circumstance. Others Complement while they dedicate, I Argue all the while: nor
intend I this for a farther Display of Your Excellent Virtues (which already
are sufficiently manifest to all the World) but to breed a more serious
reflection on Them in the minds of those against whom I write; and other
well-meaning, but misled persons.

This advantage Your Majesty and the Practical Provers of Catholic Faith have
above us Speculaters, that Your whole Life is a Continual Argument for It;
while we are bound to expect Seasons and wait Opportunities: Nor should I at
this time have offered to appear, had not the Multitude of Books lately Printed
against Catholic Religion made it my plain and necessary Duty with all my
little power to defend It, What I have endeavored, I most humbly lay at Your
Majesty's feet, and remain,

MADAM, Your Majesty's most dutiful Subject and most obedient Servant I. S.

PREFACE
To the Intelligent READER.
1. He is little acquainted with the paths which lead to Science who knows not
that the settling the First Principle in any Affair, is of mainest Import
toward Satisfaction in that particular; because if such a Principle be not
first settled, the whole Discourse, as relying on that Principle for its
Certainty, must needs waver and stagger. Reflecting on this plainest Truth and
withal on the manner how very many (I wish I might not say most) Controversies
are managed; that is, by debating much about diverse Conclusions, but very
little about the first Principle in Controversy, I cannot wonder if Disputes
come slowly to an End when few of them were ever rightly begun. Another
mischief and even despair of entire Satisfaction springs from hence; that,
seeing all Dispute Supposes an Agreement between the Disputers in some
acknowledged Principle, I much fear, while things are carried on this fashion,
this Requisite is wanting to the Catholic and Protestant Controvertists; For,
neither does the Protestant from his heart hold (witness the Books of their
most extold Champions, and even the 39. Articles, to the contrary) the
Testimonies of Fathers and Councils, Certain and Convictive; nor even Scripture
always as to its Letter and the Sense they give it, (for they pretend
Infallible Certainty of none of these;) much less does the Catholic agree that
private Interpretations of Scripture, or Citations from Fathers (not speaking
as Witnesses of the Churches Belief) are of sufficient Authority to settle the
True, or overthrow a False or pretended Faith. Yet, notwithstanding all this,
each Antagonist permits the other to frame his Discourses upon these Grounds as
if he held the Method were good and allowable; which not being heartily granted
by either, what satisfaction can we expect but endless and fruitless contests,
for want of Agreement in some acknowledged Principle, while this Method is
followed. Nay more, were it supposed that both sides had agreed not to reject
in their Disputes such a Principle; yet still, however one side might happen to
foil the other so far as to make him contradict himself, yet never so as to
convince his Tenet of falsehood, unless the process were grounded upon some
First, that is, Self-evident Principle, by virtue of whose undoubtable
Certainty the Discourse built on it might gain an establishment. Whence also,
the result of this way of Discourse can be only the Credit or Discredit of the
Authors; and touches not at all the Thing; Which, without some Evident
Principle to establish or overthrow it, hovers in its pure neutral condition of
being (as to Assent or Dissent) just a bare saying and no more.

2. The reason why the First Principle of Controversy is not more looked into
and cleared appears to me evidently this, that our modern Dissenters from the
Church and her Faith seeing (which is common to Them with all other maintainers
of Errors) that to begin with First or self-Evident Principles is the direct
road to Science, and therefore absolutely destructive of their Interest, avoid
as much as in them lies, the laying any such Principles: and instead of this
apply their whole endeavors to aerie Descants upon Words, by such means and
Arts as are never likely to give them any determinate Sense; by which craft
(the way of Science, being to proceed from one piece of Sense to another) they
carry the war out of the bounds of Science where solid ground is to be found to
fix ones fool upon, so to overthrow or be overthrown, and transfer it to a kind
of Spatium Imaginarium of Fancy and unsignifying Sounds, the proper sphere for
Chimerical Discoursers to buz confusedly and make a noise in; Where the
Catholic must either let them alone, and then they cry Victory; or follow them
thither, and so hazard to prejudice his own cause by seeming to allow their
method of discoursing. Whereas indeed the Catholic is forced by their
Importunity exciting his Charity toward the unskilful, to show how weakly
they discourse in their own shallow way.

3. How little faulty the Catholic is in this will be quickly manifest, if we
consider that ^tis against his Principles and Involuntary in him to take this
Method: for, he builds not upon those aerie Skirmishes for his Faith; nor,
consequently, esteems he it conquerable by such attempts: he received his Faith
from the present Church witnessing it is delivery from the former Age; to this
anchorage he sticks; he stands on immemorial Possession, nor doubts he that
Christ' s Doctrine is his true and proper inheritance, while brought down by the
testimony of so many Christian Nations. As long as this foundation stands firm,
quirks hurt not him; Shake this, that is, show the Church Essential is Mistress
of falsehood, and he must doubt all his Faith; but yet cannot hold the
Protestants, for he must hold nothing. No Book can secure him, when that
Principle which only can secure to us Books written long ago, is insecure it
self. Now, on the contrary, the Protestant builds his Faith by thus hammering
it out of unsenc't Characters, and is quite overthrown (would his will give his
reason leave to follow his principles) if another more dexterously fit the
words to a sense inconsistent with his. And his hopes of standing are not built
(as are the Catholics) on the self evidence of any Thing or Principle, but
indeed on the Inevidence or Ambiguity of Words and his Way to manage them;
which is, to let no Living Authority sense thew, and so they will more easily
change their shape as the ingenious contrivances of Fancy molds them; and then,
if the discourse seem but a little plausible, Education and Interest make the
Understanding content with very easiy satisfaction.

4. I am far from blaming the Catholics prudence for engaging on this manner;
I rather admire their Charity toward their weaker Brethren, that at the
expense of so much patience and pains, such excellent Wits will condescend to
so laborious a talk; less suitable both to their own Genius as Catholic, and to
the nature of their Cause. How easily might they rest secure upon Immovable
Possession, and demand Evidence and Demonstration from the Protestant, who
denies his right to Christ's Doctrine? How easily might he show their reasons
inconclusive (which method was observed by a late Learned Writer Mr. J. S.
against that Pulpit-vapour of Dr. Pierce) especially by discovering the
unsatisfactoriness of the Method they take? How most easily, that they have
never a Principle or self evident Ground to begin with; That till they settle
such a First Principle all their Discourse is frivolous; That their rejecting
the Churches Living Voice or Tradition brings all into doubt* both Sayings of
Fathers and Texts of Scripture; And hence, not to allow them the favor of
disputing ad hominem from Scripture or Fathers, by granting them any thing
Certain, but putting them to prove all; For since they are to object and bring
Evident Reason for changing, it lies on them to make their reasons Evident; nor
has any Disputant right to have any thing allowed him Certain, who renounces
that Principle, which if renounct^* all is Uncertain: And, lastly, that he who
denies the First Principle in any Science, deserves not, ^ay cannot in reason
(abstracted from circumstances) be discourst with at all in that Science, nor
They in Controversy. This will force them to lay some First or self-evident
Principle; which cannot fail to produce these two Advantages; One to the World,
that it shall get into a method of concluding something with evidence: The
other to Catholic Religion; For, ^twill be found Impossible their Reason
strained to its utmost, can invent any other in this matter, but that of
Tradition.

5. This will clearly shorten our debates, and save the laborious transcribing
and Printing Volumes of Testimonies, by bringing Conrroversy to the way of
Reason; for the Certainty of First Authority must needs be manifested by pure
Reason. But who am I that I should attempt such a change in the method of
Controversy, or think my self a fit proposer or presser of it? Far be it from
me. Yet, if I mistake not, Nature her self (whom I second in this design) is
about doing that work. For, I hear Catholic Writers complain of the Protestant
(and justly too) that he puts him to answer what h^^ been an hundred times said
before; and I am informed an Eminent Protestant now writing in behalf of Dr
Pierce, makes the same counter-complaint of the Catholic, and the Dissuader
begins his book with the same resentment: Besides, I am sure the Best Wits of
our Nation are weary of this Method, seeing it is no more but reciprocating a
Saw, or transcribing and re-printing what has been done before, only in
another Frame; or, if any new production be made, generally it is nothing but
some note collected from some Historical book unobserved by others; which, what
satisfactory Evidence it is like to bring with it, is easy to be ghest.

6. Now all this happens through not first settling and agreeing in some First
Principle. Not only for the reasons given in the beginning of this Preface;
but also, because (as will be shown hereafter) without thi^ the validity of any
Testimony from Father or Council cannot be weighed, understood, or pressed with
force upon the Adversary. For, if These be but parts of the Living Voice of the
Church Essential of their time, that is, of Christian Tradition, it will
follow that till the force of Tradition be evidenc't, Theirs will not be
clearly known. Again, Tradition once evidenc't will give principles to
distinguish those Citations by, and to secure (as far as is needful) and
interpret Scriptures Letter: Whence clear Victory will accrue to Truth, and
full Satisfaction to her ingenuous Seekers Not that I at all doubt, but that
many things in Catholic Writers of the Testimonial strain, carry 4 strong
force of Conviction with them; but I see th^^^ while the solid Testimonies are
not distinguished and solely insisted on, but run mixed with others of less
force, by such a mixture they weaken their own; I see also that they want their
effect upon the Protestant, by reason he is not first pressed to admit that
Evident Principle on which their strength is built; and, which once settled,
they are irresistible.

7. The settling then the First Principle in Controversy being so supremely
important, I have attempted it. Putting this Dilemma to the Protestant. Either
Controversy (or the skill which enables us to conclude certainly what is Faith,)
is a Science, or not; if not, why do we meddle with it; since without Science
or Knowledge, all is mere beating the air and empty ignorant talking. If it be,
common seuse tells us it must be grounded on some first and self-evident
Principle. Let Us to work then, and settle this Principle, that so we may have
something to agree in and proceed upon; that is, be able to discourse together.
I have endeavored to show the First Principle we Catholics proceed on
established on rational Grounds, and self-evident: Let the Protestant either
agree with us in it, or settle some other able to render his Citations certain,
without which they ought allege nothing. Nor is it enough for them to catch at
single words, or little parcels of my Discourse, (as their way is) but, it
being connected, they must overthrow the main of it: nor that; but they must
lay some First Principle of their own, else they ought affirm nothing, nor
speak; for why should any one say what he knows not, or how can he know without
Principles? Especially the Protestant is obliged to do this, who cannot stand
on Possession, but on his Reasons why he moved what he found settled. This
Principle then they are tied by all honest Considerations to produce, and till
they do so, I must frankly declare what reason tells ever intelligent man, that
those many flashy books of late against Catholics, by whomsoever written,
deserve not a word in Answer.

FIRST DISCOURSE,
Showing, from the nature of Rule and Faith, what Properties belong to the Rule
of Faith.
1. As common Reason gives it evident, that no satisfaction at all can be had
in any point whatever without knowing first the Meaning of those Words which
express the Thing under debate, since without this the discoursers must talk of
they know not what; so the Art of Logic assures us that, the Meaning of those
Words exactly known, a ready way is opened to a clear decision of the most
perplexing difficulties. For, seeing the Meaning of a Word includes in it self
the Nature of the Thing as signified by that Word, in regard it could not mean
That Thing, unless it also meant it of such a Nature which constitutes that
Thing, so it is plain that, the Meaning of the Word once known perfectly, the
Nature of the Thing, as signified by that word, must be known likewise.
Wherefore, since the Nature of the Thing bears along with it all those
Considerations and Attributes which intrinsecally belong to such a Nature, and
excludes all those which are incompetent to the same Nature, it acquaints us
with what can be both said and denied of the Thing, as far as expressed by that
word. The perfect knowledge then of the Meaning of the Words affords us the
certain solution of all questions whether Affirmative or Negative, and is the
most compendious way to settle all Controversies. Let us therefore apply this
method to our present purpose, and examine well what is meant by those Words
which express the thing we are discussing, namely THE RULE OF FAITH; and we may
with good grounds expect a solid, clear, and brief satisfaction both of what is
not that Rule, and what is It.

2. To begin then with what is most evident; Seeing a Rule signifies a thing
which is able to regulate or guide him who uses it, it must consequently have
in it all those Qualities by which it is able to do that it is proper Effect;
otherwise it is no Rule, that is, it is not apt or able to do what a Rule should
do.

3. It must then in the first place be Evident as to its Existence; unto the
Sense, if it be to guide it; or to the Understanding if it be an Intellectual
Rule. For, how should either of these be guided by what they neither see nor
know?

4. Whence follows that it must be Evident to all those who are to be regulated
by it, that there is such a Thing; otherwise it can be to them no Rule; since,
being unknown, it reaches not, or affects not those persons who are to be ruled
by it; that is, reaches not those things upon which it is to do its Effect; and
so, cannot rule them, or be a Rule to them.

5. Moreover, to those who can raise doubts or can have doubts raisd in them,
(that is in a manner all Mankind, even the Rudest Vulgar) it must be knowable
that the Intellectual Rule they are to be regulated by, has in it self a virtue
to rule or guide their understandings right; That is, they must be capable to
know that it deserves to be reli'd on as a Rule. Wherefore, this must either be
evident by its own light, or at least easily evidenceable by other knowledges
or skills presupposed in those users of Reason, who are to be guided by that
Rule. Otherwise, it is against Sense and Reason to yield over ones understanding
to be guided by that which he can never come to understand that it has in it
any ability or power to guide him.

6. And, because nothing can be evident to be what in reality it is not, it
follows that this Thing pretending to be a Rule, must also be certain in it is
self, or established on secure Grounds: For otherwise, it is not possible that
can in true sense be called a Rule, which one may follow and yet go wrong, or
be missed. The Directive Power then which it has must not be wavering;
Wherefore also the causes which conserve it so constantly able to perform that
Effect must be established too to that degree as to keep it fitting to do the
effect proper to its Nature; which is, to be certain in its self.

7. Thus much is evidently gathered out of the common Notion or Nature of a
Rule; That is, out of the genuin and proper meaning of that single word. We are
next to consider the meaning of the word FAITH. By which we intend not to give
rigorous School-definitions of either this or the former word; but only to
reflect on and make use of some Attributes, Predicates or Properties; which in
the sense of such who intelligently use those words are apprehended to be
involved in or truly appertaining to their signification. This caution given to
avoid mistake or cavil, let us enquire of what kind of Nature that thing is
which is meant by this word FAITH, and then reflect what further qualifications
it requires in it is Rule, that is, in the Certain Means which is to guide us to
that Knowledge called Faith.

8. FAITH then in the common sense of Mankind is the same with Believing; and
Divine Faith in the sense of the generality of Christians (from whom, as being
the intelligent users of that word, the true sense of it is taken) the
Believing God in revealed Truths, which necessarily imports some kind of
Knowledge of super^atural Things. Again, it being evident and held by those
Christians that none can come to Heaven without knowing there is such a thing,
or some very great Good reserved for the next life; nor yet without loving it,
(for none is thought to go to Heaven whether he will or no) which Love, besides
the Knowledge that Heaven is, cannot be had without knowing likewise that it is
a Good incomparably greater than any in this life; nor can these Knowledges be
had by Mankind but by Believing; hence, Belief of Supernatural things, or Faith
is conceived necessary for the salvation of Mankind. Nor is this found only in
the Judgments the learneder Faithful make concerning it by their Discourse,
but in the very Meaning of the word Faith as it imports Knowledge of
super^atural things. It being then granted by all and in it self most rational
that some at least of the vulgar are to be saved, that is, are to have Faith or
Knowledge of God, it follows that the Rule of Faith or certain means to arrive
at Faith must be appliable to them.

9. Moreover, since the ruder or unskilfuller people are, the less capable
they are of Science, and none doubts but some, amongst even the rudest, may
come to be saved, since we experience they have oftentimes well-meaning,
virtuous and devout hearts; the Rule or Means to come to Faith must also be
appliable to these; that is, must be such as even the rudest may be capable to
know there is such a thing.

10. The Rule of Faith therefore must be Knowable as to it is Existence by
natural impressions upon men's Senses, affecting their Souls according to the
common light of understanding. For, seeing the rudest are very shallow
Reflecters and Discoursers, and supposed to be utterly unacquainted with any
kind of Skill got by Speculation or Study, the Knowledge of the Rule of Faith's
Existence must not need any skill or Science acquired by Study, intervening
between the natural power of their Understanding and It^ otherwise it could not
be Knowable by them, (...) be to them a Rule, by parag. 4th.

11. Again, seeing those who are very rude are yet capable of being put into
Doubts concerning their Faith, either by Sophistry or fai^ Language, and at
length deserting it; and it is most unreasonable there should be no means lest
by God sufficient to settle them; nor can any Means be sufficient if the Rule
of Faith (which is the best if not only Means to come to the Knowledge of
Faith) be dissatisfactory, or impossible to be shown worthy to be relied on; it
follows that the Rule of Faith must be of such a nature as i^ either by its own
light evidently secure and worthy to be held a Rule, and this even to the
rudest who can doubt; or else easily evidenceable to them to be such by
intelligent persons who art versed in such reflections, and this out of
Principles they are capable of, (as was proved parag^ the 5th.) that is,
requiring only common and obvious Reason not scientifical speculation to
instill them. Otherwise those rude persons would be left unfurnish't of due
Means to be sted^ast in their Faith.

12. Also, since the Notion of the word Faith bears, that it is a perfection of
the Soul, or a Virtue, and so no act of it irrational, but on the contrary, all
its Acts rational, and the submission of onr Understandings exercisd in it
rationabile obsequium, it is evinc't that the Satisfactorines of its Rule, ought
not only to be evident or easily evidenceable to the rudest Doubters, as we
now proved, but also it ought to be so qualified, that the Faithful who yet
have no doubts should do rationally even while they simply or unreflectingly
adhere to it, and that it should supply to their common and uncultivated Reason
by a natural way what it wants of reflection: I mean, so that the common light
of Reason may tell them, upon solid and true Principles taught them by the
ordinary course of things in the World, this is to be held or followed, thongh
they dive not into the Grounds or particular Reasons of their tenets or
actions, nor can give account of them.

13. And, since our Savior intended those out of the Church should embrace
Faith, and those who are to be converted are Heterodox, that is, hold
contradictorily to the Church, in what they dissent from her; so that if they
change, they must now hold is, indead of is not, or is not instead of is (there
being no middle to hold to) in those points in which they differ from her, and
no change ought to be in reason or in a rational Nature (of which Nature those
Heterodox are) without true reason to change, and the change in our case is to
be made not to a mere Suspension, which is believing nothing, nor to a middle
between is, and is not, but to a contrary or rather contradictory Assent, and
no Assent can be^ without sufficient Cause of Assent, nor is any sufficient in
reason to put that Effect or cause Assent^ in a thing antecedent to Faith, as
is the Rule^ of Faith, but Evidence; (for while it is but probable, that is,
while the Understanding must a^ yet say I know not it is so, it cannot say I
know i^ is so, which is no more but to say understandingly or to assent that it
is so) now the Cause of our actual assenting to the Churches Faith, is the
Rule of Faith; It follows out of the notion of Rational included in the word
Faith, as applied to convettible persons, that the Rule of Faith must be beyond
all Peradventures, how high and presumed soever they be; that is, absolutely
Evident to us, and consequently CERTAIN.

14. Moreover, there being many Eminent Wits in the Chutch versed in true
Logic and enured to Sciences, and true Logic and the course of Science
necessarily telling them that nothing can in perfect reason be held by one who
penetrates difficulties, but either Self-evident Principles, or Conclusions
necessarily deduced by intrinsecal mediums from those Principles, nor can they
be necessarily deduced without immediate connection or Identification of the
Terms with the Medium which infers the Identity between themselves in the
Conclusion, and that what is not seen to be thus connected is unknown, and so,
for any thing appears, may be false; and to see a thing may be false, must
needs breed some Fear of being so, or Doubt, if we be concerned in the Truth or
Falsitie of that thing, and none can rationally assent or fix their judgment
where there is left some Doubt or wavering of Judgment, and the Judgment or
Assent of Faith must be rotional; It follows that the Rule of Faith, (which is
the immediate Producer and Cause of the Assent of Faith) ought to be of that
Nature that it must not only be plain to the ruder sort, but also contain in
it self Seeds of perfect evidence to satisfy those learned Persons who shall
more narrowly examine it: Otherwise the best and wisest portion, and as it were
the flower of Mankind, which guide themselves by perfect reason, could hold
nothing or have no Faith; That is the Church must only be made up of ignorant
and undiscerning persons; which would make her little better than a
Congregation of Phanaticks.

15. Especially the Church having many Adversaries skild in natural Sciences,
who will not stick to oppose her all they can, and conquer her too, could they
take any just advantage against her; and no greater advantage being possible to
be gained or more deadly wound to be given her than to prove her Faith
uncertain, which is done by showing the Ground of it as far as concerns our
Knowledge, that is the Rule and Means to come to Faith, possible to be false;
For this at once enervates her Government* vilifies her Sacraments, weakens all
the motives to the love of Heaven, which she proposes, and by consequence quite
enfeebles the vigor of Christian Life; or rather, this made manifest, by
reason of temptations to the Love of Creatures perpetually and on all sides
besieging us, endangers to extinguish it utterly; and, lastly, makes Christians
the most ridiculous people in the world to believe such high mysteries above
their reasons upon uncertain Grounds: It Is manifest therefore that the only
safeguard and all the strength of the Church and Christian Religion is placed
in the absolute Certainty of the Rule of Faith: It Is made therefore and ordained
to ascertain Faith; that it, it has in it what is fit for this end; that is, it
is of its own nature absolutely certain; that is, absolute Certainty is found
in the nature and notion of the Rule of Faith; or, which is all one, is
signified or meant by those words thoroughly understood.

16. And lastly, Faith being a Virtue mainly conducing to Bliss (as is seen*.
8.) and its Influence toward Bliss (which we call its Merit) consisting in
this that it makes us submit our Understanding to the Divine Veracity and by
that means adhere unwaveringly to such Truths as raise us to Heaven, so that
the Divine Authority applied is the Principal Cause or Motive of this
submission, assent or adhesion; and every Cause producing its effect better and
stronglier by how much the nearer and closer it is applied, and all the
application of it to us consisting in the Rule of Faith, whose office it is to
derive down to us those doctrines Christ taught and to assure us that Christ
said them; and the application of a thing closely to a Judging Power being
performed by Certifying it, which makes it sink into it and become an intimate
Act of that Power, whereas Uncertainty can only admit it to swim as it were
upon the surface of the Soul, much after the manner of a bare Proposal or
simple apprehension, or at best as a Probability, not having weight enough of
motive to settle deep into its solid substance which is Cognoscitive and so
become there a fixed Judgment; it follows that the Virtue of Faith and its
Merit are incomparably advantaged by the absolute Certainty of the Rule of
Faith and very feeble and inefficacious without it. This Rule then must be
absolutely-Certain of its own nature, that is, the notion of absolutely-Certain
is involved in the Rule of Faith.

17. Summing up then the full account of our Discourse hitherto it amounts to
this that out of the genuine meaning of the word Rule which as used by us
denotes an Intellectual Rule, and much more out of the meaning of the word
Faith it is clearly evinced that the Rule of Faith must have these several
conditions; namely, it must be plain and self-evident as to its Existence to
all (. 3, 4, 9, and 10.) and Evidenceable as to its Ruling Power to enquirers
even the rude vulgar (. 5. and 11.) apt to settle and justify undoubting
persons (. 12.) to satisfy fully the most Skeptical Dissenters (. 13.) and
rational Doubters (. 14.) and to convince the most obstinate and acute
Adversaries, (. 15.) built upon unmovable Grounds, that is Certain in it self,
(. 6. 15, 16.) and absolutely ascertainable to us (. 5, 11, 13, 14.)

SECOND DISCOURSE.
Showing the two first Properties of the Rule of Faith utterly incompetent to
Scripture.
1. HAving attained so clear a Description of the Rule of Faith and
acquaintance with it by particular marks, we may with reason conceive good
hopes of knowing it when we meet it: Especially, not having a great crowd from
which we are to single it out, the pretenders to that title being very few;
and, indeed, but two are owned, namely Tradition and Scripture; though if we
look narrowly into it, the Private Spirit, Private Reason, Testimonies of
Fathers, or whatsoever else is held the ascertainer of Scriptures sense ought
to have a place among the pretenders to be the Rule of Faith; since it is those
which are thought to give the reliers on them all the security they have of
Gods sense, that is, of Points of Faith, and so are or ought to be to them a
Rule of Faith.

2. But, to speak to them in their own Language who say Scripture is their
Rule, we must premise this Note, that they cannot mean by Scripture the Sense
of it, that is, the things to be known, for those they confess are the very
Points of Faith, of which the Rule of Faith is to ascertain us: When they say
then that Scripture is the Rule of Faith, they can only mean by the word
SCRIPTURE, that Book not yet senc't or interpreted, but as yet to be senc't;
that is, such and such Characters in a Book with their Aptness to signify to
them assuredly Gods Mind, or ascertain them of their Faith: For, abstracting
from the sense or actual signification of those words, there is nothing
imaginable left but those Characters with their Aptness to signify it.

This understood, let us apply now the Properties of the Rule of Faith to
Scriptures Letter, that we may see how they will fit.

3. And the first thing that occurrs is its Existence or An est; that is,
whether those Books pretended to be Gods Word be indeed Scripture, that is,
written by men divinely inspired; Of which it is most manifest the very rudest
sort cannot be Certain by Self-evidence, nor can it be easily evidenceable to
those Doubters that are the ordinary sort of the Vulgar by any skill they are
capable of; nor even to more curious and speculative Scarchers but by so deep
an inspection into the sense of it as shall discover such secrets that
Philosophy and Human Industry could never have arrived to. Besides, all the
seeming Contradictions must be solved ere they can out of the bare nature of
the Letter conclude the Scripture to be of Gods enditing, and so worthy to be a
Rule; to solve which literally, plainly and satisfactorily, the memories of so
many particulars, which made them clearer to those of the Age in which they
were written and the matter known, must needs be so worn out by tract of time,
that it is one of the most difficult tasks in the World. The Scriptures Letter
then is not the Rule of Faith (by 3, 4, 5, 10, 11. of our former Discourse) as
wanting Self-evidence of its Existence, Easy Evidenceableness of its Ruling
Virtue, and Power to establish and satisfy at least unlearned Doubters.

4. Secondly, were it known that there are some Books left written by men
divinely inspired, yet it is unknown how many those Books ought to be, and
which of the many controverted ones may securely be put in that Catalogue,
which not: Which it is most palpable that either few or at least the rude vulgar
and common sort of Mankind, (especially those who are not yet Faithful, but
looking to come to Faith, which is done by knowing the Rule of Faith) can never
be assured of, either by Self-evidence of the things themselves, or by other
skills they are already possessed of. The Scripture's Letter then is from this
Head concluded defective in the forementioned Properties necessarily belonging
to the Rule of Faith.

5. Thirdly, Were the Catalogue of the true Books known, yet how is it
self-evident or easily evidenceable to the capacities above named (if to any)
that the very Original or a perfectly true Copy of these Books was preserved
indeficiently entire, out of which our Translations were made? Can the ruder
sort either know this or be assured of the skill of others by which they know
it? The former being manifestly impossible; the later equally such; since they
have no knowledges in their heads enabling them to judge unerringly of the
competency of others skill in such a particular. Wherefore, Scriptures Letter
faulters still in the primary, most necessary and essential conditions of a
Rule of Faith.

6. Fourthly, Were it evident that the right Original or true Copy of it is
preserved indefective, yet very few, that is, only those who are perfect in
those ancient Languages, can arrive to the understanding so much; The rest,
which are in a manner all Mankind, must come to the knowledge of it by
Translations; and, ere they can think it is fit to be a Rule, they must know it
is rightly translated; For which, because they have no skill in those Languages
themselves, they must rely on the Translators skill: Concerning whose
sufficiency of understanding to be able to translate unerringly right, and
honesty of Will or true intention to do it, themselves, at least the rudest
vulgar, are not qualified enough to jndge assuredly, that they are worthy to be
securely relied on. So that we are still at a loss in this pretended Rule of
Faith for our first and fundamental conditions.

7. Fifthly, Let us pass by all these defects, and grant it most truly
translated to a tittle (and indeed to a tittle it should be, else an error may
slip in instead of a Point of Faith, for any thing the bare Letter can assure
us) yet the innumerable Copiers before Printing, and since Printers and
Correcters of the Press are still to be relied on: and they only can have
evidence of the right Letter of Scripture, who stood at their elbows
attentively watching they should not err in making it perfectly like a former
Copy; And even then why might they not mistrust their own eyes and aptness to
oversee? Or, were it granted these men erred not, nor themselves in overlooking
them, yet the same difficulty occurrs concerning the former Printer's care if
the former Copy were printed, or the Scriveners if Manuscript, which scapes the
view of our now-livers, except we will examine them again from Impression to
Impression, or from Copy to Copy by others more ancient; and still let us run
as high as we will the same difficulty pursues us. To which if we add that the
Printers, Correcters or Transcribers might hap to be Knaves; and either be
Heretics themselves or bribed by Heretics, whose manner it being ever to make
the Letter of the Scripture their weapon, they could wish no greater advantage
than to have it framed commodious to their hand, and so would questionless
endeavor it, and History assures us they did. So that we are still at the same
or a greater loss in our pretended Rule of Faith.

8. Lastly, were all this multitude of Exceptions pardon^d, still we are as far
to seek, unless those who are to be ruled and guided by the Scriptures Letter
to Faith were Certain of the true sense of it, which is found out by right
Interpretation. Now the numerous Commentators upon it and infinite disputes
about the sense of it even in most concerning points, as in that of Christ's
Divinity, beat it out so plain to us that this is not the task of the vulgar
(who yet are capable of salvation, and so of Faith, and so of the Rule of
Faith) that it is perfect phrenzy to deny it.

9, It may be alleged that some of these defects may be provided against by
skill in History. But it is quickly replied, that then none can be secure of
their Rule of Faith, nor consequently have Faith, unless skilled in Histories
or knowing those men to be so, and withal unbyast, whom ^hey converse with;
nay, without knowing that those men knew certainly the Historians whom they
relied on had secure Grounds, and not bare hearsay for what they writ, and that
they were not contradicted by others either extant or pe^ish't: now, how few of
the unlearned vulgar, ^ay even of the middle sort of prudent men which make up
the generality of the world, I may say, of very good Scholars, can judge of
these points? And, if they cannot, how then is their Faith rational or virtuous
and not rather an hair-brained opinionative rashness to build their Assent,
Faith and Salvation upon Principles they can make no Judgment of?

10. If necessity make some willing to reply what their Judgments naturally
flowing from their Principles would not, that God assists his Church, and
therefore his Providence will take care the contingencies their Rule of Faith,
the Scripture's Letter, is subject to, shall be avoided; it is ask't, how they
are certain, in their way, of such an Assistance, but by the Letter of the
Scripture? They must first then prove that Certain, ere they mention the Church
or God's Assistance to her; since this Assistance is, in their Grounds, founded
upon the Truth and Certainty of that Letter. Besides, a Church is a
Congregation of the Faithful, that is, of such as have Faith; which not being
possible to be had without Certain means to come unto it, or the Rule of Faith;
it follows that the first thing that must be cleared is the Certainty of the
Rule of Faith; antecedently to the Notions of Faith, Faithful or Church.

11. If Testimonies out of Councils or Fathers be alleged by them sufficient
Interpreters of Scripture, it is replied that if those be needful to make a
Certain Interpretation of Scripture, or (which is all one) the Letter of
Scripture certainly significative of God^s sense; then, First, none can be
capable of the Rule of Faith, nor consequently of Faith, but those who are read
in Councils and Fathers: nor yet, unless those Authorities be held Infallible
in such an office; which none but Catholics will say; for if they can err in
such a performance, how shall we be certain they do not err in each particular
Interpretation, without some other Guide to establish them and secure us; which
Guide must be infallible in such an affair, else the same question and doubt
returns concerning It: And, if there be some other infallible Guide whose
constant direction secures them from erring in every particular Interpretation
and ascertains us of the same, let them name It, not Fathers and Councils to
interpret Scripture by. But the third and most Fundamental fault is that a
Father, as the word is commonly us^d, and now taken by us, signifies not a
Doctor or learned Deducer of Consequences by human learning, nor a Commentator
upon Scripture, nor a Preacher or Homilymaker (for so every Doctor, Commentator
and Preacher would be a Father) but an Eminent and Knowing Witnesser to
Posterity of the sense and Faith of the Church which he received: The notion
then of CHURCH is presupposd to the knowledge of what is meant by the word
Father, or to the notion of a Father. Again, a Council signifies a
Representative of the Church, whence, it is Relative to what it represents, and
so its meaning cannot be known unless that others to which it relates be first
understood; nor can it be a true and right Council unless what it represents be
a true Church. Both Council therefore and Father presuppose the notion of
Church; Church presupposes the notion of Faithful; Faithful the notion of
Faith; Faith, of the Rule of Faith; It Is most evident then that, in the way of
generating Faith, the knowledge of the Rule of Faith is antecedent to the
knowledge of all these; and so none of these cau help one, who discourses
orderly and rationally, to the Knowledge of the Rule of Faith, unless
accidentally; as it may happen a Father may be a Doctor or great Scholar; and
so by a rational discourse opening the meanings of the words (or, which is all
one, the notion or nature of the Things) give us insight to know what it is
which has the properties of such a Rule. In vain therefore do they strive to
piece out the sufficiency of Scripture's Letter to be the Rule of Faith by
those helps; since the being of that Rule is presupposed entire in it self
before their existence, and indeed is that which gives them all the Being they
have.

12. Some may reply that Fundamentals are clear in Scripture. But, first, a
certain Catalogue of Fundamentals was never given and agreed to by sufficient
Authority; and yet without this all goes to wrack; since the neglecting or
not-knowing which be Fundamental hazards to ruin all: For the discourse grows
ticklish when we talk of Fundamentals; this very word importing that any one
left out or mistaken overthrows the whole End of Faith to those which miscarry
in it. Secondly, is it a Fundamental that Christ is God? If so, I ask whether
this be clearer in Scripture than that God has hands, feet, nostrils and
passions like ours? Seeing then the appearing clearness of the Scripture's
letter in this later point is certain to lead vulgar heads into exceeding great
Errors, and that Heresies are as seemingly clear in the outward face of it as
Fundamental Truths, how mistaken a Principle do they rely upon for the main
hinge of their salvation, who say that Fundamentals are so clear in Scripture's
Letter to every capacity.

THIRD DISCOURSE.
That the Three next Properties of the Rule of Faith are utterly Incompetent to
Scripture.
1. THus much to show that the Letter of Scripture wants the two first and most
Fundamental Conditions of a Rule of Faith; being neither Evident as to it is
Existence to all, nor Evidenceable as to its Ruling Power to unlearned
Enquirers. Let us proceed to the third Property, namely, its Aptness to settle
and justify those unlearned persons who rely undoubtingly upon it, such as are
the meaner sort of the Vulgar, who take things by course as they fall, in a
natural kind of way without reflecting upon them and their reasons.

2. Since then no Man or rational Creature can be justifiable either for Assent
or Practice but by proceeding upon some Principles, and such as, to his best
judgment, he takes to be true ones and those Principles can be but of two sorts
viz. either inbred in him by the ordinary Light of Nature, called Common Sense,
or got by some reflection; and that the persons we speak of are such as proceed
undoubtingly, that is, without occasion to reflect; it is left that what can
justify them must be Principles of Common Sense. Seeing then it is both against
all Principles of Common Sense to judge that themselves have any self-assurance
of the Scripture's Letter, knowing themselves utterly ignorant when 'twas writ,
by whom, how brought down, etc. and equally senceless to believe a multitude
which says it may possibly err in what it tells them, it follows that they
are left unjustify^d, nay condemned by Common Sense in absolutely believing
such a Rule; That is, condemned by the best judgments they are Masters and
capable of. This, I say, follows in case this multitude be truly dealt with,
and that the Teachers give them a sincere account of their own Tenet. Nay,
should these men say they cannot err in such a matter, by reason of their
great Schollership, as skill in History, Languages, reading of Fathers,
Councils, and such like, yet even then they could not afford them credit to
such a degree as to build their hopes of salvation on their word, in regard
those learned men's Profession is not of plain Sensations by their Eyes and Ears
which the vulgars experience capacitates them to judge of, but of such high
skills as unlearned men know not what to make of, and even understand not what
the very words which express them mean. The best then they can do is to hope
that perhaps those men may have some such strange skill, in the same manner as
they trust to other Tradesmen and Artist^s they have heard well of or seen some
of their work; or rather not near so much; seeing their Senses give them a far
better knowledge of these Handycraftsmen's skill by the Effects and their
fitness for the use intended, than their uncultivated Reason can give them of
the goodness of Christian Doctrine and its proportion to Bliss. But the main is,
when they shall hear and see many several Professions all pretending to
Scripture, yet all differ, damn and condemn one another, perhaps persecute one
another and fight about Religion, and themselves unable to judge which is most
to be trusted; what can common Sense dictate to them but an inextricable
blunder, and only clear to them thus much that that can never be the way which
many follow and yet many must needs be misled: Their most vulgar reason easily
telling them that there can be but one Truth, that is, that all the other
Professors to follow Scripture do notwithstanding believe and speak false. Now
these honest Scholars of plain down right Nature, and that of her lowest form
too, being unable to judge which truly follow the Scripture's Letter; and only
capable to know they all profess it with Words and Actions expressing the
greatest seriousness in the world; are to think that all equally mean to follow
it to their power. Whence, their common reason will tell them (though they
cannot express it in our terms, or defend it) that merely for want of Light,
that is Evidence in the Directive Power of that Rule, they all but one party
(and perhaps that too as well as the rest) go most miserably astray. This third
Property then of the Rule of Faith, namely, to justify the undoubting vulgar,
is wanting to Scriptures Letter.

3. There follows the fourth Property of the Rule of Faith, which is that it
must be able of its own nature to satisfy the most Skeptical dissenters and
rational doubters that the Doctrine it holds forth came from Christ. To make a
true conceit of what may be judged sufficient for this End, let us reflect on
the nature and temper of such Dissenters and Doubters, and we shall quickly
discover that they are men given to stir their thoughts by much reflection and
to call them to a strict account ere they yield them over to Assent: Wherefore,
if we suppose them true to their own thoughts and not to betray the Light of
their Reason to some Passion (in which case their Faith it self were in them a
Vice) we cannot imagine that any thing under Demonstration can bind and restrain
those active and volatile Souls from fluttering still in Objections and hovering
in doubts when their Eternal Good is concerned: Especially, when an Authority
is about scanning, upon whose word they are bound, after they have approved it,
to believe unconcievable and unheard of things, above the reach of human Reason
and Apprehension. Let now any man go about to demonstrate to those great wits
these points, That the Scripture's Letter was writ by men divinely inspired,
That there is never a real one however there may be many seeming Contradictions
in it, and this to be shown out of the very Letter it self; That just this
Catalogue or number of Books is enough for the Rule of Faith, and no one
Necessary that was lost, none be abated; or, if so, how many; That the
Originals out of which the Translations were made, were entire and uncorrupted;
That the first Translations were skilfully and rightly made, and afterward
derived down sincere, notwithstanding the errableness of thousands of
Transcribers, Printers, Correcters, etc. and the malice of ancient Heretics
and Jews who had it in their hands: And, lastly, That this, and this only is
the true sense of it; to which is requisite great skill in Languages to
understand the meaning of words; in Grammar, to know what meaning they should
generally beat according to its Rules as thus construed or put together;
Criticism, to know what a word do most commonly or may possibly signify by
rules (...) nicer Etymologies or acception of Authors ancient or modern, by
dialects of several Countries, etc. History, to make known the true scope of
the Author, the best Interpreter of his meaning; Logic, to draw consequence^
aright, and so find out the thread of the discourse, to avoid equivocation in
words, by discovering which are to be taken properly, which Metaphorically;
And, to apply this right, foam skill in the things themselves, that is, in
Nature and Metaphysics, especially that which treats of the nature of Spirits,
as the Soul, Angels, God and his Attributes; but especially in Divinity both
Speculative and Moral; which (by the way) supposes Faith and comes after it,
and so cannot be presupposed to the Rule of Faith which precedes it. Let any
man, I say, go about to demonstrate all these difficult Points to those acute
men and will they not smile at his endeavors? since most of them that concern
the truth of the Letter are such that we want Principles to go about to
evidence them; and the rest so obscure that a searching and sincere wit would
still find something to reply to rationally, or at least maintain his ground of
Suspense with a Might it not be otherwise? And, were some one or two of these
points demonstrable, yet who sees not it is a task of so long study that a
great part of a man's life would be spent in a wea^isome and hopeless endeavor
to come to Faith by this tedious method; which would both disinvite to a
pursuit; and even a diligent man may in likelihood die ere he could rationally
embrace any Faith at all. Faith then being intended for a man to lead his life
by, it is necessary it is Rule and the means to come to it should be easily
victorious, by reason of it is Certainty and Evidence, over the shock of Doubts
or the assaults of Intellectual Fears. In which the Scripture's Letter being
defective, it is plain that it is far from the Nature of a Rule of Faith.

4. The same discourse holds to prove that the Scripture's Letter is not
convictive of the most obstinate and acute Adversaries, which is the fifth
Property of the Rule of Faith. Yet, to apprehend this more lively, let us
imagine it applied to practice, and that some Text of Scripture were quoted to
convince a Deist in some point. He asks how you are certain that Book is God's
word? You allege the Excellencies of it; which indeed are such that eyes
already enlightened by true Faith may discern something in it above nature, and
cry, Digitus D^i est hic, though not his dim sight: He answers that many parts
of it are indeed very excellently good, but that the Devil can transform
himself into an Angel of Light. On the other side he requites your Excellencies
with many strange Absurdities and Heresies even by your own confession in the
open Letter as it lies, and most unworthy God; as that he has hands feet and
passions like ours according to which he is variable. He finds you direct Text
against acknowledged Science in diverse particulars, and reckons up a multitude
of Contradictions to his Judgment. You answer that those places are understood
according to human apprehension, and are indeed incompetent to God, but that
there are mystical and spiritual meanings couch't in those sacred Oracles,
which with the help of History would reconcile those seeming Contradictions. He
cries, you quite abandon your pretended Rule, that since you confess Heresies
are in the open Letter taken as it lies, you must have some Knowledge in your
Head concerning God which makes you decline the sense of the words as they lie
and run to gloss them; and demands whence you came by those tenets which oblige
you to correct the plain Letter; challenging your thoughts and carriage as
witnesses that that which imbued you antecedently with those contrary Tenets,
not the Scripture's Letter, was your true Rule of Faith; in regard you frame It
according to the Interest of those foreheld Tenets. He pressingly therefore
demands whence you had those Tenets or Points of Faith by which you guide your
self in adhering or not adhering to the Scripture's Letter as it lies?

5. If you say, from other places of Scripture controlling plainly the others;
he replies, this can only make you acknowledge Scripture's Letter plainly
contradicts it self, and so leaves you doubtful which side to hold, as far as
the bare Letter carries you; or, if it invites you to any thing, it is to hold
both sides of the contradiction. What therefore he still demands is, what it is
which forelaid those Judgments in you by which you were byast beyond the power
of the Letters Indifferency to hold one side rather than ^he other? Here you
are at a loss with your ^retence of the Letter's Authority, being gone beyond
it. If then you recurr to Reason and Science, teaching you that God is
immutable, a Spirit, etc. he straight replies, Then that Science taught you
that Point whether Scripture had been or no. It therefore was your Rule in
this, (and the same may be said of whatever you avail your self to interpret
Scriptute by) not the Letter. If you say you rely on the Science or Skill of
your Parents, Forefathers, and Pastors, then their skill which ascertaind them
of Gods sense (not Scripture's Letter) was their Rule, and so is likewise
yours; for whoever relies on any precisely as skilful, relies in very deed and
properly on their skill, and not on the Letter their skill works upon. Besides,
oue not skilful himself, is a bad Judge how far another skill extends. If you
say you rely not on their skill, (fallible perhaps in them, and obscure to you)
but on their Senses enabling them to be knowing Witnesses of what was delivered
them, and free from the former exceptions, you are driven for your last refuge
to Tradition, and still desert your Letter-Rule. In a word, he challenges the
consciousness of your most inward thoughts, whether (however in Controversies
against others you quote Scripture, yet) in reading the Letter for your own
Faith, you bring not along with you some thoughts to interpret it by, which you
are resolved to hold to; and so the Scriptures Letter lies before you as matter
to work on, so as to preserve it significative of what you judge sound, and not
to frame your Judgments by; that is, you use it as a thing ruled, not as a
Bule. Nay more, if you look narrowly into the bottom of those Thoughts, you
shall discover the natural method of Tradition to have at unawares settled your
Judgments concerning Faith, and actually guiding you in the Interpretation,
however when your other Concerns awake design in you, you protest against it,
and seem perhaps to your unreflecting self to embrace and hold to the mere
guidance of the Letter.

6. Again, Waving the insufficiency of the Scriptures Letter to declare its own
sense, he asks this smart question, how you are certain of the Truth of the
Letter in this very Text; and demands your certain proof or demonstration
either either for the Thing, or for the Certainty of the Authority upon which
you hold that any particular Text you allege is truly a part of the Scriptures
Letter, and not foisted in, or some way altered in its significativeness: or,
how you know by the diligence of the Letter-examiners, if it be a negative
Proposition, that the particle not was not inserted; if affirmative, not left
out. You allege Consent of all our Copies: He replies, first, that this only
argues that those ancient Copies whence ours came were alike (perhaps not so
much) but who knows or can undertake that they were not alike faulty, or alike
Unlike the true Original? or, that there were not some in those days which
never came to our knowledge, different from ours in the very point between us?
In a word, that all depends on the Truth of the Copies immediately taken from
the Original, or the very next to them; which, what they were, by whom taken,
where and how preserved from time to time, how narrowly examined when they were
first transcribed, and such like, is so buried in obscurity and oblivion, and
so far from Evidence apt to beget Certain Knowledge, that we must have recourse
to Charity to allow it our Hopes, had we no other Rule of Faith than that bare
Letter. Again, though human diligence did play its part, yet it is acknowledged
(says your Deist) that there are almost innumerable Variae Lectiones in it
still controverted; nay so many in the new Testament alone observed by one man
(my Lord Usher) that he durst not print them for fear of bringing the whole
Book into doubt; and, why may not there have been such formerly and now blindly
determined and swallowed in each Text that concerns our mainest Points of
Faith. If you reply (as Nature will lead you) that the Faith of Christ believed
and taught from Father to Son was writ in the hearts of the Faithful; and this
made them both able and willing to (that is, actually did) preserve the Letter
from Error in any passage that concerned the Body of Christian Doctrine; he
challenges you to fly your Colors, to desert your own Rule, and embrace
Tradition, the Rule of Roman-Catholikes; and lastly, that you make Scriptures
Letter the thing Ruled, not the Rule: Yet without this recourse, no
satisfactory account can possibly be rendered to a strict Examiner why Error
might not creep into the Text in substantial points of Faith as well as in less
concerning passages: which devolves to this, that the Scripture's Letter held
forth as a Rule of Faith can never convince an obstinate and acute Adversary.

FOURTH DISCOURSE,
That the Two last Properties of the Rule of Faith are clearly incompetent to
Scripture.
1. THere remain the two last conditions; Certainty in its self, and
Ascertainableness to us. That the later is incompetent to Scripture alone or
unassisted by another certain Rule, that is, incompetent to it as a Rule,
however it may agree to it as a thing regulated or ruled, is the Subject in a
manner of all our foregoing Discourse; and it so depends upon the former
Property of the two last named, Certainty in it self, that if it fails, that
later is impossible. Now, as for its Certainty in its self or its being
established on secure Grounds, we may consider Scripture's Letter either
Materially as such and such Characters, or Formally as Significative of a
determinate sense supposed to be Christ's; and both of these either in its
single self, or as dependent on other helps or Causes on foot now in the world
according to the course of things.

2. And, as for the mere material Characters in Books, it is evident that they
are of themselves as liable to be destroyed as any thing else in Nature, as
burnt, torn, blotted, worn out, etc. Which though it seems a remote and
impertinent Exception, yet to one who considers the wise Dispositions of Divine
Providence it will deserve a deep Consideration. For, seeing the Salvation of
Mankind is the End of God's making Nature, the means to it should be more
settled, strong and unalterable than any other piece of Nature whatever;
Putting then Scripture's Letter to be this Rule, and that all its
Significativeness of God's Sense, that is all its virtue of a Rule, is lost if
the material Characters, its Basis, be destroyed or altered; who sees not a
very disorderly proceeding in laying so weak means in such immediateness to so
main an end; and concludes not thence that Faith's Rule ought in right reason
have a better Basis than such perishable and alterable Elements?

3. Reflecting next on those material Characters in complexion with the Causes
actually laid in the world to preserve them entire, we shall find that either
those Causes are Material, and then themselves are also liable to continual
alterations and innumerable Contingencies; or Spiritual, that is, men's Minds.
Now, these being the noblest pieces in Nature, and freed in part from Physical
mutability by their Immateriality, we may with good reason hope for a greater
degree of constancy from them than from any other; and indeed, for a perfect
unalterableness from their Nature, and (this being to conceive Truth) an
Inerrableness, if due circumstances be observed; that is, if due proposals be
made to beget Certain Knowledge, and due care used to attend to such Proposals:
Otherwise their very Createdness and Finitness entitle them to defectibility,
besides their obnoxiousness to mutation and perpetual alteration through the
alloy of their material Compart. I call it due proposal when it must
necessarily affect the Sense, and so beget natural Knowledge; or when
unequivocal terms are so immediately and orderly laid, that the Conclusion must
as necessarily be seen in the Premises as that the same thing cannot both be
and not-be at once, by a mind inured to reflection and speculation; and I call
that due care, which preserves the Soul in such temper as permits the objects
impression to be heeded and the Mind to be affected by it.

4. This premised we may reflect that the Rule of Faith as was proud ( Disc.
1.. 4, 5, 10, 11.) must be obvious to men of ordinary Sense, and not only to
Speculators; as also, that Objects of the Senses may be of two sorts; Of the
the first are things in Nature, or else simple vulgar actions and plain matters
of Fact; which, if often repeated and familiariz'd, are unmistakable; and
consequently the perceiver inerrable in such a matter; Of the second are such
actions as are compounded and made up of an innumerable multitude of several
particularities to be observed, every of which may be mistaken apart, each
being a distinct little action in its single self; Such as is the transcribing
a whole book, consisting of such myriads of words, single Letters, and Tittles,
or Stops, and the several actions of writing over each of these so short and
cursory, that it prevents diligence and exceeds human care to keep awake and
apply distinct attentions to every of these distinct actions. And yet, to do
our Opposers right, I doubt not but each of these failings may possibly be
provided against by oft-repeated Corrections of many sedulous and sober
examiners set apart for that business, and that the truth of the Letter of an
whole Book might to a very great degree, if not altogether be ascertained to
us, were the Examiners of each Copy known to be very numerous, prudent and
honest, and each of them testifying his single examination of it word by word;
For then the difficulty, consisting in the multiplicity and the variety, is
provided against by the multitude of the preserving Causes; and their
multifariousness made convictive to us by their well-testify'd consent.

5. To apply this discourse to the matter in hand. If we were Certain there had
been anciently a multitude of Examiners of the Scripture's Letter in each Copy
taken from the first Original or the next Copies from these and so forwards,
with the exact care we have defined, the single Examinations of each and the
amendment of the Copy according to their Examinations convincingly testified,
and that by Excommunication or heavy Ecclesiastical Prohibitions and Mulcts it
had been provided for from the beginning that none should presume to take a
Copy of it, and that Copy be permitted to be read or seen till it were thus
examined; much might have been said for the Certainty of the Scripture's Letter
upon these men's Principles: But, if no such Orders or Exactness was ever heard
of, especially of the New Testament upon the Truth of whose Letter they build
Christian Faith; If the multitudes of Letters, Commaes, blottings or
illegibleness of the Originals, like-appearance of Letters and even whole Words
in in the Book, like-sounding in the ear or fancy of the Transcriber,
possibility of misplacing, omitting, inserting, etc. did administer very
fruitful occasions to human over^ight; If, the more Copies were taken, the more
the errors were like to grow, and the farther from correcting; If Experience
testifies no such exact diligence has been formerly used, by the diverse
Readings of several Copies now extant, and thousands of Corrections which have
lately been made of the Vulgar Edition, the most universally current perhaps of
any other; what can we say but that (for any thing these Principles afford)
Scriptures Letter may be uncertain in every tittle, not withstanding the
diligence which has de facto been used to preserve it uncorrupted in the way of
those who hold it the only Rule of Faith? In their way, I say, who will not
have the Sense of Christ's Doctrine writ in Christians hearts the Rule for the
Correcters of the Letter to guide themselves by, but the mere Letter of a
forme^ (and God knows, controvertible) Copy, out of which the Transcription and
by which only the Examination is made. What Certainty accrues to Scripture's
Letter by the means of Tradition, or the living voice of the present Church in
each Age, is the Subject of another enquiry.

6. Now, as for the Certainty of the Scripture's Significativeness, which is
the other Branch, nothing is more evident than that this is quite lost to all
in the Uncertainty of the Letter; and (...) evident that it is unattainable by
the vulgar, that is the better half of mankind, since they are unfurnisht of
those Arts and Skills, as Languages, Grammar, Logic, History, Metaphysics,
Divinity etc. requisite to establish and render certain the sense they conceive
the Letter ought to bear; without which they can never make such an
Interpretation of it but an acute Scholar skilled in those means will be able
to blunder theirs, and make a seeming clearer one of his own. In a word, if we
see eminent Wits of the Protestants and the Socinians, making use of the
self-same, and, as they conceive, the best advantages the Letter gives them, as
comparing places and such like, and availing themselves the best they can by
acquired skills, yet differ in so main points as those of the B. Trinity and
Christ's Divinity; what Certainty can we undertakingly promise to weaker heads,
that is, to the Generality of Mankind, less able to make such fit allusions of
places to one another; incapable of such means as should help them, which the
other had and are very pertinent and proper to work upon the Letter; And,
lastly, who are, for want of those, unfurnish't of any steady Principles to
settle their Judgments and rationally determine their own Interpretation
Certain. Scripture's Letter therefore is not Certain in it is self, that is, has
no immovably secure Grounds enabling it to perform the Office of the Rule of
Faith, or to guide Mankind in their way to Faith with a rational assuredness.

Our Conclusion then is this, that SCRIPTURE'S LETTER WANTS ALL THE
FOREMENTIONED PROPERTIES BELONGING TO THE RULE OF FAITH.

7. Lest any should misconstrue my former Discourse, I declare here once more
that, in a great part of it, I argue ad hominem; that is, I manifest what must
follow out of the Principles of those who hold the Scripture's Letter the Rule
of Faith, not out of my own or Catholic ones. I declare likewise that I with
all reverence acknowledge such Excellencies in those Sacred Oracles as would
task the tongues both of Men and Angels to lay them forth. I only contest that
the Scripture's Letter is most improper and never intended for the Rule of
Faith; as is easy to be evinc't against an unobstinate Adversary by this, that
it is known the Apostles and their Successors went not with Books in their hands
to preach and deliver Christ's Doctrine, but Words in their mouths; and that
Primitive Antiquity learned their Faith by another Method a long time before
many of those Books were universally spread amongst the vulgar, much less the
Catalogue collected and acknowledged; till the Revolters from that Method and
Rule, being manifestly convinced of Novelty by it, were for^t to invent some
other, and chose this of the Scripture's Letter for most plausible, as being
held very Sacred: until, by straining it to an undue use, and, to please the
people, putting it without any distinction of the person, into their hands, and
leaving it to their Interpretation, they have brought it (as it is made use of
for a Rule of Faith) to the vilest degree of contempt; every silly upstart
Heresy fathering it self upon It. Of which no Nation in the world is so evident
an Instance as our miserable Country, distracted into so many Sects (all
issuing from that Principle,) so impossible to be brought under Ecclesiastical
Government (and even with much ado under Temporal) that it is wonderful such
proper Effects, especially so sensible, burdensome, so universally spread, and
so continual, should not long ago have abundantly demonstrated their Proper
Cause, and obliged them to renounce that Principle which is the necessary
Parent of such ruinous and unredressable disorders

FIFTH DISCOURSE.
Showing the Notion of TRADITION, and that all the Properties of the Rule of
Faith do clearly agree to It.
1. HAving then quite lost our labor in our last search, let us see whether we
shall have better success in this second Enquiry; which is, whether we may hope
to find the Properties of the Rule of Faith meet in that which we call or all
or Practical Tradition. By which we mean a Delivery down from hand to hand (by
words, and a constant course of frequent and visible Actions conformable to
those Words) of the Sense and Faith of Forefathers.

2. But, to make a more express conceit of Tradition, that so we may more
perfectly understand the Nature of that which we treat of let us first soberly
reflect on the manner how Children learn their own and others names with whom
they live, as also of the rooms and things they converse with; afterward,
growing up, to exercise their trades, to write, read, or use civil or legal
carriage to every one in their kinds^ And, looking into the Thing we shall
observe that they first gleaned notions of those several Objects, either merely
through Impressions on their Senses by the Thing it self alone, or by the help
of having them pointed at, or something practic'^ about them at the same time
they were nam'd^ and afterward learnt to repeat the same Word after others,
more and more intelligently by degrees, and to practice the same Actions; till
a^ length the former Generation of Teachers decaying by the course of Nature, a
new one i^ sprung up to Perfection, furnished with all the accomplishments of
the former, and continuing the same natural and Civil Knowledges, Action^ and
Conveniences to this Age which the forme^ enjoyed; and so forwards to
succeeding Generations by a natural kind of method, without needing Books or
new Skills merely to perform this Effect of continuing and preserving the
former Age, as it were, alive in this. Add now to this that this Continuation
goes not by long leaps from Age to Age, or from twenty years to twenty, but
from year to year, nay month to month, and even less; according as the new
Offspring grows up by degrees to a Capacity of understanding and practicing;
and then reflect on this whole Course, and we shall see the true nature of
Tradition or immediate Delivery, as exercised in Civil matters and Human
Conveniences.

3. We want nothing now but to apply this self-same Method to Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical affairs, and to reflect how it brings down Faith by Doctrine
couch't in Words and expressed in conformable Practices; and then we shall have
gained a complete and proper notion of Faith-Tradition, which is the Tradition
we speak of.

4. We may observe then that the Children of Christians first hear the Sounds,
afterward by degrees get dim notions of God, Christ, Savior, Heaven, Hell,
Virtue, Vice, and such like; and, according as their capacity increases, are
put on to practice what they have heard, and made to do some external Actions
by precept and Example; which Actions by their more particularizing nature
ripen to a more express and familiar conceit those raw Apprehensions or
Judgments which while they stood under bare words looked as if they hovered in
the Air, and afar off. They are deterred from sins, first from lying and
disobeying their Parents, afterward others, by reproaches and punishments and
encouraged to virtuous actions by rewards such as their Age bears, to breed in
them a conceit of the badness of sin and goodness of Virtue: They are shown how
to say Grace, say their Prayers, and made do it when they are able; and to gain
them some abstracted conceit of those Actions, they are inured even while very
Infants by certain carriages unusual at other times, as holding up their hands
or perhaps eyes, kneeling, keeping silence and other sober postures, to look
upon such actions as extraordinary ones, when as yet they know no more of them;
which breeds a certain awe in them beforehand, preparing their minds to more
reverence for the future. Afterward, growing up, they come acquainted with the
Creed, the ten Commandments, the Sacraments, some common forms of Prayer and
other Practices of Christianity, and are directed to order their lives
accordingly; the Actions or Carriage of the circumstant Church and Elder
Faithful guiding the Younger (notwithstanding the difficulty of the
yet-undigested Metaphor, in which dialect Faith is delivered) to frame their
lives to several sorts of Virtues by the doctrine delivered in words; as Faith,
Hope, Charity, Prayer, Adoration, etc. and the concomitant or subservient
Virtues to these; and the more intelligent, whose Understandings are cleared by
Study and the circumstance of conversing with the learneder sort of
Forefathers, to do out of Knowledge and Reflection, what others do (as it were)
naturally, and by mere Belief or guidance of others. And this goes on by
insensible degrees, till at last the Teachers die, and leave in their room a
new Swarm of the same nature with themselves as to Christian Life; that is,
practicing the same external Actions which determine to a certain degree the
sense of the Words they have been inured to; and (since the practice of those
Actions was instilled from their Infancy, and serious) holding consequently the
Principles of those Actions; that is, the same Points of Faith with the former
Age. And this goes on not by leaps from an hundred years to an hundred, or from
twenty to twenty, but by half-years to half-years, nay months to months, and
even less; according as the young brood of Eaglets, made to see the Sun in his
full Glory, grow up to a capacity of having their tender eyes acquainted first
with the dawning, afterward with the common daylight of Christian Doctrine.

5. If any should be so dull as to think this looks like a Speculation only,
and not to see plainly that it is confirmed by ten thousand Experements every
day; I desire them to consider how the Primitive Faithful were inured to
Christianity ere the Books of Scripture were writ or communicated; or how
themselves (though Protestants or Presbyterians) were first imbued with
Christian Principles ere they could read, and they shall find it was merely by
this way of Tradition: Nay more, I dare affirm that the very Presbyterians,
much more the Protestants, still adhere to their Faith, because their Parents
and Pastors taught them it when they were young, and not upon the Evidence of
Scripture's Letter to their own private Judgment: which is manifest by this,
that those who are brought up under Mr. Baxter are apt to follow him, others
Mr. Pierce, and all in general hold fixedly to the doctrine of others,
especially if their Parents be of the same persuasion. So hard it is to beat
down Nature by Design, or not to follow Tradition in practice, though at the
same time they write and talk never so vehemently and loud against it. Nay it is
easy to remark that those who were brought up Protestants, while they followed
their Teachers and Forefathers in the Traditionary way, continued firmly such;
and that none declined from that Profession until they began to use their own
private Judgments in interpreting Scripture; and that then they ran by whole
shoals into innumerable other Sects. However then they exclaim against
Tradition, yet it is evident they owe to It all the Union and Strength they
have, and to the renouncing It all their Distractions and Weakness.

6. What is said hitherto, is only to explain the Nature of Tradition
perfectly, and to settle a right conceit of it: which done, many Objections
will be rendered unnecessary either to be answered or mentioned, as those that
proceed against a kind of Prophetical Afflatus, which can have no force against
our way, building upon perfect Evidence of our best Senses: but especially
those which take so wrong an aim, that they dispute against res traditae, or
the things delivered, instead of Tradition it self, and thereupon accuse us for
holding Human Traditions, or things invented by men for Faith. Whereas, when we
speak of the Rule of Faith, we mean by the word Tradition only the Method of
publicly delivering and conveying down Tenets, held to have come from Christ,
in the manner before declared. This note premised to avoid mistake and keep the
Reader's mind more steady to the matter in hand, let us see now whether
Tradition have in it the nature of a Rule of Faith; which is done by examining
whether the forenamed Properties belong to it or no.

7. And first, it is already manifest from what is said, that the First Property
of the Rule of Faith, namely, that it must be Evident to all as to its
Existence, absolutely agrees with Tradition. For, Tradition being the open
conveyance down of Practical Doctrines by our best senses of Discipline, that
is, our Eyes and Ears; and this by Sounds daily heard and Actions daily seen
and even felt; it is as easily appliable to all sorts, or Evident to them as to
its Existence, as it is to see and hear: So that it can be insinuated into or
affect not only the rudest vulgar and little. Children, but in some degree
even very Babes, as was shown.

8. The second Condition, which is that its Ruling Power should be easily
Evidenceable to any Enquirer is thus shown to agree to Tradition, Let the
rudest Doubter come and desire to be certify'd that Tradition is a Rule able if
followed, to convey down Christ's doctrine to our very days; or to the world's
end, and let these plain Interrogatories be put to him. Suppose all Protestants
in England were settled in an unanimous Profession of their Faith, and that
their Children without looking farther should believe and practice as their
Fathers had brought them up, would it not follow in self-evident terms that
those Children while they followed this method would be Protestants too?
Suppose these, now grown men under those Parents, should have children too of
their own who should behave themselves in the same manner toward their Fathers
by believing and practicing as they taught them, without looking any farther,
would it not be equally evident they would still be Protestants also? Since to
believe and practice thus is to be a Protestant; and, would not this method if
followed carry on that doctrine still forwards from Generation to Generation to
the very end of the world? It Is then most easily evidenceable to the rudest
capacity that this immediate delivery of Tradition, as above explicated, is a
certain way of deriving down Christ's Doctrine while the world shall last. This
Property therefore of the Rule of Faith is found evidently to agree to
Tradition.

9. The third Condition, which is that the Rule of Faith must be apt to justify
unreflecting and unredoubting persons that they proceed rationally while they
rely on it, is found most exactly in Tradition. For the common course of human
conversation makes it a madness not to believe great multitudes of Knowers, if
no possible consideration can awaken in our reason a doubt that they conspire
to deceive us. Now in the way of Tradition all deliverers or immediate
Forefathers are Knowers, as appears in those who immediately heard the
Apostles; all the Knowledge requisite being of what they were taught, and
practic't accordingly all their lives; of which it is impossible the rudest
person should be ignorant, who ever had any Effect of such a Teaching wrought
upon him. Nor can any, unless their brains rove wildly or be unsettled even to
the degree of madness, suspect deceit where such multitudes unanimously agree
in a matter of fact, look seriously when they speak, act themselves and
practice accordingly, and show in the whole course of their carriage that they
hope to be saved themselves, and to save others whom they thus instruct, by
relying on this Truth that their Forefathers thus taught them; which amounts to
this, that Nature or common Reason at unawares steals into them a solid
apprehension that Tradition is of a certain kind of Nature; and so, that, while
Fathers thus taught Children, it was ever such, that is, that Tradition is a
certain Rule of conveying down Faith, which is all we study to evince at
present. I may add that, Nature telling them by their own experiences, that
Parents generally would be apt to teach their Children what themselves had been
taught and believed to be good, and true, and needful to their eternal
Salvation, their natural thoughts would lead them by a downright procedure, to
judge that Tradition was ever in some considerable Body of Deliverers who stuck
to it and owned it; and that those had true Faith, or truly that doctrine which
Christ and the first Planters of Christianity taught. But of this point more
hereafter.

10. If it be objected that this multitude of plain honest-meaning Souls are as
much justified for believing Scripture. I answer, that if you mean their Faith
conceived to be found in Scripture, or a determinate Sense of Scripture's
Letter, it cannot with any show of reason be pretended that they are as much
justifiable for believing any, setting aside Tradition's help; for, without
this it totally depends on the inward Judgments, Fancies or Skills of men which
they are unqualify'd to judge of; not on open verdict of Senses, to wield the
Certainty or Uncertainty of which lies clearly within the reach of their common
reason. And as for Scripture's Letter they cannot possibly be justified in
reason for believing even the Substantial Truth of it without Tradition's
assisting hand and preserving care. And the reason is the same; because the
common course of human Experience tells them that Judgments or Opinions often
disagree, but their plain Sensations (especially if frequently repeated) never;
Whence a Jury of the plainest High-shoes would, upon the Evidence of the sight
of six Witnesses, without more ado condemn a Malefactor; but not upon the
Judgments of a thousand men, if a Testimony grounded on Sense were not brought.
Now take away Tradition and all ground from Certain Sense fails us, either for
the meaning or even Letter of Scripture; and all is left to men's Judgments
built on latent Skills or Fancy, or at least on Sense liable to great and
numerous mistakes, as has been shown, ( Disc. 4.. 3.) Again, seeing every one
apprehends the most vulgar have reason enough to believe there was such a one
as K. James and Q. Elizabeth, of which they are no otherwise ascertained but by
Tradition; why are not they as much or more justified for believing points of
Faith received down by the same tenor? whereas if you go about to pump their
common Reason about the Authority of the Statute-Book or the Truth of its
Letter, you shall find them blunder and at a ^oss, being posed beyond their
sphere of (...) Nature by a question entrenching upon skill, to which they can
never answer with a steady assuredness inwardly; and, if they do so outwardly,
it is manifest that some Passion and not their Reason breeds that irrational
Profession. The third Condition then of the Rule of Faith, which was to be apt
to settle and justify unreflecting and undoubting vulgar, is manifestly found
agreeing to Tradition.

11. I put next the 6th. Condition, because the proof of it evidently proves
the fourth, fifth and seventh; For, what is built on immovable Grounds or
Certain in its self, has in it wherewith to settle and satisfy the most
piercing Wit^ convince the most obstinate Adversaries, and to ascertain us
absolutely. To prove that Tradition has Certain and Infallible Grounds it may
suffi^^ to note, that, ( Disc. 1.. 13, 14, 15.) it being evidently proved Faith
must be Infallible to us, an^ no less evident that it cannot be such without
having Infallibly-c^^tain Grounds, (since nothin^ can be firmer to us than the
ground it stands on now the Rule of Faith is its Ground; It follow evidently
that This must likewise be Infallib^^ certain. There being then only two
Ground or Rules of Faith owned; namely, Deliver of it down by Writing, and by
Words an^ Practice, which we call Oral and Practical Tradition, it is left
unavoydably, out of the imposibility that Scripture should be Infallible as
Rule, that Tradition must be such.

12. Though this Conclusion, supposing the Truth of the Propositions I assume
as alread^ proved, be sufficiently consequent to those Adversaries against whom
I contest at present the Certainty of Tradition, in regard they do (...) stick
to grant that either Scripture or Tradition must be the Rule of Faith; Yet I
foresee more will be expected from a pretender to demonstrate its Certainty,
and that he should frame his Discourse from intrinsecal Mediums. Reflecting
then on the nature of Tradition as before explicated, we shall observe that it
has for its Basis the best Nature in the Universe, that is, Man's, the Flower
and End of all the rest; and this, not according to his Moral part, defectible
by reason of Original Corruption; nor yet his Intellectuals, darkly groping in
the pursuit of Science by reflected thoughts or Speculation, amidst the misty
vapors exhaled by his Passion predominant over his rational Will; but
according to those faculties in him perfectly and necessarily subject to the
operations and strokes of Nature; that is, his Eyes, Ears, handling, and the
direct Impressions of Knowledge, as naturally and necessarily issuing from the
affecting those Senses, as it is to feel he^^, cold, Pain, Pleasure, or any
other material Quality. Again, those Impressions upon the Sense are not made
once but frequently; and, in most, many times every day. Moreover, to make
these more express and apt to be taken notice of, their lives are to be framed
by the Precepts they hear and conformable Examples they see; so that Faith (I
mean the substance of it, or that solid plain Knowledge as far as it is apt to
cause downright Christian (...)) comes clad in such plain matters of Fact that
the most stupid man living cannot possibly be ignorant of it. Compare next the
certainty each Christian Forefather has of what he has practic't all his life
with that which a sworn Witness in a Court has of what he saw or heard but
once; which done, multiply these thus-qualify'd Witnesses till you equal the
vast total of Christianity, and then invent what force in Nature's Universe is
comparable to this Inerrability of Tradition. And, if clear Reason evinces to
you that it is far more possible to make a man not be than not to know what is
rivetted into his Soul by so-oft-repeated Sensations; nay if it exceed all the
power of Nature (abstracting from the cases of Madness and violent disease) to
blot Knowledges thus fixed out of the Soul of one single Believer; then it is as
clearly evinc't that sooner may all Mankind perish than the regulative virtue
of Tradition miscarry: Nay, sooner may the sinows of entire Nature by
overstraining crack, and she lose all her activity and motion, that is, her
self, than one single part of that innumerable multitude which integrate that
vast Testification we call Tradition can possibly be violated. The virtue then,
by which Tradition regulates her followers to bring down Faith unerringly, is
grounded on a far stronger Basis than all material Nature; that is, on such a
one as was fitting for Supreme Wisdom to lay for Faith, being so near and
necessary a means to bring Mankind to his Beatitude, which was the end of all
this corporeal Architecture. Its Followers, I say; for I only contest in this
present part of my Discourse that Tradition, if followed, is of such a Nature:
whether it was always thus followed or no belongs to another Enquiry.

13. Nor must I neglect the reminding in this place what was produc^t before (.
8.) to show the Evidenceableness of Tradition's Ruling Power to the rudest
Enquirers; It being as Evident that while the next Age believes and practices
as the former Age held and practic't (that is, while the Rule of Tradition is
followed) those of the later Age are still of the same Faith with the former,
as it is that to believe the same is to believe the same. Only I am forbidden
by my Reason and Logic to call this a Proof or Argument, because it is of the
Nature of that first Principle Idem est idem sibijpsi, and only an Instance or
Particular of it, as these Propositions are, a stone is a stone, a man is a
man; in which the two Terms are as nearly laid and as fast connected as perfect
Identity can ciment them; that is, so close that no medium can come between to
make them capable of being argud or proved; that is, it is self-evident: and so
I had no more to do but by opening the Terms to explicate the Proposition;
which done it was evident beyond proof.

14. Let now the most rational Doubter or most Skeptical Dissenter muster all
the Caprichoes of Fancy Invention can suggest, and the subtlest quirks
ingeniously misused Logic and abus'd-into-Sophistry can furnish them with; Let
the most obstinate and acute Adversaries of Faith whet their wits to that
degree of sharpness as to be able to penetrate with nice distinctions between
the sides of two notions, if in the least disagreeing, (that is, only
metaphysically divisible,) and lay open their difference; what can they say in
this case? If they will argue against Tradition, it must be out of some
Knowledges; but Knowledge is taken from Things, and the best Thing in this
universe, to wit, Man's Nature in what he is unalterable, is engaged for the
Certainty of Tradition. But indeed, their proper task will be to find a
solution for; or to loose those two notions which perfect Identity binds, and
to blunder that Truth which the noon-day-Sun of Self evidence discovers, and
(as it were) writes with its most lightsome and most conspicous rays.

15. These four last Conditions then of the Rule of Faith most fully agree with
Tradition as well as the three first, that is, it is Self-evident to all as to
it is Existence,. 7. and Evidenceable as to it is Ruling Power to any vulgar
Enquirer,. 8. apt to settle and justify undoubting persons,. 9, 10. to satisfy
fully the most Skeptical dissenters and most rational doubters, and to convince
the most obstinate and acute Adversaries, built upon unmovable Grounds, that
is, Certain in it is self and absolutely ascertainable to us,. 11, 12, 13, 14.
And these Properties springing out of the very nature of the Rule of Faith, and
being incompetent to any Competitor or pretended Rule, as has been shown, this
main Conclusion is made good, that TRADITION IS THE RULE OF FAITH.

SIXTH DISCOURSE.
Endeavoring to demonstrate a priori the Indefectibleness of Tradition.
1. ALl this is well, may some say, in case Tradition had been ever held to;
for then indeed Faith had come down by such an incomparable Testification that
the like was never heard of. But how know we who began to desert that Rule, and
who ever held to it; or that it was ever held to by any?

2. Now, though the carriage of Protestants makes this labor needless, while I
write against them; yet I owe to my former discourse a clearing of this
likewise. Their Carriage, I say; For, when it is proved evidently that
Tradition is a certain Rule and Scripture's Letter not such, they who reject
the former to adhere to the later are clearly cast in their Cause and condemned
without more ado. Indeed, If Protestants faulted not the Rule but only
pretended that men had failed it, they might yet delude the world with some
color that they had ever held to the doctrine of Ancestors, and only deserted
us because we had deserted Ancestors formerly; but if they put the fault in
the Rule it self, write against it, disgrace it and recurr to another, it is a
certain sign of self-condemnation, and that they judge in their inmost thoughts
that Tradition or immediate delivery ever stood our Friend and would overthrow
them. Nay, did they think they could manifest satisfactorily that we had
deserted formerly the Faith of our Forefathers as they pretend, they had no
more efficacious way to ruin us than to oppose us upon those Principles laid
in this former Discourse; since Tradition, a little after the Primitive times,
at which time they pretend we fell, had not gone down many steps, and so the
Renouncers of it would in reason seem to them more easily discoverable by its
vicinity to the Apostles. Besides, this Rule being so owned and stuck to by us
it had been the most efficacious way ad hominem to confute and shame us even by
our own Principles. Wherefore it is most evident they think it not their best
play to offer to avail themselves by Tradition, knowing 'twill be their
disadvantage and our gain; that is, they in effect tacitly yield that (if
Tradition be a Certain Rule, which we have shown self-evident) the doctrine held
by our Church to be of Faith came down uninterruptedly from the Apostles, that
is, was ever, or is Christ's doctrine, however, they blind their own Consciences
with glances of Fancy from private Interpretations of God's word, and deaf
their own and others ears with empty sounds rebounding witth false Echoes from
those Sacred Oracles.

3. Now, though it seem an unreasonable expectation to require that a Rule
should not only be able to rule those who would follow it, but also should
have power to oblige the generality of those who actually do follow it not to
desert it; yet, such is the Goodness of our Savior toward his Church to order
that the Rule which brings down Faith to us should, both out of the Nature of
Man in which it is grafted, and much more by means of the doctrine it
recommends, be of so wonderful an Efficacy.

4. This point therefore of the actual Indefectiveness of Tradition I shall
endeavor to demonstrate both a priori from proper Causes, and a posteriori
from a now-adayes experienced Effect.

5. To do the former, I say for my Grounds, First, that Christian doctrine was
at first unanimously settled by the Apostles in the hearts of the Faithful
dispersed in great multitudes over several parts of the world. Secondly, that
this doctrine was firmly believed by all those Faithful to be the way to Heaven,
and the contradicting or deserting it the way to damnation; so that the
greatest Hopes and Fears imaginable were by engaging the Divine Authority
strongly applied to the Minds of the First Believers, encouraging them to the
adhering to that doctrine, and deterring them from relinquishing it; and indeed
infinitely greater than any other whatever springing from any temporal
consideration; and that this was in all Ages the persuasion of the Faithful.
Thirdly, that Hopes of Goods and Fears of Harms strongly applied are the Causes
of Actual Will. Lastly, that the thing was feisible or within their power, that
is, that what they were bred to was Knowable by them. This put, it follows as
certainly that a great number or Body of the first Believers and after-Faithful
in each Age, that is from Age to Age, would continue to hold themselves and
teach their Children as themselves had been taught, that is, would follow and
stick to Tradition, as it does that a Cause put actually causing produces it is
Effect. Actually, I say; For, since the Cause is put, the Application put, and
the Patient disposed (for our Argument puts this to be the Minds of true
Believers, in regard the first Renouncers of Tradition must have been True
Believers or Holders of it ere they renounced it) it follows inevitably that
the Cause is put still actually causing.

6. I foresee some will object the Indisposition of the Wills of the Believing
Parents by reason of original Corruption. But, supposing I dispute against
those Christians who hold that Christ's Doctrine was intended to be an Antidote
for that Original malice, and to keep Men's Wills (already possessed with it)
right, notwithstanding the poize of their corrupted Nature and the temptations
of their circumstances; to say it is applied universally to all several sorts
and tempers, and preserves none good, is to question Christ's Wisdom, and to
doubt whether it be fit to do the Effect it was meant for. Not to mind the
Objecter how many thousands of Martyrs and Holy Confessors, by the Power of
this Doctrine, overcame this inbred declivity of their Wills and its disorderly
inclinations to the dearest Goods Life or Nature could bestow. A great part
therefore would be virtuous, and so (it being easy and obvious, as our former
Discourse proved) would teach their Children what themselves believed in their
Consciences to be Christ's Doctrine, or the doctrine they had been taught; and
so a Body of Traditionary Christians would still be continued to the very End
of the World; nor could that Rule be totally relinquisht by any Stratagem of
the Devil or prevailed against by the gates of Hell. Again, though Nat^re
incline men to sin or vicious Appetites, yet can it incline them all to this
sort of sin, that is, to teach their Children what they think will damn them?
Or rather does not Nature most strongly carry them to the contrary? Their
Original corruption then is no particular inviter to this kind of sin, to teach
their Children pernicious falsehoods, and which themselves hold such; though
themselves be otherwise liable to several sort of particular failings.

7. If any object the fickle nature of the Will, and imagine that this exempts
her from the Laws of Causes; I ask them (without engaging farther into
School-disputes, which I industriously avoid) whether Good be not the proper
Object of the Will, and so is to affect it when sufficiently applied or
proposed? If so, then, since an Object to affect a Power is to put it in act,
and the Act of the Power we call the Will is actual Volition or Willing, Good
proposed makes the Will to will or desire that Good, and consequently the known
means to obtain it; Now, Infinite Goods and Harms sufficiently proposed are of
their own nature incomparably more powerful Causes to carry the Will, than
Temporal ones. Since then, when two Causes are counterpos'd, the lesser, when
it comes to execution, is no Cause, as to the substance of that Effect (as a
heavy weight, which were otherwise a cause of descending, is no such Cause when
overweigh^d by an heavier, as not making its scale descend at all) it follows
that there is no Cause to move the Wills of a World of Believers to be willing
to do that which they judge would lose themselves and their Posterity Infinite
Goods and bring them Infinite Harms, such strong and main Hopes and Fears being
put in the counter-ballance, in case a sufficient Proposal or Application be
not wanting.

8. The last Attempt then of an Objectour is to fault the Application of
Spiritual and Heavenly Goods, and to enhance the Proposals of sensible and
Temporal Objects. But, if we reflect with how steady a pursuit and even equal
to that of eyesight or any other Sense, we generally work for Ends no
otherwise proposed than by undoubted Authority; as when a King prepares for an
Expedition against a foreign Country he never saw, or a Gentleman for a journey
to Rome and such like; If we but call to mind how the greatest Testimony in the
world engages God's supremely-Infallible Veracity for the truth of the Doctrine,
it proposes, which ascertains us of those Infinite Goods and Harms spoken of;
the best Application of a motive to a truly rational power which can possibly
be imagined; If we but consider how those spiritual and unseen Goods are made
Intelligible to all, in a fair measure, by most fit and obvious Metaphors;
Familiar and Sensible, by daily practice and as it were Experience of them in
Christian Language and Actions, by the venerable Sacraments, by the spectable
Majesty of outward Ceremonies, all including our spiritual last End or
intimating it by their order to it; nay, if we but contemplate even Essential
Heaven it self made the Object of our Senses, to comply with our weakness, by
the Word's being made Flesh and dwelling amongst us, his being born, his
suffering cold, hunger, persecution, banishment and other inconveniences in
his Life; his curing our diseased, comforting our afflicted, raising our dead,
and other miraculous actions; his being bound, buffetted, scourged, crowned
with thorns, and lastly crucified; and all this believed to be for our sakes;
all of them Objects most sensibly and palpably affecting our Understandings and
thence sliding movingly (and this by their sensible nature) into our very
Wills; we shall discover that the Infinite Spiritual Good we spoke of is become
through the Provident Goodness of our God, both as easily appliable as the most
visible and concerning civil Actions working on the best Sensations of our
Forefathers, the best and amplest Authority in the world to make their
Sensations ours, and the whole course of our Life, Actions, Sacraments, and all
other outward shows which could be invented to make such mysteries maniable,
can possibly render them; and that, if after all this they can be conceived to
want any thing of the Sensibleness, it is abundantly supplied by that deep
Impression which the Sacred Horror of the Reverence given to them makes, and
the efficacious ways to excite and and preserve that Reverence. All which
ways and objects, thus easily and strongly appliable were frequently and
efficaciously applied by the education of Parents and by the Discipline and
Economy of the Church, which brings those speculations to practice, was ever,
and must needs reach the Generality. In a word, Christianity, urged to
execution, gives its Followers a new Life and a new Nature; than which a nearer
Application cannot be imagined. No Application therefore is wanting; Wherefore,
the Efficient and the Matter being proper and fitted to one another, the Effect
must still be or continue; that is the delivering down sincerely and carefully
Christian Doctrine first received must still continue in some great multitude at
least, and this to the end of the world.

SEVENTH DISCOURSE,
An Objection cleared, and the Beginning and Progress of an HERESY connaturally
laid open.
1. WHat only and mainly seems to prejudice our Argument is, that there have
actually been many Heretics or Deserters of Tradition. To which I answer that
it is not to be expected but some Contingency should have place where an whole
Species in a manner is to be wrought upon. It suffices us that the Causes to
preserve Faith indeficiently entire are as efficacious as those which are laid
for the propagagation of Mankind; The Virtue of Faith not being to continue
longer than Mankind, its only Subject, does: And they will easily appear as
efficacious as the other if we consider the strength of those Causes before
explicated, and reflect that they are effectively powerful to make multitudes
daily debar themselves of those pleasures which are the Causes of Mankind's
Propagation. And, if we look into History for Experience of what has past in
the world since the first planting of Christianity, we shall find fa^ more
particulars failing in propagating their Kind than their Faith.

2. I know the multitudes of Heretics which have from time to time risen makes
this position seem incredible; wherefore, that we may (...) once both open
Tradition and make good ou^ Tenet, we will reflect how an Heresy is first bred
To enforce then our former Argument, we mus^ look on Christ's Church not only
as on a Congregation having in their hearts those most powerful motives already
spoken of, able of their own nature to carry each single heart possessed by them,
though left at its own liberty; but as o^ the perfectest form of a
Commonwealth, having within her self Government and Officers appointed by
Christ himself, and so looked upon by the Faithful, to take care all those
motives b^ actually applied as much as may be to the subject Layity; and that
all the Sons of the Church be awed by wholesome discipline to conform their lives
according to the Doctrine they profess. Yet notwithstanding, as in the Civil
State, maugre the Laws and care of Governors, it happens sometimes that some
particular Person turns Rebel or Outlaw, and associates to himself others; so
it happens sometimes in the Church, that, because it is impossible the
perfection of Discipline should extend it self in so vast a multititude to every
particular, some one or few persons, by neglect of applying Christian motives
to their Souls, fall into extravagancies of spiritual Pride, Ambition, Lust, or
other vices; and itching with desire of followers to honor and support them,
they first lay hold on some accidental miscarriages, as foolish opinions or ill
lives of some in the Church, which they aggravate beyond all reason to justify
their Rebellion, and (...) invent and propose new Tenets to others; which
partly by their plausibleness, partly licentiousness, suting with the curious
or passionate humor of diverse, if Governors be not vigilant and prudent,
draw them into the same faction with themselves; especially, if they get the
State on their sides, secure indemnity and hopes of reward draw the corrupt
hearts of many to bandy with their fellow-revolters against the former Church.
Thus a Body is made; inconsiderable in respect of the whole, which yet is
engaged by the natural care of self-preservation to make Head against it. The
Church stands upon the uninterrupted Succession of her Doctrine from Christ,
grounded on the noonday manifestation of the most universal and clear
Attestation in the world: The other's known newness makes it impossible to
human nature (though most deprau'd) to pretend this reception from immediate
Forefathers; the contrary being so evident to the whole world's eyesight that
this were to tell an openly to no imaginable purpose. They must cry therefore
the Church has erred in Faith, else they condemn themselves; whence they are
obliged at next to renounce and disgrace Tradition or the living voice of the
Church as unfit to be a Rule, which left in force would presently quash and
strangle all their Attempts. After this a new Rule must be sought for; either
some private Inspiration, or some waxen-natur^d words not yet senc't not having
any certain Interpreter, but fit to be played upon diversely by quirks of wit;
that is, apt to blunder and confound, but to clear little or nothing. Their
Policy must be to study vapor in wordish learning, to be dextrous in
Criticisms and all that can conduce to the various acception of words; and then
to hook Catholics from their Infallible and Evident way of Tradition, to
combat with them at their own weapon and in their own way: In which if the
Catholic be so unwary or good-natur^d as to engage, and having been inur^d to
more solid and sober Grounds for his Faith, be not perhaps so skilful in
beating the air as his bird-witted Opponent, presently a Victory is proclaimed
with the loudest Trumpet of Fame, and (vanity being generally their God who
place their honor in such aerie sorts of learning) blazed up and down to the
commendation of themselves and perversion of others. But a company which makes
such a bustle cannot long want a Name; Wherefore, the Traditionary Christian
having ever enjoyd the Appellation of Catholic, and it being impossible their
Adversaries should by any design or craft after the common Language of Mankind,
hopeless to attain the name of Catholic, they are forced to content themselves
(though unwilling) with some other new one; which, Nature, working upon their
own comportment, determines to be either from their Author, as Lutherans,
Zuingliaus; or their new Tenet, as Tritheits, Sacramentarians; or some
combination amongst themselves, as Protestants; or, lastly, some particular
carriage, as Quakers, Dippers, etc.

3. These first Adherents to the upstart Novellist being clung into a Body,
after a while young understandings ripening to a capacity of Faith, things are
presently alterd; The pretended Rule of Scripture's Letter's self-sufficiency
is immediately thrown by as useless any farther; Design has got its end
already, and the natural way of of Tradition begins to take place again and
recover its self; nay the Reformers themselves are forced to crave help of it
to keep their company together. Children are taught that they are to believe
their Pastors and Fathers; and, though they are permitted to read the
Scripture when they come at age, yet they are told they are to guide themselves
by the sense their Pastors and Fathers give it, which is that they ought to
guide themselves by the Faith of their Parents and Teachers in interpreting
Scripture; the very way Catholics ever took in that particular: And, if any
company of men though now mature to judge, presume to follow their own
Judgment in interpreting it, and differ from those first Reformers, these if
they get the power in their hands will presently fall to oblige them by force
to act, that is (if they would have them do it conscientiously, which else were
to force them to sin) to hold as they do, and persecute or punish them if they
do not; whereas they guide themselves to their best capacity by the Scripture's
Letter which is the very Rule of Faith their Persecutors taught them and made
use of themselves when they broke from the Church. Which evidently shows that a
new Rule is introduc't; and that it is not indeed the Letter of God's word
which is now thought fit to guide the Readers of it to Faith, but those men's
Interpretations of it. So that the breaking from Tradition and consequently the
Church casts them most inevitably upon these self-contradictions. First, to
reform npon pretense of the Scripture's Letter being the Rule of Faith, yet
afterward in practice to desert that Rule in their carriage toward others.
Secondly, to disallow to others those Grounds themselves proceed upon. Thirdly,
to pretend first the Scripture's Letter clear of it self without needing the
Church to interpret it, so to avoid condemnation from the former Church; yet
afterward, to judge the Followers of it to their best power to go wrong; that
is, to confess it obscure, and to need their new Churches Interpretation. 4ly.
To persecute others for taking that way, which they held (at least pretended)
meritorious in themselves. 5ly. To oblige others to relinquish the sole
guidance of the Scriptures Letter and to rule themselves by their Tradition;
and yet at the same time when they write and dispute against Catholics, to
impugn Tradition or the doctrine of Forefathers as unfitting to sense it, and
abet only the self-sufficiency of Scriptures Letter. And, lastly, to impute
that carriage to our Church as a fault which themselves practice upon their own
Subjects: And, which is most material, our Church punishes none but such as
desert the Rule she recommends; whereas they punish those under them for
following too close that Rule which themselves recommended and applauded, as
the whole and sole Bafis of their Reformation.

4. Now, what can follow hence but that their Ecclesiastical Subjects whom
Common Sense cannot but make exceeding sensible of such their unreasonable
carriage, in persecuting them purely for following God's word or the
Scripture's Letter to their best power, which themselves had taught them might
securely, nay ought in conscience be followed, let the Consent of Forefathers
and the present Church made up of mee^ men say what they would, what fallows,
I say, but that exasperated beyond patience by this procedure which they will
be apt to conceive to be a most senceless and self-condemning tyranny over
their Consciences, they will (unless Governors be vigilant,) strive to wreak
their malice against their Persecutors; and if they be numerous and powerful,
endeavor to involve whole Nations in war and blood; which God of his mercy
avert from our distracted Country. Of so main consequence it is both for Church
and State that men's Minds be right set in the Fundamental Grounds of
Christianity; and that the Principle they build Religion on be Evident, that
is, apt to unite their Understa^dings and by it their Affections; not uncertain
and vertible, which must needs lead (if pursued by an earnest zeal) to nothing
but diversities in Opinions about Faith, thence to dissensions and Feuds in the
Will, which upon any great pressure will be apt to break forth into actions of
highest enmity; and by the irreconcileableness of such Interests, (neither side
being able to yield to the other in what each of rhem holds Sacred, Religious
and Conscientious) endless and fiercest bickerings are apt to succeed, even to
utter desolation; as frequent Histories too lamentably record. Not that I
intend the Justification of those revolting Sects, who having no certain
Grounds of Controversy are both self-condemned by the common Light of Reason
for disobeying a Certain and Known Legal Authority (which God's Law and plain
Reason commands them to submit to) to maintain an Uncertainty, that is for any
thing they know an Error; and, were it a known Truth they held, would be no
less condemned by the Law of God and common Reason, nay out the nature of
Religion it self, for making Rebellion and an unimpower'd Sword the Defense of
Truth which stands firm on a surer Basis. I only mind prudent Considerers on
the by how much it conduces to State-Unity and Peace that the Principle of
conveying Faith to us be built on Sensible Evidence acknowledgable by all
Mankind, when rightly understood; and not left to giddy Interpretations of
Private Fancies, which are apt to run so eccentrically to one another, that we
can never expect they shall have any common point, where to fix and unite men's
Minds and Afflections.

5. The usefulness of this Parergon serves to elucidate as it were ptactically
and experimentally the Certainty of Tradition. The particular use we make of it
in this present Discourse, whence we digrest into it, is to conclude (as well
as we can of things at a common view, which yet is no less certain) that the
number of the actual Deserters of the natural way of Tradition have been but
few, to wit the first Revolters, a small handful compared to all Christianity
besides, and only occasionally not constantly happening; that the Descendents
of these Revolters were taught by them to believe Them in the right, in
interpreting Scripture, and not their own Judgments; that is, followed the way
of Tradition, however misplac't: To which if we compare the numerous
contingencies both in man's Nature and other circumstances, hindering
Propagation, every day happening, we shall find much reason to prefer the
multitudes of the other before this: But if we add to this Consideration the
daily decay of innumerable particulars, upon whom the Continuation of Mankind
depends, by natural or accidental deaths, and reflect on the innumerable new
Subjects and even whole Nations into which Tradition has and does daily
propagate it self, and those uninfected by new Heresies for whole Ages, that is
without any one Deserter of Tradition among them; and none of those beholding
to Progenitors for their Faith but to Externs who converted them, whereas
Propagating their Kind can only be by those of the same race; We shall find
that the Causes laid to propagate and preserve a Body of Traditionary
Christians look far more steadily and less needing a recourse to any particular
Providence than those which we can discover laid for the keeping on Foot a Body
of Men. Whence, if any (as the common fashion is) bring against the
perpetuation of Tradition such wildroving Arguments as would equally strike at
the Certainty of perpetuating Mankind, or continuing any Species in Nature, the
readiest answer is to show they do so; and then to tell them we intend not
Tradition should last longer than the only Species capable of Faith will; that
is, longer than Mankind is to stand, who only can have it or need it.

EIGHTH DISCOURSE.
Endeavoring to demonstrate a Posteriori the Vninterruptedness of Tradition
hitherto.
1. HAving seen and weighed the strength of those Causes which preserve and
continue Tradition on Foot, and thence endeavored to demonstrate its
Indefectibleness as the proper and necessary Effects of those Causes; we will
now begin our Discourse at the other end, and try if we can conclude the same
from some Proper Effect; that is, from such an Effect as could only have
sprung from the actual Indeficiency of Tradition as its Cause: That so we may
show the Certainty of Faith's Conveyance to us do^bly guarded, and on all sides
Evident.

2 Though indeed this seems a needless endeavor against the Protestant who
yields that those points of Faith in which we agree came dow^ by this way of
Tradition. Whence, he is to be pressed to answer heartily these Queres. W^ not
the Trinity, Incarnation and other points (...) which we agree held in all Ages
since Christ by Gods Church? He must yield it, no Protesta^^ ever denying it;
besides that we both agree to call that God's Church which held those mai^
points of Faith. Next, he is to be asked, whether seeing those points were held
ever of Faith, Fathers did not actually teach Children so, or the former Age
the later. Common reason will teach him they did; which devolves into this that
a Protestant must confess those points came down by Tradition, and that
Tradition has not faild to bring them down to us. Ask him next by what virtue
Tradition performed this and whether the same virtue were not powerful to bring
down others as well as these had any such been? And, when he assigns this
virtue, I cannot suspect him negative in so plain a point. Ask him farther; Is
there not a necessary Connection and Relation between such a constant Cause and
its formal Effect? So that, if its formal Effect be Those Points received as
delivered ever, the Proper Cause must be an ever-delivery, whence, we can argue
from such an Effect to its Cause for any particular Point, and consequenly for
any Point that is in Controversy between Them and Us, in case it be a Point we
held ever delivered: And if so, as manifest Reason evinces it, our now-held
Faith was taught by Christ and his Apostles, and our dispute is at an end. But,
because I rather suspect the Protestant seeing his Cause and Interest too deep
engaged and himself straightened by such strict Connection of Terms, will fly of
and deny Tradition to be a necessary Cause, notwithstanding its constant tenor
of having wrought this its Effect millions of times, or from step to step
during so many Ages, and will not care to allege that all this is pure Chance
and contingency, I shall pursue the Design and Method I at first intended.

3. The Effect then we will pitch upon and avow to be the proper one of such a
Cause, is The present persuasion of Traditionary-Christians (or Catholics,)
that their Faith has descended from Christ and his Apostles uninterruptedly,
which we find most firmly rooted in their hearts. And the Existence of this
Persuasion we affirm to be Impossible without the Existence of Traditions
ever-Indeficiency to beget it.

4. To prove this, I lay this first Principle. That Age which holds her Faith
delivered thus from the Apostles neither can it self have changed any thing in
it, nor know or doubt that any Age since the Apostles had changed or innovated
any thing therein. This Proposition needs no proof to evidence it, but only an
Explication; For, since no man can hold contrary to his Knowledge, or doubt of
what he holds, nor change or innovate in the case proposed without knowing he
did so; it is a manifest Impossibility an whole Age should fall into an
Absurdity so inconsistent with the Nature of one single man.

5. The second Principle shall be this, No Age could innovate any thing, and
withal deliver that very thing to Posterity as receiv^d from Christ by
continual succession. For, since Man is a rational Creature, he must have some
reason or motive, good or bad, which he proposes to himself as an Eud to be
achieved by his action; and (whatever his remote end is) his immediate End in
telling Posterity a late invented thing was held immediately before, is to make
them believe it; Wherefore, since a seen Impossibility cannot be a motive to
one not frantic, and that it is evidently Impossible they should make Posterity
believe a thing so universally known to be false as this must needs be; because
were it possible the whole Age should conspire to tell such a lie, (the whole,
I say, otherwise the Refusers would easily discover the cheat) yet it is
manifestly Impossible all at age to know the truth should conspire from so many
several and so far distant places, in the precise time to deceive the new
Offspring every month ripening to a capacity of such knowledges, or blot out
all the Monuments which would evidently undeceive their abused Posterity: It Is
then as impossible this Principle should falter as that the foregoing Age
should conspire to act without a motive or that the succeeding Age should
believe what they know to be otherwise; that is, should hold both sides of a
Contradiction in a clear matter of Fact, which is utterly inconsistent with a
judging or congnoscitive nature.

6. These Principles laid, we we will advance to the proof of our main
Conclusion on this manner; that since neither any Age (by our first Principle)
could hold a new introduc't point for not-new but immediately delivered; nor
yet any foregoing Age (by our second) make it be received as not-new by
Posterity, it follows that in no Age could any doctrine changing the immediate
Faith of Forefathers or new at that time, come in or be received under the
notion of immediately delivered or not-new at that time. Wherefore, since
nothing can descend or come down under the notion of not-new, or delivered
uninterruptedly, unless it first come in or be received under the notion of
not-new or delivered uninterruptedly, nor be held by us as descended under such
a notion unless it did actually descend to us under such a notion (by the
second) it follows manifestly that, if we now hold it descended as such, it did
descend as such, and consequently was received by the deliverers as such; and
(the same reason holding equally in each Age from Christ,) came down
consequently from Christ and his Apostles. No power then or wit of man could
make our Faith now held to be so descended, but its having been actually so
descended: that is, only the Existence of Tradition's Indeficiency could have
effected this present persuasion of Traditionary Christians (or Catholics)
that their Faith descended uninterruptedly from the Apostles. It being then
manifest by Experience that this Effect or present Persuasion is, (for all
Catholics hold the Church never failed in Faith,) it is demonstratively Evident
that its proper and only Cause has been put; that is, that Christian Tradition
has ever been held to by a Body of Men consisting of the Predecessors to those
whom we find actually thus persuaded.

NINTH DISCOURSE.
Opening the incomparable strength of the Churches Human Authority, and the
Infinite advantages accrue to It by the Supernatual Assistances of the Holy
Ghost.
1. BUt all this is Nature may some say, and by this Method an Heathen may by
his natural wit become a good Christian. By which word Nature, if the Objecter
means Reason wrought upon by motives laid by God's special goodness to bring
Souls to Bliss, I wonder what else is Supernaturality but this which he
miscalls Nature; and why Reason, rectified by such Lights and Proposals as the
force of Nature could not have aimed at much less effected, ought not to be
said to be affected supernaturally, however those very motives be connatural to
our Souls: It being evident that we use even the natural power of our Reason in
discoursing of things above our reason; and, on the other side to expect no
constant way or common path of motives laid for the Salvation of Mankind, but
extraordinary inspirations for each particular man, unravell's the Order of
God's best Providence, and is the very notion of Fanatickness. But to meddle
with this point is out of my road otherwise than to take my rise hence to show
how far Christian Tradition is strengthen^d above the greatest meerly-human
Testimony whatever: And that the Church owes this strength to those Motives
supervening to mere Nature, which we rightly call Assistances of the Holy
Ghost; in regard they are built on Perfections of Will in the Faithful, or on
Virtues, the Effects properly attributed to that Divine Person.

2. Ere we come to explain what advantage the Church as thus divinely assisted
has over her self as merely wrought upon by human motives, we will compare
first her human Authority with some other vast Body of Testifiers which may
most seem to stand in competition with her. And an eminent and acute opposer of
Tradition has already pointed us out a choice one; namely, that of the
Mahometans for Mahomet's Existence: which we doubt not to have the power to
convey down the Truth thereof with Infallible Certainty to the end of the
world, if followed; not do we think the most Skeptical Protestant doubts but it
has had the force to make it self be followed hitherto; however at unawares
their calm Reason grants that to a Body of Turks which their Passion makes them
question and even deny to a Church of Christians. Yet, I averr that the human
force of Tradition in the Church for the descent of the main Body of Christ's
doctrine far exceeds that of the Turks for Mahomet's Existence.

3. To show this in brief I note in the first place and chiefly; that howsoever
a report may spread universally from a small beginning in the quality of a
rumor, yet the force of its Credibility, if it be a matter of Fact, is founded
on the Quantity and Quality of those who first saw or perceived it. Putting
then the Quality of the Testifiers in both cases to be equal, so to bring our
Controversy to a smaller compass, and comparing only the Quantity or Number of
the original Testifiers on both sides; what proportion is there between that
handful of men about Mecha and some few other places where Mahomet conquered
and planted his doctrine, and those vast multitudes whom all the Apostles,
Disciples, and Apostolical men converted by most powerful miracles in so many
distant Nations in the World? If we lay them together we shall find that few
saw or felt (that is, were witnesses of) Mahomets Existence so much as once, in
comparison of those who were every day imbued with and practic^t Christian
Doctrine. A new Consideration springs hence that it is a thousand times easier
for that single company of Arabians and Syrians to conspire to a ly and so
deliver down to us a false Mahomet, than it is for such a multitude of people
in so remote Countries as first sucked in Christianity to conspire in the very
thought of having such a Conspiracy. And, lastly, it was as easy by often
repeated Sensatio^s to know Christian Doctrine at first to that degree as to
govern their actions by it (which is all that is requisite for the generality)
it giving the Principles to the daily practice of their new Life as they were
Christians, as it was for these other witnesses to be certain of Mahomet's
Existence; and much easier, in regard the greater part by far of those whom we
allow Witnesses of Mahomets Existence perhaps scarce knew him by sight; not
conversing him daily or very often, as each of the Primitive Christians did
with those points of Faith they guided their lives by.

4. The human Authority then of the Church being such as exceeds she Evidence
of other Testimonies, which yet are such that amongst all the most extravagant
Opiniastres none was ever found so frantic as to doubt them; and should any do
so, all sober Mankind would esteem them stark mad; which could not be done in
reason unless they renounced perfect evidence, that is, unless those
Testimonies were perfectly Evident: This, I say, being so, some may think it
superfluous and a quirk of an overstraining Fancy to contend there is any
greater Evidence to ascertain the conveyance of our Faith from Christ's time to
us. But, whoever reflects on the reason of those words, Sic Deus dilexit Mundum
ut Filium suum Vnigenitum daret, John 3. 16. Or for those, Nunquid de bobus
cura est Deo? 1 Cor. 9. 9. Nonne vos magis pluris estis volatilibus caeli? Mat.
6. 26. and such like; or, on what Metaphysics demonstrate concerning the
perfect methods and ways of Essential Wisdom, will easily be convinced that,
if the Salvation of Mankind be the End of this material world's Creation, the
Providence to bring about this End ought in true wisdom be so particular and
so sublimely efficacious that the means laid for the preservation of any other
species in Nature would scarce deserve the name of a Providence in comparison
of the other. Whence follows, that the means which are mainly influential to
promote Man toward Bliss (such as is Faith, the Rule of that Life by which he
tends to Heaven, and the Substance of his Hope which gives the vigor to that
Life) must be Certain (its Efficacy depending on this Certainty) beyond any
Evidence mere Nature could compass. Which that great Meditater on God's Law day
and night well comprehended, when out of the full sight of this Truth he burst
out into that expression of wonderment, Testimonia tua, Domine, credibilia,
facta suut nimis.

5. We will briefly touch at some of the Advantages which those Assistances
superadded to Nature give the Church, and leave them to be scanned by the
leasurely thoughts of attentive Considerers.

6. First then, we find that it is natural to every Man that his Phantasms
should be such as the Impressions of the Objects are apt to make them, his
Thoughts appropriated to his Phantasms, and his outward expressions concerning
the thing, and amongst them his Words, conformable to his Thoughts: So that
true Words and sincere Actions are the proper Effects of the other Causes, and
necessarily produced by them if Design hinder not: Which amounts to this, that
it is Natural for every man to speak Truth; and that, whenever one speaks False
wittingly, Artifice makes him cast about to contrive a ly fittingly to the end
he aims at; whence it is that Fools and drunken men, who are incapable of such
Artifice, use to tell the plain Truth. If this be so in Nature, and that Grace
is to perfect Nature in whatever is good in it, it follows that one truly
Christian heart is far more fixed to Veracity than others not imbued with those
heavenly Tenets; and consequently that a Multitude of such incomparably exceed,
in point of testifying, the same number of others unfortify'd by Christ's
Doctrine.

7. This will be clearer if we reflect upon the way by which Original
Corruption violates frequently in execution this natural Veracity; and it is
this; that inclining and transporting them to the undue love of Creatures even
to the injuring known rational Orders laid in the world and most necessary for
the subsistence or Universal well-being of Mankind (which we call the
Commandments) hence, afraid to own such an enormous procedure, they cast about
to cloak it with sought pretenses. The sum therefore of Christianity tending to
implant in the hearts of the Faithful an over-powering Love of Supreme
spiritual Goods attainable in the next Life, and by consequence to take off
their extravagant affection to earthly things, it leaves Man's natural
disposition to Truth free to do its Effect, and renders needless that crafty
way of design, only which could bias and pervert the Will from pursuing the
way of Nature.

8. Compare we now the positive Motives, Natural and Supernatural, obliging to
Veracity, and we find the Hopes and Fears which Christianity proposes to make
and keep men Good as infinitely exceeding the Natural ones as Eternity does a
moment, abating the intenseness of the Goods and Harms hoped for and feared,
nay held firmly by all and conceited lively by many to be beyond all imaginable
comparison greater than the other. Yet experience tells us and none doubts but
that these transitory and incomparably-less Goods and Harms are sufficient
Motives to oblige Bodies of Men to deliver down Politic or Natural matters of
Fact, as the Existence of such former Kings (to blunder which truth there
wanted not highest Interests were it conceived feisible) such Eclipses, Wars,
etc. Inconcievably more powerful then must the other motives be to oblige them
to Veracity in such narrations on which the destroying or preserving those
highest concerns depend. And what prevalency Eternal motives had over Temporal
ones when they came to clash so near as one must forego one Hope or the other
is seen by the perpetual and constant sufferings of the Martyrs in all Ages,
and the many Persecutions daily and gladly undergone every day in many places
for Conscience Sake.

9. In the Natural Commonwealth there are multitudes of men deputed
particularly to great Trusts, and some Extraordinary Ceremony done upon them to
make them true to such Trusts, nay Oaths by things they highly reverence taken,
not only by those Officers, but sometimes (though rarely) by the Generality to
secure their Fidelity. But what proportion can those Ceremonies bear being but
of human Institution to the Sacraments of the Church held to have been
instituted by Christ himself; many of which are common to all Christians; some
to initiate them most solemnly at first, or to rivet that Initiation with a new
military Tessera; some to strengthen and cure the languishing; some to win to
Love by Acts of greatest Bounty; Others are proper to empower some as Officers
to oversee the common affairs of Faith; all tending to strengthen powerfully
the Generality not to prevaricate from the Faith held ever truly received down,
and particularly to oblige Governors not to belly themselves or connive at
others grossly belying their Forefathers and betraying their Depositum.

10. Though Nature teaches the rudest that they should not do to another what
they would ^ot have done to themselves, yet Original Cor^^ption too often makes
us prevaricate in pra^ice from that evident Rule: and the Reason because while
men's Affections are chiefly ^tch't on Temporal Goods, hence, in regard ^hey
are finite, that is such that if one have ^ore another has less of them, such
men are ^t enviously to deprive their partaking Neigh^ours of them, that so the
greatest part may ^ll to their own share: But, such an action can ever proceed
from, nor thought enter into the ^ost deprau'd nature as to harm another
without ^y good to himself. Now, this in our Case ^ust be put, if we put
Christian Fathers mis^aching their Children unreceived doctrins for ^^ceived
contrary to their own knowledge. For, ^^pposing Sanctity in the Church, that
is, that ^ultitudes in it make Heaven their first Love, and look on Spiritual
Goods as their main con^ern, which are of such a Nature that none has ^ess for
another's having more, but on the con^^ary the Multitudes of virtuous persons
would ^elp to increase both Virtue and Glory too in their fellows and
relations; It follows, that ^ad those Fathers in any Age consented to mis^^ad
their Posterity from what themselves con^eit to be true, they should do the
most Extreme ^arm imaginable to others, without any the ^east Good to
themselves; which is perhaps im^ossible in one single man, more in a few, but
^nfinitly in a multitude, especially of good men Moreover, Christ's Law being
the Law of Ch^rity, which includes Love of our Neighbou^ it is directly opposite
to the Principles of Christi^nity to do them an injury of so high a nature
(...) to debar them Heaven and send them to Hel^ and all this gratis.

11. Again, the greater the Recommends any Truth is, the greater is the
obligation not belly our selves and it. Let us weigh then (...) Recommends which
Christian doctrine receive from Forefathers had; either as to its serious (...)
port, that it be faithfully transmitted to other^ or the Universality,
conceited wisdom, goo^ness, etc. of the Recommenders; and then (...) lance it
with the Recommendation of any nat^ral or civil Truth whatsoever, and we shall
(...) it levitate like an inconsiderable feather or (...) in comparison of the
vast poize and weig^ sway with which the other descended.

12. Nothing is by Nature more deeply (...) more universally rooted in the
hearts of manki^^ than a dear and tender love of their off-sprin^ and a careful
provision for their passing their (...) well, that is free from miseries, with
a com^tency of such Goods as are held fitting for the Nature. But how much more
care must Cha^^ty oblige Parents to have of their Children, (...) to use the
means they conceive proper to bri^ them Everlasting and Infinite Bliss in Heaven
and to avoid them Intolerable and Endless Mis^ries in Hell? Especially, since
the performing ^evaricating from that Duty is of equal concern (...)
Themselves? How strange an advantage ^peradds Christianity in this particular
to the ^earest natural love of our selves, or of our near^^t Relations who are
next our selves!

13. Consider we next the Natural care of not ^^sing one's Credit, and we shall
find in com^on that, the good Opinion of others we call ^redit or Repute is
looked upon as a most necessa^^ means to make men fit for human Society or
^ommerce, and without which none can expect (...) thrive in his Vocation or
live with comfort. ^eflecting next on the degrees of Discredit, we and that he
who tells a lie for his own ad^antage though without any harm to others, with
^uch ado escapes some disrepute; but if his ^yes be pernicious, he is held an
arrant villain; ^f to nearest Friends and Relations, still greater: ^f the
mischiefs he does by his salse words or ^ealings be exceeding great ones, he is
yet more ^bominable, and proportionally still as the harms, ^e induces, grow.
If the motives he had to keep ^im good were very strong and efficacious, he ^s
still more enormous; and, as the strength of those preservative motives
increase so is his Ma^ice still enhanc't. But, if he go about all this
wickedness boldly and confidently without ca^ing who knows it, especially if he
back his most notorious and most pernicious Lie with deepest Oaths and
Perjuries by things most Sacred, he is now conceived to be arrived at such a
pitch of wickedness, that he is no longer to be held a Man, but a Devil
Incarnate. But, how incomparably more wicked and consequently disgraceful must
that man be, who believing Christ's doctrine to be thus received and the means
to salvation, should teach his Children otherwise! The believed mischiefs he
does his nearest relations, no less than the loss of Heaven and the sad Gain of
Hellfire for all Eternity; the motives he had not to do it, as to his own
concerns, full as Infinite; his lie most Notorious to all about him, and even
the whole World. And, if he be a Pastor, who (besides other Sacraments implying
most obliging vows not to renounce his Faith) is consecrated by a particular
one to preach Christ's doctrine truly and to preserve his Flock sound in Faith
to his power, then to prevaricate from this Duty renders him a sacrilegious
abuser of the most holy state of life, and most inviolable tie this world, as
Sanctified by our Savior, has in it. What inconcievable villainy then and
consequently discredit must that man seeingly undergo, who shall misteach his
own Fancies for doctrins delivered; and how impossible is it a World of
Forefathers should all conspire to make so desperate and absolute a forfeit of
their reputation and honesty! It Is not possible to be summed up or even ghest
at, being beyond all proportion. The Advantage then with which Christian
Doctrine in the mind of each, and the Holy Ghost in the hearts of most of the
Faithful, rivet and confirm this natural care of Credit to the preserving
Tradition inviolable, is incomparable and in a manner Infinite.

14. It would require a large volum, to unfold particularly how each virtue
contributes to show the inerrable Indeficiency of Tradition, and how the
Principles of almost each Science are concerned in demonstrating its Certainty:
Arithmetic lends her Numbering and Multiplying Faculty to scan the vast number
of Testifiers; Geometry her Proportions to show a kind of Infinite Strength of
Certitude in Christian Tradition above those Attestations which breed Certainty
in Human affairs; Logic her skill to frame and make us see the Connexions it
has with the Principles of our Understanding; Nature her Laws of Motion and
Action; Morality, her first Principle that nothing is done gratis by a
Cognoscitive Nature, and that the Body of Traditionary Doctrine is most
conformable to Practical Reason: Historical Prudence clears the Impossibility
of an undiscernible revolt from points to descended and held so Sacred;
Politics show this to be the best way imaginable to convey down such a Law as
it concerns every man to be skilful in: Metaphysics engage the Essences of
Things, and the very notion of Being which fixes every Truth; so establishing
the scientifical Knowledges which spring from each particular nature by their
first Causes or Reasons exempt from change or motion: Divinity demonstrates it
most worthy God and most conducive to bring Mankind to Bliss. Lastly,
Controversy evidences the total Uncertainty of any thing concerning Faith if
this can be uncertain, and makes use of all the rest to establish the Certainty
of this first Principle; and, which settled, secures Scripture as far as is
requisite, and all things else that can mainly concern Salvation. To pursue
these and many other Testimonies of Tradition's Infallibleness is not my task
at present: I shall content my self with concluding, that, as we have proved it
self-evident that Tradition if ever held to is an inerrable Rule, so our four
last Discourses have shown its ever-Indeficiency or rather Indefectibleness,
scientifically Evident; and as strong as Nature and Grace strained (as we may
say) to their utmost can make it.

COROLLARIES From The former Discourses.
1. NOne can pretend to have Faith (by the ordinary course of God's Providence)
but the holders to Tradition. It Is proved by our Conclusion formerly deduc't,
(Disc. 5.. 15.) that Tradition is the Rule of Faith, that is, the Ordinary Way
to arrive at Faith.

2. None can with right pretend to be a Church but the Followers of Tradition.
For, since (Corol. 1.) none can have Faith by the ordinary course of God's
Providence but the holders to Tradition, and a Church must be a Congregation of
persons truly Faithful, or who have true Faith coming to them by ordinary
means, (as we daily experience,) it is manifest that none but the Followers of
Tradition can pretend to be a true Church.

3. None can be of the Church or any Church but Followers of Tradition. For,
seeing a Church is a Congregation of persons who have true Faith coming to them
by ordinary means, and ( Disc. 5.. 15.) Tradition is this means, it follows
that none are of the Church or any Church but they who have true Faith by this
means, that is, who follow the means of Tradition.

Those who renounce Tradition or Immediate Delivery, are ipso facto cut off
from the Root of Faith, and cease to be truly called Faithful. For seeing that
is to us, or in the way of reasoning, the Root of any Knowledge whence that
Knowledge springs, and Faith is no Knowledge in us, ( Disc. 1. 15. and Corol.
1.) but by relying on the Rule of Faith or Tradition as on its Principle, it is
manifest that they who renounce Tradition want the Root of Faith, nor
consequently are Faithful nor of the Church, but are Dead branches or Opiners
only.

5. That company of men who follow such Ancestors as formerly renounced
Tradition or Immediate Delivery are no less cut off from the Root of Faith.
For, since ( Corol. 4.) those Ancestors renouncing Tradition formerly were by
so doing cut off from the Root of Faith, their Followers (for how many
Generations soever they continue) must be so likewise, as wanting and not
daring even to pretend to that Faith^causing Principle of Tradition or
uninterrupted Delivery which their Forefathers had renounced.

6. They who follow such Ancestors as formerly had manifestly renounced
Tradition (how numerous soever) can never claim to be a part of Christian
Tradition or deliverers of Faith. First, because ( Corol. 5.) they are cut off
from Tradition and so can be no part of it. Next, because Christian Tradition
is Indeficient or Uninterrupted, ( Disc. 6, 8, and 9.) and so none can lay
claim to it who cannot lay claim to Uninterruptedness; which those we speak of
cannot. The saying then of Vincentius Lirinensis, Id teneamus quod ubique, quod
semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est, and that we must follow Universality,
Antiquity, and Consent, can only be meant within the verge of those who adhere
to Tradition, or follow the Doctrine formerly delivered, not of those who have
broke from it; otherwise all Heretics in the world, especially the Primitive
ones might claim to be part of the Church.

7. They who pretend themselves Reformers in Faith, do ipso facto, manifest
themselves cut off from the Root of Faith and the Church. For since Points of
Faith are Truths, and so have no Degrees in them, but are Indivisible;
Reformation in Faith cannot mean mending Faith, but putting it anew. But this
presupposes Tradition Interrupted, wherefore Reformers in Faith must renounce
Uninterruptedness of Delivery, that is, they must renounce Tradition; ( Disc.
6. 8, 9.) and consequently they are cut off from the Root of Faith. ( Coroll.
4.)

8. That Body of men who adhere to Tradition can evidence clearly and plainly
who are truly Faithful, who not. For, since ( Coroll. 4. and 5.) to those men
it is all one to renounce Immediate or Uninterrupted Delivery, or follow those
who renounced it, as to be cut off from the Root of Faith; and all one to be
Faithful and to rely on that Principle: Again, seeing it is evident by clear
matter of Fact who rely and proceed upon it, who not; That Body of men who
adhere to Tradition can evidence clearly and plainly who are truly Faithful,
who not; and (if Church Government be instituted by our Savior and so a Point
of Faith, and so descended to us by the Rule of Faith) who are of the Church,
who not.

9. None else can give any certain account who are to be held truly Faithful
and of the Church, who not. For since without Tradition both Letter and Sense
of Scripture is Uncertain ( Disc. 4.) and subject to dispute (as we also daily
experience) it follows that all the deniers of Tradition are uncertain who have
the right Letter or Sense of Scripture; that is, whom they are to esteem
Faithful (or sit to be of the Church) whom not. Again, Tradition being the
only certain Rule of Faith, if one Revolter from it may be admitted, all may,
so they prosess Christianity in outward talk which they will easily do:
Wherefore, since the Denier of Tradition deems some one Revolter from it to be
of the Church, that is, himself; he may, nay ought judge so of all the rest,
provided they talk a few fine pious words of God and Christ, which what
Heretics but did?

10. None can rationally punish the Revolters from their Faith but that Body
which adheres to radition. For since, setting aside Tradition, both Letter and
Sense of Scripture is Uncertain, ( Disc. 4.) the Guilt of those Revolters is
also Uncertain: seeing then none can even pretend to correct a fault much less
punish it upon uncertain Grounds, none can rationally go about to punish their
Revolters from Faith unless it be that body which adheres to Tradition; and
They can. For, in regard Tradition's Certainty is evident to the rudest by
common sense, ( Disc. 5.. 8.) and likewise it is as evident to Governors who
revolt from it as it is to know when one disacknowledges and rises against a
settled civil Authority and the Laws of the Land; It Is most manifest that the
Revolter has both Passion or Guilt enough to be held punishable, and the
Christian Magistrate evidence enough of his Fact to go about to punish it. To
avoid mistake, I declare that in this Corollary I only discourse what may or
may not be done upon a Church-account, what may be fit to be done upon a
State-account, I am neither able to judge, nor do I meddle with it.

11. No Company of men hang together like a Body of a Christian Commonwealth
or CHURCH but that which adheres to Tradition. For, since it is manifest that
every external Commonwealth or Body of men has some Outward Marks proper to
it, by which the members of it have their coherence, or consistency and that
those are certain tokens to distinguish it from any other; and as manifest that
all the marks proper to a Church as such depend upon the Rule of Faith, ( Disc.
1.. 15.) and their Certainty on its; and lastly, that none of the pretended
Rules of Faith (all of them building on Scripture's Letter) are Certain, (
Disc. 2. 3, 4.) without Tradition; it follows that no other company have any
Principle of Distinction from others, that is either of Constitution or
self-preservation under the notion of Church, but that which adheres to
Tradition. All the loud outcry then made commonly against that Body which
adheres to Tradition, called Roman Catholic, for accounting it self only the
Universal Church and excluding all others is but empty noise, and her claim
rational and well-grounded, till it be shown by evident Discourse that the
other Pretenders have some other more Evident and Certain Rule to know who are
of the Church who not, than this of Tradition now produced and explicated; upon
which she proceeds and by which she consists.

12. There is no arguing against Tradition out of Scripture. For, since (as we
have proved Disc. 4.) there can be no absolute Certainty of Scripture's Letter
without Tradition, this must first be supposed Certain ere the Scripture's
Letter can be rationally held such; and consequently ought in reason to be held
Uncertain while Tradition is thought ^it to be argued against, that is, while
it is Certainty is doubted of. Wherefore since none can argue solidly upon
uncertain Grounds, none ought to argue against Tradition out of the Letter of
Scripture.

13. None can in reason oppose the Authority of the Church or any Church
against Tradition. First because in reality Tradition (rightly understood) is
the same thing materially with the living Voic^ and Practice of the whole
Church Essential, consisting of Pastors and Layity; which is so ample that it
includes all imaginable Authority which can be conceived to be in a Church.
Secondly, because in the way of generating Faith Tradition formally taken is
antecedent to, ( Disc. 2.. 11.) and so in the way of Discourse working by
formal and abstracted notions its notion must be presupposed and its Certainty
established before the notion and Certainty of Faith, consequently of Faithful,
and consequently of Church, which must necessarily be a congregation of
Faithful. Whence they would argue very preposterously who should go about to
oppose Church against Tradition; this being the same as to think to establish
the House by overthrowing the Foundation.

14. None can in reason oppose the Authority of Fathers or Councils against
Tradition. This is evident by the former, ( Corol. 13.) in regard neither of
these have any Authority but as Representatives of the Church, or Eminent
Members of the Church: Nor can any determine certainly what is a Father or
Council ( Disc. 2.. 11.) till the notion of Church, that is of Faithful, that
is of Faith, that is of Rule of Faith, that is of Tradition be certainly
established.

15. No Disacknowledgers of Tradition are in Due of reason but in Courtesy
only to be allowed to argue out of Scripture's Letter, Father or Council. For,
since, wanting Tradition they have Certainty of none of those (as was proved,
Disc. 2.. 11.) it is manifest that, disacknowledging Tradition, while they
allege and talk of these they allege and talk of things themselves do not
know to be Certain. Wherefore, it is too great a Condescendence and courtesy in
Catholics to let them run forwards descanting with wordish Discourses on those
Testimonies after their raw manner, since they might justly take their
advantage against them and show they have no right to make use of Principles,
which their own Grounds can never make good to them; as was Tertullian's smart
and solid way, de Praescr. Haeret. c. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. denying them
the use of Scripture who denied the Church; which would save many an aerie
confused discourse about words, unapt to evidence any thing satisfactorily. Nor
can the right of an Opponent to argue ad hominem license them to claim this
favor from our Controvertists; in regard we never held that Scriptures Letter
hammered upon by Criticisms and such pretty knacks of human Learning was the
Ground of our Faith nor the way to establish it, but only as interpreted by
the Language and Practice of the Church; nor consequently can we hold it
capable to be prejudic't by such endeavors of private Wits. Though then we
should allow them a Copy of the Letter, and consequently so far a liberty to
argue ad hominem against us; yet we never allowed their method of arguing from
it, as efficacious, either to build or evert Faith, but our learned
Controvertists ever held direct contrary. Whence, in case they clamor that in
not following their wild method we desert Scripture (to avoid which calumny
with the vulgar I conceive one reason our Controvertists generally were so
civil to them as to cope with them in their fleight way) the unreasonableness
of the Calumny is to be made appear, which is quicklier done, not their
unreasonable expectation to be satisfied.

16. No Authority from any History or Testimonial Writing is valid against the
force of Tradition. For, since Falsehood is as easy to be writ or printed as
Truth, it is evident those Books can give no Testimony to themselves that what
they express is certainly true; and, if we say they are abetted by the
Testimony of other Books, the same question recurrs concerning them, in what
Age soever they were writ. It remains then that it is only the Acceptance of
Men or Sense writ in their Hearts and so conveyed down from Father to Son that
these Books are true Histories and not Fables, which gives them any Authority:
But this has plainly the nature of Tradition; They have therefore no Authority
but by force of Tradition: Therefore they can have no possible force against
Tradition; since, if Tradition, or the conveying down from hand to hand sense
writ thus universally in men's hearts, can deceive us, no such Books can have
any Authority at all: Wherefore, not the Books, but the Sense writ in men's
hearts of the Goodness and skill of the Authors of those Books (upon which
qualifications the Truth of each passage contained in those Books is built) is
to be alleged against Christian Tradition, since it is that Sense which
authorizes those Books and gives Credibility to those passages, and so is
stronger than any dead Testimony from the Books themselves. Which devolves into
this, that only some great Tradition or living Testimony for things past, can,
in point of Authority, be pretended an equal match to Christian Tradition or
competent to be alledg^d against it.

17. No Tradition is alleged or alledgeable in reason against Christian
Tradition. That none is alledg^d is Evident from matter of Fact: For, the
Adversaries of Catholic Tradition never pretend the Consent or constant Sense
of great multitudes derived from age to age by living voice that at such a time
former Tradition was relinquish't, new Faith introduc't, or the old Faith
changed or abolisht; but only odd ends or scraps of Histories or other dead
Testimonies, according as they light on some passage which seems favorable to
them, or may be rendered interpretable that way. Whence, there are almost as
many minds as men about the time when any change was made; nay, some of their
best Champions, Dr Whitaker, and Mr Powel, profess the time of the Romish
Churches change cannot easily be told, and that they cannot tell by whom or at
what time the Enemy did sow the Papists Doctrine: This, I say, being so, it is
most Evident they decline the pretense of any Tradition against ours, and the
very way of deriving down orally and practically Sense writ in men's Hearts by
matter of Fact working on their Senses; and, instead of that, recurr to
pitiful shreds and fragments o^ words, utterly unauthoriz'd if the Tradition
for that Books Goodness can fail: And, if Catholic Tradition, which in its
source was so largely extended, visible and practicable by all can faulter, ten
thousand times more easily may the Tradition for any particular Book, which in
comparison of the other can be but of a very obscure Original, fail and deceive
us.

Now, that no Tradition is alledgeable against us by Protestants appears hence,
that their immediate Forefathers little more than an 100. Years ago being
Catholics; that is, holders of their Faith no Novelty but uninterruptedly
descended, could never conspire to deliver to them any such sense that the
Roman Church had altered her Faith, since they had the contrary sense writ in
the Tables of their hearts. Nor can they have recourse to the Greek Church for
a Tradition opposite to ours for any points of Faith in which they differ from
us, for they will find none such. Nor is the Greek Church Progenitors to them
here in England, nor by consequence can they derive traditionarily from them.

18. No solid Argument from Reason or intrinsecal Principles is producible
against Christian Tradition. For, since Arguments, if solid, are taken from
Things or Nature, and the Certainty of Christian Tradition is built on the best
Nature, that is, Man's; not according to what is alterable in it, but what is
(abstracting from disease) absolutely unalterable; that is, on Knowledge
imprinted by natural Sensations; and this Knowledge strengthened and made most
lively by the oft-repeatedness of those Sensations, and the import of the
Things known: Also, since most efficacious Causes actually applied, that is,
impossible not to do the Effect, and Effects impossible to be without such a
Cause's Existence are engaged for the ever-continuance or Uninterruptedness of
Tradition (as has been shown, Disc. 6. and 8.) and the force of those
preserving Causes strengthened by the most powerful assistances of the Holy
Ghost, ( Disc. 9.) or by best Graces superadded to best Nature; It Is impossible
any solid Argument from Reason should be brought against Tradition.

19. The arguing by way of some few Instances (as the manner is) can have no
force against Tradition's Certainty and Indefectiveness. For, seeing a
pretended Instance of Tradition's failing is a particular action presumed to be
long ago past, and particulars out of the very nature of being particulars are
surrounded by a thousand individuating circumstances or rather constituted by
them, that is, are placed in the proper sphere of Contingency: and that
particular Action is put to be long ago past, and ^o affects not our Senses by
Experience (in which is founded the force of Instances, in regard Experimental
Knowledge is a necessary Effect of the Things being such as it is known) Nor
have we, or can we have without Tradition, any certain knowledge ( Coroll. 16.)
that the Points of Faith pretended to have miscarried or to have been altered
then, or else the manner of expressing them, were not mistaken then or
misrepresented to us now; nor that Interest (for example) of one party passion
between both, ambiguity of words, slightness or confusedness of report
grounding the Historians narration, rashness of belief in him, corruption of
his Books since they were writ, and innumerable other chances apt to occasion
mistake did not intervene; any of which would render the Instance uncertain,
and the Argument from it Inconclusive. Again, seeing we can have certainty of
our own meaning of our words when we demonstrate, and also of our consequence,
it follows that the way for a solid man to answer Traditions pretended
demonstrableness must be to show the incoherence of the Terms, and not to bring
some old story against it; which were to produce Uncertainty known to be such,
against pretended Certainty and not yet known to be other than such; nay whose
Evidence we cannot in reason deny till we can solve the connection of Terms
drawn from intrinsecal Mediums, on which it is built.

20. The denying Tradition is a proper and necessary disposition to
Fanatickness. For, since no Argument taken from any dead or written Testimony,
( Coroll. 12. 14. 16.) nor living Testimony of Tradition, ( Coroll. 13. 17.)
nor from any thing in Nature, Coroll. 18.) that is, from any thing without us
which is a second Cause, is valid against Tradition: It follows that Tradition
cannot be denied but by pretending some Light or Knowledge within us derived
from the immediate Influence of the First Cause. To which pretense helps its
difficulty to be confuted; in regard it is easy to stand stiff in this Tenet
that they see clearly such Truths by an inward Light, and that therefore it
were a madness to go about to confute their own manifest Experience; whereas,
were Arguments produc-t openly, they and their confutations might be published
together, and the Truth would lie exposed to the scanning and decision of the
Indifferent part of the world, and be cleared by a few Replies if a right
method of discourse be taken. Wherefore, since Nature will easily teach the
obstinate deniers of any Principle to avail themselves by the best plea they
can to escape confuting, it is manifest that Nature will connaturally carry the
deniers of Tradition to Fanatic Pranciples, and that men are so long and no
longer preserved from Fanatickness than they follow Tradition or the openly
declared Sense of Forefathers either in our Church or some other Congregation.

Again, Tradition being the way of coming to Faith by the open use of our
Senses, the denying it must drive the deniers to deny that way, and to recurr
to Knowledge had some other way; Not to Knowledge acquired by human skill, (the
Knowledge of such high mysteries being confessedly more than human) therefore
to infused Knowledge; and this not infused by ordinary ways, as preaching,
teaching of Forefathers and such like (as we experience such Knowledges to be
infused into us) for this again falls into the way of Tradition; therefore they
can only have refuge to inward Light or Knowledge infused extraordinarily or
without connatural means; to make which the common road of receiving Heaven's
Influences is the very definition of Fanatickness.

21. Fanatic Principles can have no force against Tradition, though
unconfutable but by it. For, since they pretend for their ground a Light within
imprinted on such a manner as manifests God the Author, that is, an Effect
which only themselves know and are conscious of, and on the other side nothing
appears why such a kind of Impression is impossible, nay it is granted possible,
it is clear none can argue against that inward Light's existence out of the
nature of that inward persuasion Fanatics have, in regard it is latent and
unknown. It follows then that the way to conclude against it is to show out of
evident Principles the contrary to these Inspiration to be Truth: None
therefore (as plain matter of Fact testifies) taking the way of arguing from
Principles absolutely evident, or demonstrating, but Catholics or the followers
of Tradition, and they effecting this by virtue of Tradition, Disc. 5, 6, 8.)
it follows that they and only they are able to confute Fanatics and conclude
their inward Light delusive. Again, since a Fanatic builds on conceited
experience of Divine Inspiration, there is no hopes to convince his Judgment
without producing Demonstration for the contrary; a task only performable in
the way of Tradition. Which is enforced and strengthened by this Consideration,
that the Basis of Tradidition is natural Knowledge directly imprinted by his
Senses, in which Knowledges he is undeceivable; and these Sensations or
Knowledges are daily repeated, not on one private temper but on innumerable
millions conspiring in the same, that is, Tradition is built on almost Infinite,
daily and most manifest Experiences; whereas the conceited Effect of
Inspiration, or his strong persuasion that God speaks thus inwardly is found
with consent of tenets in a few only; and liable to deceit by depending upon
Fancy, not Sense; as appears in diseased or mad persons, and the Fanatics
contradicting one another though both proceeding on the same Principle. Without
Tradition's help then it is very hard (if not impossible) to confute Fanatics,
(as Experience also testifies by Protestants being forced to recurr to
Tradidion in disputes with them) though very easy with it, or by means of it.

22. There is no arguing against Tradition without questioning the Constancy of
every species in Nature, that is the Certainty of whole Nature. For, seeing
Man's Nature is as necessarily fit to receive the direct Impressions of Objects
on his Soul, that is Natural Knowledges, and as necessarily determined to work
for a motive or reason good or bad, as Fire is to heat or water to wet, and
this absolutely and always abstracting from disease incapacitating him to use
his senses or his Fancy, and both these spring out of the very Substance of his
Nature as Rational or of such a species, which Original Corruption hinders not;
it follows that he is as fit for those Operations, and consequently will as
frequently perform them as Fire burn, water wet, fruit trees bear fruit, or any
other species in Nature do its ptoper Effect; that is generally, and only
rarely and contingently fail, unless the Author of Nature order the whole
course of it worse for Man than for other things, which were blasphemy to say,
and contrary to Experience; since we find a course of Supernaturals on foot,
and that they comfort and strengthen man's true nature as has been formerly
declared. Less liable then is the human Species to contingency in those its
natural operations than any other kind is. Wherefore, seeing Traditions
Certainty is grounded upon direct natural Knowledges, and its Indefectiveness
on Mankind's Incapableness to act without some motive; to argue against It were
to question These, that is, the constancy of the best and best-supported
Species in Nature, and a fortiori the Constancy of the rest.

Note here, that all the Arguments brought by witty Reasoners against Tradition
are fetched from the Contingency of some one or some few Particulars, whence by
a wild kind of roving way they would conclude the defectibleness of the
Generality or of the entire Species: But, because it looks too palpably
inconsequent in Logical form to say, a few can err, ergo all, therefore they
use to bring it in with a why not. So that all the arguers against Tradition
from natural reason oppose directly any Constancy in the Species or Generality,
and so are destroyers of natural Certainty and of their own Arguments to boot.

23. There is no possibility of arguing at all against Tradition rightly
understood, or the living voice of the Catholic Church with any show of
reason. For, since it is evident that Scripture's Copy or Letter is in the whole
and every tittle Uncertain ( Disc. 2, and 4.) without Tradition; as also that
the writings of Fathers, Councils, History, and of any written or dead
Testimony whatever, ( Corol. 14, and 16.) are utterly unauthoriz'd otherwise
than by means of Tradition, and that no living Testimony or Tradition is
alledgable against the Tradition we speak of or Catholic Tradition, ( Corol.
13. and 17.) Nor any pretended Instance of Tradition^s failing has force but by
its being faithfully conveyed down by Tradition and depending on Tradition for
its Certainty, ( Corol. 19.) and all Arguments from Natural Reason are so weak
that they destroy all Certainty in that matter while levelled against
Tradition, ( Corol. 18. and 22.) It follows, that no Argument from any
Authority publicly appearing in the world, nor yet from intrinsecal mediums
fetched from second Causes in Nature can bear any show against Tradition. Nor
yet from private Effects pretended from the first Cause, called Inspiration or
Light of the Private Spirit ( Corol. 21.) For, (besides what has been concluded
for this point) however this preten^e may make the first Syll^^gism, yet when
it comes to be proved, that is made appear outwardly, that the first Cause
inspired thus or thus, no extraordinary Effects proper to that Cause (as
miracles) being producible, their arguing or Proof is at an end, however their
Inward Adhesion stands. There being then no other Argument imaginable, but what
is fetched from Authority living or dead, or else from Effects or Experience
testifiable by those Authorities, or from proper Effects or Causes in the
ordinary course of natural things, or from extraordinary private and unseen
pretended Effects of the first Cause; and none of these bearing any show
against Tradition; It Is evident There is no possibility of arguing against
Tradition rightly understood, or the living voice of the Catholic Church, with
any show of Reason.

24. Tradition is the First Principle in the way of Authority as it engages for
matter of Fact long ago past. For, seeing that is the first Principle in any
Knowledge into which all Knowledges in that kind are resolved to establish
their Certainty, and all ptetended Authorities for any matter of Fact long ago
past ( Corol. 16.) and consequently all Knowledges caused by the means of them,
are resolved finally into Tradition and depend on it for their Certainty; it
follows that Tradition is the very first Principle in the way of Authority as
it undertakes for the truth of matters of Fact long ago past.

25. Tradition, in the matter of Tradition (that is, in matter of Fact before
our time) is Self-evident to all those who can need the Knowledge of such
things, that is, to all Mankind who use common Reason. This is evident from the
former; For, first Principles are to be Self-evident to all those who are to
use them and proceed upon them, which in our case is the most ordinary vulgar.

26. The Certainty of Tradition being established the whole Body of the Faithful
(by which I mean Catholics) or the Church Essential, is, by relying on it,
infallibly certain that it is in possession of Christ's true doctrine. For,
since Tradition is Self-evidently a Certain way if followd ( Disc. 5.. 8. and
13.) and both best Nature and best Grace in this world are engaged that it has
been and shall be ever followed. ( Disc. 6. and 9.) Again, since the Certainty
of what Faith was formerly taught must needs descend to us as matter of Fact
formerly past, that is whose Certainty depends on Authority, and Tradition is
the first Principle in way of Authority as it engages for matters of Fact
formerly past ( Corol. 24.) and Self-evident to the proceeders on it ( Corol.
25.) that is to the Body of Catholics: Lastly, since Christian Tradition
rightly understood is nothing but the living voice of the Catholic Church
Essential as delivering, it is manifestly and manifoldly evident that that Body
which relies on It, that is the Catholic Church or ( Corol. 6. and 11.) the
whole Church Essential, is infallibly Certain that she is in secure possession
of Christ's true Doctrine.

27. Tradition once established, General Councils and even Provincial ones, nay
particular Churches are Infallible by proceeding upon It. For the same reason;
in regard that proceeding on it they proceed upon a Certain and Self-evident
Principle; ( Corol. 24. and 25.) that is such a one as neither they can mistake
nor it mislead them.

28. The Roman See with its Head are particularly Infallible by the same means.
For, in regard a more vigorous Cause put at first is apt to produce a greater
Effect, and the Coresidence, Joynt-endeavours, Preaching, Miracles, and lastly
Martyrdom of the two Chief Apostles working upon that City which commanded the
greatest part of the world were more vigorous Causes to imprint Christ's Doctrine
at first and recommend it to the next age than was found any where else; it
follows that the stream of Tradition in its source and first putting into
motion was more particularly vigorous here than in any other See. Again, since
uninterrupted publicity of professing Faith makes a greater visibility of
Faith, which is a manifest advantage to Tradition, and no Patriarchal See but
the Roman has continued ever from the Primitive times in a public Profession
of Christ's Faith, being held under by Barbarians; hence the Roman See (and
inclusively their Pastors and most their chief Pastor) have a particular
title to Infallibility built on Tradition above any other See or Pastor
whatsoever. Not to mention and dilate on the particular Assistances to the
Clergy of that See, and most particular to its Bishop, springing out of their
divinely constituted office, in regard it is a position unacknowledged by
Adversaries against whom I am discoursing.

29. Tradition established, the Church is provided of a certain and Infallible
Rule to preserve a Copy of the Scripture's Letter truly significative of
Christ's sense, as far as it is coincident with the main Body of Christian
doctrine preached at first. For, since ^tis certain the Apostles taught the same
Doctrine they writ, ^tis manifest the Scripture^s Letter was at first (for what
of it was intended to signify Points of Faith) significative of Faith or Sense
writ by miracles, preaching and practice in the hearts of the first Faithful:
Wherefore, since the same sense that was preached at first was preserved all
along unalterably by Tradition, ( Disc. 6. and 8.) and the same sense in men's
hearts can easily guide them to correct the alteration of the outward Letter,
so as to preserve it significative of the sense first delivered; Therefore
Tradition established the Church is provided of a certain and Infallible Rule to
preserve a Copy of the Scripture's Letter truly significative of Christ's
sense, as far as Scripture is coincident with the main body of Christian
Doctrine preached at first.

30. Tradition established the Church is provided of a certain and Infallible
Rule to interpret Scripture's Letter by, so as to arrive certainly at Christ's
Sense, as far as that Letter concerns the Body of Christian Doctrine preached at
first or points requisite to Salvation. For, since ( Disc. 6. and 8.) Tradition
preserves the first delivered sense alive in men's hearts sent down by way of
living voice and Christian practice; and these were in the beginning evidently
a most certain way of knowing the Sense of the Letter, ^tis evident that they
are still such. Wherefore Tradition established the Church is provided, etc.

31. Tradition established nothing can be received by the Church as h^ld from
the first or ever, unless held ever. For, since ( Disc. 5.. 13. and Disc. 6.
and 8. and Corol. 24, and 25.) Tradition is self-evidently a certain method of
conveying down matters of Fact as they were found, it follows that, Tradition
established, points not held ever must be conveyed down such as they were
found, that is as not held ever and consequently not as held from the first or
ever.

32. Tradition established it is impossible any Error against Christ^ s Faith
should be received by the Church; that is no Error contradicting Faith can be
received as of Faith. For, since to be received as of Faith is ( Disc. 6. and
8.) to Traditionary Christians the same as to be received as held ever or from
Christ's time, and ( Corol. 31.) no point at all, though disparate or
indifferent, not-held-ever can be received as held-ever, it is evident that much
less can an erroneous point contradicting what was held ever be received as
held-ever.

33. Notwithstanding Tradition, Erroneous Opinions and (their proper Effects)
absurd Practices may creep into the Church and spread there for a while. For,
since, notwithstanding the Certainty of Tradition, the Church is still,
according to our Savior, a Congregation made up of good and bad, and the Bad
will do like themselves, that is be glad to invent and propagate such
Principles as shall make for their own Ends or for Vices, that is, Erroneous
ones; Again, since it cannot be expected but that multitudes even of good men
in the Church should in using their private reasons be liable to Error in
diverse particular points or Cases, and that the remoteness of Christian
Principles or Points of Faith from the Principles of particular Actions or
Cases is apt to make the opposition between them not easily nor clearly
discoverable at first, nay the ambiguity in wording them may make them appear
at first sight fairly reconcilable till the Terms be distinguished and cleared
from equivocation; it is very evident that Tradition's Certainty hinders not but
Erroneous Opinions, and (their proper Effects) absurd Practices may creep into
the Church and spread there for a while.

34. Erroneous Opinions can never gain any solid footing in the Church. For,
since ( Disc. 5.. 15. Corol. 11.) the Church is a Body of men relying on
Tradition or the Authority of attesting Forefathers, not on the Authority of
Opinators, these Opinions can never have any firmness in her by means of
Authority; and, on the other side, being Erroneous, they can never gain any
depth of adhesion by being demonstrably true; nor (Error being necessarily
opposite to Truth) can they even maintain their quiet posture by being evidently
not opposite to Faith; It follows that neither upon the score of Reason nor
Authority can they sink deep into the minds of the Faithful (at least the
intelligent party of them) or gain any solid footing in the Church; but are
subject to be contradicted or have their verity disputed by the searching and
unsatisfied wits of Opposers.

35. The Prudence requisite in Church Government is one Cause why Erroneous
Opinions are not immediately but after some long time perhaps to be declared
against by the Authority of the whole Church. For, since a Church is a most
vast and sacred Commonwealth, and so of the greatest gravity and Authority
imaginable, she is not in prudence to engage it trivially in slight occasions,
nor rashly when the point is unevident. Wherefore, seeing an Erroneous Opinion,
while held but by few, is of slight concern, and so only fit to be taken
notice of by inferior Officers; when universally held is of great Authority
amongst the multitude; she is in Prudence to suspend till its Opposition to
Faith be cleared by the Science of Divinity, and this satisfactorily to a great
part of the Opinatours; lest either she should in stead of tares pluck up
wheat, or use her Authority more to destruction than edification by a too hasty
decision.

36. No Erroneous Opinion in Divinity, if Universal and Practical, can be very
long permitted in the Church. For since ( Corol. 31.) a mere Opinion can never
gain the Authority of a Traditionary point, it is manifest it can never subsist
when it is shown to clash with any of the said Points: Wherefore, since it is
liable to discussion, and men are naturally of different Judgments and
Interests, and the variety and Nature of worldly Interest is such that if any
thing makes for the Interest of some it is for that very reason against the
Interest of another, it will excite them to discussion and sifting its
Conformity or Disconformity to Christian Principles, which is the way to clear
the Terms and make it appear. But, especially, seeing absurd or irrational
Practices are the proper Effects of Erroneous Principles, and that our natural
Corruption inclines men to follow such Practices till they be checked by regard
to something held Sacred, that is by being shown opposite to Faith; it follows
that, till this opposition be shown, they will infallibly grow on still more
and more, till they come to such an height of absurdity that they need now no
skill to discover them: Experience teaching us that the most palpable and
evident method to try the Truth of any Speculation is to put it into matter and
bring it into Practice. Those irrational Practices therefore must needs after
some time discover themselves opposite to Christian behavior, and consequently
confess the Principle which begot them opposite to Christian Faith; which done,
it presently loses its credit, and is quasht by the incomparably more powerful
force and all over-bearing Authority of Tradition.

37. Erroneous Opinions and the irrational Practices issuing from them (though
supposed Universal and of long continuance) can never corrupt substantially the
Judgments or Wills of the Faithful. For, since ( Corol. 31.) nothing not held
ever or not coming from Christ can possibly be accepted as held ever or coming
from Christ, it is evident no Erroneous Opinion can come to gain the sacredness
and repute of a Traditionary point, nor their proper practices the Esteem of
Christian Practice; Wherefore, Traditionary Points being the Principles which
absolutely possess the Judgmenrs and govern the lives of the Faithful as
Christians, it follows that no Opinion can ever be held by them but in a
conciev'd subordination to Traditionary points or points of Faith, nor
practic^t by them but with a conceivd subordination and conformity to those
Practices which spring from undoubtedly-known Christian Tenets or Traditionary
points. Seeing then what is not held and practic^t but as conceivd subordinate
to other Tenets and Practices must needs be less held than those others, nay
not held at all otherwise than conditionally or upon supposal of such a
subordination, ^tis clearly consequent that Traditions Certainty is so powerful
an Antidote that bad Opinions and Practices can never corrupt substantially and
absolutely the Judgments or wills of the Faithful.

38. No Erroneous Opinion or its proper Practice is imputable to the Church
properly and formally taken. For, since the Church, formally as such, proceeds
on Christian Tradition, no such Opinion nor consequently Practice is imputable
to the Church properly and formally taken, but only to some men in the Church
(materially considered) as left to the contingent force of their private
Discourses: that is, indeed, to the Schools not the Church.

39. It Is exceedingly weak and senceless to think to impugn the Church by
objecting to her such Opinions and Practices. For, since they concern her not,
nor are imputable to her as Church, or to her Members as Faithful, the wise
Objection can only signify thus much, that the Church has men in her who are
fallible in their private Discourses or School-disputes; that is, she has men
in her who are men. A heavy imputation!

40. The Knowledge of Tradition's Certainty is the first Knowledge or Principle
in Controversial Divinity, that is, without which nothing is known or knowable
in that Science. For, since Controversy or the Science which establishes the
Certainty of Faith depends on these two Propositions, Whatever God said is
true, and God said this, the former of which is out of Controversy as we now
handle it with our modern Dissenters, and only the later is the subject of our
debate: Seeing also (as has been largely and manifoldly evident) nothing can
ascertain us of this but Tradition, nor It unless its Certainty be known, it
follows that the Knowledge of Tradition's Certainty is the first Knowledge or
Principle in Controversial Divinity.

41. Christ's promise to his Church (however comfortable to the Faithful) can
bear no part in the notion of the Rule of Faith, nor be the first Principle of
a Controversial Divine. For, since Christ's promise to his Church is held as a
point of Faith, that is, received upon the Rule of Faith, that is, subsequent
to that Rule, it is manifest that it can be no part of that Rule nor first
Principle in Controversy. Again, the Rule of Faith ( Disc. 1.. 4, and 9.) must
be so evident as to its Existence that no other Knowledge must intervene
between the natural power of Understanding and It, and this in the meanest
vulgar; but, that Christ promised his Church Infallibility is not thus
self-evident but needs other Knowledges to evidence it, unless we will make all
come by Inspiration. Besides, if God's Providence laid in second Causes for
Tradition's Indeficiency be not Certain in its self, (abstracting from Christ's
promise to his Faithful) Tradition can never convey certainly that Promise to
us; It must then be assured to us by Scripture's Letter ascertained only by
imagined diligence from Copy to Copy, not by Tradition; that is, that Letter
could not be certain its self, and so fit to ascertain others, till Tradition's
Certainty be established antecedently: And, were it supposed a true Letter,
this Letter (Tradition being as yet supposed unknown to be able to convey down
certainly Christ's sense) must be interpreted only by private skills; and so,
all the Churches Veracity, that is, all Mankinds Salvation must be built on
that private Interpretation. Private, I say; for in that supposition, till the
Scripture's Letter for that point be Interpreted certainly truly, the Churches
veracity or power to interpret it truly is not yet known: which, besides the
common Rule that no Scripture is of private Interpretation, is particularly and
highly faulty in this case, that it would make our Fundamental of Fundamentals,
the Certainty of our Rule of Faith, rely on such a private Interpretation.
Moreover, to say Tradition of the Church is Certain because Christ promised it,
puts it to be believed not seen; and is the same in Controversy as it is in
Nature to say in common, such an Effect is wrought because it is God's will;
which gives no account of that particular Effect, but only says something in
common: Wherefore, since the Certainty of the Rule of Faith (it being
antecedent to Faith) must be seen not believed, a Controversial Divine ought to
make it seen; that is, ought to demonstrate its Certainty and Indeficiency by
intrinsecal mediums or dependence on proper Causes. It signisies therefore no
more in the Science of Controversy to say Christ promised, than in Natural
Science to answer to every Question, in stead of showing a proper Cause, that
God wills it; which is a good saying for a Christian, as is also the other; but
neither of them a competent Principle either for Philosopher or Controvertist.

Consent Of AUTHORITY.
To the substance of the foregoing Discourses.
1. THus far Reason: Let Us see how it is seconded by Authority: And first by the
Scriptures. 2. For the Self-evidence of the Way to Faith, or (which is all one)
The Rule of Faith, see the Prophet Isay c. 35. v. 8. This shall be to you a
direct way, so that Fools cannot err in it. That is, evident to the rudest
Vulgar, or self-evident; else Fools might possibly err in it, in case it needed
any Skill of Discourse and were not obvious to Common Sense.

3. Now, what this Self-evident Rule is, is most expressively declared by the
same Prophet c. 59. v. 21. speaking of God's favor intended to the Gentiles;
that is, of the Law of Grace. This is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my
Spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not
depart from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy Seed, and from the mouth of
thy Seed's Seed from henceforth for ever. Here we see God's promise to
perpetuate Christ's Doctrine; and on what manner; that is, by Oral Tradition, or
Delivering it from Father to Son by word of Mouth or Teaching; not by scanning
a Book put in their hands. We see it promised also that this Tradition shall be
Indefectible or Uninterrupted; and, Lastly, that his Spirit (or Sanctity) is
both in the Church, and will continue ever with her; which being so, she must
needs be supernaturally assisted by the Holy Ghost (that is, incomparably above
the power of Nature) to this Effect of perpetuating Christ's doctrine by
Tradition.

4. As pithy and home is that of the Prophet Jeremiah, c. 31. I will give my
Law in their Bowels, and i^ their Hearts will I write it; and still more that
of St. Paul contradistinguishing the Law of Grace from Moses his Law by this,
that the later was writ in Tables of Stone, the former in the fleshy Tables of
men's Hearts. Both as express as can be imagined to send us for our Faith to
living Sense in the hearts of the Faithful, not to mere dead Letters in a Book;
that is, recommending to us Tradition, which is the perfectest and naturalest
way imaginable to write them there, as has been shown. Note the word Hearts,
which in the Metaphorical expression is the Principle of Action; not of mee^
Speculative Knowledge, as is the word Brain: Which intimates the Practical
nature of Tradition; and, that it imprints Christ's Law, and conveys it down by
Christian Carriage and Action; not by Speculative scanning the
significativeness of Characters in a Book. Note also, the word Fleshy; which
signifies, that the manner of writing Christ's Law is through the affecting the
Soul by her Inferior part (considering her as she is a virtue of
understanding;) that is, by Sensations which make strong and plain Impressions
in Mankind according to their material part, and so force into them Natural
Knowledge: Whence, things thus imprinted are apt to settle themselves solidly
and even sink deeply into the most material, gross and vulgar understandings.
Quite contrary to which in all regards is the way of beginning with reading,
and laboring to understand certainly, Letters in a Book; which, is a kind of
Speculation, and so belongs to the Superior part of the Soul as she is
understanding; being Artificial, both in the very Nature of such Characters,
the skill in Reading, and highest skills requisite to Sense them with Certainty.

5. After Scripture-verdict succeed next in order those of Councils. I will
only mention three in several Ages, leaving multitudes of others. The first
Synod of Lateran. We all confirm unanimously and consequently, with one heart
and mouth, the Tenets and sayings of the Holy Fathers; adding nothing,
subtracting nothing of those things which are DELIVER^D US (quae TRADITA sunt
nobis) by them: and we believe so as the Fathers have believed, we preach so as
they have TAVGHT. The Council of Sardica, in its Encyclical sent to all
Catholic Bishops. We, have received this Doctrine, we have been taught so, we
hold this Catholic Tradition, Faith and Confession. And the seventh General
Council in its second Act. We imbued with the precepts of the Fathers, have so
confessed and do confess; In the Third, we receive and venerate the Apostolical
Traditions of the Church. And in the seventh Act, giving their final
determination, they, declare the Grounds on which they proceed in these words.
We, walking in the King's-high-way (Regiam viam incedentes) and relying on the
Doctrine of our holy and divine Fathers, and observing the TRADITION of the
Catholic Church, define, etc. where we see General Councils (that is, the
greatest Authority in the Catholic Church) relying on the Teaching of Fathers
or foregoing Church, and on the Churches Tradition as on their Rule and the
Highway to Faith; whence they repute Catholic Tradition, and Faith, the same
thing. We see also the Amplitude of this Rule, recommending to us all Faith, so
that nothing ought be added to it. And how empty a pretense the Fathers in this
Council judged it to disallow this Rule under pretext of being opposite to
Scripture is seen by these words in their First Session. They who contemn the
Teachings of the Holy Fathers and TRADITION of the Catholic Church, and bring
for their excuse and inculcate the words of Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches, and
Dioscorus, saying, Unless we were sufficiently instructed out of the Old and
New Testament, we would follow the Doctrins of the Fathers, of the six holy
Synods, and the Traditions of the Catholic Church, Let him be accursed. So
that they held private Instruction from Scripture insufficient to build Faith
on, or (which is all one) to be a Rule of Faith; Also, that it was ever the
common pretense of the most execrable Heretics of old to decline Tradition,
and pretend to sufficient Light from Scripture's Letter; and, lastly, that
since the Sense of Scripture in points of Faith is not attainable sufficiently,
or with Certainty, by the bare Letter of Scripture, and with Certainty by
Tradition, and that Tradition brings us down determinate Sense; Tradition is to
sense Scripture's Letter; and so that Letter no Rule but by virtue of
Tradition; seeing, Faith being Sense, and Points of Faith determinate Senses,
Faith's Rule must bring us to such determinate Senses.

6. After ancient Councils, let us give a glance at Fathers, and see what they
say to this Point.

Celestin, Saint and Pope to the Fathers of the Ephesin Council; Agendum igitur
nunc etc. Now therefore we must act with a common endeavor to preserve things
believed, and retained to this very time by SVCCESSION FROM THE APOSTLES.
Ireneus cap. 4. Quid autem etc. But what if the Apostles had not left us the
Scriptures, ought we not to follow the Order of ^radition which they had
delivered to those to whom they committed the Churches. To which Ordination
assent many Natiens of those Barbarians who believe in Christ, having Salvation
writ by the Spirit in their hearts without characters and Ink, and diligently
keeping the Ancient TRADITION. In the former we have it told a General Council
what their proper task is; namely to keep or hold fast what was believed and
kept; and how? by Succession from the Apostles, or from hand to hand. In the
second, that the Apostles when they gave Bishops their Charge, ordained or made
it their Duty to observe Tradition; that this Way of Tradition was sufficient
to receive Faith upon; that is, sufficient to be a Rule of Faith without
Scripture; and that de facto it did perform that office to many Nations without
Scripture. Lastly, he calls this delivery from Father to Son the writing it in
their hearts by the Spirit; that is, the work of the Holy Ghost or
Supernatural, however it connaturally descended; and seems to counterpose this
to writing by characters or Ink; as if this were not (so immediately at least)
the Holy Ghosts work; In regard (as plain reason tells us) the Sense of those
Letters, or Faith, must either be had by those Inward Characters writ in the
Readers hearts by God's Spirit; and so It, not the Ink writes it there; or else
by human or Natural Skills, which are not attributable to our Sanctifier, the
Holy Ghost.

7. The same Father ( lib. 1. cap. 3.) For though there be diverse Tongues in
the world, yet the virtue of Tradition is one and the same. The preaching of
the Church is true and firm, in which one and the same way of Salvation is
shown over the whole world. Here we have but one Rule of Faith, or way to
Faith, and this the preaching or living voice of the Church; which is not only
said to be true but also firm; that is the Certainty of its Truth is built on
solid Grounds, or founded in the nature of things ordered by God's special
Providence to that end. To show which has been the aim of my present
endeavors.

8. Origin is more express. 1. Periarchon, Servetur vero etc. Let the Churches
preaching delivered from the Apostles by order of Succession, and remaining in
the Church to this present be preserved. That only Truth is to be believed,
which differs in nothing from the Churches Tradition. And 29. in Matthew. We
ought not to believe otherwise than as the Churches of God have delivered us by
Succession. Where he directly makes Tradition the Rule to judge what is sound,
what not; that is, the Rule of Faith.

9. Tertullian lib. de carne Christi. If thou be but a Christian, believe
what is (traditum) delivered. And, speaking to an Heretic; By renouncing what
thou have believed thou provest that, before thou did renounce it, what thou
believedst was otherwise: It was then delivered otherwise: Moreover, what was
Delivered, that was True, as delivered by those to whom it belonged to deliver;
Wherefore, renouncing what was Delivered, thou have renounced what is True. So
that in this Father's Judgment a Christian and Follower of Tradition are the
same, and that to renounce what comes by Tradition is to renounce Truth; which
amounts to this, that Tradition is the Test of Christianity, and Rule of Faith.
Also he intimates that it belongs to some to deliver, to some not; and, if to
any, to whom but those who lay claim and adhere to Tradition or Delivery, and
are in possession of it? not to those who are known to have broken from
Tradition and impugn its Certainty.

10. Athanasius (in lib. de Synodis.) They have declared themselves to be
Unbelievers by Seeking what they have not; All therefore that are Seekers of
Faith are Unbelievers. They only to whom Faith comes down from their
Ancestors, that is, from Christ by Fathers, do not seek, and therefore they
only have Faith. If thou come to Faith by Seeking, thou wast before an
Unbeliever. And, in his Discourse against Paulus Samosatenus de Incarnatione.
He that searches after those things which are beyond his strength stands upon a
precipice; but he that sticks to Tradition, stands out of danger. Wherefore we
persuade you, which also we persuade our selves, that you retain the Faith
Delivered (Traditam Fidem) and avoid profane words of Novelty. I wish the
Protestants would seriously weigh the import of these Sayings of this Father,
and consider what it was which sustained him who was a Pillar of Faith in his
days; and then, applying it, see whether it fits to Catholics or Them. They
would plainly discern that which they prize themselves most for, that is for
taking their Faith out of Judgment, by finding and seeking it in the
Scriptures, is alone enough to show them not to be truly Faithful; That God has
promised a perfectly secure way to give them true Faith, that is, by believing
Ancestors. That they who do not so stand upon a precipice, seeking what is
beyond their power; that is, to hammer a certain Faith out of Scripture's
Letter by their private Wit. Which reflected on, a little reason, enlightened by
so plain and manifold Experiences, will easily tell them that it is the
shallowness of their Grounds, unable to satisfy Rational Nature, which makes so
many of theirs take upon them to seek for Faith, and so leave them; and the
solid secureness, connaturalness, and satisfactoriness of ours which makes few
or none leave us; and those who do, it is easy to discover the motives of their
revolting.

11. Yet one more from this Illustrious Father; as one whom by reason of his
Famous Contrasts with the impious Arians, it concerned to be more express in
inculcating and sticking to the true Rule of Faith. He writing to Epictetus
Bishop of Corinth. It Is to be answered (says he) to those things, which alone
of it self suffices, that those are uot of the Orthodox Church, and that our
Ancestors never held so. So that the living Voice of the Church, Tradition, or
belief of Ancestors, is held by him a sole-sufficient Rule of Faith, and the
only Answer to be given why we reject points from Faith, or admit them into
It; that is, an Evident Reason for such a carriage; for otherwise another
Answer would be requisite.

12. We will be shorter in the rest. Clemens Alexandrinus Stromaton 7o. As if
one of a man becomes a beast, like those infected by Circes poison, so he has
forfeited his being a man-of-God and Faithful to our Lord, who spurns against
the Churches Tradition, and leaps into Opinions of human Elections. Basil
against Eunomius: Would thou have us all* persuaded by thee, prefer your
Conceits before the Tradition of Faith, which perpetually has conquered under
so many holy men. And, speaking against two other Heretics, Sabellius and
Arius; Let TRADITION bridle thee: Our Lord taught thus, the Apostles preached
it, the Fathers conserved it, our Ancestors confirmed it; be content to say as
thou art taught. We have it clear then that the Renouncer of Tradition is none
of the Faithful, that is cut off from the Root of Faith (see Corol. 4.) that
all is men's Conceits and Arbitrary Opinions (which the word Heresy imports)
that is opposite to Tradition. We have, lastly, the whole course of our Faith's
descent from Christ to us; yet not a word of descending by Scripture or Letters
in Books, but by the way of Preaching and Teaching, that is, Oral delivery and
Sense writ in men's hearts.

13. I omit many other Fathers, but I must not S. Austin. Ea potius credam,
etc. I will rather believe (says he, contra Epistolam Fundamenti) those things
which are celebrated now by the consent of learned and unlearned; and are
confirmed throughout all Nations by most grave Authority. And, again; It Is
manifest that the Authority of the Catholic Church is of force to cause Faith
and Assurance. Which (Authority) from the best established Seats of the Apostles
even to this very day, is strengthened by the Series of Bishops succeeding
them, and by the Assertion of so many Nations. In both places he he makes the
consent of Learned and Unlearned, Bishops and conspiring people, continued down
to these days (that is, the living voice of the Church Essential, or
Tradition) the most grave Authority, apt to ascertain us and cause Faith; that
is, he makes Tradition the Rule of Faith; and builds its strength (as we also
do) on the multitude and consent of the Asserters or Testifiers of its descent.
Also in his 58. Epistle, The Faithful (says he) do possess perseveringly a
RVLE OF FAITH common to little and great in the Church. Where every word is
Emphatical; That the Churches voice is the Rule of Faith: That this Rule is
common to Learued and Unlearned; that is, able to satisfy the acutest
Discoursers and yet understandable by the rudest vulgar: Lastly, that they hold
it, and that perseveringly or unshakenly; which shows it self-evident; else
both, the unlearned at least, might come to doubt of it. (See Disc. 5.. 8, 9,
10, 11.

14. Thus much for the credit of Tradition; its being the Rule of Faith,
Certain, and Uninterrupted. But how shall we know who enjoyes this Tradition,
or what points have been handed down by it from the beginning? Must we not run
to Private Expositions of Scripture to be assured of this, or at least to
Libraries of Books writ in all former Ages to see if perhaps their Authors
might^have dreamed of our now difficulties, and then prophesi'd us a
satisfaction so express and ample, that no cavil can avoid it? No, we have
manifest Certainty of it other ways, if we may trust the Fathers. We will
only allege two, both very Ancient, and great Masters of Controversy against
the Heretics of their times. S. Ireneus lib. 1. cap. 3. All those who will
hear Truth may at present perfectly discern (adest perspicere) in the Church
the Tradition of the Apostles, manifest in the whole World. That is, the
Doctrine of the present Church (proceeding upon or adhering to Tradition) is a
manifest Argument, that what it teaches now was delivered by the Apostles. And
Tertullian contra Marcionem. That is manifestly True which is First, that First
which is from the beginning, that from the beginning which is from the
Apostles. In like manner that will manifestly appear to have been delivered by
the Apostles, which shall be established as Sacred in the Churches of the
Apostles. Where first he ascends, and confounds Novelty or Heresy, by showing
that the Priority of what they left, argues it to have been ever or from the
Apostles, and so True; and then proves, and manifestly too, that that was
delivered from the Apostles which is found established (that is held to be
received, as all his former Doctrine runs) as sacred in the Churches at
present, which were founded by the Apostles. But he is yet more express in his
first Book against the same Heretic, nothing is to be acknowledged a Tradition
of the Apostles, but what is at this present day professed (for such) in their
Churches. So that he sends us not to Volumes of Histories and other Writers
(which if Tradition can'fail, are of no Authority) to find what was the Ancient
or Primitive Traditions, or what the Apostles taught or delivered, but only to
the living Voice of the present Churches; which had been but a weak procedure,
in case their holding now a thing delivered were not argumentative that it was
delivered ever; which is the substance of my proof a posteriori, for the
Indefectiveness of Tradition. And, least it should be imagined that this
Argument loses its force by tract of time, or the longcontinuance of the
Church, Peter Chrysologus, in his 85. Sermon, secures us from that danger. A
Christian mind knows not how to bring into dispute those things which are
strengthened by Tradition of the Fathers, and even (ipsis temporibus) by Time
it self. To omit here that he makes it the very temper of a Christian mind not
to question Tradition, he maintains Continuance of Time, to be so far from
weakening the Certainty of Traditionary points, that it contributes to
strengthen them more. And the reason is, because the Churches Doctrine spreads
by Time, and so the sway of Tradition's descent is ampler; besides that every
new Degree of Continuance establishes its Title to Possession, and makes it
hainouser to revolt from it. And, Effects show our discourse true; for, there
were more variety of Heresies, that is Renouncers of Tradition, in the first
400 years after the Apostles, than we read of in any 400 years since; Nor (that
we may use a familiar Instance in Human Tradition) does (I conceive) any man
living more doubt now of Mahomets or Julius Caesar's existence, than within an
100 years after they lived.

15. A few Notes, well weighed, will strengthen the force of these Allegations;
which even at first sight seem to look very favorably on our Cause. I mind my
Reader then,

First, That almost every Citation alleged is of Councils or Fathers speaking
directly against Heretics; that is, in such Circumstances as put them to
declare what fixed them Catholics, and what made the other Heretics.

Secondly, That though some Fathers and Councils speak highly of Scripture, as
that it contains all Faith, etc. It Is first to be marked whether they speak of
Scripture Senc't, or as yet to be Senc^t; and, if the later, by whom; or
whether any Fathers say that Scripture wrought upon by private Interpretation
and Human Wit is apt to ascertain Faith (or be the Rule of Faith) which is the
true point between the Renouncers of Tradition and us.

Thirdly, They shall observe it frequent in Fathers to force Heretics to
accept the Sense of Scripture from those who gave them the Letter of Scripture;
and very frequent to Sense that Letter (even when dark) by Tradition; but never
to bend Tradition to the outward show the Scripture's Letter seems to bear as
interpreted by human Skills; or to say Universal Tradition is insufficient or
uncertain, unless the Scripture's Letter thus interpreted came to clear or
assist it.

Lastly, it is impossible they should hold Scripture thus interpretable the Rule
of Faith; it being notorious that most Heretics against whom they writ, held
it theirs; And so had they held Scripture thus interpreted the Rule of Faith,
they could not have held them Heretics, since they adhered stiffly to that
Rule or Root of Faith, however they might err in many particular Tenets. Not to
repeat how all the Properties of the Rule of Faith are urterly incompetent to
Scripture's Letter.

This done, all the Testimonies for Scripture against Tradition lose their
edge. That is (if my discourse also hold the test) it will appear by way of
Fact, as it did before by Argument that there is neither Reason nor Authority
against Tradition. So that I have no more to do but to show that our Church at
present grounds her faith on Tradition as formerly; which done it follows all
the Substance of my foregoing Discourses is but an Explication of our Churches
Sense.

16. To know our Churches Sense in this point, we will not fetch our Testimony
from private Authors (as is the Protestants mode when they would affix any
thing upon her) but we will attend to what her own living voice pronounced in
her late famous Representative, the Council of Trent. Where, in every Session
definitive of Faith, It professes to follow TRADITION, either in most express
or equivalent Terms. As, Session 4th. The Holy Synod clearly seeing that this
Truth and Discipline ( Christ's Doctrine) is contained in the written Books and
Traditions without writing, which received by the Apostles from Christ's own
mouth; or from the very Apostles, the Holy Ghost dictating, as it were
delivered by hands, ( per manus Traditae,) have come down to us etc. And Again,
Also the TRADITIONS both belonging to Faith and Manners, as dictated orally by
Christ or the Holy Ghost and conserved by CONTINVAL SVCSESSION in the Catholic
Church etc. Session 5. The Holy Council following the Judgment and Consent of
the Church. Ibid.. 4. As the Catholic Church where ever diffused has always
understood it; For by reason of this RVLE OF FAITH according to the TRADITION
of the Apostles etc. Session 6. It professes to follow that Doctrine which
Christ taught, the Apostles delivered, and the Catholic Church, the Holy Ghost
suggesting, perpetually ( or interruptedly) retained. Session 7. The Holy Synod
adhering to the Holy Scripture, the Traditions of the Apostles, and the Consent
of Councils and Fathers. Session 13. The sound and sincere doctrine which the
Catholic Church has ever kept, and will ever keep to the end of the World.
And, again, For so ALL OUR ANCESTOVRS that ever were in the true Church of
Christ most openly have professed. And yet again cap. 3. This Faith was ever in
the Church. So cap. 4. It was ever held in God's Church. More such like
Expressions are found in the same Session. But to proceed. Session 14. chap. 1.
The Consent of ALL the Fathers EVER understood etc. Chap. 5. The Church of God
NEVER taught nor held etc. Chap. 5. The Universal Church EVER understood that
etc. Chap. 7. It was ever held in God's Church Chap. 8. It was PERPETVALLY
COMMENDED by our Fathers to Christian people. No Catholic EVER held etc. And
in the same Session concerning Extreme Unction, alleging S. James his Text, it
adds, By which words AS THE CHVRCH HAS LEARNED BY TRADITION RECEIVED DOWN BY
HANDS, he teaches etc. And Can. 3. As the Catholic Church EVER understood
from the beginning etc. Can. 6. Which the Catholic Church ever observed from
the beginning, and does observe etc. Session 21. chap. 1. The Council professes
to follow the Judgment and CUSTOM of the Church. Chap. 2. It declares that
this power has PERPETVALLY been in the Church. Session 22. That the ancient
Faith and doctrine may be retained in the Church. Ibid. cap. 1. As the
Catholic, Church EVER understood and taught. Chap. 1. According to Apostolical
TRADITION. Session 23 Holy Writings show it, and the TRADITION of the Catholic
Church ever taught it. Chap. 2. They are known to have been in use from the
very Beginning of the Church. Session 24. The Holy Fathers, Councils and the
UNIVERSAL TRADITION of the Church have ALWAYS taught. And speaking of some
Errors, It pronounces them different from the Catholic Church, and from the
CUSTOM approved SINCE THE APOSTLES TIME. Session 25. The Catholic Church
instructed by the Holy Ghost, teaches out of Sacred Writings and the ANCIENT
TRADITION of the Church, etc. According to the use of the Catholic and
Apostolic Church [TRADITAM] delivered from the first (or Primitive) times of
Christian Religion, etc. More Expressions of the like strain are found in this
Session. And, to close up all, in their Acclamation they use this form of
words: This is the Faith of Blessed Peter, this is the Faith of the Fathers,
this is the Faith of the Orthodox. From which Testimonies, note we.

17. First, That the Council in every Session, (not one excepted) where Points
of Faith are handled, constantly professes to follow TRADITION.

Secondly, It lays claim perpetually to Vninterruptedness of this Tradition,
as appears by the words, ever, always, from the Apostles times, from the
beginning, from the Apostles have come down by hands to us, The Church has
always understood, held, openly professed, taught, has ever kept, and will ever
keep, perpetually commended by our Fathers, has learned by Tradition received
down by hand, has ever observed, and such like. Plainly showing that this
Persuasion of our Faith's descent uninterruptedly is deeply and unanimously
rooted in the heart of the whole Catholic Church. Which strengthens our
Doctrine, Disc. 8.. 2. and 3.

3ly. It makes the Suggestion of the Holy Ghost, or Sanctity in the hearts of
the Faithful, efficacious to perpetuate the delivery of received Doctrine. See
Sess. 6. Decreto de Iustificatione, Sess. 13. de SS. Euchar. Sacramento, and
many other places. The very point I went about to explicate in my 9. Discourse.

4ly. It Is observable that though it mentions the Holy Scriptures also with
Tradition, yet this is both very rarely, and when it does so It only expresses
that Faith is contained in them; but when it brings Places of Scripture to
ground Definitions upon, It perpetually professes to Interpret them by
Tradition; Which is most Evident both by its decreeing this in common. Sess. 4.
That none dare to interpret Holy Scriptures against the Sense which our Holy
Mother the Church has held and does hold; meaning that Sense in the Hearts of
the Faithful is the Rule to interpret Scripture by, (see Corol. 30.) As also by
several Instances; Sess. 5.. 4. Sess. 14. Can. 3. Sess. 22. cap. 1. and (to
omit others) in that most remarkable pla^e Sess. 14. In which after the Text of
S. James ^lledg'd for Extreme Unction, the Council subjoins, In which words, as
the Church has learned by Apostolical Tradition received down by hands, be
teaches, etc. Where Tradition is most evidently made the Rule which instructs
and guides the Church in interpreting Scripture: And it is observable that the
Council no where grounds any definition on Scripture, but at the same time she
grounds her Interpretation of Scripture on Tradition; which devolves into this
that the Council makes Tradition her only Rule to know Certainly Christ's
Sense, or Points of Faith; that is, (in proper speaking) the only Rule of
Faith.

18. But why then is the Holy Scripture made use of at all by the Council, and
that so solemnly; nay, and (which is to be noted) constantly put before
Tradition? To satisfy fully this difficulty it is not the proper season at
present; yet, being a good point and worth clearing, I will not totally neglect
it. We may observe then that when we read any Book writ by an Author we much
esteem, but yet such a Book as requires studying, ( Aristotle's for Example, or
some other such whom we hold Scientifical,) we sometimes hope well (as it were)
when we apply our own Industry to find out his meaning, and have a kind of
respect for what we conceive to be his Sense; yet his Authority takes not full
hold of our Understanding, by reason the way we take is not evidently
convictive that this is his Certain Sense; But if the Point he writes on be
first cleared to us through a Scientifical discourse by word of mouth, made by
some Interpreter versed in his Doctrine and perfectly acquainted with his
meaning, we have as it were new Eyes given us to look deeply and thoroughly
into his Sense; and, by this Security of arriving at it, his Authority (in case
we highly esteemed it) has now its full force upon us to strengthen our Assent,
according to the degree of power it had upon our Understanding. Now, what a
well-skill'd and insighted Interpreter or scientifical Explicater of the point
is to such an Author, the same is Tradition to Scripture. For, This bringing
down Certainly Christ's Sense in every Point of Faith, It easily and securely
guides us to the true meaning of Scripture in those passages which concern such
a point; whereas, the wordish way of Grammar and Criticism being evident by
Principles to be ambiguous, and by Experience to lead men into different
Senses, it can never satisfy us thoroughly that the Sense we arrive at by this
method is infallibly the true one or Christ's, and so never engages certainly
the Authority of GOD'S WORD. And, hence it is that Scripture thus interpreted
is of slight force, and at best good only for Ecclesiastical Rhetoric or
Sermons; where the concern is not much if the Preacher misses in this
particular passage so the Substance of the Point he preaches on, or his Text,
be truly Christ's doctrine; nor is Scripture thus interpreted even a competent
proof in the Science of School Divinity, as being Uncertain and so unapt to
beget Science; whence, Intelligent Divines quoting and building on Scripture
are to be supposed to judge the Sense they build on to be the Churches, and so
they are presumed to go to work as Faithful, or parts of Ecclesia docens; or
else they lay true Science first, which is ever agreeable to Faith; and so,
when any Text concerns a demonstrated point, they know by Science what the true
Sense of that Point must be. Much less is Scripture wordishly interpreted apt
to build Faith on; the unwaveringness of which kind of Assent must be grounded
and secure in the Principles which beget, it and not merely actually such as it
were by accident; whereas Interpretations thus made (Faith's Principles in this
case) are liable to possible if not probable mistake. This will be clearer by a
parallel made by a learned Author worth inserting, because it strengthens our
Discourse by a new Consideration. Let a Critic and a skilled Carpenter read
Vitruvius his Book of Architecture, the Critic has but a dim, dry and
uncertain conceit of what he reads as to the truth of the thing; but the
Carpenter or Architect, by reason of some Principles and Practice he has
already of those matters, understands him more thoroughly, and makes lively and
firm conceits of the truth and excellency of what he writes; Such is the
Practical way of knowing Christ's Sense, or Tradition, to the interpreting
Scripture, us^d by the Catholic Church; in comparison of the Critical Method
affected by others. In a word, Tradition gives us Christ's Sense, that is, the
Life of the Letter ascertaind to our hands, which therefore must needs move the
Letter, its Body, naturally; The other way takes the dead Letter, and
endeavors to move it Artificially to counterfeit that Life which it truly
wants.

19. To apply this Discourse to our matter in hand. Tradition securing to us
the Scripture's Letter truly significative of Christ's Sense, and also the true
Sense of that Letter in Points of Faith delivered, (See Coroll. 29. and 30) it
follows that Scripture alleged by the Church relying on Tradition for its
Rule, engages certainly and fully the very Authority of the Divinely inspired
Writer himself; and gives that Testimony the whole Effect upon our
understanding, which that Sacred. Writers Authority deserves to have given it.
No wonder then the Council, proceeding upon Traditionary Interpretation as it
constantly declares it self to do, honors Scripture-Testimony so as to put it
before Tradition or the delivery of Christ's Doctrine from hand to hand:
Scripture, thus alleged and securd, having the same force as if the Apostle or
Evangelist himself should sit in the Council, and by way of living voice
declared his own Sense in the matter; to whom, thus present, what deference the
Council would have given is obvious to be imagined. Hence, also, the Protestant
may see what high esteem our Church gives to Gods Word, truly so called; that
is, having Gods Sense certainly-known to be such, in it* and that it is only
the outward Letter as used to hammer a Faith out of by wordish skills, that is,
indeed, their Method of interpreting it (which, by reason of its Uncertainty
falls short of engaging the Sacred Authority of Gods Word) we fleight and
scorn: And most justly, since it is the having no better way to work on
Scripture, which has brought Scripture it self, thus us^d, to scorn and
contempt; as appears in the carriage of our Bedlam of new Sects in England. I
expect here some mighty man of talk, but very weak Speculator, should object
that this is an excellent way to bring all into our Churches hands. But till he
can prove that both Letter and Sense of Scripture are knowable, with such a
Certainty as to build on them that most firm Assent called Faith, by any other
way than this of Tradition, I can neither hinder my Inferences nor will he ever
be able to confute my discourse.

20. Thus much to show evidently that the Substance of the Doctrine we have
given in our former Discourses, is the very Sense of our Church at present; and
that her present Sense in this matter is agreeable to the Judgment of Ancient
Fathers and Councils. I have no more to do now but to show that at the very
time of the Breach here in England, the Catholic was found adhering fast to
this Rule of Tradition, renounced by the Protestant. This is evident by the
Protestants own confession; For, as often as you hear them allege that England
was formerly overgrown with Popery, that the new Light of the G^spel has of
late discovered it self, that they reform^d in Faith, that the former Church
errd, and such like expressions which naturally must burst out from them, so
often you hear them acknowledge themselves Deserters of Tradition and Innovators.
Which Expressions of theirs (by the way) easily manifest to the most vulgar
understanding who ^tis that has renounct Tradition; whence, it being also
easily evidenceable to the rudest capacity that Tradition is a most certain way
of bringing down Faith ( Disc. 5.. 8.) the most vulgar Soul is capable of
knowing which Profession it is to follow. For the two former points being
known, they are Certain by motives within their own Ken, that Protestants have
renounct the Certain way to bring down Faith; but that we renounct Tradition of
old is unacknowledged by us, disputable, and only knowable by skills they are
not Masters of. Common Sense then teaching them they must guide themselves by
reasons they are capable of, and not by reasons of which they know nothing, and
that God requires no more at their hands than they can do, Gods goodness has
provided for those weak people, out of the very Confessions of Tradition^s
deserters, Certain means to judge whether they ought to be Catholics or
Protestants. But, to return whence we diverted.

21. It is not only the Protestants own Confession, but the open Profession of
the Catholic Clergy in the very nick of the Breach manifests our claim and
constant adherence to Tradition. Whose Declaration, found in the Synodal Book,
1559. begins thus. Because by relation of public Fame, it has lately come to
our knowledge that many Tenets of Christian Religion, hitherto received and
approv^d by the Public and (...) Consent of Christian Nations, and BROVGHT
DOWN BY HANDS even from the Apostles to Us, are called into doubt* Therefore,
etc. Where we find them stick firmly to Tradition; And, insisting on this
Principle, they proceed to make a Profession of their Faith, which they exhibit
to the Bishops to be given to the Lord Keeper; but the State by power
overbearing the Votes of the Reverend Convocation, and persecuting them for
their constancy, the Breach ensu^d. The Catholic cleaving fast to his Old Rule
Tradition; the Protestants choosing a new one of Scripture privately
interpreted; whose vanity a little reason makes them see, but experience
perfectly find; and relinquishing the Ancient Rule so demonstrably
self-evident, secure and solid; By which means they became cut off from the
only Certain way to know Christ's Sense, that is from the Root of Faith, and
consequently from the Body of the Church; The Guilt of which Fact neither Human
Authority, Multitude, Prosperity, Continuance, nor yet all their Voluminous
wordish Excuses will ever be able to Efface.

ANIMADVERSIONS On Dr. Pierce's Sermon: Also, on Mr. Whitby and Mr.
Stillingfleet, where they touch the Way laid in the foregoing Discourses.

In Three Appendixes.

Psalm. 63. Sagittae parvulorum factae sunt Plagae eorum. Anno Dom. 1665.

TRANSITION To The following APPENDIXES.
I Have finished my Discourse: how dexterously must be determined by the
Judgment of my Readers, and Confutation from m^^e Adversaries. But I account
those only my proper Judges and competent Adversaries who lay their Principles
ere they discourse, and weigh the efficaciousness of their Testimonies in the
Scales of Reason ere they allege them. If I find a man laying no Principles of
his own, but supposing them, and making account all men must admit them out of
respect to him or his party, and yet bend all his endeavors to cavil at
Principles laid by others to ascertain and establish the Groundwork of
Christianity; If I find one ignorant of or resolved against the onely-Certain
method and Rule of Discourse, which is, that No Position deserves Assent unless
the Connection of its Terms be Evident, which must either be when they are
Evidently connected of themselves (of which nature ought to be all First
Principles) or made evidently-connected by the interposition of some other,
which we call Evident-by-consequence or Deduction: Lastly, if I find a man
wedded to Parrat-talk of Air and Sounds that he thinks it a rare thing to load
margents with Citations, without first distinguishing them and considering what
strength each ought to have according to rational Principles; I decline such an
empty Soul for my Judge, and slight him as mine Adversary. And lest any should
impute this carriage to me for fastidiousness I offer my Reason for it. For, to
cavil at Principles and yet go about to lay none himself, is the method of a
Sceptick; and from him indeed I must suffer it, if I cannot forc^ him to hold
his tongue: But, that one who pretends himself a Christian, that is an Holder
of Christ's Law, that is (if he goes consequently) a Relier upon some First or
Self-evident Principle for holding that Christ said thus or thus, should be
permitted to impugn Principles brought to ascertain fundamentally that point,
and yet himself lay none to do that Effect (as is the Custom of the Impugners
of Tradition) is to let him behave himself like a Renouncer of Christianity,
and to fight against any assuredness of Christianity; that is, to contradict
himself and all his own positions as he is Christian; which permission is
unreasonable according to Maxims of Common Sense, and illegal by the Rules of
true Logic. Again, if the clear light of Understanding gives it manifest, that
nothing can be seen intellectually but what is either Evident by its own Light
or by Deduction in the manner declared, it is as Evident that to frame Discourses
in another method than this, or at least loose Discourses that have no
Connection involu'd in them, enabling them to bear the Test of this Method, can
be only to talk Uncertainties, that is, of we know not what: Which is unworthy
a Man, much more a Scholar. And, lastly, Since it is evident by Reason that
every slight Authority is not comparable to that of God's Church, it is Evident
likewise that Reason is to weigh what is due to Authorities; and that, No
Authority deserves any Assent further than Reason gives it to deserve. Now,
this being so, to allege Authorities undistinguishingly, whereas there is such
diversity of degrees in them that perhaps there are no two to be found
perfectly alike in merit, is such a wild proceeding hand over head, such a
careless saying any thing to no imaginable purpose but purely to talk, that no
sober Discourser can think it fit to spend time in combating such an aerie
Adversary.

2. I make it my request to my intelligent Reader (for I write to none but
such) that he would reflect back on the Method I have taken in my short
Discouse; and he will see that (however my Performance speeds) I pursue the Way
of Evidence, and aim at least at perfect Science of the point in hand. He will
see I take my rise at the meaning of the words Rule and Faith; this known, I
establish my first Principles in this present matter to be these, a Rule is a
Rule, Faith is Faith; hence I proceed to discover diverse Attributes
necessarily connext with what is meant by those two words; and if, to avoid
witty cavil, I decline the pretense of rigorous Definitions of either word,
without pressing the Essentialness of any of those Attributes to the Natures of
Rule and Faith, I hope I shall merit both pardon and thanks from those who look
for satisfaction; For, as long as those Attributes must necessarily accompany
the Rule of Faith, I do my work without engaging into nicer disquisitions.
Those Attributes being shown necessarily connected with the notion of Rule of
Faith, I applied them to my matter in hand by means of these two Propositions,
bearing a necessity of Truth in their very Terms; That is not the Rule of Faith
to which Attributes necessarily belonging to the Rule of Faith belong not; and,
That is the Rule of Faith to which Properties belonging only to such a Rule do
belong. Hence I reject Scripture's Letter from being that Rule, and assert
Tradition to be it. And this was enough perhaps for me to do if I only minded
opposition to those who adhere to Scripture's Letter for their Rule, in
contradistinction and opposition to Traditions being such.

3. But, intending to avail my self and my Cause by the strength of Truth and
Reason not the Weakness and Passion of others, I went forwards (having first
shown it clearly Self-evident that Tradition was a most Certain Rule, if
followed) endeavoring to demonstrate the Indefectiveness of Tradition, or that
it was ever followed; and this I attempted by those means. I took the allowed
Definition of Man (the Subject of the Effect I was to show,) which was to be a
Rational Creature. I found the proper Agent or Efficient to work upon him as
such to be Motives or Reasons; and, from the impossibility of any such Motives
to make him prevaricate from openly-deliver'd Faith, nay the necessity of
seeing he must destroy his Credit without any possibility of compassing his
End, I endeavored to conclude that Faith thus descended was never prevaricated
from. Then, taking the way of demonstrating the same a poste^iori, I took an
Effect I conceived Impossible to be introduc't into a Knowing Nature without
the Existence of Tradition's ever-Indeficiency to ingraft it there, or rather
to imbue Souls with it naturally, and, as it were, ex traduce.

4. Seeing by this time that my Discourse, by stooping from my First Principles
while I apply^d them to my business, seemed immerst in matter; and, by the
blunder of many more and more particular Terms than were in the mere Principle
forci^ly taken in, began to look with a contingent Face (though indeed I still
perch't upon the specifical natures of Things, and so never flaggd below the
Sphere of Science) therefore to comfort the Readers understanding apt to grow
turbid by my approach toward Practice, I considered Tradition practically and
opened the nature of it, by reflecting connaturally how the Revolt from it
which we call Heresy comes to be originiz'd. For the same reason I compared the
Human force of Christian Tradition with another vast Tradition merely human;
and then touching at some Divine Assistances, showed how the Author of Nature
had established the best piece of it, Man's Nature, by particular means
exceeding her own native strength, to this Effect of preserving the descent of
Christ's doctrine unalterable and uninterrupted; that is, I showed Tradition
most Certain and most Indefective, and far beyond the establishment of any
other piece of Natural Science whatsoever.

5. Lastly, observing that my Discourse by process (as the custom is in all
Discourses, however evident, if not bound to Syllogistical form) began to look
disheveled, I added diverse Corollaries; In some of which I made many several
ends of it meet in a closer frame; in others I advanced forwards to show that
the Churches Unity, power to oblige and govern her Subjects as Faithful, and
her Infallibility in the whole and several parts of her was founded in
Tradition; nay that by means of Tradition She enjoyes a wonderful Sacredness of
Authority, being not only unexpugnable but also unimpugnable without
destroying all kinds of Certainty; that is, without highest nonsense in the
Opposer. And hence I seat TRADITION on her Throne; demonstrating her they the
First, and consequently self-evident, Principle in affairs of this Nature; and
therefore that the Knowledge of her Certainty is the First Principle in the
Science of Controversy.

6. This tenor of my Discourse briefly reflected on, I beg of my intelligent
Reader to regard it once more in the bulk, and he will see that I begin with
Self-evident Principles; That my Principles are antecedent to Authorities, and
so are competent means to judge Authorities by; that I studiously avoid wordish
ambiguity, which Rhetorical Discoursers ly open to, holding rigorously to the
notion or meaning of the words; that I lay but the meaning of two familiar
words, Rule and Faith, for the basis of all my Discourse; that I endeavor to
pursue my Principles by very obvious and immediate connexions; that all the way
I attend heedfully to and build upon the Natures of the Things; which, in
short, devolves to this, that it may be hoped (at least by my method) that
there needs nothing but Time and Industry to frame and make up in rigorous
demonstrative form, that sense which I have here delivered in a way more
suitable to the temper of the World and ease of my Readers; who may see Evidence
in my Discourse, without being obliged to bend their brains to study my Book
with that severity as they would do an Euclid.

7. When this is done, let my Reader reflect on all the Discourses concerning
Faith made by any Protestant, and see how far they are short from (I will not
say any such performance, but) even an Attempt of Evidence. First Principles
they lay none; and consequently Evidence of Deduction cannot be expected from
them: for, wanting First Principles, it is nonsense and folly to talk of
deducing. Again, For want of such Principles, they want Certainty of any Text
of Scripture to justify it against an Atheist or Deist. They want Self-evident
Principles to guide them in interpreting their Uncertain Letter, and so confute
other Sects which differ from their Church; and the method they take to do it
is evidently quite of another nature than Scientifical. They have nothing upon
account of Living Teachers which ascertain Sense; so that you must to find your
Faith not build upon the sense of two or a few familiar words, but of an whole
large Book; that is, on millions of words, and those too not only unsenc't,
but also very abstruse and mysterious. They suppose all which is antecedent to
Faith, that is all Principles which are to induce Faith and so make no
Provision for the Grounds of Christianity against Heathens and Atheists: The
Natures of Things they are so far from proceeding upon, that they not so much
as mind or think of them, nor I doubt fancy or value that method when set
before their eyes. Principles to weigh each Testimony by they lay none, and so
quote at random. Certainty they seek not, nor care for; for they quote the
Fathers and Scripture as by themselves interpreted, and yet neither hold the
Testimony of Fathers Infallible nor yet themselves in interpreting Scripture;
yet plainest reason tells us, that unless the Fathers or themselves were
Infallible hic and nunc in this saying or interpretation, they were hic and
nunc Fallible; that is, all built on that Testimony or Interpretation is
contingent and Uncertain: yet of such Citations no better authorized, cl^d
perhaps in some fine words, the Books of their best Champions are made up. So
that they are convinced not to study Things, but Words; that is, not to be
Scholars or Knowers, but Empty Talkers; and so the effect of their endeavors
can never be satisfaction to an intelligent soul, but only tickling the Ear or
pleasing the Fancy.

9. As I have shown this Ungrounded proceeding of the Protestants by
Principles, so I intend to do the same by Instances: but ere I go about this
undertaking, I think fit to meet with an Objection obvious to many Readers.
It Is this; that, It Is strange all Catholics do not take this way, it being so
conclusive, as well as I.

10. I answer, that all Truths being connected, it is evident each Truth, even
for being such, is maintainable several ways; especially Supreme and very
concerning ones: Amongst which ways, some are suitable to some capacities,
others to others. Wherefore Catholic Controvertists esteeming themselves
Debtors both Sapientibus, or to those who judge of things per altissimas causas;
and Insipientibus, or those who do not so nor fly higher than a prudential
pitch: and the later of these being the Generality; hereupon the Charity and
Prudence of those learned Opposers of Dr. Pierce (and very many others) have
thought fit to address to These by answering his Testimonies particularly;
leaving me the way of Reason and Principles; though in danger to receive much
disadvantage by my imperfect delivery, and securer under the managery of their
abler heads and pens. I declare therefore that I intend no confutation of any
of those Authors, nor to share in the victory of those excellent Champions of
Truth: It being perhaps needless to the Generality (however very satisfactory
to examining Wits) to confute that in Common which is already confuted by
Retail. I write more against their Way than their Books. Yet, if any will be so
charitable as to judge my short hints to bear the force of a solid Confutation,
because they radically and fundamentally overthrow all their Arguments and very
Method of arguing, if it be Truth's advantage, I shall give God thanks for it
and be glad of it. But the main is, it imports not in maintaining Truth what
others do or do not; but, if it be shown that Catholic Principles (I mean the
living voice of the Catholic Church, or Tradition, our Rule of Faith) can bear
such a rigorous test of Reason, and appear more lustrous and bright by so
severe a trial; and, on the contrary, that the Principles of the Revolters from
her are so little solid, so volatile and merely made up of Fancy, that they
evaporate into air and even shrink into nothing when set in the mid-da^ beams
of Truth, the Rules of Evidence; I desire no higher an honor to the Catholic
Church, nor deeper discredit to her Adversaries.

FIRST APPENDIX.
Animadversions on the Groundlesness of Dr Pierce's Sermon.
1. LOoking about for Instances of Protestants Books most proper to be confuted
by my former Doctrine, my thoughts pitched naturally on Mr Whitby's, where he
goes about to settle rationally his Rule of Faith, and on Mr Stillingfleet's,
where he opposes the way of Reason, and the Certainty of Tradition. But it
seemed convenient to take to task also some Adversary who insisted on
Testimonies, and bring him to Grounds; because, in the way of Reason which
brings Testimonies to Grounds, to confute one is in a manner to confute all. Dr
Hamond seemed proper; but his Book is now out of vogue, if it were ever in it;
for I never heard past two or three persons speak of it: and, I am sure, the
best Protestant Wits of our Nation never valued him as a smart and efficacious
Writer. Besides, the Notes I have lately given upon the Fathers Testimonies,
leave little in him to be replied to, and my Discourses have left nothing at
all. Amongst late Adversaries then, Dr Dentons folly seemed so ultra crepidam,
that it was not worth a serious thought; and it is wholly answered by declaring
that he begins and grounds his whole Book on so knavish a Calumny, that, could
the Universality of Catholics have the same Law against him, that a private
Protestant, though the meanest in the Kingdom, might freely have, he would
lose his Ears for Libelling. The Dissuader for his plausibleness (not for his
strength of sense) seemed to require a larger Answer than was suitable to the
design of an Appendix. Dr Pierce was of highest vogue, and short; but he was
already so doubly overthrown by two Learned Opposers, that it seem^d unhandsome
and ignoble to strike a man when he was down; his Circumstances making him
rather an Object of Pity than Victory. Yet his Pulpit-alarum to excite all
England to persecute Catholics was so full of malice, and so monstrously cried
up, that I judged it above all others deserving to be made an Example of
ungrounded Talk. Though I shall do it with that compassion as not so much to
confute him, as by laying a few Notes as Admonitions to him, to open his
Understanding and enable him to look into the force of his own Citations, and
so to guide himself better the next time he goes about to quote Authors; a
point I doubt he as yet never thinks on. They may also give his Defender (now,
as I hear, writing) some light to strengthen his Testimonies against us. I am
sure they will tend to clear Truth, not to blunder it; and so all ingenuous
seekers of satisfaction will thank me for them. To begin then,

2. The whole scope of his Sermon expressed in the Title of it, The Primitive
Rule of Reformation, causes my first Admonition. For, since we both agree that
the Primitive Faith is to be held to, and only differ about the Certain means
to come to know what that Faith was; we holding to Tradition and to Fathers and
Councils (which are, taken properly, parts of Tradition) as Certain means to
know that Faith; The Protestants to private Interpretations of Scripture, and
to Citations quoted on any fashion; The way to confute us Catholics is to
demonstrate the Certainty of the way they take to prove their Faith the same
with the Primitive; otherwise, let them talk and write as long as they will,
they are never the nearer their Conclusion. Now, if plain Experience tells us
the Sm^ctymnuans too preached and writ against Episcopacy by quoting Fathers and
Scripture, let Dr Pierce show us what his way of Talking has above theirs which
gives it a virtue of ascertaining or perfectly settling the understanding; or
confess theirs (and so his too) is fallible and frivolous. To demonstrate then
against us, and so confute us, he ought rather have insisted on a derivative
Rule, or a Rule able to derive down to them Christ's Faith with Certainty; so
to make out their present knowledge, which alone can justify their present or
late Action of Reforming; and not run afar off to a Primitive Rule or Faith,
which is nothing to the Protestants, unless they can prove Certainly they
follow it. When D. Pierce makes a Sermon at Court upon the Certainty of such a
Rule, we will all become Auditors, so he will promise to begin with first
Principles, and bring Evidence of what he says: Till then let him take heed of
bragging in print of Demonstrations, until he knows what the word means: that
is, till he reflects how a Demonstration is a Proof which obliges the
Uudersta^ding, and considers or studies wherein the virtue by which it performs
this, consists. Such bold and careless talk has cost his Credit dear already;
and when it comes to be scanned by Principles and Science, will leave it quite
bankrupt.

3. We have seen the End and Scope of D. Pierce's Performance, which is, to
over-leap all that concerned him to prove, if he would conclude with Certainty
against us: Now, the usefullest part of his whole performance, as he says in
his Dedication, are his Citations, as being the Evide^ce and Warrant of all the
rest; which therefore (if any thing) deserve to be considered.

Their faults distinguish them into so many forts.

Of the first sort are those which are impertinent to our (or indeed to any)
purpose, but to make a noise or vaporing show.

Of the second, those which are raw or unapply'd, and only say something in
common which never comes home to the point.

Of the third, those which are levelled blindly at none knows what, or at a
question unstated; and so are shot at rovers.

Of the fourth, Those which impugn a Word for a Thing; or some Circumstance or
Manner for the Substance.

Of the fifth, Negative Testimonies.

Of the sixth, A private Authors saying against the torrent of a contrary
consent; which, of it self, is liable to innumerable contingencies of passion,
mistake or ignorance; but, thus compared, signifies less than nothing. The like
is to quote a Schoolman or two for a point which others freely contradict.

Of the seventh, those which are false, and signify not the thing they are
expressly quoted for.

Of the eighth, those which labor of obscurity by an evidently ambiguous word.

Of the ninth, Sayings of those on his own side.

Of the tenth, a few fragments of Scripture, senc't by Fancy.

4. I intend not to muster up one by one all his Citations and then rank them
under their respective Heads, the brevity of an Appendix not permitting it:
But, I make this fair proffer to his Vindicater or himself, that if they please
to pitch upon any Testimony of his which falls not under some one (perhaps
many) of these Faulty Common-places, I will yield them all valid and
conclusive, and make him public satisfaction for the Injury.

Having thus given my bond for the Truth y charge, and under so great a
penalty upon failure of being so, I have Title to free license to suppose my
charge good, (which will also appear shortly in common by my. 9.) and
accordingly to apply my reason to consider his Citations. I discourse then
thus, and Note.

6. First, That Citations are of two sorts; the one alleges the Testifiers
Knowledge by Eyesight or Infallible Sense; the other his Judgment or Opinion.
Now this later, in regard men's Judgments or Opinions depend on Reasons, is not
properly that Authors Testimony, nor he a Witness (who ought to proceed upon
Evidence had by Senses) but a Scholar or Relier on his Reasons; and, so, his
expressing himself in the words found in such a Citation has no Authority
further than his Reason gives him; which Reason therefore and not his Saying
ought to be alleged: in regard it was merely by virtue of his Reason he knew
this; and so the whole virtue of his Authority (which follows and goes parallel
to Knowledge) consists in that Reason. None therefore are properly Testimonies,
but those which rely on Sensitive Knowledge: and those are of Certain
Authority, if the sincerity of the Testator be unquestionable, and the
conveyance of his sincerelymeant Knowledge to us be Evident; not otherwise.

2ly. Note secondly, that, for the reason given, Citations from Adversaries,
and Opinators signify nothing; also those whose words presumed to express the
Witnessers sense are Ambiguous, or otherwise-interpretable; or else their very
Letter Uncertain; as all are, if the way of Tradition be held fallible.

Thus much in common of Citations as in themselves. Considering them next as
made use of by D. Pierce, we find he relies on them as on his Principles to
conclude against us, or as he (good man) unfortunately calls it, Demonstrate.
Hence.

3ly, They must not be Negative; for such can conclude nothing.

4ly, They must not be false or evidently signifying another thing than they
are produced for, nor impertinent; for then they are in both cases quite
besides the purpose.

5ly, They must be express and home to the point; for, Principles must need
nothing but themselves (besides the Application) to infer the Conclusion
pretended to spring from them.

9ly, They must be void of ambiguity. For, Principles must be either
self-evident, or at least made evident, ere they can deserve to be produced or
admitted as such.

Lastly, Principles are Sense, not Sounds or Characters; and so their Sense
ought to be Indisputable.

7. The first Note evacuates at once all his Citations from Authors that
concern any point between us. For he brings no Certainty of any knowledge
expressed to be built on Sense; that is no Citation against us, which, in proper
speech, deserves to be called a Testimony.

The second Note particularly invalidates those of the eighth and ninth sorth.

The third, those of the fifth sort.

The fourth, those of the first and seventh.

The fifth, those of the five first sorts, and also those of the seventh.

The sixth, those of the second, third, and particularly the eighth.

The last Note enervates the tenth, and indeed almost all the rest. It being
evident that our learned Controvertists give other Senses to those Citations
than what Protestants assign them, and maintain still those senses to be
better than theirs.

8. In a word, seeing all Testimonial Authority supposes Knowledge in the
Author, and all Knowledge is either from Sense (called Experience) or else
from evident connection of Terms (or Reason) and that this later knowledge is
apt to make a Master, that is, one fit to convince and teach another rationally
by Intrinsecal Mediums or to cause Science in him, and so is unfit for
Testifying: And the former kind of Knowledge only is fit to be an Extrinsecal
Medium or apt to beget Belief of the Witnesses word (in regard any person,
unacquainted otherwise with the Truth of the Point, knows by ordinary
Experience and common reason that men's Understandings may err, but their Senses
rightly circumstanc't, cannot;) it follows that no Citation in proper speech
deserves the name nor has the force or virtue of a Testimony but those which
are built on Sense or Experience. This weighed, reflecting on the main, I find
not one ^^^ress Testimony against any point of our ^aith, engaging Sense; that
is, not one which merits the name of a Testimony or to be esteemed a part of
Tradition. That of S. Austin for communicating Infants has the true nature of a
Testimony in it, and deserved a more elaborate Answer, had its Sense been
unquestionable and the Words cited from the Father himself; but the Sense of it
being Disputable (his Expositors explicating S. Austin by himself in another
place no^ to mean oral Manducation, but virtual ^^^ly which is done by Baptism)
and withal cited as a private Authors Sense concerning S. Austin, it falls
under the 6th, and 8th. Head of faulty or inconclusive Citations, and so is
already answered.

9. This is the upshot of that famous Sermon: And now I would gladly know what,
in the Judgment of an intelligent person who examins things by Grounds, Dr.
Pierce has performed in this so highly extolled piece of his more than his
dear Brother and fellow-champion against the Pope, Mr. HENRY WHISTLER? Only he
has clad his little Nothings in some kind of mock-Rhetorick; which, like
Fig Leaves, cover after a pitiful manner the Nakedness of his empty Discourse.
Yet, were even his Rhetoric examined by the substantial Rules of that Art, I
doubt it would come of as ill as his Proofs. For it is obvious to observe that
the beginning of his Sermon is a-la-mode a School-boy's Theme, and that his
Style is far from even or spun on one thread; Instead of the Thunder and
Lightning of strong and sententious Sense astonishing and moving the Auditors
reason by the advantageous smartness and Majesty of the Expression; he gives us
a peal of Ordinance charged with air, a volly of thunder-thumping bombast, able
to make a solid man's Reason nauseate; and this most inartificially placed at
the very entrance of his Sermon,. 2. Or else loud Pulpit-beating invectives*
and railings. He makes huge account of little quirking Observations out of
Human Authors; which have no imaginable force or purpose but to make an
ostentation of the uncouthness of his reading; the Gallantry of his third
paragraph. For ingenious surprises of Reason, erecting and taking the
Understanding, we have wordish Quibbles, Quirks, and Paranomasias: and those
most evidently (contrary to Art) studiously and industriously affected. His
con^ident sayings without Proof make up half his Sermon; and his Ironies and
Sarcasms are the sauce to make all this windy meat go down.

10. I will close with noting his excellent Faculty in quoting Scripture: To do
which when the place is worth looking, as being brought to justify some passage
we are about, is grave and to some purpose; but, when no occasion or need
invites, upon the naming any two or three words which hap to be in Scripture,
to be still quoting and tricking the Margent with Book, Chapter and Verse and
relating Stars or little Letters, is a very empty piece of Pageantrie, and most
sillily Pedantical. Now, our Dr. cannot talk of Faith, but he must add (though
most unsutably to his Reformers in England, to whom it is most notorious no body
delivered it) which was once delivered to the Saints, and Jude 3. shall
ascertain it. He cannot name the words, which was from the beginning, but the
margent shall direct you to Mat. 19. 8. The two words Spending and being Spent
oblige him to let you know where to find them, 2 Cor. 12. 15. At the very
naming Help and All sufficient, (two good honest words, which might have been
spoke whether Scripture had been or not) he cannot for his heart hold, but
alleges you for it, 1. Cor. 1. 27. And will needs (though indeed very
needlessly to us) prove himself a weak Instrument by a plain Text, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
The obvious and common words condemned out of their mouths, must have a Star of
the First magnitude to light you to a lesser one in the margent, and that to
Luke 19. 22. And David's cutting of Goliah's Head with his own Sword, a story
known undoubtedly by all that were like to read his Sermon, shall be secured
from being thought a piece of a Romance or Knight-errantry by a punctual
Citation in the open margent, 1 Samuel 17. 51. And, to omit diverse of the like
pleasant strain, lest any Unbeliever should be so impious as to doubt that his
THEOPNEVST AHOLIAB was an Embroiderer, you shall see it as plain as the nose on
a man's face in an express Text, Exodus 35. 30. 34.

11. But why insist I thus on so poor a foolery in a Book I designed for solid?
or what advantage can I gain to my cause by so slight an Animadversion?
I'answer, ^Tis my temper when I see an odd action done without reason, to trace
it to its Original, and to search after its proper Cause: And, upon
consideration, I find none so proper for this Effect, as a certain kind of
humor of quoting in D. Pierce and others of his Brethren, so strongly
possessing them, and even naturalized into them, that, so they be quoting, they
matter not much whether it be to purpose or not: This I have shown in the whole
bead-roll of his Citations ( the usefullest part (as he says) of his whole
performance) and that not one of those which he call Evidences, is conclusive;
that is, worth a straw, or to purpose: But, because every one will not be
capable to see it in those Citations he brings for Proofs, I let them see it in
those his late quotations of Scriptures: In which he so pitifully betraies his
silly and vain humor of quoting to no imaginable end but to satisfy his
customary habit or Fancy; and, as in his Citations, so in these, imagins the
Application of them to his Cause in stead of showing it, that I conceive no
Universitie-wit but will see in this carriage of his, that Dr. Pierce's head is
not too Scienti^ical, nor himself a fit man to to demonstrate against the
Papists.

SECOND APPENDIX.
Animadversions, On Some Passages in Mr. Whitby.
1. I Beg pardon of my Reader for my late Merriment and Children's play with
aerie bubbles and Feathers. Both D. Pierce's manner of writing and his Carriage
toward Catholics merited this kind of return. I hope the passages in Mr.
Whitby I have designed to answer, will give me occasion to speak more solidly:
And, that they may do so, I will pick out those which aim at some point of
Concernment. I have a particular respect for the person, and am sorry his
growing hopefulness received a foil by his Book against Mr. S. C. and this
though a threefold disadvantage; the badness of his Cause, the Patronage of Dr.
Pierce's malice, and his impar congressus with so learned an Antagonist.

2. My Design leads me to take notice especially of that passage, p. 93. Sect.
4. where he begins a discourse about the Sovereignty of Reason, and explicates
(rather than proves it ought to be so) what is his Rule and Guide to Faith.
Which, because it looked plausibly, yet was prudently neglected by Mr. S C. who
hearing of more Eminent Antagonists writing against him, judged it wisest to
reserve himself to answer the Protestanrs second and best Thoughts in Them, in
case they were found to deserve it; and, because on the other side the
Challenge was made to all the Romanists in the World, and many passages in it
light cross to the Grounds I had laid, I took leave to consider and examine it
my way. In a great part of it, especially at the beginning the discourse is
rightly made; but in other places he confounds Guide with Rule, Power with
Motive, and, by straining a word in Mr. S. C. beyond its necessary
signification, imposes on us a false Tenet which he mainly builds upon. So that
I am forced to begin my answer by putting down our true one, which gives Faith
and Reason both their due. This done, his Superstructutes on that Supposition
will fall of themselves.

3. Our Tenet then is that Faith is the same with Belief, that Belief relies on
Authority, and Divine Faith or Belief on the Divine Authority as its Motive,
and on the Church's as on the Applier of the other to my Understanding. At
next, I hold that no Authority deserves Assent further than true Reason gives
it to deserve; and, hence, the Divine Authority, being Essential Truth deserves
in true Reason, if possible, Infinitely intense Assent or adhesion to its
sayings from me; and the Churches Authority being found by my Reason to be
Certain, it applies with Certainty (that is closely) the Divine Authority to my
Understanding; and so obliges it absolutely to believe the Truths God has told,
and to submit whatever reasons I may have against the Object revealed to this
all-overpowering Authority of Essential Truth; This being the First Cause of
all those things, whence my particular Reasons are taken. Nay, farther, hence
it is that I adhere more heartily and firmly to a point of Faith than to any
Conclusion of any Science whatever; because a more efficacious Cause equally
closely applied is apt to produce a greater Effect, and no Cause is or can be
in (...) reason comparable to that of the Divine Ver^city in the point of
causing Assent; which is closely applied by me to the Churches assurance. Hence
my Faith is ever most Rational; because ^is (...) rational to believe a point
for which the Divine Veracity is engaged, and highly rational to believe the
Church assuring me that it is engag^d for such and such points: Nor yet is the
Divine Authority or the Church (as Mr. Whitby p. 96. very mistakingly argues)
beholden to the judgment of my private reason for my belief of her
Infallibility, but on, the contrary, my private reason is beholden to them for
that Judgment; seeing I therefore come to have that Judgment because Those, as
Objects, wrought upon my Apprehension and imprinted a conceit of them there as
they were in themselves, and so obliged my Reason to conclude and my Judgment
to hold them such as they were. This Rational Assent establishes my Faith
against the assaulds of any doubts from Human Reasons; resting assured th^^ the
same God who told me this, is the Maker of all things else, and has writ all
Created Truths in the Things he has made; whence no created truth can thwart
my Faith unless He can contradict himself, which is impossible. Hence, if I
have true Science I am certain to find no part of it opposite to my Faith; but,
on the contrary, conformable to It, as being a Child of the same Parent,
Essential Truth: If I have not true Science, I ought not to think so; nothing
therefore but mine own overweening can make me miscarry.

4. Reason having thus play^d her part in bringing me to Faith, deserts me not
yet while I act in it, nor I her: my Acts of Belief are still rational, because
it was rational to believe at first, and my Grounds why I then believed rest
still unchanged, nay are unchangeable. But yet, Reason acts much differently
now then ^ormerly; Before I came at Faith she acted about her own Objects,
Motives or Maxims, by which she scand the Authorities we spoke of: But, in Acts
of Faith she has nothing to do with the Objects of those Acts or Points of
Faith; She is like a dimsighted man who used his Reason to find a trusty Friend
to lead him in the twilight, and then reli'd on his guidance rationally
without using his own Reason at all about the Way it self. To make this clearer
we may distinguish two senses in the word Reason; one, as it is taken for that
natural Faculty which constitutes Man; which Faculty never deserts or ought to
desert us in any action that is Manly or virtuous, The other as it is taken for
that Power wrought upon by motives under its own ken; in the same sense we call
it human Reason; by which is not meant the natural Power unactuated or
abstractedly, for then the word human were a Ta^tology; but Reason as
conversant with such objects or informed by such knowledges as are commonly
found within the sphere of our natural condition as Men, such as are those
which beget Science: And this leaves us when we have once found the Authority
now spoken of; the Objects of Faith, formally speaking, being out of her reach;
nor is she (thus understood) the motive of our Assent to the verity of the
Point of Faith, but AVTHORITY only. Wherefore into Authority only, Faith (as
such) is resolvd finally; though, if you go about to resolve the Rationalness
of assenting to the Authority it self, it will light into those Evident
Reasons, which your natural power of reason, as yet uninform'd by Faith but by
motives or maxims within its own sphere, was capable to wield.

5. Reason therefore taken for my natural Power is my Eye or interior sight;
as informed by common Principles or Maxims antecedent to Faith, my Guide to
bring me to believe Authority; and those motives or Maxims are the Rules to my
Reason, by attending to which, she has virtue or skill to set her own thoughts
right, that is to guide me in my way to Faith: but, when I have once come to
believe Authority, that is, come to Faith, not Reason but Authority is my Guide;
for I follow Authority and not my Reason in judging what is Faith, what not;
and, though the Light of that natural power never deserts me, yet Reason, as
ruled by her own natural maxims, is useless to me as a Guide, or those Maxims as
a Rule; for I apply neither of these to the mysteries of Faith to scan their
verity or falsity by, but purely rely upon Authority, and believe them.
Authority then is my Guide; and in the Infallibility of that Authority, consists
the power or virtue it has to guide me right, that is to regulate or rule me,
as one of the Faithful, or as one who must have such Certain Grounds of my
Assent, as I may securely build my Salvation on. This Authority then, as it is
In^allible, is also my Rule in my believing, or the Rule of my Faith. This of
my Rule of Faith in Common, against Adversaries of Faith in common. But, with
Protestants, who grant Christ to be God, and consequently his words or doctrine
true, the only Rule and Guide we need, is to lead us into the Knowledge of what
he said and assure it to us. We affirm then, that the Catholic Church is the
Guide we follow, and her Infallibility (consisting in Tradition) our Rule of
Faith. Hence all Catholics profess her doctrine uninterruptedly succeeding from
the Apostles time, and so to continue to the end of the World; hence with one
voice they lay claim to Christ's gracious Assistance to her, in defending her
from over-growing Errors against Faith, or Heresies; hence all profess to hear
and follow her, and pledge undoubtingly even the security of their salvation,
by relying on the Certainty of her Living Voice for their Tenets, and on her
Discipline for the Practice of their Faith. And though some Schoolmen make
Scripture a partial Rule of Faith, yet they can mean only materially not
formally, that is, that some part of Faith is signified by Scripture's Letter,
not that Scripture's Letter alone is sufficient securely to signify it to
private understandings so as to beget that most strong and firm Assent found in
Divine Faith; as is evident by this, that all hold no Scripture is of private
Interpretation; all hold the living voice of the Church and her constant
Practice are the best Interpreters of Scripture. Now, Faith being Tenets and
Sense, that must be (...) the Rule of Faith, which ascertains us of Christ's
Sense; not the material Characters which that Certain Interpreter we call the
Church works upon, and by her Practical Tradition interprets.

6. It Is high time now to look back upon Dr. Pierce and his party, how justly
they deal with us, and how mistakingly they discourse when they come to the
Grounds of their Faith.

7. First, by the tenor of his discourse he would seem to obtrude upon us a
Tenet, which none but perfect madmen could hold; namely that we profess we
have no reason why we believe the Church; which devolves to this that we must
profess we have as much reason to believe an old wife's dream as our Faith,
since there can be no less reason than none at all. And hence he will needs
assure the Reader, that therefore, the Enthusiastic Sectaries are in part
Romish Proselytes, etc. And indeed upon so gross a calumny laid down for his
principle and a sober Truth, what might he not conclude? with equal reason he
might have inferred that all Bedlam were Catholics, and that to turn mad were
to turn a Romanist. But his carriage to put this upon Mr. S. C. is strangely
unjust; since he knows and hints it, that he writ a Book upon his declaring
himself Catholic, entitled, Motives of his Conversion; does he think the word
Motives does not signify Reasons, or, that to write an whole Book of Reasons
why he adhea'd to the Catholic Church signifies that he renounced all reason
why he believed her?

8. Next, as for his own tenet, he lays this for his Ground, that, Reason
alone is Judge in all cases. I will propose him one case, and it is the
Existence of a Trinity. To work now with your Reason about this object, and see
how you evince it. I doubt your best reasons will crack ere you make all ends
meet. But, you mean you must have Reason to believe it; I conceive (speaking
properly) you should rather say you must have Reason to believe the Authority,
and Authority to believe It; for Belief is as properly relative to Authority as
Science is to an Act of true Reason or Evidence. Whence it is as incongruous to
say I must have Reason to believe such a Point, as to say I know such a point
Scientifically by Authority. Again, for God's love who ever denied they ought
to have reason to believe the Churches Authority; Is any thing more frequent in
our Controvertists and Divines treating of the Ground of Faith than large
Discourses concerning Motives of Credibility?

9. Thirdly, he says that disputing with Romanists whether Scripture be the
sole Rule, he means it is so limitedly, that is between Christians, who have
already acknowledged Scripture a Rule of Faith. By which I see Mr Whitby guides
him self by sounds, though he must need; know (if he knows any thing of
Catholic Ten^^^) our sense is quite different. I beseech you, Sir, deal fairly
with us: Is not that, speaking formally and properly, the Rule of Faith which
gives us Christ's sense; and does not that give us the Sense of Scripture which
regulates us in the Interpretation of it? Did ever Catholic then hold that
Scripture interpreted on any fashion, much less on your fashion by private
Judgments or reasons regulated by Grammatical skill, Criticisms and such like
verbal knowledges, is a Rule of Faith; nay do not we constantly abhor this way
as the Source of Heresy? Take us right then we hold not Scripture's Letter
alone a Rule, but Scripture interpreted by the Church; that is, indeed, the
Church formally speaking; and so you see you mistake our Principle. Yet upon
our joint-agreement in this your Discourse against us proceeds. Retrive it
then, you see your Error. Again, you tell us Scripture is your new Rule, but
forget quite in your discourse to tell us that your Reason assures you
Scripture is to be the only Rule, or why it should be so; since (besides what
I have demonstrated to the Contrary in my former Discourses) it is evident
Christian Religion had descended many steps ere the Scripture's parts were much
scattered, much less the Whole collected; and no less clear that, that can
never be a Rule or Way to Faith, which many follow yet their thoughts straggle
into many several Judgments; not in indifferent points, but in that of the
Trinity amongst the rest, as your self profess of the Socinian, that he rejects
not the Trinity in the first place, because it seems a contradiction, but
because it is not clearly discovered in Scripture; by which you see he adheres
firm to your Rule, and so ought to be acknowledged one of your Church; since,
though he hap to differ in some points, yet he holds fast the Rule common to
both; which is the substantiallest Principle of a Church as such, being the
Ground of all Faith. And, indeed, your Kindness to him here, and your tender
care not to displease him, shows you have a true brotherly affection for him.
Though I fear he he will con you small thanks for making his Principle run
thus, That which is not clearly reveal^d in Scripture and is coniradictory ti
reason is not to be believed; which seems to imply, that were it clear in
Scripture, yet contradictory to Reason, then he would notwithstanding belive
it. An over-strain of Piety no Socinian was ever guilty of, and I can assure
you no learned Catholic Divine I ever heard of ever made such an Act of Faith.
But it is another case if it only seems contradictory, and is not judged by him
to be evidently such; for then there is room left in his mind for the contrary
Assent of Faith to settle there.

10. You say you prescribe not the doctrine imputed to the Socinians, because it
makes Reason the Judge of Faith, but the Rule of Faith. Pray take pains to
consider what you say. He that judges must have some Principles in his head by
which he is regulated in making such a Judgment; those Principles then must be
his Rule in that Action; and, if that Judgment be an adhesion to a point of
Faith, those Principles are his RULE OF FAITH. Examine now well your own
thoughts, whether your Principles, by which you find out certainly by
interpreting Scripture this is God's sense or a point of Faith, be not Maxims
of your human Reason. I am sure in disputes against us you prove and defend
your Faith by such skills; as Languages, History and other Knowledges got by
Human Learning; and consequently hold It your selves upon the tenor of those
skills, which therefore are your Rule of Faith, and not upon the bare Letter.
You, I know, will deny it. But I beg your second thoughts to reflect that a
Rule to such an Effect is the immediate Knowledge to the Power as conversant
about that Effect; and that, if another intervene, it regulates the former;
which thereupon becomes the thing ruled, not the Rule. Do then these skills
clear the Letter of Scripture, that is, make known Gods Sense to you? If so,
since their Immediate effect is to clear it, it is impossible to deny but they
are at least part of the Revelation; for revealing is clearing, and God's Sense
was not clearly revealed but by those means, that is by human maxims; and so
they are at least the more formal part of your Rule of Faith. Again, I ask
might you not have mistaken the true Sense without those Human Maxims? If so,
then They, and not Scripture's Letter, were your Rule. If not, then only
common Sense is requisite to understand clearly what is revealed in Scripture;
and then, either your Brother Socinian or you want Common Sense, which I think
you will scarce say.

11. But, will you see you still hold Reason your Rule, notwithstanding you cry
up the Written word? Find you not there expressly that God has hands, feet,
nostrils and passions like ours, and this in clear terms? Why is it not then a
point of Faith? You will not answer sure it is against Maxims of Reason; you
renounced them formerly ( p. 94.) when you had found out your new Rule and
only allowed your Reason power to judge, if a point were sufficiently
revealed, that it is most rational to (...) it self, though it seem to
contradict or thw^^^ Reason. Now this is sufficiently revealed being plainly
writ in your Rule of Faith, and the direct Letter of Scripture; why will you
not then captivate your Reason and believe it? I see you do but complement with
God's incomprehensible Knowledge in speaking so highly of it and so humbly of
your own shallow Intell^ct: Will you deny a point of Faith so plainly reveald
for your own capricho or conceit? Perhaps you will say it is not clearly revealed
because the contrary is plain in Scripture too. I ask, is it as plain? if not,
it cannot overthrow the title of This to be a point of Faith: If as plain, why
should you not believe both? Be valiant, Sir, and believe a contradiction it
being clearly revealed. Perhaps it seems but such, and then your own
profession. p. 94. obliges you to admit it: You that can acknowledge an Infinite
extension of space (when you say all the world besides does so too, sure you
thought all the World was in your Fancy) may also hold Materia ab aeterno, and
that it is only a part of Gods Nature, as (if I mistake not) Jacob Bemen does;
and then secundum hanc partum of illam will do the work, and gives a true sense
to both sides of the contradiction. You should do any thing which could by any
means make it seem possible, rather than question a plain Divine Revelation:
Nay, perhaps you do not think you can demonstrate the contrary to the solution
I have helped you out with, at least that your Demonstration is but a seeming
one; and then I challenge your candor to own your sayings, and demand why you
are not bound to use this shift and a thousand others rather than violate your
avowed Rule of Faith, and deny and hold against the clear Letter of Scripture.
If you allege you have perfect Science of the contrary by Metaphysics; then,
though I expect not this from you, your Science rules your Rule of Faith;
glossing or rather violently wresting the plain Letter, and so is so absolutely
your Rule of Faith that it controls and even baffles the other though clearly
revealing: Or, if to be in express terms in Scripture be not to be clearly
revealed, I would fain know what those words clearly revealed in Scripture
signify.

12. Perhaps you I say, that notwithstanding your new Rule, Reason must be your
GVID still even in Faith, though not your Rule. But I ask, if your Reason must
guide you sometimes so as to deny the clear Letter of Scripture, since a Guide
in any thing must be regulated by some Knowledges in that Affair, by what
Principles or Knowledges Reason is to regulate it self while it guides you in
that particular now in question? By Principles of Faith? How can that be in
your Grounds antecedently to the known Sense of the Scripture? By Principles of
Human Science? Then those Principles of Human Science give you the certain
Sense of the Written Word when it self is insufficient, and therefore are still
truly your Rule of Faith; and so you are forced to fly back for refuge to the
old Rule, Human Reason, which you seemingly renounced when you had found your
new Rule of the Scripture. It Is Evident then that some Maxims of your Reason
are your Rule and not Scripture's Letter. And this is what we reprehend in the
Socinian and you too; that, choosing a wrong Rule of Faith so to avoid the
Church, you both gloss it as seems best to your Reason regulating her self by
her own, and those fallible, Maxims. They by certain acute and ingenious
Sophistries proper to themselves, you by the more schoolboy way of Grammar and
Dictionary Learning; and so both of you make your Rule the thing Ruled. Nor
think to retort any part of this Discourse upon our Rule of Faith; For, this
being the living voice of the Church, delivers us a Determinate Sense of the
Points we are to profess, whereas Yours needs skils and helps of studious
Reason to tell you what it would say; Ours is alive, and in the Breast and
Actions of the Faithful; yours is dead characters, waxen-natur'd, and pliable
to, the Dedalean fancies of the ingenious molders of new Opinions; and so,
alone, can satisfy no man as you handle it.

13. No wonder now, if, having no certainer a Ground or Rule of Faith for her
self, your Church is shamefast of obliging others to believe her: Man's nature
could scarce own or permit so irrational a tyranny. Yet whether she does or
does not, we must not know from your words; which run so backwards and
forwards, that none can tell which is the true face of the Ianus. First p. 99.
you seem to deny it stoutly from the carriage of your Convocations and Bishops,
and from your own Tenets: Yet afterward you seem to grant they do require a
positive assent sometimes, and justify them as not doing it upon pretense of
any Infallibility, but because the thing determined is so Evident in Scripture,
that all denying it must be wilful. A rare Discourse, and worthy a deep
consideration! Pray who must be Judge it is so Evident in Scripture as to
render the Dissenters guilty of flat Wilfulness? The Bishops, or your Church?
Nothing less: In the beginning of this Discourse (p. 93.) you plainly denied
them to be Judges of Faith. Now in your sense to be clearly revealed or evident
in Scripture, and to be of Faith is all one; so that they must not be Judges of
what is evident in Scripture, lest by necessary consequence they become Judges
of Faith; and yet without having power to judge what is evident in Scripture,
they must have power to require assent to Points as evident in Scripture; nay
and punish the dissenters too: For it is a madness for Governors to require any
thing of their Subjects, without having Rewards and Punishments in their hands
to make what they require to be duly observ^d. Nay p. 93. you absolutely
refused to admit them as Guides of your Faith. A moderate word and less than to
be a Judge! Which signifies they may have power to require our Assents in
matters in which they have no power to guide us; that is, they may have power
to require us to go wrong for any thing we or they know. An excellent honor
for the Church of England, that her Champions profess in Print her Supreme
Pastors have no power at all to guide their Flock in their Faith, or to it when
they are out of it! Again, I would ask whether the Trinity be not Evident in
Scripture, and the Socinians wilful for denying it? Why are they then so kindly
dealt with? Or what could be replied to a Socinian, answering, when his Assent
to the Trinity were required, that he humbly submitted to Scripture, that he
used all the means he could, but discovered it not so evident there; and
thereupon complained that you obtruded upon his equally-learned party your own
conceit or opinion for Scripture-Evidences? What therefore you allege here, as
in your Churches behalf, that she requires not a positive assent upon pretense
of any Infallibility, more condemns Her; seeing it is most absurd and irrational
that one should require any man to assent to any point or proposition whatever,
as evident in Scripture, without Infallible Certainty (at least imagined and
pretended) that it is thus evident there; for, should it happen to be
otherwise, how ridiculous were his Authority, how damnable and diabolical his
Tyranny to oblige men to the hazard of falsehoods in matters of Faith, that is
in matters belonging to his eternal Salvation; and in the mean time profess
himself Ignorant whether they be false or no.

14. Now our Church goes another way; which ere I declare, I would let your
party see, that Interior Assent may be required by Governors lawfully and
rationally, which your Principles can never make sense of. Suppose a thousand
witnesses from several places each of them held always men of good consciences
should swear in open Court that they had seen such and such actions done by
such a man, or that they had seen, spoken or converst with such a person, were
not he mad that is a renouncor of Reason or Man's Nature who should not believe
them. You see then these Witnesses have power to propose such an Object as can
oblige to Belief? You see the Dissenters are Irrational, that their act of
dissenting springs from some Passion or Vice, and Vice is punishable; and so is
the Effects of that Dissent, if it be in such a matter as is highly pernicious
to Mankind's best concerns. Now our Church makes account she is able to propose
an Authority incomparably more ample than the Attestation now spoken of, for
the true Descent of her Faith; and judges such a proposal, founded on the
eyesight of all those Witnesses, to be able to oblige to interior Assent in
such a degree as to render them most highly wilful vicious and irrational who
should disbelieve it; hence (the crime intrenching upon the order to mankind's
Salvation* the highest concern imaginable,) both to edify those dissenters by
correcting their vice, and the circumstant Faithful, by breeding a conceit in
them, through the punishment of the others, of the sacredness of Faith and its
Rule, and the hainousness of Pride of understanding the ready way to all
Heresies, they may nay ought punish their Interior Dissent: Not out of an
height of Authority without motives, as Mr. Whitby conceits, but because that
Authority is her self such a motive to Belief, that only irrational vicious
and wilfully-blind persons can recede from it by disbelief: And hence our
Churches procedure is rational, natural, sweet and charitable, tending to amend
an enormity of Will not bred from a rationally but passionate dissatisfied
Understanding. Nay, Mr. Whitby's discourse justifies Our Churches procedure;
who seems to allow his Church a power to require a positive Assent, when the
case comes to be such that the denier of it must needs be held wilful; and our
Church neither says nor acts otherwise.

15. By this Discourse I would not have Mr Whitby imagine that I am about
proving our Churches Infallibility in this place; but only showing that,
holding She can evidence her Authority, She goes rationally to work and
consonantly to her self in requiring Assent to her Proposals; whereas Theirs,
confessing her self fallible even in interpreting Scripture, upon which all,
both her Faith, and Authority as a Church, depends, were self-condemned,
irrational and tyrannical if She should go about to require any such Interior
Assent. Now, though he in big words denies this to be her carriage, asking when
did they (meaning Bishops, Convocations or Parliaments) challenge any power
over our minds and Consciences, and alleges the consent of their Divines for
it, yet I wonder what he thinks of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, made
by a Protestant Parliament; is there no obligation there to hold any thing?
Yes, as strong as Oath can tie it. And, which is worse, it is more Irrational to
go about to bind Our Assents who are not of their Church, than to bind their
own Subjects. This in practice is performed toward all; but so imprincipled a
procedure that their Church waves it when it comes to a rational scanning in a
Dispute and Controversy, acknowledging so their want of Grounds to make it
good. Which shows that the Authority of their Church sprang from the Parliament
or Secular State, in regard She professes her self very heartily content with
external Obedience, let the Interior Assent goes where it will; most unlike
the Church settled by the Wisdom of the Eternal Father, and constituted the
Pillar and Ground of Truth; who provided in the first place for the Churches
Power to hold us to the same Tenets (which are the Principles of our Actions)
knowing that, unless the Root of Faith be sound, the Actions, its branches,
must needs be rotten and unconscientious; and, that no Congregation could long
hold together, nor indeed longer than the plain force of the Secular Sword awed
them, unless by power to evidence its Authority it had power to oblige men's
Understandings connaturally to an Unity in the same Faith; which done, all else
would follow, And hence we may see confessedly in the Protestant Principles the
reason of their present and past distractions, and divine of the future; for,
men's Fancies being naturally various, and no power in her to keep them in an
Union, they must needs ramble into multitudes of dissenting Sects; which to
strive to unite into one were to force both Nature and Conscience too. Nature,
in striving to unite their Understandings in Faith, without offering them
Evidence of Authority; Conscience, in binding them to Act as Protestants do,
whereas they are ready to stake their Salvation upon it that their best reasons
working upon the very Rule of Faith Protestants recommend, obliges them to the
contrary, and that to force them to act with Them is to force them to sin; So
that the Protestants at once profess they will not or cannot oblige their
Understandings, and yet at the same time contend by force to oblige their
Wills, without, nay against their Understandings.

16. In a word, let Protestants write, talk and quote words as long as they
will, Plainest Common Sense tells them and every man who considers it, that
unless they settle some undisputable Method of arriving at Christ's Sense or
Faith, that is, some self-evident (and so all-obliging) Rule of Faith, the
Protestant Church can never hope for Power to reduce their Dissenters, nor to
hold together or govern efficaciously their own Subjects; that is, they can
never hope for Unity within themselves; nor, lastly, Union with them that have
it, and charitably endeavor they may have it too.

THIRD APPENDIX.
Animadversions On Some Passages in Mr. Stillingfleet.
1. THe loud Fame of Mr. Stillingfleet's Book preventing its Publication, and
withal the report of his good parts coming from diverse Judicious Persons,
bred in me a great Impatience to see something of his other Writings, that so I
might have more solid Ground to build my Expectation on than common rumor or
commendation of acquaintances. A Protestant Friend showed me a little Treatise
of his concerning Excommunication. I perused the beginning of it, and
immediately told him Mr. Stillingfleet was a very ingenious person, and writ
the best I ever yet saw any Protestant: For he settled first his notion or the
true nature of the Thing, and thence attempted by intrinsecal mediums to draw
immediate Consequences, which showed that his head lay right for Science. But,
withal, I assured my Friend 'twas impossible he could write against us, and
take that method; the nature of his Cause not enduring so severe a Test. His
Book coming forth, and bearing in its Title a Rational Account of the Grounds
of Protestant Religion, my Expectation was more erected; and, till my self
could get leisure to peruse it, I told diverse both Catholics and Protestants
that they might expect from Mr. Stillingfleet's Wit the most that could be said
either for the later or against the former. But, coming to overlook cursorily
his Infallibility of Tradition, Part 1. Cap. 6. and The. Protestants Way of
resolving Faith, Cap. 7. I had quite lost Mr. Stillingfleet; and, instead of
him, had found a Dr. Hammond, Dr. Pierce, or a Dissuader; who talk not out of
Nature or Things, but Words and Imagination. I plainly discovered there was not
one proposition in those two Discourses which could be a solid Ground for a
rational understanding (that would be true to it self) to settle and rely on;
and was desirous to show it, had it not been uncivil to put my sickle into
another man's harvest, and crop the victory due to another's Learning and
Industry: Victory, I say; For he that defends his Cause no better, in effect
yields it lost. Yet I beg leave of the judicious Author of Labyrinthus
Cantuariensis to maintain one Breach where I find my self more directly
assaulted; Oral Tradition being the Post I have taken upon me to explicate
further and defend, because I conceive it the solid Ground on which the Church,
or all Catholics both Learned and Unlearned, rely as Faithful: however some
Schoolmen, abounding in their own Sense, ground also their Explication of the
Churches Infallibility on something besides.

2. Mr Stillingfleet then Part 3. Chap. 5. 4, and 5. sets himself to oppose
Oral Tradition, whose Infallibility he opposes to Doctrinal Infallibility in
Pope or Councils. Where, if by Doctrinal Infallibility, he means that which
they have as Doctors or Scholars, he may reflect that no Catholic makes such
an Infallibility proper to the Church or Church Governors, as such; however it
may be sometimes necessary to proceed upon it in some signal occasions. Now,
take away this Infallibility, there is none left but the Infallibility of
Tradition, performed by Testifying: It being Evident that we have but two ways
of ordinary Knowledge; by Acts of our Soul, or Operations on our Body; that is,
by Reason and Experience; the former of which belongs to Speculaters or
Doctors; the second to Deliverers of what was received, or, to Testifiers.
Whence M. Stillingfleet may see he stumbles at the very threshold by
counterposing Doctrinal Infallibility to Traditionary; since that which we call
Ecclesia docens professes constantly to ground her self on Tradition; witness
the Council of Trent in every Session where she defines Faith.

3. No wonder then, if grounding on this mistake, Mr Stillingfleet declares
himself unsatisfi'd. He asks therefore whether he is bound to believe what the
present Church delivers to be Infallible? I understand him not: Had he instead
of the word Infallible, put received as delivered ever, or Infallibly true, I
had; for Fallibility and Infallibility belong to the Knowing Power or the
Persons that have it, not to the Object; The Object being neither deceived nor
not deceived, but we: Well, but suppose he means by it delivered ever, or
(which is equivalent) certainly true, for what came from Christ must be so; In
that case we answer Affirmatively: He asks again, on what account is he bound
to believe it? And he makes our Answer to be, Because the present Church cannot
be deceived in what the Church of the former Age believed, nor That in the
precedent, and so up till Christ. This is indeed part of our Answer: The other
part is, that the Church in no Age could conspire against her Knowledge to
deceive that Age immediately following in matter of Fact evident in a manner to
the whole World. Upon this, he falls into two new Demands which take up this
whole paragraph.

4. The first is, how we can assure him the present Church obliges him to
believe nothing but only what and so far as it received from the former
Church? I answer, by her manifest Practice; never refusing Communion to any man
that could approve himself to believe all the former Age did. I could here
distinguish the word Believe, but I refer it till I come to speak of de fide.
He proceeds. What Evidence can you bring to convince me both that the Church
always observed this Rule, and could never be deceived in it? For the later, I
hope I need bring no greater Evidence than this, that men in all Ages had Eyes,
Ears, and other Senses, also common Reason, and as much memory as to remember
their own names and frequently-inculcated Actions. If you disprove this, I
doubt we have lost mankind, the subject we are speaking of. And, till you
disprove it, neither I nor any man in his wits can doubt that this Rule
depending on Testifying, that is Sense or Experience, can possibly permit men
to be deceivable. The former part I shall speak to when I come to show the
Obligation not to vary from Faith. His Scruple springs hence, that he sees the
Roman Church asserts things to be de fide in one age which were not in another,
etc. that this is the common Doctrine and the deniers ill-look't on. I beg leave
to distinguish the words de fide; which may either mean Christian Faith or
Points of Faith taught by Christ; and then you see it is nonsense to say they
can be in one Age and not in another; for what Christ has taught he has taught,
and the preteritness of the Thing has so fixed its Existence to its proper time,
that it is not now obnoxious to variation; Quod factum est infectum fieri non
potest. Or, de fide may mean obligatory to be believed. In this later sense
none (I think) denies things may be de fide in one Age, and not in another; in
the former sense none holds it. What Is now become of your difficulty? I believe
you are in some wonderment, and think I elude it rather then answer it: I shall
endeavor to unperplex you.

5. Christianity ayms not to make us Beasts but more perfectly Men; and the
perfection of our Manhood consists in using our Reasons. Since then natural
Consequences are apt to spring from natural Principles by the operation of
Reason, and we cannot but think that the Consequences apt to flow from
Supernatural Principles or Points of Faith delivered down from Christ (only
which are de fide in the former Sense) are of incomparably greater Excellency
than Natural Truths, it follows that Christianity or Christian Faith is so far
from hindering the Faithful from deducing out of them, that both out of their
nature as Supreme Truths or Principles, and out of their high Excellency they
invite and prompt most strongly to it. Now these Points deduct out of
Principles of Faith are of two sorts; The former those which need no more but
Common Sense or the ordinary natural Light of Reason to discover their arising
thence, nor any piece of Skill or Science to infer them, but are seen by the
bare Principle of Faith, or rather in it; being indeed but a Branch or Part of
that Principle. The later are those which need, besides, the Maxims of some
Science got by Speculation to infer them. An Example of the former sort is that
against the Monothelites of Christ's having an Human Will; for, common
Experience tells the most vulgar that every Man has a Principle in him
impelling him to Act, which we agree to call a Will. Such likewise are all
Propositions of this Nature which the Church uses upon occasion of some
emergent Heresy to explain her self and put the point of Faith out of danger
of being equivocated. Examples of the later sort are Theological Conclusions;
in which a Natural Truth is one of the Premises, joining with the Supernatural
one to infer them. To omit this, as little to our purpose at present; Of the
former sort the Church is necessitated to make use upon occasion; that is, when
any Heretic questions Those, and eadem opera the whole point of Faith it self
of which they were a part. Upon occasion I say; For what concerned its the
Faithful or who ever heard much noise of this Proposition, Christ has two
Wills, thus singled out and expressed apart, till the Monothelite granting him
but one, forced the Church, that she might preserve the main Tenet of Christ's
having two Natures, or being God and Man, to maintain, publish and define that
other.

6. To apply this then; since none can have Obligation to believe what they
have not obligation to think of, and, that in some Age the Generality of the
Faithful have no Occasion nor consequently Obligation to mind, reflect or
think on those Propositions involvd in the main stock of Faith, and truly parts
of it, that is indeed It; It follows that a Thing may be de fide or obligatory
to be believed in one Age and not in another. Perhaps Mr. Stillingfleet may ask
how the Church can have Power to oblige the Generality to Belief of such a
point. I answer, she obliges them to believe the main Point of Faith by virtue
of Tradition's being a Self-evident Rule, and these Implied Points by virtue of
their being self-evidently-connected with those main and perpetually-us'd
Points, so that the vulgar can be rationally and connaturally made capable of
this their Obligation. Whence the Government of our Church is still justified
to be sweet and according to right Nature, and yet forcible and Efficacious to
hold her Subjects in a strict Union. Not to mention how these Points also
descended by a kind of Tradition; for I doubt not but the Apostles had occasion
in explaining Faith to speak of These; however the no Necessity brought them
not so much into play, but left them unreflected on by the Generality.

7. But to return to Mr. Stillingfleet, who acts here like a Politician and
would conquer us by first dividing us, and making odious Comparisons between
two parties of Divines. But he may please to reflect how we all hold firmly the
same divinely-constituted Church Government, and the same self-evident Rule of
Faith to give our understandings the same principles as Christians, and so our
wills the same Actions: And those are firmly rooted in all our hearts to have
been recommended to us by the wisdom of the Eternal Father: Whence it is
Impossible for all the Wit of Man or even Malice of Hell to disunite us as we
are Faithful: As private Discoursers, our different Natures and Circumstances
must needs distinguish us. Every one believes the same; but, coming to
explicate this Belief, they vary according to the several degrees of perfection
in their understanding Powers. And yet M. Stillingfleet is not aware how little
we differ even as Divines: For, though some Speculaters attribute to the Church
a power of defining things not held before, yet few will say she has New
Revelations, or New Articles of Faith, and those only some Lawyers who talk
ultra crepidam, no Divines that I know of; and none, that Christ was not a
perfect Lawgiver; which are necessary Consequents (or rather in a manner
Identical) to the other. And, when it comes to the point, those men explain
themselves that all was delivered Faith, either Explicitly or Implicitly; which
I have shown to bear a very good Sense, in my Explication of de fide. He tells
us Popes and Councils challenge a power to make things de fide in one Age which
was not in another: he speaks only in common and proves it not: Had he brought
Instances, it might have been better cleared. In the mean time I have shown him
how, take them right, this is both perfectly innocent and unavoidably necessary
to a Church. What would avail him is, if a Pope and Council should define a new
Thing, and declare they ground themselves on new Lights, as did their first
Reformers in England. But he will find no such fopperies in Faith-definitions
made by the Catholic Church. He tells us that this is the common Doctrine
maintained; By which I perceive he is at an end of his Argument against our
Church; there being no evidenter sign of it, than to leave off assaulting Her;
confound her with the Schools, or some private Opinaters, and then carp at
these men's Tenets. Whereas M. Stillingfleet wants not Wit to know, that no
sober Catholic holds Human deductions the Rule of our Faith, Schoolmen
Definers of it, nor the Schools the Tribunal whence to propose it
authoritatively and obligingly to the Generality of the Faithful; much less a
few Divines, which are far from reaching the Authority of the Schools. Yet how
much of his Book would need no Answer, were this Impertinent Topic laid aside?
But well; Let Schools and Church be all one, that is, let every master of
divinity be a Bishop, what means he to conclude from the words common Doctrine?
Does he make account every School-Doctrin must be equally in vogue, or that an
Opinion's being Common defines it Faith and condemns the other for Heretical.
Where Is his Reason? The direct contrary follows from its being Common; and,
that it is not Faith which others, though not so many, may contradict; and he is
but meanly vers't in our Schools if he sees not very many publicly maintain
that there are no new Revelations without dreading Excommunication, or being
held Heretical and seditious: So they grant the Church power (as they ought) by
new Propositions and new but expressive Words, (yet, both the same in sense and
so not new in substance) to meet with the new blundering Cavils of Innovators.

8. Yet all this while M. Stillingfleet cannot see how to satisfy himself of
the Sense of our Church as to this particular. Nor ever will, while he wilfully
looks the wrong way, that is, toward some particular Schoolmen or Divines, not
toward the Universality of the Faithful or Church. What need he counterfeit
this puzzle? Did he never hear of such a thing as the Council of Trent? Or is
it so hard to find it? Again, does not he know all the Catholic Church allow
more a thousand times to It than to all the Schoolmen in the World? Yes very
well; How comes it then that he runs to some Schoolmen, and neglects the Church
speaking in her Representative? Because he may find there a clear Solution of
his doubt, by the constant procedure of that most grave Synod in its
definitions: where he will hear of no such Toys as New Revelations, but
directly the contrary; Every Session where Faith was defined professing to
build on Tradition, Teaching and Preaching, that is, Oral Tradition; ever,
always, from the beginning, etc. that is not- new, but the old-and-
ever-Faith. If you would combat our Church, here you have her; fall to work:
But you find some Schoolmen opining also Infallibility in some other means
besides Tradition, and judging this Tenet easilier confuted, you level your
blows at it, because the other is out of your reach; and would make this Tenet
the Sense of the Catholic Church, and so seem to oppose the Church her self.
You would disgrace this Way of Tradition as maintained but by a few, and those
blemished persons. How far are you wide of the Truth? It Is the way every
Catholic in the whole Church, none excepted, holds and follows. For my part, I
disavow the maintaining any Point or affecting any way which is not assented to
by all; and this, not as Opinion, but deeply rooted in their hearts as
Infallibly Certain. Schoolmen at Liberty question Personal Infallibility of the
Pope, some grant it not to him and his Roman Clergy, some question that of a
Provincial Synod; nay some, whose Books are extant and yet uncensur'd, maintain
even a General Council may possibly err; but not one I have heard or read of
affirms that Tradition, or the Living voice of the Church Essential, could err;
For in doing so, he called all his Faith in question, and so ceast to be a
Christian.

9. This then being held by all; held firmly; and that it is absolutely
Infallible so that in no case it can err, the others only by some, and faintly
in comparison (as appears by the Faithful's permitting them ^o be questioned)
nay, not held at all Infallible but upon Supposal of certain Conditions to be
observed, in which also Divines differ, Mr. Stillingfleet and other Protestant
Writers may see what they have to do if they will heartily impugn the Catholic
Church, and not trifle away time in wrangling with some private Opinators. I
have set them a fair mark in my Discourses, if they will speak to the Point;
and the end of my Preface has told them how to do it. If they overthrow this,
all the other Infallibilities now spoken of will fall with It; If not, not
only This of Universal Tradition will stand, but also all the other
Infallibilities will in Virtue of it be established on a firmer basis, than any
who begins not with and settles the First Principle in Controversy could ever
give them. This Foundation then they must either subvert, or they may fear the
Papists will build such superstructures on it as will reach to Heaven. It rises
apace, and has advanced many Stories in a small time.

10. By this Discourse all Mr. Stillingfleet's If's which follow, have their
Answer; and he will see the knot easily loosed in distinguishing the word
other; by which if he means disparate, unconnected or unimply'd Points of
Faith: No Divines of any number or account hold they can be de novo, much less
our Church; If involved or implied in the main Point, he must show it is
absolutely Another, and not rather a piece or part of the Implying one; as,
Homo est Animal, is a part of Homo est Animal rationale. In the mean time let
him consider what Logic tells us, that The Conclusion is in the Premises,
which reflection will much unblunder his Thoughts; and withal, that it is most
unreasonable to deny the Church the Liberty to take asunder her own Thoughts,
and clear them, upon occasion; by representing their Parts distinctly or in
many Propositions, which were invol'd before in some one. A privilege Nature
grants all Mankind as a necessary Conseqent to their working by abstracted
Notions; this being no more than to regard or view the same thing`now on one
side, then on the other.

11. His Second Chief Demand is, What security is there that in no Age of the
Church any Practices should come in which were not in the Precedent. I answer,
Our Practices spring from our Tenets; If then he means Ecclesiastical
Practices, that is, such as spring from Ecclesiastical Constitutions, there is
no security at all; for these are to come in anew as often as the necessity of
Discipline or Government requires it: If he mean such Practices, as spring from
Points of Faith taught by Christ, there is the same security no such new
Practices can be introduct as there is that no new Christian Tenets can come
in. Now these later Practices are those we make use of in Tradition, as making
Faith visible, being as it were its Body: He must mean then of These Practices
to do his Discourse any service; and, so, of these he questions whether the
Descendents held themselves bound unalterably to observe what their Forefathers
did; otherwise to know barely what they did, was not enough to make them follow
it. He argues well. To smooth as many rubs as I can, that so we may have no
difficulty but our main one, I would reflect on the signification of the word
unalterably. For to introduce new Practices consequent to the former is to
propagate, enlarge, extend and so strengthen them, not to alter them; in the
same manner as to discourse consequently to a Principle or Tenet, is so far
from altering it, that by the contexture of other Truths with it, it
corroborates and establishes it more unalterably its self. They must then be
Practices not of a subordinate but an opposite Nature to Christian ones which
can be feared to alter Christian Practices. The Question then is whether
Children or the Succeeding Age held themselves still bound not to bring in
Practices and Tenets contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the Precedent Age.
And, the Affirmative is most Evident, in case they held those Tenets which
Principled those Actions, True, taught by Christ, and commanded by him as the
Way to bring them to Heaven; and those Practices Consequent. If then they held
the deliver^d Doctrine Christ's, they could not but hold themselves obliged not
to alter it, nor consequently its Practices. So that our Question is restrained
to to a narrower compass, and the only Difficulty now is whether they held the
Doctrine of Forefathers to be the Doctrine of Christ, or no.

12. I am heartily glad so acute an Adversary as Mr. Stillingfleet and one
chosen out (if I am informed right) as a person conceived the ablest to write
against Catholics, has so heartily confessed here, p. 629. That the only thing
to be proved in this case, is, That every Age in the Church and all persons in
it looked upon themselves as obliged not to vary in any thing from the Doctrine
and Practice of the Precedent Age. He offers me my choice of three ways to
prove it: I accept of the way of Reason. He presses for a demonstrative medium
to prove it; yet seems to dislike our pretense to Demonstrations for the Ground
of our Faith. Not to note the unconsonancy of this carriage, I shall yield him
the honor of professing he has no Demonstration but only Probability for the
Ground of his; and to make this serious protestation for my self, that I should
esteem my self very dishonest did I assert and press on others any Argument for
the Ground of my Faith which I judge not Evident, that is, Demonstrative. This,
I hope, will secure the Honesty of my Intentions, however my Weakness may
permit me to fail in my performance. After this he endeavors to forestal my
Reason for the Point in these words; They have understandings of another mould
from others, who can conceive it Impossible that men should not think
themselves obliged to believe and do all just as their Predecessors did. Which
words I desire the Reader to review and note, for thence my Discourse takes its
rise.

13. What is it then that we affirm the later Ages obliged to hold and act as
their Forefathers held and acted? Wearing their clothes, or building their
houses? No; For, both, those matters of their own nature are of trivial
concern, and the fashion of both depend on Fancy which is too slight a
Principle to oblige to a Constancy. What is it then? To manage their Estates
thus or thus; no, for the Inconvenience or Convenience of the different ways
were perhaps held not very material, and the judging which was best depended
upon Prudential Principles which are of their own nature variable and
accommodable to circumstances, and therefore not obliging them to think and Act
as their Forefathers did. Let us proceed? Was it some piece of Skill or a
Speculative Opinion depending on the Goodness or Badness of the Ancestors
knowledge? No: For, experience teaching that men differ in such Judgments and
are errable, it could never oblige posterity to believe Unalterably as They
did. Is it then some Historical passage or matter of Fact, of great note, and
as such apt to strike their Fancy strongly, yet still such as the succeeding
Age was not highly concerned whether it were true or no; for example, that of
Alexander's Conquest of Asia to the Asian and Grecian offspring of the next
age after. No; Yet Experience tells us the memory of this is fresh and lively
(even amongst Us who are not the immediate descendents of those where he
conquered) though some thousands of years since.

14. Before we go any further, let us examine how this History comes to obtain so
firm and unshaken a Belief from the whole World to this very day. And, first,
he must be a very weak Speculater that can think the universal and strong
Persuasion of this matter of Fact was caused by Books, Curtius his History for
Example; For, since all Mankind knows naturally that Falsehoods may as easily be
charactered in Letters as Truths; it is evidently the continued Belief of the
Thing or Sense in men's hearts of it is Truth, that is Human Tradition, which
gives that Book all its Authority, and secures its strange Contents from being
held Romanical; which the very being-writ could never have done. Let Us see next
whence this Human Tradition had its force to continue hitherto so settled and
unalterable a Persuasion of Alexanders Conquests. And, looking into the Thing
for Proper Causes, that is, the best demonstrative mediums, we shall find the
Object it self was very Universal, strange, notorious, and held of concern to
the then livers; which made their Hearts and Fancies full of it, and so obliged
them to burst out into Expressions of it, and relate it to their Offspring of
the next Age. I but, what obliged the Offspring to believe their Forefathers
telling it, and to act (or talk of it again to their Children) as the Fathers
did; without which obligation it could not have descended to us. Regarding once
more the Thing, we shall discover that it was imprinted into the Offspring by
the Forefathers Testifying what their senses had told them; which put, Common
Sense informed them the thing was Infallibly-true, and as Certain as if they
had seen it with their own eyes. For, no reach of Reason but only Extravagance
of Madness could have furnished them with any imaginable motive, why the whole
world should conspire to deceive them, or be decievable in their Sensations. By
this means the Conceit of the Thing or matter of Fact (as to the main, for
circumstantial Considerations were not so evident to all at first, and so could
not be universally delivered as ascertained by Sense) was in the same degree of
firmness and Certainty rivetted into the Hearts of next Age; and, so, there
being necessarily in the Rational part of the World some curious persons, whom
Nature her self could not but incline to an Inquisitiveness of what was done
formerly, and others too naturally inclined to tell it Children who were
capable of it and delighted with hearing such strange-true Stories; It went
down continuing by the way of Tradition to our very days.

15. But we have over-shot our mark. The question is of the Obligation not to
believe contrary to Forefathers from Age to Age. And, it is already evident, that
the second Age after Alexander was obliged to believe the First, because They
saw with their eyes what was done; But how could those in the Third Age be
obliged to believe the Second who saw it not? To answer this, we must ask
whether the third Age could be Certain that the second could not be deceived in
what the first Age told them (and the notoriousness of the Thing, being no
speculation but a plain matter of Fact, secures that:) or conspire to belly the
second Ages Authority; and, common reason satisfying them, by the
circumstances, of the honesty of the persons, their Consent and the
disinteressedness of the position, that they could not thus conspire, even the
rudest have a Demonstration the second Age truly testified what the First said;
and so those of the third Age have the first Ages Authority certainly applied
to them; and, by means of its Authority, its Sensations too, and perfect
knowledge of the Thing springing from that Experimential Perception; which
therefore must needs work the same Effect upon the third Age, as it did upon
the second. And by virtue of the same Argument upon the the fourth, fifth, and
five hundredth, while it is known to have come down by the way of
Testification, and this is known by its being received in the five-hundredth
Age as testified; For, if the second Age could not tell the third it was
testified by the first unless it had been so testified, the same reason I have
assigned for the Impossibility of that will hold for each Age to the End of the
world, that is, 'twill follow no Age could say a former Age testifyd so, unless
they did so; whence nothing can come in as Testified by a former Age, unless
thus Testifyd. If therefore the five-hundredth Age received a thing as
testified (supposing the notoreity of it secured the thing from mistakableness)
it followed, demonstratively it was testified; and, (to come close to our
purpose) that the descendents in each age, to the very end of the world, had
the same Obligation to believe their immediate Forefathers saying it was
testified by the former, as those of the third Age to believe the second, or
the second the first.

16. Who ever looks into Rational Nature, with even that ordinary Knowledge
with which the rudest person almost that lives does upon material natures,
would discern the same Necessity or Obligation of continuing down by the way of
Testifying notorious and Important matters of Fact, fixed at first in the minds
and fancies of an Universality by the Existence of the Thing working on their
Senses, as that in a long chain of Iron, one link drawn should draw all the
rest; or, that the turning the First wheel, should move a thousand distant ones
depending on its motion. Nor doubt I but it will be made full as Evident, when
rational Souls come to set themselves to reflect seriously on their own nature
and procedure to Action; a speculation few Protestants are acquainted with;
Bookishness and much reading being only in Vogue with the talking Tribe
amongst them. In the mean time Mr. Stillingfleet may see in the Instance now
put, that is, in the strong Persuasion of Alexander's Victories yet continuing
by Tradition, that there is an Obligation in one Age to believe another when
they proceed as Witnesses; and this, not only of what they saw, but of what
others told them They saw, and of what some affirmed they were told by others
that the Age before Them saw; and so downwards; and that, as the Impulsive
force is communicated from the Movers hand to the farthest-distant-wheel by the
Application of the intermediate ones, the solid or Inflexible nature of the
matter obliging the next wheel to propagate its motion; So the Existence of the
Thing moved the First Experimental Percievers of it; and That solid Notion,
which fixes every Truth, was the virtue which run thorough and gave force to
all the rest; being applied by Universal Witnessing a plain matter of Fact (or
others Testimonies) from each Age to the other; as great a Ty to Assent as
Human Nature was capable of by natural means. For, that Existence of the Thing
was the virtue which made this Persuasion so solid and firm, besides what is
said, is seen by this; that, were it delivered only as an Opinion of the
Things being so, its strong conveyance had not been able to elevate it beyond
Opinion; for, the stronger That had been, the more perfectly it had been held
Opinion still. The Existence then of the Thing had virtue to oblige to a full
persuasion the thing was so, when Applied with Certainty; The Testification of
the precedent Age is a Certain Applier of it, and Undoubtable, that is Obliging
to Belief; therefore the next Age is (in such matters conveyed down this way)
as strongly obliged to believe the foregoing as Reason can oblige it; that is,
by seen Effects impossible to be without the Existence of foregoing
Testifications, nor they, finally, without the Existence of the Thing.

17. I expect now what Mr Stillingfleet will reply to this discourse. Will he
say there were no Causes laid to oblige the After-comers to believe the
Fore-goer, that Alexander conquered Asia, but that it happened so by Chance?
What will he say then to thousand other such matters of Fact, and indeed all
that were done long ago; all which must either be held obligingly this way or
none; (see Cowll. 24.) Besides, the Causes proper to work on a rational Nature
are Reasons: To say then there are no Causes able to make us believe Alexander
thus conquered, is to say there is no Reason for it; and (Chance being nothing
but a Cause unforeseen by us) to say all believe it by Chance, signifies none
s^e any reason why they believe it; which makes (...) the world Asses; Or have
I not hit on the right Causes? I shall thank Mr Stillingfleet to help me out;
and in the mean time assure him that whatever Causes he assigns, obliging
poposterity, to believe Ancestors in this, shall strengthen Tradition. Perhaps
he will say, they may be obliged to believe such Histories delivered, yet not
delivered Points of Faith. I shall wonder at the position; but, because I
foresee he is like to recurr to this (for he must be forced to say either this
or what is worse) I shall prepare against it, by parallelling the Obligation to
believe this delivered History to the Obligation to believe Christian Faith
delivered.

18. To do this more amply we will consider Christ's Doctrine according to the
whole complexion of Circumstances expressed in that common Verse, Quis, quid,
ubi, quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando.

Quis? Who was the Author and Subject of this Faith thus to be delivered; Not
a poor mortal, but the Wisdom of the Eternal Father; not an ambitious
self-extolling Man, but a self-humbled God, come down from his Heaven to be the
World's Savior and Master; every of whose Words and Actions were infinitely to
be admired; and, consequently, requiring to be had in perpetual remembrance.

Quid? What thing was it which was delivered or Testified? A Doctrine containing
Principles of the new Life they were to lead as Christians, and so Practical,
notwithstanding the Majesty of its abstruseness; a Doctrine Connatural and
suitable to Reason, Man's true Nature, and so apt to sink into him and not be
easily relinquishable; A Doctrine which bears in its very notion to be a Guide
toward Eternal Bliss, and consequently that to forsake it is the way to
Eternal misery, which therefore obliged Fathers to teach it, and Children to
esteem themselves bound to learn it and hold to it. Lastly, a Doctrine all made
up of most astonishing miracle and wonder; and, so, apt to strike a deep sense
of reverence into hearts already imbued with it. Such was the nature of the
Thing we call Christ's Doctrine, imprinted on the Sensarions of the (...) Age of
Christians; not a pitiful story of an Alexander or Caesar; of Slight
concern, wonderment or practical Usefulness; but, in comparison of the other,
like a Tale of a Tub; which, no hurt is done if it go in at one ear and out a^
the other.

19. Vbi? When was this matter of Fact or Preaching this doctrine performed? In
all, even the remotest parts of the world, and not only in a piece of Europe
and in Asia; and this openly: Especially in Rome the world's Metropolis, whence
it could easily and effectually spread into the rest. Nay in the very face of
Tyrants; which things gave it a perfect Visibility; and, lastly, in every
private Family it was taught and put in practice; which made it beyond dispute
Sensible and Maniable as far as it conduces to Christian Life.

Quibus auxiliis? By what helps or means? By most stupendous miracles,
powerful preaching and heavenly Living conformably to those Principles; which
made those Principles or Faith visible and evident. Not by three or four
Victories, imputable perhaps to Chance; at least in which nothing Divine
discovered it self engaged.

Cur? Why was this doctrine of Christ's taught and practic't? not to satisfy the
vain humor of impotent Ambition, but to deliver mankind from the Devils
slavery and-hell fire its reward, and to bring him to everlasting Salvation.

Quomodo? By what manner? By writing it in the fleshy Tables of the hearts of
the First Christians; and, afterward, continuing it by the way of Testifying;
the most connatural way to oblige the Generality to Belief of matters of Fact,
that Nature knows.

Quando? When? In the First Christians when they were now at Age to judge of
the miracles, and multitudes of Motives spoken of; which awed, overpowered and
subdued their Understandings to a firm Belief and an high Reverence to the
doctrine thus attested to be Gods: In the after-Christians when they were yet
scarce able to speak much less to judge; and taught by nature to believe their
Parents. Hence a lively and reverential conceit was bred in their Hearts, by
others serious teaching and their own practicing, of the Sacredness and
consequently Unalterableness, of that doctrine; ere they came to that Ripeness
as to use their own Judgment; Nay, that doctrine was so deeply naturalized into
them by Christian Life ere they came to maturity of Understanding that it
became Unnatural and exceedingly violent for them to act and believe contrary
to what Fathers had taught. Whereas the story of Alexander was not proper to be
told Children till they were at Age and fit for some kind of Schollership; and
then, it was so little practical that nothing was to be acted about it, but
talking of it again; so that it looked like a mere piece of Speculation and
totally unconcerning them. I add, that this delivery by attestation or teaching
went on linking the former Age to the later, by propagating it into new
Subjects, not all at one time, but from year to year, month to month, and
even less; according as the Understandings and even Bodies of Children budded
into a Capacity of knowing saying or doing something which belonged to
Christianity; which still-continu'd Interweaving the former Age with the later,
after a wonderful manner strengthens the sway of Tradition, and secures it both
against Mistake and Deceit; neither of them having any possible place where the
whole business is carried on by such immediate Steps.

20. I will not repeat over again (...) ^^conceivable Advantages, but leave it
to M^o Stillingfleet's reflection; and so, proceed (...) discourse thus. If the
conceited Sacredness, Concern, Necessity, Unalterableness,
miraculously-attestedness, also if the Visibleness, Practicalness with extent
to every particular, connaturalness etc. found in the notion and nature of
Christ's doctrine or manifestly connected with it, rendered it incomparably
recommendable in every respect above the Story of Alexander's Conquests, and
that plainest nature or Common Sense and daily Experience teaches us that, by
how much more a thing is recommendable or deserving to be believed and
practic't, by so much more it is obligatory to be believed and practic't; and
that we find in unconcerning Stories a continued Obligation laid in Nature for
the Children to believe Parents (else such stories could never have descended
with an hearty persuasion of their Truth hitherto) it follows that incomparably
and in a manner infinitely greater must the Obligation be to believe Christ's
Doctrine than Alexander's or William the Conquerors Victories; or any History of
the like nature whatever.

21. I have been much longer in such a point than the matter required; it
needed no more but to manifest that Common Sense tells us Nature obliges every
man to believe those he takes to be honest; much more children Fathers: (or the
next Age those of the former;) still more, if what they tell them be no
Speculation depending on Fancy or private Judgment, but matter of Fact
depending only on Sense; that is, if they tell it them as Witnesses: But most
of all, if they see we conspire in the same; For then the Obligation is so
necessary, that I cannot conceive that from the beginning of the world there
was ever found one single person so unreasonable as not to yield to it. Whence
also we can show every first Beginner of an Heresy is (...), or
self-condemned; that is, conscious to himself that out of Pride or some Passion
he goes against Evidence of Authority. Now, in Tradition all is carried on this
manner. So that, if the Explainers of Tradition have not made provision for
this point, it is because they thought there could not be found a Considerer so
unreasonable as to question it. Yet, because Mr Stillingfleet puts the whole
stress of his Objection against. Tradition in this, I shall (to give him
further satisfaction) consider it practically.

22. Let us conceive then that the Apostles, Disciples, and Apostolical men,
taught the first Age Christ's Doctrine (qualified in the manner before declared)
and recommended it as such (that is as Sacred, Unalterable, the way to Bliss.
Taught by Christ etc.) by Miracles and other Supernatural means; it is plain
They had Obligation to believe Christ taught it. Well, they receiving it as
such, that is, as Christ's, and, so, Unalterable; were bound to recommend it
for such to the next Age. Nor does Mr. Stillingfleet question this: But, were
their Children obliged to believe them? While they were young it is plain they
could do no other neither out of Reason nor Passion. But what were they obliged
to when they were grown up to ripeness of Judgment? It Is plain, that, were
that Doctrine delivered as an Invention of then Forefathers, or some Collection
of their Reason that it was Christ's, it was obvious for them to make this
Discourse; We have natural Wit as well as our Parents had, and perhaps as good
Circumstances to apply that wit, and why then should not we cast about and
consider whether that be indeed Christ's Doctrine, and taught by the Apostles,
which they would persuade us is so? But, in case it were delivered as
ascertained by their Senses, to have been taught by the Apostles, what
imaginable reason can they have of doubt? Can they think all their Fathers and
Neighbors a pack of impudent Knaves, that conspire to abuse their posterity
purposely to damn them, or that they could be mistaken in a Doctrine they were
so highly concerned to learn right, and had led their lives by ever since they
were Christian? The third Age succeeds, whose Immediate Ancestors the Second
Age told them they had been taught and brought up thus by the First. Nor have
they more reason to doubt the Second Ages Attestation of the First Ages Doctrine
and Life (it being an unmistakable matter of Fact) than the Second had the
First's; that is, they were obliged to believe it. And, since each foregoing
Ages Attestation is a plain matter of Fact, it follows that each succeeding Age
has still equal obligation to believe the foregoing: Especially in a matter
carrying along with it such powerful Recommends, and this out of its very
Nature, as that the preserving and holding to it would bring them Infinite
Goods, and the altering it Infinite Harms. Thus it goes on; and while it goes on
thus, that is, while this Rule is followed, it is self-evident no Heresy could
ever be. (Disc. 5. 8.) Whence by the way, if this be the only difficulty in
Tradition; (that is, in case the next Age were obliged to believe the former,
Tradition would still be followed, and so it would be self-evident no Heretic
could be) then it needs no proof they have such an Obligation; for it is
questionless there is an Obligation for men not to be Heretics.

23. Well, but an acute Wit or great Scholar arises who begins to question this
way. Let Us see if he have a good reason, if not he is still obliged. Can he
bring an ampler or Certainer living Authority for the contrary? Where shall he
have it? For all the Christian world is against him, if he be the first (and so
only) denier of this way of Tradition. Will he bring Demonstration against the
Point? How can he against a Truth; for our case puts the point truly delivered,
and only enquires into the obligation of believing Ancestors in such a
Delivery; and he must not hope a seeming Demonstration can free him from his
Obligation of believing Ancestors. For, whence happened it that it seemed so to
him when it was not such? From Perfection in Science in that particular? No
surely; for then he had not miscarried: From the Imperfectness of his Science?
Then he ought the more to have believed: From Precipitancy? Then he ought not
have been passionate. But, perhaps he will build on Dead Testimony, or some
Book granted to be Sacred. In that case I ask, how knows he with such a
Certainty as to build Faith and his opposition to the whole Church upon it
(which ought be no less than a Demonstration) that he has the right Letter and
Sense of that Book. Can he Demonstrate the exact conformity of its Letter from
Copy to Copy, and Translation to Translation, and this up to the very Original?
He may as well measure the backside of Heaven. Will he recur to Traditions
help? Tradition could only perform this either by the way of diligent
Examiners continued along and securely testified, which (as was said) is
impossible to show; Or by continued Sense in Christian Hearts, and then it is
plain if their Sense preserved the Letter rightly significative, he ought to
take the Sense of the Letter from them too, as the Fathers use to press upon
ancient Heretics. It Is left then that he must pretend he will demonstrate some
former Age has erred; How I wonder? We have excluded him Scripture, the nature
of the Points, and Authority of living men. It may be he will allege
Testimonies of Historians, or Fathers. But, first, Fathers, taken as such, are
not merely great Scholars, but Eminent Parts of Ecclesia docens or Witnessers
of the Doctrine delivered; Take away then the Certainty of Delivery or
Tradition, there is no Certainty of Doctrine delivered, nor consequently of
Fathers. 2ly, An Historians Testimony signifies but his own private saying,
unless authorized by Sense writ in men's hearts or Tradition. 3ly, Are those
Testimonies (and the like may be said of Scripture-proofs) evidently against
the present Church, or no? If not, it is a madness to talk of seeming
Testimonies against so vast and evident a one as that of the whole foregoing
Church. If Evident, it is inconsistent with man's Nature the Christian Church
should recommend down for true Fathers and creditable Historians those Authors
which so evidently oppose her Doctrine: Or, if so great an Authority as the
Churches delivers them down for fabulous or spurious, how can their Authority
ever come to be undoubtable or Certain? The last refuge then of a
passion-misled Reason is, ashamed of her want of Principles and loath to show
her head, to pretend private Inspirations: which therefore is the last non
ultra of all Heresies and the flower or most refined quitessence of all
Faith-Reformation. But, miracles failing these poor Creatures to show forth the
hidden divinity which they pretend possesses them, they quickly fade away; or,
if they make any further progress, it is into phrenzy or perfect Madness, as we
experience in our most miserably-distracted Country; which disposition is
therefore the Caput mortuum, or Terra damnata of Heresy, and the last and most
natural effect of relinquishing Tradition.

24. By this Discourse is seen that it is impossible the following Age and every
person in it, unlearned and learned, should not be obliged to believe the
foregoing delivering to them Christ's Doctrine as received from hand to hand by
way of Testifying: and that this Universal Obligation springs out of the Nature
of that Heavenly Doctrine, and the Nature of the Way of conveying it downwards.
It Is time now to review Mr Stillingfleets words against the possibility of
proving this by Reason, and see how lank they look: They are these, neither
more nor fewer: It is hard to conceive what Reason should enforce it but such
as proves the Impossibility of the contrary: And they have Understandings of
another mould from others who can conceive it impossible men should not think
themselves obliged to believe and do all just as their Predecessors did. Is
this Mr Stillingfleet who in the Appendix to his Irenicum 6. so rationally
characters those for more zealous than Judicious discoursers who argue not out
the very Nature and Constitution of a Thing; and here, in a discourse
concerning the Rational way of looking into a point, quite overleaps all that
concerns either the Nature or necessary circumstances of that Thing, and talks
so rawly in common, that is, not one word to that particular purpose? Observe
the words, Obliged to believe and do ALL JUST as their Predecessors have done.
What means the word ALL? Does he mean we hold them obliged to cut their Beards,
or wear such Garters and Hatbands as their Forefathers did? His raw words
reach no farther: What means the word JUST? Does he think Faith being planted
in Human, that is Rational, Nature will not propagate it self into consequent
and subordinate Tenets and Practices? All the wonder then of the Impossibility
of the no-obligation lies in his crafty and sophistical expressing it, which
includes a fallacy of non-causa pro causa; for, not any thing conveyed down on
any fashion is held by us thus obliging to believe and act accordingly, but
such a Doctrine, and so conveyed as was before declared. Had he put our Position
thus, as indeed he ought, it being the true case, Children or Immediate
Posterity taught by Fathers or immediate Ancestors relying on the way of
Sensation, that such a Doctrine was taught or deliverd to be taught by God
himself, as most Sacred, Necessary to be believed and practic^t by all, being
the way to salvation, so that to vary from it, or hold or practice the
contrary, is the way to eternal misery, are all obliged to believe and act as
their Forefathers did, and not introduce Contrary Doctrins and practices to
those they had received* Had it been, I say, thus proposed, there had been no
such cause of wonderment: But all these, that is indeed all of weight in the
point is quite left out. Such poor shifts even the best Wits must be driven to,
when they would maintain a false Cause.

25. One word to M. Stillingfleet. He has challenged us to make out this
Obligation to Belief as the only Thing we are to prove in the Traditionary
way; he has offered us the choice of our Weapon, either Reason, particular
Testimony, or Universal Tradition: I have accepted his offer, chosen my weapon,
and given here the first blow; I hope he will not now run the Field, but return
an Answer to my Discourse in the way of Reason, which I have chosen by his
Offer. I am sorry for his sake my reflections here are not more elaborate, being
sent to the Press in loose quarters of sheets as soon as writ, more time not
being allowed me, nor I hope needful to answer such mistakes. Only I request
him when he replies, to take along with him the nature of the subjecta materia,
the Doctrins and Practices we speak of; the Nature of the Manner of delivering
it, and the necessary Circumstances which give weight to both, as I have
declared above; and I promise him (God assisting me) a very serious Reply.

26. Ere I quite leave this matter, I desire to take the Reader along with me
in my quest for a Reason or proper Cause why so judicious a person as Mr.
Stillingfleet could come to doubt of such an Obligation in posterity to believe
their Ancestors in a matter of fact, or a matter delivered to have been (not
deemed or thought, but) done; or (which is equivalent being it is necessary
effect) seen or known by Sense. For, I make account there is not a man in the
world or ever was (such is the Goodness of rational Nature given us by God) who
in his natural thoughts could ever raise such a doubt, or think he could
possibly frame his thoughts to a disbelief of the contrary; no more than any
man in England (whom Speculative Skepticism has not besotted and unmann'd) can
doubt of William the Conquerors, Harry the Eighths, or Mahomets Existence; much
less judge the contrary; And, it appears at first sight to be a strange
distorsion or rather destruction of human Nature, which can so alter it. Now,
looking into Things, I find it to be a proper and natural Effect of the
Protestant's temper, and indeed of all who have left the Church. For their
humor being to choose every one his Faith by his private Judgment or Wit
working upon disputable words; They wonder, and judge it very unreasonable
their Posterity, thus imbued, should be obliged to believe and act as
Ancestors do; and so should I too. For, while they can never deliver it to
their Children as received ever, by the way of Infallible Sense or Witnessing,
but must say the former Church de facto erred and consequently that themselves
might do so too, so that they can only deliver it as depending or built on
their own fallible Opinion in interpreting Scripture (all which is implied in
their making Scriptur's Letter the Rule of Faith, and allowing no Living
Interpreter able to give infallibly the Sense of it) it is natural their
posterity should (...) hold themselves obliged to believe Immediate Ancestors,
but use their own Judgments and choose their own Faith when they come at Age as
well as They did; and Experience tells us they have done so in England till
they have chosen fairly. And this horrid Unreasonableness is the venomous
source, the First defective Principle, or indeed the very nature of all
Heresy; imported also in the very word, which signifies Choice, or choosing
one's Religion; mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus (cited above p. 135.) and
counterpos'd by him to Tradition as also by S. Athanasius (cited p. 133. 134.)
where it is most excellently described, and homely applied to the Protestants
and such others, as the Reader may see. I am a bad Transcriber.

27. I have done my main task, and so shall only touch at his next paragraph.
It begins thus; It is to no purpose to prove the Impossibility of motion when I
see men move, no more it is to prove no Age of the Church could vary from the
foregoing when we can evidently prove they have done it. You argue well. But
two things are required ere you can see our Faith varies from the former.
First, To see what our Church holds now, and then to see what the former Church
held before; and if I see any thing you see neither well. For, while you cannot
distinguish between Faith and its Explication, some Schoolmen and Church, I
have no hopes you should see heartily what our Church holds now: and, if you
cannot at present see what our Church holds now, how and by what method will
you assure us you see what She held formerly? The thing to be proved is a plain
matter of Fact, and you have renounced all living Attestation the common and
secure way to bring it down; and consequently Fathers too; For Fathers
(speaking of them as such) being Evident Witnessers, Transmitters or Propagates
of the Faith received to Immediate Posterity, if you question Delivery or
Tradition (which you do while you doubt Obligation in Posterity to believe
Ancestors) you question whether there be any Doctrine delivered and so any
Fathers: and I wonder how you can imagine any man obliged to believe Fathers,
Historians or any that writ or testified things long ago, and yet think the
next age not obliged to believe the former in a matter of Fact done in their
own days. How far short then are your Evidences of the former Churches
Doctrine, like to prove of being parallel to our seeing a man move with our
corporeal Eyes! But you may say any thing; or rather indeed, forced by your bad
Cause, you must do so.

28. You call this Way of ours a Superficial Subtilty; I beseech you consider
what you say; Is that which is wholly builds on the Nature of the Things (as
you see ours does) Superficial; or Yours which is merely an aerie Descant upon
dead Words? What do you think Controversy is? I deal plainly with you, you may
take it to be an Art of Talking, and I think you do so though you will not
profess it; but I take it to be a noble Science; I hold its Object to be
rationem reddere fidei, or to maintain questioned Faith, which is chiefly done
by showing the Authority on which Faith depends quoad nos Certain. Hence, all
other Authority depending on Tradition's, I hold Knowledge of its Certainty the
First Principle in Controversy; And this being quoad nos necessarily antecedent
to Authority, it can only be manifested by Reasons taken from Things or men's
Minds, naturally; and (if we discourse against those who grant the excellency
of the first-preached Doctrine) Supernaturally affected or qualified; as he sees
I have endeavored in my Discourses.

29. So much for our Way. Now for yours: Who sees not first how Words as
interpretable are its subject; and if in the method you take to work upon them
you lay one Principle which deserves the name of a Principle, I dare undertake
to be of Mr. Stillingfleet's persuasion. He sees in my TRANSITION our Way laid
open; Either let him acknowledge it solid, or remember, having provoked us, he
is challenged to produce something for his Rule of Faith, which begins with the
natures of the Things in hand, that is of Rule and Faith, and approves it self
solider than ours. But it is so impossible their Cause can endure the Trial of
that clearing Method, that I fear not either Mr. Stillingfleet or any
Protestant Writer of the least prudence will dare to attempt it.

30. Will you see one Example of our Superficialness and Mr. Stillingfleet's
Solidness? He gives you both in his next words, p. 620. and assures the Reader
we would prove no alteration in the Faith of the Church by such an Argument as
would prove the world ab aeterno. How strangely wide he roves from the mark?
Our Argument runs thus, beginning a priori; Causes were laid in the nature of
Christ's heavenly Doctrine, and the nature of its Conveyance down by Testifying
to make its Delivery continued hitherto; a posteriori thus; we find a present
Effect (the present Persuasion of Christians their Faith descended
uninterruptedly from Christ) impossible to be without such a Cause's Existence
or its having been at first taught by Christ; whence we conclude that Faith
came from Christ: Let us parallel it then to his. Finds he any such Effect in
the world at present apt to spring only from the Worlds Eternity as its Cause;
or Causes laid ab aeterno in the nature of the world apt to continue it
hitherto? If he does, he must hold it was Eternal; If not, how unconsonant is
his parallel? He makes our Argument run thus; The present Age sees no
alteration in it, and they could not be deceived in what their Forefathers
believed, nor they in theirs, and so on in infinitum; for no men did ever see
the World made, and therefore it was never made, and so Eternal. In return, I
must first profess there is not a tittle in it parallel to our medium; and, at
next, that I never saw in my life more absurdities coucht in so few words. For,

First, he should have begun, the present Age has a firm persuasion it was
ever, or have alleged some other Effect, without which it is impossible to
argue to the Existence of a thing before, or a Cause.

2ly, He wrongly supposes a Belief in the former Age of the Worlds
ever-Existence, saying, They could not be deceived in what their Forefathers
believed.

4ly, The words, Nor they in theirs, falsely suppose a Continuance of belief
upwards of the worlds Eternity.

5ly, He says not whether this Belief was founded on Ey-sight at first, or
Opinion. If the later, it is contrary, and not parallel to our case. If the
former, then he must suppose some man saw the world made ab aeterno.

6ly, The words, and so on in Infinitum, suppose this belief did go on in
Infinitum; which put, it is beyond question, and placed in the very Terms, that
the world was Eternal.

7ly, His reason for the last words, thus, For no man did ever see the World
made, is manifoldly faulty: for it is a negative argument, and, as such,
inconsequent; since the world might have been made, whether any had seen it or
not. Again, the first men might have known it certainly to have been made,
whether they had seen it making or no. And lastly, it is directly contradictory
to what it should parallel; For, we agreeing with them that Christ and his
Apostles did teach a Doctrine thus qualified, first put its Existence seen, and
thence conclude the contrary could never come to be held universally; or else,
we take a present-Belief of its then-Existence as ever received by Testifying:
neither of which have any correspondence with his rambling chimerical Argument;
no two pieces of which hang together with themselves or any thing else.

31. He says, he can evidence the Alteration of Faith. I wish he would tell us
first what an evidence means; whether a strong Fancy of his own, or a
Demonstration, only which can excuse him or not believing the former Age
Attesting. His first proof is, Because the Scripture supposes a degeneracy in
the Christian Church: Incomparably argued! why see we not the place! Does it
evidently speak of Faith or Manners; the universal Church, or particular
persons; that is, some Heretics? But be it in Faith; Be it Universal. Does it
suppose this Degeneracy already past (which is only proper to your purpose) or
yet to come? That is, does it say there must be a Total Apostasy in Faith
before the Year 1664? Alas, he had forgot this: Yet for such wretched proofs as
these, baptized God's Word, have they left the evidently-attested Doctrine and
the Union of the former Church. His next Evidences are his own Performances in
some other parts of his Book. Truly the miserableness of these Evidences
disinvite me from thinking the other worth a serious thought: But, if perhaps
there be ever a Testimony among them that is not coincident with some of Dr.
Pierce's faulty ones; Let him single it out and Print it at the End of his
Rejoinder to this, it shall have a fair Answer from me, or some other more
proper.

FINIS.
THE HEADS.
First Discourse. SHowing from the nature of Rule and Faith, what Properties
belong to the Rule of Faith. p. 1. Second Discourse. Showing the two first
Properties of the Rule of Faith utterly incompetent to Scripture. p. 12. Third
Discourse. That the three next Properties of the Rule of Faith are utterly
incompetent to Scripture. p. 22. Fourth Discourse. That the two last Properties
of the Rule of Faith are clearly incompetent to Scripture. p. 33. Fifth
Discourse. Showing the notion of TRADITION, and that all the Properties of the
Rule of Faith do clearly agree to It. p. 41. Sixth Discourse. Endeavoring to
demonstrate a priori the Indefectibleness of Tradition. p. 57. Seventh
Discourse. An Objection cleared, and the Beginning and Progress of an Heresy
connaturally laid open. p. 65. Eighth Discourse. Endeavoring to demonstrate a
posteriori the Vninterruptedness of Tradition hitherto. p. 75. Ninth Discourse.
Opening the Incomparable Strength of the Churches Human Authority, and the
Infinite Advantages accrue to it by the Supernatural Assistances of the Holy
Ghost. p. 81. Corollaries from the former Discourses. p. 95. Consent of
Authority to the Substance of the foregoing Discourses. p. 126. Transition to
the Appendixes: p. 157. First Appendix. Animadversions on the groundlesness of
Dr. Pierce's Sermon. p. 167 Second Appendix. Animadversions on some passages in
Mr. Whitby. p. 179. Third Appendix. Animadversions on some passages in Mr.
Stillingfleet. p. 201.

