ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE Last Speech and Confession OF THE LATE WILLIAM Lord
RUSSEL.
HAving perused a certain Printed sheet, called, The Speech of the Lord Russel
to the Sheriffs, together with the Paper delivered by him to them at the place
of Execution; I could no ^ imagine the said Paper to be the Words of a Person
of his Quality, or indeed of a dying Christian, till ^ound underwritten,
Printed by J. Darby by Direction (...) the Lady Russel.

Upon this satisfaction, I could not forbear seriously ^d thoroughly examining
the Contents of the Speech ^d Paper; and upon full consideration thereof, I
think (...) the Duty of a good Subject to give the World my ^inion of the
several Protestations and Assertions ^roughout it, and the Tendency they
naturally bear.

In his short Speech to the Sheriff he says little; only, that be expected much
noise at that place, and therefore ^ng not fond of much speaking, and much less
at that (...); He tells the Sheriff, He had set down in that Paper ^en and
there given him) all that he THOUGHT FIT (...) ^ave behind him: And truly in
that he spoke like an ^e, for in the said Paper he has left no more behind ^m,
as he says, then he Thought fit indeed.

In true, he continues in the said Speech to affirm, (...) the words of a dying
man, I know of no Plot, either against ^e Kings Life, or the Government. The
Truth and Va^dity of which dying Protestation, we shall see fully examined in
his following Paper.

The subject of the first Paragraph in the Paper; is only his Thoughts of
another World, and his Preparations made for Death; his Thanks to God for his
In^ite Blessings, both in the Advantages of his Worthy Parents and Religious
Education, with the Assurance of the Love and Mercy of God through the Merits
of Christ, and Fullness of Joy in his Presence, etc. All which I have nothing
to say to, but only to wish with Cordial Christian Charity, that he has found
that Mercy from the hands of a Gracious God, which his own hopes assured him:
For Heaven forbid the highest of Criminals should be punished beyond the Grave,
or that a Temporal punishment with a true Penitence might not be a sufficient
Expiation for the greatest Guilt.

In the second Paragraph, he gives you an account of his Faith, saying, I dye
of the Reformed Religion, a true and sincere Protestant, and in the Communion
of the Church of England, though I could never yet comply with, or rise up to
all the heights of many People.

Here it is true he is of the Church of England's Communion; but indeed such a
Mungril Communicant of that Church, that he cannot comply with, or rise up to
the heights of many people of that Communion. Now how he has lag'd below the
Members of our Church; not only the Fatal Cause that brought him to his End,
demonstrates; but a farther sample of his Religion we have upon Record in the
Learned Works of his own good Chaplain the Author of JVLIAN.

Where the Doctrine of, Rebel my Countrymen, is so elaborately handled, and
that great pattern of Christ Submission to Magistracy, and that distinguishing
Shibboleth of Christianity, Passive Obedience, is so Artfully attaqued; that
truly-from such a Pastor, and such Principles, it is undoubtedly evident, that
(to use his Expression) he was not extremely well taught to reach to the
heights of the Church of England.

From this part of his Paper, to the end of the Chapter, his Lordship begins to
bear up smartly to the matter; and the whole Paper throughout, is but a Compact
of the highest Uncharity against the King and Court, a continued Arraignment of
the Judge and Justice of the Kingdom, and indeed the whole Government it self:
A heap of Exclamations against the monstrous dangers of Popery, and an Appeal
to the very Mobile to remove them, and lastly a feeble and lame pretense of his
own Loyalty and Innocence crutch'd up with so many Reservations, Evasions, and
Equivocations, that even through his Lordships own Spectacles were never seen
in the Rankest of Jesuits 3 which you will find as follows.

But first, for a taste of his Innocence, in Paragraph the 8th. he avers, I
never was at Mr. Shepherds with that Company but once, and there was no
undertaking then of securing and seizing the Guards, nor none appointed to view
or examine them: (which (nor none) I Will be so charitable not to take in the
Affirmative, but read it (nor any)] Some discourse there was of the
Feasibleness of it, had several Times by ACCIDENT in general discourse
elsewhere I have heard it mentioned, as a thing might easily be done, but never
consented to as fit to be done. And particularly at my Lord Shaftsbury 's,
there being some general discourse of this kind, I immediately flew out, and
exclaimed against it; and asked if the thing succeeded, what must be done next
but Massacring the ^n^s, and killing 'em in Cold Blood? which I looked upon as
so detestable a thing, and so like a Popish Practice, that I could not but
abhor it. And at the same time the Duke of Monmouth took me by the Hand, and
told me very kindly. My Lord, I see you and I are of a Temper: did you ever
hear so horrid a Thing?

Here observe the prettiest piece of more than Jesuitical Equivocation. The
Conference at Shepherds contained no Undertaking of Securing or Seizing the
Guards, etc. Only some Discourse about the Feasibleness of it. If so eminent a
piece of work as Seizing the Kings Guards were only a piece of Title Tatle
amongst these great men, a Trial of Skill to argue for Wit-sake, or to pass
away the time over a Glass of Mr. Shepherds Sherry: How comes it about the Lord
heard it by his own Confession SEVERAL TIMES, and oh wonderful, all by
Accident! A thing never intended to be put in Action, could never be the dull
reiterated impertinent Talk so many times over, amongst persons of such Sense,
nor could the Lord Russel's Exclamation of, What kill 'em in cold Blood? And
harmless Monmouth's (Oh horrid!) to it, be a rational Repartee to a Chimera, or
a Discourse only en Passant. No, no, the business is this; the Lord Russel is
to die as Innocent as a Sucking Lamb, (for Child unborn's out of fashion;) and
because the seizing of Guards was only Sworn against him at the Meeting at
Shepherds, to make the Witnesses Perjured, the Discourse of it at the other
several Times and Places might be in order to the putting it into Execution,
and what Treason ye please; but at that one only Time, 'twas all harmless
Prattle, and nothing but the Feasibleness of the Thing the matter in debate.

However, though the Innocent Lord lets us know, and all this with no less than
the words of a dying Protestant, that the feasibility of the business was the
only Argument of the Guards seizing, in this 8th. Paragraph: In the 10th:
Paragraph he gives a farther Narrative of this Meeting at Shepherd's; and
there, as damnable ill fortune would have it, he relates so different an
account of the Thing, that Bedlow's and Prance's description of Sir
Edmundbury's Murder, are little less contradictory, viz. he says in these
words, The day before that Meeting, I came to Town for two or three days; and
the Duke of Monmouth came to me, and told me, he was extreme glad I was come to
Town, for my Lord Shaftsbury and some hot men would undo us all: How so, my
Lord? I said, Why (answered he) they will certainly do some disorderly thing or
other, if some care be not taken; and therefore, for Gods sake use your
endeavors with your Friends, to prevent any thing of this kind. He told me,
there would be Company at Mr. Shepherd 's that night, and desired me to be at
home that evening, and he would call me, which he did; and when I came into the
Room, I saw Mr. Rumsey sitting by the Chimney, though he swears he came in after;
and there were things said by some with much more HEAT than JUDGMENT, which I
did sufficiently disapprove, and yet for these things of stands condemned. But
I thank God my para was sincere and will meant.

Here we find the fa^e of Affairs strangely altered; for now the Duke of
Monmouth comes with an Outcry, that my Lord Shaftsbury and other Hot men were
for doing things so disorderly, as threatened no less than to undo 'em all; and
Shepherds being the place of assignation, my Lord Russel heard some things said
there with more Heat than Judgment. Now that those things said must signify
the business of seizing the Guards, is plain, by my Lords owning it to be that
for which he stoud condemned; and that the debate must be upon the downright
Resolution and Proposals of putting the project into a speedy Execution, is
every way manifest; For, if the abovesaid harmless feasibleness of it were all
that had been argued amongst them, there had been no need either of Monmouth's
Allarum, the Lord Russel's Reproof, or the Companies Heat out-running their
Judgments; nor was there any occasion for his thanking God that his part was
sincere, and well meant, if theirs had been so too.

And that the Reader may not mistake, and think possibly these two different
Accounts of the Guards seizing might be at two different times, the Lord
answers expressly, No; for be never was at Shepherd' s in that Company but once.

However, the Lord Russel still upholds his Innocence; and tells you in the
last Paragraph, -- It was inferred from hence, that I was acquainted with those
Heats and ill Designs, and did not discover them; But that was but MISPRISION
of Treason at most. I shall not answer for what passed at the Trial, because
it is not yet published, nor was I present to hear it; and therefore I leave the
dispute of that to the Judges learned in the Law, that were not of my Lord
Russel's Opinion. But supposing my Lord would insinuate himself only guilty of
Misprision of Treason from the proofs against him at the Trial; yet by his own
proofs against himself in this intended Vindication, he was recorded himself to
all Posterity plainly guilty of High Treason, in that very Paper where he
arrogates the highest of Innocence. For suppose, as he affirms, that the proof
of his being in a Company once at Mr. Shepherd's, where Treason was spoken, and
the concealing it were only Misprision; Misprision being imagined to be a man's
unfortunate hearing of Treason spoken in ill company, and afterward the
wanting of prudence or care to detect that Treason. Yet in his Paper, his Crime
is of a deeper dye. He confesses there, He held Amity and Correspondence with
persons that did not once or twice, but several times, treat upon the same
numerical Treasonable Projection; He visited 'em at their own Houses, as
Shaftsbury's for instance, and give 'em meetings abroad, And tho it be
Misprision of Treason to conceal the hearing of it though a man abjures and
avoids the company of the Traitor that speaks it; yet this Innocent Lord
continues the highest friendship with these very Treason-mongers, herds and
nests with them at all turns, and has the continued Repetition of Treasonable
Machinations in his ears and yet his want of discovery is and shall be only
(...) bare Misprision of Treason. But the Noble Lord makes a very honest and
charitable excuse for his silence in not discovering, viz. I hope no body will
imagine that so mean a thought could enter into me, as to go about to save my
life by accusing others. That is, my Lord could hear Shaftsbury and his Crew
projecting to play the Cutthroats, and if no less than the Kings Guards and
that too in cold blood, though indeed himself abhorred such a Popish practice,
yet at the same time he affirms it a more Gentleman like Quality to be true to
Cut throats than Kings, to Treason than Loyalty, and hopes no man will imagine
him capable of so mean a thought as to have discovered this Rand of Associating
Murderers, though threatening no less than the Murder of the Kings Guards, But my
Lords is to be Innocent still, and must and shall be so; for alas, the seizing
of the Kings Guards was no Design at all, God knows, upon the Kings Persons for
in the next Paragraph he is very outrageous to think how hard a Sentence be
had; for he says, Nothing was sworn against him, but some discourses about
making some STIRS, [a pretty Puritanical mincing word for a National
Insurrection] which by no means he will allow to be levying War against the
King. Besides, by a strange Fetch, the Design of seizing the Guards, was
construed a Design of killing the King; and so I was cast. Good Heavens! that
Ignoranous was our of fashion! and that a pack of Popish Tory Jurymen, should
ever interpret a Combination for seizing the Guards of a King to be the least
ill intention against the Person of Majesty. Nay, the dying Lord is so
extravagantly possessed not only with his own undoubted Innocence, but even of
those very men too that with all this Hear and Fury so many several times
machinated so Murderous and Treasonable a Design, that in the 13th Paragraph he
wishes that the Gentlemen of the Law would make more conscience than to run men
down by strains and fetches, and impose on easy and willing Juries, to the
Ruin of Innocent men; for to kill by forms and subtilties of Law, is the worst
sort of Murder. But I wish the rashness of hot men, and the partiality of
Juries, may be stopped with my Blood; which I would offer up with more joy, if I
thought I should be the last were to suffer in such a way. In this it is plainly
intimated, that his very Brethren in iniquity; those that not like himself
dissented and disapproved of seizing the Guards, but the very Promoters and
Defenders of the Design, are all Innocent too; insomuch that it is his last
Prayer, That their guiltless Blood may not be sacrificed like His, but himself
may be the last of Martyrs in this Cause.

I protest I am so startled at the latitude of some men's consciences, and the
extravagance of some men's self-justification, that I wonder what it is they will
allow to be Treason, or whether or no they have not expunged all those Texts in
their Bibles that teach Obedience to Kings as the Ordinance of God till at last
they believe there is no such Duty in the whole Body of Christianity, and no
such thing as Treason in Rerum Natura.

But to return to his Lordships Confession. Amongst those unanswerable
Demonstrations of his Loyalty to the Crown, and love to the King, with the
description of his miraculous Innocence, he gives you his sense of the present
State of the Nation, and in the second Paragraph he says, I wish with all my
Soul all our unhappy differences were removed, and that all sincere Protestants
would so far consider the danger of Popery, as to lay aside their Heats, and
agree against the common Enemy. In that good wish I hope all good Protestants
will join with him, provided his Uniting and Agreeing be honest, as I much
suspect the contrary; For he goes on, and I says.

For Popery, I look on it as an Idolatrous and Bloody Religion, and therefore
thought my self (...) in my ^ion to do all things against it. And by that, I
foresaw I should procure such great (...) to my self and such (...) ones, that
I have now been for some time expecting (...) And blessed be God I fall by the
Ax, (...) not by! the (...) Trial.

Here his Protestant Lordship (...) cunningly, but most venomously too makes
his Death (...) Popish Conspiracy against him; and that from his fatal Zeal
against Popery, he foresaw the great and powerful Enemies he should procure,
and expected the very Fate befell him. And to explain himself was born on this
Topic, paragr. the 7th. he says, that his earnestness against the Duke about
the Bill of Exclusion; had no small instaence on his present Sufferings. And
again par. the 5th! he says, I did believe, and do still, that Popery is
breaking in upon the Nation, and those that will advance it, will stop at
nothing to carry on their Designs, I am heartily sorry so many Protestants give
their helping hand to it: But I hope God will preserve the Protestant Religion,
and this Nation, though I am afraid it will fall under very great Trials, and
very sharp Suffering.

Here we have his Lordships Scheme of the whole Nations Destruction, by the
already All commanding power of Popery, and himself no less than one of the
(...)Martyrs to it, only he thanks God he falls by the Ax, not the Faggot. And
who is in this damnable new Popish Plot against the Lord Russels life, but that
great and powerful Enemy the Duke of York; for his Bill of Exclusion
earnestness, was the great influence in his Fall. And to effect this new
Diabolical Popish Conspiracy, those that advance it, will stop at nothing to
carry on their Designs; nay, the very Protestants have a hand in it, insomuch
that he plainly insinuates that all those new Protestant Evidences against
himself and the rest of the late Plotters; though men of Quality and Fortune,
though men of their own Faction, are only so many Popish Tools engaged by
Subornation and Perjury, from the great Popish Enemies of our Religion, to
remove the great Zealots for the Protestant Religion, and cut the Throats of
the Innocent, by no less than the most unexampled and most infernal of
Perjuries.

Nay, the Root of all this premeditated Plot against their Protestant lives,
lies not in the Witnesses and their Suborners only, but in the very Judges and
Juries themselves. For he says in para. the 13th From the Time of choosing
Sheriffs, I concluded the Heat in that matter would produce something of this
kind; And I am not much surprised to find it fall upon me. And I wish what is
done to me, may put a stop and satiate some peoples Revenge, and that no more
Innocent Blood be shed.

Here it is observed, that not only the Justice of the Nation is impeached, but
the wanting of the old Ignoramus Sheriffs and Juries is an evident combination
against the lives of Loyal, Innocent, and Protestant Subjects; nay though the
kind Lord confesses that Shaftsbury himself, once acquitted by Ignoramus, with
the rest of his Accomplices were really Guilty of Conspiring the seizing the
Guards, and murdering 'em in cold Blood, and raising of Stirs alias
Insurrections; yet the want of Sheriffs and Jurice to plead Ignoramus even to
such audacious Conspiracies; is a bringing of Innocence and Loyalty to
Scaffolds and Gibbers, a gratifying the insatiate Revenge of Popish Courtiers
Conspiring for Guiltless Blood, and ^o less than making Popery rule the
Assendant of the whole Court and City.

By this Insinuation of such a Popish Confederacy, into the heads of the Unwary
and Ignorant Reader, and indeed the whole Babble of the Kingdom too easily ^ed
into such an Apprehension, the Zealous Lady (...) to lose no time in so good a
Design, having set it to Printing a day before the Lord died; Here Is a plain,
perfect and visible Incentive to the Multitude, to Revenge the Death of this
Innocent Lord, and rise up in Arms to prevent the growth of Popery, and the
effusion of more Guiltless Blood still threatened. But truly the peaceable Lord
in the 6th. paragraph, says, I forgive the whole World, particularly all those
concerned in taking away my Life: and I desire and conjure my Friends to think
of no Revenge, but to submit to the Holy will of God, etc. Here indeed the good
Lord desires no Revenge, but at the same breath he intimates that his Blood
calls for it, only his forgiving Charity forbids it. But this is so transparent
a Mask, that half an eye may see through it, and this seeming Christian like
Dehortation of the people from Rebellion, is but adding a new provocation to
'em to begin it, whilst the generosity and goodness of this Murdered Lord, as
he calls himself, is but setting a higher price on his Blood: Thus after so
many false colors on his own Integrity, and appealing to God he had as
Passion, by end, or ill Design in him. Though at the same time he tells you both
his Comrades and their Character and his own privity to their abominable
Practices the Projections; he publishes that false inflaming Narratives his own
pretended Innocence, that is not to be man by any thing but the Speech of the
Noble Peer, and (...) serves the same Fate.

Thus every Design against the Peace of the Nation and all Plots and
Machinations whatever against t^ King and Government, though never so plainly
made o^ or by more substantial Evidence, are to be instantly ^ned into Popish
Perjury and Subornation: And Guilt whatever can or shall lie at any door but
the P^ and Jesuits; whilst the Execution of this Lord, is to be (...) no other
a Tool than the Kings intended Assassi^tion, viz. a Popish Combination and a
Popish Blow. (...) yet see the wretchedness of the Project, in all this v^mence
for Innocent Protestant Blood, I defy any (...) partial Reader to look over but
this short Paper of my Lord Russels, and to tell me there is not 100 times
worse matter discussed and bandyed by the Lord Shaft^bury and his Colleagues
even in my Lord Russels single Sheet of Paper, and all for the proving a Plot
against the Kings Life and the Government, than in all Coleman's voluminous
Letters, the great and almost only Gorgon of Popery.

I shall only finish with my true and cordial sense o^ the publication of that
Paper, that it is a much greate^ Dishonor to the Noble Family of that Great
Man, that the Scaffold he died upon.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for T. Graves, MDCLXXXIII.


