A LETTER To the D. of P. IN ANSWER TO THE Arguing Part OF HIS FIRST LETTER To
Mr. G.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel. 1687.

A LETTER To the D. of P. In Answer to the Arguing Part of his First Letter.
1. THAT you may not take it unkindly the Arguing Part of your Letter to Mr. G.
should pass unregarded, I have been prevailed upon to accept of his Commission
to hold his Cards, while he is not in Circumstances to play out his Game
himself. But can assure you beforehand, since Matter of Fact is clearing by
other Hands more proper, I mean to confine my self to Matter of Right; and so
shall give you the least and most excusable trouble that can be, a short one.

2. Your Letter tells us, that the Conference was for the sake of a Gentleman,
who I heard desired to be satisfied that Protestants are absolutely certain of
what they believe, and made account you could satisfy him, and professed, if
you could not, he would quit your Communion. And you take care to inform us (
p. 2.) that he was satisfied, and declared immediately after the Conference,
that he was much more confirmed in the Communion of your Church by it, and
resolved to continue in it. But could you not have afforded to inform us
likewise by what he was satisfied? For there is many a Man who would be as
glad, and is as much concerned to be satisfied in that Point as that Gentleman;
and he would not have been a jot the less confirmed or the less resolved, if
his Neighbor had been confirmed and resolved with him. I cannot for my life
imagine why you should make a Secret of a thing, which, besides your own and
your Churches Honor, concerns the Salvation of thousands and thousands to know.

3. Your Letter I perceive would shift it off to Mr. G. whom you desire (p. 7.)
to prove that Protestants have no Absolute Certainty, etc. Of this Proposal
there will be occasion to say more by and by. At the present I pray you
consider how you deal with those Souls who rely on you. If you should move them
to trust their Estates with a Man of your naming, of whom you would give no
other satisfaction that he were able to manage them, and faithful, and
responsible, but only to bid those who doubted, prove the contrary; I fancy
there would need all the Credit you have to hinder the Motion from appearing
very strange: And yet you have the confidence to make them one as much stranger
as their Souls are more worth than their Money: For you would have them hazard
their Souls where they are not safe, for any care you take to satisfy them
that they are. Why, suppose Mr. G. could not prove that Protestants are not
Certain, are they therefore Certain? Has Peter Twenty pounds in his Purse,
because Paul cannot prove he has not? Or, ever the more Title to an Estate,
because an Adversary may have the ill luck to be Nonsuited? Must not every
body speak for himself one day, and bring in his own Account, which will pass
or not pass as it is or is not faulty in it self, whether any fault have been
found in it before or no? And will not the Happiness or Misery of their Souls
for ever depend on that Account? Can you suffer them to run that terrible
hazard, without making them able to justify their Accounts themselves, and
furnishing them with assurance that they can, and with no more to say but that
they hoped Dr. St. would make his Party good with Mr. G.? That things so
precious to God as Souls should be of no more value with those who set up for
Ministers of the Gospel! That their great and only care, as far as I see,
should be to make a show, and pass for some body here, let every one take his
chance hereafter! Besides, Truth is therefore Truth, because it is built on
Intrinsecal Grounds which prove it to be such; and not on private Men's
Abilities, or their saying this or that; wherefore till those Grounds be
produced, it cannot be with reason held Truth: And Dr. St. is more particularly
obliged to make good he has such Grounds, having had such ill fortune formerly
with the Principles to which he undertook to reduce Protestant Faith, as
appears by the Account given of them in Error Non-plust.

4. But, leaving these Matters to be Answered where we must all answer why we
have believed so and so; pray let us have fair play in the mean time. Let every
one bear his own Burden, and you not think to discharge your self by throwing
your Load on another Man's Shoulders. You affirm there is Absolute Certainty on
the Protestants side and it is for him to prove it who affirms it. If you do it
but half so well as Mr. G. can, and has, the Infallibility which he asserts,
you will earn Thanks from one side, and Admiration from the other. But it is
for you to do it: To trick off proving the contrary upon your Adversary, is to
own that Proving is a thing which agrees not with your Constitution, and in
which your Heart misgives you.

5. Yet even so you were uneasy still, and would not venture what Mr. G. could
do, as slightly as you think, or would have others think of him. You know well
enough, that to prove Protestants have no Absolute Certainty of their Faith, is
no hard Task even for a weak Man: Dr. Tillotson 's Rule of Faith, p. 117, 118.
You know any Man may find it confessed to his hand by Protestants. And
therefore you had reason to bethink your self of an Expedient to trick it off
again from that Point, Page 7.
and put Mr. G. to prove, That Protestants have no Absolute Certainty as to the
Rule of their Faith, viz. the Scripture. The Merits of this Cause too I think
will return hereafter more fitly; in this place I mind only the Art. Pray, was
not the very First Question at the Conference, Dr. St's Second Letter, p. 14.
Whether Protestants are absolutely Certain that they hold now the same Tenets
in Faith, and All that our Savior taught to his Apostles? And your Answer that
They are? Did our Savior teach, and do Protestants believe no more, than that
the Book so called is Scripture? Is Certainty of this more, and Certainty of
this Book all one? And was not the Question plainly of the Certainty of this,
and of All this more? Here is then an Enquiry after one thing plainly turned
off to another. Yes; but this was one of the two things which the whole
Conference depended upon. As if the whole Conference did not depend on that
thing which was to be made manifest by the Conference, viz. the Absolute
Certainty of Protestant Faith. Mr. G. indeed did himself ask some Questions
about your Certainty of your Rule; Questions, whose course it was wisely done
to cut off, before they had questioned away your Certainty of Faith. For, after
they had caused it to be admitted, that the Certainty of Scripture is from
Tradition, there was no refusing to admit that Tradition causes Certainty, and
makes Faith as Certain as Scripture. And then it would have proved something
difficult to satisfy even a willing Man, that the Faith is Certain which is
opposite to a Faith come down by Tradition. But it was seen whereto it would
come, and thought fit to break off in time, and not let the Conference proceed
too far. In the mean time Absolute Certainty of Scripture was not the Point of
the Conference, nor is it the Point of Concern. Besides that it is agreed on all
hands, Men are Saved by Believing and Practicing what Christ taught, not barely
by believing Scripture is Scripture: And Salvation is the thing that imports us
in these Disputes, and 'twere well that nothing else were minded by Disputers.
But it imported you it seems both to shift off Proving from your self, and to
stifle any further Talk of the Certainty of Protestant Faith, and keep us from
looking that way by fixing our Eyes on another Object. And this is all you do;
but with so much Art, that I verily think many a Reader is persuaded you are
talking all the while to the purpose. The truth is, you have reason to carry it
as you do; for it is good to avoid undertaking what cannot be performed: And
you cannot, and I believe know you cannot make out, That Protestants are
Absolutely Certain, that they now hold all the same Doctrine that was taught by
Christ and his Apostles, as you affirmed in your Answer to Mr. G's first
Question. And this I thought it imported to tell you plainly and publicly,
that it might be in your hands to pin the Controversie-basket, and bring all
Catholics to your Church; where I will answer you will be sure to find us, if
you make us sure we shall find this Certainty there when we come.

6. In the mean time why has not Mr. G. done already as much as should be done?
It is plain, that where Churches differ in Faith, Infallible Faith in one,
cannot stand with Certain Faith in the other. Wherefore if Mr. G. have fixed
Infallibility in his own Church, he has removed Certainty from all that differ
from her. Let us then take and sift Mr. G's Argument, even as you put it, who
had not, I suppose, partiality enough for him, to make it better than it was.
You put it thus, p. 4, 5.

7. All Traditionary Christians believe the same to day which they did
yesterday, and so up to the time of our Blessed Savior; and if they follow
this Rule, they can never err in Faith, therefore are Infallible. And you (Mr.
G.) proved they could not innovate in Faith, unless they did forget what they
held the day before, or out of malice alter it. And now,

That there may be no mistake, let us take each Proposition by it self.

8. The First is, [ All Traditionary Christians believe the same to day which
they did yesterday, and so up to the time of our Blessed Savior.] You have
nothing to say to this, I hope: For since Traditionary Christians are those who
proceed upon Tradition, and Tradition signifies Immediate Delivery, it follows,
that unless they believe the same to day which they did yesterday, and so
upwards, they cease to be Traditionary Christians, by proceeding not upon an
Immediate, but an Interrupted Delivery, or some other Principle. And so there
is no denying this Proposition, but by affirming that Traditionary Christians
are not Traditionary Christians.

9. The second Proposition is this. [ And if they follow this Rule, they can
never err in Faith.] This is palpably self-evident: For, to follow this Rule is
to believe still the same to day which they did yesterday: And so, if they did
this from Christ's time, and so forwards, they must still continue to believe,
to the end of the World, the self-same that Christ and his Apostles taught;
and, therefore, cannot err in Faith, unless those Authors of our Faith did:
Which that they did not, is not to be proved to Christians.

10. There follows this Inference: [ Therefore they are Infallible.] This is no
less plainly self-evident. For these words [ They can never err in Faith] in
the Antecedent, and [ They are Infallible] in the Consequent, are most
manifestly the self-same in sense, and perfectly equivalent.

11. The fourth and last (which according to you, aimed to prove, that they
could not innovate) is this. [ They could not innovate in Faith, unless they
did forget what they held the day before, or out of malice alter it.] And this
is no less unexceptionable than its Fellows. For, if they knew not they altered
Faith, when they altered it, they had forgot what they believed the day before.
If they altered it wittingly, excuse them from Malice who can; who, believing,
as all who proceed upon Tradition do, that Tradition is the certain Means to
convey the Doctrine of Christ, would notwithstanding alter the Doctrine conveyed
to them by Tradition. Pray what ails this Argument? and what wants it, save
bare Application, to conclude what was intended as fully and as rigorously as
you can desire? And, pray, what need was there to apply it to the Roman Church,
and say she followed Tradition, to you who deny it not either of the Roman or
Greek Church? As every thing is true, and every thing clear; who now besides
your self would have thought of an evasion from it? And yet you venture at one,
such as it is.

12. You tell us then, ( p. 5.) That you thought the best way to show the
vanity of this rare Demonstration, was to produce an Instance of such as
followed Tradition, and yet Mr. G. could not deny to have erred, and that was
of the Greek Church, etc. You had even as good have said, what Mr. G. says is
true, but yet he does not say true for all that. For to pitch upon nothing for
false, is, in Disputes, to own that every thing is true. The best way, say you?
I should have thought it every jot as good a way to have said nothing when one
has nothing to say. But yet the World is obliged to you for letting them know
what Scholars knew before, that Protestants think it the best way to answer
Catholic Arguments, to give them no Answer at all: For you are not to be told
that this Instance of yours is not an Answer to Mr. G-'s Argument, but a new
Argument against him of your own, which undoubtedly you might have produced as
well as my Lord Falkland, if you had been, as my Lord Falkland was, arguing.
But it is your turn now to answer. And must you be minded of what every
Smatterer in Logic knows, that an Answerer is confined to his Concedo, his
Nego, and Distinguo, as the Propositions which he is to speak to, are True,
False or Ambiguous? He may deny the Inference too, if he find more or other
Terms in the Conclusion than in the Premises. But these are his Bounds; and
Answering turns Babbling, when they are exceeded. Must you be minded that the
Business must be stopped before it come to the Conclusion, and that otherwise
there is no speaking against it? For you know that if the Premises be right,
and the Inference good, the Conclusion must be as necessarily True, as it is
that the same thing cannot be, and not be at once; that is, must be more
certain than that England, for Example, shall not crumble into Atoms, or be
swallowed up in the Sea to morrow: For this, and a thousand such things may
happen to all material Nature; that a Contradiction should prove True, cannot.
And it is perfect Contradiction that Terms which cohere in the Premises, by
being the same with a Third, should not cohere with one another in the
Conclusion. Must you be minded that an Arguer is to prove his Conclusion, and
an Answerer to show he does not, by assigning where and how he fails? Do you do
any such matter? Do you so much as go about it? And would you have what you say
pass for an Answer? Pray consider the Case: The Church of Rome is Infallible,
says Mr. G.: She is not, say you. He brings his Argument, and you your Instance
against it. What are People the wiser now? and which shall they be for; the
Argument or the Instance? They have reason to think well of the Argument,
because you have no fault to find with it; and they may think as they please of
the Instance. You would not, I suppose, have them believe you both, and think
the Church of Rome for your sake Fallible, and, for his, Infallible at once.
Pray what assistance do you afford them to determine either way? And what do you
more than even leave them to draw Cuts, and venture their Souls as handy-dandy
shall decide, for you or Mr. G.? It Is true, when Zeno would needs be paradoxing
against the possibility of Motion, his Vanity was not ill ridiculed by the
walking of Diogenes before him. For 'twas palpably and ridiculously vain to
talk against Motion with a Tongue, that must needs move to talk against it. And
there may be vanity too in our Case, for ought I know: But where shall it be
lodged? Why more with Mr. G's. Argument than your Instance? Why is it more vain
to pretend to prove Infallibility, upon which depend the Hopes which Millions
and Millions have of a blessed Eternity, and which is proved by Arguments, to
which you think it your best way not to attempt to Answer, than it is to except
against a Conclusion, against the Premises whereof there lies no Exception?
That is, to find fault with a Sum Total, and find none in the particulars, or
the casting up: For a Conclusion is a kind of Sum Total of the Premises. But it
is infinitely more vain to talk against one Infallibility, unless you will set
up another. For, if there be no Means, by which Men may be secured, that the
ways they take to arrive at their greatest and only Good will not deceive them,
it cannot be expected they will take all the pains that are necessary to
compass that Good, which for ought they can tell, they may not compass with all
their pains. It Is a pleasant thing in you to talk of the vanity of Mr. G's.
Demonstration, when, by seeking to take Infallibility out of the World, you are
making the whole Creation vain. For all Material Nature was made for Rational
Nature, and Rational Nature requires Rational Satisfaction in all its
proceedings, and most of all in the pursuit of Happiness: And what Rational
Satisfaction can there be, if there may be Deceit in whatever can be proposed
for Satisfaction? In short, the Result of your Instance, whatever was the Aim,
it is to amuse and confound People, and hinder them perhaps from seeing what
otherwise would be clear; but it shows them nothing, nor can; for that Argument
of yours is not at all of a showing Nature.

13. It Is, at best, but an Argument (as they call it) ad hominem; which you
know are of the worst sort of Arguments. They serve for nothing but to stop an
Adversaries mouth, or shame him, if he cannot answer without contradicting
himself; but are of no use toward the Discovery of Truth. For a thing is not
the more or less True, because such a Man's Tongue is tied up for speaking
against it. But is it so much as an Argument ad hominem? As all the little
force of the Topic consists in the Obligation which a Man may have to grant or
deny what it supposes he does, it affords no Argument at all against the Man
who has no such Obligation. And pray where does it appear that Mr. G. is
obliged not to deny that the Greek Church has erred in matters of Faith? And
how can you, of all Men, suppose he is? You, who in your Rational Account ( p.
32.) quote these words from Peter Lombard; The Difference between the Greeks
and Latins, is in Words and not in Sense: Name Thomas a Jesus, and Azorius, and
tell us of other Roman Catholic Authors, of the same judgment, whom I suppose
you could name. Pray, how comes Mr. G. to lie under an Obligation, from which
Men of Reputation in his own Communion are exempt? And what a wise Argument ad
hominem have you made against him, whom your self have furnished with an
Argument ad hominem to confute it when he pleases? In fine, he goes to work
like a Scholar, puts his Premises, and infers his Conclusion, which you know
cannot but be True, if there be no Fault in his Premises: And it is for you to
find one when you can. You put nothing to show how the Inference you make
should be True, but barely assume, without proof, that he cannot deny it (p.
5.): As if Truth depended on his Denying or Affirming, and that what People say
or think, made things True or False. And even, for so much, you are at his
Courtesy: If he be not the better Natured, and will crossly affirm or deny in
the wrong place, you and your Argument are left in the lurch. In a word, one
may see he aimed at Truth, who takes at least the way to it: what you aimed at,
you best know; but no body shall ever discover what is, or is not True, by your
Method.

14. But that you may not complain, your Cock is not suffered to fight, let us
see what your Instance will do. You put it thus, ( p. 5.) The Greek Church went
upon Tradition from Father to Son, as much as ever the Roman did. And I desired
to know of Mr. G. whether the Greek Church notwithstanding did not err in
matters of Faith; And, if it did, then a Church holding to Tradition was not
Infallible. How! If it did? Why then it is apparent if it did not, your
Argument holds not. And will you assume that the Greek Church errs, who believe
she does not? Will you take a Premise to infer a Conclusion, upon which the
Salvation of People depends, which Premise your self in your own heart think is
not true? Can you deal thus with their Souls, who pin them upon you, persuade
them of what you are not persuaded your self, and offer them a Securiy for
their Eternity, in which your own judgment tells you there is a flaw? For you
have declared your self upon this Matter in your Rational Account, and taken
great pains to clear the Greek Church, at least upon the Article of the Holy
Ghost, in which consists their main difference with the Latins, and to which
the other two you mention were added, I suppose, for fashion sake. I know you
there propose to free that Church from the charge of Heresy. But pray what
difference betwixt Heresy and Error in matter of Faith? unless you will trifle
about Obstinacy, and such collateral considerations; which neither concern us
here, nor were any part of your Defense there. I see too that you word it here
conditionally, and with reference to Mr. G's. Answer: As if his Answer made or
marred, and the Greek Church did or did not err, as he says, I, or No. Whatever
Mr. G. may say, or you have said, unless the Greek Church actually does Err,
your Instance is no Instance of a Church that goes upon Tradition and Errs; and
your Inference that then a Church holding to Tradition was not Infallible, is
wondrous pertinently inferred from the Example of a Church that errs not. Pray
take it well that I entreat you by all the care you have of your own Soul, and
should have of others, to manage Disputes about Faith a little otherwise, and
not propose Arguments, in which you must needs think your self there is no
force. For there is plainly none in this, if the Greek Church does not err; and
you at least think she does not. I am sure it is what I would not do my self for
all the World.

15. But to proceed to Mr. G's. Answer, ( p. 5.) It was say you, that the Greek
Church followed Tradition, till the Arians left that Rule and took up a new
one, etc. And why has he not answered well? You assumed that the Greek Church
erred while it went upon Tradition; If you did not, you said nothing; for, that
a Church may follow Tradition at one time, and leave it at another, is no news.
It Is the case of all erring Churches which ever followed Tradition at all. Mr.
G's Reply then that Tradition was followed till another Rule was taken up,
denies that Tradition and Error were found together, as you contended, in the
Greek Church. And pray what more direct or more full Answer can there be to an
Argument, than to deny the Premises? As slightly as you would seem to think of
him, he understood disputing better than to start aside into an Exception
against your Conclusion, but answers fair and home by denying the Assumption
from which you infer it; which now he has done, you know it rests with you to
prove it; and yet you never think on it, as far as I see; but, as if you had no
more to do, fall a complaining against Mr. G. for speaking of the Arians, and
not of the present Greek Church; and against his Copy, for leaving out the
Inference which you drew. In doing which, if he did so, he did you no small
kindness; there being no Premises to draw the Inference from, as has been shown
above; or if any, such as put you to contradict your own Doctrine ere any thing
could follow from them.

16. As for the omission of the Inference, I know not how it happened, nor mean
to meddle with matter of Fact. But I see they had reason, who observed before
me, that it is a thing of no manner of Consequence, I verily think, in your own
Judgment. Unless you think the Age we live in so dull, that, without much
hammering it into their Heads, it cannot be perceived, that if a Church has
erred which held to Tradition, a Church may err which holds to Tradition. Or,
unless you think it of mighty Consequence to have an Inference stand in the
Relation which fell with the Premises at the Conference. Mr. G. took them away
by his denial, and you must begin again, and bring something from whence you
may draw an Inference, if you will needs have an Inference; for an Inference
cannot be drawn from nothing. Pray divert us not perpetually from minding what
we are about; but remember the Question now is, Whether the Greek Church held
to Tradition and erred at once? and bethink your self, if you please of a
Medium, which will infer that Point for you; for Mr. G. you see denies it.

17. From his mentioning the Arians you take occasi-to speak big, and bear us
in hand he was hard put to it, and sought an occasion, and affirm ( p. 6.) you
could get no Answer at all to the Case of the present Greek Church. As if his
Answer pincht on the Arians, and were not as full to the present as past Greek
Church. It goes on this, That those who err in Faith, let them be who they
will, and the Error what it will, and in what Time and Place you will, all
leave Tradition. Whether the Case of the present Greek Church be the same with
the Arians, is matter of Fact, with which Mr. G. did well not to meddle; it is
for you to make it out, if you will make good your Argument. Modern or Ancient
Heresy is all one to his Answer, which is applicable to all Heresy: And you
complain of the want of an Answer when you have one. Pray, if a Man should put
an Objection to you about an Animal, for Example, and you answer it of all
Animals, would you think it just in him to quarrel with you for not mentioning
the Rational or Irrational in particular? And yet this is your Quarrel to Mr.
G. All your magnificent Talk ( p. 6.) of undeniably true, granted by Mr. G.
known to every one, etc. as apt as I see it is to make a Reader believe your
Instance is notoriously true, and against which Mr. G. has nothing to say,
cannot make me, or any Man of Reason, who examins the Point, believe he has any
Reason to say more, till you do. He has answered directly, and positively
denied, that Error and Tradition can be found together in the Greek Church, or
any other, modern or ancient. There it sticks, and you may drive it on farther
(it being your own Argument) if you please. Only when you tell us ( p. 6.) that
the present Greek Church in all its Differences with the Roman, still pleaded
Tradition, and adhered to it, I wish you had told us whether you speak of
Differences in matter of Faith, or no. For Differences may be occasioned by
matters of Faith, which are not Differences in Faith. If you do not, you
support your Instance very strongly, and prove the consistence of Tradition
with Error in Faith very Learnedly, from Differences which belong not to Faith.
If you do, as Nature itches after strange Sights, I long to see by what
Differences, or any thing else, it can be made out, That an erring Church can
still plead Tradition, and adhere to it. Not but that for Pleading much may be,
there are such confident doings in the World. As certain as it is, that the
Religion in England now, is not the same which it was before Henry the Eighth,
I think there is confidence enough in England to plead Tradition for it. It Is
but finding some Expression in an ancient Writer, not couched with Prophetical
foresight enough to avoid being understood, as some will desire it should, and
it will serve turn to pretend to Antiquity, and bear the Name of Tradition. So
I suspect you take it your self, when you say the Arians insisted on Tradition:
For sure you do not think in earnest, that Doctrine contrary to
Consubstantiality, was taught by Christ, and believed from Father to Son till
the Council of Nice. This, or some such thing may perhaps have been pleaded;
but for adhering to Tradition, Your Servant. For, pray, did Christ teach any
Error? When a Father believed what Christ taught him, and the Son what the
Father believed, did not the Son too believe what Christ taught? Run it on to
the last Son that shall be born in the World, must not every one believe what
Christ taught, if every one believed what his Father believed? And will you go
about to persuade us, that there actually is a company of Men in the World who
adhered to this Method, all Sons believing always as their Fathers did, whereof
the First believed as Christ taught, and who notwithstanding erred in matters
of Faith? They would thank you for making this out, who would be glad that
Christ taught Error and were not God. But it is not plainer that Two and Three
make Five, than it is that this cannot be. And yet you would top it upon us,
and bear us in hand it is not only true, but apparent in the Greek Church, and
known to every body who knows any thing of it. The comfort is, there is nothing
for all these Assertions but your Word; in which, where you stick not to pass
it for an arrant Impossibility, I for my part do not think there is Absolute
Certainty.

18. I see not what there remains more, but to bear in mind where we are. At
the Conference, instead of answering Mr. G's Argument, you would needs make one
of your own, which was in short; The Greek Church goes upon Tradition and errs,
therefore another Church may err which goes upon Tradition. There was no need
to trouble the Greek Church for the matter: It had been altogether as
methodical, and as much to purpose, to have instanced in the Latin Church it
self, and never gone further; and shorter, to have spared Instancing too, and
have said without more ado, Mr. G 's Conclusion is not true: For you do no
more, till you make it appear, that the Church you pitch upon for an Instance,
does indeed adhere to Tradition and err. But, because this had been too open,
and People would have sooner perceived that it had been to say, I know not how
to answer Mr. G 's Argument, but will notwithstanding stand to it, that his
Conclusion is false, you thought the best way to divert the Reader's attention
from what is before him, was to travel into Greece; and yet when you come there,
do no more than if you had stayed at home: For you barely say there is both
Tradition and Error in the Greek Church, and you might have said as much of the
Latin; or, without mentioning either, have said, Though Mr. G. has proved a
Traditionary Church cannot err, I say it can and has. All is but Saying till
you come to Proving: Only to make a formal show with an Antecedent and a
Conclusion, you say it with the Ceremony of an Argument; of which since Mr. G.
denied the Antecedent, he had no more to do till you proved it.

19. So it stood at the Conference, and so it stands still, and for ought I
see, is like to stand: For though you have writ two Letters since, there appears
no word of Proof in either, or sign that you do so much as think on it: You
only say your Instance over again, and would have the Face you set upon it, and
great Words you give it, make it pass for plain and undeniable, when all the
while it is plainly impossible, and actually denied. Mr. G. I hope, will bide
by his Answer, because it is a good one, true in it self, and direct to the
Point: For it denies just what you assumed, That the Greek Church stood upon
Tradition, and fell at the same time into Error. And speaking as you do, or
should do, of Error in matter of Faith, Euclid never made any thing plainer
than it is, That where ever Error comes in, Tradition goes out. Of necessity
therefore, if the present Greek Church have adhered to Tradition, it has not
erred: If it have erred, it has not adhered to Tradition. Which of the two is
the Case, neither concerns Mr. G. nor can he dispute it without following bad
Example, that is, falling to Argue now it is his Part to Answer. You would pass
it upon us, that the Greek Church has erred without swerving from Tradition;
and you must either make it out, or acknowledge you have made much ado about
nothing: For your Instance is no Instance, till it appears to be true; Till you
do it, there is no Work for Mr. G.

20 At the close ( p. 7.) you desire Mr. G. to make good two things, and tell
us why you desire it, and what will follow if he accept or decline your Motion.
I neither understand how your Proposals follow from your Reasons, nor your
Consequences from your Proposals: But think it no more worth losing time upon:
them, than you thought it worth boasting of the Victory. The First is, That we
[Protestants] have no Absolute Certainty as to the Rule of our Faith, viz. the
Scripture; although we have a larger and firmer Tradition for it, viz. the
Consent of all Christian Churches, than you [Catholics] can have for the Points
of Faith in difference between us.

21. I can tell you a better Reason for this Proposal than any you give. There
was no avoiding to own Absolute Certainty to a Man who talked of quitting your
Communion without it. But you knew well enough that your Absolute Certainty
would be thwittled into Sufficient Certainty, and Sufficient Certainty into no
Certainty at last; and had your Wits about you when you thought of this
Proposal: For it is in effect to say, This Certainty of Faith is a troublesome
matter, and not for my turn; Let us go to something else, leave Faith and pass
to Scripture; of which you, Mr. G. shall prove we have no Absolute Certainty:
For, if I should go about to prove we have, I foresee, that while I am seeking
harbor in my larger and firmer Tradition, I shall venture to split upon your
Infallibility, There can be no necessity supposed of any Infallible Society of
Men, either to attest or explain these Writings among Christians. Dr. St.
Principle 15.
to contradict my 15 th Principle for the Faith of Protestants, and full at
unawares into the Snares laid for me in Error Nonplust, from p. 90 to p. 96,
which I have no mind to come near. But whatever Reasons you had to make this
Proposal, I see none that Mr. G. has to accept it. Do you prove, if you please,
that you have Absolute Certainty; you, who bear those in hand who consult you,
that you have; and Absolute Certainty too of that of which you professed your
self absolutely Certain, Dr. St's Copy.
viz. That you now hold all the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his
Apostles; which by your own confession there, is the true Point. For you know
very well, one is not certain of his Faith by being certain of Scripture: Your
self take all who dissent from yours, to have not only an Uncertain, but a
Wrong Faith, else why do you dissent from them? And yet they have all as much
Certainty of Scripture as you. The truth is, if you were pressed to make out your
Absolute Certainty even of Scripture in your way, you would perhaps find a hard
Task of it, for all your Appeal to Tradition. But it was not the Point for
which the Conference was, nor ought it be the Point here, neither ought Mr. G.
to meddle with it, and you trust much to his good Nature to propose it: For,
besides that all the thanks he would have for his pains, would be to have the
Arguments against your Certainty, turned against the Certainty of Scripture one
day, as if he did not believe Scripture Certain: You would have him undertake a
matter in which he has no concern, to save you from an Undertaking in which you
are deeply concerned, but with which you know not how to go through; which is a
very reasonable Request. In a word, it is for you either to make manifest now,
what you should have made manifest at the Conference, viz. That Protestants
have Absolute Certainty, not only of the Scripture, which they call their Rule,
but of the Faith which they pretend to have from that Rule; or else to suffer
another thing to be manifest, viz. That I said true when I said you cannot do
it; and thither I am sure it will come.

22. However, I am glad to hear any Talk from you of Absolute Certainty, even
though it be but Talk: It Is a great Stranger, as coming from your Quarters, and
has a friendly and an accommodating look, and therefore for both regards
deserves a hearty welcome. For this very Profession makes a fair approach
toward the Doctrine of Infallibility, or rather it is the self-same with it; it
being against Common Sense to say you judge your self Absolutely Certain of any
thing, if at the same time you judge you may be deceived in thus judging. But I
accept the Omen that you seem to grant you are thus Absolutely Certain, or
Infallible, by virtue of Tradition; for this makes Tradition to be an
Infallible Ascertainer in some things at least; and, so, unless some special
difficulty be found in other things that light into the same Channel, it must
needs bring them down infallibly too. Now I cannot for my heart discern what
great difficulty there can be 'to remember all along the yesterdays Faith, or
to be willing to be guided and instructed by their yesterdays Fathers, Teachers
and Pastors; especially the sense of the Points (to omit many other means)
being determined by open and daily Practice. Yet I a little fear all this your
seeming kindness for Tradition, is only for your own Interest; and that,
because you were necessitated to make use of it to abet Scripture's Letter, you
allow it in that regard, these high Complements; but in other things,
particularly in conveying down a Body of Christian Faith (which is incomparably
more easy) it will presently become useless and good for nothing. In the
former exigency you esteem it A worthy Rule, but in the later duty, A Rule
worthy --

23. Now to let the Reader plainly see that it was mere Force, and not
Inclination, which obliged you to grant an Absolute Certainty in Tradition
conveying down Scriptures Letter, we will examine what you allowed it when you
laid your Principles, and so spoke your own free thoughts unconstrained by any
Adversary: Your fifteenth Principle is put down ( p. 90.) in Error Nonplust,
and that part of it that concerns this present Point, is thus reflected upon by
your Adversary ( p. 92, 93.) [ Again, tho all this were true, and that the
Scriptures were owned as containing in them the whole Will of God so plainly
revealed, that no sober Enquirer can miss of what is necessary to Salvation, and
that therefore there needed no Church to explain them: Yet it is a strange
Consequence, that therefore there can be no necessity of any Infallible Society
of Men to Attest them, or to witness that the Letter of Scripture is right.
This is so far from following out of the former part of Dr. St's. Discourse,
that the contrary ought to follow; or, from prejudicing his own pretense, that
it conduces exceedingly to it. For certainly his Sober Enquirer would less be
in doubt to miss of what is necessary to Salvation in case the Letter, on which
all depends, be well attested, than if it be not; and most certainly an
Infallible Society of Men can better attest that Letter than a Fallible one:
and those Writings can with better show of Reason be owned to contain in them
the Will of God, if their Letter be attested beyond possibility of being wrong,
than if left in a possibility of being such; for if the Letter be wrong, All is
wrong in this case. -- ] As manifest then as it is, that to be Absolutely
Certain of any thing, is not to be Fallibly Certain of it; that is, as manifest
as it is, that to be Absolutely Certain of a thing, is to be Infallibly Certain
of it; so manifest it is, that you there contradict your self here, and, that,
however you may endeavor to come off, you allow not heartily, nor without some
regret and reluctance, an Absolute Certainty to Tradition, even in Attesting
Scripture's Letter.

24. In these words of yours ( p. 7) [ As to the Rule of our Faith] give me
leave to reflect on the word [ OUR,] and thence to ask you, who are YOU? A
Question which I ask not of your Name or Surname, but of your Judgment (as you
call it) of Discretion. Are you a Socinian, an Arian, a Sabellian, an
Eutychian, etc. or what are you? Are you a whole, or a half, or a
Quarter-nine-and-thirty-Article Man? Do you take them for Snares, or Fences,
and when for the one, and when for the other, and wherefore? These words [ The
Rule of OUR Faith] make you all these at once; for all these profess
unanimously Scripture's Letter is their Rule of Faith. Mr. G. when he came to
your House, imagined he was to treat with a Protestant, or something like it,
and to have learned from you what Absolute Certainty you would assign for your,
(that is, Protestant) Faith; and you give him only a Generical Latitudinarian
Rule, common to all the Heresies in the World. The Project of the
Comprehension-Bill was a trifle to this: It brings into one Fold all the most
enormous Straglers that have been since Christ's time, nay Wolves, and Sheep
and all. It blends into one Mass the most heterogeneous and hitherto
irreconcilable Sects. Nay, it miraculously makes Light and Darkness very
consistent, and Christ and Belial very good Friends. For your own Credit sake
then distinguish your kind of Protestants (if you be indeed one of that Church)
from that infamous Rabble of stigmatized Heretics; and let us know what is the
Proper Difference that restrains that Notion of a Common Rule to your
particular, as such a kind of Protestant, and show us that specifical Rule to
be Absolutely Certain. I say, such a kind; for even the word Protestant too is
a Subaltern Genus, and has diverse Species, and it is doubted by many, who are no
Papists, under which Species you are to be rankt. But, why should I vex you
with putting you upon manifest Impossibilities? For the Letter being the common
Rule to them all, and, as daily experience shows us, variously explicable, that
which particularizes it to belong specially to this or that Sect, as its proper
Rule, can be only this, [ According as my self, and those of my Judgment
understand or interpret it.] The Difference then constituting your Protestant
Rule, as distinguished from that of those most abominable Heresies, can only be
[ as my own Judgment, or others of my side, thus or thus interpret Scripture's
Letter] and wriggle which way you please, there it will and must end at last.
Go to work then, distinguish your self by your Ground of Faith, and then make
out this your proper Rule to be Absolutely Certain or Infallible; and then, who
will not laugh at you for attempting it, and assuming that to your self, which
you deny to God's Church, and preferring your self as to the Gift of
Understanding Scripture right, before the whole body of those many and Learned
Churches in Communion with Rome? Nay, and before the Socinians too; without so
much as pretending to make out to the World, that you have better Means, either
Natural or Supernatural, to interpret those Sacred Oracles, than had the others.

25. My last Exception is, that you pretend the Letter of Scripture is a Rule
of Faith for your People, which not one in a Million, even of your own
Protestants relies on; or ever thinks of relying on, in order to make choice of
their Faith, or determining what to hold. This pretense of yours looks so like
a mere Jest, that I cannot persuade my self you are in earnest, when you
advance such a Paradox. For, it is manifest that while your Protestants are
under Age, and not yet at years of Discretion to judge, they simply believe
their Fathers and Teachers; that is, they follow the way of Tradition, however
misplaced. And, when they come to Maturity, pray tell us truly, how many of
your Sober Enquirers have you met with in your life, who endeavor to abstract
from all the prejudices they have imbibed in their Minority, and, reducing
their inclined thoughts to an equal Balance of Indifferency, do with a wise
Jealousy, lest this Popish way of believing immediate Fathers and Pastors
should delude them, as it has done the whole World formerly, resolve to examine
the Book of Scripture it self, read it attentively, pray daily and fervently,
that God's Spirit would discover to them, whether what they have learned hither
to be true or no, and what is; and, in a word, use all the Fallible means (for
you allow them no other) which your Sober Enquirers are to make use of to find
out their Faith? I doubt, if you would please to answer sincerely, you would
seriously confess you scarce ever met with such a one in your life; that is,
never met with any one who relied upon Scripture's Letter practically for his
Rule of Faith, whatever you may have taught them to talk by rote. Can any Man
of Reason imagine, that all the Reformed in Denmark or Sueden (to omit others)
did light to be so unanimously of one Religion merely by means of reading your
Letter-Rule, and your Sober Enquiry? Or can any be so blind, as not to see,
that it is the following the natural way of Tradition, or Childrens believing
Fathers (that is, indeed, of Education) that such multitudes in several places,
continue still of the same persuasion; and that you consequently owe to this
way, which you so decry in Catholics, that any considerable number of you do
voluntarily hang together at all? And that those Principles of yours, which you
take up for a show, when you write against Catholics, would, if put in
practice, in a short time crumble to Atoms all the Churches in the World?
Perhaps, indeed, when your Protestants come at Age, they may receive some
Confirmation from their Fathers and Preachers, quoting Scripture-places against
what Catholics hold, or what they shall please to say they hold; and by the
same means come to believe a Trinity, the Godhead of Christ, Christ's Body
being absent in the Sacrament, and such like; but do the Hearers and Learners
make it their business to use all careful disquisition (for a slubbering
superficial diligence will not serve the turn in matters of such high Concern)
whether the Catholics, and those great Scripturists, who deny those other
Points, do not give more congruous explications of those places than their own
Preachers do? unless they do this, or something equivalent, it is manifest the
Letter of Scripture is not their Rule, but honest Tradition. And that they do
no such thing, is hence very apparent, that they rest easily satisfied, and
well appaid with their Parson's interpretation of Scripture, they presently
accept it for right and good, and readily swallow that sense, which some
Learned Men, of their own Judgment, assign it, without thinking themselves
obliged to observe your Method of Sober Enquiry. You may rail against the
Council of Trent, as you will, for forbidding any to interpret Scripture
against the Sense which the Church holds; but it is no more than what your
Hearers perpetually practice, and the Preachers too (for all their fair words)
expect from them. And I much doubt even your self (though your Principles are the
most pernicious for taking matters out of the Church's, and putting them into
private Hands, of any Protestant I ever yet read) would not take it very well
if some Parishioner of yours, presuming upon his Prayers for Direction, etc.
should tell you that you erred in Interpreting Scripture, and that the Sense he
gave it, was sound and right Faith, yours wrong and Heretical; and I would be
glad to know what you would say to him, according to your Principles, if he
should hap to stand out against you, that he understands Scripture to be
plainly against a Trinity and Christ's Divinity, as John Biddle did against the
Minister of his Parish, and the whole Church of England to boot. It Is plain you
ought to cherish and commend him for standing firm to his Rule; But I am much
afraid you would be out of humor with him, and esteem your self affronted. You
may pretend what you please of high Expressions given by Antiquity, of
Scripture's incomparable Excellency, and Sufficiency for the Ends it was
intended for, which we do not deny to it; but I dare say, even your self does
not think, that either the Ancient Faithful, or the Modern Reformers, meant
that any of the Ecclesia credens, or Believing Church, should have the liberty
to Interpret Scripture against the Ecclesia docens, or Teaching Church, i. e.
Pastors; or Coin a Faith out of it, contrary to the present or former
Congregation of which he was a Member.

26. The sum is; It Is evident hence, that Tradition of your Fathers and
Teachers, and not Scriptures Letter, is indeed your Rule; That by it you
Interpret Scripture; which then only is called your Rule, and made use of as
such, when you are Disputing against us; because having thus set it up, to
avoid and counterbalance the Authority of the former Church you left, you make
account your own private Interpretation of it may come to be thought
Argumentative against the great Body of those Churches from whose Communion you
departed; and yet you judge no private Parishioner should claim the same
Privilege against you, without affronting your great Learning, and Pastoral
Authority. But I much wonder you should still venture to call Scripture's
Letter a Rule of Faith, having been beaten from that Tenet so pitifully in
Error Nonplust, from Page 59. to Page 72. where I believe you may observe
diverse Particulars requisite to be cleared e're the Letter can be in all regards
Absolutely Certain, which the Consent of all Christian Churches will never
reach to by their mere Authority, unless you will allow the Sense of Christ's
Doctrine descending by Tradition, did preserve the Copy substantially right and
entire.

27. Your pretended Rule of Faith then, being in reality the same that is
challenged by all the Heretics in the World, viz. Scripture's Letter
Interpreted by your selves; I will let you see in this following short
Discourse, how far it is from being Absolutely Certain.

I. God has left us some Way to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught.

II. Therefore this Way must be such, that they who take it, shall arrive by it
at the End it was intended for; that is, know surely what Christ and his
Apostles taught.

III. Scripture's Letter Interpretable by Private Judgments, is not that Way;
for we experience Presbyterians and Socinians (for example) both take that Way,
yet differ in such high Fundamentals, as the Trinity, and the Godhead of Christ.

IV. Therefore Scripture's Letter Interpretable by Private Judgments, is not
the Way left by God to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught, or
surely to arrive at right Faith.

V. Therefore they who take only that Way, cannot by it arrive surely at right
Faith, since it is impossible to arrive at the End, without the Means or Way
that leads to it.

28. I do not expect any Answer to this Discourse, as short as it is, and as
plain and as nearly as it touches your Copyhold; it may be served as Mr. G's
Argument is, turned off so so with an Instance, if there be one at hand; or,
with what always is at hand, an Irony or scornful Jest, your readiest; and, in
truth, most useful Servants: But you must be excused from finding any
Proposition or Inference to deny, or any thing, save the Conclusion it self:
Which, though it will not be fairly avoided, I cannot hope should be fairly
admitted, unless I could hope that Men would be more in love with Truth than
their Credit. Till Truth be taken a little more to heart, Catholic Arguments
will and must always be faulty; but they are the most unluckily and crosly
faulty of any in the World; faulty still in the wrong place. When fault is
found in other Arguments, it is always found in the Premises; in these, it is
found in the Conclusion: In which, notwithstanding, all who know any thing of a
Conclusion, know there can be no fault, if there be none in the Premises.
Indeed, they show that to be true which Men cannot endure should be true; and
that is their great and unpardonable fault. That you may not think I talk in
the Air, I declare openly, that you cannot Answer this Discourse, unless you
will call some unconcerning Return an Answer; and I engage my self to show the
Proposition true, and the Inference good, which you shall pitch upon to deny;
And the Distinction, if you will make any, not to purpose. The truth is, I
engage for no great matter; for I know beforehand you can no more Answer now,
than you could to Error Nonplust, or can prove an Absolute Certainty in
Protestant Faith.

29. To return now to Mr. G. the Second thing which you desire him to make
good, is, That the Tradition from Father to Son is an infallible Conveyance of
Matters of Faith, notwithstanding the Greek Church is charged by him with
Error, which adhered to Tradition. That is, you desire him to prove over again,
what you tell us your self he has proved once already: For you tell us ( p.
5.), he proved, That they [Traditionary Christians] could not innovate in
Faith, unless they did forget what they held the day before, or out of malice
alter it. Pray, when it is proved, that the Conveyance of Faith by Tradition,
excludes the possibility of Change in Faith, save by forgetfulness or malice,
is it not proved, That, where there could be neither forgetfulness nor malice,
there could be no change in Faith? You do not, I suppose, desire he should
prove, that Men had always Memories, or that Christians were never malicious
enough to damn themselves and Posterity wittingly; and yet it can stick no
where else: If it can, said Mr. G. assign where. Now you know very well, that a
Conveyance which makes it impossible that Faith should ever be changed, is an
Infallible Conveyance; and the very thing is proved which you desire should be
proved. What reason has Mr. G. to prove it a second time? And what reason have
you to desire it? If Proof would content you, you have it already; but a second
cannot hope to content you better than the first, unless it be worse.

30. Yes, but you would have him prove, Notwithstanding the Greek Church, etc.
( p. 7.) Notwithstanding? Why, do you think it is with Arguments as with Writs,
where the want of a Non obstante spoils all? When a Truth is once proved, is it
not proved, notwithstanding all Objections? And will any Notwithstanding
unprove it again? Will your Notwithstanding show us there was a time in which
Men were not Men, nor acted like Men? Will it show us, that a thing which
cannot possibly be changed, may yet possibly remain not the same? Will it show
us, that a Cause can be without its Effect, or an Effect without its Cause?
Will it show us, that a thing can be and not be at once? Unless it can do such
Feats as these, you may keep your Notwithstanding to your self, for any Service
it will do you here: For all the Notwithstandings in the world cannot hinder a
thing which is true, from being true; nor the Proof which proves it to be true,
from being a Proof. Mr. G 's Proof shows, that Tradition from Father to Son is
an Infallible Conveyance of Faith, as plainly, as that Men are Men: And would
you persuade us with the Rhetoric of your Notwithstanding, that we do not see
what we see? Though you had brought twenty of them instead of one, we could see
nothing by them* but that you had a good Fancy; for they show us nothing of the
Object, nor offer at it. You show us not how the Operations of Human Nature
should be suspended in our present Case, nor any thing which should or could
suspend them, but would have us believe Men were prodigiously forgetful or
malicious, purely for the sake of an Imagination of yours. I pray rub up afresh
your old Logical Notions, and reflect whether it were ever heard of in
University Disputes, that when an Argument is advanced, the Defendant is
allowed to make Objections against it; and instead of Answering, bid the Arguer
prove his Conclusions to be true, Notwithstanding all his Objections? Consider
how perfectly this confounds the Offices of the Disputant and Defendent, and
makes all Regular Discourse impossible. Consider how this new Method of yours
destroys the very possibility of ever concluding any thing, that is, the very
Faculty of Reasoning; For Objections being generally multipliable without end,
if all of them must be Solved e're any Argument concludes, nothing will be
concluded, nor any Conclusion admitted: And so a long so Farewell to Rational
Nature. Consider that Truth is built on its own Intrinsecal Grounds, and not on
the Solving Objections. For your own Credits sake then with Learned Men and
Logicians, do not seek to evade with Notwithstandings, but Answer fairly and
squarely to the Argument as it lies: Consider, that who has found the Cause,
has found the Effect. Mr. G. has found us a Cause of Infallible Conveyance, and
therefore has showed us an Infallible Conveyance. You pretend, that though there
was the Cause, there was not the Effect; and this it is known beforehand cannot
be, and you knew it as well as any body: But you knew likewise there was no
saving your Stakes without playing a new Game; and therefore, give you your
due, did all that could be done, in trying to divert our sight from a Matter
plain before us, and amuse us us with a Matter of Fact, which you are sure will
be obscure enough, by that time it is handled long enough. The Terms you put,
viz. Tradition, Error, and the Greek Church, must needs bring into Dispute,
whether such and so many Quotations, or some one or two Men disclaiming their
Tenet to be a Novelty, be a Proof of Tradition from Father to Son; whether the
Error be any Error; and whether, and for how much, an Error in Faith, and how
much of it belongs to Divinity; whether the Greek Church be engaged by a
Citation from a Greek Author; of two that be cited, one against another, which
shall be preferred, and thought to speak the sense of his Church; and which is
a Latiniz'd, which a frank Grecian. And who shall see through the Mists which
these Disputes will raise? More too will fall in in process of time: There will
be wrangling about the sense of Words, the propriety of Phrases, the preference
of Readings, and twenty such important quarrels; which will tire out every
body, and satisfy no body. In short, you saw that if you could persuade People
not to think the Church of Rome Infallible, till all be said, which will occur
to be said of the Greek Church, you are safe enough; For Doomsday will come
before that day. Till then you may carry it with a show of Erudition, because
there must be abundance of Greek cited. And this is all which can come of your
Instance; and I wish it were not all you had in your Eye.

31. In the mean time you have not answered Mr. G. because you have found no
fault in any Proposition, or in the Inference of his Argument; and therefore it
rests with you to answer it. He has answered you; because he has found this
fault with your Instance, which you make your Antecedent, that it is not true;
and that the Greek Church did not at once err in Faith, and adhere to
Tradition: and therefore it rests again with you to prove it; and yet while you
are Debtor both ways, you call upon him to pay. Ere we part, Take this along
with you, that the Debt which you are precisely bound to satisfy, first is to
answer his Argument, and till you do this, you can claim no right to Object or
Argue.

I am SIR Your humble Servant.

The Second Catholic Letter; OR, REFLECTIONS ON THE Reflecters Defense OF Dr.
Stillingfleet's First Letter to Mr. G. Against the ANSWER To the Arguing Part
of it.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Holbourn. 1687.

TO THE READER.
PErhaps it has scarce been seen hitherto, that all our Polemical Contests were
reduced within so narrow a compass. My First Letter insisted chiefly on Two
short Discourses: Whereof the one undertook to show the Nullity of the Rule of
Faith, claimed by Dr. St. and his Protestants. The other the Absolute Certainty
of the Catholic Rule; and the whole Controversy was, in short, about the
Certainty or Uncertainty of Christian Faith. Both of those Discourses were
presumed by us to be Conclusive; and so we offered a fair Advantage to our
Adversary, if he could show clearly any of our Propositions was false, or their
Connection slack. Hence I had good hopes that Reply of mine would have brought
our Controversy very near an end, had Dr. St's Return been suitable to our
Attempts. Especially, it had brought the Business to a Crisis, had he been
pleased to show the Absolute Certainty of his Rule, or of his Faith, as
grounded on that Rule, which was justly expected. But Error Nonplust has
already convinced the World, That the bringing any Dispute to Principles or
Grounds, agrees not with their Constitution who have none. While our
Expectations were thus raised, no News could we hear of Dr. St. An Answer comes
out from another hand; not very obliging to him in my opinion, whether he were
or were not preacquainted with it: For if he were (and it is hard to imagine
that a Piece writ in his Defense had not both his Direction, Inspection, and
Approbation) People will suspect he foresaw what would come of it, and was glad
the Shame should fall on another; and that he has but little Kindness for his
Friend, whom he suffers to Write on this manner. If he were not, they will
suspect his Friends have as little Kindness for him, and less Regard, who
manage his Cause without his Privity. However it be, the Answer affords no work
for a Replier, but the most ungrateful one in the World; to be perpetually
telling men of their Faults, without the least hopes of doing them good, or
contributing to their amendment; They being of such a nature, that they are our
Adversaries most necessary supports in their unlucky circumstances. And indeed,
the whole Piece seems to have no other Design, but to bring the Dispute into a
Wrangle. Yet this Profit may be hoped, that every moderate Judgment will see by
the very methods we take, which side desires and sincerely endeavors that
Truth may appear. It would be much a greater, if Dr. St. or whom he pleases to
employ, would plainly show the Second Letter, P. 14.
Absolute Certainty which he says they have; or else plainly confess they have
it not. But this is not to be hoped. Yet I entreat the Reader, because I
distrust my own Credit, to solicit him (if he thinks it not too dangerous for
him) to do the one or the other; and in doing it, to use as much Reason as he
will, and as little Laughing as he can. We are sufficiently satisfied of his
faculty of Risibility, and would be glad to see a touch or two of his
Rationality.

REFLECTIONS ON Dr. St's Reflecters Defense Addressed to Himself.
1. I Enquire not, Sir, since it concerns me not to know, why you would needs
become a Party, or rather an Advocate in a Cause, depending between Dr. St. and
another. If it were desired of you, you are to be excused, so you perform well
what you undertook; that is, to defend the Dr. especially his Logic, and his
Absolute Certainty; But if you had nothing to draw you in, besides the Weight
of what you had to say, I think you might very well have kept out. You begin
like a man of Art, with prepossessing your Reader against your Adversary, and
in favor of your self: and so would have me pass for a pleasant, artificial,
deluding Companion; and your self for a man, Godly even to scruple, and who
cannot barely repeat the Metaphor (of holding ones Cards) without P. 2.
asking Pardon. The Reader will find, by your writing, to which of us your
former Character is most like. In the mean time, I own the Confidence of
talking of Self-evidence, and Absolute Certainty, and Infallibility; and bless
the Mercy of God, for making me of a Communion, in which that Language is
Proper; and humbly pray Him to preserve me from the Face (if I must not say
Confidence) of setting up for a Guide without them. For, between a blind Guide,
and one who sees not his way, I think the difference is not great. Much good
may your Modesty do you; your Obscurity; your Uncertainty and Fallibility. If
your Conscience persuade you these are the best qualifications of Christan
Doctrine, and best Security which God would provide for the Souls of men, mine
would sooner use Twenty Metaphors, than persuade People to venture their
Eternity upon them. But, at worst, it is no greater fault in me sure, than in
Dr. St 's first Letter, p. 7. and second, p. 14.
Dr. St. to talk of Absolute Certainty. Unless he perhaps repent, and would be
content an unfortunate Word inconsiderately blurted out, should be retracted
for him by another, which it is not so handsome to retract himself; whereas I,
like a man of Confidence, meant what I said, and stand to it; and can have no
good opinion of those modest men, that say and unsay, as suits with the
occasion.

2. To fall to our Business, your Discourse has Three Parts. The First reflects
on what I said of turning Proof over from your Protestants to Catholics: The
Second pretends to answer my Argument; And the Third, Mr. G's. Some Gleanings
in your Language there are besides; but this is the main Crop. Upon the first
Point, since Proof does or does not belong to Protestants, there is nothing
more to be said to purpose, but either to show that Proof does not belong to
them, or to bring it if it does. But let us see how you handle the matter.

3. I had expressed my self to grieve and wonder there should be so little value
for Souls among your Party, as to send Men to the Tribunal of God, without
furnishing them with assurance that they can justify their Accounts themselves.

But if (say you) they may be assured they can give up a good account, P. 3.
may they not be assured that they have the Grace of God, and of their
Justification and Salvation? And then what becomes of the Council of Trent? Of
what Account do you speak, I beseech you? If, as I did, of an Account of Faith,
I hope you will not persuade us a man cannot know why he believes, without
knowing whether he be in the State of Grace, or sure of his Salvation; and
therefore, P. 4.
I hope you will not persist to think it hard to conceive how the bare
assurance of the Truth of what is taught, should enable a man to justify his
account, without an Assurance of Grace too; since his very Assurance of the
Truth which he believes is a Justification of his Account, for believing it. If
you speak of an Account of our whole lives, it becomes you huge well to talk of
my Confidence, who have your self the Confidence to turn things against the
plain Scope of my Discourse, against my plain Words, and (I much fear) against
your own Knowledge. For where the only Question was of the Certainty of
Protestant Faith, or (which is all one) of Christian Faith, upon your
Protestant Grounds: an Account why your Protestants believe, who cannot tell
whether Christ taught it, was the only Account that belongs to that Question.
But what needs more? Are not you, I too, fully persuaded, while we are writing
this very Controversy, that we maintain the Truth of our Faith by such
arguments as can justify us not to have failed of that Duty; and if we do so,
cannot both us justify our selves in that particular, and all who assent upon
them, to God as well as man? And cannot either of us bring a solid Argument to
prove that Christ Taught what we hold, without being assured beforehand we are
in the state of Grace, and shall be saved? Or, Is this any thing to the Council
of Trent, as you pretend? What paltring is this then, to pretend, that no
Controvertist can bring a Proof that concludes Christ Taught such a Doctrine,
and so justifies them that adhere to the Truth it evinces; for fear (forsooth)
of making men sure of their Justification and Salvation, and of contradicting
the Council of Trent. A pretty fetch, to excuse your selves from bringing any
Arguments worth a Straw to justify your Followers, for believing upon them!
Alas! you have store enough of them; but out of pure Conscience (we must think)
dare not produce them, for fear of enabling your People to justify themselves
for not believing rashly; or for fear of making them sure of their Salvation.

4. I had alleged farther, that till Protestants produce the Grounds which
prove their Faith to be True, it cannot with Reason be held Truth. You put my
Discourse first in my Words, only leaving out those which did not please you,
and then disguise it in your own, and laugh at it for being too plainly True:
For plain Truth, it seems, is a ridiculous thing with you; and you are of
opinion, that the more plain it is, that you ought to bring your Proofs, the
less you are obliged to bring them. Thence you start aside to tell us, that the
vulgar Catholic has less certainty than the vulgar Protestant; because the one
has only the Word of his Priest, the other has the Word of his Minister and the
Word of God in Scripture besides. Do you think Catholic Priests are at liberty
to tell the vulgar what Faith they please, as your Ministers may interpret
Scripture as seems best to their Judgment of Discretion! when you cannot but
know, they dare not teach them any Faith, but what the Church holds; nor does
the Church hold any but upon Tradition? Again, You do well to say your People
have it in Scripture, or in a Book; for they have it no where else. And you
know the vulgar Socinians and Presbyterians, and all the rest, have it as much
there, as your vulgar Protestants, notwithstanding all you have said, or can
say; and then, I suppose, you do not think they Truly have the Word of God on
their side, unless you think the Word of God says different things to different
Hearers. When you prove that you and your Ministers have any Certain means of
making it out, that the Sense, which by their explaining and catechizing they
put upon the Written Characters, is truly God's Meaning, you will do something,
make many Converts, and my self one among the rest: Till then, to possess your
vulgar Protestants with a Conceit of having the Word of God, is merely to
delude them. Sure you wanted a Commonplace to furnish out your Paragraph, or
else writ it in a Dream. For, P. 5.
to tell me, that Truth can depend no more upon the Saying of a Romish Priest,
than of an English Minister, when I tell you, it depends not on any private
man's Sayings, is not a Reply of a man well awake. In two words, Bring you
Proofs, say I; the Saying, that is, the No-proof of a Minister, is as good as
the No-proof of a Priest, say you; And the short and the long is; No Proof, I
thank you.

5. But two things, say you, follow from my Position, Ibid.
which you fear I will not grant. The First is, That if we cannot with Reason
hold a Truth till the Intrinsical Grounds of it be produced, we cannot with
reason hold any thing for a Truth, namely, because the Church of Rome has
determined it; for her Determination is no Intrinsical Ground of the Truth, but
only an outward Testimony or Declaration of it; and then what is become either
of her Infallibility or Authority to command our Faith! As slips of honest
Ignorance deserve compassion and instruction, and I do not know this to be any
more, I will be so charitable, as to set you right. Authority, amongst those
who already admit it for True, has Force to prove that to be Truth, which
depends on it, and will conclude against those who allow its veracity, if it be
shown to be engaged against them. But it has not this Effect upon Human Nature
by its proper Power as it is mere Authority; but, because Intrinsical Mediums
justify it to be worthy to be relied on. Whence, let that Authority come into
dispute, it will lose it is Credit, unless it can be proved by such Mediums to
deserve what it pretends to. And, hence, you see we go about to demonstrate the
Infallibility of the Church's Human Authority, in deriving down Christian
Faith. To clear this farther, I advance this Fundamental Position; viz. No
Authority deserves any Assent farther than Reason gives it to deserve: And,
therefore, without abating any thing of our respect, we may affirm, that the
Authority of the whole Catholic Church would be no greater than that of an old
Woman, (or one of your sober Enquirers) were there no more Reason to be given
for believing the former, than there is for believing the later. And
consonantly to this Doctrine, we declare to you, that, When Dr. St. comes to
argue, either out of Authority of Writers, or Instances depending on their
Authority, against Tradition; he shall be pressed to make out by Intrinsical
Mediums they are Absolutely Certain; or they shall deservedly be looked upon
and contemned as Inconclusive. By this time, I hope, you see that All Truths
are built on Intrinsical Mediums; and, that whereas you apprehended they would
overthrow our Church's Testimony or Authority, such Mediums (in case we produce
them) are the best means to establish it, and give it force upon our selves and
others: As also, how it comes that the Church can oblige to Belief: which is
not by a dry commanding our Faith, as you apprehend; but by having its Human
Authority so solidly grounded upon Reason, that it self becomes a Motive able
to beget, according to the best Maxims of Rational Nature, such an Assent in
us, to this matter of Fact, that Christ and his Apostles taught such Doctrins.
But, what a put off is this? We say Truth is not therefore Truth, because of
men's bare Sayings or Authority; and therefore demand your Proofs from
Intrinsical Mediums, (for thither it must come, e're it be known for Truth) to
make out what you pretend; Your Answer, in effect, is, You are afraid to do it,
lest you should destroy our Church's Infallibility and Authority. How much is
our Church in your Debt, that the Care of Her makes you careless of those Souls
in your own Church, to whom you owe this satisfaction.

6. The second thing you fear I will not grant, is, A Judgment of Discretion to
common People, P. 5.
with which they may discern the Intrinsical Grounds of Truth. You gave your
self at first the Character of a scrupulous man; and I see by this, you have a
mind to maintain it. You know, that those who write and print, can have no
design their Books should not be read; and you know those that read, will and
must judge of what they do read; and yet your scrupulosity can fear I will not
allow the Common People to judge of the Intrinsical Grounds of Truth, who take
pains they may judge, put it into their power to judge, and out of my own, and
so cannot hinder them, though I would. Indeed, I think it no great sign of a
Judgment of Discretion, to pretend to discern the Truth of Faith, by Lights
that do not show it to be True; and, upon such a Judgment I wish and labor
People should not venture their Souls. But I disallow no other Judgment of
Discretion; full well knowing, that the more Judgment a man has, and the more
he uses it, the sooner and better he will discern, that the Doctrine of Christ
cannot be securely learnt from those of Your and Dr. St's Principles. But, Why
all this? Or, How come I to stand in your way? Do I hinder you from showing
Protestants that They are Certain of their Faith? They allow a Judgment of
Discretion, if it stick there, whether I do or no. But you cannot gratify
Catholics with Proof, it seems, because they are against Judgment of
Discretion; nor Protestants, because they are for it; that is, in plain terms,
you will not prove the Certainty of your Faith at all. You conclude very
conformably, that I P. 6.
have set us all on even Ground: Yes, most Mathematically even: For I set
Absolute Certainty on the one side, and Uncertainty on the other; and this, in
your Language, is even Ground.

P. 6.
7. Your next Paragraph says, I fall upon the Certainty of Protestant Faith;
which I hope easily to overthrow. The Reader cannot but apprehend now, that I
am making Arguments against it, of which you know very well I did not think.
Where do I fall upon this Matter! Why, I said, Suppose Mr. G. could not prove
Protestants are certain, are they therefore certain? The meaning of which words
is clearly this, that the Certainty of Protestant Faith must depend on their
own Proofs for it, not on any Man's being able or not able to prove the
contrary, which is what Dr. St. would have put upon us. So that (to avoid
proving, which was demanded) you put upon me the direct contrary to what I
affirmed, viz. That the Certainty of Protestant Faith does depend upon our not
proving they have none; whereas I contend it does not depend upon it. What
shifts are you put to, that you may escape this dangerous business of proving
your Faith Certain. Well, but did I say true, or no? You trouble not your Head
with such impertinent thoughts, but fall to prophecy what I imagined. This
(say you) he first imagins, that all the certainty of our Faith is this, That
Papists cannot prove it to be uncertain, and that then I make sport with my own
Imagination. Better and better! Not to take notice of your shuffling in, that
Papists cannot prove Protestants are not Certain, which I am very far from
imagining; because I said our not-proving the contrary, is no Certainty to
Protestants, he will have me imagine it is their Certainty; nay, All their
Certainty: when he knows I am aware, and confess they pretend to Scripture for
it; and, p. 26. urged them to make out they had Absolute Certainty by It. The
rest is, to tell me I play, and you will be serious: And your way of being
serious, when you have chosen to fall upon this Question, whether Protestants
become Certain by our not proving them Uncertain, is, without saying a word to
it, to skip to another Paragraph of mine.

8. Where I had said, that Any man may find it confessed to his hand, by
Protestants, that they have no Absolute Certainty of their Faith: For which I
cited Dr. Tillotson. And you tell me first, that Dr. Tillotson is an excellent
man; and so he is; for he excells even your self (which requires a great Talent
in your way of handling Controversy) in all your Arts. Next, to take your turn
in imagining, you imagine single Dr. Tillotson too many for all the Traditionary
Catholics to answer his Rule of Faith. P. 6.
And I imagine, that Dr. Tillotson knows the contrary: For I have been informed,
Dr. Tillotson had the offer of an Answer, from a Traditionary Catholic long
ago, upon condition he would contribute his Credit to get it printed: which he
thought not sit to do. Since I perceive you do not know an Answer when you see
it, unless the word [ Answer] be in the Title Page, I will not tell you it is
answered already, though I believe I can make it good: But I will venture a fair
Wager with you, it will be answered, in his own Formal way, every jot as soon
as Reason against Railery. Lastly, You deny that this Confession That
Protestants have no Certainty (no Absolute Certainty, P. 7.
if it please you) of their Faith, is to be found in the pages cited, or any
other part of Dr. Tillotson's Book. If you do not understand English, I cannot
help it; but any one that does, may find in the last of the pages cited. As far
as silence gives consent, it is owned by Dr. Tillotson himself: See Reason
against Railery, p. 97. to p. 114.
For it was laid before him by Reason against Railery, and with him it has lain
these fifteen Years; and yet you would persuade us you see it not, Ibid.
nor I neither, if I may be believed against my self.

9. Your Rhetoric, Sir, is very great, if it will do you this piece of
Service; but let us hear it however. I had said to Dr. St. p. 23. My First
Letter, p. 23.
You seem to grant you are thus Absolutely-Certain or Infallible, by virtue of
Tradition. Upon which Theme you thus declame. How? confess we have no Certainty
(no Absolute Certainty, I beseech you again) and yet seem to grant we are
Infallible, and that too by Virtue of Tradition. -- Some people had need of
good Memories. As if it were so strange a thing for Protestants to contradict
one another, or the same man himself; or, that there needed Memory to observe
what passes every day. By the favor of your Exclamations, Dr. St. did say at
the Conference, Dr. St's second Letter, p. 14.
that They are Absolutely Certain, that they now hold all the same Doctrine that
was taught by Christ and his Apostles, -- by the Divine Revelations contained
in the Writings of the New Testament; and of those Revelations by the Universal
Testimony of the Christian Church. Ibid. p. 15.
And in his First Letter he did desire Mr. G. to prove that they have no
Absolute Certainty as to the Rule of their Faith, Dr. St's First Letter, p. 7.
although they have a larger and firmer Tradition for it than we can have for the
points of Faith in difference. And Dr. Tillotson did say in his Rule of Faith,
p. 118. We are not infallibly certain that any Book (speaking of Scripture) is
so ancient as it pretends to be, or that it was written by him whose Name it
bears; or, that this is the sense of such and such passages in it: It is
possible all this may be otherwise. Now, if one of those Writers do not seem to
grant that they are Absolutely Certain, (or Infallible) and that too by virtue
of Tradition, and the Other confess, that they have no Absolute Certainty of
their Faith, English is no intelligible Language in England. If you think this
a Contradiction, you may talk with your excellent men about it, and let me
alone; till you can show I talk against my self by relating barely what others
say. Must my Memory be blamed, when their Judgments are in fault? For a
Contradiction it is, if Absolutely Certain and Infallible be the same; which I
both proved formerly, and it will come into play again e're long. However I
only said they seemed to grant, etc. For the Tenet of Faiths Uncertainty, if I
may speak what I think, is hearty in them; it is Absolute Certainty is but
seeming; and surely, it is lawful to say he seems to hold it, who in print avows
it, whether he do indeed hold it or no.

10. From hence you pass to a company of Traditionary Gentlemen; with whom if
you have business, P. 7.
I have none, and think yours cannot be very great, since you take this time to
dispatch it. You may dispatch with me, if you please, first; and say what you
will to them afterward. Dr. Tillotson, you say, in his Rule of Faith, p. 120.
etc. said great matters of them, and if I find them wronged, I have the liberty
to vindicate them. I know you would invent twenty impertinent Tasks for me, so
I would but forget the point in hand, and excuse you from proving. But how
careless are you of what you say. One of those Authors was occasionally
vindicated in the Letter of Thanks, and the notorious Abuse of him, made good
against that Dr's Excuse, in Reason against Railery, p. 227. to p. 234. And
were it seasonable, perhaps we should find the others abused too, or wilfully
misunderstood. But, What is this to our present business? At last, you conclude
with a seasonable Warning, as you call it; That, Ibid.
if any Protestant shall begin to plead Infallibility by Virtue of Tradition,
it will behove Catholics in time to seek cut a new one. Why so, I beseech you!
This is as much as to say, that, as soon as Protestants take a fancy to any
thing that belongs to Catholics, it is their own, and Catholics must
presently yield it up. Your reason is, because When both Parties pretend alike
to Infallibility and Tradition, neither of these can be any longer a fit Medium
to prove which is in the Right. What will be when both pretend alike, we shall
see when the Time comes. But, Why must they, or how can they pretend alike? Can
Tradition infallibly deliver contrary things? Why should Tradition be a Medium
less fit to determine between Catholic and Protestant, which of them has right
to Infallibility, when both pretend to it by Tradition, than a Deed to
determine between Peter and Paul, which has right to the Estate, which both
claim by the same Deed? Do their contrary Pretenses hinder it from being seen
whether the Deed be for Peter or Paul; or Tradition for Catholics or
Protestants? Or do you think a Protestant, to get Tradition on his side, has no
more to do, but to pretend to it. At this rate, Scripture cannot be a fit
Medium for you, because all Heretics pretend to it, and alike too. But it
seems, that with you, when two pretend, One with Right, the Other without it,
they both pretend alike, or with equal Title. Of which it was, indeed,
seasonable to warn us; for neither we, (nor any man well in his wits) would
have hit on it of our selves. Thus much in return to your present Excursion.
But what is become of your Proof all this while? Instead of bringing that, you
tell me, I fall upon Protestant Certainty, of which there was not the least
show; that I speak against my self; that Dr. Tillotson is an Excellent man,
that he did not confess, etc. Out of which rambling Talk we are to conclude,
That your Protestant Proof needs not appear; but to make us amends for this
constant Neglect, you will needs give us a seasonable Warning; and that is worth
all the Proof in the World.

11. Yet we shall have this Proof, I hope, in the next Paragraph: For you give
me notice then, When your Certainty (Absolute Certainty, P. 8.
I pray you again for Dr. Stillingfleet's sake) is once proved, no more is
needful to confute our Infallibility, and that you are not afraid to undertake
making it good, even All that I here call upon you to prove. And you do not
raise our Expectations sure only to defeat them. Yet it bodes ill, that you
would have the word [ Absolutely] left out a while: A motion which would make a
jealous man suspect you had a design to palm a Certainty upon us which will
prove no-Certainty. But you are Absolute Master of your own Proofs, and may put
in and put out what you please. I, for my part, cannot consent to leave that
word out; because it is not fair to alter a word of Dr. St's; nor possible,
though it were fair. For you and I cannot make him not have said what he has
said; and, though we should agree to suppress that Word amongst our selves, it
will still be found in his Two Letters, do what we can. But, now we are thus
far onward, it is pity to break for a single Word; and to give you your due, you
begin to deal here very fair with us. We manifest, say you. Very well: Now the
Business is on the Hinges again; and here is not only Proof, but Manifest Proof
coming. But what is it which you manifest? Why, the Certainty you have of
Scripture; Ibid.
and that, after the same manner as we do our* Rule or Scripture, I know not
which you mean. But, I see you need a good Memory too as well as your
Neighbors: For you do not remember that Absolute Certainty of Scripture is not
the Point to be proved, though I told you so in the very page you cite. I waved
that point, not to be more severe than needs and put Protestants upon a Task
which I told them withal They would find a hard one; but from which, while we
both agree that Scripture is Certain, I was willing to excuse them. Again, You
forget that just before you wondered at me for saying, You seem to grant you
are thus Absolutely Certain or Infallible by virtue of Tradition; and now you
say, you manifest your Certainty in the same manner as we do; and sure you do
not forget, that Our manner of manifesting is by Tradition. But, to lose no
more time about that which is not the point, pray How do you prove that which
is*

P. 9.
12. Why, you think you do sufficiently prove the Certainty of every Article of
your Faith, when you show it to be solidly grounded on God's Word; and, this
being shown, wonderful things will follow. In the mean time you speak Oracle,
and have all the reason in the world to think that you prove sufficiently, when
you solidly show: Neither did you need to mince it with sufficiently, for it is
very Absolutely Certain you do prove when you solidly show or prove; and this
you might have said with less Ceremony if you had been pleased: For we can see
well enough, that when there is Proof, there is Proof; though our Expectation had
not been screwed up with your professions of Courage to undertake, or Shows to
perform. This is just to invite your Company, say Grace to them, tell them you
think you treat them sufficiently, when you set Solid Meat on the Board; and,
all this done, send them hungry away. Pray, when will that When of yours be?
When will the day come, in which you will show your Faith to be
solidly-grounded on the Word of God? Every Article, as you word it, (to bring
it, I suppose, to your solid Endless way of Quoting and Criticizing) is too
much at present. We are not got so far yet: It will be time to talk of This or
That Article, when This or That Article is in Question. At present, you are to
show, if you can, that you have any Means, unless you take Ours to ground any
Article solidly on the Word of God. You are to show your interpretation of it
is Absolutely Certain, and that God's Word means as you teach it does.
Otherwise your Confident Talking will not hinder us from seeing that you
wretchedly delude your Followers; while you are your selves truly Uncertain,
whether any thing you teach them be True, and Conscious that you are so.

13. And yet, though you have served us thus, you have a fetch to lay the blame
upon me, for being harder to you than the Laws of Disputation are. I will have
them, P. 9
he says, prove two things more: First, that they are absolutely certain of All
This. By the way, I take for granted, that by All This, you mean All which Dr.
St. affirmed, which was All of which I desired Proof. And Secondly, Not only
this, but of All that more which Our Savior taught his Apostles. Of this
Charge I own the first half. I did demand proof of Absolute Certainty, and that
for All This; and shall persist to demand it, till you show me the
Disputation-Law-Book, which allows a Disputant to say what he pleases, and
choose whether he will prove it or no when he has done. Dr. Stillingfleet did
affirm, that You are Absolutely Certain; and, absolutely Certain that you now
hold All the same Doctrine that was Taught by Christ and his Apostles. And of
All this, Dr. St's second Letter, p. 14.
all the Laws of Disputation that I ever read or heard of, warrant me to demand
proof: And you shall permit me to believe there was something in the Wind,
besides those Laws, which makes you decline to give it. I had been Logician
good enough, if you had known how to have proved. Yes, but I make
Absolutely-Certain and Infallible all one. I make them all one! Why, all
Mankind made them so before I was born. Take all the Men who pretend to
Absolute Certainty, and all the ways by which they pretend; Authority,
Demonstration, Sense, Experience, or what you will; and see whether all Mankind
agree not, that when there is room for Deceit, there is no Absolute Certainty;
and let a man pretend to be Absolutely Certain as much as he will, if he be, or
may be deceived, he will be but laughed at for his pains, and not thought
Absolutely Certain by any man in the World, no not by your Reflecting self. And
yet you would persuade us I break the Laws of Disputation by understanding that
Word as every body else does. Certainly, you would make a pleasant Lawmakers
for Disputation: For when you have forbid us to understand words as others do,
we could dispute no longer, nor so much as converse; for there would be no
knowing one another meaning.

14. But if I take that word ill, how must I do to take it well? Not to mistake
a second time, I would be glad to know how your self take it, who to be sure
take it right. But this you keep to your self; and you have reason, if by
Absolutely Certain you mean not Absolutely Certain, which I suspect is the true
case; and must be, unless you would have it mean nothing. Otherwise, why might
not we know what you will let it mean, if you will not let it mean what I and
every body else think it does. Since you leave me to my self, I shall, at the
hazard of incurring again the Penalties of your Laws of Disputation, venture to
think that He, who will not suffer those who are Absolutely Certain to be
Infallible, will have them Fallible; that is, Deceivable in that whereof they
are Absolutely Certain; and for ought they can tell, actually deceived. And
then he will have Protestants believe that their Religion is the same that is
taught by Christ, stand firm, and draw over to it as many as they can, and vex
and persecute their Neighbors whom they cannot; prefer it before the Unity of
the Church, and keep up differences in Religion with as much jealous Concern,
as if the Wall of Division in the Church were the only safe Fence of the
Nation; in a word, stake their Souls and Eternity upon it: When, all the while,
he cannot Absolutely tell whether it be True or No; nay, knows he cannot. Let
him honestly tell Protestants so; and if they will venture Persecution, and
Schism, and Salvation on those terms, the Fault is their own, and he has washed
his Hands: Otherwise, he deludes them shamefully. If they waver, and stand upon
Security, they are told, they are Absolutely Certain, and this confirms them;
for it is as good Security as Heart can wish: But, when it comes to be sifted,
it appears they may be deceived for all their Security; and their
Absolutely-Certain Religion proves to be such as perhaps is arrantly False. In
short, they have a bare Sound to rely upon for their Souls. Call their Security
Absolutely Certain, and it is good Protestant Doctrine; but call it Infallible,
(which is the same) and it is rank Popery, and your Protestants will none of it.
And so, they may if they will, and must if they will continue to be of your
principles, be content with Sounds: But, if they will stand upon Security from
Deceit, they must look for it where it is to be had: With all they can get
here, it remains They may be Deceived.

15. The second-half of your Charge is purely your own Invention, and as
pleasant an Invention as ever roving Fancy suggested. Absolute Certainty of
Protestant Faith was turned by Dr. St. to Absolute Certainty of Scripture.
Since then, Protestants believe more than that Scripture is Scripture, I said,
they were to prove their Absolute Certainty of the more which they believed
besides. You have taken such extraordinary pains to mistake me, as plainly as I
expressed my self, that you fancy I would have them say they are thus certain of
those Points which they deny to be in Scripture, and think them to be added by
the Council of Trent, and which, therefore, they believe not. And these Points
you understand to be the more of which I demanded Proof; and so by your power
in Reflection, to desire Proof of what they do believe, is to desire Proof of
what they do not believe: Absolute Certainty of what is their Faith, is
Absolute Certainty of what is not their Faith; and their not-Faith is their
more-Faith. Ridiculous Folly! To pretend we expected Protestants should prove
to us such Points as they denied, and our selves held; whence they could need
no Proof to us; and if they needed any to others, it was certainly our proper
Duty, not theirs, to produce them. Many, when they are hard put to it, have
waved the consideration of Shame, but it is a sad thing utterly to renounce
Common Sense too. Yet, what is it you will not do? What absurd pretenses not
lay hold of, rather than be brought to this odious and dangerous thing called
Proving? You reflect out your Paragraph with the H. Scripture, the good men,
who penned it, with the Primitive Church, and Primitive Creeds, and the Council
of Trent, and this you call Reflecting on my Letter.

16. Yet you set a good face on it at p^r^ing, and tell us, You decline no Proof
that is incumbent on you; as if it were not incumbent on you to prove what you
say. You add, That we see by this time -- as if there were any thing to be seen
in all your Reflections, but that they decline all Proof, and that with the
most awkward shifts in the World, as, Because the Council of Trent had made a
Declaration concerning Grace, p. 3. Because a Minister is as good a man as a
Priest, p. 4. Because the Infallibility and Authority of the Church of Rome
might run a risque, p. 5. Because Catholics and Protestants hit it not about
Judgment of Discretion, Ibid. Because Dr. Tillotson is an Excellent man, p. 6.
Because we will not dispense with the word [ Absolute] which was Dr. St's, but
will needs take it in its natural sense, and not admit of your no-sense of it,
Ibid. These and many other such weighty Reflections have been our chief
entertainment; and yet your scrupulous Modesty has the Confidence to say you
decline no Proof that is incumbent on you, P. 11.
when you have incumb'd all the while, if that be the word, on nothing but
throwing out Baits to draw us from your incumbent Proof, to other matters. You
talk indeed of Proof at last; and that which you say of it, is, That you prove
when you prove. Moreover, you blame me for desiring Proof of two things more;
whereof One is the very thing your selves have made the point to be proved, and
the other I never desired you to prove at all. With this stuff you face it out,
Ibid.
that You prove Scripture to be the Word of God; which, if one should put you
to it, you cannot; and every Article of your Faith by the Scripture (common
words, which every Heretic may and does use); when I have been all this while
soliciting with all the earnestness I can, to know which way you can prove any
Article with Absolute Certainty by Scripture; and you will not tell me, and I
am sure, cannot. Though you have the Confidence to say you do it, yet every
body may perceive you know you cannot. For your very next words are, Thus we
prove we have sufficient Certainty of our whole Faith; which is to say, You
decline Dr. St's Absolute Certainty, nor know of any way to prove more than
sufficient Certainty. And this sufficient Certainty of yours may be
no-Certainty: For there goes no more to make a thing sufficient, than to make a
man content with it. A Yard of Cloth will make a sufficient Garment for him who
is content to go half naked; and a Table without Meat is a sufficient Meal for
him who is contented to fast. And so, as long as you can prevail with your
Protestants to be content without Certainty, you can prove they have Certainty
abundantly Sufficient, because no-Certainty will suffice. Marry, if they will
insist upon having at least this Sufficient Certainty which you promise, I know
not how you will do without Weights and Scales to weigh out your Certainty,
according to several men's Exigencies, and make down-weight Sufficient, except
they will take your word; for you have no more to give them even for so much:
But, for Absolute True Certainty, the only Certainty of which Dr. Stillingfleet
spoke and I demanded Proof, They must absolutely excuse you. Poor Protestants,
to be thus used! That Empty Words and solemn Outsides, and Confident Noise,
should be offered to them for Truth, and, which is more deplorable, pass upon
them! That they should not yet perceive they are but the Stratagems of those
no-principled men, who impose on them, and secretly laugh at them for their
Easiness; and yet reflect not that they must answer one day with their souls,
for suffering themselves to be so imposed upon.

17. From your Proving Talent you pass to your Answering Talent; and will try
to answer a Discourse of mine, in which there are but See my first Letter, P.
30.
Five Propositions. The First, [ God has left us some way to know surely what
Christ and his Apostles taught.] This you grant to be a Certain Truth: and so
there is one step of our Journey made. I think you grant the second too, not
that you positively say I or No; for that is too precise and dull a Method for
a Man of your parts: But as Plain Truth seems always ridiculous to you; you
laugh at it for a foolish Inference, because it is so visibly in the Antecedent.
You are not aware I perceive, that your Raillery is Complement. To be contained
in the Antecedent, which you make the Fault, is the Praise of an Inference;
without which it would indeed be good for nothing, or rather not be at all. For
which way can an Inference be drawn from an Antecedent, in which it was not to
be drawn? Would you have us draw Wine out of an empty Cask, or Beer out of a
Jarr of Oil. Again, the more we know the thing is where we would draw it, the
surer our Draught. But you seem to be so little acquainted with Antecedents and
Inferences, that it is no wonder; by making them your sport, you make your self
the sport of those who do understand them. In the mean time your laughing is
owning that the Inference is contained in the Antecedent, and therefore
Certain, as you before owned the Antecedent was. And so we are another step
onwards; and might so forwards without stopping longer, if you could have let
my Proposition alone. But, you must needs be wording on it your own way, to show
that either you did not understand it, or that you had a mind to inform us how
neatly and dexterously you could change and pervert words, as well as Answer.
My Words were: Therefore this way must be such that they who take it, shall
arrive by it at the End it was intended for; that is, know surely what Christ
and his Apostles taught. Your Words which you pretend equivalent to mine, are
these: P. 12.
[ If God has left us a Way to know, then by that Way we may know.] Pray Sir,
do You take my sense, or say what I do? Is shall know and may know all one? I
say that they who take the Way left by God shall, that is, cannot choose but
know; as he cannot choose but draw a straight Line, who draws it by a straight
Rule; and he cannot choose but come to London who goes on the Right Way thither:
If either could miss, provided they draw by the Rule, and travel on in the
Road; the Rule of the One is not straight, nor the Way of the other Right. And,
so, I make account that the Way to know the Faith of Christ, is not a Right
Way, if those who take it can fail to know their Faith; and therefore not the
Way left by God. You barely say, we may know with which it consists we may not
know; and, so, you make us a Way in which they who travel may be always out of
the Way; which is well enough for a Way of your making; but it is certainly no
Way of God's making; for it is plainly no Way. But leaving this little trial of
your skill; that which you say to my Proposition (unfalsifyed) if you say any
thing is, that it is, indeed a little too visibly, but yet true, and so we may
go on.

18. You Preface to the Third Proposition with asking, who I dispute against?
and why if I would be thought to dispute against you, I do not use such and
such Terms? Two very pleasant Questions! Your own and my Title Page tell as
many as see them that I am disputing against D. of Paul's; and yet you stand
enquiring after the secret again, to ask why I do not use Terms to your mind,
is to ask why the Defendant does not go to the Plaintiff to draw his Answer.
You shall excuse me from being beholding to you, if you please; till you have a
better knack at making Arguments, for your self, you shall make none for me, by
my consent. But, where lies the Quarrel? You do not sure expect I should write
to your liking; and if you think I speak not against you, and your party, you
need not trouble your self with what I say. What does not touch you, cannot
hurt you; so you may say concedo totum, and rest secure by being unconcerned.
Yet you speak at last, and not till then, to purpose; when you bear the Reader
in hand I pack the Cards, P. 13.
and you will play fair; it is that must carry the Cause, or nothing. To get the
Readers Affection on his side much imports him, who has nothing but such little
Rhetorical tricks to trust to.

19. But, as if I had not the gift of Prophesy to foresee with what a kind of
Man I should have to do, I happened to propose first what I intended to prove,
before I went about to prove it, which I thought was the clearest way. You at a
venture take what comes first, and though you saw it was my Conclusion which I
inferred from the following Proposition, will needs speak to it before you
speak to the Premises. This has so blunder'd all things, that the Reader will
not easily perceive what we are doing. I shall thefore, (as you should have
done) mind only the Proof here, and reserve the Inference till we come to the
place where I made it. I put then to be proved that [ Scripture's Letter
interpretable by private Judgments is not that Way] viz. the Way left by God;
and for my proof that [ we experience Presbyterians and Socinians, for example,
both take that Way [of private Interpretation] viz. and yet differ in such high
Fundamentals as the Trinity and Godhead of Christ.]

20. You, before you answer, would have it thought you might ridicule me in my
own Language. Never spare me, good Sir, nor balk your mirth for me if I give a
just Occasion: But where lies the Jest? Why, I quarreled with Dr. St. for
bringing an instance, and now bring one my self: If this be all, I shall be
tempted to be merry in my turn. My First Letter, p. 10.
I told Dr. St. he might undoubtedly have produced his Instance if he had been
arguing, but minded him that his turn was then to Answer, and that his Instance
was not an Answer, but a new Argument. And yet this is not plain enough for you
to see that I faulted not the Instance, but the unseasonable Argument, as I
should any other in such circumstances; and you would have it ridiculous in me
who am arguing to do what I only excepted against, because he was not arguing;
and freely acknowledged he might do, if he had been to argue. Sure you were in
a pleasant humor, when you thought of turning me into ridicule, because your
self understood not where the stress lay, though it were never so plainly told
you. But to let this pass, as you say, with your causelessly gleeking
Reflections upon Scripture and Tradition, what say you to the Proof I bring?

P. 15.
21. Why, the force of my Argument (say you) is this: If any men can be found
who wrest or misinterpret Scripture, then can it not be the Way to know what
Christ and his Apostles taught. One thing after another, if it please you. Talk
of the force of my Argument as much as you will, but, e're you leave the
Proposition before you, of the Presbyterians and Socinians, it is but fair to
grant or deny it. I must entreat you too to leave translating my Arguments.
They are New yet, and need no mending; when they do, I will be better satisfied
of your Skill in the Trade, before I become your Customer. By your next words,
rallying against the Validity of the Consequence, I guess you grant the
Antecedent; and so, that care being over, we have nothing but the Consequence
to mind. The Dispute would fall in more properly under the next Proposition
which infers the Consequent; but now I am here, I will hear what you say,
before I pass farther. You say then, That indeed this Argument proves nothing,
but that I have no good opinion of the Scripture. Will this venomous Cant never
be left? I think the Scripture too good and too sacred to be abused by wrong
Interpretations, and labor to preserve it from them: You labor to keep it
exposed to that Abuse; Pray, which of us two have a better Opinion and more
Reverence for the Scripture? You proceed: Must a Rule be no good Rule, because
some who use it misunderstand it and abuse it? What may you mean by this? I
take my Ruler, and draw a Line by it; Does the Straightness or Crookedness of
this Line depend upon my Understanding? What is it then you call
Misunderstanding a Rule? If you make the Letter of Scripture the Rule, and so
private Interpreting the Using it, or drawing the Line, and the Sense the Line
drawn; unriddle to us, if you can, how the Sense drawn from the Letter can any
more fail to be True, than the Line drawn by the Rule to be straight; and which
way that Sense can be misunderstood; and how the Rule can be a good Rule if it
be used, and the Sense to which it is a Rule be misunderstood? Or, do you mean
perhaps that it is with the Scripture as with a Grammar-Rule; where he who
understands not what it is for a Nominative Case and a Verb to agree, may make
false Construction, and yet the Rule be a good Rule. Though you should go thither
for your Notion of a Rule, we should be but where we were. For, as the
Grammar-Rule, let it be never so ill understood, will make good Construction in
case it be used; so the Scripture-Rule, if it be, as you put it, used, must
needs produce right sense. But the truth is, a Grammar-Rule is not a Rule till
it be understood; for he who understands not what it is for Cases and Verbs to
agree, has no Rule to make them agree: And, then, if you will make the Letter
of Scripture such a Rule, you will make the Letter first understood to be the
Rule of understanding it, and people misunderstand what they understand, and
the misunderstood Rule be a Rule, which is only a Rule by being understood. In
short, turn it which way you will, you will (to borrow an Expression) be much
beholden to the Reader to make Sense of what you say.

22. You question on; Must a Way be a wrong Way, because some that take it will
not keep it? P. 15.
Riddle my Riddle again. Pray, who are or can be those some who take it and
will not keep it? As long as they take it, they keep it, I think; and they keep
it not against their Wills sure. He who has no Will to keep it, may when he
pleases go out of it, but then he does no longer take it, and is none of the
some of whom the Question speaks, (for they all take it) and so we have nothing
to do with him. When all is done, the Will here is to no more purpose than the
Understanding before: For he who takes the Way, shall certainly arrive at his
Journeys end, let him Will what he pleases, and the Way must needs be a wrong
way if he do not. It Is great pity you are not in the right; You would save more
men than the Benefit of their Clergy: For the Thief in a Cart, upon the Way to
Tyburn, would never come there if willing not to keep that Way would keep him
from it. But by affirming that some take the Way who yet will not keep it, you
affirm that some do and do not Take it. And so Dr. St. is well holp up with a
Reflecter, who imagins we are talking of one, who only takes the Way at first,
and afterward leaves it; whereas it is plain, the Argument proceeds of such as
make the Way their Choice, and persist to follow no other to their life's End.

Ibid.
23. Lastly, You tell us, that Till it be proved God has left such a Way or
Rule, as no man can possibly err out of it, mistake it, or abuse it, etc. For
you must permit me to stop by the way, I am too short breathed to run over the
long period at a loose. But, let you alone to make all sure: You are safe
enough if all must go on your side, till some body prove to you that no man can
err out of the Way left by God, mistake or abuse it; that is, till some body
prove that Ways are Prisons out of which there is no escaping; or that the man
cannot possibly fall into Error who is out of the Way to Truth. As many as
leave the Catholic Church, leave the Way left by God; and you, like a right
pleasant man, would have it proved, that the thing cannot possibly be done
which we see is done by millions; and would have us, who say, they all do err
and mistake, prove they cannot. All this while I a little suspect you mean
otherwise than you say; and that by your words, Error, and Mistake, and Abuse
of the Way, you understand missing the End of the Way, Truth. But let us see
what you will make of it: What would you have proved next? Why That it is not
enough that God has left us such a Way or Rule, as men may understand and
observe if they be not wanting to themselves. What do you call being wanting to
themselves? I understand how a man that will not travel, or leaves a right and
takes a wrong way, is wanting to himself: but he who puts himself upon the Way,
continues on in it, and changes not his Road, is not wanting to himself in any
thing I can imagine, which belongs to the Way: And the way of this Traveller I
maintain against you, has not enough to be a Way, if it barely may, and yet may
not, bring him to his Journeys End. What will this come to at last? Why, till
these things be proved, It will not follow, that the Scripture's Letter, in the
sense you have owned it, is not the Way, though not only Presbyterians and
Socinians, but the greater number of Mankind should own it, and yet differ
about Fundamental Points contained in it. What you call the Sense which you own
of the Letter of Scripture, will come by and by. But will not that follow which
you say here will not? Will it not follow, that the Way by which a man that
goes in it comes to Error, is not the Way to Truth? Will it not follow, that
he who at his Journeys End finds himself at York, did not go the Way to London?
Pray, what is the Way to a Place? Is it not that Passage that he who has past
it, finds himself at that Place? And so the Way to know the Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, is it not the Means which he who has used knows that Doctrine?
Why then, since Presbyterians and Socinians both interpret by their private
Judgments, and one side knows not the Doctrine of Christ, it follows as
unavoidably, that the Way of private Interpretation is no sure way to know it,
as that he who has gone through the Strand, and finds himself at Charing Cross,
has not gone the way to Moorfields; That is, as certainly as that a Way is a
Way or Means to bring a man to such a Place.

24. What do you talk then of erring for, and mistaking and abusing the Way? Or
what do you mean? It Is true, those erring men do mistake the true Way, and for
that reason err. But they mistake not the Way which you say is the true Way.
They do interpret by their private Judgment, and so take, not mistake it; use,
not abuse it. Sure you mean that they mistake the Doctrine of Christ; and, so,
by mistaking the Way, you very wisely understand mistaking the End. And then,
what a man are you to contend their way is a Way, and a sure Way too, to bring
them to the Knowledge of Christ's Doctrine, when they pursue it and are not
brought to that Knowledge? And what Eyes have you who perceive not that
therefore it cannot be a sure way? Again, to what purpose do you tell us that
men may understand and observe (as if Observing concerned our Question of
Knowing) if they be not wanting to themselves? when they who take a right Way,
not only may, but must, and cannot possibly fail of coming whither it leads,
any more than the man who goes down the Strand, of coming to Charing Cross; and
when men have no more to do with a Way, but to travel in it; and so cannot be
wanting to themselves, in that respect if they do. Of the same batch is your
misunderstanding and not keeping the Way. As if they who interpret by their
private Judgments did not keep the way of interpreting by private Judgments.
And though their Understandings be none of the best when they take that for the
sure Way to understand by, yet that very misunderstanding is their
understanding it to be the Way; and so they, even in your opinion,
misunderstand not the Way, however they misunderstand by it. In fine, you amuse
us with a company of Words, which have a Sound; but either no sense at all, or
none to purpose: And it remains, that, because a Way must bring every one that
takes it to the End of that Way; and private Interpretation does not bring
Socinians to the sure Knowledge of Christ's Doctrine, which is the End; that,
therefore Private Interpretation of Scripture is not a way to know that
Doctrine surely.

25. And yet you can bear us in hand that this follows no more than it follows
that because we see men misinterpret and break good Laws daily, P. 16.
therefore those Laws are Unintelligible, or cannot be kept, and must be
thought insufficient to show them what the Lawgiver expects from them. What
breaking and keeping the Laws is brought in for, you best know that bring them
in. Our Discourse is only about knowing the Doctrine of Faith, and not at all
about Living up to it; and so has nothing to do with those who know, but will
not keep the Laws, as is the case of most Malefactors. But you end your
Discourse well I must needs say, and very sutably to all the rest, with an
Instance directly against your self. You see that Laws left to Private
Interpretation are, by all Mankind, judged insufficient, and public
Interpreters therefore set up every where; and, from the Parity with them which
are Insufficient, you conclude the Letter of Scripture is not Insufficient. Any
body but your self would have made another Use of this Instance. As God can
write much plainer than Men, when he thinks fit, and has more care of their
Salvation than they of their Temporal Concerns; another man would have
concluded that God did not intend their Salvation should depend on the
privately-interpretable Letter of the Divine Law, which he left less plain than
Men made the Letter of Humane Laws. But you, it seems, had a mind to make your
Discourse all of a piece. The best is, it is now ended, and we are free to pass
on to the fourth Proposition. To which, because the force of Exceptions against
an Inference before it be inferred appears not so well, I reserve what you say
against it, while I put it only to be proved.

26. It is this, Therefore Scriptures Letter interpretable by private Judgments
is not the way left by God to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught,
or surely to arrive at right Faith. And now I must look to my self, for you
pour out here your distinguishing Talent upon me. If, say you, by Scripture's
Letter, he means unsensed Characters, P. 13.
then I confess Scriptures Letter cannot be the Rule or Way. There is one
branch of your Distinction; and so the other, unless you will talk nonsense,
must needs be, Scripture's Letter, meaning sensed Characters, can be or is the
Rule. Your words are, Yet if he can think it reasonable to allow as much to the
Scripture as he expects we should allow to this Letter of his, that it contains
good sense expressed in words significant and intelligible; we deny his
Assumption that Scripture's Letter is not this way. As you have this Art, among
the rest, to talk unintelligibly, when you have a mind to it, in very plain
English, I wish some Body would tell me for you, whether you take scripture's
Letter in this period for unsensed or sensed Characters; for truly I cannot
tell my self. By the terms you put [ intelligible] and [ significant] one would
guess you mean unsensed Characters; for [ intelligible] imports what may be
understood, but is not yet; and [ significant] what may be perceived by the
sign, whether it be or no. And then you have made a fair hand of it with your
fair dealing, who distinguish the word [ Letter] into Characters unsensed and
Characters unsensed; and grant it to be a Rule in one of the two same meanings,
and deny it in the other. But you shall talk sense for me, and mean Characters
sensed; and then lets see how much you have mended the matter. A Character
sensed signifies a Character with the sense joined to it: The sense of the
Characters of Scripture is the sense of God, and the sense of God is that which
we are to believe. And, so, Scripture-Characters sensed; signify Faith it self
in conjunction with those Characters. Now Faith is the End to which we are
looking for a Way to carry us. To tell us then that scripture's Letters taken
for sensed Characters is this way, is to tell us that the end is the way to it
self; that the means to get Faith is to have it first; that, when we know it,
we know it; that, when we are at our Journeys End, we are in the direct Road to
it, and such fine things, which would tempt a man not very fond of disputing,
to leave it off and betake himself to some other business: For how can you or
any think fit to vex poor controversy all your life, when your very sense
proves Nonsense? And yet it is not that you have not served a Prentiship long
enough in the Mystery: But the best Shoemaker in the world cannot make a good
shoe of Bad Leather.

27. Yet, as you are not a man to be discouraged with ill success, you are at
your Distinctions again; and tell us that, if by these words, interpretable by
private Judgments, Ibid.
I mean the Scripture any way interpretable, as any private man may possibly
wrest the words to make them comply with his own sentiments, or through
Ignorance, and Laziness, and Neglect of such Helps and Means as are fit to be
used, may misunderstand them, I must have a very bad Conscience, etc. As if the
Question were about my Conscience. But you would say, I suppose that Scripture,
so meant, is not the Way, and I say it is not too. Pray, what Conscience is
yours, if mine be bad when I say as you do? P. 14.
But if my meaning be, that Scripture as it may be understood by a Private Man
of a competent Judgment, using such Helps as are proper, is not the Way, you
again deny my Assumption. Because it would render the Discourse unintelligibly
confused to repeat so many lines at every turn, I shall, with your good leave;
say in short, Good and Bad Judgments; understanding by the Bad all the
qualifications of the First Branch, and all of your second by the Good. I take
you then to say that Scripture's Letter, as interpretable by Bad Judgments is
not the Way; but, as Interpretable by Good Judgments is the Way. By this
account three parts in four of Mankind at a modest computation, have no Way.
For so many Bad Judgments there are at least. But, the main Point is, while we
are enquiring which the Way is which God has left, pray what have we to do with
the Judgments of men? Can they make or unmake it? Or does it depend on them to
be or not be the Way he left, as they happen to be different? It is a Way only
so long as good Judgments travel in it, and ceases to be a Way as soon as Bad
Judgments come upon it. A Way, I think, is a Way whether it be beaten by the
Lusty or the Lame, the Pur-blind or the Well-sighted. And, so if the Letter of
Scripture, interpretable by Private Judgments, be the Way which God has left
us, it is not the Goodness or Badness of Private Judgments which can make it not
the Way. Wherefore, though you have chopped upon a Distinction for which we are
beholden to you, for we might chance else not to have minded there are Good and
Bad Judgments in the World; Yet your Distinction unluckily has no relation at
all to the question. Nevertheless, it serves for Talk and Show, and bids fair
to draw us from thinking what it is we are about, to wrangling about how much
Brains go to a Competent Judgment, how much Pains to Diligence, and such very
useful Disputes: which, if you had any, was in likelihood your Design. For sure
you cannot but see your self, that your Distinction is no more to our purpose
than News from Hungary or the Morea.

28. Again, your First Branch says that Bad Judgments may misunderstand the
Letter of Scripture, and that it is not the Way to such; which I think is to
say, that it is not the Way for that reason; for you do not, and I suppose,
will not say that they may not understand it right, if luck serve, let them be
never so Bad; but, because they may misunderstand it, therefore it is not the
Way. Why then the very reason you give why it is not the Way in your First
branch, bars you from making it a Way in your Second. For all you say of your
competent and assisted Judgment, is, that they may understand it right; which
is not denying, if it be not owning, they may likewise understand it wrong. And
then, you may unriddle to us when you can, how the Bad Judgment, which may
misunderstand it, makes it no Way, and the Good makes it a Way, which may
misunderstand it too. You are strangely partial to Good Judgments, to make the
Possibility to misunderstand Scripture's Letter exclude the Bad and admit the
Good; and the Possibility to understand it right, include the Good and shut out
the Bad. Thus men have, or have not a Way as they find favor with you, and as
you like their Judgments. As far as I see, your Favor is all in all. For,
since you make the Letter of Scripture a Way to Good, but not to Bad Judgments,
there is no knowing when it is and when it is not the Way, till we know which
must pass for Good, and which for Bad Judgments: and so nothing can come of it
till we have a Test to try them. Now, I am much afraid that your own Judgment
is, like Bays his Play, your only Test; and that you make account all goes
right as long as People think as you do. Marry, if they chance to deviate from
you, they lose their Judgments, or their Diligence, or their Proper Helps, or
something, and stop up their way with their own Faults. There is no doing here
without Scales again to weigh out the Brains which go to a Competent Judgment,
the Pains which go to Diligence, and the rest. Otherwise, we have lost
Scripture; and, for our Comfort, get your Word instead of it. For, if Scripture
interpretable by a Competent Judgment be our Way, and yours be a Competent
Judgment (which no doubt you suppose as your First Principle) it is a plain Case
that Your Judgment is our Way; which in truth is the Sum of all. So long as we
will believe as you would have us, we shall have the most magnificent words in
the world, for our Souls. We shall all have Competent Judgments from Nature,
and Proper Helps from Grace. We shall (as many as will stand upon it) have
Absolute Certainty, nay infinitely greater Certainty than Reason can afford,
the Word of God. But, all is to be understood with the condition annexed of
trusting You for all. Otherwise we have neither Diligence, nor Judgment, nor
Helps, nor Certainty, nor Word of God, nor any thing in the world but Your
Word; who yet cannot for your life make any three words you say hang handsomely
together.

29. But I have strayed after your Will-of-the-Wisp till I have almost lost
sight of our Point. The Question is, Whether Scripture's Letter Interpretable
by private Judgments be the Way left by God. I maintain it is not; and prove
it, because men who take that way err. For, I thought it needed no proving,
that the Way left by God is not the Way to Error. You distinguish twice; First
the Letter into Sensed and Vns^nsed Characters; that is, if you make there any
Distinction at all. Now the Proposition is of the Letter Interpretable, that
is, not yet Interpreted, or which has not yet the Sense put to it, and so is
yet unsensed. When you then distinguish the Letter Interpretable, into Sensed
and Vnsensed, you make a Distinction, whereof one branch is not comprehended in
the Notion to be divided. It Is just the same as to distinguish Learned Men into
Learned and Unlearned; or Men into Negroes and Horses. Your Second Distinction
is, of Judgments, into Competent and Incompetent, which is Twin to the former.
I vouch't for Proof the Presbyterians and Socinians; men of very Competent
Judgments; and who are neither ignorant, nor lazy, nor negligent, nor baulk any
means or helps, which they judge can enable them to understand the Letter, or
that you have, except that, for a Spiritual Guide (which, I suppose, is one of
the Helps) they in likelihood use the Assistance of some body of their own, not
of Your Persuasion. But if one of your Protestant Guides be a proper help to
your Protestant, a Socinian sure is proper to a Socinian. In short, they fall
under none of your ill Qualifications, and when I speak of Competent and
Qualified Judgments, you distinguish the Competent into some which are
Competent, and some which are not Competent; and, again, the Qualified, into
those which are, and those which are not Qualified. The sum is this, I ask
whether the Vnsensed Letter be the Way; and you answer, the Sensed Letter is;
that is, the End is part of the way to the End. I propose you Competent
Judgments, and ask if the Letter be a Way to Them, and you reply, it is not a
way to the Incompetent. And so you, who, good squeamish Gentleman, fall into a
Scruple at the very name of Cards, can play at Cross-purposes all along very
freely, even when Souls are at Stake. I desire you to remember that I speak of
a Way, which they who take, shall, and that surely, arrive at Christ's Faith.
You talk of a way by which men so and so qualified, may arrive at it. As if may
be were any thing to shall and must be; or the qualifications of Travelers any
thing to the way. I My First Letter, P. 31.
foretold I should have nothing but an unconcerning Return for an Answer: And
you have made me, though against my will, prophecy; not bating so much of my
Prediction as the scornful Jest. For there is the Mountain and the Mouse, and
Reading a Lecture in Logic to verify it.

30. You conclude with an Argument against my Conclusion: You, I say, who are
Answering, and have nothing to do with Arguing. But, what would we have? Men
who are uneasy will always be shifting places. All our earnest Solicitations
could not wring one Argument out of you when it was your turn to prove; and now
it is your turn to Answer, you thrust your Arguments upon us unbidden. Nor is
there any keeping you from falling into the same Fault with your Suppositions,
that Dr. St. did with his Instance. You suppose then 1. That the Scripture is
God's Word. And so do I too, provided you mean the true Sense of it. For a
false Sense, whatever you think, is, in my Judgment, not God's Word. 2. That it
was written to be understood. Undoubtedly; but not by every one, barely by
means of the Letter. All Books are written to be understood: Grammar, for
Children to understand Construction; Mathematical Books for those who will
understand Mathematics; and yet those Books without Masters will make but few
Grammarians or Mathematicians. 3. That it is written for the Instruction of
Private Men. Yes, but not for the only, or sufficient means of their
Instruction, barely by the Letter. 4. That they are concerned to understand it.
Yes again; and as much concerned not to misunderstand it. 5. That they may
believe and live as it directs. They not only may, but ought. But, pray
remember, that It directs no believing or living according to a false sense. 6.
That they have means left them of God for the Understanding of it, so far as it
is of necessary concernment to them. Yes, and that Absolutely Certain Means,
the public Interpretation of the Church or Tradition. 7. And that, using those
Means as they ought they may understand it. Never mince it with may; they shall
and certainly shall understand it who use those means. From all you conclude at
last. And thus it is to them the way to know surely what Christ and his
Apostles taught as necessary to their salvation. How! The way to those who use
those Means! Why this is just as I say. But what becomes of those who use not
those Means? 'Twas ill forgot when your Hand was in at supposing, not to
suppose in amongst the rest, that Private Interpretation is the Means lest by
God for understanding Scripture. For, if public Interpretation be those Means,
as it needs must, since I have proved that Private is not; the Scripture
plainly is no Way to those who only rely on the Private Means to understand it.
And your Protestants are much beholding to your Argument which shows that
Scripture, interpreted, as they interpret it, by private Judgment, is no Way to
them. And I were very unreasonable if I should take offense at your Challenge,
which bids me show, when I can, that your suppositions are Unreasonable or
False. Not I, believe me; For I should be very cross-natur'd to fall out with a
man who takes my part.

31. Thus you have tried P. 12.
as you call it, to answer my Argument; and have succeeded (even in your own
Judgment, I guess) very sorrily. For had you been Confident of your performance
against it as it is, you would never have thought of changing it, as you do
here p. 17. Men who have put by a Thrust are not sollicitous to instruct their
Adversary how he should have Thrust. And yet you will needs be teaching me, how
I should have done to have made sure work; that is, to have been sure to hit
your Buckler. I mean not to lose time on your Argument. It were ridiculous for
me to amuse my self with what never was nor will be said by any but your self.
No body else would have left out the principal Consideration, using the Rule,
and, so, coming to Right Faith by using it. As if a Rule would make a Line of
it self, though no body draw by it: And a Way bring to the Journeys End; even
those who travel not in it. In a word, your Argument has all the faults of your
Answer in short; and only shows you can speak from the purpose more solemnly
and methodically, by way of Syllogism.

32. After you had thus nobly acquitted your self in answering my short
Discourse, you proceed in the same Method to answer Mr. G's Argument for the
Infallibility of the Catholic Church. Which, e're I come to examine, I must
first say something to your Preliminaries.

33. You doubt whether I think it needs any Proof that the Church of Rome is
Infallible. To those who reflect on the force of a vast Human Testimony,
attesting notorious matter of Fact, and what Assent it claims from Human Nature
in parallel occasions, I do indeed judge it does not so much need Proof as
Reflection. But, why should I think it needs no Proof against You; who, we see
plainly, have interpreted your selves out of your Natural Sentiments? Your
reason, Sir, because I say It Is in vain to talk against one Infallibility, P.
17.
without setting up another. Now it Faith Vindicated, P. 37, 38.
has been demonstrated to you, and never yet answered, That Infallibility and
Certainty are the same; and Nature tells us, that All Discourse supposes
something Certain, otherwise it may run on endlesly, and so nothing can ever
come to be concluded. How is it possible then to discourse against
Infallibility, or any thing else, without setting up and proceeding upon
something that is Certain, or Infallibly true? By your constant jesting
whenever Infallibility comes in the way, you discover your anger against it,
because you know you can produce nothing that is truly Certain, to ground your
Faith. Notwithstanding the vulgar use to say commonly, [ I am infallibly
Certain of such a thing] yet none laughs at them or thinks them extravagant:
And must we be afraid to use the same Language in our Controversy, because
your Ears are so tender, or rather your Grounds so soft, they cannot bear it?
If you will needs declare against Infallible Certainty, be but so candid as to
say still you are Fallibly Certain, and see how your Readers will smile at your
Folly: And yet you ought to own one or the other, if you be Certain at all; for
there can be no Third or Middle sort of Certainty, which is neither Fallible or
Infallible. Pray speak to this Point, and let us have a little Reason from you
at least, and not perpetual Rambling and Shuffling. How can you justify your
selves, that you are not Deserters of Human Nature, by affirming (or at least
supposing) there is no Infallibility (that is, True Certainty) to be found
amongst Men? Betrayers of Christian Faith, while you leave it all capable to be
a Lie; nay, maintain the full Sense of that wicked Position [ All Christian
Faith is possible to be False] in Discourses directly framed for that
set-purpose! Blasphemers of God's Providence, in declaring and asserting that
he has left less Certain Grounds for Faith, and consequently for the Salvation
of Mankind, for which the World was created, and God himself died, than he has
for other things of a trifling importance! Will it expiate for those Crimes, to
talk cantingly here of an Infallible and Living God, and his giving us His Word
by Men endu'd with an Infallible Spirit; Sayings fit to take the good Women
that are much pleased with Godly Talk in a Sermon, but frivolous in our
Controversy! Who ever questioned that God was Living or Infallible; or that he
has left us an Infallible Word? The only question is, whether you can settle
for others, or have your self, any Absolutely-Certain way to know the sense of
that Word which this Infallible God has left us. P. 18.
You tell us indeed it is plainly written: but that is the Question still, and
the Point we deny; and for which we are continually demanding your Proof, and
such a one as may confute our daily Experience, assuring us, that it is not
plain to Private Judgments. Yet this only important Point, you only name, then
slide over it and retreat to your old refuge, that weak insignificant pretense
of Sufficient Certainty, (by which, I suppose, you mean a Certainty that is
neither Infallible nor Fallible) and tell your People, if they will take your
word against their own experience, the Plainness of it (for it is that must give
them this Security) secures them from being dangerously deceived; then, as it is
but fitting, follow again of course [ in things necessary to Salvation] and [
using the Proper helps] which (as we shall see anon) will cost one's life to
peruse; and this you tell us, encourages them to take pains to be well assured
of the Truth. Fine words, I must confess, if they had any Sense! Is it such a
rare Encouragement to take pains to be well assured their Faith is True, when
you tell them, that after all their pains they can never be satisfied, but it
may be False; that is, they can never be satisfied that it is True? But, when
all is done, and the Certainty of your Grounds fail you, your last refuge is,
that the same Infallible God who has given the Means, has assured his Blessing
to them that diligently use them. But this begs the Question: For, if the Rule
you follow be not the Means ordained by God to arrive at Faith, you have
neither the right Means, nor can you be assured of any Blessing by using them;
unless you can prove God has promised his Assistance to those that use not the
Means he appointed; or will certainly direct those to the right Place who take
the wrong Way to it. Next, you fall into a Wonderment to hear me talk of men's
being discouraged -- for want of an Infallible Guide. And I wonder you should
hear me talk what I never spoke. Not one Syllable was there of a Guide: All my
Discourse was about an Infallible Rule. But the Truth is, you are sick of any
Discourse that sifts the Uncertainty of your Rule; and therefore cared not what
new pretense you started, nor whether it were a False or True one, so you could
but get the Dispute transferred to another subject. Yet, upon this false
pretense you run on with your Raillery to the end of the Section.

34. But, at last you have found Infallibility in Tradition, P. 18.
after you have been sent from place to place to seek it. Pray, Sir, who sent
you? We, with whom you are discoursing, never directed you to any other, but to
that of Tradition: and you know well, and every Reader sees, we are treating of
no Infallibility, but only that. Yet you triumph mightily, you have found a
thing which was proffered to you unsought: and found it at last, which was both
proposed to you and urged upon you at first. What an everlasting Trifler are
you, to confess to your Reader you have been running after Butterflies all this
while, and could not once turn your Eye to the Question which was just before
you, nay pressed upon you! Well, but what are my My First Letter, P. 7.
words? [ The Certainty of Scripture is from Tradition.] Do you deny this? No,
you positively assert it, First Letter, p. 7. Let Us proceed. [ Therefore there
is no refusing to admit, that Tradition causes Certainty.] Do you deny this?
How can you without destroying the Certainty of your own Rule [ Scripture]
which depends upon it, and withal contradicting your self? I added, [ And makes
Faith as Certain as Scripture.] Can you deny this? That is, will you affirm the
same Virtue does not work the same Effect if the matter be capable? Let Us see
now how you answer. Yet it may be this Certainty comes not up to Infallibility.
Yes, it does; for the Certainty here spoken of was Absolute Certainty, as was
twice insisted on immediately before, from your own words, p. 6. and I P. 23.
proved it was the same with Infallibility which you have never disproved; and
so, unless you give a better Answer, your own Acknowledgment that Tradition
causes Absolute Certainty, forces you to grant we are Infallibly Certain of our
Faith. But say P. 19.
you, The Tradition for Scripture was more Universal: Suppose it so, was not
Tradition for Doctrine large enough to cause Absolute Certainty! Or, are not ten
millions of Attesters as able to cause Absolute Certainty as Twenty? Pray,
consider a little the Virtue of Witnessing Authority, and the force it has upon
Human Nature. When the Number comes to that pitch, that it is seen to be
impossible they should all be deceived in the thing they unanimously attest, or
conspire to deceive us, their Testimony has its full Effect upon us, and begets
in us that firm and unalterable Assent we call Absolute Certainty; and the
Addition of myriads more adds nothing to the substance of that Assent, since it
was wrought without it. But the main is, you quite misunderstand the nature of
a long Successive Testimony. Let ten thousand men witness what two or three,
who were the Original Attestors of a thing, said at first, and twenty thousand
more witness in the next Age what those ten thousand told them, and so
forwards, yet (taking them precisely as Witnesses) they amount to no more, in
order to prove the Truth of that thing, than the Credit of those two or three
First Witnesses goes. It Is the First Source of a Testimony, which gives the
succeeding ones all their weight to prove the Thing that is witnest to be True:
It Is that from which the Largeness and Firmness of a Testimony, brought to
evince the Truth of any thing, is to be measured or calculated. Since then the
stream of Tradition for Doctrine had for its Source innumerable Multitudes of
those Christians in the First Age, in many places of the World, who heard the
Apostles preach it, and saw them settle the Practice of it in the respective
Churches; but the Original Testifiers that such a Book was writ by such or such
an Apostle or Evangelist, were very few in comparison, sometimes perhaps not
past two or three: It cannot with any show of Sense be pretended, that the
Tradition for the several Books of Scripture is in any degree comparable in
either regard to the Tradition for Doctrine. Your next Answer is, that This
Universal Tradition is no more but Human Testimony, P. 19.
and that can be no ground for Infallibility which excludes all possibility of
Error. Pray why not! If things were so ordered (as indeed they are that the
Testifiers could neither be deceived in the Doctrine, being bred and brought up
to it; nor conspire to deceive us, in telling the World in any Age that the new
Doctrine they had invented was immediately delivered; then it was not possible
any Error could come in, under the notion of a Doctrine delivered from the
beginning. But is not your Tradition for Scripture Human Testimony too? And if
that can be erroneous, may not all Christian Faith by your Principles be
perhaps a company of Lying Stories? You must be forced by your own words here
to confess it; but I dare say, your Parishioners, should you openly avow it,
would hate you for the Blasphemy. You would tell them, I doubt not, as you do
us, that Moral Certainty is enough to stand on such a Foundation: that is, such
a Certainty as may deceive you, and, by a necessary consequence, may haste to
overturn the whole Fabric of Christian Faith. In the mean time let us see how
manifestly you contradict Dr. St. when you should defend him. He avowed First
Letter, P. 7.
Absolute Certainty for the Book of Scripture, and this upon the Foundation of
Tradition; and you tell us here Tradition can ground but Moral Certainty: Now
all the World, till you writ, counter distinguished Absolute and Moral
Certainty, which you jumble in one. But distinct they ever were, are, and shall
be; for the Word [ Moral] signifies a Diminution or Imperfection of Certainty,
and [ Absolute] plainly expresses the Perfection of it: whence it is Evident,
that either you contradict Dr. St. (perhaps not without his private Order) or
he himself. We shall have all words shortly lose their signification, for no
other reason, but to give you room to shift this way and that, when you are too
close pressed with Reason.

35. Now, since Dr. St. had granted, that Tradition is Absolutely Certain for
Scripture, and I had proved that Absolute Certainty was the same with
Infallibility, what should hinder me from inferring, My First Letter P. 21.
that unless some special difficulty be found in other things that light into
the same channel, it must bring them down infallibly too? Your Gifts of
Interpretation expounds these Words of mine thus: These other things are things
unwritten in that Holy Book. P. 21.
I do assure you, Sir, you are mightily mistaken. I never told you yet that all
Faith was not contained in Scripture explicitly or implicitly. What I meant
was, that the whole Body of Christ's Doctrine; (and not only that such a Book was
Scripture,) nay the self-same Doctrine of Faith that is contained in Scripture,
comes down by Tradition, or the Church's Testimony. But with this Difference,
(as to the Manner of it,) among others, that the Church that testifies it,
having the sense of it in her Breast, can explain her meaning so as to put it
out of all Question to Learners, Doubters and Enquirers; which the Scripture
cannot. Whence we need not fish for our Faith in the channel of Tyber, as your
great Wit tells us; St. Peter's Ship, (the Church) that caught so many Fishes
at first, (the Body of Primitive Christians, who were the first deliverers of
Christ's Doctrine,) has stored up provision enough for the succession of Faith
to the Worlds end. There we find it to our Hands. It Is your sober Enquirers who
Fish for it among dead unsensed Characters, and in the Lake of Geneva; from
whence to save the labor of going thither, you and your Friends are deriving a
great Channel to run into Thames, over-swell it is Banks, and drown all the
Churches. Lacus Lemanus is your Tyber, Geneva your Rome, and John Calvin (the
Prime of your new Apostles) your St. Peter.

36. All this is but prelude: But, now comes Mr. G's Argument, and therefore we
are to expect now, however you but trifled hitherto, more pertinent and close
Discourse. The first Proposition was this: All Traditionary Christians believe
the same to day they did yesterday, and so up to the time of our B. Savior.
This you seem to deny in regard they may perhaps be so called from their
adhereing to a Tradition which reaches not so high as our Saviors time, but
only pretends to it, whither we only pretend to it or no will be seen
hereafter, when the Fourth Proposition comes to be examined. In the mean time
pray jumble not two Questions which are distinct, and ought to be kept so. The
whole Business here is about the use or Sense of the word [ Traditionary] and
how we both take it in our present Controversy. Now that we both agree in the
Notion of [ Tradition,] whence [ Traditionary] is derived, is evident by this,
that we lay claim to such a Tradition as reaches to Christ, and go about to
prove it; you deny our Claim, and endeavor to disprove it: But it is evident
you deny the same thing to us which we lay Claim to; otherwise we should not
talk of the same Thing, and so should not understand one another, nor could
discourse together; wherefore it is manifest we both agree in the Notion or
Meaning of that Word, however we disagree in the Application of it to the
Persons. Nor do we pretend in the least, what you would put upon us here, to
infer hence that this body of Christians that now adheres to it, did always
so; but only contend, that if they did not ever adhere to it, they must have
deserted it and taken up another Rule, and so, cease to be true Claimers of a
Tradition from Christ, or Traditionary Christians. Moreover, we judge we have
right to lay Claim to it, till we be driven out of it by a former and better
Title; since we were in possession of this Rule at the time of the Reformation,
or held all our Faith upon that tenure.

37. The second Proposition is this: If they follow this Rule they can never
err in Faith. Whence follows the Third; [ And therefore they are Infallible.]
Your Answer Sir, to this. Can they adhere still to what was delivered, and yet
err in Faith, if what was still delivered, was Christ's Doctrine. Your Answer
is; P. 21.
His Friend tells us this is palpably self-evident. And does not his Adversary
confess it too? Do not your self acknowledge it in your 21 st, and 22 d. Pages,
and say you must lay by your Reason, turn Romanist, and renounce your Private
Judgment, if you did not grant it. And can the Reader, so well acquainted with
your shuffles, judge it less than palpably self-evident, which your humor, so
restiff to grant any thing, though never so clearly proved, is forced to yield
to. Lastly, does his Friend only tell you it is self-evident? Does not he prove
it to be as Evident as it is that the same is the same with it self? And is not
such a thing Evident by its own light, or out of the very Terms, that is,
self-evident? Pray, Sir, when I prove any thing, let the Reader know I did so;
and do not thus constantly pretend still that I only said so, or told you so. A
pretty Stratagem to avoid speaking to my Proofs; but how honest let the Reader
judge.

38. But, say you, unless this Tradition be longer than it is yet proved to be,
they may follow it, P. 21.
and err all along in following it. No doubt of it; if it fall short of
reaching up to Christ's, we may follow it, and Err by following it, as all
Heretics do in following their novel Traditions. That ( yet) is a very pretty
Word; for it puts the Reader into a conceit that we have produced nothing from
the beginning of the World, to the very time of your Writing, to prove our
Tradition reaches to our Saviors days; and yet, if we challenge you that we
have proved it in the very next words of our Argument, you can make your
escape, by saying, that you are not yet come to speak to that point, and that
you meant no more. Who would think there should be such Virtue in a petty
Monosyllable, as at once to disgrace us, and save you harmless! The second
Answer to this Point is, Let it (the Tradition spoken of) be never so long, yet
if they follow it not, they may err. Very good! The Arguers Words are, If they
follow this Rule they cannot err in Faith; which implies, that, if they do not,
they may err: and you say the self-same over again, with an air of Opposition,
and there is an Answer for us now. As if to conform to your Adversaries Words
were to confute him, any thing will serve, rather than say nothing.

39. The fourth Proposition brought to prove that this Tradition we lay Claim
to, does indeed reach to Christ and his Apostles, is this, They could not
innovate in Faith, unless they did forget what they held the day before, or out
of malice alter it. And here lies the main Stress of the Controversy between
us; for you have granted here, Page 21.22. that were this Rule followed, they
must still enjoy the same Faith Christ and his Apostles taught; and this
Discourse is brought to show they did follow it. We are to expect then that
your choicest Engines must be set on work to baffle a Proof, which, if it
holds; brings such dangerous consequences after it, and indeed concludes the
whole Controversy. Your first Attempt is in plain terms most Evident, and a
most Unconscionable Falsification. After you had (P. 21.) recited this fourth
Proposition, you immediately add. Our Author undertakes to make this out more
clearly, and therefore we will hear what he says for our better Information.
P. 18. He asks, did Christ teach any Errors? and so you go on reciting that
whole Argument, which proves, that if the first Fathers believed what Christ
taught, and the succeeding Sons all along believed what their Fathers did, the
last-born Son in the World believed the same that Christ taught. Pray, Sir,
play fair above-board. You have directly falsify'd that whole Discourse, by
pretending here that the words you cite were to make out that Fourth
Proposition clearly, (viz. That we could not innovate in Faith etc.) whereas
the truth of that Fourth Proposition was made out by me nine pages before (viz.
p. 9.) and the Discourse you mention here, as intended to make it out, is found
p. 18, 19. and levelled at a quite different business: viz. that a Church could
not adhere to Tradition, and at the same time err, as you pretended we must
grant of the Greek Church. Clear your Credit when you can, I charge it upon you
as a voluntary Insincerity: but you shall never clear it unless by putting out
your Reader's eyes, or persuading him not to use them. So that it seems let us
bring what Arguments we will, you need do no more when they are too hard to
answer, but apply them to a wrong Point they were never meant to prove, and
then it is easy to show manifestly they are frivolous and good for nothing. In
the mean time, who sees not that your Cause as well as your Credit is run a
ground and like to split, when you are put to such shifts! I wonder how this
gross Fault could escape Dr. St's acute sight, if he perused and reviewed your
Reflections.

40. Your Second Answer, or rather Cavil, is, that you could make as fine
sport with the word [ Notwithstanding] as I did, but that, it seems, it spoils
your Gravity. Yet you can dispense with that Formal humor very easily, as often
as a hard Point presses you, especially when you are put to Proving: nor are we
now to learn that you can laugh at a feather, when you have nothing of more
weight to say. But, where lies the Jest? I never excepted against the Word, but
the misapplying it by Dr. St. Who, when he was at a loss to give an Answer to
Mr. G's Demonstration, very learnedly and advisedly thought it best to deny the
Conclusion, Object an Argument of his own against it, and then bid the Opponent
prove his Thesis (which he had proved already) notwithstanding his Argument.
When you find me thus untowardly making use of That, or any other, Word, you
are at liberty to except against me. In the mean time put this in the number of
your Reflections, that when a man pretends to make sport when there is no
occasion, he but discovers his own Folly. But the Point is, Can you make good
his Logic in this irregular Proceeding? This is what we expected from a writer
that undertakes to defend him. But the Task is so insuperable, that neither
your wonderful Learning, nor Dr. St. himself, nor all the World to help him can
ever be able to do it; unless he can make the Schools renounce all Rules of
Art, and Mankind their Reason. But what were my words that were so mirthful?
Why, I denied that a Body of men could adhere to Tradition, and notwithstanding
err. Is here any occasion of fine sport? Or, cannot I use a plain word in the
Context of my Discourse falling in naturally, because he had misused it
unskillfully and inartificially? I see by this sliding over it so gentilely,
this is all the Answer I am to expect to my 10, 11, 12, 13, 33 d. and 34 th.
pages; where such Errors against all Methods of Dispute are charged upon the
Dr. as would banckrupt any man's Credit who had not a large stock of it laid in
beforehand. And all the favor his best Friends can do him to excuse his
Person, is to refund it upon his Cause.

41. But, though it was granted that Discourse of mine cited by you page 21. was
so evident, that it was both Unreasonable and absurd to deny it, yet it must
not escape without some animadversion. A Fault there must be in it, that is
decreed; and what should that Fault be, but that good one of being too
Evident. And this, as was shown formerly, is one of the new tricks taken up to
evade Answering. When our Arguments are too clear to be baffled by any (even
plausible) Reason, being next to self-evident, or easily reducible to it, to
save us the labor you reduce it thither your self, but first vilely deformed,
that it may become a fit Subject for your Jesting way of Confuting. We will
grant him (say you) it is impossible to prove that men have erred
notwithstanding they never erred. Very excellent! But do you not grant much
more; viz. that It is impossible they should adhere to our Rule, and yet err?
You do, and, in doing so, you grant the whole substance of my Discourse. And so
let them laugh that win. I am sure you have lost by this forced Confession,
that Tradiction is a certain Rule, and that I have proved it evidently. Which
no man will grant of your Rule that is in his wits, nor can the wit of all the
men in the World ever prove it to be such as you have yielded ours to be.

42. The same disingenuity often repeated gives all the force to your next
Sect. For, 1. P. 22.
You pretend we but suppose it hitherto, that these Traditionary Christians
adhere undecliningly to a Tradition descending really, and invariably from
Christ and his Apostles, etc. How! only supposed hitherto! Was it not proved,
and not barely supposed in the Fourth Proposition, and made good by me, p. 9.
If you will not come up to it, but stand hovering, fencing, jesting,
falsifying* and capering about by the way, must we be blamed as barely
supposing it hitherto? 2. You falsify our words: For who ever said a
Supposition is Self-evident, which every one sees, while it is barely a
Supposition, is not Evident at all. Why quote you not the page where we say
this? Because you would not be caught. 3. You falsify again without care of
credit or regard to your Reader, in affirming, that from this self-evident
Supposition I necessarily conclude thus; suppose Traditionary Christians
neither did nor could err, it is certain they neither did nor could err. But
why again no place quoted! Because you had again falsify'd it, and durst not
hazard discovery.

43. I perceive, your play here (p. 22.) is to disjoint our Discourse, and
jumble all the pieces of it confusedly together; and, so, it must be my Work to
rectify what you had so industriously unravelled. Since then Mr. G. had made
use of these words [ Traditionary Christians] their Sense was first to be
explained, and therefore I My First Letter, p. 8.
declared that the meaning of them was, such Christians as proceeded upon an
Immediate Delivery not only at present, or since the Council of Trent, or some
hundreds of years before, as you put upon us, p. 20. but upwards till Christ's
time; and all the advantage I gained thence was that in case they did not
adhere to it all along, it would follow that the pretended Traditionary
Christians ( our selves) were not really such, and so the Subject of our
Dispute would be lost, and we should receive a perfect foil. Could any thing be
clearer or more candid? Yet, how many shuffles, and baffling Jests, you have
been pleased to bestow on us instead of admitting so clear a Proposition; to
how many wrong ends you have applied it, never thought on by us, we have
already seen. For the Truth is, you are so horribly afraid of any connected
Discourse, that you dare not so much as suffer it to peep out, but it alarums
your Jealousy; no, not the very signification of the single words to be
distinctly known, or the most Evident Proposition, though it be Indifferent to
either Cause, to be admitted. Now let us see what you say to it; you make it
amount to this: Suppose Traditionary Christians neither did nor could err, P.
22.
it is Certain they neither did nor could err. Which you call my necessary
Conclusion from my self-evident Supposition. You improve mightily, Sir, in your
Talent of Insincerity. Our entire Discourse runs thus, if we must needs put it
into Form for you. Those who adhere to Tradition all along from the beginning,
neither did nor could err in Faith, (otherwise they would not be Adherents to
Tradition or Traditionary Christians). But this Body of Christians, called The
Roman Catholic Church, does now, and did from time to time adhere to
Tradition. Therefore this Body of Christians, called The Roman Catholic
Church, neither did or could err in Faith. This is Mr. G's Argument: The Major
is granted by P. 21, 22.
your self. The Proof of the Minor is contained in Mr. G's Fourth Proposition,
which I have shown to be valid in my First Letter, p. 9. and the Discussion of
it is now under hand. The Conclusion is in greatest danger, lest you should,
according to the new True-Protestant Logic, deny it again, and bring some
Instance against it; otherwise, since it follows evidently, it will shift well
enough for it self. This, I say, is our entire Discourse; all the rest is your
flashy Drollery, your ever faithful Friend, when you are perplexed how to Answer.

44. The Argument then for the Perpetuity of our Tradition from Christ's time,
runs thus. They could not innovate in Faith, unless they did forget what they
held the day before, or, out of malice, alter it. To enforce this Argument, I
discoursed My First Letter, P. 32.
thus. You do not, I suppose, desire we should prove that men had always
Memories, or that Christians were never malicious enough to damn themselves and
their Posterities wittingly; and yet, it can stick no where else. Yet you are
such a bold Undertaker, that you will needs prove they may be both thus
Forgetful and thus Malicious. A hard Task one would think; especially since the
Argument proceeds upon Forgetting and Altering what they Remembered and Held
Yesterday. Your First Reason to prove they might be thus Forgetful, P. 23.
is; because Otherwise it is hard to say why the Penmen of the Scripture
should have been at the needless pains to write it. Let Us apply this to the
Argument, and your Discourse is this. It Is hard to say that Christians could
have remembered their Yesterday's Faith, had not Scripture been writ. Now, pray
Sir, be serious, and tell us, Do you think there is any danger, or even
possibility of this among the very Protestants in England, though they had never
a Bible to read to morrow? How many of them read not so much as a Chapter in
three or four days, how many not in a much longer time; nay, how few of them
read all their Faith there in a Year, or even in their whole Life; and yet they
retain the memory not only of their Yesterdays, but last Years Faith? What a
weakness is this, to suppose Miracles must be done for no other end, but that
you may answer our Argument? The Reasons why Scripture was writ, you might have
read in St. Paul to Timothy; 2 Timothy c. 3.16, 17.
where there is no such thing as to make men remember their Yesterdays Faith,
nor that Scripture is of Necessity at all; but only that it is Profitable for
many Uses there enumerated. Your Second Argument to confute our Demonstration,
is a Text, 2 Pet. 1.15. by which you will convince us, Men's memories are not
always so faithful: You must mean to remember their Yesterdays Faith; for this
Degree of Memory only the Argument insists on. But what says that B. Apostle? I
will endeavor, that you may be able, after my Decease, to have these things
always in remembrance. Now, there is not so much as one Word in the whole
Chapter concerning the remembering or forgetting their Faith, much less the
Faith they held Yesterday; or leaving their Faith in Writing for that purpose,
but only (Faith supposed) of remembering his particular Exhortations to Good
Life; and, by thus inculcating them, to stir them up (as it is said, v. 13.) to
Christian Virtue, and leaving such things in Writing to that end. Now, such
Spiritual and Moral Instructions are both easily Intelligible, especially,
since he had taught the same to them formerly; and Man's Natural Corruption
making even good men apt to slide back from the high degree of Perfection in
which they had been educated; no doubt a Letter left by that Holy Apostle, now
near his death, as he there tells them, would strike them more feelingly, and
excite them more effectually to pursue that Course of Holy Life, in which he
had instructed them. What miserable Stuff is this? Would not Faith have an
excellent Basis, did it depend on Scripture interpreted by your Private
Judgments. When this one Instance manifests, you have the boldness to quote
Scripture for any thing, though never so disparate and unconcerning, and then
blasphemously nickname it God's Word, when it is nothing at all to the purpose.
But, I beseech you, Sir, let us have the Return of one Scholar to another. If
our Argument lie too open, or the Connection in it be too slack, speak to it as
you ought; but think not your Private Interpretations a competent Solution to
Demonstrations. If such wretched Answers may serve the turn, the Schools and
Universities may shut up Shop, and Reasoning bid adieu to the World: Every Fop
will find a Text he can hook in, nor will he fail of interpreting it blindly to
his own purpose, when he is gravelled with an Argument; and of calling it God's
Word when he has done. Who will not see you are sinking, when you catch at such
Straws and weak Twigs to keep you above Water.

45. By this time the Reader will be satisfied, that Notwithstanding all you
have answered, Men had Memory enough not to forget their Yesterdays Faith:
Next, you go about to prove Christians may be malicious enough to alter it. May
not Christians (say you, p. 23.) through malice and wickedness, be as careless
of preserving the Faith, as in maintaining Holiness in themselves or their
Posterity, when they know that Sin is as damnable as Error? Be Judge your
self. Do not many of your Congregation (and the like may be said of all Sects)
sin often, and yet few or none of them desert their Faith once? The reasons why
the Parallel holds not, are these. 1. Sins are generally private; at least, Men
do for the most part endeavor and hope to conceal their Faults, for fear of
shame and discredit. But the Change of Faith must be professed and open;
otherwise it alters not the case; and Posterity will still believe on,
according as things appear outwardly. 2. Sinners are seldom Malicious to that
degree, as to resolve firmly to persist so to the end of their Lives; but
generally fall out of frailty, and intend and hope to repent. And so this very
thing will oblige them still to hold to their former Faith, which (as
Experience tells them) furnishes Sinners with means of Repentance. 3. Man's
Nature being inclined to Truth, scarce one man tells a Lie, but hopes to cloak
it. But here, when they deliver another Faith for the same that was held
Yesterday, every man must know his Neighbor to be an abominable shameless
Liar; and, the Concern being so Sacred, must hold himself and all his
fellow-Alterers the wickedst men living* Unless it be said they went
conscientiously upon some other ground than Tradition; for to pretend to be
saved by Tenets held upon no ground at all, is absolutely impossible to consist
with Rational Nature. But it is impossible they should take up another Ground:
Because if they could not innovate in Faith, they could not innovate in that
upon which they held all their Faith. Nor could they be certain, but all their
former Faith might be renounced, if a new Rule of Faith were taken up. To hear
of which, could not consist with the temper of Christians, to bear a loss for
all their Faith. Besides, Men are more tenacious of their Principles,
especially if they have gained a vast Credit by their long Continuance, than
they are to relinquish all they have received upon those Principles. Again,
Tradition is the Authority of the whole Ecclesia Docens, the Chiefest part of
(I might say the Ecclesia Credens too) witnessing the delivered Faith; which is
so vast a Body, that it could never (were there nothing but its own Interest)
permit it self to be thought to have attested a Lie hitherto: Add, That none
could be competent Judges what was fit to be a Rule of Faith, but They who were
so concerned both in Duty and Interest, Tradition should not be set aside.
Which considerations clearly evince an Universal Change in the Rule of Faith;
and this over the whole Body of Believers is absolutely impracticable. Lastly,
There must be some great time between their discarding Tradition and espousing
a New Rule; during which time, we must imagine the whole Church (except perhaps
some few that discourse it first) would be made up of Seekers; some hovering
one way, some another; in which case they would as yet have no Faith, and
consequently there could be no Church. It Is left then, that if they could
innovate in Faith, they must pretend to Tradition still when they had evidently
deserted it; that is, they must profess to hold the Yesterdays Faith, when all
the World must see, and every man's own Heart must tell him the contrary: Which
is the highest Impossibility. Luther altered, Calvin altered, so did many
others; but none of them had the face to say they still adhered to Tradition,
or the Faith delivered immediately before, and that they had not altered. 4.
Men fall into Sins through Temptations, and Temptations are various, according
to men's Tempers and Circumstances; whence it happens, that one falls into one
sort of Sin, others into another, as things light. But it is impossible there
should have been Causes laid in the World, so Universal, as to reach a whole
Body of men consisting of so many Millions of different Countries, Tempers, and
Circumstances, so as to impel them effectually to fall into the same Individual
sort of sin, and this such a horrid and shameful one, viz. The Altering the
Faith they hoped to be saved by, and this so suddenly. The Nature of the thing
shows evidently it is above Chance; and the very Interest of the World would
forbid such a Conspiracy, were there neither Religion, Conscience, nor Common
Humanity in it. Their very Passions, Disaffections, and Enmity to one another,
would make them disagree in carrying on such a wicked Project: Their Natural
Tempers, abstracting from their Common Propension to Truth, and the care of
preserving their Credits utterly lost by speaking such open and pernicious
falsehoods, would render them apt, out of a mere Antipathy of Humor, to oppose
one another; and all this, supposing there were no Goodness at all in the
World; to suppose which, evacuates all Christian Motives, and their Efficacy,
and makes our dear Savior preach and dye in vain; especially, since there
never wanted, no, not even in the worst times, a fair Degree of Discipline to
apply those Motives. Nay, State-Interest, or the Quarrels of Princes, would
make them glad to take hence an Advantage against their emulous Neighbors; and
to think it the best Policy to lay hold on such an occasion, to fight in behalf
of Faith and Common Honesty, against a pack of shameless Liars, and Deserters
both of Religion and Human Nature, who cared not what became of their own
Salvation, or that of others. Lastly, Th^se Causes thwarting the Universal
Alteration of Faith, while Christians proceeded on the former Rule of
Tradition; and full as much hindering the taking up a New Rule in opposition to
the Testimony of the Universal Church; as there could be no Cause to make men
conspire to alter the Yesterdays Faith, so Christian Motives, which contain the
greatest Hopes and Fears imaginable, the Hopes of never-ending Bliss, and Fears
of Eternal and Intolerable Misery, which were believed and applied to the
generality of Christians, could not, on the contrary side, but influence them
most powerfully to preserve unchanged and inviolate both the Rule and the
Faith. It Is as Certain then, that a very Great Body of Adherers to Tradition,
and consequently to the first delivered Faith, would still remain on Foot in
the World, as that Effects could not be without Proper Causes, or that Motives,
which are the Proper Causes to work upon Rational Nature, will produce their
Effect: I mean such Motives as engage their very Nature. Add, That such a
Change must needs have been publicly known; and, so, have excited the Pens,
Tongues, Interests (perhaps Swords too) of the Traditionary and Innovating
Party one against another, at the time of the Change; as we see has happened in
our late Alterations or Reformations. Yet no such thing was ever mentioned in
History; or come to us by Tradition; or any thing alleged, but some
differences amongst particular Spectators, and their Adherents siding with
them; which amounts to nothing comparable to that Universal and most Memorable
Concussion, such a vast Change as this we speak of, must needs have made in the
whole Body of the Church.

46. Summing up then this Discourse, it is manifest you have no way to answer
our Argument, but by supposing there was a time (the Lord knows when) in which
there were no considerable Body of Men in the World, either good Christians,
honest men, or valuing their Credit; but only a company of brutish, Godless,
Lying Ruffians, without the least Degree of Grace or Shame in them. Unfortunate
Confuter! Aristotle looked upon things as they were; Plato on things as they
should be; but, to make a show of an Answer to our Argument, you would have
your Readers look upon the Christian World, as it neither is, was, should be,
or can be.

47. But you object. What if all Sons did not understand aright all that
Fathers had Taught them! P. 23.
Answer. If All did not, most of the Intelligent and Pastors, who were of
greater Authority than those, some less-understanding Persons, and tied by
their Duty and Office to instruct their Ignorance, would and could easily do
it, when the Doctrine, open Practice and Discipline of the Christian Church was
settled, and made it both so obligatory and so easy. 2. What if some Sons were
so negligent as to take no care either to remember or teach what they had been
taught by their Fathers? Answ. If only some were so, then those who were
diligent to do this, would reprehend them, and see to have things amended, and
those careless Persons, especially if Pastors, reduced to their Duty; there
being Orders on foot in the World to oblige them to it. Besides, it is an
unheard of Negligence, not to know or remember the next day the Faith they held
the day before; nor did it require that care you pretend to retain the
remembrance of it four and twenty hours. 3. What if some, through Ambition,
Vainglory and Popularity, P. 24.
set a broach New Doctrines, and taught them for Apostolical Tradition? Answ.
If only some were so, then those others, who were good Men, and free from those
Vices, would set themselves to oppose them, make known their false pretenses,
and lay open their Novelties: Both Reason assuring us, that Good men use not to
be so stupidly careless in such Sacred Concerns; and History informing us they
were ever very zealously vigilant to oppose Heretics, when ever they began to
vent their Pestilent, Doctrins. 4. What if others, to save themselves from
Persecution, concealed part, and corrupted more of the Doctrine of Christ by
their own Traditions, taken not from Christ, but from their Forefathers, Jews
or Gentiles? Then those who were out of Persecution, or valued it not so much
as they did their Conscience, would oppose their Unchristian Proceedings: Then
the Fathers, Doctors, and Pastors of the Church would reveal what they had
concealed, restore what they had corrupted, and manifest that their Pretenses
and Subterfuges were False, and that the Doctrine they subintroduc'd, had not
descended by the open Channel of the Christian Church's Tradition. 5. What if
some through a blind Zeal, ignorant Devotion, Superstitious, Rigor, and vain
Credulity, added many things to the Doctrine of Christ; which by degrees grew
into more general esteem, till at last they were owned, and imposed as
necessary to be believed and practiced? Answ. If they belonged to Faith, they
could not come in, while the Rule of Tradition was adhered to, as has been
proved and granted: Though perhaps some Points involved in the main Body of
Faith, yet so particularly or universally known, might, on emergent occasions,
be singled out, defined and more specially recommended than formerly; without
any Detriment to the Faith received, but rather to the Advantage and farther
Explication of it. And, as for unwarrantable Practices, as they belong not to
Faith, so they do not concern our present business. 6. What if Error any of
these Ways brought forth, grew, multiplied, spread, obtained most power, and
drove out all that held the naked Truth out of all those Countries where it
came; Of which all Histories furnish us with Instances. Answ. But does any
History tell you this Error spread over the whole Church, without your
supposing the Question that such or such a Tenet is an Error which you pretend
such; which is above the Skill of Historians to decide; and is only to be
determined by examining First who have, who have not a Certain Rule of Faith.
Besides, Error in Faith never yet appeared, even though abetted by Great men
in the Church, but it was opposed; and Truth grew clearer by the Opposition
made to it; and though for a while it grew under the shadow of some Particular
State, yet no History ever recorded, that all the States of Christendom ever
joined to protect it.

48. Well, but what are all these rambling Questions to our Argument, which
insists on the impossibility of Altering the yesterdays Faith, but either out
of want of Memory, or out of Malice? Apply them to this, and they lose all
their force, how plausibly soever a witty man, that talks at rovers, supposes
all to be Error, which the Revolting Party Held, and never considers the
Nature of Christian Mankind and their Circumstances, may descant upon it: For
what Paradox is there, though never so ridiculous, that Wit discoursing thus
wildly and at random, cannot make plausible? Our General Objection then
against P. 23.24.
your whole Paragraph is this, that you never apply your several What ifs? to
our Argument. Besides, that you pretend in the beginning of it that you will
show other Reasons of such an Alteration, which are neither Forgetfulness nor
Malice; and yet most of those you here assign are Defects of Goodness, P. 23.
which implies some degree of Malice, and some of them, the highest Malice that
can be.

49. But (say you) we must seek out a new Medium to prove our Church
Infallible, for this already brought, P. 25.
proves only she does not err so long as she holds to Tradition; but still she
may err, if she leaves it; wherefore we must prove she cannot leave Tradition,
or else She is not Infallible, and so we are but where we were. And do not you
see this is already proved to your Hand? For (not to repeat the many Reasons
produced for this Point, Sect. 45.) Innovation and Tradition being formerly and
diametrically opposite, what proves she could not Innovate, proves also that
she could not leave Tradition; for this were to Innovate. And this, our
Argument you see has already proved; nor is the force of that Proof weakened by
any thing you have hitherto said. I wonder you should dissemble a thing so
obvious, and run forwards upon that affected Inadvertence of yours, as if it
were a business unthought of by us before, and required a new Medium, whereas
it is the very thing our Argument chiefly aims at: and for which, we had of our
own accord, without any one's bidding, made provision for before hand.

P. 25.
50. Your next Sect. P. 25. would persuade us rather to prove our Church free
from Error, which (say you) is a much easier task, if she be so, than to prove
Her Self Infallible. Very Good! Your wise advice amounts to this, that you
would have us prove our Conclusion without beginning with our Premises, or
Principles. If this be Yours and Dr. St's Logic, it is a very preposterous one;
and can only be made good by a Figure called Hysteron Proteron, or Cart before
Horse. Though I must confess it keeps decorum, and is perfectly of the same hue
with all your Logic hitherto. Please then to know that all our Faith may be
Error, if the Testimony of the Church, (our Rule) may be Erroneous: and, if it
cannot, nothing we hold of Faith can be so. Again, what mean you by our proving
her free from Error? Your meaning is, we should only prove she Embraces no
Error now; but what Provision would this make for Her not falling perhaps into
Error to morrow? We ought then to prove (and so ought you too of your Rule)
that if we adhere to it, it can at no time permit us to Err; which could not be
if at any time it might be deceived it self, or leave us deceived while we
follow it. Besides, if it were granted Fallible or Liable to Error, by what
more evident Light, or greater and clearer Testimony could we guide our selves
to know when it did actually Err, when not in deriving down Christ's Doctrine?
Or by what more certain Way could we be directed to arrive at Christ's sense.
If there were any such, It and not Tradition ought to be our Rule. We return
you then your Counsel back with many Thanks, for it neither suits in any degree
with Logic, Common Sense, our own, or any other Principles. But however it
suites better with your convenience, than these crabbed Demonstrations: For you
tell us One single Instance of her erring is enough to Answer all the Arguments
can be brought for her Infallibility. Ibid.
Sure you have a mind to convince all Scholars that read your Books, you never
heard of Logic in your Life: Or else you would endeavor to baffle the whole
Art of Discoursing, because you foresee it is like to baffle you. An Instance
may perhaps make an Objection against the Conclusion taking it single for a
mere proposition and not as standing under Proof; but Arguments are answered by
finding defects in the Premises or the Consequence. You might have seen (to use
your own words) better Logic read to the D. of P. in my Page 10 and 11. Where
it is shown you, that if the Premises be right, and the Inference good, the
Conclusion must be as necessarily True, as that the same Thing cannot be, and
not be at once: Yet, you take no notice of it, but still run on obstinately to
confute all the Schools and Universities that ever Writ or Taught Logic from
the beginning of the World, to the Time of His and Your Writing. The Truth is,
you are sick of the Argument, and would shift it off on any Fashion. Bring what
Instances you please; But first you are to Answer our Argument, and next, to
see the Authority that qualifies your Instance for an Argument, be above
Morally Certain; otherwise it will be beyond the power of any Logic to make it
conclude: For the force of that Maxim on which the Conclusiveness of any
Argument is built, is far beyond any Moral Certainty; Nor let Dr. St. think to
stand arguing still ad hominem; but let him be sure his Instance infers the
Truth of his Conclusion, when it comes to be put to the Test of a Syllogism.
This we will expect from him; since it is the Right of the Respondent to deny
any thing that is not driven up to Evidence; and by that Test we will judge of
your Instance and other Arguments, if you have any that you will vouch to be
Demonstrative, that is, Conclusive.

51. You seem so kind as not to undertake to prove that an erring Church
adheres to Tradition, if it be True Apostolical Tradition, and that it adheres
to it wholly and solely. I a little wonder at this; for if you mean not by
Tradition such a one as is built on Living voice and Practice, you ran quite
away from the Point; If such a one; you quit your own Rule, by requiring men
should adhere to the other wholly and Solely, and admit that a Church adhering
to such a Tradition is not an Erring Church. I infer: Therefore, till you
answer our Argument which proves that our Tradition could not be interrupted by
any Innovation, you cannot with reason deny but ours is such. You think
Infallibility a kind of bar against our mutual Agreement; as if there were any
hopes or even possibility men's Minds should center, unless it be in something
that is Absolutely Certain or Evident. Show us something else endu'd with such
an Evidence as is able to oblige Human Nature to an Universal Acceptance and
Conviction, and then blame us for maintaining Infallibility. Till then pray,
excuse us for making such Provision for Faith, as sets it beyond Possibility of
Falsehood. You drop some insignificant Exceptions after the Shower of your
shrewd (invisible) Reasons. As that our P. 26.
Argument must prove that no man that has been taught the Faith can ever err
from it; and yet still withal, confess that a Church, following Tradition now,
may leave it afterward. This were an Incoherence with a witness: But how do
you show our Argument must prove this absurd position! Only with saying it
here over and over again, without the least attempt to show from our words or
Doctrine, this pretended necessity, that we must both contradict our selves so
grossly, and besides go against our daily experience. I do assure the Reader
we have no where either such words or sense, and that it is merely a false sham
or some weak deduction of yours, for want of some better thing to say. Our
Tenet is that, though not one single man can err while he adheres to our Rule,
yet even some particular Churches may leave off adhering to Tradition, and so
err in Faith. Only we say that the main Body of the Church consisting of all
particular Churches that compound Christianity, being supported by Motives of
adhering to the former Faith, so Prevalent, and Universal, and applied to a
very vast multitude of them, cannot conspire to relinquish this Rule, go
against and disgrace their own Testimony, nor consequently err in Faith. The
word [ All] indeed, and [ They] in each Proposition are distributive, and
appliable to each single man; but do you find the least word in any of them,
that says that single men or great multitudes may not out of malice alter
Faith? Where find you that! Or that they cannot desert the Rule, and by
Consequence their Faith. Pray, be not so liberal of our Concessions, without
showing something under our hands for it.

52. But you sum up your Solution of our Demonstration with an admirable grace,
or rather you give us the very Quintessence of your Answer to it in these few
words. P. 27.
The Church of Rome says all have broke the Rule of Tradition but she only,
and proves it, by saying that she holds the same to day she did yesterday, and
so up to our B. Saviors time. You proceed. We call again for a Proof of this.
She tells us, If she followed this Rule she could never err in Faith. But did
she follow this Rule? She says she did; and if you will not believe her,
there is an end. How smart and victorious this looks? But the best is, it is
wholly built on some few of your own wilful Falsifications. Pray, where did we
ever bring these Words, [ If she followed this Rule, etc.] For a Proof that she
holds the same to day which she did yesterday. Or where did we prove we
followed this Rule only with iffs? But why are you so shy to quote the Pages or
Paragraphs where we bring these absurd Proofs? because you would be at Liberty
to say any thing and yet not expose your Credit. And it is worth noting, that
you point out the Page in other occasions very diligently; but, when you have a
mind to falsify, it is still suppressed. It Is observable too that this insincerity
of yours here is of such advantage to you, that it gains the whole Cause. For,
if we prove this main Point no better but with Iffs, and that our Argument has
no force but by standing to your Kindness in Believing what Our Church says,
then there is an End indeed; for nothing can be more Evident, than, it is that in
that Supposition, we are utterly routed, and our whole Cause quite defeated.
Now I would entreat the Reader (for You are resolved neither to use your Eyes
nor Honesty, lest they should too openly accuse you) that he will once more
review our Argument, as it is put down by Dr. St. himself, First Letter, p. 4.
and 5. and made good by me, p. 8. and 9. and he will see clearly, the first
half of it was to prove, that If they followed this Rule, viz. of believing the
same to day they did yesterday, they could never err in Faith, or were
Infallible: And the other part [ And they could not innovate in Faith, unless
they did forget what they held the day before, or out of malice alter it] was
brought to prove they did ever follow that Rule. For since nothing but
Innovation can break the Chain of Tradition, whoever proves they could not
innovate, proves directly they could not recede from Tradition. Nay, 'twas
confessed by Dr. St. himself, when he was as yet in better circumstances, (First
Letter, p. 5. l. 4.) that we proved our Church could not innovate, by the
Medium now mentioned. Yet you have the Confidence to tell the Reader, she only
says she follows this Rule; and if you will not believe her, P. 27.
there is an end: Whereas you ought in candor to have said, They proved she
followed, and could not but follow this Rule; but I cannot answer their
Argument, and there is an End. See what you have brought upon your self, and how
fatal it is to your pretended Answer, that as you See above. Sect. 39.
began your Reply to this 4th. Proposition with a most wicked Falsification, so
you close it up here with a double one, and those too of so large a size, that
were they True, they had carried all before them. Your intermediate Endeavors
are many of them of the same kind; the rest Mistakes, (and generally wilful
ones) which I thought at first to have reckoned up; but they thickened so upon
me, that I saw it would be tedious to count them, and so gave it over. But your
excuse for this insincere Carriage is, That you do no more than all Writers use
to do, who have had the bad luck to defend an ill Cause, and come to be pressed
with Close Truth. All they can do, when they are not able to give a good acount
of themselves, is, to bend all their study and seek about for shifts, how they
may give no account. And the D. of P. and you are of this prudent Generation. I
say once again, It Is your Chief Study how to shift; and long Study of any
thing, with frequent practice, makes a man Excellent at it; and every man loves
most to do that he is Excellent at; and so we are to expect it. To convince the
Reader whether I wrong you or no, Put you your Arguments for the Absolute
Certainty of your Rule in conveying to us Christ's Sense, and for your
following it, as close and home as you can possibly; and see whether I do not
answer it directly, fairly and squarely, without any of these shifting
Excursions or Falsifications: And let our different Carriage be the Test to
distinguish the candid Asserters of Truth, from the Insincere Abetters of
Error.

53. After I had showed that Scripture privately interpreted could not be a
Rule of Faith, the nature and method of our Dispute led me into an Enquiry what
was in reality your Rule, as you are such a kind of Protestant; and, to this
End I discours't thus; That Scripture was a Generical Rule, common to you and
all Heresies in the world; and, That your Specifical Rule must be [ as my self
and those of my Judgment understand or interpret it.] And can there be any
thing more Evident? Do not they all strive to lay claim to the Letter of
Scripture for their Rule, as well as you? Do not they all, as much as you, rely
upon it, and avail themselves by quoting it still, and endeavoring to show it
favorable to their respective Tenets? Plain Experience informs us and every
one, they all do this, and that too, with an ardour and earnestness equal to
yours, as far as we can discern. In this then you all agree; and therefore it is
beyond all dispute, Scripture is your Common or Generical Rule, if we may
believe your Carriage and Profession. Now let us see what it is you disagree in.
And it is manifest you disagree in the Sense of Scripture; otherwise, the Sense
of Scripture being God's Sense or your Faith, you would be of the same Faith;
which cannot be pretended, since you contradict them, and they You, in matters
belonging to Faith; and What Is the Way to arrive at the Sense of Scripture?
Certainly the Interpreting it; for Interpretation signifies in proper speech
the Giving or Assigning to Words their sense; and do not you accept that Sense
of Scripture for your Faith which your Private Judgment interpreting it,
conceives to be truly its meaning; and they, in like manner, as they apprehend
it, ought to be interpreted? Is it not for this very end you so cry up your
Judgment of Discretion, and that you are not to submit to the Decrees of
Councils or Consent of Fathers, farther than you conceive them agreeable to the
Word of God? Does not Dr. St. profess openly, that his sober Enquirer may
understand the Explicit Sense of Implicit Points that are Doubtful (such as all
main Points of Faith are) without the Church's help, (Second Letter, p. 21.)
that is, without any Public Interpreter? And, Will you after this deny that
Scripture is your General Rule in which you agree with all Heretics; and your
specifical, peculiar or proper Rule, in which you differ from them, and they
from one another, is Scripture, as Interpreted by your selves? The thing is
plain, let us see what you say to it. You, with a very dexterous artifice, grant
and not grant it, as we shall see anon: and tell us, 1. That Scripture is and
ought to be common to all Heretics, though they miserably abuse it. Pray, Sir,
use my words; I said, a Common Rule to them and you; and, Can that be truly a
Rule, which they direct themselves by and yet warp into Error? You tell us
indeed they miserably abuse it; and the Socinians will say the same of you,
while you pretend to prove thence Christ is God. And how shall this Quarrel be
decided? For it is hitherto a drawn Match between you, while you fight with that
ambidextrous Weapon, Scripture's Letter interpretable by Private Judgments. The
Point still sticks: How can an indifferent man, seeking for Faith by your Rule,
be satisfied They abuse it more than You? Must not you be obliged to show him
some clearer Light than They have, and that this Light justifies you for
judging thus harshly of them, that they are such miserable Abusers of
Scripture? And, if you do not, must he not in true reason judge it is pretended
by you gratis; as also, that you are highly uncharitable, to charge them
downright with so heinous a Crime? It Is that farther degree of Light in You
that must justify you for these pretenses, which we would gladly see; for,
whatever it is, it is That which distinguishes you from them, and sets you up to
be Right Users of Scripture; that is, it gives you the Right Sense of it, or
your Faith; and so it must difference you Essentially from them in your Grounds
or Rule. It Is this Light, I say, we would be at; Why is it so shy to show its
Face? 2. Though it is hard to conceive how they can be said to abuse Scripture who
follow it to their Power; yet, since you will have it allowed you gratis, Does
not their pretended miserable Abuse of Scripture consist in misinterpreting it?
Certainly, you must say it does. And if so, then your right Interpretation of
it, or your taking it in a right sense, is that in which your right Use of it
consists: wherefore your own Interpretation of it, is, beyond all Evasion, that
which differences you from them; and so it is your peculiar or specifical Rule
of Faith. 3. Do those Heretics who thus miserably abuse it, do this out of
Wilfulness, that is, do they indeed understand it right, but pretend they do
not; or do they use their endeavor to understand it, and yet hap to abuse it
by misunderstanding it? If the former, then again you must tell us gratis, and
ought to make it out to an Indifferent man seeking for Faith, that the
Socinians (and all the erring Sects) are the most wickedly insincere, and the
most blasphemous men in the World, nay, the greatest Hypocrites to boot; to
know certainly by Scripture that Christ is God, and yet knowingly impugn his
Divinity, voluntarily abuse Scripture they seem so highly to venerate, and
pretend Conscience all the while: And yet none but you have such horrid
apprehensions of them: and as for my self, seeing how they decline no Adversary
at the alleging and comparing Places, how sedulously they make Scripture their
Study, and in all appearance adhere to the Letter; I verily believe they follow
it to their power, but fall into Error through their misfortune of espousing a
wrong Rule. And if you still say they are thus voluntarily insincere, I desire
to know of you by what outward signs can an indifferent man judge You and your
Party are not as Insincere as They, or perhaps more? Acquaint us, I say, for
what other Reason you say this, but because they frame another Sense of
Scripture than you do, that is, interpret it differently from You? If you can
give no other than your own Interpretation is the only Light you have to judge
them Heretics, or to determine what is Heresy; and by consequence to judge
what is True Faith; and so it is unavoidably your Rule of Faith, of which more by
and by. But, if you say they follow it to their power, and yet err in Faith,
then the fault not being in Them, for not following their Rule, their fault
must be (as it is yours) their adhering to a Rule which secures not men, though
doing their best to understand it, from falling into Heresy; that is, it
consists in their pitching upon that for their Rule, which is indeed no Rule at
all.

54. Your Rule then equally patronizing true Faith and Heresy, I had reason to
affirm, that it inferred those blasphemous Propositions, as to make Light and
Darkness very consistent, and Christ and Belial very good Friends. Now, this
being my Charge, it was manifestly your Duty to show it does not patronize true
Faith and Heresy, and by doing so, induce those horrid blasphemies; and to
make out, that only true Faith can be grounded on Scripture privately
interpreted; and therefore, that I had impeached it wrongfully. But this was
too hard a Point to meddle with. Instead of doing this, and clearing your self
from Blasphemy, which was directly incumbent on you, you tell the Reader, with
a great garb of Gravity, that I speak Blasphemy my self, Blasphemy against God
and his Holy Word; when I only mention it while I am charging you with it. And
hereupon, like a right Good man, you fall to talk Godly, and out of your pure
Charity will needs bestow upon me the Benediction of your hearty Prayer, that
God would give me Repentance unto Life. Indeed, had I said that Christ and
Belial could ever be reconciled, or advanced any Position that implied it, as
yours does, I confess, I must have been Guilty of a horrid Blasphemy. But, not
knowing how to clear your self, for owning no Rule but such a one as equally
patronizes Truth and Falsehood, and therefore, by a necessary consequence,
infers those Blasphemies; you very demurely put on a Godly Countenance, and
betake your self very charitably to your hearty Prayers. As much as to say, In
good Truth, Sir, I cannot answer you, nor show I have any Rule, but what serves
for Error as well as Truth; but yet if that may excuse me, I will be content
in lieu of it, to pray for you with all my Heart. Is not this pleasant?

55. Thus much for your Rule as it is common to You and all Heretics. What Is
your particular Rule? Here 1. You take it ill that we will needs know what is
your Rule better than your selves do; P. 28.
And we take it as ill of You, that you would have us believe you before our
own Evident Reason. We know you cannot defend such an insignificant Rule as
your own Interpretations; and therefore are forced to disown it, when we press
you to give a good account of it; with which may very well consist, that you
proceed upon it when the danger is remote. 2. You assure us Plain Scripture is
your Rule; that is, Ibid.
(as appears by your Discourse here) your Rule as you are such a kind of
Protestant. Pray, will you explain and unriddle to us this most obscure word [
Plain] in what kind of Points, to whom, and by what kind of Light, is Scripture
taken as your Rule, Plain? And let us have something more than a blind Word to
work on. Experience tells us Scripture is not plain, even in the highest Points
of Faith, since so many follow it, and yet go astray. Again, if it be so plain,
all your useful Helps are needless; and Lastly, Scripture conceived by you to
be plain, which is your particular Rule, can never be made out to be Absolutely
Certain; for the Socinians too proceed upon Scripture, Plain to them, as their
Rule, and yet err; which evinces it is not so plain as to convince and certainly
enlighten Human Reason attending to it: An evident Argument, that both the one
and the other do but fancy it plain, but that, in reality, it is Plain to
neither. 3. You declare, that the Interpretation of it by any Sect of people,
Romanists or others, P. 28.
is Extrinsical to it, and no constitutive difference of it. That the
Interpretation of Romanists is not the particular Rule of Your Protestants, all
the World knew before; which makes it frivolous to tell us so here. Nor do we
challenge you, or pretend, that the Interpretation of any other Sect is your
Rule; for we told you, that the Interpretation of each Sect, respectively, was
its particular Rule. It Is Your own Interpretation we said was your Rule;
instead of granting or denying which, you shuffle about, and talk of the
Interpretation of Romanists, and other Sects. But, if (which is strangely
expressed) in other Sects you include your own too, it is all one to my Discourse.
For, whether you regard the Interpretation of your own Sect, or make account,
that as each individual Angel is a distinct Species, so each individual
Interpreter among you is a distinct Sect, still Scripture, as interpretable by
your selves, is your particular Rule, and not Extrinsical to it. For let me ask
you once more, Is not the Sense of Scripture your Faith? and, Is not that
Essentially your Particular Rule of Faith, that gives you your Particular
Faith? and, Must I mind you again, that it is the very Essence (as I may say)
or nature of Interpretation to give you the Sense of the Words of Scripture,
which in our case is your Faith. Wriggle then still which way you please, you
can never avoid, but your own Interpretation of Scripture is your Particular
Rule; taking you either for a whole Sect, an Individual, or Both.

56. At length, as a man in danger when he is followed close at the Heels, and
ready to be caught, takes a desperate leap, though he hazards himself a mischief;
you venture boldly to declare what is your particular Rule, as differenced from
both Romanists, and other Heretics and Sectaries; P. 28.
viz. Scripture plainly delivering a Sense owned and declared by the Primitive
Church of Christ in the Three Creeds, Four First General Councils, and Harmony
of the Fathers. After which you add, This, I hope, is plain dealing, and no
wriggling; and here we take up our stand, let him endeavor to draw us whither
he can. Never fear it, Sir, you are out of danger of being drawn any whither.
Ten thousand Cart-Ropes will not go round you, and we must be at least Twenty
Years in fastening them. But let us examine this your particular Rule. 1. I ask,
whether, since Differences use to be Essential, these words, [ owned and
declared by the Primitive Church, etc.] which are found in the Difference of
your Rule from that of others, be at all Essential, or not: If not Essential,
since, if you be Orthodox, you ought to have a Rule essentially distinct from
that of Heretics and Sectaries, what is this Essentially-different Rule of
yours; for it is this we are enquiring after? If you say it is Essential; then
Scripture had not all the due power to regulate you as to your Faith, without
their additional Light: And, by consequence, Scripture is not your Only and
Entire Rule, as you ever pretended hitherto; since these are Part of it. 2 When
you say your Rule is Scripture, plainly delivering a Sense, etc. I suppose you
must mean such a particular Sense as is of Faith with you: and can any more be
required to your particular Rule than Scripture plainly delivering your
particular Faith? Certainly you will not say it. For, there is the Divine
Authority in the Scripture, which is the Formal Motive of Divine Faith. There
is Plainness, which gives it a Directive Virtue, and qualifies it for a Rule;
and the Clear Light of this plain Rule must shine bright upon the particular
Tenets you hold, for it is to shine there, and no where else. Which once put,
what can all the other, esteemed by you but Human Authorities, serve for? Can
they add weight to the Divine Authority, or clear that to us which is already
so plain by Scripture? 3. Pray be candid, and tell us, After a thing is plain
in Scripture, are you to value a straw, what either Primitive Church, Creeds,
or Fathers say? I dare say you will grant you are not. Wherefore, all these are
utterly useless, unless they be pretended to give you some light to interpret
Scripture. But this cannot be neither; both because you tell us here plain
Scripture is your Rule, and it would not be plain, but obscure, if it needed an
Explainer: Besides, you put this as a constitutive difference of your Rule, and
yet denied that any Interpretation of Scripture is such, but Extrinsical to it.
It Is then a great Mystery still, how these Human Authorities affect your
General Rule, or influence your Faith already had by plain Scripture, or to
what end they serve but for a Show only. 4. The Lutherans proceed upon all
these as much as you, and yet hold a Real Presence of Christ's very Body in
the Sacrament, as much as we do. So that this does not difference you in your
Grounds or Rule from all other Sects; for sure you will not deny that to be a
Sect, that holds an Error, which Dr. St. has taken such pains to prove is
Idolatry. My last question shall be, Whether your sober Enquirers are not to
come to their particular Faith, by this their particular Rule of Faith? And,
since it is Evident they must, we would know next how many of them are to arrive
at any Faith at all? For it will take up many Years to examine and compare all
the Fathers, and be sure of their Harmony with one another, and with the
Scripture too. Nay, the Duration of the World will be too short to compass that
Satisfaction, if we may believe the Dissuasive from Popery, p 7.
Bishop of Downs, who assures us, That out of the Fathers succeeding the
Primitive Times, both sides eternally and inconfutably shall bring Sayings for
themselves respectively. Can any man living make Sense of such stuff, or ever
come at his Faith by such a Rule?

57. For this last Reason chiefly, I affirmed, That not one Protestant in a
million followed Dr. St's Rule, but honestly followed the Tradition of their
own Church, Pastors or Fathers; that is, believed as they had been educated.
To the first part of this Assertion you say little, but that if there be any
Fault, it is the Fault of the People only. But if this peculiar Rule of yours,
which takes in the seeing your Sense of Scripture owned and declared by the
Primitive Church, P. 29.
Four first General Councils, and the Harmony of the Fathers, be to be followed
e're you can come at your Faith; I doubt the Fault will prove to be in the
Rule. For very few Persons have Learning, fewer Leisure enough, and none of
them security of having any Faith by this Method; unless you could ensure their
Salvation by inspiring those who are ignorant with competent Learning to
understand all the Fathers and their Harmony; and withal, by letting them good
long Leases of their Lives; which I am of opinion you cannot. The second part,
that they followed the Method of Tradition, puts you in a marvelvellous jocund
humor; and, as if you had forgot your way (a thing not unusual with you) you
ask, all amazed, Where are we now? In the Church of Rome e're we are aware of
it: We are all good Roman Catholics on a sudden, we are become an Infallible
Church, etc. and away you run with the Jest, laughing and giggling as if you
had found a Mare's Nest. Surcease your fears, good Sir, you are not a jot the
nearer being Catholics for following your own Tradition. It reaches no farther
than John Calvin, Martin Luther, or some such Reforming Hero; and there it
ends and stops in a flat Novelty. Whereas Catholics abhor a Tradition that has
any known Beginning, or takes a Name from any Particular Author, or has any
Original but Christ, his Apostles, and the Church in the very first Age, who
were the Original Deliverers of it to the next, and so to the succeeding ones.
Pray Sir, what is become of your Jest? All I said, was, that You First Letter,
p. 27. l. 3, 4.
followed the Way of Tradition, however misplaced; I proved it by Reasons and
Instances; you hint some, omit others, and pervert the rest. You tell us, it is
all Scriptural Tradition. But we will trust our Eyes and Experience before your
bare Word. We see some taught before they can read; we see them Catechized in
Churches, and they repeat and believe what is there told them, though Scripture be
not quoted for the distinct Passages. We see them read the Scripture
afterward; but we see withal not One in Thousands trusts his own Judgment of
Discretion for the sense of it; but, without reluctance or jealousy, accepts
that which his Pastors assign to it; especially in Spiritual Points, or
Mysteries of Faith, about which we are chiefly discoursing. But do not your
self incline to admit (as much as we can expect from a man that affects not too
much candor) that very thing you so laugh at here. I affirmed, that Not one in
a million thinks of relying on your Rule of Faith, in order to make choice of
their Faith, etc. This you answer with hems and hahs: Though I fear -- yet I hope
he is out in his Account -- I am apt to think they are more attentive -- Yet be
it as he would have it, P. 29.
etc. Now, since they must either have their Faith by Reliance on their
Pastors and Preachers, delivering it to them, and educating them in it, that
is, by some kind of Tradition; or else by relying on Scripture; Ibid.
and your self seems to doubt, or rather in a manner grants it, That they have
it not the later way; you must at least doubt that they have it by the Way of
Tradition. But your Fancy was so big with your empty Jest, that you had forgot
what you had allowed but a little before.

58. Thus, Sir, I have traced you punctually step by step; not (as is your
constant use) picked out a few words scattered here and there: which you thought
you might most commodiously pervert: wherefore I have reason to expect the same
exact measure from you. The Sum of your Answer is manifestly this. Shuffles and
wilful Mistakes without number; Evasions endless; Falsifications frequent;
Godly Talk frivolous; Jests groundless; and all these brought in still to stop
Gaps when your Reason was Nonplust. Be pleased to leave off your Affected
Insincerities; otherwise I must be forced to Expose them yet farther; than
which there can be no Task more Ungrateful imposed upon

Your Servant, J. S.

ERRATA. Page 3. l. 28. Read both of u^. p. 10. l. ult. find it in. p. 11. l.
11 notice there. p. 21. l. 24. go forwards. p. 22. l. 27. Secret. Again, p. 23.
l. 9. as I had not. p. 32. l. 30. Is it a Way. Ibid. l. 32. upon it? p. 39. l.
7. Your Reason is, because. p. 44. l. 17. may hap. p. 45. l. 5. Gift. Ibid. l.
32. Prince of. p. 46. l. 7. it. Whether. p. 48. l. 27. a most. p. 53. l. 12.
Adherers. p. 57. l. 14. to be at a loss. Ibid. l. ult. discovered it. p. 60. l.
8. Speculaters. p. 62. l. 9. Yet not so explicitly or. p. 63. l. 28. formally
and. p. 73. l. 13. other, then.

THE THIRD Catholic Letter IN ANSWER To the Arguing Part of Doctor
Stillingfleet's SECOND LETTER To Mr. G.

By I. S.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Holbourn. 1687.

THE THIRD Catholic Letter, etc.
SIR,
1. I Come now to take a view of your Second Letter, with my Eye, as in the
former, fixed only upon what I think you mean for Argument. Whether you give us
just your First Words at the Conference; or second Thoughts since; whether no
troublesome Part of Mr. G's Discourse be left out; in short, whatever belongs
to matter of Fact, shall be out of my prospect, which shall be bounded by what
you think fit to open to it.

You acquaint us here ( Page 7.) that you put two Questions. 1. How does it
appear that the Church of Rome is Infallible in the sense and meaning of
Tradition? 2. Is this Tradition a Rule of Faith distinct from Scripture? And
you complain of Mr. G. that his Copy makes you ask a very wise Question. viz.
How does it appear that the Church of Rome is Infallible in Tradition. Why this
Question should be ironically called a very wise one, I cannot imagine. I am
sure it is very pertinent to the Intention of your Dispute, and directly points
at one of the Chief Subjects of the Conference. But you shall have your Will;
though I believe it will appear Mr. G's question made better Provision for your
Credit in point of Wisdom than you have done for your self.

2. For, your Second was in truth a very needless Question; because both your
self and all your Auditors, if they ever heard any thing of this kind of
Controversy, knew beforehand without needing to ask, that the Tradition we lay
claim to, pretends to derive down the Entire Body of Christ's Doctrine, and not
only the Books of Scripture, of which ( P. 9.) you very learnedly seem to
counterfeit your self ignorant. And this is the first part of your
distinguishing the plain Sense of this Word [ Tradition] as held by Mr. G. By
this Question you tell us ( p. 9.) you intended to put a difference between the
Tradition held by us [Protestants] and the Tradition disputed. For the first
meaning of the Word [ Tradition] which you grant, you put the Vniniversal
Testimony of the Christian Church, as to the Books of Scripture. The second and
denied meaning you contra distinguish from the former in these words. But if by
Tradition be understood either some necessary Articles of Faith not contained
in Scripture, or a Power in the Church to make unnecessary to become necessary,
this I denied, etc. Certainly, Sir, you have a Logic of your own so peculiarly
fitted to your designs, that no man living but your self ever used it. I ever
thought, and apprehended I had all the World on my side for thinking so, that
all Differences or Distinctions were to be Opposites, and to divide the Common
Genus, or the Notion that was to be distinguished; and, therefore, since the
first sense of the Word [ Tradition] was Tradition for Books of Scripture,
which is your Tenet; I verily expected the opposite sense of it should have been
Tradition for Doctrines, which is Ours; and that, as the former was Tradition
for Christ's Words, so the latter should be Tradition for Christ's Sense. But
while I was vainly imagining the second sense of the Word would be Tradition
for Faith, instead of that I found nothing but such Articles, and such a Power.
Did ever any mortal Man think or pretend that Tradition was an Article, or a
Power, any more than that it was a Horse shoe? Did your self when you granted
the Latin and Greek Churches followed Tradition, Dr. St's First Letter. P. 5.
intend to signify that they followed Articles and Powers? The sum then of
your learned Distinction is in plain Terms this: Tradition is twofold: One is
a Tradition for Books; the other is no Tradition at all, but only Articles and
Power. Had it not been better then to have accepted of Mr. G's Civility, and
have answered to the purpose, rather than out of a pique to his Copy, and a
desire to make it stand in need to be corrected, thus to pervert common sense,
and out of a too zealous care not to forfeit your Wisdom, to commit such an
illogical Absurdity? But Sense and Logic, though they be plain and honest true
Friends, yet I must own that, like the Queens Old Courtiers, they may appear
scandalous Companions to a man of your more polite and modish Education.
However, I dare answer for you, it was not ignorance of their worth, but an
unlucky necessity, which made you introduce in their room two New Questions to
while away the time and escape the true one, which you had no mind to meet
close and grapple with. Yet perhaps you may have better luck in your First
Question; let us see: By your First Question then, and your Explication of your
Design of it immediately after, P. 7.
it is easy to discern that you again quite mistake the End and Use, and
consequently the Nature of Tradition; which is a very inauspicious beginning,
and puts us out of hopes you should ever discourse pertinently of it, since you
go about to impugn you know not what. For Tradition does not bring us down set
Forms of Words only, as you imagine, viz. (as you instance P. 7.) Christ was
the Son of God, under which you say well a Heretical Sense may ly: But it
derives down to us the very sense of those words, and all the rest of Christ's
Doctrine; there being found in Tradition all the ways and means to signify and
express the Determinate Meaning and Sense of Forefathers that can possibly be
imagined. For, they not only deliver the Propositions of Faith in such or so
many Words, as you apprehend; but, they signify to their Children the very
Tenets they have in their hearts, in such expressions as best suits with the
occasion, according as their different methods of explaining themselves may
lead them. You may upon reflection observe it passes thus in your self when you
instruct people in their Faith: In which circumstance, you do not ty your self
up to rigorous Forms of Words made to your hands, but take your liberty to
deliver your self in any manner that you judge will make your meaning be best
understood. The same Method is taken by the Pastors of the Church (and the
Fathers of Families too according to their pitch and station.) They Catechize
their Children; they Preach upon the Texts proper to such Points; they dilate
themselves in their Discourse, with a full design to make their Sense be
perfectly comprehended; they reply to the difficulties of those who are not yet
perfectly instructed, or well satisfied; and accommodate themselves to all
their Exigencies. Lastly, they lead their Christian Lives, and breed up others
to do the same, by those Principles: And, Experience as well as Reason tells
us, that nothing gives the determinate sense of Words which express Tenets,
more distinctly than does perpetual Practice, and Living conformably to what is
signified by those Words. The want of which Requisits in the Letter of
Scripture, which can give no Answer to any difficulty, nor vary any expression
to make its Meaning more Intelligible, nor live, and by Example make the Reader
live according to such a sense, shows clearly, that, taking it alone and
unassisted by the Church's Tradition (determining and ascertaining it is
meaning in Dogmatical Points) it cannot in any proper Speech be called a Rule
of Faith.

3. If, notwithstanding what has been said, this Discourse should still seem to
you more a Speculation than a Real Truth (which yet I judge impossible): pray
reflect how your self would go about to instruct your own Children in your
Faith; and you will easily find by experience, when it is brought home to your
own case, how connatural this Way is to clear to them your sense, in what you
would have them Believe. Do not your self use the same Method? Do you only
deliver to them certain Forms of Speech, without endeavoring, by all the
possible means you can invent, to imprint the true sense (that I may use your
own Instance) of these Words [ Christ is the Son of GOD] in their Souls; and to
make it still clearer to them, as their budding capacities grow riper and
riper? Do you not experience they come by degrees to understand you too; and
that you have at length transfused into them the Sense of the Tenet you had in
your own Breast? Do not you practically instill into them, that they ought to
Pray to Christ; and exercise their Faith, Hope and Charity toward Him while
they are Praying? Do not you tell them they are to give Divine Reverence to
Christ; without stinting them, or making them scruple, lest they give too much,
or commit Idolatry, by giving that to a Creature, which is only due to the True
GOD? And does not this Practice, beyond all possibility of mistake, insinuate
into them, that he is equally to be Adored with God the Father, or Coequal to
him; and, so, not a Creature, but very God of very God? I doubt not but you do
all this; at least, I am sure, if you do it not, you do not your Duty: Nor do I
doubt but your Children come at length to understand you too, and, by
understanding you, become of the same Religion. And can you imagine, that Men
were not Men in all Ages, but (in the blind times of Popery forsooth!)
degenerated into Parrots, and learned to prate set-Words, without minding their
Sense? Or, that Christians were not always Christians, and endeavored to
imbue under-growing Posterity with the Meaning of the Tenets they professed; and
hoped to be Saved by their propagating them to those whom they were bound to
see Instructed in Faith? Or, lastly, can you conceive there can be any Means
invented by Man's Wit, to make known and propagate the Sense of Words that
express Points of Faith, which is not in the highest measure found in
Tradition? If you cannot, (as I am sure you cannot) then you must withal either
confess, that Tradition brings down the Sense of Christ's Law, and not the bare
Words or Sounds only; or, you must advance this monstrous Paradox, that there
is no possible way in the whole World for Mankind to communicate their Thoughts
and Meanings to one another in such Points; the contrary to which you
experience daily in your self and others. And, were this so, then, to what end
were Catechisms, Sermons and Controversies about such subjects? To what end all
Instructions, Conferences, and Explications of them by the Pastors? Again, if
you grant these (as you must) to be the best Expedients to transmit down the
Sense of Christ's Words, that is, our Faith; how can you hold Scripture's
Letter the Rule of Faith: which, taken as counterdistinguish't to Tradition,
wants all those most effectual Means of discovering to us it is Meaning.
Certainly, That must be the Rule of Faith that is best qualified to give us our
Faith; and that must be best qualified to give us our Faith, which has the best
Means to give us Christ's Sense; and not that which wants all the best Means to
produce such an Effect. On the other side, supposing Christ's Doctrine once
settled in the Body of the Church, how can you deny Tradition, thus abundantly
furnished with the best Means imaginable to deliver down the first-taught
Doctrine, to be such a Rule; seeing no more is required to be a Rule of Faith,
but to be qualified with a Power to acquaint us who live at this distance with
the true Sense of what was delivered by the Founders of the Church in the
beginning, without danger of losing it by the way; which cannot be imagined as
long as Tradition is held to, the same believed to day which was held
yesterday, or that the immediately succeeding Fathers still delivered the same
Doctrine. To do which there wanted no Power, as has been lately shown to the
full; nor Will to use that Power; being obliged to it by the greatest Penalties
GOD himself could inflict, the Damning Themselves and their Posterity.

4. But, say you (page 8.) If the Church may explain the Sense and Meaning of
Tradition, so as to oblige men to believe that by Virtue of such Explication,
which they were not obliged to before, then it is impossible the Infallibility
of Tradition should ly in a constant Tradition from Father to Son; for they
have no Power to oblige to any more than they received.] How Plausibly and
smoothly this Discourse runs, and how shrewdly it seems to conclude? Would any
well-meaning Reader imagine that it were perfect Nonsense all the while, and
wholly built on your own Liberality, giving us another sort of Tradition which
is no Tradition? This malignant word [ Tradition] must not be taken in its
right sense, that is resolved, for then it would grow too troublesome; but, take
it in any other sense, that is, mistake it, and then have at it. For when you
speak of explaining the sense and meaning of Tradition, you do not take
Tradition, as, you know well, we do, and as the word plainly imports; for the
Delivery of Doctrine, but for Doctrins Delivered; and so again, we have once
more lost the Question. For, what can these words mean? If the Church may
explain the sense and meaning of Tradition; that is, of the Method of conveying
down Christ's Doctrine? The Method of Delivery is the very Signification of that
Doctrine from Age to Age, and how can one Explain the Sense and meaning of a
signification of Christ's sense, when it is self is that very Explication of it?
This gives me occasion to reflect how oddly you have hampered our Tradition
hitherto instead of handling it. P. 9. You seem to doubt by your [ If no more
were meant, etc.] Whether it does not mean Tradition for the Books of
Scripture; and, this you knew well enough before, was none of our Tradition in
dispute here; which, as may be seen by Mr. G's Demonstration put down by your
self, First Letter p. 4. and 5. is confessed to be Tradition for matters of Faith
or Doctrine: Now in this new sense you give us there of Tradition, you kindly P.
9.
grant it; for it is your own, not that which we here mean by that word. Next
comes Ibid.
another [ If] and makes it seem to signify P. 10.
Articles and Power. And this is no Tradition at all; neither ours, nor yours,
nor any body's: For, neither those Articles nor that Power you speak of p. 10.
are or can be the Delivery of Christ's Doctrine from day to day; for that speaks
such a Method of bringing down things, not the things brought down. And this
you very gravely deny. And so you may, with my good leave, either deny or
expunge, or condemn it to what doom you please; for certainly it comes with a
felonious Intention, to draw the Reader out of his Road into a Labyrinth of
Nonsense, and then robb him of his Reason. Again, p. 7. you make it a Delivery
of bare Words, at best, with a general (impossible) sense, and perhaps a
Heretical one too, into the bargain; whereas you cannot but know Tradition, as
We mean it, is a Delivery of the sense of Christian Tenets, and this a
particular sense too; and such a one as cannot possibly be Heretical, while
this Rule is adhered to; unless the First-Taught Faith were Heretical, which is
Blasphemy to imagine. And, here again p. 8. you make Tradition or Delivery to
mean the Point delivered, and would have us give you the signification and
Explication of That which is it is self the signification and Explication of
Christ's Faith; and this too, the Sea Sect. 2, and 3.
very best that can be imagined. Is it possible to deform Tradition more
untowardly, or wrest it into more misconstructions than has been done already?
After a serious manner, certainly, it is impossible: But Drollery is now to act
its part: And to cheer your spirits, which droop't under the difficulty of
answering the Argument for Tradition, you put your self in masquerade; and
would make the Relation of perhaps two or three, it may be, partial Friends of
yours, concerning Mr. G's Discourse about You, a perfect parallel to our Rule
of Faith; and that, if they can mistake or misrepresent, down goes Tradition.
Which amounts to this, that sooner may all the Christian Fathers in any Age,
consisting of many millions, and those dispersed in far-distant Parts of the
World, be mistaken in their Faith, which it imported them no less than their
Salvation to know; sooner may all of them conspire to deliver to their Children
another Doctrine than that which they held the way to Heaven; than that a very
few of your own Party should, to gratify you, tell you a false Story, or
Aggravate; though all of them were, besides, professed Adversaries to the Person
against whom they witnest; and, indeed, Witnesses in their Own Common Cause. I
beseech you, Sir, though you be never so much to seek for a solid Answer, yet
speak at least plausible things, and do not thus expose your Credit while you
affect to play the Wit. Poor Tradition, what has it done to be thus
misrepresented! Did it deserve no better for bringing down the Book of
Scripture, but to be exposed in so many awkward Vizards, when it was to come
upon the Stage, and not once suffered to show it is true face, but still
travestee'd into another Form, and put in all shapes but its own? This Carriage
of yours is enough to make the Reader think you apprehend it to be some
terrible Gorgons Head, or some Basilisk; and, that the very sight of it, unless
it came thus muffled up, would undo you. At least he will suspect from such an
untoward broken Scene, that the Dramma is not like to be regular: Indeed you
shift too often, and to catch and confute you I must travel through the whole
Compass; for no sooner can a man steer one way, but your Discourse, like the
Wind, whips straight into another quarter; and about we must tack, or we must
not make forwards at all. But I will insist no more at present on this
dexterity of yours; you will afford your Friends many fresh Instances of it,
through the whole course of this Letter hereafter. Only I must note your
forgetfulness, or what else may I call it? For you took the Notion of Tradition
very right, First Letter ( p. 7.) where you alleged you had a larger and
firmer Tradition for Scripture than we had for us: You did not there, take
Tradition of that Book, for the Book delivered; for then that Book had been the
Delivery of its self; and yet that Book had as good Title to be it is own
Tradition, as you had to make the Points delivered by our Tradition to be the
Tradition or Delivery of those Points. You granted too in the same place that
the Latin and Greek Churches proceeded upon it; and, by granting this, confessed
there were as many Attesters went to make it up as there were Men, (at least
Intelligent men) in the compass of the many vast Nations which those two
Churches included: How come you then so much to forget your self as to parallel
it here to the pitiful Attestation of three or four possibly prejudic't
Relaters. But the reason of this self-contradicting and extravagant
representation of Tradition is clear; it was your Interest to take it right
there, and the same reason prevailed with you to take it wrong here.

5. But I am weary of fencing with Shadows, when I can take any occasion that
leads me to treat of what is Substantial. Mistake me not, it is not your
Discourse that obliges me to it; it had been a sufficient Answer to That, to
let the Reader see you purposely mistook the Nature of Tradition, to divert and
perplex his Thoughts, and there let it rest. Yet, Because your taking Tradition
wrong, for the Doctrines delivered, good use may be drawn from it, I shall, for
the benefit of the Reader, not decline speaking to what you object. You make
account ( p. 7. and 8.) the Tradition of the Church delivered the Point of the
`Reall Presence, and of Christ's being the Son of God, in General Words only.
Which, waving what has been alleged in my 2 d. and 3 d. Sect. I judge for
diverse other Reasons to be Impossible. For, besides that, if the Forefathers
delivered only the Words, they taught their Children (against the supposition)
no Faith in these Points, for Faith has sense in it, and is not Faith if it
have none, being in that case no true Judgment or Truth; who knows not that
Words were instituted and intended by Mankind to signify something; and,
therefore, it is inconsistent with the nature of the same Mankind, when at Age,
especially the Wiser sort, not to hold some Sense or other to be signified by
those Words; and with the nature of Christians, not to instruct those whom they
are to educate in Faith, with that Sense; as also with the nature of those who
are to be Instructed, not to desire to know the Sense of the Tenets they are to
believe. But, that Sense cannot be a General one, that is, Common to all the
several Tenets now sound among us (for it will not be General if it exclude any
one) it must therefore abstract from all particulars, and be applicable to
every one. Now there is no such Generical Notion or Sense which can be
abstracted from Christ's Body, which is Living, and a piece of Bread, unless
this, that they are both Quantitative or Mixed Bodies; to believe which would
make a very extravagant Point of Faith; much less can such an Abstraction be
made from Christ's Real Living Body, and some supernatural Gifts or Qualities,
either in the Bread, or wrought in our Souls by Means of our receiving the
Eucharist; For a Substance and a Quality differ toto genere (as the Logicians
express it) that is, belong to different Commonest Heads, which have no Genus
above them, or that can abstract from them. Least of all can any such Common
Notion be abstracted from the Natural or True Son of God, and a mere Man; no
more than there can from God and a Creature. Whence follows most evidently,
that, since the Faithful must necessarily have always had some Meaning of those
words in their hearts, and a general Sense of them is impossible, they must
have ever had Particular Notions of those Words, determining their Sense to the
one signification, or the other; that is, either to mean Christ's Real Body, or
not his Real Body; a True and Essential Godhead, or a mere Creature. My second
Reason is, because Faith is Ordained to work through Charity, or to stir up
devour Affections in us; whence, as the distance is Infinite in both cases,
between one of those Senses and the other, there being God on one side, on the
other a Creature; so the Affections of the Soul wrought in us by our Faith,
must either oblige us to pay an Infinite Veneration to a Creature if Christ's
Real Body (and consequently God) be not there, or if Christ be not God; which
is the greatest deviation from true Religion that is possible; or else, to be
highly Irreverent, and to want the most efficacious Motive that can be imagined
to excite and elevate our Devotion, if he be there, or Christ be indeed God.
Nor can any middle disposition be invented that can make the Acts of the Soul
hover between it is tendency toward an Infinite and Finite Being, or between an
Infinite and Finite Reverence. I dare confidently conclude then, and dare avow
it to be Demonstrable out of the Nature of Mankind, that either the one or the
other Determinate Sense of those Words must have been held in all Ages, ever
since the Apostles time, by the Generality of the foregoing Faithful; more or
less expressly, as those respective Points, broke out more or less into
Christian Action; which their Duty could not but prompt and oblige them to
deliver to their Children as occasion served; and consequently, that that
Particular sense, and not only (as you fancy) the General Words, must have
descended by Tradition.

6. Next, my Position is, that, taking the word [ Tradition] for Points
descending by Tradition, as you will needs have it, the Church has Power and
Authority to explain the Sense and Meaning of them, and to oblige others to
believe Her; and yet, that this hinders not the Infallibility of Tradition from
consisting in holding the same to day that was delivered yesterday, etc. This
is the difficulty, I conceive, that so much troubles you. To clear which, you
may please to reflect on what you know already by experience; that, let any man
advance a single Tenet, and afterward, upon occasion, set himself to Explicate
at large the Sense of that Proposition; it is plain, there will be found in that
large Explication many particular Propositions; not adequately the same, but in
part different from that which he went about thus elaborately and distinctly to
explain; of which perhaps even himself was not aware while he did not reflect;
not being yet invited to make it clearer, or dilate on it. And yet he held,
even at first, the Sense (and not only the Words) nay the whole Sense of that
main Tenet or Sentence; though he saw not distinctly every single Proposition
contained in it, till he became obliged to Scan and Study his own
undistinguisht, but true, thoughts concerning it. The same may be said of every
Sermon and it is Text, supposing it be rigorously held to; and no more be
attended to but to explain it is intrinsic and full Meaning. In which case, the
Preacher sticks not to assure his Auditory, that what he has Preached to them
all the while, is Gods Word; and to press them to regard it as such, as far as
his small Authority over them can reach. And, had he more, in case he did
verily judge his Explication of that Text was genuin, and, consequently,
Christ's true Sense; he would questionless esteem himself bound to make use of
that Authority to his utmost, to edify them with the Explicit Belief of each
Particular contained in so Excellent a Truth. This being so, why should not the
same Privilege be granted to the Church and her Pastors to explicate, upon
due occasion, the Sense of Christ's Faith, in many particular Propositions
involved in the main Tenet, (even though we should suppose them to be not heard
of, perhaps not distinctly thought of, before) which is allowed to every
private man, and any ordinary Preacher? And, if those Governors of the Church
be, by their Office, Conservers of Christ's Law, and see that these
Propositions, newly singled out, are included, in any Point of Faith received
upon their Rule; why ought they not, out of their Duty and Zeal to preserve
Christ's Faith Entire, both define these Points, and also use their Authority
to oblige the Faithful to accept them as such; or, if they disaccept them and
express themselves against them, to exclude them from their Communion?

7. But still, say you, these particular Points came not down by Tradition, nor
were delivered as held yesterday, and so upwards till Christ's Time; for they
were not held at all before they were defined or declared. I distinguish: These
Propositions were held ever and descended ever as they were involved in the
Entire Point; in the bowels of which, the Sense of those others were found:
But, as singled out in such and such particularizing manners of Expression,
they were (perhaps) not held ever. I say, not held ever formerly, at least not
universally. Which is the true reason why some Private Writers, nay possibly
some Great Men, might (out of a dutiful fear not to add to Faith) have doubted
of them, or disaccepted them, perhaps opposed them; till the Collective Church,
or some Great Body of them, who are able to look more intelligently into those
Points, declared and unfolded the Sense of the main Article, in which they were
hitherto enwrapt: For, besides that it is their peculiar Office, and (as it
were) Trade, to look deeper into the Sense of the several Points of Faith, then
others do; it is very Rational to conceive, that those Tenets were found more
particularly explicated in some parts of the Body of the Church than in others;
which makes it difficult to affirm any particular Point defined since Christ's
time, was not in many places of the Church held ever, though it was not in All;
nor made as yet any great Noise, being as yet neither opposed, (which alarmed
the Church to reflect heedfully upon it;) nor so powerfully recommended, which
obliged the Faithful more briskly and manifestly to own it. What difficulty or
disagreeableness to the connatural course of things there is in all this, I
cannot imagine; Nor, I am confident, your self; unless your thoughts, startling
at the unwelcom Conclusion, should recoil back to your former mistake, that
only Words came down by Tradition; or that Christ's Sense was never in the
Breast of the Diffusive Church (his Spouse, and the Pillar and Ground of Truth)
and in the Understandings of her Pastors; which takes all Faith out of the
world, and destroys the very Essence of a Church: Or, lastly, that many
particular (or rather partial) Propositions are not included in the Total Sense
of every main Tenet, and disclosed by a full explication of it; whence it comes
to be discovered to be a Part of It, that is, in part It.

8. I am sorry you will needs give me occasion to interrupt such Discourses, as
tend to the clearing some Truth, to defend Tradition against your reproachful
mistakes; with which, in defiance to all Sense, I had almost said against your
own Conscience too, you have loaded it. But these are some of your Extrinsecal
Arguments, which, for want of better, jealousy of your cause and reputation
prevails with you still to make use of; and, so, you will triumph mightily if
they be past over unconfuted. You attempt, p. 8. to play your Politic Game,
and to conquer us by dividing us in our Rule of Faith; though it cost your Credit
very dear to effect it. To this end, running on in your former mistake of the
plain word [ Tradition] and that it means Points and Articles, you tell us
sadly that this denying to the Church of Rome Power to explain Tradition takes
off from its Power and Authority. That it resolves all into mere Humane Faith
-- mere Natural Reason -- That the utmost it can amount to, p. 9.
is resolving Faith into a Logical Demonstration. Then follows the Holy Cant.
And is this the Faith Christians are to be saved by? what Grace of God, what
Assistance of the Holy Spirit are necessary to such a Faith as this? But for
this I refer you to the Haeresis Blacloana. You should have added See Haeresis
Blacloana.
[where Dr. Tillotson, and my self have the honor to be brought in for writing
so Catholickly]. Truly Sir, you have given us a very pretty Period; in which
many of your modish qualifications vy for the precedence, and it is hard to
determine which has most Title to it. Nay, p. 13. you tell Mr. G. that our
Grounds overthrow the Church's Authority in matters of Faith, and proceed upon
Pelagian Principles. Your Charge, Sir, is very grievous and heavy; and
therefore, unless the Evidence you bring to prove it, be answerable, you will
manifest your self to proceed upon a new Christian (in truth, an old
Unchristian) Principle; but, which suits it seems with your humor, and is
requisite to your Cause, Calumniare fortiter -- I need not tell you whose it
was.

9. To stop your mouth therefore once for all concerning Haeresis Blacloana,
know that that Book, though Printed in a Catholic Country, could not be
licenc't; but came out surreptitiously, without any Printers name at it, or any
other then a fictitious name of the Author. Know that it was sent to Rome, and
was compared there with the Doctrine of Tradition which it impugn'd. And yet it
was not found that this Doctrine either overthrew the Churches Authority in
matters of Faith, nor that there was any Pelagianism in it: Otherwise those
Books which were accused of it, and defended Tradition to the height, had not
escaped their Censure. This shows how shallow this Exception of yours is, and
to what mean shifts you are reduced, since you can quote a squabbling Book of
one Roman Catholic against another about Tradition, in stead of answering the
Argument for it. An ill-natured man might (you know very well) name Authors of
another Communion, not too well thought and spoken of by Eminent Persons of
their own side, and written against too by others. Yet I shall not be so like
some I know, to turn a Dispute into a Wrangle; but shall apply my self to show
how far the Doctrine of Tradition is from deserving to be charged with such
injurious reflections.

10. But before I go farther, I must take notice of your quoting F. Warner
here, p. 8. and your appealing to him, where you put Haeresis Blacloana in the
Margent: By which you seem to hint, that he is the Author of that Book, and an
Adversary to the Doctrine of Tradition; even so far as to judge it not sound in
Faith: for, no less aversion could make you very much question whether F. W.
would absolve any man who professed to embrace Catholic Faith on Mr. G's.
Grounds. p. 13.
But, as that very Reverend Person declares, he never saw that Book till some
of them were presented him bound, so himself has forestal'd your little
policies, aiming to set us at variance in our Tenets, in his Anti-Haman p. 203.
[ We Catholics have Faith, because we believe firmly those Truths that God has
revealed, because he revealed them to the Church: Which, as a faithful Witness,
gives hitherto, and will give to the end of the World Testimony to that
Revelation. And we cannot be Heretics because we never take the liberty to
choose our selves, or admit what others choose; but we take bona fide what is
delivered us, revealed by the greatest Authority imaginable, on Earth, which is
that of the Catholic Church.] He proceeds: [ Here then is the Tenure of our
Faith. The Father sent his only begotten Son, consubstantial to himself, into
the world; and what he heard of his Father he made known to us, Io. 15.11. The
Father and Son sent the H. Ghost; and he did not speak of himself, but what he
heard, that he spoke, Io. 16.13. The Holy Ghost sent the Apostles, and they
declared unto us what they had seen and heard, 1 Io. 1.3. The Apostles sent the
Highest and Lowest Prelates in the Church; and the Rule by which they framed
their Decrees was, Let nothing be altered in the Depositum, Let no Innovation
be admitted in what is delivered: Quod Traditum est non innovetur:] But he more
expressly yet declares himself no Adversary to this way ibid. p. 267. Your
Friend Mr. G. B. had called this way of proving Doctrines, that They had them
from their Fathers, they from theirs, a New method of proving Popish Doctrines;
and receives for Answer these words. You discover your Ignorance, in saying
that Method was New, or that Arnaud invented it: Mr. Thomas White had it before
Arnaud: Mr. Fisher a Jesuit, before T. W. Bellarmin before him; and St.
Austin, St. Stephen Pope, and Tertullian before them all. Where you see he both
allows this very Method we take, as practiced by Modern Controvertists of note;
nay, by some of his own Order too, whom he is far from disapproving; and by
Ancient Fathers also, whom he highly venerates.

Your petty Project thus defeated, I shall endeavor to open your Eyes, if they
be not (which God grant they be not) wilfully shut.

11. The Asserters of Tradition observing, that the Adversaries they had to
deal with admitted Christ's Doctrine to be Divine, held it the most compendious
way to put a speedier End to all Controversies, (which Experience taught them
were otherwise liable to be spun out into a voluminous length) and the most
efficacious Method to conclude all the Heterodox, of what denomination soever,
to prove, That the Doctrine held now by the Catholic Church was Christ's, or
the self-same that was taught at first by Himself and his Apostles. It was
bootless for them to attempt to prove this by Texts of Scripture, managed by
their Private Wits; For, the Truth of our Faith depending on Christ's Teaching
it, if it were not Absolutely Certain Christ taught it, it could not be evinc't
with Absolute Certainty to be True. Now, the same Experience informed them,
that no Interpretation of Scripture, made by Private Judgments, (of themselves,
or others) could arrive to such a pitch of Certainty; and, consequently, would
leave Faith under the scandalous ignominy of being possibly, and, perhaps
actually false. It was to as little purpose to allege against such Adversaries
the Divine Assistance to the Church, or Christ's Promise of Infallibility to it,
as you very weakly object to Mr. G. (p. 16.) as not once asserted by him. For,
though this was believed by the Faithful, yet it was disowned by all those
Heterodox; and, being it self a point of Faith, it seemed improper to be
produced for a Rule of Faith. Besides, how should they prove this Divine
Assistance? If by Scripture interpreted by their Private Judgments; these not
being Absolutely Certain, it would have weakened the Establishment of that
Grand Article, which to the Faithful was a kind of Principle to all the rest,
in regard that upon the Certainty of it, the Security they had of all the other
Articles was to depend. If, by the Divine Authority of the Church it self, it
was not so easy to defend that method not to run round in a Circle; whereas
all Regular Discourse ought to proceed straight forwards. These Considerations
obliged them to set themselves to make out by Natural Mediums, that the Human
Authority of such a Great Body, as was that of the Church, was Absolutely
Certain, or Infallible, in conveying down many visible and notorious Matters of
Fact; and, among the rest, (or rather far above the rest, the Subject being
Practical, and of infinite Concern) that such and such a Doctrine was first
taught to the Age contiguous to the Apostles, and continued ever since. By this
means they resolved the Doctrine of the present Church into that of Christ, and
his Authority; and, consequently, (these being supposed by both Parties to be
Divine) into the Divine Authority, granted by all to be the Formal Motive of
Divine Faith.

12. This is the true state of that Affair. And now, I beseech you, Learned
Sir, Where Is the Polagianism? Where is the least Ground, or shadow of Ground,
for all these bugbear words and false accusations, which, to make them sink
deeper into the Reader's Belief, and create a more perfect abhorrence of our
Tenet, come mask't here under an affected show of Godliness? All hold their
Faith relies on the Divine (or Christ's) Authority, into which they finally
resolve it: and all Catholics hold Grace necessary to believe the Mysteries of
Divine Faith; though all, perhaps, do not judge Grace needful to believe upon
Human Authority, this Matter of Fact, viz. That Christ taught it. Yet my self
in P. 154.
Faith vindicated, seeing that the admitting this Truth would oblige the
Heterodox to relinquish their ill-chosen Tenets, and return to the Church,
against which they had a strong aversion; did there declare my particular
Sentiment, That God's Grace and some Assistance of the Holy Ghost was required,
to make them willing to see the force even of this Natural Demonstration, so
much against their Humor and Interest. Is it Pelagianism to conclude, that
Human Motives, which are Preliminaries to Faith, and on which the assuredness
of Faith it self depends, as to us, are Truly Certain? And, Might you not with
as much reason say the same, if one should maintain the Absolute Certainty of
our Senses, which is one of those Preliminaries? How strangely do you
misrepresent every thing you are to meddle with! How constantly do you make
your voluntary mistake of every Point serve for a Confutation of it! It Is
confessed, and ever was, That the Human Authority of the Church, or Tradition,
begets only Human Faith, as its immediate Effect; but, by bringing it up to
Christ, it leads us to what is Divine; yet not by its own force, but by Virtue
of the Supposition agreed upon, That Christ's Doctrine is such. Is it
Pelagianism to say, we must use our Reason to come to Faith; or, do you pretend
all the World must be the worst of Phanaticks, and use none? Or, does it
trouble you, we offer to justify, that the Reasons we bring to make good that
Preliminary, which, in our way of Discoursing, is to introduce Faith, are not
such as may deceive us? And that we do not confess they are Fallible, or may
deceive us, as you grant of your Interpretations of Scripture, which ground
your Belief? No surely, we shall not quit the Certainty we have, because you
have none. For if it be not Certain such Doctrines are indeed Christ's, who is
our Lawgiver, we cannot be sure they are True; their Truth depending on his
Authority; and, would you have us for fear of Pelagianism confess all our Faith
may perhaps be but a story? But, into what an unadvisedness does your Anger
transport you, to run the Weapon through your own Side to do us a Mischief? You
bore us in hand ( First Letter p. 7.) that you had a larger and firmer
Tradition for Scripture than we have for what we pretend to. Yet, this
Tradition could cause no more but Human Faith; for I do not think you will say
you had Divine Faith, before you were got to your Rule of Divine Faith. By your
Discourse then your self are an Arrant Pelagian too: Perhaps worse than we,
because you pretend to a larger and firmer (Human) Tradition than you say we
have; nay, you pretend it to be Absolutely Certain too, which is a dangerous
Point indeed. Pray, have a care what you do; for, you are upon the very brink
of Pelagianism. The knowing you have the true Books of Scripture, is a most
necessary Preliminary to your Faith; for, without knowing that, you cannot
pretend to have any Faith at all; and, if it be Pelagianism in us to hold such
Preliminaries absolutely Certain, I fear the danger may come to reach you too.
Yet you have one Way, and but one, to escape that damnable Heresy; which is,
that you do not go about to demonstrate the Absolute Certainty of Your
Tradition, as we do of Ours. That, that is the very Venom of Pelagianism. But,
take comfort, Sir, my life for yours, you will never fall so abominably into
the mire as to demonstrate or conclude any thing: (For, what Idaea soever you
may frame of it, we mean no more by Demonstrating, but plain honest
Concluding.) Your way of Discoursing does not look as if it intended to
conclude or demonstrate. It Is so wholly (pass for as great a Man as you will)
made up of mistakes, misrepresentations, petty cavils, witty shifts, untoward
explications of your own Words, constant prevarications, and many more such
neat dexterities, that whatever fault it may through human frailty, provoked by
powerful Necessity, be liable to, I dare pawn my life it will never be guilty
of that heinous Crime of demonstrating or concluding any thing; no, not the
Absolute Certainty of your firmer Tradition. And, yet, unless you can prove or
conclude it is thus Certain, it is a Riddle to us, how can you either hold or say
it is such.

13 Pray, be not offended, if on this occasion I ask You a plain downright
Question. Is it not equally blamable to Falsify your Adversaries Tenet
perpetually, as it is to falsify his Words? Nay, is it not worse, being less
liable to discovery, and so more certainly and more perniciously Injurious? And
can any thing excuse You from being thus faulty, but Ignorance of our Tenet? I
fear that Plea will utterly sail you too, and leave you exposed to the Censure
of every sincere Reader, when I show him to his Eye that You could not but know
all this before. For, in Error Non-plust p. 121. Sect. 8. You must needs have
read the quite contrary Doctrine, and how those who maintain Tradition do
resolve their Faith. [There is no necessity then of proving this Infallibility
(viz. Of the Church) merely by Scripture interpreted by Virtue of this
Infallibility. Error Non-plust, P. 121.
Nor do the Faithful or the Church commit a Circle in believing that the Church
is Infallible, upon Tradition. For, -- they believe only the supernatural
Infallibility built on the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, that is on the
Church's Sanctity; and, this is proved by the Human Authority of the Church to
have been held ever from the Beginning; and the force of the Human Testimony of
the Church is proved by Maxims of mere Reason] The same is more at large
delivered in the foregoing Section, and in diverse other places. Now, this Book
was Writ against your self; and, so, it is as hardly Conceiveable you should
never have read it, as it is Unconceiveable how you should ever answer it: And,
if you did read it, what was become of your sincerity when you counterfeited
your Ignorance of our Tenet? All is resolved (say you, here, p. 9.) into mere
Human Faith, which is the unavoidable consequence of the Doctrine of Oral
Tradition. How shrewdly positive you are in your Sayings, how modest and meek
in your Proofs! Nothing can be more manifest from our constantly avowed
Doctrine, and your own opposing it too, than it is, that Tradition resolves all
into Christ's and the Apostles Teaching: And, pray, do you hold that Christ is
a mere man, or that the Believing Him is a mere human Faith, or that the
Doctrine taught by Him and Them is merely Human? If this be indeed your Tenet, I
am sorry I knew it not before; for then I should have thought fit to begin with
other Principles to confute you: And, I pray God, by your impugning known
Truths, you may never need them. I see I had reason to allege in Faith
Vindicated, that the Grace of God was requisite to make men assent to a Natural
Conclusion when it came very cross to their Interest: For, it appears too plain
it is exceedingly needful to assist you here in a mere Point of Common Morality;
which is, to enable you not to speak and represent things directly contrary to
your own knowledge. And, I am sorry I must tell you, and too evidently prove
it, that the greatest part of your Writings against Catholics, when the Point
is to be managed by Reason, is (in a manner) made up of such studied
Insincerities.

14 You give us another Instance of this Indisposition of your Will, p. 13.
where you tell us Mr. M. says, that the first thing which was proposed, and
indeed the only subject Mr. G. had any purpose to discourse on was, whether
Protestants had a Ground of Absolute Certainty for their Faith or not? This you
do not deny; but turn it off to a quite different business; and then slide from
that to another, till you had wheeled about the Question from what was intended
to the Point you thought best served your turn to shuffle in. Here (say you)
the Faith spoken of is that Faith whereby we are Christians. Ibid.
How? Are Protestants and Christians then Convertible Terms or Synonyma's? Are
there not many sorts of Christians which are not Protestants? And is it not
plain, and not contradicted by your self, that it was demanded, whether (your)
Protestants had a Ground of Absolute Certainty for their (that is Protestant)
Faith? Does not the word [ their] signify theirs as distinct from all other
sorts of Christians? And is it come now to signify theirs simply as Christians,
or as conjoined with all the rest? This is too open dodging to pass upon the
Reader. It Is granted, you hold many of the same Christian Points which
Catholics do; but it is denied, you can as you are Protestants (I mean still
such Protestants as are of your Principles) hold them to be Absolutely Certain,
or hold them upon such Grounds as are able to support that Firm and Unalterable
Assent, called Faith: The Grounds proper to your Protestants being (as was
shown in my Former Letter, Sect. 24.) to hold them upon the Letter interpreted
by your selves. Of which Letter, by virtue of your Principles, you can have no
Absolute Certainty (as shall be shown hereafter;) and of that Letter
Interpreted by your private Judgments, much less. In a word, either you speak
of Points held by Protestants, p. 14.
which you pretend to be all the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his
Apostles; and then you are distinguished not only from those Christians called
Catholics, but from Socinians, Lutherans, and (to omit others) Calvinists too,
if you be one of those that hold Episcopacy to be of Divine Right: Or else you
mean the Assent, given to those Points of Protestant Faith, on their pretended
Rule; and then, you must show your Assent is more Absolutely Certain than that
of the three last, and diverse others who Dissent from you in their Tenets, and
yet go upon the Same Rule; and make it out to us, that, though it be both theirs
and yours, yet still' it is yours in particular, or peculiarly yours, as you are
such Protestants.

15. Your next Prevarication is much worse. After you had should Protestant
Faith into Christian Faith, you throw it a Bar and a half further off by
virtue of an Id est. Absolute Certainty of the Christian Faith: i. e. (say you)
of the Grounds on which we believe the Scripture to contain the Word of God, or
all things necessary to be believed by us in order to salvation. This Id est,
like Pacolets wooden Horse, has a Charm to transfer us from one Pole to the
other in an instant. By virtue of its all-powerful Magic, Christian Faith is
made to be the same with the Grounds on which we believe the Scripture to
contain the Word of God; so that, according to you, Faith is the same with your
Grounds for Scripture's being your Ground; that is, Faith is made the same with
the Grounds for your Ground of Faith. What a medley of Sense is this, and how
many folds have we here involving one another! Christian Faith is Divine, these
Grounds and the Faith built on them is Human, being the Testimony of Men: Are
these two the same Notion? Had I a mind to be Quarrelsome, how easily, how
justly too, might I retort your former Calumny against Tradition; and object
that this way of yours resolves all into mere Human Faith, mere Natural Reason,
that it makes God's Grace and Assistance of the Holy Ghost unnecessary to
Faith; and then ask, Is this the Faith Christians are to be saved by? And
reckon up twenty other absurdities springing from this ill-grounded Position.
But I am now to trace your transferring Faculty. In your First Letter p. 7. you
speak only of Absolute Certainty as to the Rule of your Faith, viz. the
Scripture; but here the case is altered; Dr. St. Second Letter, p. 14.
and Certainty of Scripture is turned into Certainty of the Grounds on which we
believe the Scripture to contain the Word of God. These slippery doings, and
not any Reasons you bring, make you Inconfutable; for, we must set upon the
Proteus in all his shapes ere we can bind him. The Question is not, whether
Scripture Contains the Word of God, that is, his Sense, or our Faith, but
(which we cannot mind you of too often, for all will be too little to make you
take notice of it) how the Sense contained there can be got out thence, or be
signified to us with Absolute Certainty, even in the very highest Points of
Christian Faith, and what Grounds you have to bring about this Effect: For, you
can profess no Absolute Certainty of any one point, till you have made it out
with Absolute Certainty, that the Sense, you pretend contained in Scripture is
it is genuin Meaning. This is your true task, if you would prove the Absolute
Certainty of your Protestant Faith, or your Faith as depending on your
Principles. But of this we hear not a syllable.

16. And I beseech you, to what end is it to tell us you are speaking of your
Rule or Ground of Faith, if it carry you not through to any one particular; no,
not those Points which are most Fundamental, and so most necessary for the
Salvation of Mankind? Since, notwithstanding you have your Rule, you are still
as far to seek as before in all a Rule should be good for? Remember, the
Question and Mr. T's expectation was about the Absolute Certainty of Protestant
Faith, by virtue of your Rule or Ground; and, therefore, if your Rule does not
reach to Absolute Certainty of the main Points of Faith at least, you are still
at a loss both for your Faith, and for a Ground of your Faith. Yet this,
conscious of it is failure, you seem unwilling to stand to, by still sliding
silently over it, or slipping by it when it lies just in your way. For, You
tell us, page 20. that your Faith rests on the Word of God as its Absolute
Ground of Certainty. Which by the way is another little shuffle; for you should
have said absolutely-Certain Ground, not Absolute Ground of Certainty. But let
that pass, and let the horse-mill go for the mill-horse. You proceed. But the
particular* Ibid.
Certainty as to this or that Doctrine, depends on the Evidence that it is
contained in Scripture. You ought to have said, if you would make your Faith so
Certain as you pretended [ We are absolutely Certain such and such particular
Points are contained there] otherwise your General Ground comes not up to the
Question, nor does your Faith any service at all, since it leaves it still
Uncertain; of which more hereafter. Especially, since you pretended, or rather
declared openly, p. 14. that you now held all the same Doctrine that was taught
by Christ and his Apostles: Which Profession reaches to all the Points of
Faith, and not only to your Ground of Faith. I must confess you rendered that
Profession insignificant, and cancelled the obligation as soon as you had made
it, in the Explication of those words immediately following; which makes those
hearty expressions [ Absolutely Certain of all the same Doctrin] amount to no
more, but that you resolve your Faith into Scripture. We must, I see, deal with
you as those who have a pretense in Court do with Great Courtiers; who lose
their repute with them as ill-bred, and unmannerly, if they will needs take
them at their word, and do not distinguish between what is spoken and what is
meant. Your Answer was very honest and direct [We are absolutely Certain we now
hold all the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles. The
Comment is this, [ I framed my Answer on purpose to show that our Faith is not
to be resolved into what Christ taught, any otherwise than as it is conveyed to
us by the Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists.] Whereas, if there be so
much as one word of [ Writing or Evangelists] even hinted in your Answer it
self (unless the Word Taught meant Writ, which cannot be because we never read
that Christ writ any Books) or the least Semblance of reason, for making this
Skewing Explication, but to shuffle off your too large Concession, I will
confess my self too shallow to fathom the profound depth of your inscrutable
sense. Resolve then your Faith, in God's Name, into what you will, so you but
show us an Absolutely Certain Connection, between the Points resolved, and the
Rule into which you profess to resolve it: Otherwise it is no Resolution of
Faith, if the continued Chain of Motives winding it up to the First Truth, or
God's infinite veracity, hangs slack. Such Incoherence serves not for Faith,
which must be indissolubly connected to the Formal Motive of all our Faith;
else the Resolution of it may be shattered, and broke to pieces by the way, ere
we come there. Which if it may, then the Resolution is no Resolution, for that
speaks Connection of the Motives; and, Faith thus resolved may perhaps all be
False, and so is no Faith. It Is your work then to show in particular, when you
come to it, and at present in general, that your Rule gives you Absolute
Certainty of the Points of Faith, more than it does the Socinian, who have the
same Rule, and profess to follow it as much as you do for your heart, and yet
err enormously. Nay, in effect they take the same Method too to interpret
Scripture which you do; for, though you give good words to the consent of former
ages, yet your Grounds do not allow it Absolute Certainty in bringing down
Doctrine or interpreting Scripture; and less than such a Certainty, and in such
things, signifies nothing in our case. And it is either by your Rule and Method,
you can arrive thus certainly at the Sense of Scripture, or by nothing. If you
could once with Absolute Certainty convince the Socinians of Obstinacy against
a Clear Truth by your Rule, or Method, or both together; I mean, if you could
make it clear to them that your Rule of Faith, cannot possibly bear any other
Sense, so that the indifferent part of the world judged them wilful adherers to
a false Interpretation, or that you could silence them, and put them to open
shame for adhering to it, you would do something* Otherwise, your starting aside
still from the Absolute Certainty of the Points, even though p. 14. you pretended
to be Absolutely Certain you hold them All, and talking to us of nothing but a
General Ground, is mere shuffling; and shows plainly you meant not really in
that Answer of yours to Mr. G's first Question, where you spoke of all the
Doctrine; which includes every Particular Point; so that by All it seems you
meant None. It Is very paradoxical to see you distinguish here ( p. 14) between
the Doctrine taught by Christ, and that which was taught by the Apostles. The
reason why you do it, is to insinuate into our Readers that we derive the
source of our Tradition from Christ's Teaching orally (as the Jews affirm of
Moses delivering an unwritten Law) else to what purpose this Distinction? The
Tradition we lay claim to has no such obscure Original; it takes it is ^ife from
the whole Body of Primitive Christians in the Apostles days, dispers't in Great
multitudes over the World, and settled in the Knowledge of his Faith by means
of their Preaching. So that Tradition starts into motion from a most Public,
and notorious matter of Fact, viz. That the Apostles taught the First
Christians such a Faith. To what imaginable purpose then was this frivolous
distinction brought in? You knew this was our Tenet; and we knew well your Rule
was Scripture. What needed then this shuffling Paraphrase? By Tradition, you
know we mean a Testimony for Doctrine received. If the source be weak, or that
the Body of the Witnessers of it is Delivery at first, and successively
afterward, was small, the Tradition is, consequently, weak in proportion; if
Great, it was stronger still, according as the multitude of the Attesters was
more numerous, and their Credibleness more unexceptionable. Well, but admit
your Faith be not resolved into what Christ taught by his own mouth, but what
the Apostles taught us from him, why must you necessarily resolve your Faith
into their Writings only? Did the Apostles when they went to convert the world
go with Books in their hands, or Words in their Mouths? Or were those Words a
jot less Sacred when it came from their Mouths, than when they put them in a
Book? Or, lastly, does any Command from Christ appear to write the Book of
Scripture, or any Revelation before hand that it was to be a Rule of Faith to
the future Church? No such matter: and the Accidental occasions of it is writing
at first, and it is Acceptance afterward, bar any such Pretenses? On the other
side, their Grand Commission was not Scribite, but only Predicate Evangelium.
Yet, you can slubber this over without taking notice of it, and carry it as if
the Apostles Teaching meant Writing only, and that they taught the World no
more than they writ. Sure you do not mean the Apostles took Texts out of their
own Books, and preached Sermons upon then as you do now. Why must it be quite
forgotten then, and buried in silence, that they taught any thing by word of
mouth or preached the Gospel publicly? Allow that to be equally Sacred as what
is writ, and to be embraced if well attested, and blame the Attestation, and
Tradition as it may be found to deserve; but still, when you would put your own
Tenet as distinguished from ours, be so kind as to put ours too; and do not
stand talking to us, and fooling your Readers, with the Rabbis pretended
Tradition from Moses his mouth: no more like ours than an Apple is like an
Oyster. Again, this Resolution of your Faith gives every one Absolute Certainty
of his Faith, who believes he has Absolute Certainty of Scripture's letter, and
that it contains the Word of God. And yet Experience tells us that whole Bodies
of Learned men believe all this, and yet differ (that is, one side errs) in the
highest Mysteries of Christian Faith. Whence follows, that both sides, by this
Doctrine, are Absolutely Certain of their Faith; one side (for example) is
Absolutely Certain there is a Trinity, and that Christ is God; the other, that
there is no Trinity, and that Christ is not God. This seems but a very odd
account of the Certainty of Protestant Faith.

17. But you refine upon your self, in your Answer to the 3 d Question. p. 15.
It was ask't there [ By what Certain Rule do you know that the New Testament
which we now have, does contain all the Divine Revelations of Christ, and his
Apostles? This Question evidently aims at two things: viz. First whether some
Books writ by the Apostles were not lost; (as appears by those words which we
now have:) For if they were, then, being penned by men divinely inspired, they
must necessarily contain some Divine Revelations in them too, as well as did
the other; and then how does it appear there were not more or other
Revelations, contained in them than were contained in the books now extant? The
other is, that you know well very many hold that diverse Divine Revelations
were delivered down by Tradition, and not all by Writing. Let Us see now how
your Answer suits with this Question. By the Universal Testimony (say you) of
the Christian Church from the Apostles times downwards. This Reply, if
pertinent to that Question, must mean that this Universal Testimony ascertains
us, that the Scriptures we have now, contains all the Divine Revelations. But,
when you come to explain your self, it comes to no more but that, The Testimony
of the Apostolical, and the succeeding Churches did by degrees make men fix
upon the Certain Canon of the New Testament. What a flight have you taken on a
sudden! Where will you pitch when you light? I am sure not on the place where
you took wing, and where you ought to have stayed. For, What is their Testimony
for the Books we now have, to the Books which have or may have prerish't and to
their containing some other Divine Revelations? Or, what is the fixing upon the
Certain Canon of the Books to the difficulty, whether some Divine Revelations
did not descend by Tradition without Writing? Do the Apostolical or succeeding
Churches testify either of these? Or, do you so much as pretend they do? Not a
syllable of this do you say or take notice of* and, so, not a syllable have you
Answered to his Question. Which was not about the Canon of Scripture, or how
you would resolve your Faith, with which you keep such a pother over and over;
but, whether the New Testament we have now, contained all the Divine
Revelations? If you explicate Scripture no better for your Faith, than you do
your own words here, you will questionless make a very extraordinary piece of
work of it. Your Answers come now and then pretty home, the smartness of the
Questions obliging you to it; but, your Explications of them immediately after,
seem purposely framed that we should not take you at your Word in your Answers.

18. That Answer then prevaricating from the whole Question, Mr. G. endeavored
to press for a pertinent return to what was demanded; and therefore puts his
fourth Question thus. Was that Universal Testimony an Infallible Rule to assure
us certainly down to our time, p. 17.
that the New Testament contained all the Divine Revelations of Christ and his
Apostles? Your Answer was. The Universal Testimony of the Christian Church
concerning the Book of Scripture and the Doctrine contained therein, is a
sufficient Ground to make us certain of all matters necessary to our Salvation.

19. Here are many things worth our Admiration. In the First Letter p. 7. this
Universal Testimony was only to ascertain the Scripture. In the Answer to the
Third Question here, it is only to assure us that the New Testament contains
all the Divine Revelations: But, here it is to certify us of the Doctrine too
contained in it: which, if you mean as your Words seem to sound, is all we
require in our Tradition-Rule. There may be some other subtle meaning lying yet
coucht in those Words, which Time may discover; though we cannot yet, till he
that made the Lock bring the Key. Again, it is ask't if it be an Infallible
Rule? It Is answered, It Is a sufficient Ground. It Is ask't, whether this Testimony
assures us certainly the New Testament contains all the Divine Revelations? It Is
answered, it makes us certain of all Matters necessary to our Salvation: which
is clearly intended for a diminishing expression, and argues some fear of
undertaking for All the Divine Revelations being contained there, or All the
Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles, as was pretended p. 14. One
would verily imagine by this unsuitable Answer, that Dr. St. and Mr. G. were
playing at Cross-purposes, the Answer is so wide from the Question, at least
that there is some indirect design lies lurking; it being so opposite to the
ways of honest Nature. When one asks a positive Question, all Mankind expects
a Positive Answer to the very words as they ly, I, or No: Or, if the words be
ambiguous, it is the duty of the Answerer to desire to be satisfied of the
meaning of the Asker, if present, ere he answers; without which, in that case,
it is impossible to reply pertinently. But, it is not your temper nor interest
to use such clear and open candor. For, you saw that great multitudes had the
Letter thus secured to them, yet had not Absolute Certainty that all the Divine
Revelations are contained in it; therefore by adding [ and the Doctrine
contained therein] you had some faint hopes you might be safe. Again, you saw
well, that, should you grant Universal Testimony to be an Infallible Rule, you
would hazard to grant too much to Tradition, and all the learned Jests you have
broke upon us for asserting Infallibility would fly back upon your self:
therefore grant it you durst not. Nor, yet durst you deny it to be an
Infallible Rule; for then (since one of the two it must forcibly be) you must
affirm it to be a Fallible Rule: And then the common sense of all Mankind (Mr.
T. amongst the rest) would be justly scandalized at the non sense: For an
intellectual Ground that may perhaps let sink into Falsity, and overturn what is
Built on it, deserves not the name of a Ground; and a Rule which may perhaps
mislead me when I follow it, is in reality no Rule: Besides, should you declare
it is a Fallible Rule, Men would wonder with what sense you could pretend that a
Fallible Testimony (nay, which you confess to be such) can make you Absolutely
Certain of the thing it attests: it being the same as to profess I grant they
may all be deceived in what they tell me, yet I am absolutely Certain, by their
very Testimony, that what they tell me is True. What could you do then in that
perplexity, being neither in condition to allow Infallibility, nor avow
Fallibility; and standing gored with both the Horns of the Dilemma or
Contradiction? Why, you were forced to call in your constant and dear Friend [
sufficient Certainty] to help you out at a dead plunge. For, this is able to do
more than Miracle; this can divide an Indivisible, and put a middle betwixt two
Contradictories; by showing the World a Certainty, that is neither Infallible
nor Fallible, but between both, or mixed of both; we may imagine, half the one,
half the other. Lastly, fearing that you would be driven at length (as you
must) to bring your Rule home to particular Points, and knowing the Socinians,
and other late-sprung Heretical Congregations (whom you ought to acknowledge
Christian Churches, since they hold stiffly to that which you maintain here is
the only Rule of Christian Faith) denied many of those, which you hold Divine
Revelations, to be contained in Scripture; nay, on the contrary, hold they are
excluded thence; and that the opposit^ Tenets are contained there; therefore
you very prudently and warily changed [ All the Divine Revelations] which were
the words of the Question, into [ all matters necessary for our Salvation*]
Providing thus a security for their Souls at least, though you could not for
their Errors; and a kind of Excuse for the Incertainty of your Rule, which
permitted the followers of it to run astray; and withal, a Retreat for your
self. In all which dexterous Alterations, as this due commendation must be
allowed you, to have acted very wisely and politickly; so it must be absolutely
denied you have given any Answer at all to the Question. The Words which you
would obtrude upon us for an Answer, carry indeed a pretty show, and shift it
off with much cunning; but when we come to look into their sense, with an Eye
directed to the Question, they squint aside to quite other matters; and the
whole Reply, in a manner, is made up of different Notions from what was ask't.
Nor can I liken the Replies you generally make to our Questions, or the
Explications you make of your own Answers, to any thing better than to that
mock Exposition of the First Verse in Genesis, which Luther made for your
Friend Zuinglius's Iinterpretation of Hoc est Corpus meum. Deus (God) that is a
Cuckoo; creavit (created) that is, devoured; Coelum and Terram (Heaven and
Earth) that is a Hedge Sparrow with bones, and feathers and all.

20. You put a pretty Similitude indeed to Illustrate your own Tenet; P. 17, r
8.
but in reference to our main Question, the Absolute Certainty of your kind of
Protestant Faith by your Grounds, it is so far from running on four legs, that
it is in many regards, lame on the right, (and indeed only) foot it ought to
stand on, and (which is worse) is perhaps against your self. You resemble the
Holy Scripture to a purse full of Gold and Silver; left by a Father, and
entrusted to Executours; who tell his Son, this is all his Father left him;
and, if they deal truly with him, do certainly deliver all it contains. This
the Primitive Church, Christ's Executours, did, by delivering us the Scripture;
and assuring us all Divine Truths, which respect Man's Salvation, were contained
there in the Lump; among which, some were Gold Points, some Sylver Points; but,
having the Purse of Scripture, we have the one as well as the other, and,
consequently, all matters necessary to our Salvation, these being of greatest
moment. Thus stands the Similitude, for, run it cannot; and the sum of it (as
far as I apprehend it) amounts to this; that, because Scripture contains all,
and Protestants have Scripture, therefore, they have all. A strange kind of
Discourse! As if, because they have it in a Book, therefore, they have it in
their Minds or Souls, in which, and, no where else, Faith is to reside. And as
if a Man, were a jot the more learned, for having purchased Aristotle's Works,
and reading, and not understanding them.

21. I could except against diverse particulars, presumed on, in this
Similitude; as, that you have any Absolute Certainty of your having the whole
Scripture that was writ, or, that it contains all Divine Revelations; or, that
you have the right Copy, to every material particle in it, that may signify
Faith, that is, indeed, right Scripture, etc. (or the right Purse, etc. But, I
am more concerned for some plausible Insinuations in this Similitude, which may
hazard to corrupt the Reader's Judgment. For, however, you decline and avoid
it, yet the generality of Readers, whenever they hear any speech of the
Certainty of the Grounds of their Faith, they immediately apprehend they are to
be Certain of the particular Points of their Faith by virtue of those Grounds.
And, it is a common Error in many, of an indifferent good Judgment, (I wish it
did not sway with some who pass for great Scholars) that, when a thing easily
sinks into their Apprehension, they are apt to conceit it to be a Truth. When,
therefore they hear of a Purse, which is a thing very easy to open, (it being
no more but pulling two strings which use to run very glib;) and, that
Scripture is in many regards, here compared to a Purse; they are presently
inclined to fancy, that, Scripture's sense is as easy to be come at, as it is to
take money out of a Purse: It Is but plucking those easily following strings,
and the deed is done. But, alas! Here lies all the difficulty. The Arians,
Novatians, Socinians, etc. have all of them this Purse, yet are never the
richer; but, for want of skill to open it, and get the Gold and Silver thence,
they go away empty, or worse. Now, certainly, those high points, viz. A
Trinity, Christ's Divinity; the Real Presence, etc. Should deserve to be
reckoned amongst the Golden Ones; and, therefore, should be as most valuable,
so most easily attainable; being of the highest import for the Church, or the
Body of Christianity. Yet, it is granted the Socinians Err in the two first of
those Points, for all their acuteness and wit. I except next against the
resembling the Contents of it to Gold and Silver; which certainly enrich those
who are Possessours of such a Purse: whereas, those Sects lay claim to that
Purse too with equal Title, yet, coming to open it by their Interpretation,
they take the Dross of Error for the pure Gold of Truth, and Soul-poysoning
Heresies for means of Salvation. Had I a mind to set up a similitude-mender,
and, that you will needs have it a Purse, I should beg your leave to put it
thus: Suppose that Purse's Mouth were tied up with a knot of such a mysterious
contrivance, that none could open it (I mean still, as to the understanding the
Mysteries of our Faith) but those who knew the Mind of the Bequeather; and,
that the Church, to which it was left as a Legacy, had knowledge of his Mind,
and so could open it; while others tortured their Wits with little tricks and
inventions, turning and winding the ambiguous folds of it, some one way, some
another; and yet entangled their own thoughts, more and more, while they went
about to unty the Knots that so perplex't them.

22. This is the true case. You make account containing does all the business;
whereas, it is nothing at all to our purpose, which is (in the final Intention
of it) about the Absolute Certainty of your Faith; unless we have equal
assurance that you can get out thence what is contained there, as you pretend to
have, that it is contained. Now, it cannot be denied, but the Primitive Church
was imbued with Christ's sense by the Preaching of the Apostles and their
immediate Successors; and so had a sure and proper Way to interpret Scripture;
and, while this sense was still delivered down, they could not fail of an
absolutely Certain Rule to understand it right.

But, there steps up now one Heretic, then another, opposing himself to the
sense of the Church; and, relying on the dextery of his own wit, will needs
find out contrivances how to open the Scripture's Meaning by ways of his
private Skill: But falls into multitudes of Errors, finding no way to unfold
the deeply-mysterious Book; having refused to make use of the right means, viz.
Christ's sense descending in the Church by Tradition. Whence, notwithstanding
all his little Arts and boasting presumption like the Fox in the Fable, Vas
lambit, Pultem non attingit.

23. Mistake me not: I do not mean Scriptures Letter is not clear in such
passages as concern Common Morality, or the Ten Commandments; with the Sense of
which every one is imbued by the Light of Nature. Nor in matters of Fact, such
as were most of those Marks or Signs to know the Messiah by, foretold us by the
Prophets; our Savior's doing such and such Miracles, his going beyond Jordan,
etc. Nor in Parables explained by himself, and such like. But, in Dogmatical
Points or Tenets, which are Spiritual, and oftentimes profound Mysteries, (and,
of these, by the way, I desire still to be understood, when I speak of the
Certainty of the Letter or Sense of Scripture, for with other Passages I meddle
not) as the Tenet of a Trinity, Christ's Godhead, the Real Presence of his
Body in the Sacrament; and such like; which have a vast Influence upon
Christian Life; either immediately, or else in a higher Nature, being (as it
were) Principles to many other Articles of Faith, which depend on their Truth:
One would verily think, I say, that such as these should be some of your Golden
Points, or else there were none at all contained in your Purse: Yet, we
experience, That even in such as these, your Rule is not intelligible enough to
keep the Followers of it from erring. So that, let your Purse have never so
Golden and Silver a lining, you are never the richer, unless you can come at
it, or can certainly distinguish the pure Gold of Truth from the impure Dross
of Error. Your Similitude then comes not home to your purpose, nor shows that
you have therefore all your Faith, or all Divine Revelations, because you have
a Book which you judge contains them. Let Us see now if it does not make against
you. You put the Doctrine (or Points) of Faith to be the Gold and Silver
contained in the Purse; and, consequently that must be the Purse into which
that Doctrine of Faith was put by Christ our Savior; and this was evidently the
Heads, and Hearts of the Faithful. For the Points of Faith, being so many
Divine Truths, are only contained in Men's Minds properly; and, Words being,
by their very Definition, but Signs of what is in our Minds, Truths are no
more really in a Book, than Wine is really in a Bush which signifies it. Since
then those Truths were only in the Breast of Christ Originally, and, after
him, in that of the Apostles; and their Thoughts could not be communicated, nor
consequently the Gold and Silver delivered to the Legatees, otherwise than by
signifying it, which can only be done by one of these ways, by Living Voice
and Practice, or by Writing; that is by Tradition or Scripture, neither of
these can with any Sense be liken'd to the Purse it self, into which the money
is to be put, or answer comparatively to It; but they are both of them Ways,
Means or Methods of putting these heavenly Riches into it is Proper Purse, the
Souls of the Faithful. Of these two Ways our Savior chose the First; which was
Teaching his Doctrine orally, for he writ nothing; and by doing thus, told us it
was the better: For, it had been against his Infinite Wisdom to choose the worser
way for Himself to make use of, and leave the better to his Servants. Nor, did
his servants, the Apostles, affect the Way of Writing, so as to use it only;
but, on the contrary, they made use of this Oral Way of Preaching constantly,
and that of Writing (for the most part at least, if not altogether)
occasionally. They converted the present Church by their Preaching; they
comforted the future Church by leaving many most edifying Words, and Actions of
our Blessed Savior, Written; which being Particulars, and not breaking out
openly into Christian Practice, might otherwise in likelihood, (at least to a
great degree) have been lost to succeeding generations; besides the abetment
their Writings give to Faith it self, when certainly interpreted, and rightly
understood. So that, according to this discourse of yours we should either have
never a Purse to put Points of Faith in, for you take no notice of the Souls of
the Faithful into which they are properly put, and in which only they are in
reality contained: Or, if you will needs call that a Purse which contains them
merely as a Sign does the thing signified, or as that which may signify to us
our Faith, you must put two Purses: Tradition and Scripture: And then the only
Question is, out of which Purse, we can with more Certainty get it. That is,
whether a Living Container, which can give us perfect light of it is Sense by
See above, Sect. 2. and 3.
all the best ways imaginable; or the Dead Letter, which, as Experience
demonstrates, can neither clear it is Sense to Private Understandings; nor, if
we doubt of it is Meaning, and had a mind to ask it, could either hear or reply,
much less pertinently, and appositely speak to the Asker as often as he had
occasion to press still for satisfaction. Again, the Written Instrument or
Means of putting this heaven-stampt coin in our Souls, is an Ignoble Instrument
in comparison; being in reality, as to it is Material part, or taken as
abstracted from the Sacred Sense which is signified by it, nothing but Ink thus
figured on Paper. Whereas, the material part of the other is the most Noble
that can be found under Heaven it self: viz. the Church which all Christians
must acknowledge to be the Spouse of Christ, the Pillar and Ground of Truth,
and consisting of the Living Temples of the Holy Ghost; That, for whose
edification the Scripture was writ; and, so, holds proportion with it as the
Means does with the End, which is in a manner Infinite. Nay, That, for which all
the Material World was created, and the Economy of it still carried on, from
the first beginning of Time to it is last Period. Lastly, That for whose sake
God himself was made Man, and died a most cruel Death on a Cross. So that it is
unconceivable, that it can enter into the thoughts of any intelligent man who
believes this to be the due Character of the Church, there should be any
competition betwixt the Letter of Scripture and it; or that it can possibly be
doubted to which of them (all things considered) we ought to attribute most in
looking after Faith. But, to return to your similitude. The sum of it is this:
That the Gold and Silver you speak of, being the Doctrine of Faith; not the
Scripture, but the Heads, and Hearts of the Faithful, (that is, of the Church)
does really and indeed contain it; and, consequently, this only can with any
propriety be compared to a Purse. That, both Tradition and Scripture are to be
liken'd to the several Ways of putting the Heavenly Treasure of Faith, into
this Purse, or Faith into the Souls of the Faithful. Lastly, that taking them
as containing them, as signs do the things signified, it is not their
containing this Treasure does us any good, but the delivering it out to us; no
more than a man is better for having a Trunk full of Money so circumstanc't
that he could never come at it: and, that, between these two ways of coming at
this Treasure, or their delivering it out to us there is no comparison, whether
we regard the Intelligibleness, or Providential Establishment of those
respective Instruments in order to such an End. So that your similitude, how
prettily soever it looked at first, has one misfortune very common to such
fine useless toys, that is, to be good for nothing; for it neither comes up to
the Question, nor suits with your own Tenet.

24. But ere we part from this Point, it were not amiss to examine a little that
cautious expression of yours [ all things necessary for salvation] into which
you change that bold assertion that you are absolutely certain you now hold all
the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles. I ask you then,
what do you mean by those words [ necessary for Salvation] which mince the
matter so warily? Do you think Christ taught any unnecessary Points, or did a
needless action! Sure you will not say it. And yet my self will grant too, and
agree with you that fewer Means than the Knowledge of all Christ taught, may
suffice for the Salvation of some particular persons. What follows then, but,
that, since they are all necessary for some body, and yet not all necessary for
every particular person, more of them are necessary for one man than for
another, and all of them necessary for the body of the Church: whose Pastors
are to instruct their Children in them, and apply the Efficacy of them to their
Souls, as their capacities admit, and exigencies require. For, though some few
may be saved without the knowledge of such and such Points, (slender Motives
being enough for their circumstances,) yet multitudes of others may require
incomparably more effectual Means, to buoy them up from the World, and raise
them to heaven; and so, they would certainly miscarry for want of them.
Particularly, the points now mentioned, are of such a high and general
Influence, that, without these, the Devotion of a very great portion of the
Church, would be enfeebled, many of the Souls that want them be lost eternally,
and others be but dim Stars in the Glorious Firmament of Heaven, in comparison
of what they might have been, had their Minds been cultivated with such
elevating considerations. And, can the Church, which God has entrusted with
those Souls, think that it is agreeable to his Will, his Flock should either die,
or fall short of the full growth they might have had in the plentiful Pastorage
he had provided for them? It rests then for you, either to show those Points
not necessary for the Generality, and that your Grounds are sufficient to give
men, both as able and as willing (for ought appears) to understand Scripture
right as your self is, Absolute Certainty of Them (which is to confute
Experience, and dispute against your own Knowledge,) or else to confess
ingenuously you have no Absolute Certainty of even the highest Fundamentals,
and most necessary Points for the Salvation of Mankind.

25. Thus much to show that your Rule gives you no Absolute Certainty of all
such matters as are necessary for your Salvation, with reference to the Points
of Faith; to certify which, Experience assures us it does not reach. Now,
should we speak of the Assent of Faith, the Short Discourse, p. 30, 31. of my
former Letter, demonstrates clearly you can have no Absolute Certainty of any
one, and so cannot with reason affirm your Faith is True; since, wanting
Absolute Certainty that Christ taught it, it may be False. The same point has
been pressed upon you in Faith vindicated, Reason against Raillery, Error
non-plust, and diverse other Books: yet though it was the most important
objection that is or can be imagined, as plucking up by the roots all your
Faith, and destroying it from it is very Foundation; no return could ever yet be
obtained, nor candid Reason produced, but only a put-off with sufficient
Certainty, and such dow-bak't words; without being able or even endeavoring,
to show that Grounds less than Absolutely Certain can possibly be thus
sufficient for the Nature, the Ends and Uses of Faith. But it is high time to
return to our Disputants.

26. Against this pretended Answer of yours, you introduce Mr. M. suggesting
several things. P. 18.
First, As to difference of Translations. To which you reply. Does Mr. M. think
our Faith is to be resolved into the Original Texts? What he thinks, you know
better than you would seem to do. He cannot but think, if he may believe you,
that you resolve your Faith into the Letter of Scripture. He cannot but think
that by these words you mean the Right Letter; for, otherwise, it would not be
Scripture: Nor can he think, or you either, it can be the Right Letter, unless
it have a Right Translation, and this, from a True Copy; nor that any Copy can
be True, unless conformable to the True Original. And, if there can be any
failure in any of these, nay, if you have not Absolute Certainty of all these,
you cannot have (by your Grounds) any Absolute Certainty of your Faith: For, if
the Letter be wrong, all is wrong that is built on it: and it may be wrong, for
ought you know, notwithstanding the Testimony of all Christian Churches relying
on this Way of attesting the Truth of the Letter. For, you can never show that
all those Churches consented to apply their utmost diligence to examine and
attest all the several Translations, made in their respective languages; or
witnest that they came from the true Original; or took the most exquisit care
that was possible, to see that the Translaters and the Copiers did their duty.
Which, had they held the Letter to be their only Rule of Faith, and,
consequently, that All Faith, that is, the very Being of the present and future
Church, and their own Salvation too, depended on the Scripture, they were
obliged in conscience, and under the highest Sin, above all things in the
World, to have done; and this, with the exactest care imaginable: Your Grounds
then, notwithstanding all you have said or alleged hitherto to ensure the
Letter, make no Provision for the Absolute Certainty of the Written-Rule, nor
consequently of your Faith.

27. But what becomes then (say you) of the Vulgar Latin Translation? I answer,
in our Grounds no harm at all: Ibid.
For the Canon of the Books comes down by the Testimony of all Christian
Churches that are truly Christian; and the Doctrine of Christ, transfused into
the hearts of the succeeding Faithful ever since the beginning, both taught
them how, and obliged them to correct the Copy in those particular Texts that
concerned Faith, if any Error through the carelessness, unattentiveness or
malice of the Translaters or Transcribers at any time had crept in. By the same
Means as you can now adays correct the Copy in those Texts, that ought to
express some Point of Morality, in case it were corrupted, and deviated from
Christian Manners; viz. by virtue of the Sense of that Practical Tenet you were
imbued with formerly; and this, even though you had no other Copy or Text to
amend it by: Insomuch that, how good an opinion so ever you had of the Copy,
Translater, Printer or Correcter of the Press; yet, for all that, you would
conclude they had erred, and the Letter was faulty, rather than forgo the
Doctrine so firmly rivetted in your heart by the constant Teaching and Practice
of the Christian world. As for other particular Texts of an Inferior Concern,
they could be best corrected by multitudes of other ancient Copies (the
Churches Care still going along) in which too the greatest care that was
possible to rectify it is Errors was taken by the Council of Trent, that so it
might be as exact as Human Diligence could well render it. A thing, as far as
my memory reaches, never ordered or very much regarded by any Council formerly.

28. But I foresee, your method of confuting (which is to muster up
Extrinsecall objections not at all to the purpose) will naturally lead you to
discredit this way of correcting Scripture's Letter in passages belonging to
Faith, as singular or New; This being the same your Friend G. B. objected to
the Way of Tradition it self; as may be seen above, Sect. 10. Such piddling
Exceptions, dressed up prettily in gay language, go a great way, and make a fine
show in your Controversies; and, which is a benefit of most advantage to you,
excuse you from bringing any Intrinsecal Arguments; though these only are such
as conclude any thing, and though you are bound by your precise Duty to produce
such: Wherefore, to ward this blow, I shall allege the Judgment of that
Learned, and Excellent Personage, Sir Thomas More, our first Modern English
Controvertist; who, writing, not against you in defense of our Grounds, but to
another Catholic Divine, expresses heartily his Sentiment in these words. [
Ego certe hoc persuadeo mihi, idque (ut opinor) vere; quicquid ad fidem
astruendam faciat, non esse a quovis melius versum, quam ab ipsis Apostolis
perscriptum. Ideoque fit ut, quoties in Latinis codicibus occurrat quidquam
quod aut contra Fidem aut mores facere videatur; Epist^ ad Martinum Dorpium.
Scripturarum interpretes aut ex aliis alibi verbis quid illud sibi velit
dubium expiscentur; aut ad vivum Evangelium Fidei, quod per universam Ecclesiam
in corda Fidelium infusum est; quod etiam, priusquam scriberetur a quoquam,
Apostolis a Christo, ab Apostolis Vniverso Mundo praedicatum est, dubios
ejusmodi sermones applicent, atque ad inflexibilem veritatis Regulam examinent:
ad quam si non satis adaptare queant, aut sese non intelligere, aut mendosum
esse codicem, non dubitent.] This is my Judgment, and (as I conceive) a True
one; that whatever (Text) is useful to build Faith on, was not better
translated by any than it was writ by the Apostles themselves. And therefore,
as often as any thing occurs in the Latin-Books, that seems to make against Faith
or Good Manners, the Interpreters of Scripture, either gather from other Words
in other places what that doubt should mean; or they compare those doubtful
sayings to the living Gospel of Faith, which was infused into the Hearts of the
Faithful, throughout the Universal Church; and which, before any man writ it,
was Preached by Christ to the Apostles, and by the Apostles to the whole World;
and examine them by the inflexible Rule of Faith; with which if they cannot
make it square, they conclude, that either they do not understand it, or the
Book is faulty] where he passes by the former way with a slight word
[expiscentur] fish out the sense; but insists on the latter way of preserving
the Copy sincere, as Certain and Proper.

29. I must not pretermit your Objection p. 19. that the Ancient Christian
Church never knew any thing concerning this Method of resolving Faith into mere
Oral Tradition. I would desire you to add [ Practical] to Oral; at least to
conceive it to be understood all the way, that being our True and
constantly-avow'd Tenet. But, did the Ancient Church, in reality, never know
any thing of this way? It Is wonderful you should not understand they meant the
same as we do, unless they speak the self-same Words, and make the same
Discourses we do now. Did not they all hold, that who taught any thing contrary
to the Doctrine delivered down by the Church, was a Heretic? Did any of them
say that the Church's Tradition of a Doctrine, as Christ's, was liable to
Error? Did any of them hold that it was lawful for your Sober Enquirer to rely
on his Private Interpretation of the Scripture, and relinquish the sense of the
Church, which is the true Point? Not one. It Is one thing to say they often quoted
Scripture against Heretics, who had rejected the Authority of the Church,
(even the Council of Trent does so;) another, to say they had no firmer Ground
for their Faith, but their own private Judgments of it is sense. It Is one thing
to give it high Commendations for it is Excellency, Divine Doctrine, Usefulness
and Sufficiency for the Ends for which it was Ordained by God: It Is another, to
say that, in those places which relate to Spiritual Points and high Mysteries
of our Faith, it is so clear, that, private Fancies can with Absolute Certainty
fix upon it is true sense, and, on that, Ground their Faith. It Is one thing to
say sometimes, it is Plain and Evident, when they are Arguing against Heretics:
this is a thing not unusual even among us, when we are disputing, and have an
opinion that what we allege is manifest; and those Fathers or Councils which
insisted on it, had good reason to have that opinion of what they alleged,
having the Doctrine of Faith, (Scripture's best Interpreter*) in their hearts:
Besides, when there is full assurance of it is sense, who doubts but it is of a
vast Authority too; being in that case the same as if the Apostle or Christ
himself were there, and spoke his Mind in the Point under debate. Whence they
confuted Heretics with defining from Scripture; upon the assurance that they
had the true sense of it another Way, than the Heretic had by his private
Interpretations. But, it is another thing to say, that, as managed by Private
Judgments, working on the bare Letter, or relying on Fallible Interpreters, it
is so unavoidably convictive, beyond all possibility of giving it another
plausible sense, that all Mankind must think him a Renouncer of the clear Light
of Reason, or stark blind with Passion and Interest, and abhor him as such,
who shall interpret it after another manner. And such the Rule of Faith must
be, otherwise, none could with Conscience think or say any Heretic is
obstinate, nor any man (no not the Church it self) condemn him, much less
abhor him for being, such, as was ever her Custom. All the former Perfections
we as heartily, fully, and constantly ascribe to Scripture as any Protestant in
the world: nay, we say moreover, that this want of Clearness which unqualifies
it for being a Rule, springs from a very high perfection in it; viz. It Is deep
Sense; only this one, of giving every particular man, who by his private
Judgment Interprets it, such assurance of its sense as is competent to Ground
his Faith on, we cannot grant; this being no less contrary to common Reason,
than it is even to Experience also. To return then to your Objection. You see
Sect. 10. that the Ancient Fathers were not such Strangers to this Method of
Tradition we follow and explicate. And, you might have observed many others
both named and cited, Surefooting p. 131. to 137. What matters it that they did
not express That our Tenet, or Dilate upon it in such Terms as we do now; so
they taught others to hold to what was delivered, and not to rely on their own
private Interpretations of Scripture against the present Churches Doctrine?
Since in doing this, they held the substance of that which we have since more
diffusely explained, and reduced our Discourses to more Methodical and Formal
Resolutions of Faith, which were not so much in fashion in former Ages.
Besides, you are not to be told we both have and could allege Fathers enough for
our Tenet, and the Obligation to hold to the Doctrine delivered from Fathers,
that is to Tradition; and how smartly and unanswerably they pressed it against
Heretics, as a certain Determiner of the Controversies between the Catholics
and Them. On the other side, how often they complained of the Uncertainty of
the Scripture interpreted by private Men, as Grounding all Heresies; by reason
of the mysterious Obscurity of the Letter, and its liableness to be
misinterpreted and misunderstood? Whereas, it was never heard that the Rule of
Tradition taken in the sense, in which we hold it ( viz. for a Delivery of a
Practical Doctrine, publicly preached to great multitudes at first, practiced
by them, and held, and recommended as Divine, and the way to Salvation) did
ever give rise to any Heresy, and impossible it should. Which one Reflection to
a Considerate Man, is sufficient to conclude the whole present Controversy
about the Rule of Faith.

30. From the Qualities requisite to make Scripture's Letter a Rule of your
Faith, we come to consider the Quantity it ought to have, or the Number of
Books; which you tell us p. 19. Mr. M. suggested. In order to which, I have
only two things to ask you. 1. Whether, as I said formerly, you have any
unanimous Consent of the Christian Church, that there was never a Book lost
that was writ by some who were Divinely inspired; and, consequently, did
contain some Divine Revelations? Or, if you cannot prove but there was, how do
you know but those Divine Revelations, which that Book or Books contained, were
not different from, or to be superadded to those, contained in the Canon we
have now? If you cannot prove these two Points, then it is manifest you cannot
prove with Absolute Certainty, that the Books We have now, contained all the
Divine Revelations. 2. You insist only on this Universal Testimony for the
Canonical Books of the New Testament; but, I would know whether this Testimony
reaches to each Chapter and every Verse of those Chapters, nay, each material
Word in those Verses? If it does not, as you neither say, nor with any Reason
can say (for it is hard to prove the former, and impossible to prove the later
but by our Rule) then you are as far from your Faith as ever; unless you bring
some other Testimony that is Absolutely Certain, to assure you that such and
such a Verse, which you would quote and rely on for such and such a Point of
Faith, nay, the main and most significant Word in that Verse is true Scripture:
which, I am sure you cannot: For, what Testimony else can be invented to do
this, if the other, which was of the whole Christian Church, cannot reach it?
Is there any possible way to ascertain this, but by our Doctrin-Rule? Upon this
occasion, pray inform me with what reason you could reflect so severely page
15. on the Church of Rome; for not receiving the Epistle to the Hebrews in St.
Hierom's Time, as soon as other Churches; and, not on the Greek Churches, (which
you use to prefer before the Latin) who, in the same Father's time, refused to
admit the Apocalypse? The accepting or not accepting such Books, even according
to your own Doctrine, depended on their being satisfied of the Evidence produced
for their Apostolical Authority; and so was an Act of Prudence, antecedent to
the Judgment or Determination of any Church, whether Greek or Latin. But, so
unreasonable is your pique against the Church of Rome, that she cannot act
prudently without forfeiting her Infallibility. Though, another man would have
acknowledged, it was rather a very commendable cautiousness in the Latin and
Greek Church too, not to admit into such a sacred Roll, Books that were not yet
clearly proved to be authentickly such; than a blameable Lapse, or so heinous a
Crime, that for committing it, she must needs lose all her Title to Christ's
promised Assistance.

31. This gives me occasion to ask you what becomes of Your Rule, and,
consequently, of Your Faith all that while? If the Letter of the Canonical
Books, that is, of the whole Canon of the New Testament be your Rule, and those
Books were part of this Canon, they must necessarily be part of your Rule too;
whence it follows that your Rule was not Entire, but deficient for some
hundreds of years, till the whole Canon was Collected and Acknowledged. I see
you do but complement with the Primitive Church of the first 300 years; and,
that you only cry it up to avoid the unkindness, which the succeeding Ages
show to your Cause; for, by your Doctrine, you cannot but hold that the Ages
which followed it, are to be preferred: Since These had your entire Rule, the
Others wanted some parts of it; and sometimes held but three parts of it, half
of it, or less, (and so, by your Principles, were but three quarters or half
Christians) according as the several pieces came by degrees to be acknowledged,
and universally accepted. I doubt Mr. M's Discourse about the Number of Books,
more perplexes you, than your are willing to make show of. For, pray, how many
of these Books go to make up your Rule of Faith? If any one, or some few, then
you should not have stood upon the Canon we have now; that is, all the
Apostolical Books, or Scripture in general. If all the Canonical Writings be
your Rule, then perhaps the Primitive Christians had but half their Faith, or
less; it may be none at all, because, wanting yet those other Books, they
wanted necessary places to compare those Texts with they already had; which is
a great part of your Method to find out your Faith in Scripture. Pray, satisfy
us about this exact Number of Books, and how many will just serve the turn;
and, make something cohere; for, I cannot for my heart as yet find any thing
that does. You talk to us of a Purse, and say it must be full; but, when we
come to look at it more narrowly, it appears to have been for some time but
half a Purse, and wanted one side of it, at least had a great Hole in it: so
that you put us into an apprehension, that many of the Gold and Silver Points
might have dropped out of it in the time of the Primitive Church; by which Church
notwithstanding, and no other, in our disputes about Faith, you seem heartily
willing to be judged. But, p. 31.
let us examine a little the Consent of all (your) Christian Churches for
Scripture, you make such brags of. Dr. St's first Letter. p. 7.
In the first place marches and leads the Van, your Christian Church of the
Noble Arch-Heretick Marciou; who blotted out of the Canon the Epistle to the
Epiphan. haer. 24. n. 9.
Hebrews, that to Titus, and both those to Timothy; who admitted only St.
Luke's Gospel to be Divine, and Iren. lib. 3.
rejected all the Epistles of St. Paul, as an Apostate from the Law. In the
next rank, go abreast those three Famous Christian Churches of Ebion,
Valentinus, and Cerinthus: Of which Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.
the First admitted only St. Matthews Gospel; the Iren. lib. 2. cap. 26.
second, only St. John's; and the third, only St. Mark's. After them, come
others, mentioned by St. Hierom and Epiphanius, who in a manner brought all
into doubt; Hier. ad Paul at Eustoch. in Proem. Ep. ad Philom. Epip. haer. 76.
especially if Faith depended in those days on the comparing of places; for,
they held that diverse things both in the Old Testament and the New, were not
inspired by GOD, but writ by a Human spirit. I need not acquaint you, that
Luther, Brentius and Chemnitius, did revive the old Doubts about the Epistle to
the Hebrews and the Apocalypse, of later days. Nor need it be recounted how
many Orthodox Christian Churches did not accept diverse Books formerly. And,
though afterward, as you say well, they came by degrees to fix on the Certain
Canon of the New Testament, yet I am apt to judge that this was not performed
by Immediate Testimony: P. 15.
For, the Witnesses were long ago dead, and their Grandfathers too, who could
attest that such a Book was indeed, to their knowledge, written by such an
Apostle or Evangelist. It descended then by Oral Tradition in those respective
Churches. Whence, as that Tradition was not so Practical, so it was restrained
to some few in each Church, and was withal, very narrow at first in comparison
of our Tradition for Christ's Doctrine; which was, in a manner, universally and
publicly preached and practiced. Now the strength of a Tradition, and the
largeness of it are to be taken from the largeness of the first Attestation;
and all that after-Ages can do, when they attest such things, is to witness
that they received it from some others; but so, that the Tradition was still
narrower as it came nearer the fountain; which very much weakens it. By what
other Lights the Church guided her self in her accepting such and such Books
for Canonical Scripture, belongs to another place. Your Tradition then was not
Universal for Scripture in the first 300 years, and its Original Attestation
was weak in comparison of that which was for Doctrine.

P. 20.
32. I have little to say to your Explicit or Implicit Points contained in
Scripture: For, I see they are both equally to no purpose, while but contained
there, till you bring us a Rule to interpret the Letter with Absolute
Certainty. If any ought to be explicitly there, none can have so good a Title
to it as those high and most Fundamental Articles spoken of so often; yet we
see there are no places producible for them, but may have other senses given
them; and bear (as experience shows us) not yet ended, and, for ought we know,
endless Disputes among your sober Enquirers attending to your Rule. Only I a
little wonder you should say it is sufficient for your purpose, that all Doctrine
of Faith necessary to Salvation are contained in (the Letter of) Scripture,
either explicitly or implicitly. If they be necessary to Salvation, they must
be necessary to be believed or known to be there; for they must save men by
believing them, and acting according to that Belief, or no way; and, if they be
only implicitly there, they are as yet unknown, or not believed: So that,
according to you, that is a Point necessary to Salvation, which does not at all
conduce to it. But, I wonder more at the happiness of your Sober Enquirer to
whom, you affirm and stand to it stoutly, Ibid.
those Implicit Points will become Explicit without the help of the Church; and
yet you call it assuming, Ibid.
in the Church of Rome, to do the same, or declare the Sense of such Articles.
Certainly, this Sober Enquirer is your special Darling, and Favourit. He, though
a private person, can discover those Explicit Points; and I suppose may declare
them too, to as many as he pleases; for how can he in Charity do less? But
alas! The silly insignificant Church, can do nothing at all; she must submit to
the wondrous Gifts, you have bestowed upon the Rabble, and her Governors and
Pastors be accounted Tyrants if they shall dare to encroach upon their high
Prerogatives, or presume to share in their Privileges of being able to unfold
or know the Explicit Meaning of Scripture-Texts: For, in case they can know
this, and this Knowledge be good for the Faithful (as it is, being as you say
necessary to Salvation) it is without question they may declare them, or make
them known to others: nay, and use their Authority too (if you will vouchsafe
to allow them any) to edify the Faithful by making this Knowledge sink into
them. Nor can it prejudice their Reason, that the Church obliges them to
believe them; for this is no more than obliging them to act according to
Reason; which tells them that, since they must either trust themselves or their
Pastors in such things, and the Pastors must be incomparably better qualified
than themselves are, for the discovering of such mysterious Truths, and withal
appointed by God to teach them; it is far more Rational to submit to their
Judgments in such things, than to use their own. But, indeed, you have reason
to stand up for your Sober Enquirer; for all Ringleaders of any Heresy, or
Faction against the Church, took this very Method in their proceedings. The
Spirit of Pride, which possessed them, principled them with these Rational and
Peaceable Maxims, that they had Authority to judge their Judges, teach their
Teachers, direct their Guides, and that their own Wit excelled that of all the
World before them. But, when a Faction was formed into a good lusty Body, the
Scripture-Rule was laid aside again; so that it is doubtful whether we have had
ever a Sober Enquirer since, as was shown in my First Letter Sect. 25.

33. You desire to see this Power of the Church in Scripture in Express Terms;
and we tell you we need not let you see it in Scripture at all: for Tradition,
and even Common Sense, tells us, that the Church has Power to feed, and
instruct her Flock; and enlighten them in what she knows, and they are ignorant
of. If you demand how the Roman Church came by this knowledge of making
Implicit Points Explicit? I answer, by Tradition, giving her the Sense of
Christ's whole Law, and each Entire point of it; and by the Light of Nature
purified by supernatural knowledges antecedently; as also by her Application,
when occasion required, to reflect upon, and penetrate deeply into that Sense;
which enables her to explicate her own thoughts (or the Points of Faith) more
clearly now; which she had indeed before, but did not so distinctly look into
them, or set her self to explain them. But pray, what express Scripture has
your Sober Enquirer for his Power to make the Implicit Points Explicit? You
reckon up diverse agreeablenesses p. 21. why this should be; but not one word
of express Scripture do you pretend to for it. And if himself pretend to any
such Power, besides that it will look a little odd that God should take more
care of private men than of his Church, let him either show us he has better
means Natural or Supernatural to do this, than the Church has, or he discovers
his Pride and Folly both to pretend to it. You say p. 21. that the Church of
Rome has no where declared in Council it has any such Power; viz. to declare
explicitly Points implied in Scripture. But, First, you may please to know It
has made such a declaration Sect. 4. where it defines that it belongs to the
Church, judicare de vero sensu et interpretatione Scripturarum, to judge of the
true sense, and Interpretation of Scripture; Next, It, accordingly, proceeds
upon this Power, as I shall manifest by three several Instances. One Sess. 13.
cap. 4. where it explains those Texts, Luc. 22. Io. 6. and 2 Cor. 11. to be
meant of being truly Christ's Body; and declares thence that the Church was
ever persuaded of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Another, Sess. 14. cap. 7.
Where it declares the Text, 1 Cor. 1. Let a man examine himself, etc. to be
understood by the Custom (or Practice) of the Church, of, Sacramental
Confession, necessary to be used before receiving the Sacrament by all those
who are conscious to themselves of mortal sin. The Third, Sess. 14. cap. 1.
where it interprets that Text of S. James cap. 5. to be by Apostolical
Tradition understood of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. Which places you do
not judge so much as implicitly to contain that Sense, but hold that they
contain another thing. How the Churches declaring explicitly Points descending
by Tradition, makes no new Articles of Faith, is discours't above, Sect. 4, 5,
6, 7. By which, you may see that Mr. G. and Mr. M. whom (page 22.) you will
needs set at variance, are, notwithstanding, very good Friends. For, if the
Church knew the the sense which is contained in that place, before; the Doctrine
is Old, though the declaring it to be signified by that particular Text, be
perhaps New. I say perhaps; for, in some signal passages, much in use in the
Churches Preaching, Catechisms and Practice; I doubt not but that, not only the
particular Doctrine, but also that it is signified by such a Text, comes down by
Tradition in the Ecclesia docens. Notwithstanding the agreeableness of these
two Positions, you triumph mightily here p. 23. that, Thus Mr. M. has answered
Mr. G 's Demonstration. As much as to say, I know not for my life what to say
to it my self, and therefore, would gladly shift it off upon any Body, so I
could handsomely rid my Hands of it. Thus, you make (for you can make any thing
by your Method of mistaking every thing) the Council of Trent clash with the
Church of Rome (a hard Task one would think!) by pretending to interpret
Scripture according to the unanimous sense of the Fathers; which you judge
contradicts the making known, and obliging Men to believe that explicitly now,
which they were not obliged to by any precedent Sense or Explication. What mean
the words [ Men] and [ They] If they signify all men, and intend to signify
that no man knew those implied Points before, but all might hap to contradict
them, you mistake our Tenet: for, we judge it absolutely impossible that none
of the Fathers should reflect more attentively on the full sense of the Points
delivered, or look into their own thoughts as Faithful; and, therefore, it was
much more impossible they should unanimously contradict those Points. And,
unless they did so, the Council of Trent, and the Church of Rome may, by the
Grace of God, very well correspond in their Doctrine for all your mistake. For
the Intention of the Fathers in that Decree (Sess. 4.) was to repress the
insolency of Heretics wresting the Scripture to their own private sentiments [
contrary to the Sense of the Church, or the unanimous Consent of the Fathers.]
And how this is directly contrary to this power of obliging to believe
something, as in Scripture, explicitly now, which was not so known before, is
unconceivable; unless you will prove that that Explicit Sense is directly
contrary to the unanimous Consent of the Fathers or the Church, which you will
never do. But, it is a trivial Exploit to make Mr. M. clash with Mr. G. or the
Church of Rome with the Council of Trent; you can make that very Church clash
with her self -- Suis et ipsa Roma -- and that openly and professedly too: Nay,
which is most wonderful, fall out with her self about her own Prerogatives.
For, you tell us p. 23. that though it has assumed this Power now spoken of, yet
it still disowned it. Now to assume a Power, is to challenge it; and to disown
it, is to renounce it; which hang together much alter the rate of all your
Discourse hitherto. This Church of Rome is a most monstrous kind of Creature:
It goes backwards, and forwards, blows and sups, declares for and against, and
all at once: but we must imagine her to be such only as she stands portrayed
in Dr. St's Fancy.

34. Your main Stratagem to elude all this discourse, remains yet to be more
fully detected, though it has been occasionally touched at diverse times formerly.
It Is this, that you are now upon the General Ground of Faith, p. 20.
and not the particular Acts of it, or the particular Certainty as to this or
that Doctrine. And you seem to have reason for it too, because the main point
in Dispute was, whether Protestants could show any Ground of Absolute Certainty
for their Faith. p. 24.
And this you think justifies you for hovering in the air, and only talking of
your Scripture-Rule in common, without lighting on or applying it to any one
particular point contained in that Rule. But this will avail you nothing. For,
first; Neither does our Discourse pinch upon any one particular Point, but upon
the Uncertainty of your Faith in general, or on all your Points of Faith at
once as built on your Ground. So that, it is the pretended Ground of your Faith
we are disputing against all the while, and not any one particular Tenet. We
bring, indeed, Instances now and then of some particular Articles; but, it is to
show that, if your Ground has not power to ascertain absolutely those most
Fundamental Points, it has power to ascertain none; and, so, is no Ground of
Faith at all. Secondly, A pretended Ground cannot be known or acknowledged to
be a real and firm Ground, till we see it grounds something, It Is Notion plainly
imports a Relation to the Superstructure; and you may as well prove a man a
Father without proving he has a Child, as prove any thing to be a Ground
without proving such and such Points to be grounded on it; and this (in our
case) with Absolute Certainty. Pray, take that along with you still, otherwise
you turn your back to the Question, and run away from it in the open Field. It Is
tedious and mortifying beyond measure to hear you still talking, and pretending
you have an Absolutely Certain Ground for Faith, and yet never see you, so much
as once, endeavoring to show how it is Ascertaining Virtue affects the Articles
you build upon it; and that this particular Sense of Scripture in each
respective Point has such a close, and necessary Connection with the Letter on
which it is built, as to give Absolute Certainty of it to all that are competent
Judges of the Sense of Words. Which the Experience of all Ages since Christ
confutes, and our own Eyes Witness to be false in the Socinians and others.
Thirdly, Your self confessed once upon a time that you are absolutely Certain you
now hold all the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles. Now,
P. 14.
this candid expression would make any honest well-meaning man verily believe
that you meant you had been absolutely Certain of every particular Christian
Doctrine, by virtue of your Ground or Rule. But your incomparable dexterity
quite and clean over-reach't us. For, when you came to explain your self there,
it amounted to no more but that your Faith was resolved into Scripture (that
is, that you pretended to Scripture) which contains all, or as you told us p.
17. that you were absolutely certain you hold all, because you hold all, not in
your Soul or Mind (where Points of Faith are to be held) but in a kind of Purse
as it were; as one is said, when he holds a Book in his hand, to hold all that
is in it: being possessed of which, though you cannot come at it is sense (which is
little better than if it were locked up in a Trunk) you are in possession of
all Christian Faith notwithstanding, and hold very firmly (in that Sense) all
that was taught by Christ and his Apostles. Fourthly, Hence you have not
performed what you undertook, viz. to show that Protestants had any Absolutely
Certain Ground of their Faith. For, it is not enough to point out a Book, and
cry out aloud It Is your Ground, but you must show, that it is indeed such a
Ground. Now a Ground or Rule bears in it is notion Evidence to those who are to
use it, and to know other things by it is Direction; Nay more, Clear Evidence:
For, as all Certainty must have some kind of Evidence to create it in us, so
this Effect of Absolute Certainty can have no less than Clear Evidence for it is
Cause. But, you may as easily prove Mankind has no Eyes to see with, as go
about to show that the Letter of Scripture is thus clear in order to the
discovery of right Faith, even in the highest and most concerning Points of our
Christian Belief. Fifthly, It Is pleasant to observe what a rare Resolution of
your Faith you give us p. 24. Our Faith (say you) is resolved into the
Scripture as the Word of God, and whatever is built on the Word of God, is
absolutely Certain. You must, indeed, having deserted the Tradition of the
Church, either pretend to Scripture, or nothing; unless you will confess your
selves to be pure Phanaticks or Pagans: and it looks mighty plausibly to say,
that whatever is built on the Word of God is absolutely Certain; for it is a
great Truth. But the only Point is still, Are you absolutely-certain by your
Grounds, that your Faith is indeed built on the Word of God? You say, indeed,
Scripture is your Ground, you pretend to it as your Ground, perhaps you think
it so too; and, it is not about your saying, pretending or thinking it to be
such, that we dispute with you; for we should not scruple to grant you all this
without any Dispute at all: But does your saying, pretending or thinking Prove
it to be so really, and indeed? All Heresies in the world do as much as this
comes to, and yet are no less Heresies than if they did none of this. It Is your
Proving it to be your Ground (and that an Absolutely Certain one too) which we
would be at; but, we justly complain you flinch from the only thing in Dispute
and perpetually balk us. We tell you once more, (and we cannot repeat it too
often) there is a necessary Connection between the Ground and the Building; for,
it is not a Building if it have no Ground, nor the Ground of a Building if
nothing be built on it. You are then to show us Absolute Certainty of this
necessary Connection between the Scripture and your Faith, or you do nothing but
talk at random. But, alas! You have not the Confidence to make out this, or
produce your Reasons to conelude this Ground and this Building have such a
necessary Relation; and I must tell you plainly, you can never do it. For,
pray, tell me, May not the Socinians, and indeed all Heretics that ever arose
in the Church, say, pretend, and (perhaps) think the same that you do? Nay, do
not they all allege the same? Do not they all profess to resolve theit Faith
(I mean their abominable Errors) into the written Word? Do not they pretend it
for their Ground, and, that they build their profane Tenets on it; and lastly,
avow as stoutly as you do for your heart, that whatever is built on Gods Word,
is absolutely Certain? Will you allow these Pleas Argumentative for them, or,
that their wicked Errors are therefore true Faith and Absolutely Certain,
because they allege all this! And can you be so unreasonable as to expect we
should pass that for a good Argument, or a conclusive Reason to prove you have
Absolute Certainty for your Faith, which your self disallows, when it is
alleged for them; nay, which you must disallow and declare against, unless you
will patronize all their Heresies? Pray, lay your hand on your Heart, and
consider (I am sure, it is more your own Good, than mine, you should) into what
a Lamentable, or rather Chimerical Condition God's Church is reduced by your
Resolution of your Faith here, and the Account you give of it. The Pillar and
Ground of Truth, is reduced by you into a confused Chaos of incoherent Errors;
Christ's immaculate Spouse is associated with all the Adulterate Synagogues of
Satan; lastly, Faith as to it is Certainty is in no better a Condition than
Heresy, and Heresy is upon even Ground with Faith. I have a better opinion of
the Church of England, than to believe Her most learned and genuin Members,
will own such a Resolution of her Faith, as will make the Socinians, and all
other Heretics in the World their Fellow Christians and Brothers; as they must
be forced to do, if they own no other Resolution of it than all those pestilent
Sects unanimously profess. I see Mr. G had good reason to ask you in his 5 th.
Question, What Churches you accounted Christian Churches? For, I much fear, by
your Discourse and Principles, you exclude None: Nor ought you, so they
heartily hold the same Gound of Faith with you; for then all their Unchristian
Tenets are to pass for Material Errors, not Formal Heresies: They hold all
true Faith in the Purse still, though they mistake the coin and metal; and
that is enough, in all conscience, for such a Church as that you are about
rearing or dawbing up. You pass a complement indeed upon the four first General
Councils, and that you reject all such Doctrins as were condemned by them;
which use to be words of course in your Controversies; as [ your humble
servant] and such like, are in our common Conversation: but, when you are once
got out of the circumstance of pretending to hold to some Antiquity, that so
you may set a better face on it, when you oppose the Papists; when that job is
over, they are but Fallible Congregations, and so perhaps were deceived in all
they defined against the Arians, Eutychians, etc. Especially, if one of your
sober Enquirers comes to fancy otherwise; and, no doubt, there were many such
even in those days. And, then comes the 21 st. Article of Q. Elizabeth's
Symbol, and knocks them down all at once with a Declaration that their Decrees
have neither Strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared, that they be
taken out of Holy Scripture; and so all is with a turn of ones hand brought
back to the same Point again, and, farewell Councils: Your self, and any one of
your sober Enquirers, are at full liberty still to judge of them by your
Scripture-Rule; and the Resolution of your Faith is established by that Article
(at least as you make use of it) to be the same with that which is made, and
professed by all the vile Heretics in the world. For, as Dr. Burnet says very
heartily in his Answer to the Method of oonverting Protestants, p. 83. and, no
doubt upon your Principles, If any man, after his strictest Enquiries, is still
persuaded that a Council, has decreed against the true meaning of the
Scriptures, in a point necessary to Salvation, then he must prefer God to Man,
and follow the Sounder though it should prove to be the lesser party: And, if any
Company or Synod of Protestants have decreed any thing contrary to this, in so
far they have departed from the Protestant Principles.] Where we see he gives
every sober Enquirer leave to judge of Councils, even though General ones, for he
excepts None; and himself shows them the way, by Judging and Censuring the
Councils of his own Church.

35. Another scruple yet remains incumbent on you to clear; which is, that, by
your putting it upon Mr. G. to prove you have not Absolute Certainty as to the
Rule of your Faith, and by your innate Antipathy against Infallibility, it is
very dubious whether your self do indeed hold the Tradition of all Christian
Churches Absolutely Certain, even for the Scripture; however to save your
Credit, you then pretended it, fearing your denying it might disedify Mr. T.
Since then you ly under a shrewd suspicion, that you do not deal really with
him, and the rest of your Readers, in this forced Profession; it would become
you, in your Reply, both to show why you allow that Testimony to be Absolutely
Certain, and yet are such an Enemy to Infallibility; since common sense tells
us, no man can judge himself Absolutely Certain of a thing, if he judges he may
at the same time be deceived in it; and, withal, that you may give more
satisfaction to your Readers herein, than an empty and scarce credible
acknowledgment of it, when you were in untoward Circumstances; pray, go to work
like a Scholar, and demonstrate to us by way of solid Reason, working upon the
Nature of the Thing (for no Argument merely probable will suffice to prove a
Testimony Absolutely Certain) how, and by what virtue this Tradition of all
Christian Churches comes to be thus Absolutely Certain for the Letter of the
Scripture; as you see we endeavor to demonstrate the Absolute Cettainty of our
Tradition for Doctrine, There cannot be a worthier Point to exert your self in,
nor a greater service done to your Rule; nor a better way to clear your self to
the incredulous part of the World, than to perform this: for one knows not
whence mere Words, and outward Professions may proceed; but, solid and
convincing Reasons can come only from a Heart possessed wiih the Truth of what
is Professed. Go to work then, and bless us with the sight of this truly Learned
and Judicious Performance, And, while your hand is in, please to show us too,
that, the Absolute Certainty of this Universal Testimony reaches to prove your
Rule Entire; that is, reaches to prove no part of the Written Word was lost:
nay, that it reaches to the particular Verses, and the most substantial Words
in those Verses, as well as to the main Books; and lastly, to Translations also
and Transcriptions; as you ought to do in case they be (as indeed they are) of
equal Concern, in our circumstances, as the Books themselves. Or, if you deny
they are equally important; and, maintain that this Absolute Certainty may be
had of your Rule, without the same Certainty for these; then please to give us
your Reasons for it, and show how Faith can be Absolutely Certain, though the
Letter on which it depends, may perhaps have been maimed or corrupted by any of
these miscarriages. Or, if you think fit to say you have Absolute Certainty of
your Faith, though you have not Absolute Certainty for it is Rule; then, confess
heartily and ingenuously your Faith is Absolutely-speaking Uncertain; and, to
make good that rare Christian Tenet, fall to work and confute utterly that
Positive Book [ Faith Vindicated] which undertakes to produce a multitude of
Demonstrations to prove that Faith cannot possibly be false; and, withal,
please to inform us to what end you maintain your Rule of Faith to be
Absolutely Certain, if it do not make your Faith thus Certain too, or what that
Certainty serves for. Any thing would content us, so you would once leave
fluttering, and hovering in common Words: Either tell us plainly all Faith is
Uncertain, or come at length to some firm bottom, on which we may with Absolute
Certainty ground the Truth of it, and raise it above some plausible Likelihood.
But, we remonstrate against your putting us off with the Old Sham [ Sufficient
Certainty] unless you particularize to us what kind of Certainty you hold, and
make out it is sufficient for the Nature, the Ends and Uses of Faith, and the
Obligations issuing from it, and incumbent on the Prosessours of it. If you
refuse to condescend to these fair Proposals, all the World must think you
only temporiz'd with Mr. T. and the occasion; and that you have not that Zeal
for your Rule of Faith (whose grand Interest it is these things should be made
out) as you pretend. Once more I tell you, that, if all this will not move you
to this every way necessary undertaking, I must then plainly challenge you,
that it is your necessary and precise Duty, in this very circumstance, as you
are a Controvertist; and, as I am concerned with you under that notion, I must
demand it of you.

36. I know not well whether it be worth the while to justify Mr. M. for
calling your Answer to Mr. G's 5 th. Question Trifling; or whether it be
necessary, after so ample a Discovery, that all the rest of them, taking them
in the sense you explicated them, deserved no better Character. You were ask't
only the meaning of your Words, [ Christian Church] but you had a mind to be
liberal, and give more than was ask't, the meaning of [ Universal Testimony]
too: and to tell us, that, by Universal Testimony, you mean Universal Consent.
That is to say, by Universal Testimony, you mean Universal Testimony: For, all
agree or consent in the Testimony, if it be Universal. Then, to the precise
Question, you Answer, that, by the Christian Church, you mean all Christian
Churches; which is to say, that, by the Christian Church, you mean the
Christian Church; for All the Parts make the Whole; so that, instead of an
Explication, you give us the same thing over again, and almost in the same
Words. And, pray, who is the wiser for such an Answer? Yet, though it be
impertinent, and nothing to the purpose, it is at least True, and Evident by its
self, without needing to make it a Question: If you would please to afford us
such Evidences, when it is to purpose, you would highly oblige us. Certainly, a
Considering Reader cannot but think you are very unhappy in explicating your
self; for, either your Explications run quite away from your Answer, which you
are to explicate, and are a mile wide of them; or they come too close to them,
and are the self-same said over again, and almost in the same Words. But, can
any one think so excellent a Wit, as Yours, is justly reputed, should expose
himself so manifestly, without some latent Design? It Is incredible: Let us take
a view then of Mr. G's 5 th. Question; Being the Words Christian Church may be
taken in several Latitudes by Persons of different Religions, I desire to know
what that Christian Church is, etc. Here we see plainly, that the main of the
Question was, what Churches were accounted by You Christian, or how that Word [
Christian] was to be explicated; and, You give him for explication the
self-same word again, and in effect tell him, that by Christian is meant
Christian; and that's all he can get from You. And, You did prudently; for, had
You come to distinguish which Congregation was Christian, which not, You must
have secluded all Heretics, which your Principles could not do; for your
Ground of Faith here is most manifestly Common to all of them; and so You would
have lain open to the Disrepute of having and professing a Brotherhead with all
those Excrementitious Outcasts; and your pretended Rule (notwithstanding its
other many Divine Excellencies) had appeared to be utterly unqualifi'd with
Clearness and Firmness enough to be called a Rule or Ground. To avoid this, and
in Consonancy to your Principles, You take all their Testimonies in for
Scripture, and pretend it strengthens it. So it may perhaps as to the Books:
But, You know how the Church complained of the Heretics for corrupting the
Letter of Scripture, to make it Favorable for them; and, therefore, for any
thing You know, they cried up the Books, because they had fitted them for their
own purpose. Whence, though the Testimony for the Books should be stronger by
their concurrence, yet the Credit of the Letter, in the respective places that
oppose those Heretics, is weaker for their allowing them, because they
admitted them as consistent with their Tenets; otherwise, they would have
rejected them, as they did others upon that score. And, what advantage can you
gain by the former toward the proving your Ground of Faith Absolutely Certain,
if you be not equally Certain of the later? Surely none at all: For, it is not
the whole Book in the lump that can be produced to prove Faith, or confute
Heresy, but particular Texts; and, if These and the mainly significant Words in
them, be not Absolutely Certain, what becomes of the Absolute Certainty of your
Rule, or your Faith? Nay, I am not fully satisfied that their concurrent
Testimony does strengthen the Certainty of even so much as the Books. For, I
observe that our Judges suspect the Testimony of honest men, and misdoubt the
justness of the Cause, if known Knights of the Post are called in to
corroborate their Evidence. But, you have prudent Maxims of your own which are
beyond the reach of Lawyers.

37. You endeavor to come a little closer to the Point p. 29. and set your
self to prove that Scripture is your Rule of Faith; ay, that it is: In order to
which, You advance this Proposition, that Certainly all that believe it to be
the Word of GOD, must take it for a Rule of Faith. These two confident Words, [
Certainly] and [ Must] are very efficacious to persuade those who will take it
upon your Word; nay they are so magisterial, that they impose a kind of
necessity upon them of believing all is as you say, or else of denying your
Authority, which would break Friendship. But, if they will not, but happen to
be so uncivil as to require Proofs for it, they quite lose their force; and,
which is worse, such positive Assertions make People expect very strong
Arguments to Answer and make good such confident Affirmations; else it hazards
Credit, to pretend Great Things and bring little or no Proof. How you will
justify those big Words, we shall see shortly. In the mean time let us ask you,
how you come to be thus Certain of it? Is there no more requisite to a Rule, but
to be the Word of God? Or, did you never read in Error non-plust, long ago, p.
73, 74, 75. the Answer now given You to this Pretense, in the Confutation of
your 12 th. Principle; in which You endeavor to establish Scripture to be a
Rule? Or, can You so much forget your self, and your duty to reply to it, as to
discourse still thus crudely, with the same confidence as if You had never read
or heard of such a Book, or any thing alleged there to the contrary? If we
must needs mind You of it so often, take these few words along with you now at
least; and till you have replied to them, and others such which are there
alleged, I beseech you let us be tired no more with such Talk, as serves only
to amuse, but can never edify or convince. [ To be writ by men divinely
inspired, to be Divine, Infallible, and the Word of God, Error Non-plust, P. 74.
signifies no more but that they (the Scriptures) are perfectly Holy and True
in themselves, and beneficial to Mankind in some way or other; and, this is the
farthest these Words will carry: But, that they are of themselves of sufficient
Clearness to give sincerely endeavoring Persons such security of their Faith
while they rely on them as cannot consist with Error ( which is requisite to
the Rule of Faith) these Words signif^y not. They may be most Holy, they may be
most True in themselves, they may be exceedingly Useful, or Beneficial to
Mankind, and yet not endowed with this Property; which yet the Rule of Faith
must have.] And, page 75. [What then Dr. St. is to do, is to produce conclusive
Reasons to evince that the Letter of Scripture has such a Perspicuity, and
other Perfections belonging to such a Rule, as must Ground that most Firm, and
Unalterable, and (if rightly Grounded) Inerrable Assent called Christian
Faith.] We see here the Question rightly stated, and the Point that sticks; now
let us see whether your Proof does so much as touch it, or in the least mention
it.

38. The Argument you make choice of, (I suppose it is your best, the matter in
hand being of highest consequence) to prove that all who believe Scripture to
be the Word of God must take it for a Rule of Faith, is this. [ For, since the
reason of our believing is because God has revealed, whatever God has revealed
must be believed, and a Book containing in it such Divine Revelations must be
the Rule of our Faith. i. e. by it we are to judge what we are bound to believe
as Divine Revelations.] What a wild medly is here, instead of a Reason! Here
are four Propositions involved. The First, is this; the reason of our believing
is because God has revealed; and this is granted: only you may note that we
are equally bound to believe what God has revealed by the Church's Testimony as
by Writing, if it be equally clear it was thus revealed; nay, more by the
former than by the later, in case that way of ascertaining the Divine
Revelation be more clear than this: nor does your First Proposition deny this,
but rather asserts it. The Second, This, [ whatever God has revealed must be
believed.] And this is pretended for an Inference, but alas, it is nothing less.
For, how does it follow that because the reason of our believing is God's
Revealing, therefore we are bound to believe what God has revealed, whether we
know it or no? All then that can be said of it is, that it is pious Nonsense,
unless you add to it that we have also Certain Grounds God has indeed revealed
it: For, otherwise, besides the danger of erring our selves in matters of the
highest moment (and this unalterably too, in regard we entertain that Error as
recommended by the Divine Revelation) we shall moreover hazard to entitle God's
Infinite veracity to a Falsehood, and make Truth it self the Author of Lies.
The Third, that [ a Book, containing in it such Revelations must be the Rule of
our Faith] is absolutely denied. For a Book may contain in it Divine
Revelations, and I may not know certainly it does contain them: Or, I may know
certainly by very good Testimony it does contain them, yet not know certainly
it does contain them all: Or, I may know it does contain them all, yet perhaps
not be able to know any one of those Divine Revelations in particular, which
are contained there; for example, if it be in a language I understand not: Or,
though I do understand the language, yet by reason of it is mysterious Sublimity,
and deep Sense, and thence Obscurity and Ambiguity in many passages relating to
spiritual matters, and the Chief Articles of our Christian Profession, I cannot
be assured with Absolute Certainty which is the right Sense of it; and
therefore (considering me as in the way to Faith, and that my Assent depends
necessarily on the Truth of some Preliminary which is the object of pure
Reason) I might not, nay cannot, with any true Reason, firmly assent to what I
see may be an Error; nor hazard my salvation upon an Uncertain Ground, and on
which I know great multitudes have already Ship-wrackt. The Fourth [ By it we
are to judge what we are bound to believe as Divine Revelations) runs upon the
same strain; for you are to show us how by it I am to judge my self bound to
believe any thing at all as a Divine Revelation, that is, as taught by Christ,
with a Firm and Unalterable Assent, (such as Faith is) till I am Certain it is
so, by being ascertained he taught it. This is the True, This is the Main
Point; which you slide over still as smoothly as a non-plust Commentator does
over hard Texts, that puzzle him to explicate. I say once more, it is the Main
if not only Point: for, till you have made out this, you can never prove that
Scripture (taken alone) is a Ground of Faith at all, much less an Absolutely
Certain Ground; and, least of all, your Ground in particular. And therefore you
said very True when you lamented p. 28. you were in a hard case: for though (say
you) there is an Absolute Certainty, and this Certainty lies in Universal
Tradition, and we can show this Universal Tradition, yet we cannot show the
Ground of our Certainty. For, you cannot show Universal Tradition for every
particular Text that concerns Faith without our Tradition- Rule for Doctrine;
nor Absolute Certainty you have the true Sense, though you had that Certainty for
the Letter, without which it is not your Ground at all. A Certainty there is,
but not by virtue of your Grounds, and so it is none of your Certainty, nor your
Ground neither. Whereas then you confess here that, if you cannot show the true
Ground of your Certainty you deserve to be either pitied or begged, you say
very true: for we do from our hearts pity you, let who will take the the other
part. We pity you to see such excellent Wits, who, had they a good cause, would
be honorably victorious, forced by the Patronage of a bad one to employ their
Talents in shifting about for bypath to avoid meeting the Question in the
face. We pity you for your being necessitated to impose upon your well-meaning
Readers with your specious pretenses of Gods Word, instead of showing them with
Absolute Certainty (on your Grounds) that you have the true Sense of it in any
one passage relating to the controverted points; without which you cannot with
Honesty pretend it Gods Word as to those Points. And, if that kind of begging
may do you any good, we shall earnestly and heartily beg of God's Infinite
Mercy to give you hearts to seek Truth, and heartily acknowledge it when found.

39. I had almost forgot your Id est, which connects your Third and Last
Proposition together [ -- must be the Rule of our Faith, Id est (say you) by it
we are to judge what we are bound to believe as Divine Revelations. These Id
est's, which should be used to clear things, are still so made use of that they
are the main Engines to confound them. Let your Id est then say what it please,
I must tell you plainly, you quite mistake the meaning of the Word Rule; It
speaks Rectitude, and that such an Evident one as preserves those who regulate
themselves by it from obliquity or Deviation, that is, in our case, from
Error. You ought then to have said -- The Rule of our Faith, Id est, by which,
while we follow it, we shall be absolutely secured from erring in Faith, For
the Primary Effect of a Rule is to give Faith that prerequisit* Quality as
elevates it to the Dignity of such a kind of Assent, and raises it above that
dwindling, feeble, alterable assent called Opinion. But you will needs, (to
avoid coming near so dangerous a Rock) take it for a kind of Quantitative
Measure, nor for a Qualifying Principle: Whereas, indeed, it is not the What or
how much we are to believe, which is now our Question; but, the That we ought
to believe any thing at all; or That you can by your Grounds have any Faith at
all for want of this Absolute Certainty, which you pretend to; It Is this I say,
which is the true Subject of our present Debate. For though we both held the same
Quantity or Number of Points to a tittle, yet it might be Faith in one of us,
and but Opinion in the other; nay perhaps Opinion in both, if both of us wanted
Certain Grounds to evince they were Christ's Doctrine, which is the Formal Motive
of our Faith. It belongs then to a Rule to ascertain both the That we are to
believe, and the What; but the former Office of it is Antecedent and Principal,
the later Collateral, and Secondary: Common Sense telling us that we ought
first to determine whether there is any Faith at all, e're we come to debate
what Points are of Faith, what not. These Fast-and-Loose Doings make me, when
ever I meet with an Id est, still expect it means [ aliud est] and that, like
your other Explications of your self, it is brought in to divert our Eyes to
another Object instead of keeping them still fixed upon the same.

40. Enough has been said, I am sure too much ever to be Answered, to prove
that Scripture alone as interterpreted by any Private Man's Judgment, wants the
Chief Property of a Rule of Faith, viz. such a Clearness as is able to give all
sorts of People, or the Generality of Christians (be they never so Sober
Enquirers) Absolute Assurance of it is Sense, even in the highest Mysteries of
our Faith, without needing the Church's Help. Nor, will You ever be able to
produce the Consent of all Christian Churches affirming that it has this
Property. Wherefore, when it is called a Rule by some of the Ancients, it must
be taken (as Mr. M. Dr. St. second Letter, p. 29.
says) with the Interpretation of the Church adjoined; which, having the
Living Sense of Christ's Law in her Heart, can animate the Dead Letter, and
preserve it from Explications any way prejudicial to the Faith received. And,
thus indeed, it may be called a Rule of Faith; because, as it is thus
understood, it cannot lead any into Error, but, See Sect. 23*
is of good use to abett Truth by it is Divine Authority. In which sense Councils
proceed upon it often, and sometimes call it a Rule. And, I remember the Famous
Launoy, when we were Discoursing once about Tradition showed me a little Book
of his, in which, he goes about to prove, that Councils had frequently defined
against Heretics out of Scripture. On which occasion I ask't him, if he judged
those Councils framed their Definitions by the sense they had of the Letter by
their own human Skill; or by the sense of the Church, which they had by
Tradition: he answered, undoubtedly by the later; and that there would be no
End of Disputing with Heretics, had they taken the former Way. By which we may
discern that still Tradition was in proper speech their Rule, even when they
alleged Scripture. Other, call Scripture sometimes a Rule, because it contains
Faith; in which sense even some Catholics call it a partial Rule because Part
of Christ's Doctrine is contained in it, the other part descending by Tradition:
which acceptance of the Word [ Rule] is yet less Proper; because (as has been
proved) it may be contained there, and yet we be never the nearer knowing our
Faith merely by virtue of Scripture's containing it. But no Catholic ever said
that every sober Enquirer may find out all necessary Points of Faith in
Scripture without the Churches Help. A Doctrine, which You declare p. 21. You
are far from being ashamed of. And yet, let me tell You Sir, You will never
find this Position of yours as it lies [ without the Churches Help:] in the
Universal Tradition of all Christian Churches; and, unless You find this, You
will never prove they held it a Rule in the genuin and proper signification in
which we take that Word; (and though they should call it a Rule, in either of the
former Senses lately mentioned, they impugn not us at all, who grant the same.

41. You will needs run out of the way, p. 30. to talk of a Judge of
Controversies; but the best is, You acknowledge you do go thus astray, by
acknowledging it is another distinct Controversy; and yet, though you acknowledge
this, You still run on with it, that is, You still wander from the Point. You
triumph mightily p. 31. that it is impossible for us to bring such an unanimous
Consent of all Christian Churches for our Infallible Judge -- or our
Infallibility, as Protestants bring for their Rule. As for the later, where
were your thoughts, Sir, while you thus bad adieu to the plainest Rules of
Discourse? Cannot we go about to demonstrate the Infallibility of a Human
Testimony by Natural Mediums, but, instead of Answering it, you must object
against our Conclusion, and bid us bring the Consent of all Churches to abett
that, which neither depends, nor is pretended to depend, on Authority, but on
mere Reason? Cannot one say two and three make five, but he must be presently
bobb'd in the mouth that he cannot show the Consent of all Christian Churches
for it; and that, unless he does this, let it be never so evident, it is not
True? It Is very pleasant to reflect how brisk you are still with this Consent of
all Churches; (I suppose because it is a Topic very seldom heard of in your
Controversies) though as has been shown over and over, it is not a jot to your
purpose, nor avails any thing to the evincing you have an Absolutely-Certain
Ground of your Faith. And, if we have an Infallible Rule, or such a Rule as
permits not those to be deceived that follow it, can there be any thing more
Rational than to hold by consequence, that there is an Infallible Judge, or
that our Church can judge unerringly in matters belonging to Faith? the word
Judge only signifying that that Person or Persons, are in Authority, or are
Authoritative Deciders, to preserve the Integrity of Faith, and the Peace of
the Church. So that, supposing Church Governors or Bishops, and that those
Sacred Concerns are to be provided for, plain Reason demonstrates to us this
too as well as the other, without needing the Consent of all Christian
Churches; though you need not to be told this does not want neither; unless you
think that all the General Councils that defined against Heretics, imagined
they might perhaps be in an Error all the while; and the Heretic, whom they
condemned, in the right. Your p. 3.
Appeal to all the Churches of the Christian World for your Rule, has a
plausible appearance, but vanishes into air when one comes to grasp it. How
often must it be repeated that you have as yet produced no Rule at all for your
Faith? For you have neither proved that Scripture's Letter, as to every
substantial word that concerns Faith, is absolutely-Certain; nor that it has in
it the nature of a Rule; nor that, it is your Rule, more than it is to all the
Heretics in the world; nor that your Assent to any Point upon that Rule, as
made use of by you, (for want of Connection between the Points to be believed,
and the Rule on which they are believed,) can have the nature of true Faith in
it. If talking big would do the deed, you would indeed do wonders; but let your
Reasons be proportionable; otherwise, strong words and faint blows are but very
ill-matcht. Now, I must declare plainly I cannot see the least semblance of so
much as one solid Proof in this whole Treatise of yours. If there be, confute
me by showing it, and maintaining it to be such. You explain you own Tenet over
and over till one is weary of readding it, and half ashamed so often to answer
it. You talk much of God's Word; that we are bound to believe it, that it
contains God's Will, and all things necessary to Salvation; and, twenty such
fine things; which bear a Godly Sound, and would do well in a Sermon where all
goes down glib, there being none to contradict you; but, are very dull and flat
in Controversy. On the contrary, not one Argument have you even offered at, to
prove you have Absolute Certainty of the Rule or Ground of your Faith, but have
fallen short in every one of those Considerations; both as to the Notions of
Certainty, Ground, Rule, Faith; and that it is your Ground, your Rule, and your
Faith.

42. A Rule to any thing, if we take that word in a proper sense as we do in
our modern Controversies, is the Immediate Light to direct us in order to our
knowing that thing. For, in case it be not Immediate, but some other thing
intervenes that is needful to direct us, and by whose Rectitude we frame our
thoughts as to that affair, and that it renders the other capable to direct us;
that other becomes presently the Thing Ruled, and not the Rule: in regard it
wanted the Rectitude of another thing to direct it, that so it might be fit to
direct us. Wherefore the Interpretation of Scripture being more Immediate to
the knowing the Sense of it is Words, (that is to the knowing our Faith) than is
the Letter, for it is manifest that all who have the Letter have not right
Faith unless they make a right Interpretation of it; hence Mr. M. had reason to
object, that The Christian Church did not agree that every man is to interpret
Scripture for himself, or to build his Faith upon his own private
Interpretation of it: Nor ought you to be offended at his position, in regard
you told us before p. 7. and 8. a Heretical Sense may ly under these General
Words [Christ is the Son of God] and different Senses may be couch't under
these, Christ is really in the Eucharist; and so, (even according to your self)
it is the Interpretation or the assigning the Sense to those words which makes
True Faith or Heresy. Wherefore, it is plain that your own Interpretation of
Scripture is, in true speech, your Rule; for That is a more Immediate Direction
to give you the Sense of Scripture than is the Letter; which is Antecedent, and
presupposed to the Interpretation, as it is Matter or Object. Nor had you your
Faith though you had the Letter, till you had interpreted it. And, besides, the
proper and Immediate Effect of Interpretation, is to give the Sense of Words,
and it is the Sense of Scripture which is your Faith, and so your own Private
Interpretation is unavoidably your Rule. If then you will vouch, as you do all
over, that the Universal Consent of all Christian Churches gave you your Rule,
it must attest your way of interpreting Scripture too, by private judgments;
Nay, it must moreover attest that way to be absolutely Certain; otherwise you
can never show how your kind of Protestant Faith, no better grounded, can be
absolutely Certain; and this, as to all the Doctrine that was taught by Christ
and his Apostles; for both which you very unadvisedly undertook when you were
at a pinch; hoping, I suppose, to shift it off again with one of your
transferring Expedients, or some squinting [ Id est]. To what purpose is it
then to tell us here p. 31. how a man (one of your Sober Enquirers I suppose)
is to behave himself, where the Texts or places are doubtful. For, unless the
Consent of all Christian Churches bring us down by their Universal Testimony
that those methods are to be taken, and that they are absolutely Certain Means
for all that use them to interpret Scripture right, or come at the true Sense
of it, you are still as incapable as ever of showing us absolute Certainty for
your Faith, or that you have any Faith at all by those Means. Nay, I much
mistake you if your Principles will allow these Means, no not even the
Testimony which brings down to us the Sense of the Primitive Church (upon which
you here pass a complement) to be more than Fallible. If you do, you admit our
Rule: If you do not, I would advise you to prepare your Reasons to convince the
World how a Fallible Authority can prove that what is built on it is absolutely
Certain. However, you set the best Color upon these Fallible Means you can;
telling us, your Sober Enquirer is to make use of the best helps, the best and
most reasonable means, etc. though they are such that in likelihood it will take
up his whole life time, ere he can use and peruse them all, so as to compass
sincerely this satisfaction; nay it is ten to one he will die a Seeker: and then
he will have inquired very soberly, to go to the next world to ask the way to
heaven. I wonder how many of the Church of England, or even of Geneva, made use
of all these Means ere they finally pitched upon their Faith: I much doubt --
Vel duo, vel nemo -- Few or none. And we would know of you whether any of those
means, or all together, are absolutely Certain. If none, you are still where
you were. If you say any or all, you will fight against Experience; for many
who use all these Means do notwithstanding differ. You would insinuate by the
words, [ doubtful places] that the Points your Sober Enquirers doubt of, are
but unnecessary, slight, or disputable; but alas! they are the highest
Mysteries of our Christian Faith; and if they must take such pains, as to
compare Scripture and Expositors, and the Sense of the Primitive Church (which
will require perusing attentively a pretty Library) ere they can accept these
for Points of Faith, what satisfaction is to be expected in all that Christ and
his Apostles taught, by your Rule, which asks such laborious study to
understand it is Sense in these; or by your method, which is both Endless, and
when all is done Uncertain?

43. Of how different a Judgment the Primitive Church was, let a Chief Pillar
of it, St. Athanasius inform us ( Lib. de Synodis Arimini and Seleuciae) where
he blames some Clergymen of his time for going about enquiring what they were
to believe, in these words, Si credidissent, nunquam, quasi Fidem non haberent,
de Fide quaesivissent. -- Sese Infideles esse declaraverunt, cum id quaerant
quod non habent. If they had believed, they had never inquired, as if they did
want Faith. -- They have declared themselves to be Unbelievers by their
enquiring after what they have not. So, that, it seems all your Sober Enquirers
are (according to this Fathers Judgment) Infidels, or Unbelievers. Observe here
the vast distance between your Principles and those of this Holy Father and
most learned Controvertist. Nothing but seeking and enquiry (with the Epithet
of sober to grace it a little) will serve your turn; but, he tells us, on the
quite contrary, that, if We seek, or enquire, we have no Faith at all: Which,
in plain English, signifies thus much; you judge that to be the only way to
Faith, which, he judges a plain Argument of having none. You are all for
seeking for your Faith in Scripture; He, for taking what is already found to
our hand some other Way, which. must be by Tradition. One thing I should much
wonder at, did not I know your private-spirited Principles; it is this, why
amongst other means you assign for your sober Enquirer to make use of, you do
not put the Judgment of the Present Church (let it be your own if you please)
for one? I should think the Faith of the Church had more weight in it, than all
the rest put together, if you do indeed hold it a True Church; and it is far
more easy to know its sense, where it has thought fit to explicate it is self
clearly. The finding the sense of Commentatours, and the Places compared, and
of Primitive Antiquity, costs infinite trouble; whereas, there is no difficulty
to know the sense of the Present Church, speaking to you by Living Voice, and
consonant Practice. I should think too, it is most agreeable to the Order of the
World, the Unity of the Church, and the Maxims of Government (if you will allow
any such to a Church) that People should follow the Doctrine of their Teachers,
be led by their Pastors, and obey their Superiors; rather than be left to
their own private Fancies, in matters of such Concern, that, if they clash with
them in their Judgment, it hazards to break all those sacred Orders, by which
the World subsists. Let me ask you one thing, ere we leave this Point. Is your
sober Enquirer Bound to use these means for his satisfaction in doubtful
Points, or not? You say expressly here, that, he is bound to do this; and, so I
suppose you will be disatisfi'd with him, if he falls short of this Duty. I ask
next, did Mr. T. use all these means in a doubtful Point, to compass a rational
satisfaction? How should he, when he was satisfied, and confirmed, and resolved
in so little time. Yet, for all your contrary Doctrine here, you are well
satisfied with him, nay, you undertake p. 13. to satisfy the World that Mr. T.
had sufficient Grounds for what he then said; which was, that, he was much more
confirmed in the Communion of our (the Protestant) Church, and resolved to
continue in it, Pray, Sir, was he a sober Enquirer or no? If he was, did he in
two hours time, that Mr. G. and you were Disputing, use the means you say your
sober Enquirer is bound to make use of in doubtful cases; as his was, if he
dealt sincerely with Mr. G. and did not play booty? Did he in two or three
hours time, pray, meditate, compare Scripture, and Expositours upon it, use the
help of spiritual Guides, and the sense of the Primitive Church, which, are but
some of the Means you prescribe p. 31. He made prodigious have, if he did use
those means: How comes he then to be so satisfied, nay, so resolved, without
using those means; and so worthy of your Patronage, if he did not what you say
here, he was bound to do? These are Mysteries, which must be veiled from the
eyes of the Vulgar, and Profane. Nor is there any way to reconcile these
Contradictions, but to understand you with this Clavis; that, you say any thing
that seems to serve your turn, when you are disputing against us, and disclaim
it again when the circumstance is altered; and that, as you pretended that for
your Rule of Faith, which not one in a thousand follow; so you pretend those
methods must be taken, to understand your Rule right to the end we may not be
deceived by it, which, neither are taken by any, nay, need not be taken at all,
though you told us here men were bound to take them; the believing your word that
your Answer was competent ( See the Anwer to Dr. St 's First Letter, Sect.
12.18, 30.
which was indeed none) acquitted his Obligation, and atton'd for his rashness.
This, this alone, was so meritorious, that, it was equivalent to Prayer,
Meditation, comparing Scripture, and Expositours upon it, the help of spiritual
Guides, and the sense of the Primitive Church, which, you declare here, such as
he were bound to consult for their satisfaction in Faith. By which I guess your
Test to distinguish a Sober from a Rash Enquirer, is, whether he will rely on
your Word or Skill for his security of Heaven. If he will, he is of your sober
sort without more ado; and, need not trouble himself with those painful
Methods: If he will not, he must go through them all, or be Rash. The Truth is,
you play sure; and may safely defy any man living ever to enquire himself
soberly out of your Communion: For, whoever begins, shall be sure to die before
he have inquired half way.

44. At length, to my great Comfort (for it is tedious to find no Reasons to
speak to, but still to be employed in confuting Mistakes) I am come to the last
Task, that, as far as I can discern, will belong to my Province. Toward the
end of page 31. your Discourse ayms to establish your kind of Judgment of
Discretion; which makes such a noise in your Books, and of late rings out of
the Pulpit too. See Mr. Kidder's famous Sermon Preached at St. Paul's Cross,
Feb. 23. 1686.
You make way to it thus, If we have the Consent of all Christian Churches
against the only pretended Infallible Judge, we have their Consent likewise
that every man is to judge for his own Salvation. Your Argument, such as it is,
stands thus, By the Consent of all Christian Churches, there is no Infallible
Judge, therefore, every man must judge for himself. It seems then nothing will
content you now but Infallibility; and, if that be not to be had, every one may
set up for himself in the Judging Profession. Why, suppose the Governors of
Our Church, when you left Her, or of your Own Church either, were Fallible; are
you grown so nice on a sudden, and your Conscience so tender in embracing any
thing less than Infallibly-Certain, for Faith, that Fallibility will not serve
your turn, which hitherto, you so contentedly hugged and adored, and so wittily
derided any Certainty above it? Suppose they had but your Sufficient Certainty,
or great Likelyhoods, fair Probabilities, or such like, for their
Interpretations of Scripture; must they therefore lose their Power of Judging
in that particular, because they are Bishops? Or, forfeit the Dignity of
Pastors and Leaders, because they are not Infallible? You have such an a king
tooth at the Churches intermeddling in Faith-matters, no not so much as to help
her Children in the most necessary Points (p. 21..) so they be doubtful, that
neither profes't Infallibility nor acknowledged Fallibility will put you in
good humor with Church Governors; but out they must, and your sober Enquirer
starts up in their stead. For he must judge whether they tell him right or no,
when all is done; I suppose by the light Scripture gives him, as he is to judge
of the veracity of General Councils; and so we are got into the giddy
whirl-pool of a Circle. He must learn the Sense of Scripture by them, and yet
trust himself interpreting Scripture, not them, for the Sense of it? It Is pity
but he had a blew Apron on, and a Tub to hold forth in what heavenly light he
had gained, by interpreting Scripture after the Method you have shown him. It Is
true, if there were no Absolute Certainty in the way to Faith (and I believe
you hold none in your Church) every man must shift for himself as well as he
may; yet still even in that case, he is bound to do that which shall appear
best, and come up as near to Certainty as he can. And can he in any reason
think his own Enquiry will bring him to more Certainty, than the Pastors of his
Church, who had been sober Enquirers too themselves, and understood the Means
you assign to make that Enquiry, perhaps a thousand times better than himself?
If he thinks them better qualified than himself for interpreting Scripture, he
sins against the Light of Reason, not to trust them rather than himself: For
they have, in that Supposition, more knowledge than he; It Is left then, that he
is to judge himself to be better qualified than his Church, her Bishops and all
his Pastors are for that work: and, upon this brisk self-conceit, the Book of
Scripture flies open on a sudden, discloses it is Sense, and discovers to him
his Faith. Certainly, such a man is likely to have a very Reverend esteem of
his Church, her Bishops and Pastors; and yet, your Principles would have all
men such. Indeed, you would have your sober Enquirers, pray and meditate. But,
it should seem they are to pray, amongst other things, God would give them the
Grace not to obey or believe their Pastors so much as themselves in necessary
Points; (I hope you hold the Tenet of a Trinity, Christ's Godhead, and such
other Points, such) which otherwise their honest Natural Reason, conscious to
it self of it is own Ignorance, will very much tempt them to do; and to meditate
on God's great Mercy, in giving them greater Abilities and better Assistance
than he does to his Church; for they are very ungrateful if they forget so
signal and extravagant a Favor. But, let us see what is to be meant by an
Infallible Judge; for you do not particularize your acception of those words;
nor let your Reader see what Judge, how, or for what reason we hold him
Infallible.

45. If you mean by [ Iudge] an Authoritative Decider of Controversies about
Faith (as was said above) and that (which is what we hold) his verdict is
Infallible by proceeding upon an Infallible Rule, you must either pretend the
Christian Church never permitted Church Governors to exercise their Authority
in deciding matters of Faith; or else that it never held they had an Infallible
Rule to go by. And I believe your utmost attempts will fall so far short of
producing any such Consent of Universal Tradition for either, that it will be
directly against you in both; and you must have a strange opinion of the
Decrees of General Councils, in such cases, if you apprehend they held either
of those self-condemning Tenets. And yet I cannot tell, but I have made my self
too large a Promise concerning this Universal Consent of all Christian Churches
being for us or not against us in this particular: For I remember now, that,
when you were to state the Notion of Tradition, you took in the Consent of all
former Heretics to make your Tradition for Scripture larger and firmer than
ours is against you, Dr. St's First Letter, p. 7.
Dr. St. second Letter, p. 25.
and to make your Argument stronger by their concurrent Testimony; and I see a
glimmering light already, which will grow very clear ere long, you take in the
same infamous Gang to bear witness against our Infallibility; And what a case
is the Catholic Church in then? We can never expect those obstinate Revolters
from that Church or those Churches which were then in Communion with Rome, will
ever acknowledge the Governors had a just Authority to declare against them as
Heretics (for they were all of them, to a man, true-blew Sober Enquirers) or
that those Governors proceeded upon an Infallible Rule; for this were to cut
their own throats, and acknowledge themselves Heretics; a mortification not to
be submitted to by much contumacious spirits. Now all these by your Principles
are to be accounted Christian Churches, and are called so very currently, and
very frequently by you (p. 24. 25. 26. and in many other places) without any
distinction at all. And so we are reduced to a very pretty condition, according
to the admirable mould in which you have new-cast the Church. For, unless all
those Heretics of old, any Lutherans, Calvinists, and all the inferior
Subdivisions of Faith Reformers, vouchsafe to give their concurrent Testimony
to the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church (which condemned them all;
and, as appears by the Council of Trent throughout, by the same Rule of
Tradition) she is to have no Infallibility at all allowed her; her old Rule too
is condemned by them for a False Light, because it condemned them, and their
New-Light; nor consequently can she be an Infallible Judge in
Faith-Controversies. This is a very hard Law; Yet your severe Discourses allow
us no better quarter. You allege that the Eastern Churches utterly deny the
Roman Church's Infalliblely, though they be of very different denominations. You
mean (I suppose) amongst the rest, the Nestorians, Eutychians, and such kind of
good folks. And can you without blushing avail your self of such concurrent
Testimonies against the Body communicating with the Roman, and her Infallible
Rule, whose Ancestors were condemned by that very Body to which the present
Roman Catholic Church uninterruptedly succeeds; and were cast out of the
Church for receding from the Christian Doctrine, held even then upon that very
Rule?

46. But what have we to do with any of your pretended Christian Churches,
whether Eastern, or not-Eastern, Modern, or Ancient; many or few? Or, what have
you to do with them either, if you would, as becomes a Controvertist, speak
home to us. You know already we place the Infallibility of our Church in
delivering, defining and Judging of Faith-Controversies, in the Absolutely
Certain Rule of Tradition. All therefore that have adhered to Tradition as
their Rule, must allow to Her this Inerrableness, while she adheres to it, else
they must condemn themselves. And those pretended Churches which have deserted
Tradition, can never, for many reasons, be of any competent Authority against
the Roman Catholic. For, having no Certain Rule, they can have no sure Ground
of what they believe or allege against her: And, besides, being her Enemies,
and condemned by her, and that by virtue of this very Rule they carp at, common
Equity tells every man it is not a pin matter what such men say of that Rule, or
that Church either, whether those men live East, West, North, or South. I
perceive by your far-stretcht words here p. 31. [ All the Churches of the
Christian World, All the Eastern Churches though of very different denominations,
that you imagine the force of an Authority depends merely on the Number of the
Witnesses; whereas we make account it depends much more on their Weight; that
is, on their Knowledge, and on their Sincerity, or Indifferency of their Wills,
as to the Person or Affair concerning which they are to witness: And Fallible
Congregations, which are both Outcasts, and Enemies, have for each of those
regards, no weight at all.

47. You have another Fetch yet left to prejudice the Reader against our Tenet.
For, you often make mention of our Infallibility, the Roman, or the Roman
Churches Infallibility, and (as appears p. 15. and 16) of the Infallibility of
the Particular Church of Rome; whereas the Question, and our true Tenet, is, of
those many particular Churches communicating with the Roman; so that you seem
desirous to convince us you are resolved never to speak to any point sincerely
or represent it ingenuously. For this slight, though it seems trivial,
insinuates into your Readers, that we hold the very Spot of Rome is the
precise, and adequate mold in which Infallibility is cast. Please then to
remember, and pray let it be the last time we tell you of it, that it is her
following the Sea First (...) p. 18.
self-evidently certain Rule of Tradition, in which as a Controvertist I do, in
this Dispute, place her Infallibility. That, being thus absolutely Certain of
her Faith, we can prove she is qualified to be an Infallible Judge of Faith.
That every Bishop is a Judge of Faith-Controversies in proportion to his
Sphere, and the Highest Bishop above them all: but still, the last resort or
Test of their final obliging to Belief (for any one may oblige his Diocesans to
Silence for Peace's sake) is with reference to the Body of the Church; and the
Infallibility of the Church is refunded into the Certainty of her Rule; and
there it rests. Hence, conscious to your selves of the want of such an
Infallible Rule, you dare pretend to no Infallible Judge, but are forced to
leave every particular man to his private Judgment of Discretion; though you
experience it shatters your Church, no better principled, into thousands of
Sects. In a word, in the way of our Controversy, all Discourse ought to begin
Originally, and end Finally in an absolutely Certain Rule of Faith; that is, in
such a Rule as influences our Tenets with the same Certainty. We are sure we
have such a Rule, and, so, we are sure we have true Faith; and we are sure you
can have no Certainty that You have true Faith, because true Faith requires
Absolute Certainty, and, therefore, an Infallible Rule, which you renounce.
This is the main Point between us, on which depends all the rest, whether it
relates to an Infallible Church or Infallible Judge. Look it then in the face;
spare it not, but level your whole quiver of Reasons at this mark. Unless you
do this, you do but trifle; you beat the bush, and scatter leaves, but spring
nothing. While this Infallible Rule remains unconfuted, you must confess there
may, and ought to be an Infallible Judge; and your Judgment of Discretion is
convinced to be a mere Libertinage, forcibly granted to all, for want of
Principles in your selves to Ground them certainly in their Faith, keep them
steady in it, and reduce them to it when they deviate.

48. To come closer, and take a more distinct view of this Judgment of
Discretion, I will acquaint you how far and in what I allow it, how far and in
what I reject it. I grant that every man is to judge for his own salvation, and
to endeavor by his Reason to find the Way to right Faith. I grant with you
that all Mankind agrees in it; and therefore wonder at your self-contradiction
to make us disagree to it, who certainly are some part of Mankind. I grant
that, otherwise, it is to no purpose to go about to make Converts: I add, nor
for you, and me, to write Controversies. I grant that every man is to judge of
the best way to Salvation, and of all the Controversies between us and you; and
especially of the true Grounds of Faith; and to be well satisfied who proceeds
on a Certain Rule, who not; and that the contrary Tenet is as ridiculous as
what is most, unless your putting upon us, against your daily experience, such a
sottishness as to hold it. I add, that, since every man is to judge of his
Grounds, therefore the Rule of Faith must be such as needs not much Learning
and Reading, Se Faith vind. p. 132, 133, 134, 135.
but must ly level to every man's Natural Light of Understanding; as the nature
of Testifying Authority, and it is Certainty does. I will grant you moreover,
that to deprive Mankind of this Privilege of judging thus, is to debarr him of
the Light and Use of his Reason, when it is most needful for him; that is, when
it should direct him how to find out the way to his Eternal Happiness, and,
avoid the paths that lead him to Eternal Misery. But, I utterly deny, that
therefore, he ought to think it Discretion to hammer out his Faith by the dints
of his private and unelevated Reason, from Words that are of so deep, and
mysterious a sense; and this, after he has experienced that multitudes of other
men, as wise or wiser than himself, and (for ought he can discern) very sincere
too, do their best to understand them right; and yet, as appears by their
contradicting one another in matters of highest importance, one of those Great,
and Learned Parties, does err most dangerously; I deny that his Discretion can
lead him to judge that God's Providence has left no absolutely Certain Way to
Faith, it being of so vast a Concern, and highest necessity: Or that it can
command him to Assent firmly and unalterably to any Tenet as a Truth, nay,
profess it to be such, even with the laying down his Life to attest it; and yet
that, notwithstanding, it may be a Lie, for any thing can be known by the
Grounds he goes upon. And, therefore, I deny that, in case Faith depends on
some Authority bringing it from Christ (without Certainty of which none can be
Certain it is True at all) that Authority should be Fallible in that affair, and
perhaps deceive him while he trusts it, or relies on it: Or, in case it depends
on some other Means ( viz. Scripture's Letter, and his own Interpretation of
it) that Means should not certainly bring him to the End, if he makes use of it
to the best of his power: I deny it to be Discretion to think himself capable
to judge he has Absolute Certainty of the Entire Books of Scripture, even to
such particular Words or Verses he builds on, but by our Tradition for
Doctrine; as likewise of their Translations and Transcriptions all along; and,
of the Copies being taken at first from the true Original; whence I deny he can
with true reason judge his Faith True; since a fault in any of these may make
it False. I deny that he can with any Discretion judge that the ways you
prescribe p. 31. for your Sober Enquirer to understand the Letter of Scripture
right, and so come at true Faith, (viz. comparing Scripture and Expositours
upon it, help of spiritual Guides (who confess they may all be deceiv d, and so
may mislead him) and knowing the sense of the Primitive Church, etc.) are the
means left by God for Men to arrive at Faith and Salvation; since to do this,
he sees so many volumns must be read over, compared, and well-weigh'd, that in
all likelihood, a hundred parts of Mankind for one (I may say a thousand) would
Die e're they could make a certain choice which side to take in dubious points;
and to add to his discomfort, those Points which of all other, are of highest
concern, as are the Trinity, Christ's Godhead, the Real Presence of Christ's
Body in the Sacrament, the Efficacy of God's Grace, and such like, are the most
dubious; as being most controverted by the Pretenders to the Scripture-Rule. I
deny he can with any Discretion, when he comes to receive satisfaction of the
Absolute Certainty of his Faith, suffer himself to be fobb'd off with telling
him there is Absolute Certainty of such a Book which contains it; when common
Sense tells him he is as far as ever from having such a Certainty of his Faith,
unless he has the same Certainty he interprets that Book right; and does not
err perniciously by misunderstanding the sense of it in those important
Articles: Especially, since your selves, though it be against your own Interest,
are forced to confess other Great and Learned Bodies had most grievously
misunderstood its meaning, who had both the same Letter, and the same Means to
look into it that he has, and all that your Grounds afford him. I deny, he can
with the least Discretion Judge it possible that all Christian Fathers could
forget to day what they held yesterday; or that they should, if they remembered
it, knowingly resolve to damn themselves and Posterity, by teaching them a
wrong Faith; or, that they could conspire to do so if they would; and
consequently, that he ought not, if he acts discreetly, judge, that this Rule
of Tradition is an absolutely, or infallibly-Certain Conveyer of Christ's Faith
down to Our Days. Whence, I deny that he can with the least grain of
Discretion refuse to communicate with those who proceed on such an evidently
Certain Rule, and are found in Possession of their Faith upon that secure
Tenure; and adhere to those others who declare against any Infallible Rule;
that is, who confess the means they have to know any one particular Point of
Faith or (which is all one) any Faith at all, is Fallible; that their Guides
may perhaps all mislead them, and their Rule permit the Followers of it to Err.
You see now how we allow them the Use of their Reason, and Judgment of
Discretion, till it brings them to find a Certain Authority; and, when they
have once found That, the same Judgment of Discretion, which showed them that
Authority was Absolutely Certain, obliges them to trust it, when it tells them
what is Christ's Faith; without using their private Judgment any longer, about
the particular Points themselves, thus ascertained to them, but submitting to
It. In doing which, yet, they do not at all relinquish their Reason, but,
follow and exercise it. For, nothing is more Rational than to submit to an
Authority which my Reason has told me is Absolutely Certain, in things which
the same Reason assures me can no other ways be known certainly but by that
Authority.

49. Now, let us consider the Judgment of Discretion, as understood by you, of
which your sober Enquirer makes use to find out his Faith. It Is only employed
about searching out the sense of Scripture's Letter by Fallible means; which he
can never hope will preserve him Certainly from Error, let him do his very
best; since he is told, even by your selves, that Great Bodies of very Learned
Men, and acute Scripturists do follow the same Rule, and yet err in the
highest Articles of our Belief; nay, he sees himself, by daily experience, how
many Sects follow that for their Rule, yet vastly differ. Whence, instead of
judging discreetly, he commits the most absurd Indiscretion in the world, to
hazard his salvation upon his own Interpretation of Scripture; when, at the
same time, he is told by those very Men who propose to him this Rule, that
there is no Absolute security (neither by his own Industry, nor his Church's
veracity) from erring in that Interpretation. And, not only this, but he sees
or may see, if he will soberly enquire, what Certain Grounds are proposed by
others; and yet suffers his Reason, and the Truth to be run down with the noisy
hubbubs against Popery; and, either out of a blameable Weakness, or, perhaps
out of an inexcusable obstinacy, rejects those Grounds, or disregards the
looking into them. I say again, Inexcusable: For, the very Nature of Faith
tells him, that, it is an Unalterable Assent, and, that it cannot possibly be a
Ly; whence, common sense will tell him, it is not to be hoped for amongst those
who confess that all the Knowledge they have of each particular Point of Faith,
(that is of any Faith) is Fallible; and, only likely to be had amongst those
who own and maintain their Grounds cannot deceive them; so that, such a man, if
he ever came to a due Reflection upon what most concerns him, sins against the
Light of Reason, in many regards; and, what you call Judgment of Discretion is
convinced to be the most Vnjudicious Indiscretion imaginable: And, your sober
Enquirer, who builds all his hopes of salvation upon such a Judgment, proves
himself (the weight of the Concern being duly considered) to be the most rash
and hair-brained Opiniastre, and the most credulously blind, that ever
submitted and prostituted his Rational Faculty (with which God has endowed him,
and will require a strict account of him, how he has used it) to a most
Groundless and Improbable Conjecture. Disregarding all Authority out of his
presumption on his own Skill, or that he is more in GOD's Favor than the whole
Church; and, I much fear, out of a spiritual Pride, and self-conceit, that he
can find out all necessary Faith well enough of himself, without being
beholding to any Church at all; or, (as you instruct him here p. 21. and
declare openly and avowedly you are not ashamed of it) without the Churches
Help. Which, is the very First Principle, nay, the Quintessence of all Heresy;
Fanaticism in the Egg, perfect Enthusiasm when hatched, and downright Atheism
when fledge.

FINIS.
THE FOURTH Catholic Letter IN ANSWER TO Dr. Stillingfleet's SERMON, Preached
at GUILD HALL, November 27 th. 1687. Entitled, Scripture and Tradition
Compared, Addressed to His AUDITORY.

By John Sergeant.

Published with Allowance.

London Printed, and sold by Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Holbourn. 1688.

TO THE READER.
PErhaps the smart Expressions and plausible Methods that Dr. St. so affects in
his late Discourse concerning the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith,
in which he pretends to Answer the Catholic Letters, may have raised
Expectation in many indifferent men, and Triumph in some of his Partial
Admirers; wherefore, to stay the Appetites of the former, and give some check
to the overweening of the later: I thought it fitting to say something here by
way of Preface, to give our Readers a short Account of his main Performances in
that Discourse, till I come to publish a Complete Answer to the whole. What I
affirm of it, and undertake to make good, is;

1. That he so strangely prevaricates from the whole business we are about,
that he even forgets we are Writing Controversy; and would turn the Polemical
Contest in which we are engaged, into a Dispute of School Divinity; bearing the
Reader in hand, That we are Treating of Faith, as formally Divine, and of all
the Intrinsical Requisites to it, as it is such; though none of them be
Controverted between us, and some of them are perhaps only Knowable by GOD
himself. The meanest Reflecter may discern how impossible it is for the Dr, My
self, or any man living, to put such Particulars as these into our Proofs, or
Arguments; and how unpardonable an Absurdity it is to allege them in our
Circumstances. The very nature (I say) of Controversy, obliges and restrains us
both to speak of Faith precisely according to what is Controverted between the
Contending Parties; and the nature of our present Contest, which is about an
Absolutely-Certain Rule to know this matter of Fact, that Christ and his
Apostles did Teach the Doctrines we Profess, determines us both to speak of
Divine Faith precisely as it stands under such a Rule, recommending our Faith
to us, as delivered by Christ, and proving it to be his genuin Doctrine.

2. That, whatever the Big Letters in his Title pretend, he neither shows from
the Nature of Faith, as it lies under our Consideration, that it does not need
the Perfect Certainty we require; nor that the Certainty he assigns to make us
adhere to it as True, is not Perfect Uncertainty; since he does not bottom it
on the firm Ground of the things themselves without us, in which Creative
Wisdom has imprinted all Truths; but, on our own aerie Apprehensions, or
undoubting Persuasions; which must necessarily be Unsteady, when the Knowledge
of those Things does not Fix them. Particularly (which more closely touches our
present Controversy) the Certainty he substitutes to that advanced by us, which
excludes Deception, is impossible to be manifested by Outward Arguments to
others, being only his own Interior Satisfaction or Opinion; which, as it is
Invisible, so it may, in Disputes, be, with just reason; Rejected by any man at
his pleasure.

Lastly, Whereas he pretends to lay Grounds for the Absolute C^^tainty of
Faith, he shall never be able to show he has laid any one Ground thus Certain
(which is what he pretended) worthy the Name of a Ground, for the only Point in
debate; viz. That Christ and his Apostles taught thus or thus; but instead
thereof, such feeble Foundations, as leave Christian Faith, whose Truth depends
necessarily upon the Truth of Christ's Teaching It, in the opprobrious and
scandalous condition of being possibly (or perhaps) False. In a word, he was to
show the Absolute Certainty of his Grounds of Faith, and he so handles the
matter, that one would think, instead of showing them, he were showing there
was no such Certainty Requisite, and so none needs to be shown.

The rest of his Answer consists, generally, of impertinent Excursions,
disingenuous Cavils, witty Avoidances of any Rub that should hinder his
Discourse from sliding on smoothly. His mistakes (whether Sincere or Affected
the Reader is to judge) are numberless, his scornful jests frequent, and either
mere Trifles, or built upon Chimaeraes of his own Invention. All which
delivered in Poignant and Smart Language, give a pretty tang of Gayity and
Briskness to his Discourses, and counterfeit a kind of liveliness of Reason;
when as I dare avouch, and shall make it good, he has not one Single Argument
that is Pertinent and Sincere in the whole Course of his Answer. I pass by his
Omissions, which are both very many, and most important; as likewise how he
does not take his Adversaries Discourse End-wayes, as I did His; nor gives the
due force to his Arguments; but Skips up and down, here and there, Skimming off
the Superficial part of them by Playing upon his Words, without regarding the
full Sense; that so he might make a more plausible mock-shew of an Answer.
Lastly, his Evasions, as is the natural Progress of Non-plust Error, are still
worse and worse, and are Confuted by being Detected. It Is easy to discern by
his Expressions he is much Piqu'd and out of Humor; nor can I blame him; for
it is too severe a Trial of Patience, for a Man of his great Abilities and
Authority, to be so closely pressed to show his Grounds why he Holds it True (or
which is the same, Impossible to be False) That the Faith he pretends to, was
indeed Christ's Doctrine, and to find himself utterly unfurnish't with any means
to perform it.

But I have reason to hope there will need no more to let the Reader see that
all that Glisters in the Drs. Writtings is not Gold, but his carriage in this
Sermon of his which I now come to examine; and to make him judge, that, if he
has dealt so delusively with his Auditors when he spoke out of the Pulpit in
God's Name, he will scarce behave himself more sincerely toward me, when he
speaks in his own.

THE FOURTH Catholic Letter.
Gentlemen,
1. WHen Controversies are Preached out of Pulpits, every Well-meaning Hearer
is apt to conceit, that what sounds thence is to be received as a Voice from
Heaven: Too great a Disadvantage to be admitted by a Person concerned, who
judges he is able to show it is but a false Echo: especially, when he sees this
forestalling the World by a Sermon, is a mere preparation to turn the Question
quite off the Hinges; and, withal, as the Preface intimates, to bring it from
the handling one single Point, which bears all the rest along with it, to the
debating of many; none of which can be decided, till That be first cleared.
Hence I esteemed it not only a Justice to my self, but a Christian Duty to
others, to Address my Defense to You, his Auditory; who (I fear) were led into
Errors by many particulars in that Sermon, relating to our Controversy. I have
reason to hope this Discourse will keep your Thoughts Impartial; which done, I
will desire no other Umpire of our Contest, at present, but your selves.

. 2. It being the Chief and most Precise Duty of a Controvertist to secure the
Truth of Christian Faith, and this not being possible to be done, without
proving it True That Christ or his Apostles taught it: hence, it has ever been
my Endeavor to establish that Fundamental Verity in the first place, by
settling some Method that might secure it with a perfect or Absolute Certainty.
Nature tells us, an End cannot be compassed without a a Means enabling us to
attain it; whence, the first thing to be examined is, what that Means is, that
is to give us this Certainty. Your common Reason assures you, that what is
[True] cannot possibly be False; and the common Sentiment of all Christians,
and the very Notion of Faith it self, has, I doubt not, imbued you with this
apprehension, that your Faith cannot but be True; nor does any thing sound more
harsh to a Christian Ear than to affirm that All Christian Faith may perhaps be
but a Lying Story; which yet it is unavoidable it may be, if it may not be True
that it is Christ's Doctrine.

. 3. You will wonder perhaps, when I acquaint you this is my greatest quarrel
with Dr. St. and others of his Principles, that they make all Christian Faith
possible to be False. Dr. Tillotson, with whom he agrees, and whose Rule of
Faith he approves, maintains there, that there is no Absolute Security to be
had from our being Deciev'd in judging we have the right Letter, or right Sense
of the Holy Scripture, or that they were Writ by those Divinely-inspired
Persons; but that, notwithstanding all the certainty we can have of those
particulars, Rule of Faith. p. 118.
It is possible all this may be otherwise. This I say, as appears by my Preface
to the Second Catholic Letter, and by my Discourses quite through all the
Three, is our Grand Contest, under which all our other differences subsume. But
this Dr. St. was so prudent as to conceal from you, lest it should shock all
his well-meaning Hearers; and I do assure you, and shall show it, that, in
those matters which he thought it expedient to let you know, he so
misrepresents every thing, that he has both deluded You, injured the Truth, and
quite dropped the Question. Whether he is to make satisfaction to Truth and to
You, or I to Him, is to be determined by the Evidence I bring to make good my
Charge. To State the Question then.

. 4. As to the Holy Scriptures, my very Principles oblige me to declare that
what I attribute to them, is,

First, That they have All those Excellencies which Dr. St. yields them, and
one more which he does not; of which hereafter.

Secondly, That they are Profitable to all the Ends St. Paul writing to Timothy
ascribes to them; and that in such a high measure, that I do from my heart
grant them to be so great an Instrument of our Salvation, that the Church had
been at an incredible loss without them; and that not near half the number of
Christian Souls would have been saved, had it not pleased God to leave to the
Church such a Powerful Means to instruct them in a virtuous life, and raise
them up to it.

Thirdly, That, when they are animated with the Sense of the Divinely-Inspired
Writers by a Certain Interpretation, they are very useful to confute Heretics;
and that, Thus Interpreted, they are with much profit made use of, to that end,
by Fathers and Councils.

Fourthly, That, though they were written on several occasions, it was not
without the Design of God's good Providence; which orders all our Actions to
the bringing about his Best Ends, however they be occasional to us; much more
an Affair so mainly important to the Churches improvement.

Fifthly, That there was also a peculiar Providence in preserving the Letter
from any material Corruption; and, that the Second Causes by which this
Providence exerted it self, was the most obligatory Care of the Church to whom
those Sacred Oracles were committed, and the Knowledge she ever had of Christ's
Doctrine.

6 thly, That the Sense of Scripture is so sublime in Spiritual Points and high
Mysteries of Faith, which are above Nature, and could only be known to the
World by Divine Revelation, that no men by their Private Judgments, much less
all sorts of men coming to Faith (and therefore unelevated and unenlighten'd by
It) can arrive at the knowledge of it is Sense by the Letter in those difficult
Texts, with such an unerring Certainty as is requisite for that most Firm,
Rational and Unalterable Assent, called Faith; and, therefore, that in These,
they need the Help of the Church: Whereas in other passages that are
Historical, Moral, etc. where the subject matter is more obvious to ordinary
Reason, they are either clear of themselves, or may be cleared, as much as is
necessary, by the Learning of the more Knowing Faithful. For the same reason I
hold, that Scripture, thus privately interpreted, is not convictive of
Heretics, who have imbibed a contrary sentiment to that of the Divine Enditer;
because those men admit no Certain Interpreter of those difficult places. And,
this want of Clearness in such Texts, I do not take to be a Privative
Imperfection; but, on the contrary, to argue a very high Perfection in
Scripture; viz. as Vincentius Lirinensis has told us 1200 years ago,
Commonitor, cap. 2. It Is Deep Sense; Whence it is rather to be called properly,
a Disproportion of that Sense to the low Conceptions of Private Judgments
looking after Faith; or an Obscurity, relatively to such Persons, than an
Absolute one: since the Faithful, who are instructed in that Sense, are both
capable to understand it right, and moreover to discover still more and more
Excellent Truths in it.

7 thly, That for this reason, I cannot hold the Letter of Scripture privately
interpreted the Rule of Faith, or a Means for people of every capacity, looking
after Faith, to know the Sense of it in those Dogmatical Articles; with such a
Certainty, as was shown. 2.
above to be Necessary for a Ground of Faith; nor can I allow that the Truth of
Christian Faith ought to be built upon such a Sandy Foundation as are those
Private Interpretations. And, therefore, that there needs some other Rule to
Ascertain people of all sorts what is Christ's true Doctrine in those points.
Moreover, I make account the Experience of all Ages since Christ's time abets
my Position. Every Heretic, and all his Followers, relying on his private
Interpretations of Scripture for his wicked Blasphemies; as the Socinians do
now, who are (as far as we can discern) sincere and exact Followers of that
Rule, or Users of that Means; and yet, fall short of Christ's genuin Doctrine,
denying his Godhead, and the Mystery of the B. Trinity* A plain Argument that
That cannot be the way to Truth, which such vast multitudes have followed, and
yet have been led into Error, unless we knew them all to be wilfully sincere,
or strangely negligent; which we can neither know, nor have reason to think.
And, as experience has shown this to every man's eye, so neither is it my
sentiment only. The same Ibid.
Lirinensis telling us, That by reason of the Scripture's Depth, as many
Opinions as there are Men seem possible to be drawn thence. Where he ascribes
the obscurity of the Letter not merely to the fault of the Persons, nor the
hardness of the Words, in which the Sense is delivered, but to the Profoundness
of the Sense it self; Reason and Experience both informing us, that, where the
matter is above the Readers capacity, though the Words be never so plain, yet the
Doctrine is not easily comprehended without some who is already skilled in that
Sense.

. 5. As for Tradition; The very sound of the Word may perhaps give you some
prejudice against it, because our Savior reprehended the Jews for some
unwarrantable Traditions of theirs. This obliges me to give you a true
Character of our Tenet concerning It, and to make known to you particularly
what [ Tradition] means, as we understand it in our Controversies; which Dr.
St. (though he knows it) will never do; but, on the contrary, (as shall be seen)
misrepresents it all along very disingenuously in every particular. What we
hold of it then, is,

First, That the Apostles, by their Preaching during the whole time of their
lives, settled the self-same Christian Doctrine in the minds of the Generality
of the Faithful, dispersed in several Countries; and not only at large and
particularly explicated it, and fixed it by their heavenly Preaching, but
riveted it (as we may say) by Miracles; founded Churches, and constituted
Discipline; by means of which, and their own Example, they established them in
the Practice of that Doctrine. Lastly, They recommended the continuing it as the
means of Salvation; and, consequently, that the swerving from it themselves, or
neglecting to educate their Children in it, was the assured way to Eternal
misery to them and their Posterity.

2 dly, That this vast multitude unanimously settled in the same Faith is that
which we make the First Source of Tradition; which had no more to do but to
attest to the next Age what the First had received and practiced; nor could
they forget a Doctrine which was so recommended, and according to which they had
led their Christian lives so long: Nor could true Faith (the Parent of all
other Virtues) which was in their hearts, no nor even the Natural love to
themselves and their Children, permit them all to be so Wicked as to decline
from it voluntarily, or neglect to educate the others in it; however, it was to
be expected there would be now and then a failure in some Particulars,
deserting the former Doctrine, and drawing Proselytes after them.

3 dly, That, the same reason holds for the Continuate Delivery of the same
Doctrine by the Second Age to the Third, and so still forwards; the most
powerful Motives God himself could propose being laid to oblige Christians not
to deviate from it in the least, or be careless to recommend it. And those
Motives too a thousand times more lively imprinted and apprehended by the
heaven-instructed Faithful, than they were by any in the former Ages of the
World, before Christ.

4thly, That by [ Tradition] then is meant, The Testimony of the whole
foregoing Age of Christians to the next Age, of what had been delivered, and
explained to them by their Living Voice and Practice. Or, taking Tradition (as
it ought to be) for Oral and Practical both, It Is, A Continued Education of
undergrowing Posterity in the Principles and Practice of their Immediate
Predecessors.

5 thly, That hence it is Evident beyond needing Proof, that this Rule cannot
(on it is part) deceive us. For, putting that it was still followed, or, that
Posterity still believ d and practiced as their Immediate Forefathers did, who
at first believed and practiced as the Apostles had instructed them; it is
manifest the Last Age of the World must have the same Faith that the First Age
of Christianity had. Whence follows evidently that no Error could possibly
come in at any time unless this Rule of Tradition had been deserted.

6 thly, That Tradition, thus understood, (and we never understood it
otherwise) being the Living Voice and Practice of the Church in the immediate
Age before, is applicable to all even of the lowest Capacity; as we experience,
to some degree, in the instructions by Pastors even now adays. And, since it
delivers it is Sense (which, in those that have followed that Rule, has been
even now shown to be Christ's Doctrine) by Preaching* Catechizing, Explaining,
daily Practicing, and all the ways imaginable to make it understood, it is also
an Absolutely-Clear Conveyer of Christ's Doctrine downwards. Add that, should
it is sense be at any time misapprehended, the Church and her Pastors can
explain their own meaning, pertinently to the Askers, Doubter's or Mistaker's
Exigencies; which a Letter in a Book cannot.

7 thly, That the Chief Care of the Church was to inculcate to the Faithful,
and preserve inviolate the Chief Points of the Christian Faith; and, therefore,
that Tradition did most particularly exert it is self in Teaching and
Transmitting Those.

8 thly, It Is not to be denied but Scriptural Tradition went along with this
other we have explained. For the Church having the same sense in her breast
which the First Writers had, were, consequently, the best Interpreters of it;
which was one Reason why the Fathers and Councils often made use of it to
confute Heretics, and comfort the Faithful by it is concurrence. But, when they
were to convert any to Faith, it was never heard, they took such a Method as to
put the Bible in his hand, and bid him look for his Faith there; telling him
'twas Plain even in the highest points, that were dubious or Controverted, to
every capacity.

9 thly, That, hence, Scripture, Dr. St's. Second Letter, p. 21.
without the Churches help, was never held by them Anciently, nor can with
reason be held by us now to be the Rule of Faith, in the sense we use that
word; that is, to be a Means or Way for All who are coming to Faith, to arrive
unerringly at it.

Lastly, we hold that the Sense of Scripture's Letter, in those sublime Points,
surpasses the apprehensions of private men coming to Faith; and, so, the Letter
alone cannot be an assured Ground to build the Truth of Christian Faith upon:
whence follows that Tradition (which is Plain and Easy) and only It, can be in
Proper Speech the Rule of Faith.

. 6. This then is the true State of the Question between us. This is our true
Tenet, both concerning Scripture and Tradition, and what are the Points to be
ascertained by them. Now, let us see how the Sermon represents us, and whether
your admired Preacher does so much as touch any one of these particulars.

. 7. In the first place you may please to take notice that he never lets you
know, or so much as suspect that the main Contest between him and me is about
the Absolute Certainty, or Uncertainty of Christian Faith, His wicked Doctrine,
in that Point, obliged me to write a Faith vindicated from possibility of
Falsehood.
whole Treatise formerly in Vindication of Christianity from such an
Intolerable Scandal; which I applied, in the cloze of it, against himself and
Dr. Tillotson. Had he let you know this, he prudently foresaw your Zeal for
Christianity (your best Concern) would have given you a just prejudice against
his Sermon, and the Preacher too; and the very Conceit all Christians have of
the Truth of their Faith, would have made you abhor a Discourse out of a
Pulpit, maintaining it might possibly be a Ly. As for particulars.

. 8. First, he talks of a Stedfastness, and a firm and well-settled resolution
to adhere to that Faith which Christ himself delivered. P. 1.
But, ought you not to be assured first that he did indeed deliver it? Or are
you to adhere to it as his, whether you are certain it is his or no? Or is a
resolution, to hold steadfastly to what you judge is the Faith of Christ,
well-settled, if that Faith of yours, the Basis of your Spiritual Building and
Ground of that Resolution, be not well-settled it self, but may sink into
False-hood? This is the true Point you are to look after; and, till you have
perfect satisfaction from him in this, wisely to consider, that Pious Talk
without Solid Grounds to support their Truth, is but painting the outside of a
Sepulcher. The tinkling cymball of a little Rhetoric, and shows of much
Reading, may go far with persons whom such flourishes can prevail upon to forgo
their Reason; but he had but a very small respect for you, if he hoped you were
so easy to be played upon with the wind of a little articulate air.

. 9. It was very possible, he says, for them to have mistaken or misremember'd
what was at first delivered: P. 4.
Whom does he mean by [Them] What by [ First Delivery]? Does he mean the
Universality of Christians in the First Age, or any succeeding one? Or that
those Great Bodies settled in their Faith, formed into Church Government, and
kept up to their Christian Duties by Discipline, could thus mistake or
misremember the former Teaching and Practice, which was a plain matter of Fact?
This is the only Tradition we ever spoke of, or went about to defend. None
doubts, but that, when some single Apostle was Preaching in some places at
first, the Thoughts of the Hearers were as yet raw, and the things that were
told them were so strange, that they did not immediately sink deep into the
Conceptions of the Generality. But, it was otherwise, when in tract of time
that Doctrine was farther spread, more often inculcated, and more clearly
explained; and well-instructed Pastors constituted, to Teach it more
expressly, and put them forwards to practice it. He mistake^ then and
misrepresents the whole nature of Our Tradition; and by antedating it, sights
against it, before it could have a Being. And, as this Error runs through all
his Discourses, and weak Inferences out of Scripture; so the laying it open
once for all, is a full confutation of them all at once. Add, that he never
considered whether, when those several Churches Erred, or were in hazard to
Err, they did so by following even that particular Tradition, or Preaching of
such or such an Apostle; or, whether they came to err by deserting it. If the
Later, the Tradition was not faulty, but They who Deserted it; Yet, how
different soever these two Points are, the one making for that particular
Tradition, the other against it, he never thinks of distinguishing them, or
letting the Reader know when the Tradition was in fault, and when the Persons;
but runs on in common words, as if he had no Design, or determinate prospect
whither he was going. I am sure it is not at all toward the true Question, nor
against Us.

. 10. But, though all his Reflections from the several pieces of Scripture are
quite besides the purpose, yet his Candid and Solid way of managing his own
Mistakes, and how he wire-draws every thing to make it seem fit, deserves our
particular observation. He tells us, speaking of the Church of Corinth, P. 5.
that They (which signifies the whole Church) had like to have lost All their
Faith; whereas the Text only says [ Some among you.] And, is it such a wonder
that some among many should hap to be imperfectly instructed, fantastical or
refractory to their Teachers. But his Partiality is most remarkable. When he
was forced to be beholding to the Churches Testimony of Doctrine (which is our
Tradition) to abet the Scripture; he p. 11.
could tell us then, This is very different from the Case of particular Persons
in some Churches, who might mistake or forget what was taught; but (says he)
-- the Churches themselves could not agree to approve on Error in the Gospel
contrary to the Faith delivered to them. So that there it was a very different
Case; but here it seems the Case is not different at all, but the very same.
For [ Some among You] are enlarged to signify that Church it self; and whereas
the only Point those Some denied, was The Resurrection of the Dead, to let you
see how utterly insignificant a thing Tradition is that can do no good at all,
he extends it to signify [ All their Faith] hoping I suppose any thing would
pass upon you, so 'twere spoke out of a Pulpit; It Is told you there, All Is Gods
Word; and he presumes you will be so Civil to God Almighty, and so Kind to
himself as to accept it for Such, and swallow it for Pure Truth.

. 11. I am obliged to him for allowing, That the Testimony of every Christian
Church did show the Concurrence of all the Apostles, p. 10, 11.
as to the Doctrine contained in the several Gospels. For then, I hope, they
may be able to show to the next Age (and so forwards) the concurrent Doctrine
of the First, which establishes the Original of our Tradition to be Absolutely
Certain. He discourses well ( p. 11.) and he ends better; That the Memory of
the Apostles Doctrine was so fresh in their Minds, that it was in effect the
Consent of all the Apostles who had taught them. And yet better; That the
concurrent Testimony of all the Apostolical Churches could not let them agree
to approve an Error in the Gospels, contrary to the Faith delivered to them.
This is very extraordinary kind and no less solid. For, 1. these Words, [ could
not agree to approve a contrary Doctrine] makes their Testimony Infallible. 2.
This discourse makes the acceptance of the Truth of the Gospels, that is of
their Sense, depend on Unwritten Tradition 3. We cannot doubt but that Doctrine
was Full as fresh in their Memories, when they were grown Older, and were to
transmit it to the next Age after the Apostles decease, as it was before;
unless they lost the Memory of it, by discoursing of it more while they taught
it to others, and by Practicing it longer themselves. 4. As little can it be
doubted but the Doctrine and Practice of the First Age, was as Fresh in the
minds of the Second Age, since they Led their Christian Lives by it; for it was
Equally Intelligible, and of Equal Concern still to them to Learn and Teach it,
as it was to the First. Lastly, That this being so, the Testimony of that Body,
even now adays, that adheres to Tradition, P. 11.
is in effect, the Consent of all the Apostles that taught it at First.
Observe, Gentlemen, that this is the only time Dr. St. has so much as touched
upon Our Tradition; and that he is so far from impugning or confuting it, that
he, in some part directly, in others by necessary Consequence, acknowledges
it is force, and strongly abets it. But, it was not out of good will; he was
intent in that place upon making good the Truth of the Gospels; and, as soon as
he has made use of it to serve a present turn, he immediately discards it as
good for little or nothing, or nothing to the particular purpose he had lately
allowed, the Testifying Christ's Doctrine.

. 12. For the very next page, he reckons up three things, for which, The common
Tradition of the Apostolical Churches were useful after the Decease of the
Apostles. P. 12.
But not a word of their Usefulness to Testify to others what they had learnt
from those Masters of Christianity. No sooner were the Apostles dead, and that
first Age had, by their concurrent Testimony of the Doctrine they had received
from them, given credit to the Truth of the Written Gospels; but immediately
the whole Christian World had lost their Memory of that Doctrine on a sudden,
and the Grace to preserve and propagate it. One would think by this wild
Discourse of his, that both Common Natural parts, and all degrees of Ordinary
Honesty had been preserved to them miraculously thitherto, merely to recommend
the Truth of the Gospels; and, that as soon as that was done, and the Apostles
were dead, the Author of Nature and Grace suspended or rather subtracted for
ever all his Influence, and left them a Tabula rasa (without either Memory or
Goodness) to learn their Faith a new out of Scripture.

P. 13.
. 13. And, hence it is that he rallies upon Universal Testimony or Tradition as
if it were some slight story of a few Tatling Gossips, or of those who heard
what some say, that others told them, who had it from such, etc. Whereas had he
said as he ought to have said, What the whole First Age of Christians witnest
to the next Age, that They had heard, seen, and practic't; and the whole next
Age to the Third, and so forwards, with an Obligation still to transmit it,
Equal to that the First Age had to believe it, there had been no place left for
his ridiculous Raillery. But his constant Method is this; he endeavors to put
you out of conceit with Tradition, by concealing every thing that might give
you a true Conceit what Tradition is, and what we mean by it.

P. 14.
. 14. The Argument or Instance he brings to prove that the Authority of
Tradition was mightily sunk in the Second Century, is, if possible, ten
thousand times worse, One would verily think, from those big words, he would
prove that All the Christians of the First Age had conspired to tell a Ly to
the Second, concerning Christ's Doctrine. But, this mountainous Expectation came
off with a poor little mouse, the relation of one single man, Papias, of what
an Apostle had told him; which he being a good honest Soul, gained credit with
diverse. Though, as for his wit, Dr. St's Author, Eusebius, tells us he was a man
of a mean capacity, and scarce understood the meaning of what was spoken, I
wonder the Dr. blush't not to put such a Slur upon his Auditory, as to compare
the Public Authority of the whole Christian World, and the Universal Testimony
of God's Church, to the private story of one weak man; or to pretend hence that
if he were mistaken, the Authority of Tradition mightily sinks and fails;
whereas it is only his own Credit that falls into that disaster by making such a
senseless Argument. Yet, this is the best, and, as far as I can find, the only
one he has brought to prove directly the First Age of Christians had belied
Christ's Doctrine to the Second; and that because one man of a mean Capacity
mistook, we may stand in doubt of our Assurance whether all the Learneder
Faithful, nay all the Pastors and Bishops in the Church, had Capacity enough
to know an open matter of Fact, viz. what had been taught and practiced
publicly every day by a World of Forefathers, or the Integrity not to deceive
us.

. 15. Of the same stamp is his alleging that St. Luke's reason why he writ his
Gospel, P. 14.
was to give Theophilus Certainty of those things wherein he had been
instructed. The Subject of our Enquiry is about the High Points of Christian
Belief: Does the Dr. think then that Theophilus was not a Christian, or had no
Certain Knowledge of his Faith, ere St. Luke writ? Or, that the Apostles did not
instruct people in those Main Articles? Or that St. Luke's Writing those Points
in short (for those Points we speak of take up a very inconsiderable part of
his Gospel) could make him know it better, and with more Certainty than their
Preaching it at large? With what Sense can any of this be pretended? The
Apostles did Miracles to attest their Doctrine: Did St. Luke, do any to attest
the True Sense of all he writ in those Points? Again, what did his Gospel
contain? Only those Dogmatical Points controverted from time to time between
the Sons of the Church, and her Deserters; of which, and none but which, we
speak? Alas! these are the least part of his Gospel, and make but a small
appearance in it. He relates our Savior's Genealogy, Temptation, Fasting,
Miracles, Parables, his sending his Apostles and Disciples, his Exhortations to
Repentance and good Life, the Manner of his Entering into Jerusalem, his
Instituting the Last Supper, the particulars of his being apprehended, accused,
condemned, and Crucified. Lastly, his Burial, Resurrection, Apparitions and
Ascension. These are laid out in that Gospel at large, together with many
excellent sayings of our Blessed Savior related verbatim. And These, as they
were never pretended by us to be the Object of Tradition; so, though spoken of
frequently (and perhaps variously) amongst Christians, were Impossible ever to
be perfectly remembered by the Generality, unless put in a Book; and therefore
St. Luke gives Theophilus (and others) the Certain and particular knowledge of
all these Passages by Writing: And Dr. St. confesses the same (p. 17.) and that
his aim and Intention was to give an Account of the Life and Actions of Christ,
but not a word that his Writing was to give Theophilus Certainty or a Clearer
Knowledge of those Main Articles, to ascertain which Tradition is pretended by
us to be the most proper Means.

. 16. Now let us see how many notorious prevarications and faults he has fallen
into in this one Instance. 1. Our whole Controversy is about the Certainty of
those sublime Points of Christian Faith; which he conceals, and confounds them
with a multitude of particular Passages. 2. He intimates our Tradition is to
ascertain all that is contained in St. Luke's Gospel. Whereas, he knows well, we
rely upon no Tradition but what is in some degree Practical, which those
Particulars are not; unless it be those, of which we keep Anniversary
Solemnities. 3. He is so angry at Tradition, page 15.
that he pretends the very Oral Tradition or Preaching of the Gospel by the
Apostles, needed something to strengthen and confirm it. Lastly, he makes our
Tradition to begin with the first Preaching of the Apostles; whereas, it dates
it is Original from the first Age of Christianity; already perfectly instructed
by them, during all their Lives, and settled into Ecclesiastical Order and
Discipline at their Decease.

. 17. He seems at length to come nearer the Point, and affirms, That the
Writings of the Apostles, when Matters of Doctrine came to be contested, page 14.
were the Infallible Rule whereby they were to judge which was the true and
genuin Doctrine of Christ; and, which is yet better, that They were intended by
the Holy Ghost, to be a standing Rule, whereby the Church was to judge which
was the true and genuin Doctrine of Christ. I am glad with all my heart, to
hear him speak of the Church being a Judge of Controversies; or, that he allows
Her any hand in ascertaining and proposing Faith. I ever understood him
hitherto, That every sober Enquirer was to judge of the sense of Scripture for
himself; That it was plain to him even in the highest Points; and, that if, in
any contested or dubious Articles, the Letter of Scripture did not declare it
explicitly, his sober Enquirer could Dr. St's Answer to the Catholic Letters,
p. 71
by parity of Reason render any Implicit Point Explicit, Dr. St's Second
Letter, p. 21.
without the Church's Help; though this was the most difficult Task as to the
penetrating the Sense of Scripture that is possible, and far beyond the
understanding what is there Explicitly. He told us too in his second Letter, p.
31, 32. that, because there is no Infallible Judge -- every man is to Judge for
himself; and this by Scripture, his Rule. But, here the case is altered, and
the Church is to judge of Christ's Doctrine by Scripture. I can allow honest
Retractions without upbraiding them; and am contented that the Church should
judge by Scripture, both when She is to Edify Her Children, and in contests
with Heretics, as to all those Points contained there; and, I think the only
difficulty in that particular is, By what means She came to be
Absolutely-Certain of it is Sense. Let him add then but one word more, and say
that by the Letter of Scripture She so judged of Faith, that She could not be
in an Error, or mistaken all the while, and then Christian Faith is
Absolutely-Certain, and my greatest care is over. And, if he does not That,
what is the future Church, after the Apostles Deaths, the better for
Scripture's being an Infallible Rule, if She and Her Children partake not the
Benefit of that Infallibility some way or other, by being perfectly secured
from Erring in Faith? Is it not all one as to the intent of knowing assuredly
we have the Faith taught by Christ, whether we have an Infallible Rule or no,
if, when we have done our best, we may still stray from Her Faith? Or, why is
not a Rule that is not Absolutely-Certain, so I have Absolute Certainty I am
directed by it, as good for that purpose, as an Absolutely-Certain Rule with no
Absolute Certainty that I do indeed go according to it. To speak to his
proposition: Whether the Church and the Faithful in Contests with Heretics
availed Her self of Scripture's Letter, to gain Absolute-Certainty of it is
Sense, in those main Tenets; or brought the Sense (which She had another way)
along with her, shall be decided if he pleases, by St. Austin, whom he cites
here, p. 16.

. 18. He will prove Scripture a Rule from the general Reason of it is Writing;
See p. 15.
and prove this general Reason from a Testimony of Irenaeus, which speaks of
the Gospel as abstracted from being Preached and Written; and who doubts but as
such it is infallibly true. He seems to build much upon the Words [ That it
might be a Foundation and Pillar of our Faith.] Be it what it will in it self,
the Point is, How does it Build Faith in us? By it is mere Letter, descanted
upon by private Judgments, or, interpreted by the Church? The Later he denies;
the Former, all our most earnest Pressing and Entreating could never bring him,
nor his Reflecter to go about to make out; and he ways it totally through this
whole Sermon. Let him then but show that he has Absolute-Certainty of
Scripture's Sense, in those Tenets of Christian-Faith, by any Method his
Principles will allow him, and his Sermon should have past for me without
Control. That Is the main Point, whereas all here is quite besides it. As for
those Words from S. Irenaeus he could have quoted the very same words (in a
manner) from a better Author (even the Holy Scripture) calling the Church, the
Pillar and Ground of Truth; but that he liked not the Application of them to
the Church. It seems he can neglect his Rule, and make no more reckoning of it
than he did of the Oral Tradition, or Preaching of the Apostles, when it stands
in his way, of comes cross to his purpose.

. 19. It has been manifested above, that his Discourses from the writing of the
Gospels and Epistles are all guilty of the same Fault, and Antedate our
Tradition; p. 16, 17. etc.
and his Inferences thence, as levelled against our Tenet, are weaker than
Water. He makes Tradition any thing what he pleases, and will have it do every
thing, though it was never intended for it, nor ever pretended by us it was able
to do it. One while it must bring down the p. 19.
Decrees of Councils. Another while it must convey ibid.
long Disputes about diverse Points; and the resolution of them; and this
Totidem Verbis, otherwise the Apostles Sense might have been lost. It must
secure people from being p. 20.
removed from Christ's Gospel to another; whereas no man ever held that the
Galatians were removed from Christ's Gospel by following even the particular
Tradition or Preaching of that Apostle; nor that any particular Men, nay
Churches, might not be removed from it even into Heathenism, or Judaism, if
they deserted it. He expects too, it should secure men from p. 21.
danger of being Deceived; whereas, supposing them once well-Instructed in
Faith (and it is supposed to our Tradition the Church was so) it is See above. 5.
Note 5.
self-evident they can never be deceived while they hold to that Certain Rule;
because that is to hold the same they were instructed in at first. But if all
were not well instructed at first, as it is impossible they should, then they
might be deceived, either by deserting Tradition, or even by holding to such a
Tradition; if, for want of perfect Instruction in that raw and unsettled state
of Christianity, that which they held at first was not perfectly Christ's
Doctrine. Nay, he would have it keep even Heretics from Ibid.
Defection, Hypocrisy, Lying and Deceiving: which were a rare Tradition
indeed, to do such Kindnesses, and work such good Effects upon those who had
deserted it, and would not make use of it; at least, he would have it keep
People from Weakness and Folly; which the Common Assistances of Nature and
Grace will do, after the Generality is well settled in that Doctrine. For, when
all the Question is, What the Apostles preached, it is a Madness and Folly both
to believe some few men, before the Universal Testimony of the Christian
Church. But he will have Tradition still do all the Mischiefs imaginable, and
Writing do all the Good; forgetting, I suppose, that there are some things in
St. Paul's Writings, 2 Pet. 3.16.
which the Unlearned and Unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures,
to their own destruction. All this while, What is this to the Tradition we
assert, which begun afterward?

. 20. From these impertinent Premises, he infers as impertinent a Conclusion,
viz. That, P. 22.
what was delivered in Scripture contains a complete Rule of the true and
genuin Faith, as it was at first delivered to the Church. Now, that what is
signified by Scripture is the same the Apostles signified by their Preaching,
is plain Sense, and never denied; and, so he needed not have made all this
clutter to prove it. But plain sense will do him no service, whose best play
it is to blunder and confound every thing; let us see then what it is that will.
His first words [ What they have therein delivered] can mean nothing but the
Sense of Scripture; for that is the thing signified or delivered by the Letter;
and both sides confess, that the Sense of Scripture is Christ's Faith. If then
we spell his Words together, they plainly amount to this, That Christ's Faith
contains a complete Rule of the true and genuin Faith, as it was delivered at
first to the Church, that is, Faith it self contains a complete Rule to it is
self. Make sense of this who can. The best I can make of it is, That the
Conclusion keeps decorum with the Premises; and that he has mighty well
employed his Labor to keep such a huge Pother to infer such a worthy Point.

. 21. I have nothing to do with his Objecting some of our Writers, but shall
come to his P. 23.
Second Reason, drawn from the notorious Uncertainty of mere Tradition; and
that never was any trial made of it but it failed, even when it had the
greatest Advantages. Expect Gentlemen, by those high and mighty Words, he will
bring most Convincing Arguments, to prove that the Universal Testimony of the
Church in delivering down those high Points of Faith is notoriously Uncertain,
and failed in every Age, nay, the very First, for then it had the Greatest
Advantages; the Christians having then fresh Memories, and being then
Infallible, since they could not agree to approve false Doctrine, as himself
told us p. 11, 12. For my part I am of his mind, and never knew any other
Tradition have Advantages comparable to what Christian Tradition had for
transmitting the Doctrine of Faith; and if he lets you know what those
Advantages of Christian Tradition were, and shows them unable to oblige the
Church to convey Christ's Doctrine down, he will gain his Point: But, if he
prevaricates from this necessary Duty, he abuses you with fine Lukewarm Words
to no purpose. I do assure you before hand, though he talks here of Advantages,
he has not in his whole Sermon mentioned, much less ingenuously informed you of
any one Advantage Christian Tradition has; but industriously concealed every
particular that gives it force. Yet, who sees not that without doing this, it is
impossible to impugn it, or deal fairly with his Auditory; for how should you
judge of the Comparison, without a clear sight of the things Compared?

. 22. He did very prudently, not to insist on the falling of Tradition in the
Law of Nature; Ibid.
For 1. He must have shown It failed them, and not They failed It by deserting
it; which could only be done by proving that had they continued to follow it,
they could have strayed into Polytheism; which he can never do, it being
evidently Impossible. 2. That, to make good the Parallel, he must have proved
it had as Ample an Original (which gives a vast force to Testifying Authority)
as Christian Tradition had; which is equally impossible; for it had for its
Source but one single man, Adam. 3. That there were not more powerful Motives,
nor greater Assistances of Grace to continue the Christian Doctrine under the
Law of Grace, than there were under that most imperfect Law of Nature; nor more
exact Discipline in the Church of Christ, than there was in that loose State:
which had been hard Points, and altogether impossible even to attempt with any
show of Reason. ibid.
He did very wisely too to Wave the Opinion of the Millenaries, the time of
Easter and the Communicating of Infants. For he both knows that every
Apostolical Tradition (had this last been supposed such) is not necessarily an
Article of Faith; as also that none of these (nor yet their contrary) was a
Point of Christian Doctrine Preached and Settled unanimously over the World by
the Apostles. He made account he had a better game to play, by showing how P.
23.24.
Tradition failed in delivering down the Apostles Creed. But he might, had he
pleased, as well have left out That as the Others; for See my third Catholic
Letter. 2, and 3.
none of the Explainers of Tradition ever held or said it was to bring down Set
Form of Words, which required application of Memory and Repetition of them in
Order; but only the Sense of the First Age (which was Christ's true Faith)
instilled after a connatural way by Education; and apt to be expressed in
different Words, according to different Circumces.

. 23. Were it granted him, That P. 26.
things Written (supposing the Letter could be proved to be still continued
Absolutely Certain) had the Advantage, as to the Certainty of Conveyance, above
things merely committed to Memory and Tradition; yet he is where he was. The
Point between us still sticks; that is, Whether mere Words, expressing in short
such sublime spiritual Tenets, as are most of the chief Articles of Christian
Religion, are so Clear to private Judgments, nay, to All (even the Vulgar) that
are looking for Faith, that they can have that perfect Assurance of their true
Sense, as to build that Never-to-be-Alter'd Assent, called Faith, upon their
understanding them. This is the sum of our difficulty; this is what we most
insist upon, and are perpetually pressing him to show the security of the
Method he takes to give us this Certainty: I do not mean the Certainty of the
Letter (about which he keeps such ado) but of the sense of it in such Points,
if he thinks any one of them so necessary, that the Generality cannot be saved
without the knowledge of it. This is it, which most imports you to know, if you
value the having such Grounds for your Faith, as ought in true reason to
persuade you it is true that it was Taught by Christ, or that you are not
perhaps dociend, and in an Error all this while. But, not one word of this in
the whole Sermon. P. 16.
He argues from God's making choice of Writing, when he delivered the Ten
Commandments. What means he, or how can he apply this to our Question? Are the
Ten Commandments, which are plain honest Nature, of as Deep and Mysterious a
Sense, as the high Points we speak of? Are they so hard to be understood, that
Writing is not a clear Conveyer of God's Sense in such Matters? Does he hear a
great part of the World at variance about the Meaning of the Ten Commandments,
as multitudes of Heretics have been Wrangling with the Church ever since
Christ's time, about the Sense of Scripture in those Dogmatical Points? Were
the Texts which contain those Points as plain to all Mankind as the Ten
Commandments are, or as are generally the Historical and Moral parts of
Scripture, I should frankly declare, that Scripture might in that Supposition
be a Rule of Faith, as to the Points contained in it; and that there would be
no need of the Church for our simply believing, but only to confirm our Faith,
explain it more thoroughly, when any part of it, implied in some main Point, is
denied; apply it to our Consciences by her Preaching, and keep us up to the
Doctrine it delivers by her Government and Discipline. So that our
Controversy-Preacher, who has never hit the Point hitherto, doubly misses it
here in his representing Tradition, as held by us needful to supply the defect
of Clearness in Moral passages, that are plain enough of themselves; and that
it is to bring down Set-Forms of Words, (which is not its business) whatever it
be those Words express. And this shows his Mistake in his P. 27.
Second Proof; viz. the restoring the Knowledge of the Law Written by a Written
Book; which was a Way most Proper for that End. Whence, for the same Reason, if
there were any deviation from the Christian Doctrine, which, as
contradistinguish't to that other, was writ in the Living Tables of the Hearts
of the Faithful, the best Way of preserving or restoring That, was by the Sense
writ in the Heart of the Church at first by the Preaching of the Apostles, and
continued ever since, in the manner we have described and proved.

. 24. But, The Dr. is got into a Track of mistaking, and he cannot get out of
it. He brings for his Third Argument our B. Savior's advice to the Jews to
search the Scriptures. The business was, Ibid.
to know whether he was the true Messiah; and the Prophecies relating to the
Messiah were Matters of Fact, or else Moral; and therefore proportioned to the
Understanding of the Searchers; and plain enough, so they applied but Industry
and Diligence to find them out. Are your Mysteries of Christian Faith such? Or,
Must weak unelevated Understandings therefore presume to penetrate the Meaning
of the Scripture in Texts of so deep a Sense as those Mysteries are, because
the Jews were exhorted to do it, in a matter within the Sphere of their
Capacity? Again, The Tradition of the Jews was very strong, that a Messiah
should come; but that This was the Person, there was no Tradition at all. This
was therefore either to be made known by his Miracles done to attest it, or to
be found out by the applying of diverse particulars to Him, and by seeing they
all concurred in him. And did ever any of us pretend, that Tradition was to
bring down such particulars? If he says we did, he must show where! If he
confesses we did not, he must confess withal, his Text and Discourse here is
nothing to the purpose. He turns it off from the Admonition of searching the
Scriptures to know the true Messiah, to the knowing whether he were a Temporal
Prince; whereas the Tradition of his Kingdom's being purely Spiritual, was
neither Universally held, taught, nor delivered at first by the First Founders
of that Law, nor settled in the hearts of the Synagogue, or the Universality of
the Jews in the beginning, as Christ's Doctrine was by the unanimous Preaching
of the Apostles in the hearts of such a numerous Multitude as was the Christian
Church of the First Age. Which being evidently so, What reason was there our
Savior should refer them to such a slight, or rather no-Tradition, and not to
the Written Prophecies, in which he was foretold? Or, What consequence can be
drawn hence to the prejudice of Christian Tradition, which, and which only, we
defend; and which (as was fitting) is so strongly supported, that it is
impossible to find a Parallel to equal or come nigh it. And unless this be
done, all his Arguments against it stand thus, A Lesser Force cannot do an
Effect, therefore a Greater cannot. An odd piece of Logic, but suitable to all
the rest.

. 25. His Fourth Reason represents Tradition to be merely Verbal, and not
Practical. p. 28.
That it (alone) is to bring down particular Matters of Fact, or Historical
passages; nay, the Speculative Whimsies of the old Heathen Philosophers. None
of which was ever pretended; and, so, all his Discourse runs upon his old and
oft-repeated Error in the true meaning of Tradition.

. 26. The Reasons he gives for the Certainty of the Books of Scripture, we
allow to a Tittle; and we add to them One, over and above, which is better than
them all; viz. the Obligation and Care of the Church; which, as She ever held
the Scriptures to contain the same Doctrine which was preached to Her at first
by Christ's Order, and that it was a most incomparable Instrument for the
Edification of her Children, the Abetment of Faith, the Salvation of Mankind,
nay, an Instruction to Her Self too in thousands of most excellent, most
useful, and most enlightening passages; so She could not but look upon Her Self
as most highly obliged to preserve the Letter from any material Alteration; and
yet more particularly, in case any Heretics went about to corrupt it in any
Texts (nay, Coma's or Pointings) that concerned the main Articles of
Christianity, which they sometimes attempted; the Doctrine of Christ in her
Breast, could easily direct them to set the Text right again, and that with
Absolute Certainty. Nor does any say, or so much as suppose any Book of
Scripture is indeed lost, as he hints, p. 29. only, upon his saying, That See
Third Catholic Letter, p. 36.
the Scripture we have now, contains all the Divine Revelations; I used the
right of a Disputant, and put him to make good what he says, and to prove he
has the Absolute Certainty he pretended to, that no Book was lost, without
which he could have no such Certainty those pieces of Scripture we have now,
did contain All the Divine Revelations; which, by his Grounds, denying any
Certainty but what might admit of Deceit, I was sure he was not able to perform.

. 27. Nor do I at all doubt of the Influence of Divine Grace, P. 30.
or of the Internal Satisfaction which good Souls, who are already Faithful,
(or as St. Thomas of Aquin cited by him, expresses himself, Have the Habit of
Faith, by which they have a right Judgment of those things which are agreeable
to that virtue) receive concerning Scripture and Christ's Doctrine; or that they
confirm men more than Demonstration does. Arguments have the Nature of
Preliminaries to Faith, or Searches after it; but the Inward Satisfaction that
that Heavenly Doctrine rectifies and purifies the Soul, and levels it directly
toward the Attainment of it is last Blissful End, has the nature of a kind of
Experience, and, as it were, Possession and Enjoyment of what Humane Arguments,
previous to Faith, had been looking after, and contending for. I suppose,
Gentlemen, the Dr. brought in this Discourse to prepare your Minds, by a show
of Piety, to rest appay'd with any slight Reason that falls short of
concluding, and breed in you a prejudice against the necessity of his producing
any such Arguments, as place Christian Faith above Possibility of Falsehood.
But, he is as much out of the Way here as he was in all the rest; For,
notwithstanding God's Grace, and this Internal Satisfaction, which is Proper to
good Souls who are Believers already, the Church and her Pastors must be
furnished with solid and unanswerable Reasons, to satisfy perfectly those,
both of the lowest and most acute capacity, who are looking after Faith, that
the Doctrine She professes was taught by Christ; and, to evince and defend its
Truth, in that particular, against the most subtle Adversaries; which cannot
be done, unless the Reasons which we, as Controvertists, bring, set it above
possibility of Falsehood, that Christ taught it. We cannot put God's Grace and
our Internal Satisfaction into Syllogisms when we are disputing. Nor does God
intend by His Grace to prejudice the true Nature Himself has given us, which is
Reason; but to perfect and elevate it. It Is against Reason, that in
Preliminaries to Faith, which are the Objects of Natural Reason, those who are
capable to penetrate the force of reasons, should assent beyond the Motive;
for, as far as it is beyond the Motive, it is without any Motive; that is,
without any Reason; and, therefore (whatever often happens through the
Imperfection of Creatures) such an Irrational Assent could never have been
intended by God. Whence, as it belongs to Infinite Goodness to give those who
sincerely seek for Truth, the Grace to embrace it; so it belongs to infinite
Wisdom to lay such means to arrive at Truth, (that is, in our case, such a Rule
of Faith) as both evince it is Truth to those who are capable, according to the
most exact Methods of True Reason; and withal, perfectly See Error Non-plust,
p. 134, 135.
secure those from Error who follow that Rule, let them be as Weak as they
will. If then we are bound to embrace Christian Faith as a Truth, and profess
it to be so, it must be indeed such; and therefore the Grounds left us by God
must be of that nature, as to prove or conclude it to be such: and, if Dr. St.
have no such Grounds that what he holds is really Christ's Doctrine, he ought
not to handle or preach Controversy; since he must necessarily disgrace and
weaken Christian Faith, when he is to credit and establish it. Nay, he ought
not to pretend he has that most firm, and most strongly-supported Assent,
called Faith, which depends necessarily on the Certainty that it was taught by
Christ, but heartily yield he has Opinion only in that Point; not an
Unalterable Belief it is True, but only a good Conceit or Hope that it is so,
or may be so: Too weak a Prop to sustain it is Truth, as it leans on Christ or
his Apostles, having taught it; or to settle the Basis of all our Spiritual
Life.

. 28. And now let us apply this Discourse to his Ground or Rule, by means of
which he is to be thus assured, or able to assure You of the Truth of those
Controverted Points, which you hear so warmly disputed in the world; and which
it so much imports you to be satisfied in. It Is Scripture's Letter (in Texts
that are thought to relate to those Points) as understood or interpreted by
Himself, or any other Private Judgment. What he has then to do, is to make out
with Absolute Certainty, that this Method of arriving at the Knowledge of
Christ's True Doctrine, as to those Points, cannot be Deceitful and Erroneous.
Otherwise, it is unavoidable, his Faith, and all Christian Faith, no better
grounded, may be False, and, by consequence, is not True. He will tell you
Twenty fine Stories, and give you many pretty words of it is being Sufficiently
Certain, Morally Certain, that it has such Assurance as men accept for other
matters, etc. But ask him smartly and closely, if any of these Certainties or
Assurances are Impossible to be False, and he must not, nor will deny it: for,
should he say it, he must pretend he could not be deceived in his understanding
those Texts right, which he could not do without professing Infallibility in
that particular. Observe, I beseech you, where the stress of the whole Question
lies. It Is in this, Whether this Ground or Method of his to be assured of
Faith, is able to prove it to have been truly and indeed taught by Christ, so
as it was not possible it should be otherwise. By this Test, if you examine the
very good-Grounds for the Certainty of his Protestant Faith, which he promises
you here in his Preface, you will find evidently he only gives you very good
Words instead of very good Grounds; and that, whatever he produces, whether he
quotes or argues, he will never vouch them to be so Certain, but Deceit and
Error may possibly consist with them. He will complain, that it is an
unreasonable expectation, because the nature of the things will not bear it.
And what is this, but to tell you in other terms, that there neither is any
Absolute Certainty of Faith, nor can be any: which bids fair for Atheism,
unless Interest satisfies the Will, and by it the Reason. By his speaking there
of the main Points in Controversy between us, I perceive he is running from
the whole business in hand, and seeking to shelter himself, and hide his Head
in a Wilderness. But he shall not shift the Question thus, and fall to ramble
into endless Disputes. Himself confessed ( Second Letter, p. 20.) our Question
was about the General Grounds of our Faith, and not the particular Certainty as
to this or that Doctrine, and I joined issue with him upon the same. To run to
particular points while That Is a settling, is to put the Conclusions before the
Premises; and, to go about to ascertain things depending entirely on a Method
or Rule, without ascertaining that Method or Rule first, is to begin at the
wrong end, and make the Cart draw the Horse.

. 29. I owe him yet an Answer to St. Austin. He alleges that Father ( p. 16.)
whose Testimony says only, That the Gospels are to be looked upon as Christ's
own Handwriting, and that he directed the order and manner of the Evangelist's
Writing; which only signifies they were divinely inspired in both: which none
denies; nor has This any Influence upon the Point in hand. He could have quoted
you other places out of Him, if he had pleased, which come up to it fully; and
I shall supply his backwardness with doing it my self. Quaerendi dubitatio,
etc. ( Lib. 1. Genesis ad Lit. Imperfect. cap. 1.
says that Learned and Holy Father) The Doubt of Enquiry ought not to exceed
the Bounds of Catholic Faith. And, because many Heretics use to draw the
Exposition of the Divine Scriptures to their own Opinion, which is against the
Faith of the Catholic Discipline; therefore -- Ante tractationem hujus Libri
Catholica Fides explicanda est. Before the handling this Book, the Catholic
Faith is to be explained. Where Dr. St's Sober Enquirer is curbed and
restrained in his licentious Search of his Faith in Scripture, by the Catholic
Faith, had (it seems) some other way; for, were his Faith to be had merely by
searching Scripture for it, with what sense ought he to be restrained, while he
was in the Way to Faith: To restrain one who is in the right Way, is to hinder
him from going right, or perhaps to put him out of his Way. Again, Though those
Heretical Opinions were both against the true Sense of Scripture, and against
Tradition too; yet, had he held Scripture the Rule, he should rather have said
they were against the true signification of Scripture's Letter, than against
the Faith of the Catholic Discipline. Besides, if Catholic Faith was to be
explained before they came to handle Scripture, how was Scripture the Rule for
all to come to Faith, when as Faith was to be had (nay, well understood by the
Explanation of it) antecedently, lest they might otherwise fall into Heresy?
And, in another place, speaking of a false Pointing of the Letter, made by the
Arians, to abet their Heresy, he confutes them thus; De Doct. Christ. l. 3. c.
1.
( Sed hoc -- But this is to be refuted by the Rule of Faith, by which we are
instructed beforehand in the Equality of the Trinity. Had this Rule of Faith
been held by him to be the Letter of Scripture, he would have had recourse to
some exacter Copy, correcting their faulty one; and, so have born up still to
that Rule: But it is evident he does not thus. He makes then the Sense of the
Church or Tradition the Rule, both to know our Faith, and also to correct the
faultiness of the Letter. Whether this suits better with the Drs. Principles or
ours, is left to your selves or any man of reason to judge and determine.

. 30. Thus comes off this famous Sermon which makes such a noise, for a
Confutation of the Traditionary Doctrine. The Sum of it is, 1. The Dr. takes no
notice of the main Question betwixt us, which is about the Absolute-Certainty
that our Faith is Truly Christian or taught by Christ, nor attempts to show his
is thus Certain; but Preaches to you Stedfastness and a well-setled Resolution
to continue in it, yet avoids the giving you any Grounds to make you Steadfast
and Well-setled in that resolution. 2. He conceals every Advantage Christian
Tradition has, or is pretended to have; that is, he would persuade you to Hate
it, before you See it, and to compare it to Scripture before you know what kind
of thing it is; which is yet worse, he shows you another thing for It, and
through all his Discourse pretends it is It, which is nothing at all to It, but
utterly unlike It; viz. Particular Traditions, both before and after that
Universal Tradition (only which we defend) was settled. 3. He fixes a false date
upon the beginning of the Tradition we speak of, that the vast source of it,
which (with the Circumstances annexed) was able to continue the Current strong,
and the Derivation of Christ's Doctrine both Certain and Perpetual, might not be
reflected on. To deform it the more, he makes it merely Verbal, as if it were
nothing but the telling some dry story, by surpressing it is Practicalness, in
which consists it is chiefest Virtue. 4. He hides from your consideration all
the most Incomparable, and most Powerful Motives which enforce its Continuance,
and oblige the Church never to forsake the first delivered Doctrine. 5. He never
regards, even in those Particular Traditions, whether they failed the Persons,
or the Persons failed Them; but supposes still the Tradition was in all the
fault, without attempting to show it. 6. He would have you imagine the Church in
the first Age (consisting of Pastors and People) lost all their Memory and
Grace too, as soon as ever the Apostles were dead, lest it should be held Able
and Willing to testify Christ's Doctrine to the Next Age, which by Parity would
Establish it a Rule for all succeeding Ages to the End of the World. 7. He
mingles known Opinions, and which he holds himself not to have been Universally
delivered at first, with Points which we All hold to have been first delivered.
Then, as to the Matter of Object of Tradition, which, and only which we pretend
it is to bring down with absolute Certainty, and deliver Clearly (viz. the
Dogmatical or Controverted Articles of Christian Faith, which are Practical) he
never mentions it at all with any distinction, but tumbles and confounds it
with all things imaginable for which it was never pretended; and puts upon
Tradition a hundred abused tasks as never thought of by us, so improper, and
often times impossible in themselves; As, the deriving down the Ten Commandments,
Creeds, Decrees of Councils, set Forms of Words, an Infinity of particular
passages not at all Practical, nay, whole Epistles and Gospels, Schemes of
Doctrine taught by Heathen Philosophers; Messages which use to be sent by long
Letters; Historical Narrations or Actions; and in a word, every thing he could
invent but the right one (viz. Those Controverted Points of Faith) though it lay
just before him: the very nature of Controversy, which we are about,
determining our Discourses to those Points, and nothing else: This is his
General view of Scripture and Tradition, as to the way of conveying down
matters of Faith. He means a General view, which misrepresents and blinds your
sight of it in every Particular: In a Word, there is much of Reading, Conduct
and Wit in his Sermon; but wholly misemploy'd to speak as handsomely as he
could to no purpose, and to miss the whole Point in Question with a great deal
of Plausibility. In which, amongst his other Great Abilities, justly
acknowledged to be Excellent, consists his most considerable Talent and
Dexterity.

. 31. So he ends his Sermon with good Advice to you to follow Christ's Heavenly
Doctrine in your Lives and Conversations. Which, as he worthily presses upon
you, so I shall heartily pray that God would vouchsafe you his Grace to follow
it. I am far from blaming His or any one's Preaching the wholesome Moral
Doctrines of Christianity, and laying it home to men's Consciences: But I ought
not, if concerned, to suffer, that, when he pretends to speak to your
Understandings, and establish you in Faith, he should bubble his Auditory with
forty impertinent pretenses, Injurious to his candid Adversaries and to Truth,
as well as to your selves; please and delude your Fancies with a great show of
his Reading, and little conjectural Reflections tack't prettily together; and,
in the mean time, send you away empty of knowing any Ground which may render
you, or any, Absolutely Certain, that what you hold is indeed Christ's Doctrine;
that is, any Ground of perfect security; that is, cannot but be indeed his
Doctrine; without being which it ought not be held True. Whereas yet, it is only
this Certainty which can give His or any other Sermon it is full force and
Energy.

Your Servant in Christ, J. S.

Advertisement, The 2d. and 3d. Catholic Letters, are to be Sold by M. Turner
at the Lamb in High-Holbourn.

THE FIFTH Catholic Letter IN REPLY TO Dr. Stillingfleet's (Pretended) ANSWER
To About the Fortieth Part of I. S's Catholic Letters, Addressed to all
Impartial Readers.

By John Sergeant.

Published with Allowance.

London, Printed, and sold by Matthew Turner, at the Lamb in High-Holborn, 1688.

THE PREFACE. Addressed to the most Partial of Dr. Stillingfleet's Friends.
Gentlemen,
WHen a Person is incomparably qualified above all others in any Particular;
men use to look upon him as a Pattern in that Kind. I will not say Dr St. has
manifested himself to be such an Exemplar in every respect that can be an
Ingredient of an Ill Controvertist. This is yet to be shown; and Pretense
without Proof signifies nothing: Only I may justly fear that, while you are
reading my Reply to his Answer (as he calls it) to my Catholic Letters, you
may be apt to judge that I am rather framing an Idea of what Human Weakness
maintaining an insupportably-ill Cause may be obnoxious to, than giving a Just
Character of his Performances; and that, it is Absolutely Impossible that a Man
of his Parts should be Guilty of such and so many Incredible Failings. I
acknowledge with all due Respect to him, his Great Endowments; and am heartily
glad, in Truth's behalf, I am engaged with an Adversary to whom no Personal
Insufficiency can be objected. Nothing could make the Victory come more Clear
to the Cause I am defending; and the more Dr St. is raised above the Common
Level of Writers, the more Evidently it will appear that nothing but the pure
force of Truth could drive a man of his Abilities to such unparalled Shifts
and Subterfuges, to palliate that Error the Patronage of which he had so
unfortunately espoused. Nor is it to be wondered at, that even the best Wit in
the World should be baffled while it maintains such a Cause: For, were it some
Error of an ordinary size that he defended, or were the Truth which he opposes
of a trivial Importance, Rhetoric and misused Wit might perhaps bear it down,
and gain a seeming Victory over it: but when the sole Point is, whether even
what we all hold to have been the Faith taught by Christ, may for ought any man
living knows, be perhaps none of his; and so, a Falsehood and a Lying Story;
it is not to be imagined that any Tricks of Human Skill can prevail against a
Point of that Sacred Concern. It belongs to the Wisdom of our Good God, to
settle those things most firmly, which are of the greatest Weight; and
therefore the Certainty we are to have that Christ was indeed the Author of the
Faith we profess, being such an Incomparable Good, and the Basis of all our
Spiritual Building, must be by far more unremovably established, and more surely
placed above a tottering Contingency, than the strongest Pillars of this
Material World; whence, all Attempts to undermine, and weaken this Certainty
(which as shall be seen is the Chief Endeavor of Dr St.) must be
proportionably Weak and Ruinous.

To give you a Map of his main Performances taken from his Book in short, and
proved upon him in this Reply.

First, Whereas it is the Principal Duty of a Controvertist (especially, writing
about the Grounds of Faith) to justify, that is to prove Faith to be True; the
Dr is so far from doing, or allowing this good Office to be done to Faith, that
he maintains the direct contrary. Nay, he will not grant so much honor to any
Particular Point of Faith (and our Whole Faith is made up of such Particulars)
as to let it enjoy even his own kind of Absolute Certainty, though that falls
short of proving any thing to be above possibility of Falsehood or (which is the
same) True; but says over and over in perfectly equivalent terms that the Sense
which himself, or any man (or Church either) has of Scripture in particular
Points, may not be the True Sense of it; that is, may not be Christ's Doctrine;
which if it be not, it may not be True; And is it possible that what may not be
True, can at the same time be True; that is, Is it possible that Truth may not
be its self.

Secondly, We are writing Controversy, and consequently treating of Faith
precisely according to a particular consideration belonging to it, which is, by
what way it is with Absolute Certainty derivable from Christ. This has been
repeated and Echoed to him over and over even to Surfeit. This was the Scope
and Occasion of the Conference. This is expressed in my Short Discourse against
his way of having Certainty of Christ's Doctrine; and clearly aimed at in Mr G's
Demonstration. Nay, this has been told him fifteen years ago in Error
Non-plust, p. 44. Where I in these plainest words thus Stated the Question. [It
being then agreed amongst us all that what Christ and his Apostles taught is
God's Word, or his Will, and the Means to Salvation; all that is to be done by
us as to matters of Faith, is to know with Absolute Certainty what was the
first-taught Doctrine, or Christ's Sense; and whatever can thus assure us of
That, is deservedly called, The Rule of Faith.] Yet, though we should trumpet
this into his Ears every moment, he is still Deaf, and never takes notice of
it, or regards it in his whole Reply; Nay, he diverts from it with all the have
he can make, when our express words force him to it. To do this with the
greater Formality and Solemnity, he Entitles his Book, [A Discourse concerning
the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith.] Which Expression is so
Large, that it leaves it Indifferent for him, under that Head, either to treat
of Faith as it is in its self, viz. as it is Divine; or of Faith as it is
Controverted between us; that is of our Faith as it is Ascertainable to us to be
Christ's true Doctrine. And, that we may see this was done by Design, when he
comes to determine the Sense of those Equivocal Words, he pitches upon that
Meaning of them which is quite beside our purpose, and nothing at all to our
Question: viz. upon Christ's Faith as it is Divine; which is not disputed but
agreed to be such; and this, whether the Faith comes to our knowledge by
Tradition attesting it; or by an Absolutely Certain Interpretation of
Scripture; and the sole Question is, whether the Tradition of the Church or the
Letter of Scripture interpreted by any Way his Principles afford us, be the
more Certain and more Clear Way to give us Christ's Sense, or (which is the
same) our Faith. How untoward a Procedure is it then, to stand quoting our
School-Divines against me, whenas the Objects of Controversy and of
School Divinity are so vastly different: the one treating of Faith as made
known to the World at first by Divine-Revelation; the other, of the Way to know
now what was at first Divinely revealed, by Human Motives inducing men to the
Acceptance of it of for the same Doctrine. Hence, also, when he was to bring
Arguments which should evince, by his Principles, that the Faith held now is
the same that was revealed at first, to avoid that impossible task, he falls
unseasonably to allege God's Grace and Invisible Moral Qualifications: Which,
though absolutely requisite in many regards to Faith as it is formally Divine; yet
are they most improper to be alleged in Controversy against an Adversary, for
a Proof that what he holds is the first-taught Doctrine; since only God himself
can know whether the Alledger or any man else has those Supernatural Means or
no.

To put a stop once for all to this impertinent Topic, and to show how he
trifles while he quotes our School-Divines, I allege First, that the plain
state of the Question lately given, which runs through our whole Controversy,
has forestalled all he can object from them; unless he can show that they
stated the Question, and treated of Faith under the same Consideration, as we
do in our Controversy; which I am Certain he cannot instance in so much as any
one of them: And in case they do not state it after the same manner we do in
our Controversy, with what sense can it be pretended that I contradict Them, or
They Me, whenas we do not speak of the same Point, and a Contradiction must be
ad idem? Secondly, Our Divines bring Motives of Credibility to prove Christian
Faith to be Divine and True; such as are Miracles, the Conversion of the World,
the Sufferings of the Martyrs, etc. Very good* would Dr St. reply, these might
prove the Faith professed in those times to be True: but you have altered that
Faith since, and therefore you are to prove that the Faith you profess now is
the same which was of old. So that, out of the very nature of our
circumstances, This is the Only Point between us, and the main business of our
Controversy about the Rule of Faith, or the Ground that can justify its
Invariable Conveyance downwards; for, this being made out by us, all the rest
is admitted. Thirdly, Hence both the Protestants and We agree, that That is to
be called the Rule of Faith Dr Tillotson's Rule of Faith. p. 6.7.
by which the knowledge of Christ's Doctrine is conveyed certainly down to us at
the distance of so many Ages from the time of its first Delivery. Does any of
our School-Divines take the Words [Rule of Faith] in this Sense? Not one. They
content themselves with what serves for their purpose, and call that a Rule of
Faith which barely contains Faith. Fourthly, Our only Point being to know
assuredly the former Faith by a Certain Conveyer, how must this be made out to
those who are enquiring what is Christ's True Doctrine? Must we bid them rely on
their Private Interpretations of Scripture? No surely; for this is the way
Proper to all Heretics. Must we bring them the Public Interpretation of it by
the Church? This might do the deed so we could manifest this by some Knowledges
those Candidates are already possessed of, and did admit. Must we then, at the
first dash, allege the Public Interpretation of the Church Divinely assisted?
What effect can this have upon those who do not yet hold that Tenet; and,
consequently, how can this be a Proper Argument to convince them? It remains
then that we can only begin with their unelevated Reason, by alleging the
Church's Human-Authority or Tradition (the most vast and best-qualify'd
Testimony to convey down a notorious matter of Fact, of Infinite. Concern, that
ever was since the World was Created) for a Certain Conveyer of Faith from the
time that those Motives of Credibility, proving the then* Faith to be Divine,
were on foot. And, if so, why not with the same labor, and for the same
Reasons, to bring it down from the very Beginning of the Church? And if we must
allege it, are we not obliged, as Disputants, to bring such Arguments, to
prove that Authority Certain, as do conclude that Point? If they do not, what
are they good for in a Controversy, or what signifies a Proof that Concludes
nothing? This is the Sum of my Procedure and my Reasons for it in short; which
are abundantly sufficient to show to any man of Sense, that, while the Doctor
objects our School-Divines to one in my Circumstances, his hand is all the
while in the wrong Box, as will more at large be shown hereafter. He might have
seen cited by me in my P. 212.
Clypeus Septemplex, two Writers of great Eminency, viz. Father Fisher, the
most Learned Controvertist of his Age here in England; and a Modern Author,
Dominicus de Sancta Trinitate, whose Book was Printed at Rome it self, and
appprov'd by the Magister Sacri Palatii, who (to omit diverse others) do abet
each particular Branch of my Doctrine; which renders insignificant all his
pretense of my Singularity, and my Opposition to the Catholic Controvertists.

But to leave off this necessary Digression and proceed. As our Doctor has
shuffled off the whole Question by taking the word [Faith] as treated of by us,
in a wrong Sense, so he behaves himself as ill in every particular of the rest
of his Title; viz. in his discoursing of his pretended [Certainty] of Faith,
and of the [Nature] and the [Grounds] of it. He cannot be won to give us any
Account how his Grounds Influence the Points of Faith with the Absolute
Certainty he pretended. And as for the Certainty it self, (the only word of his
Title that is left) he never shows how any one Article (even though it be most
Fundamental) is absolutely secured from being False or Heretical, by any Rule,
Ground or Way he assigns us. Nor can I imagine any thing could tempt him to so
strange Extravagances, but the straight he was in, being put to show his Faith
Absolutely Certain; and his Despondency ever to perform an Undertaking, which
he foresaw was, by his shallow Principles, impossible to be achieved. And
hence he was necessitated to all these crafty Shifts, and Wiles, and all those
Unsound Methods which, like so many complicated Diseases, affect his
languishing Discourse and dying Cause; as shall be laid open in the Progress of
this Discourse, and, particularly, in the Concluding Section. I shall only
instance at present in two or three Material ones, which, like the Grain in
wood, run through his whole Work. For Example:

When any Question is propounded which grows too troublesome, he never pursues
that Game but flushes up another, and flies at that, 'till the true Point be
out of sight. Tell him our Point is whether the High Mysteries and other
Spiritual Articles of Faith be Clear in Scripture; he will never answer
directly, but runs to Points necessary to Salvation. Ask him if the Tenet of
Christ's Godhead be necessary to Salvation; no direct Answer can we get to that
neither, though it be the very Point we instanc't in. Press him that there are no
Unnecessary Points; and, therefore, that All are Necessary for the Generality
of the Church, he cries Alas for me! but answers nothing. Ask him what Points
he accounts Necessary? He is perfectly mute: 'Till at length he shuffles about
so, that the true Question which is about a Rule of Faith, comes to be changed
into a Rule of Manners; and those High Spiritual Points which are most properly
Christian, and could only be known to the World by Divine Revelation, are
thrown aside; and Moral ones put in their place, which were known to many even
of the Heathen Writers. And this is the best Sense I can pick out of a man who
affects to wrap up those Tenets of his, and their Consequences, which he thinks
would not be for his Credit to discover, in Mysterious Reserves. The like
Shuffling he uses in the Notion of Certainty, or any other that is of Concern
in our present Dispute; for he is a very Impartial man, and treats them All
alike. Ask him then, If Faith be Absolutely Certain by his Grounds? He will not
say it, but more than once hints the contrary. Are the Grounds of it at least
Absolutely Certain, though he makes them such ill-natured things that (contrary
to all other Grounds in the world) they keep their Absolute Certainty to
themselves, and will let Faith have none of it? Yes; he will tell you they are;
provided that by Absolute Certainty you will mean such a Certainty as will
permit those Grounds may be False, and Faith built upon them much more: for we
are to know it is a Maxim with him that the Absolute Certainty he allows his
Grounds is possible to be False, and he allows a less degree of Certainty to
Particular Points than to his Grounds, so that Faith may much more easily be
False then his Grounds may, though they may be False too. And all this out of
an Antipathy I suppose, to Infallibility, because the abominable Papists own
it; as if Mankind did not use to say they are Infallibly Certain of some things
before the Papists were born. What then is this Absolute Certainty? Is it
merely built on his Apprehension or Thinking it so? No, but upon such an
Evidence as the Thing is capable of. Very good. Is any thing in the world
capable to be known? It Is a strange Paradox to deny it; and yet if he grants it
he cannot escape meeting with this bugbear Infallibility: For, if the
Knowledge (as it is) be as the Thing is, and the Thing be Infallibly as it self
is, the Knowledge is Infallibly as the Thing is. Here Gentlemen you may expect
he will turn it off with some scornful Irony, for he never in his life
answered any such pressing Reason any other way. But the Argument will not be
laughed out of Countenance; and therefore if Infallibility must be allowed, he
is to show us what harm would come to Faith if the Previous Grounds of it, as
to our Knowledge, were thus Certain? None at all. But then, alas! his Credit
and his Cause will go to wrack; for no show or shadow of any such Argument can
his superficial Principles allow us: and therefore no Absolute Certainty will
he yield to the Grounds to know Christ's Faith, but such a one as permits all
Mankind may be deceived in them, and much more in knowing what is his Doctrine
it self after we have those Grounds: For Absolute Certainty shall not mean
Infallibility, let us say and prove what we will. However I Will venture to ask
him once more; Since (as he says) the Thing, notwithstanding the Absolute
Certainty we have of its being True, may yet be False, let us suppose (as it is
not impossible, there being some degree of Contingency in it) that it happens
to be False; Can he in that Case have Absolute Certainty that a Falsehood is
True? Here it goes hard with him, nor can all his old Heathen Philosophers, he
so often recurrs to, in the least help him out. He has but one Refuge that I know
of to sly to; and that is to use some trick to shuffle away from Absolute
Certainty, and say that he meant by it Sufficient Certainty, and That he will
stick to when all his new notions fail him. For Absolute Certainty he was
unluckily forced upon by Mr G. though he had no acquaintance with it, or
friendship for it; but his Inclination and Heart was for Sufficient Certainty.
And good reason, for in the Sanctuary of that Common Word he is as safe as in an
Enchanted Castle. Those scurvy Particularizing Expressions are Tell-tales, and
by their Lavishness are apt to discover Sense or Nonsense; but This keeps
aloof, and by signifying nothing at all determinately, is past the reach of any
Confute. But if you tell him it is a Relative word, and put him upon proving
that his possibly-False Certainty is Sufficient to conclude it to be True, that
any Point of his Faith is the same that our Divine Master taught the World,
he will no more hear or mind you than he did me when I alleged that a Rule and
Ground were Relative words too; and, therefore, must communicate their
Certainty to all the Particular Points they relate to. And, if you continue to
press him hard with such Cramp-questions, he will tell you he is not at leisure,
having his foot in the stirrup to take a long Journey as far as Trent: So being
Bankrupt of Reason, he withdraws his Effects thence to Trade more fortunately
(as he hopes) in Citations; and finding himself beaten at Tradition he gets
Letters of Reprizall from his new Logic to revenge himself on us in combating
the Tridentin Council; To which he will receive an Answer when he first shows
us that he stood firm in his own Principles at home, ere he took such a leap
beyond Sea; and Satisfies the World how it is possible that a man who confesses
he has no Absolute Certainty of Christian Faith, can be sufficiently qualified
either to prove any Tenet of his own, or disprove any Tenet of others to be
truly Christian.

In a word, his chief Art is to Cloak his Arts, and he is a great Master at it.
His Aim is to make his Discourses run plausibly, whatever it costs his Credit:
which he hopes is so great now with the Inferior Clergy, that, let him be as
Prodigal of it as he will, it can never be exhausted. The telling of his tale
smoothly will take much with those Readers who dwell in the middle story: But
strip his Discourse of all those needful Ornaments and Assistances, and it is
plain impertinent Nonsense in cuerpo. For, not any thing like a solid Ground is
found in his whole Book: The Manufacture and Contrivance of it is all in all.

It may perhaps be thought by some that I am too downright with him in diverse
of my Expressions; but I desire them to consider that I do not use him half so
rudely as some of the Church of England have done; and besides, that in doing
that little I did, I do but write after his own Copy; and fall very short too
of imitating him, as appears by his Angry Viper, venomous froth, Gall, Spleen,
Folly, Malice, etc. His Faults are Great, and Many; and must I not Name them
when I am obliged to lay them open? If I must, the very Names we give to Great
Faults will be Harsh words, let me do what I can. Yet I have moderated them as
much as the sense of what I owed to Christian Faith would give me leave.
Besides as my Genius leads me to carry it friendly with unpretended Honesty
though Erring; so it inclines me to show less respect to a man, who as I see
plainly by a constant Experience, has none at all for Truth, but practices and
pursues all over Studied Insincerity.

I have one Request, or rather a fair Offer to make the Dr. which is, that,
since it is so mortifying to a man who, (as appears by all his former Writings)
aims to reduce Truth to Evidence and Principles, to be still task't in laying
open such multitudes of his Shifts and Prevarications* (For I do think in my
Conscience I have not either in this Preface, or my following Book even hinted
a quarter of them) he would condescend that we may each of us choose two worthy
Gentlemen; who, leaving out the Question of Right, may examine only matter of
Fact, viz. which of us uses Indirect Tricks and Stratagems to avoid the force
of Truth, and which of us heartily pursues it; and let them after a mutual
protestation upon their Honors, that they will pass an Impartial Verdict, give
under their Hands the particulars in which each of us have notoriously failed
or falter'd: I mean that such Faults, whether of Commission or Omission, should
be noted as may appear to be wilfully disingenuous or affectedly Insincere, and
not merely Humane Oversights. This fair and Equal Offer, Gentlemen, will
exceedingly conduce to your and all our Readers Satisfaction; and Dr St's
accepting it is the only way to do right to his Credit, which stands impeacht
of using such unworthy Methods: And your pressing him to it, will be both a
Justification of your Friendship and Esteem for him, and be also received as a
very great favor by

Your Friend and Servant in Christ, J. S.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. r. unconsonantly. P. 23. l. 15. nor did. p. 28. l. 2. of the
Approvers. p. 36. l. 34. can be competent. p. 64. l. 22. thence embrace. p. 68.
l. 21. C^rinthians. p. 70. l. 27. disparate. p. 101. l. 33. may as much. p.
102. l. 1. them not to. p. 106. l. 29.30. is got. p. 108. l. 1. not at all. p.
112. l. 1. so plain and easy. p. 115. l. 13. recurr to. Ibid l. ult. Censures.
p. 127. l. 3^. any Decree. p. 12^. l. 13.14. may seem. p. 140. l. 2. following
it, then. p. 150. l. 18. Argument good. p. 152. l. 23. stand yet in. p. 156. l.
19. showing it. p. 166. l. 7. of my words. p. 169. (in the Margent) See above.
p. 126.

Introduction.
1. IN his Preamble Dr. St. according to his usual way of confuting, quarrels
every word he meets with, and gives every circumstance an invidious turn. This
looks brisk; but how weak and flat he is in his Arguments shall be seen
hereafter. In the mean time the dimmest Eye may discern how Impertinent this is
to our Dispute, and to the Certainty of his Grounds of Faith, nay to his own
Title Page. I am sorry to see him so much out of humor, as to run against, and
strike at every thing near him, though it lay not in his way. But sinking men,
when their case is desperate, must catch at straws having no firmer support at
hand to keep them from drowning. First, P. 1.
He wonders why Mr. G. did not defend his own cause himself. He was at that
very time called upon to attend his Majesty's Service; and it was a Duty owing
to Truth and our Sovereign, as well as Charity and Friendship to him, that some
body should step in to supply for him. 2 ly, Why must J. S. be the man? Because
it was desired of him; and, he was besides pressed to it by many Judicious
Persons; as one who had, in their Opinion, and by the Dr's own tacit Confession
by his silence for 15 years, unanswerably overthrown his Principles in Error
Non-plust; and, besides, he was injured, provoked, and in a manner Challenged
by him in his Second Letter, by his quoting and abetting Haeresis Blacloana,
which was writ designedly against Him; and by pretending the way of Controversy
he followed, was Pelagainism. Now it belonged properly to I. S. to clear this
by his own Pen; and (whatever the Dr's Intention was) I am to thank him he has
put a force upon me to Vindicate my self in English, which I have done in
Clypeus Septemplex and Vindiciae.
two Latin Treatises above ten years ago, to the Satisfaction of my Judges and
Superiors, and the farther Illustration and Abetment of what I had written in
my former Books. 3 ly, P. 2.
He quarrels the Titles of my Catholic Letters, and that no one Church of the
Christian World ever owned it. And does he in his great Learning think the
Church is to Own, or prescribe every one their particular Methods of handling
Controversy? All she is to do is to deliver to us Christ's Doctrine; and then
leave it to the Learning of her Controvertists to take such Methods to defend
it as best suits with their Circumstances, and the Exigencies of the Persons
they are to treat with. Are all the Sea Error Non-plust.
Principles Dr. St. laid? Is all his Discourse at the Conference with Mr. G? Is
his avowed Position, that every Sober Enquirer may without the Churches help
find out all necessary Points of Faith, owned by any one Catholic Church? I
know not what that Great Conventicle of Geneva may do, or what the new one that
is now erecting here by the Dr. Burnet, Dr. Tillotson. and Dr. Stillingfleet.
Triumvirate of the Church of England's Reformers, mentioned in the scurrilous
Reply to the Bishop of Oxford, may do in time, when they have brought about
their Projects; but I am confident he shall never find any one Catholic Church
that ever owned diverse of his Principles and that Position. 4 ly, But why did
I not call those Letters [Roman-Catholick] but [Catholick.] He tells the Reader
with much assuredness I durst not do so, because I had not forgotten how hardly
I had lately escaped Censure at Rome. Now, another man whose Reason was free
and undisturbed, would think I should rather have done this, in Gratitude to
their allowing and accepting my Defense upon such honorable terms as a kind
Admonition, that mindful of the Apostles words, Romans 2.14
[I am a Debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, both to the Wise and
to the Unwise,] I would explain my self as to some passages, which were
Aliquantulum obscura.
somewhat obscure from the Ob ^quivationem utriufque Evidentiae.
ambiguity of a word. My true reason, if he will needs have it, was, because
Dr. St's private-spirited Rule was Common to all Heretics; and the Rule I
defended was quite opposite to it, and therefore Catholic; and this, even in
the sense of many Eminent Protestants, who pretend to Universal Tradition as
the Rule, to ascertain their Interpretations of Scripture; to whom the name of
[ Roman] is not so agreeable.

2. The Dr. will still be leaving the road-way of the Question, though (which I
am sorry to see) he runs himself into the Briars most woefully. So he tells the
Reader I ought to have let him alone, and not have writ against him, P. 3.
because I have done next to nothing for my self, and seem to have forgotten
the Answer to my Sure-footing, meaning Dr. Tillotson's Rule of Faith. Yes,
quite forgotten it without doubt! About two Months after that Answer came out,
I published my Letter of Thanks. In which I laid open how he had mistaken still
the main point in Controversy; how he had wilfully perverted my Sense all
along, and falsify'd my Words in many places; nay, inserted some of his own,
and then impugn'd what himself had disingenuously added; I defended my
Testimonies, and replied to the most concerning passages. Then, observing that
his whole Answer proceeded on a False Ground, viz. That there was no Rule of
Faith but what left it under the Scandalous ignominy of being perhaps False,
that is, indeed no Rule at all; therefore to stubb-up his shallow-rooted work
from its Foundations, I writ another Treatise [ Faith Uindicated] in which I
demonstrated from many Heads that Introduction to Faith Vindication.
the Motives as laid in Second Causes by Gods Providence to light Mankind in
their way to Faith, or the ( Rule of Faith, (and consequently Faith it self, in
what it depends on that Rule, that is, as to us,) must be Impossible to be
false; and Faith Vindicated. P. 167 to the End.
applied it home against Dr St. and Dr. Tillotson at the End of that Treatise;
and thence showed that his Book could have no just claim to any farther Answer,
and that the branches must necessarily be held Withered and Sapless when the
Root was once shown to be rotten. Nor content with this, I followed on my blow
and penned a short discourse, entitled The Method to arrive at Satisfaction in
Religion; comprizing, in short, the strength of Sure footing; and reduced each
branch of it to Self-Evident Propositions, which force Humane Nature to assent
to their Verity. Farther it was not possible to go. Yet all this, my candid
Adversaries, who must not acknowledge it for fear of giving under their hands
they owe a Debt they can never pay, slubber over with assuring their Readers, I
have done next to nothing in my own Defense. It seems that to talk triflingly
is with them to do All; and Principles and clearest Evidences, are either
Nothing at all, or next to it.

3. What Reply made Dr. Tillotson? Why, he had a mind to print his Sermons;
and, knowing his Auditory were his best-inclin'd Friends, in a Preface
(forsooth) to them, he gives a slight touch at each of those Treatises. He
endeavors to clear himself of Two of his many Insincerities, and (oh
wonderful!) with about a dozen Jests quite confutes Three Books. I would not
let him rest so, nor enjoy even this empty vapor; but gave a full and distinct
Reply to his Preface in Reason against Raillery. I instructed his shallow
Logic, utterly unacquainted with the First Principles of our Understanding,
with which Nature imbues even the rudest. I proved against him evidently those
few of his many faults of which he had labored to purge himself. I laid open
the Folly and Weakness of his First Principle; and accused him severely of
making both Christian Faith and the Tenet of a Deity uncertain; and this by
virtue of that very First Principle of his: And, out of my zeal for such dear
concerns, I charged home upon him those two shameful Tenets by many Arguments.
Since which time he has not replied a word, but has sat very contentedly under
that heaviest Scandal full fifteen Years; and now he stands indebted to me for
an Answer to all those Treatises. And I have been so civil a Creditor as not
once to call upon him severely for such considerable Arrears, till Dr. St.
would needs have me to be his Debtor, and so obliged me to make up the Accounts
between us. Now, to have done all this, is, if a man of Dr. St's Sincerity may
be trusted, to do next to nothing, and not to have defended my self.

4. But since he will have it so, let us see what Dr. St. himself, who objects
this, has done to defend Himself. He undertook to write Principles for his
Protestant Religion. I showed in From pa. 212. to the End.
Error Nonplust he had not laid one for that particular end. I manifested that
he was guilty of the most weak piece of Illogical procedure that ever mortal
man stumbled upon; by making almost all his Conclusions to be Self-Evident and
beyond needing any Proof; and his Principles which should prove them, and so
ought to be clearer than they, Obscure or False. Error Non-plust. p. 236.
I showed the Grounds of his Discourse to be plain Contradictions and some of
his pretended Principles to lead directly to Ibid. p. 123.124.
Phanaticism. And yet he has quietly endured his Doctrine, concerning the
Grounds of his Faith to be stigmatized for Erroneous, and himself declared
Nonplust; nay he has had the phlegm to see himself exposed in Capital Letters
in the Title Page of that Book for a Man of No Principles; and yet has born it
with Invincible and Heroical Patience full fifteen Years: Which yet I had not
so particularly insisted on at this time, had he not so utterly forgot himself,
as to charge me to have done next to nothing in my own defense, when I had so
manifestly baffled and put to silence, (those who have most reason to pardon my
glorying) Dr. Tillotson and Himself. He Will pretend I owe him an Answer to an
Appendix of his: the main of which is answered in Faith Vindicated, where its
Grounds are subverted; and, if any thing, besides the Raillery, remains
unspoken to in Error Nonplust, when he pays me my Hundred Pound, I will reckon
with him for his Brass Shilling. So much difference in just value Principles
ought to have above a loose Discourse made up of mere misrepresentations and
Drollery. In the mean time, it were not amiss to give the Reader an Instance
how he quite misses the business we are about, in that Appendix; which, I
conceive, is the most solid way of confuting the whole. App. to the Rule of
Faith. p. 82.
[ If Mr. S. (says he) would have undertaken to have told us who they were that
first peopled America, and from what place they came, by the Tradition of the
present Inhabitants; and what famous actions had been done there in former
Ages; we might have thought indeed, that sole Tradition had been a very safe
way to convey matters of Fact from one Age to another.] By which we see he both
forgets that the Tradition we speak of is Practical, and waves all the
Obligations and Motives to continue the memory of Christ's Doctrine; which are
the greatest God himself could impose, or Man's nature is capable of. He should
have shown us that those Inhabitants of America, had some Constant and
Obligatory Practices and Solemnities, Commemorating their coming from another
Nation, or their former Great Actions (of the same kind the Children of Israel
had of their deliverance out of Egypt) and then he might draw thence some show
of an Objection. And yet, even then, it would fall short of a Parallel to the
force of Christian Tradition; unless the Matters to be conveyed were of Equal
Concern, and the Obligations to propagate them, Equally forcible and binding. I
shall propose to him an Instance of the force of Our Tradition, and than ask
his judgment of it. Suppose the Anniversary of the Powder Plot should be kept
on foot, by Ringing of Bells, Bonefires, Squibbs, and spiteful Preaching
against All Catholics indifferently, and their very Religion it self, as
guilty of that Villainous Treason; I would know of him whether the Memory of it,
though kept alive by this Practical Solemnity but once a year, would not be
perpetuated for thousands of Generations, or how it should ever be forgot? If
(as I am sure he must) he grants it; he must grant withal that the Tradition
of Christ's Doctrine, which had a source incomparably larger, and was of the
highest Concern to every particular Person not to desert it, but to hold to it,
practice and live according to it Daily, and propagate it to others, must be in
a manner infinitely stronger. For, sure, he will not say that the Hatred
against the Papists, which, I fear, is the main Motive to continue the other,
is a more powerful Cause to effect this, than all the Motives laid by God, and
the Care of the Salvation of themselves and their Posterity was for the Body of
the Church to perpetuate a Doctrine that came from Heaven. In a word, this one
Instance is enough to show evidently that he either grossly mistakes, or
wilfully perverts in that Appendix the whole Subject about which we are there
discoursing. And is such a slight piece, or such a man worth answering, were it
not for the Repute he has got, not for writing for the Church of England, but
for his Hatred and Scribbling against the Papists? Since this one Error is so
Fundamental that it must needs influence all that Discourse of his as far as
it is Serious, or pretends to Solidity; and, so, leaves nothing to be replied to
but wilely Shuffles and aerie Trifles, which are Frivolous in themselves, and
(in his Writings) Endless.

SECT. I. The Author of the Catholic Letters cleared from Dr. St.'s borrowed
Calumnies.
5. HAving behaved himself thus unfortunately to himself and his Friends ever
since he came upon the Stage, Dr. St. comes to settle his Method, which he
says, he thinks is most Natural and Effectual to proceed in, in handling the
main Subject of our Debate about the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of
Faith. It consists of Four Heads: and I shall follow my Leader, he being such a
Master of Method, and take them as they lie. The First is, To show how unfit J.
S. is of all men to undertake this Cause, who contradicts himself as occasion
serves. Certainly, this man has a Method as well as a Logic peculiar to
himself. Does it follow so Naturally that Faith needs no Higher Grounds of
Certainty, because J. S. writes unconstantly? Or, does he prove so Effectually
he has shown his Grounds do allow Faith, as it is controverted between us, the
Certainty due to it is Nature, because I write weakly. But, the truth is, his
Method is to avoid all Method; and to wriggle in twenty Impertinent and
Invidious things, to make a show of having said a great deal, though to no
purpose: and to raise as much Dust as he can, that he may run away from the
business we are about, and hide himself in the Mist. But is he sure that I. S.
contradicts himself? Impartial men will doubt it, when they shall know, that
both those few pretended contradictions he has borrowed out of Lominus and many
more were objected and earnestly pressed against me in a far-distant Tribunal;
where my self was unknown, and had few or rather no Friends, but what my Cause
and Defenses gave me: That they were discust by those strictest Judges and
compared with my Answers, and yet not so much as the least check given me, or
any Correction of my Books, even in the least tittle, was ordered; though this
be a thing not unusual in such cases: That the business already transiit in rem
judicatam; and that the Satisfaction I gave then to Superiors, who could have
no imaginable reason to be favorable to me, to the prejudice of Catholic
Doctrine, is an abundant clearing of the Soundness of my Writings, and the
Sincerity of my Defenses. It would, I say, be enough to do this, and then leave
the Doctor's malice to the Censure of all Ingenuous Persons, for objecting anew
things of which I was about Eleven years ago, so authentiquely acquitted. But
alas! his Method, which obliged him to speak to the true Point as little as he
could for shame, and to fill up an empty figure of an Answer with as many
Impertinencies as he could well hook in, led him so directly to it, that he
could not for his heart avoid it. Should he object Murder or any other heinous
Crime to a pretended Malefactor, already cleared of it by his Proper Judges and
the Court, every honest man would admire at his folly; but all is meritorious
with his Party against the Papists. Though, I say, this be sufficient for my
Vindication; yet because those Clypeus Septemplex and Vindiciae.
Defenses of mine were in Latin, and the clearing this Point conduces very much
to the shortening and illustrating my future Answer, I shall repeat here some
few particulars of many which are found there at large. And First, I shall put
some notes to give a clear Light of this business. Next I shall show his
Shallowness and Insincerity in what he objects. Thirdly, I will put down the
most Authentic Approbations of my Books by the Testimony of Learned Men of all
sorts, and beyond all Exception; and then reflect on his Imprudence in making
such an objection.

6. For the First, I lay these Notes. 1. That School-Divines discourse of Faith
under another Notion or Consideration than Controvertists do. The former treat
of it as it is a Theological Virtue, and the Material Objects of it, as revealed
by a Testimony formally Divine: And they prove it to be such by alleging the
Miracles done to attest it; the wonderful Conversion of the World by it, and
the admirable Effects issuing from it; as the Sanctity of it is Professors that
live up to it, the Heroic Sufferings of Martyrs, etc. And, because it is a
Supernatural Virtue, and, so, depends on God's Supernatural Influence as much
as Natural Effects do on His Power as Author of Nature; hence, they consider it
as introduc't by Supernatural Dispositions inclining men to it, and God's
Heavenly Grace making them embrace it and adhere to it constantly. On the other
side, Controvertists, particularly We in our Modern Controversies, being to
argue against those who admit whatever was taught by Christ to be Divine,
cannot possibly have the least occasion to treat of it as it is such, or use any
of the former Arguments that are apt to prove it such; but accommodate our
Discourses precisely to make out what those men deny; that is, the Grounds by
which we come to know assuredly that these or those Points were taught by
Christ. Much less do we consider Faith as it depends on the Workings of God's
Holy Spirit, illuminating Interiourly the Souls of the Faithful, and fixing
them in their Faith; these being Invisible and so Impossible to be brought into
Arguments, or produced against an Adversary in our Controversial Disputes. 2.
That it is evident that in all my Books I am writing Controversies; and,
consequently, writing of Faith precisely as it is controverted between me and my
Opposers: Which manifestly evinces that I treat of it under none of those
Considerations School-Divines do; in regard none of my Adversaries, (at least
professedly) deny it to be Divine, or that God's Grace is requisite to it. Nor
can any man show so much as One Argument in all my Books that looks that way.
3. That, since it is manifest beyond all Cavil that we are writing Controversy,
and consequently treating of Faith precisely as it is Controverted; and there
are but Two Points that can be controverted in relation to the Evincing or
Defending the Truth of Christian Faith: The one, that what Christ taught was
Divine; the other, that Christ taught what we now believe; the Former of which
being granted by all the Deserters of the Church, and therefore cannot possibly
need to be Proved by Me, or any in my Circumstances; it follows evidently that
the later Point is only that which can be debated between me and my
Adversaries; that is, we are only to treat of Faith as it stands under that
Abstraction or Consideration; that is, as it stands under some certain Rule,
securing us that it was taught by Christ; It being agreed on all hands, that,
if he taught it, it Is Divine. 4. That though this and no other can with any
sense be our Task, yet it is tedious to stand repeating at every turn this
Abstracted Acception of Faith, as it is found or treated in our Controversies,
or reiterating still this reduplication [ as taught by Christ;] but it is enough
to have expressed it at first in Prefaces, and the State of the Question, and
afterward upon occasion in many signal passages, which I did very punctually,
as appears by my See Clypeus Septemplex from. p. 151. to 194.
Defenses, where I instanc't in Sixty three several places: I might say, I did
it in whole Books, where I spoke in short, as is seen in my Declaration p. 43.
Method; in which very small Treatise it is inculcated above twenty times.
Whence, wherever I use the single word [ Faith] it must necessarily mean
Faith as Controverted, or, according to what is Controverted between us. Such a
sollicitous Repetition would argue a distrust in me, that my Readers wanted
Common Sense; who could not reflect on what was in hand, or keep a heedfull eye
upon what was at first, and once for all declared and signally expressed in those
remarkable places. Lastly, That my treating of what Motives or Rule Christian
Faith must have in it self, or in its own nature to make good its Truth, (which
is Essential to it) as I did particularly in Faith Vindicated, does not exceed
the bounds of Controversy, or treat of Faith as it is a Theological Virtue, or
in any Consideration relating to it as such: for I still express my self over
and over in the Introduction to speak of its Rule, or of Faith, as proveable by
its Rule; and though I do not there apply it against any Adversary, yet in the
Inferences at the End I do this against Dr. Tillotson and Himself, without any
Reply for these Fifteen years: Nor, have they any Possible way to come off, but
either, by answering Faith Vindicated, and showing there needs no Absolutely
Certain Rule to secure us of our having Christian Faith; or, by showing that
they have some Rule Absolutely securing those from Error who rely on it. The
same Introduction, and the same Answer serves to show how Moral Certainty of
the Infallibility of this Rule is, and how it is not sufficient. For I declare
my self Faith Vindicated Introduction. p. 18.
there to speak of the Nature of those Motives (or Rule) in themselves and as
laid in Second Causes by Gods Providence to light Mankind in their way to
Faith; to which the dimness of Eyesight, neglect to look at all, or looking
the wrong way, even in many particular men, is Extrinsical and Contingent.
Moral Evidence then of the Rule of Faith's Certainty, nay, even less, may serve
many particular men; for they are still secured from Error, by adhering to
what such a Rule delivers, though they penetrate not the Grounds of its
Certainty; with which it well consists that that Rule as laid by God to light
or satisfy all Mankind, who are in their way to Faith, must be in it self more
than Morally Certain, or must be impossible to be False; otherwise it could not
perfectly satisfy acute Scholars that what it abets is True; nor enable
Pastors and Learned men to defend the Truth of Faith as far as it depends on
that Rule; nor Secure any man, Learned or Unlearned, from Erring in Faith;
whereas, by being thus Absolutely Certain, it secures every man, though never so
weak, from Error while he follows it, and preserves inviolable the Truth of
Faith it self.

7. This last Note fully answers his first pretended Contradiction, P. 7.
that my Chief End in that Treatise (viz. Faith Vindicated) was to settle
Christian Faith, and yet that I speak not of Faith in it self, but as it it
controverted. For I no where meddle with Faith in it self, or as it is a
Theological Virtue as School-Divines do, but merely in order to my Opposers.
With which may well consist, that I may write a Book to settle Christian Faith
by showing it must have a Certain Rule, before I apply it against my
Adversaries, by showing they have no such Rule, and so no Certainty of their
Faith; as I did against Himself and Dr. T. at the End of that Book, and do
peremptorily Challenge them to clear themselves of those Inferences, and prove
themselves to be Holders of Christ's Doctrine or Christians. An Instance will
show how weak this Cavil is. A Scrivener makes a Pen; and his Primary
Intention, considering him, as he is doing that Action, is that the Pen should
be a good one; and his writing taking him precisely as a Pen-maker was
Secondary and Occasional. And yet writing was for all that his Primary
Intention as he was a Scrivener. Thus it past with me. My Main, Primary, and
(if he will) precise End in that Treatise was to settle Christian Faith, by
demonstrating it was to have a sure Foundation: and in this was terminated the
particular design of that Book. Now, the doing this was apt to exclude all
pretenders to Christianity, who had no such Grounds; but I did not this, till I
had ended the Treatise, nor stood applying my Discourses, or striking my
Opposer just then with the Weapon I was but a making. Which yet hinders not but
the Primary End of writing that whole Treatise was in Order to my Opposers,
though a little more remotely; and this is so Evident by my Inferences at the
End, that none but a Caviller, enraged that he could not answer them, would
have made such an Objection.

P. 8.
8. Hence his Second, which Equivocates in the word [ Objects] is frivolous. For
I no where treat of the Objects or Mysteries of Faith in themselves, or say the
Connection of their Terms must be Evident; but only that the Certainty of the
Humane Authority of the Church, which I make our Rule, to know they were taught
by Christ, must be proved from the Objects or things without us, viz. the
Nature of Mankind, and the Nature of the Motives laid to perpetuate Christ's
Doctrine. And I wonder at his Insincerity to allege this: when I had
particularly forestalled it in my Introduction ( p. 18.) and declared there
once for all, that in the following Treatise I only spoke of the Motives to
light Mankind in their way to Faith; Does he think the Mysteries of Faith are
the Way to Faith? Or can he pretend that the State of the Question, expressed so
carefully beforehand in a Preface to signify my meaning throughout the whole
Treatise following, is totally to be set aside and neglected; and that only
single words picked out, where for brevity's sake I did not constantly repeat
it, are to give my true Sense? What impertinent Brabbling is this? Again, p.
16.17. I no less punctually declare that I Introduction to Faith Vindicated. p.
16.17.
only treat of the Objects or Points of Faith, as their Truth depends on those
Motives or Rule of Faith. Yet all will not do to a man bent upon Cavil.

9. My last Note, toward the End, let us him see clearly when, to whom, and
how, P. 9.
Infallible Assent is requisite and not requisite. And I had forestalled this
too before in an Elaborate Discourse from p. 131. to p. 158. in Error Nonplust;
where I showed that since Faith must be True, and not possible to be a Lie,
therefore all who have true Faith must be out of capacity of being in an Error,
or must be in some manner Infallible. That it was enough simply to have Faith,
that they be Materially Infallible, or not capable of being in an Error, by
relying on a Ground that cannot deceive them (such as is the Testimony of Gods
Church) though they see not how it must be so. Nay, that this is absolutely
sufficient for Error Nonplust. p. 148.
All who are coming to Faith; provided they do not happen to doubt that their
Reasons for the Churches Infallibility are Inconclusive; and, so, be apt to
remain unsatisfied; or, are not bound to maintain the Truth of Faith against
Opposers; in which case they are to be able to see and prove the Conclusiveness
of their Grounds from some Certain Principle; which I call there to be Formally
Infallible. This and much more is laid out there at large; which prevents most
of his Objections here. But no notice takes the good Dr. of it. It was, it
seems, too great a Mortification to him, to peruse a Book, which he was highly
Concerned to answer, and knew he could not.

10. His Fourth Contradiction is solved in three lines. P. 10.
I treated of the Humane Authority of the Church (the Rule of Faith) which was
Extrinsical to Faith as it is a Theological Virtue or Divine. Yet it being an
Extrinsical Argument as all Testimony is, I therefore went about to prove it is
force from Intrinsical Mediums, fetched from the Natures of the Things; viz.
Man's Nature, and the Nature of the Motives. Nor can the Certainty of
Witnessing Authority be proved otherwise.

11. His Fifth is cleared by my first four Notes; which show that I spoke of
Faith, P. 11.
which was by the Confession of both Parties Divine and Supernatural, and for
that reason called so by me; but did not treat of it as thus qualified, or go
about to prove it Divine; but proved it is Truth merely as it depended on Humane
Faith previous to it; and so, did only formally treat of that Humane Faith it
self, on which the Knowledge of Divine Faith leans, and by which those coming
to Divine Faith are raised up to it. Yet what hideous Outcries the Dr. makes
here, that by my Doctrine we are to seek for the Certainty of Faith formally
Divine; That I make Divine and Supernatural Faith derive it is Certainty from
Natural Infallibility, etc. Though he knows as well as that he lives that we make
Faith as Formally Divine derive it is Certainty from the Divine Authority
testified to us by Miracles; That this Establishment of Divine Faith by
Supernatural means is presupposed to our Question and granted by both sides;
and that our only Point is how we may know certainly what was this Divine Faith
thus ascertained at first. Whoever reads Third Catholic Letter. p. 23.24. will
admire with what face he could object these falsehoods, or counterfeit an
Ignorance of what has been so often and so clearly told him; and which he had
seen so particularly answered in my Defenses: But this is his usual Sincerity.
It Is pretty to observe into what a monstrous piece of Nonsense our Dr. has
fallen here: and how because I argue from Supernatural Faith, he thinks I am
arguing for it or proving it. Whereas common sense tells every man who has not
laid it aside, that he who argues from another thing, supposes that other
thing, and, so cannot possibly, while he does so, go about to prove it, or
treat of it. But it seems For and From are the same with his great Reason, and
not possible to be distinguished. He might have seen other Faith Vindicated.
Object. 6. p. 149.
Arguments drawn from the Supernaturality of Faith, to prove that the Rule
which is to light intelligent men, who are Unbelievers, to Faith, must be more
then Morally Certain. But he thought best to choose the worst; and, while he
objected that too, mistook [ From] for [ For;] that is, the Premises for the
Conclusion, and the Cart for the Horse.

12. His Sixth Exception, if pertinent, P. 12.
amounts to this. I.S. did not prove any point Divine and Supernatural,
therefore Dr. St. needs prove no point of Faith he holds to be truly derived
from Christ: A fair riddance of his whole Task! For the rest; We do not desire
him to prove by his Rule one determinate point more than another; only, since
he talks of his Grounds, which cannot be such unless they derive their solid
Virtue of supporting to what is built on them, we instance now and then in some
main and most necessary Articles; of which, if he can give us no account how
they come to be absolutely ascertained by his Ground or Rule, he can give it of
none. Each Point of Faith is of a determinate sense; We show that Tradition
gives and ascertains to us this determinate sense; and we show why it must do
so, and how it does so, and this with Absolute Certainty. Let him show his Rule
has the power to do this, and then pretend we are on equal Ground. But alas! He
must not say this who is all for Moral Certainty, and fancies nothing above it.
For he cannot say by such Grounds any Point [ is] or [ is True] while it may be
False that they were taught by Christ; and if he says they [ are or were taught
by Christ,] while they [ may not be so] he in plain terms affirms the same
thing may at once be and not be. For thither the Doctrine of Faith's possible
falsehood must be reduced at last, and the Greatest of Contradictions will be
found to be his First Principle.

P. 13.
13. His 7th Exception is answered in my last Note; which shows that the Ground
upon which the Truth of Faith depends must be more than Morally Certain; though
every Believer needs not penetrate the force of those Grounds, or have even so
much as Moral Certainty of their Conclusiveness. But, what means he when he
Objects my saying, that, True Faith, by reason of its Immovable Grounds can
bear an asserting the Impossibility of it is Falsehood? Can this man do himself a
greater prejudice, than by thus confessing, that he holds not Christian Faith,
absolutely speaking, True? Or can he lay a greater scandal on Christian Faith
it self, than to quarrel at a Position that can give him no displeasure, but by
asserting it is perfect Truth? If this do not like his new-fashion'd Christian
Principles, I suppose he will own the contrary Position, and affirm that True
Faith, by reason of it is Moveable (or Uncertain) Grounds, Cannot bear an
asserting the Absolute Impossibility of it is Falsehood; And this is in plain
terms to assert, that absolutely speaking, True Faith may all be False: which
is both Unchristian, and strong Nonsense to boot. He should have Preached this
to his Auditory at Guildhall; and then he should have seen how every honest
Hearer, would have abhorred his Doctrine, have looked upon Him as scarce half a
Christian, and on such a Faith as absurd, praeternatural, and Irrational, as
well as I did.

14. These are the greatest Contradictions the Dr. could pick even out of an
Adversaries Book; concerning which he keeps such a mighty noise, blusters and
triumphs. P. 14.15.
He tells the Reader, I affirm that Moral Certainty destroys the Essence of
Faith. And I affirm it does, taking Faith without some absolutely certain
Principle, as Demonstration is, to ground it on. For Faith is essentially True;
and it cannot be True to those who see that, notwithstanding it is Grounds which
are to prove it Christ's Doctrine, it may yet be none of his Doctrine. Again,
he says I make Moral Certainty Sufficient and Insufficient for Faith.
Distinguish, good Doctor; It Is not Sufficient for the Ground of Faith as we
treat of it; for, if there may be Deceit in that Ground, the Truth of Faith as
to us, sinks: See. 9.
And yet Moral Certainty, and even less, of the force of that Ground is
Sufficient to many, nay See Error Non-plust. p. 148.
All, so they adhere to a Ground that is really Infallible, and Salvation is
attainable by those Persons. Oh, but Salvation is to be had by such a Faith no
better grounded; and that is the main business. What? If for want of a firm
Ground, Faith hap to be False? Who ever said it? or that, in case any Point
embraced upon such a Ground happen to be Untrue, it could be a Point of Faith,
or that any man could be saved by virtue of a Heretical Tenet, or a pernicious
Falsehood? Yet, for want of Dr. St's understanding plain sense, and his applying
my words to a wrong subject, I must forfeit my Sincerity and Moral Honesty;
whereas himself forfeits both by confounding every thing which I had so See my
Declaration and Vindiciae.
carefully distinguished. There is not a tittle objected by himself or Lominus,
but I distinctly and clearly answered in my Clypeus Septemplex and Vindiciae,
to the satisfaction of all my Superiors and Judges. Yet this man of Moral
Honesty, has the Ingenuity to object them afresh, without taking notice of my
Answers, or letting the Reader so much as know any such Satisfactory Answers,
or any answer at all, had been already given.

14. As for the three Propositions picked out of my Books apart from the
Context, and which, as taken in the precise words in which they were exhibited,
were censured: I desire the Reader to reflect, that these words [ There is no
God] though found in the Holy Scripture it self, yet as separated from the words
adjoining, and expressed in those precise terms, are perfect Atheism, and deserve
the highest Censure; and yet the same words as they lie in the Sacred Book it
self with these foregoing words [ The Fool has said in his heart] joined with
them, the direct contrary is signified by that place. This was my very case.
The words or passages taken alone, without the Prefaces, declaring the sole
Intent of the Author, without the State of the Question, and other Paragraphs
(or words in the same Paragraph) giving light, by the Tenor of the Discourse,
to my true meaning, bore a show as if I had affirmed that it was requisite to
Faith to demonstrate the Mysteries of Faith, and among them the Supernatural
Infallibility of the Church, which is a Point of Faith. Especially since there
was inserted by the Exhibiter a Parenthesis in the middle of the second
Proposition, [ he speaks of Propositions of Faith] whereas there was not a word
of any such thing, but about Vindiciae J. S. p. 23.24.
fifteen times the contrary, in the self-same Paragraph: viz. That I spoke of
Motives, Premises, and Grounds of Faith. Now the Censurers knew not that those
Propositions were in any Book, or had any Antecedents or Consequents (as they
Querimonia J. S. p. 70. and 75.
publicly declared, and I have it under their hands) and, consequently,
Censured them; as my self should have done, had I been in their Circumstances,
and circumvented as they were. Ibid. p. 67.
As soon as I saw the Censure, I offered voluntarily to Subscribe to it;
knowing that those Propositions thus singled out, were no more my Doctrine than
[ There is no God] was the Sense of the Sacred Writer; nay See Vindiciae J. S.
p. 4.5.6.7.
quite contrary to it. The Censurers declared they were surpised, and Querim.
p. 74.
complained they were by indirect wiles imposed upon. So at the Archbishop of
Paris his Command I writ my Vindiciae, to manifest the true Sense of those
passages as they lay in my Books; which I showed very clearly and particularly
to be, that I only spoke of Faith as standing under a Rule ascertaining it is
Descent from Christ. My Books being in English, it was ordered that some
Persons of great Learning and Repute who understood English should examine and
testify, whether, taking those Propositions as they lay in my Books, the
Orthodox Sense I assigned to them, were indeed my genuine meaning in those
places; My Adversary too App. seu Quer. p. 76.77.
allowed of them to attest it; for indeed their known Probity and Learning was
such that it was impossible to except against them; and that Venerable and
Pious Personage, Ibid. p. 62.
Abbot Montagu, to whom they were known, it being required, gave Testimony to
both those Qualifications in them. They all unanimously attested by their
Subscriptions, Ibid. p. 57.58
that the Orthodox Sense I assigned was indeed the true meaning of those
Places; and that the Sense condemned was not in those Books, but the direct
contrary; whence follows that when I Subscribed the Censure, I subscribed only
to what had ever been my own Doctrine. Those Reverend and Judicious Persons,
were Mr Francis Gage, Dr. of Sorbon; Mr Thomas Godden, Dr. of Divinity; Mr
Robert Barclay, Principal of the Scotch College in Paris; Mr Bonaventure
Giffard, and Mr John Betham, then Batchelours of Divinity in Sorbon, both of
them since, Doctors of the same Faculty, and the former of them now Bishop of
Madaura; Mr Edward Carry, Mr Edward Lutton, and Mr G. K. The Archbishop of
Paris, being perfectly satisfied, hoping it might end future Disputes, desired
me to Subscribe to the Censure: I refused at first, Ibid. p. 65.
alleging that such a Subscription might be improved into a pretense that I
had retracted. He replied, App. seu Quer. p. 65.
Uteris itaque qua Subscriptionis formula tibi placuerit; Make use therefore of
what form of Subscription you please. I replied, Then I will declare that I do
Subscribe, not retracting my Doctrine but persisting in it; which he allowed;
Ibid. p. 77.
and I did it in the selfsame terms; adding, that I persisted in it as being
free from Censure, Ibid.
and approved by very Eminent Personages. Which done, Ibid. p. 69.
the Censurers were ordered nay commanded to make me Satisfaction by an
Instrument Signed by them both; P. 76.
declaring that no Proposition in any Book of mine was touched by their Censure.
Could there be a greater and more Authentic Clearing my Books and Doctrine
from being Censured than that was; or, might not Dr St. by parity of reason as
well have pretended that the Scripture teaches Atheism, or that King David
deserved to be Censured, for saying There is no God, as that any Proposition,
as found in my Books, was there Censured or Declared Heretical.

15. And now to lay open some of the Doctor's Falsehoods upon this occasion;
They are these. 1. That the main Design of my Catholic Letters are there
declared to be no Catholic Doctrine. Well bowl'd Doctor. Have I a word there
pretending to show the Mysteries of Faith, or the Authority of the Church [that
is believed by Faith] that is it is Supernatural Infallibility by Assistance of
the Holy Ghost, to be Demonstrable? Is it not shown you in most express words (
Third Cath. Letter. p. 22.23.) and in many other places) that we speak only of
the Third Catho. Letter. p. 23. l. 11.12. Ibid. p. 22. L. 32.33.
Humane Authority of the Church, which is to be proved by Natural Mediums, and
not of the other which is believed by the Faithful? This then is a mere forged
pretense against your own Conscience and perfect Knowledge. 2. That I was
Censured and retracted: whereas it is manifest not any thing as it lay in my
Books (that is indeed nothing of mine) was Censured; nor did I subscribe,
otherwise than as not Retracting my Doctrine, but persisting in it as being
free from Censure. This the Archbishop of Paris allowed, and the Censurers
themselves judged to be Just and True, and upon those terms acquitted me and
made me Satisfaction. 3. He says, that if this (the Sense Condemned) be not
Catholic Doctrine, P. 5.
he is Infallibly Certain my Letters are far from being Catholic in their
Sense. Now, not one word is there in those Letters which is the Sense
Condemned, as I showed lately; however I am glad he who has still been so high
against all Infallibility in his Writings, and denied it to the Catholic, or
any Church, owns it at least in Himself. I see now what Grounds he went upon
when he would not make a Candid Retractation of his Irenicum. Certainly this
man would persuade us to take his word for our Rule of Faith. But the ill luck,
is his Infallibility is evidently proved already to be wilful Forgery,
against plain and Authentic matter of Fact. He say* the A. B. of D. averrs
many fine things already answered, and that my Plea was ridiculous. Which is
false for any thing he or I know. For, that Illustrious Personage denied that
Book of Lominus to be his, or did any man own it; but it came out
surreptitiously without the Approbation of any man, under an unknown name, nay,
without so much as the Printers name to it; which was punishable by the Laws
there. Whence we may judge of our Drs. sincerity: In his Second Letter to Mr.
G. p. 8. by putting Heresis Blacloana in the Margent over against his Appeal to
F. W. He hinted, that that Venerable Person was Author of that Book. Beat off
from that False and Ungrounded pretense, he has found us another Author for it;
and I expect in his next piece we shall have a Third or Fourth; according as
his fancy, so heated now that it has shaken off all regard to Civility, shall
prompt him. Again, he shows us how wonderfully ingenuous he is, by his quoting
against me the railing Book of an unknown Adversary, which had besides all the
Marks of a Libel in it; and over-flipping the Attestation of Eight Worthy
Divines of great repute; who, openly and owning their names, did witness that
those places, in my Books, did not bear the Sense in which those words picked
out thence were censured. Add that Dr. St. knew all these particulars were
cleared satisfactorily, since it appears (by his quoting them) he had read my
Defenses, in which they are printed at large. Which Common Sense may assure him
I durst not have done, in the Lifetime of all the Persons mentioned and
concerned, without quite losing my Cause; Nay I should have exposed my self to
new Accusations as a Falsifier, had I not dealt sincerely to a tittle, and
preserved all the Authentic Originals in my own hands, for the Justification
of my Defenses, which I yet have. I charge the Dr. then, to have published
against me Wilful and Notorious Falsehoods, which he had reason to know to be
such. Yet we are still to think he did all this out of his pure Love to Moral
Honesty, P. 14.
of which he makes such a Saintly Profession. I Challenge him moreover to show
me any one Catholic Writer of any Eminency (I do profess I do not know so
much as one of any degree whatever) whoever Censured this Position, that the
Infallibility of the Churches Humane Authority, antecedent to Faith, and
deriving down Christ's Doctrine might be demonstrated; which is all I require
in my Catholic Letters. Whereas the Sea Third Cath. Letter. p. 21.22.
Right Reverend F. W. has named him diverse, both Ancient and Modern, who follow
that Method in general; and I have quoted Declaratio Sergeantii. p. 40.
diverse Eminent Controvertists as occasion served, and particularly insisted on
App. p. 209. ad p. 246.
two beyond all Exception, F. Fisher here in England, and Dominicus de Sta
Trinitate, who writ and printed his Book at Rome, and had it approved by the
Magister Sacri Palatii, who take the same way I do, almost to a tittle. I may
add, to the Drs. greater confusion, the Authority of the Archbishop of D.
himself, and of all those Eminent Persons who have approved my Doctrine, as
shall be seen hereafter.

16. Not a man then has Dr St. on his side, but one unknown and altogether
unapprov'd Author Lominus, and a bitter Adversary to me besides; out of whose
Falsehoods, interlarded with his own, and by his Concealing my Replies to all he
objects (and those such as fully satisfied my Judges and Superiors) he makes a
shift to patch up his Calumnies. We will see next, whether (to his further
shame) my Books or Doctrine have not had Testimonials of greater weight to
approve and authenticate them, than that of Lominus was to Condemn them.

17. In the first place that Blessed and Glorious Martyr, the Illustrious, and
Eminently Learned Oliver Plunket, Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of all
Ireland, as soon as he heard my Books were opposed, out of his mere Justice,
love of Truth and the Esteem he had of my Doctrine, unsought to nay unthought
of, sent me out of Ireland, an Approbation of it writ with his own hand, and
Sealed with his Archiepiscopall Seal, in these words. Declaratio Sergeantis. p.
55.


[ Infrascripti testamur, etc. We underwritten do attest that we have read
thorough diligently and accurately, and that with both Profit and Pleasure,
three Books writ in the English Dialect, Published by that Learned Person Mr.
John Sergeant, whose Titles and Arguments are these; Surefooting in
Christianity, Faith vindicated, and Reason against Raillery; In which I have
not only found nothing against the Integrity of the True Faith and of good
manners; but, moreover, Clear and Solid Principles, which admirably conspire to
the Estabishing and confirming the Catholic Doctrine. For, both by Reasons and
Authorities they excellently impugn the Protestants affirming the Holy
Scripture is the only Rule of Faith; and vigorously maintain that the genuin
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles has descended, by the force of Tradition,
from Century to Century, nay from year to year, incorruptedly to our time, and
still remains inviolably in the Orthodox Church. In Testimony whereof we have
Subscribed, and have caused our portatil Seal to be assixt, this 15 th of March
1674. at Armagh Oliversus Armachanus, totius Hiberniae Primas.

Can any man imagine that this Grave and Learned Personage, who had for twelve
years professed Divinity in the Sacra Congregatio at Rome, and had been advanced
by them to this high Dignity, would have hazarded his Credit there, in
approving so highly the Writings of one who was a Stranger to him and no ways
capable to oblige him, had he not been perfectly assured there was nothing
Censurable in them? Yet, this, though known to our ingenuous Dr. is nothing with
him. He cries still Lominus for my money, let him be what he will; and assures
the Reader upon his Moral Honesty, he is Infallibly Certain my Doctrine in my
Letters is not Catholic.

18. The next in Dignity is that Illustrious and Right Reverend Personage Mr.
Peter Talbot Arch Bishop of Dublin, who died a Confessor of the Catholic Faith
in Dublin Castle in the time of that truly Hellish, though not Popish Plot. This
Eminent Person more than once has approved and highly commended my Doctrine. A
Sovereign Remedy against Heresy and Atheism. p. 28. See my Declara. p 95.
[ The Author of Surefooting (says he) has with great zeal writ diverse
Treatises of this matter (viz. the force of Tradition) and has overwhelmed
those who defend only Moral Certainty in Faith with so great Confusion that
they can no way clear themselves from the blemish of Atheism, to which their
Principles and mere Probability of Faith lead; of which crime the foresaid
Author proves them Guilty beyond all possibility of Reply. And a little after,
Ibid. p. 29.30.
he acknowledges that the Rule of Faith (viz. in our Controversies) is the
Humane Authority of the Church; and, that it must be an Infallible Directress;
otherwise it might lead us out of the way. Unfortunate Dr. St. to quote an
Authority against me, which so highly approves my Doctrine and condemns his as
leading to Atheism! The Reader may hence discern how likely it is the Archbishop
of Dublin should be the Author of Lominus his Book, Haeres. Blacloana. p.
where he and Dr. Tillotson are praised for Writing so Catholickly against me;
whereas that Right Reverend Prelate so highly extolls my Books as writing so
unanswerably against Them. Lastly, in his Appendix to that Book of his cited
above, he has this solid Discourse. Declaration p. 99.
[ Although Tradition does not demonstrate or conclude evidently the Divinity of
Christ, nor consequently can demonstrate or conclude evidently that the
Revelation of our Faith was Divine; yet it is a Conclusive Argument ad hominem,
against Protestants and all those who acknowledge the Divinity of Christ, that
God revealed all the Articles which the Roman Catholic Church professes, in
regard they acknowledge Christ to be God. And thus the Author of Sure-footing,
Faith Vindicated, etc. argues invincibly against his Adversaries for the
Conclusive Evidence (by the force of Tradition) that God revealed all the
Articles of the Roman Catholic Faith, out of the Supposition that Christ is
God. Note that this Appendix was write purposely to clear me, after the
Conference in Abbot Montague's Chamber: where though I would not then answer to
propositions taken out of books, when no Books were there to clear them by the
Context; Yet, after I had the Objections in writing, I did answer them; and
this to the Querim. p. 81. and Declaratio. p. 70.
Satisfaction of the Archbishop himself, and of Declaratio. p. 69.70.
Dr. Gough who was present, and prejudiced formerly against my Writings.

19. I had comprised the Sum of my Doctrine into a short Treatise, Entitled, A
Method to arrive at Satisfaction in Religion; which when I was at Paris I
translated into Latin, and showed it to that Excellent Prelate the Bishop of
Condom; my singular Friend and Patron, desiring his Judgment of it. He read it,
and at my request made his Exceptions; which being cleared by me, he asked me
why I did not Print it? I replied I would, so his Grandeur would please to give
me leave to Dedicate it to himself. Which obtained, it was proposed to the
Sorbon for their Approbation of it, the former of them (Monsieur Pirot)
testifying it contained nothing against Faith or good manners, and the later of
them (Dr Gage) added that the most certain Rule of Faith was in that Treatise
exactly settled and invincibly defended. But still obscure Lominus is worth
twenty Sorbons in Dr. St's. Learned Judgment. Though it is here to be observed
that the Bishop of Condoms Approbation was antecedent to theirs; not only as
allowing and owning the Book, but as inviting me to Print it.

20. I allege in the Fourth place the Testimony of my Superior here in
England, Mr. Humphry Ellice, an Ancient Dr. and Professor of Divinity, and late
Dean of our Catholic Chapter; whose Sanctity of Life and solid Judgment gave
him a high Esteem with all that knew him. This Grave and Venerable Person,
besides the Ordinary and Customary Approbation of my Books, added that They do
clearly demonstrate, out of the very nature of Ecclesiastical Tradition, that
the Doctrine delivered by Christ and his Apostles, was inviolably eonserv'd in
the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church even to this Age in which we now
live; and by Irrefragable force of Reason did evidently convince the Grounds of
the Heretics (meaning Dr. St. and Dr. Till. against whom I had writ) to be
mere Tricks and vain Fallacies. But still Lominus (that is the Lord knows who)
is Dr. St's. only Saint and Infallible Oracle.

21. It were not amiss to add next the Testimony or rather Judgment of that
deservedly Esteemed, and Learned man, Mr. R. H. Author of The Guide of
Controversy. This Excellent Writer, though he inclines rather to the
School-opinion of the sufficiency of Moral Certainty, yet, like a truly
ingenuous and Charitable man, preferring the Common Good of Christianity before
his own private Sentiment, after having discourst according to his own Grounds,
he, in allusion to my way of proceeding, subjoyns these words: [ But then, if
any, after all this, can make good any farther Certainty in such Tradition; I
know no Party, if Christian, that has any Interest to oppose him -- The
stronger any one can make this Faith, they have all reason to like it the
better.] By which it is apparent that he is so far from condemning and censuring
the way I take, that he declares it is not the Interest of any Party, if
Christian, to oppose it; and that himself and every one ought to like it better
than the other way, so it could be made good. And, that it can, my best Reason
tells me; since, as appears by my Method, it has born the Test of being reduced
even to Self-Evidence; and the miserable shifts and Evasions, to which the most
Learned of our Adversaries are driven, to avoid it is force, do more and more
assure me it is not at all hard to compass it.

22. In the last place, to omit many others, I shall put the Testimony of that
very Reverend Person F. Martin Harney, Dr. of Divinity of the University of
Lovain, and Principal Regent of the General Studies of the Order of St
Dominick: Who being asked at Rome (where he was at the time of the Contest) his
Judgment of my Doctrine, comprised in my Method, and of the Sense of the three
Propositions, as they lie in my Books, gave under his hand this Testimonial of
both. I underwritten have attentively read the Method writ by Mr John
Sergeant, and his Vindication of the three Propositions picked out of his Books;
and I have found that the Method is sound Doctrine, and useful to reduce many
to the Catholic Faith. And in his Vindiciae it is plainly demonstrated that the
foresaid Propositions, as written by the Author, do make a Sense altogether
Orthodox. This Reverend Person I had never seen, nor heard of; nor could any
thing but the love of Truth move him to this Approbation; nay, he must have
lost much Credit with the Sacra Congregatio, had my Doctrine been proved
Vnorthodox, or the Propositions in my Book, (as Infallible Dr. St. affirms)
Heretical.

23. Modesty forbids me to mention the excessive Encomiums of that Eminent
Controvertist Mr. Edward Worsley, a Father of the Society; who, though utterly
unknown to me, took such a Friendship for me upon the reading my Books, and in
all places where he came extolled my poor Endeavors with such immoderate
Expressions, that to save my blushes in rehearsing them I entreat those who
have the Curiosity to read them in my Declaratio from p. 73. to p. 78. I showed
them to the Right Honorable the Earl of Castlemain, who was pleased to do me
the right to attest them to be his handwriting. The same noble Personage and
as many as knew F. Worsley, will, I doubt not, do that right to his Memory, as
to witness for him that as he was Second to none in ability to distinguish
between Sound and Tainted Doctrine; so his sincere Candor and Integrity set
him as far above the humor of Flattery, as my Meanness could incline any to it.

24. The Sum of my present Defense is this. Eight Divines of great Repute
appointed by the Archbishop of Paris, and admitted by my Adversary himself, do
unanimously attest that the Sense condemned is not in my Books, but the
contrary. My Judge clears me, the Censurers are commanded to make me
Satisfaction. The Highest Tribunal allows my Plea, and acquits me. Primates,
Archbishops, Bishops, the Sorbon, Eminent Divines, and even those who take
another way in their Writings, approve and commend my Doctrine, and most of
them in very high and extraordinary expressions; my own Superior does the
same; nay even those, who were formerly highly prejudic't, declared themselves
satisfied in it. So that poor Dr. St. is left alone to balance against all
this weighty Authority, with one Lominus, a mere Utopian, or Man in the Moon;
on whose sole no-Authority he grounds all his senseless Calumnies. Was ever weak
man so baffled! Add, that he knew that all these Defenses of mine had been made
and accepted many years ago, and those Authorities alleged, and my Doctrine
thus approved and cleared; yet he had not the Candor to let his Reader have
the least hint of any of those particulars; which argues not too great love of
Moral Honesty. Nor does he take off any one Answer of those many I had given;
but only says over again rawly some few things objected, replied to, and
printed fourteen Years ago; and plays upon a double-sens't word or two by
applying them still to wrong Subjects. which is in effect to tell the Reader he
must either talk insignificantly against evident matter of Fact, or say just
nothing, and to confess in plain terms he is at a perfect Nonplus.

25. To close this present business I desire the Reader to reflect that those
Judges, Approvers and Commenders of my Books and Doctrine, lived generally in
diverse and far-distant Nations, were of different Faculties and Universities,
of different Education, different Orders, and (to some degree) of different
Principles and Interests; some of them of slight acquaintance; diverse utterly
unknown to me, or I to Them. So that, it is impossible to imagine that any thing
but the Force of Truth and the Integrity of my way of proving the Certainty of
our Faith as to it is being taught by Jesus Christ, could make them conspire to
allow or abet my Writings so heartily and unanimously. Nor could there be any
Human inducements to make them so partial to a private man every way
inconsiderable, and of no Esteem at all but what my Writings and Principles
gave me. Whence, though no one Church, as Dr. St. weakly objects, has ever
owned my Doctrine (to give formal Approbations of Controversial or Theological
Writings not being a work proper for Churches) yet, the Dignity of the Persons
and all these Circumstances considered, I conceive it may amount to the full
weight of the Judgment of any one particular Church whatsoever, that my Doctrine
is Sound and Orthodox. Nor will he, I believe, find that any work of a
particular Writer has had more Authentic Testimonials for it, than my poor
Endeavors have had; except that of the never-enough-praised, the Bishop of
Condom. And it is not the least Confirmation of their Integrity that they have
been twice brought to the Trial, (at Paris and Rome) and nothing unsound found
in them. Though I must do the Doctor the right to acknowledge he has spoke one
(and hitherto but one) true word: but he is to be pardoned for prevaricating
from his constant method of speaking Falsehoods, for it was at unawares, and he
knew not he did so; The Truth he spoke against his will was this, That I hardly
escaped Censure at Rome: and therefore, to make his words good, I Will tell him
how it was. All my Books were sent thither to Cardinal Barberin; and amongst
them one written by the Right Honorable my Lord Chancellor Hyde, in defense
of Dr. St. against Mr. Cressy; pretending (the Title of this last being torn
out) they were all writ by the same Author, my self; There went with them a
desire to His Eminency, that, not to give them the trouble of Perusing them
All, he would cause only this last of my Lord Chancellour's to be read; and, by
the Character he received of that, to judge whether all the rest writ by that
Author ought not to be Condemned. He gave them to an English Divine to keep,
who knew nothing of the Contest; ordering him to read only That, and give him a
faithful account of it as soon as he could. While he was reading it, God's
Providence so ordered it, that an English Gentleman, his acquaintance, came
accidentally into his Chamber, and finding all my Books on his Table, asked how
they came there? He, hearing me named as their Author, admired, and said he
could not believe they were mine; in regard he had heard I was a Writer for
Catholic Faith; whereas this Author was of far other Principles. After some
perusing it, my Friend found it was my Lord Chancellour's Book foisted in for
one of mine. Which understood by my Friend's Testimony and the finding all the
other Books to run in a quite different strain, they informed the Protector of
the Fourbe that was put upon him, and so my poor Books escapt scot-free. By
this or some such Stratagem they might perhaps have been condemned, but that
there was any danger of it when my Defenses were seen and compared with the
Accusations, Infallible Dr. St. is the first man that ever informed us. But,
what would we have from a man that can scarce speak a word of liquid Truth!

26. But, though Dr. St. has neither managed this invidious Cavil Solidly, nor
(he must pardon me) honestly or justly, according to any Moral Honesty but his
own, which he has told us he so loves: Has he at least deserved the
Commendation given to the Unjust Steward; has he done wisely, or, in any
degree, prudently? Let Us see. In his Irenicum, he Answer to a Letter against
Mr. Lowth, in Defense of Dr. St. p. 8. Ibid. p. 7.
had Sacrificed the whole Order of Bishops to the pleasure of the Magistrate or
the Mobile, and actually degraded them into the rank of Presbyters; or, to give
us a more complete Map of that ill Book, that he had given us there a curtailed
kind of Episcopacy coldly and faintly allowed, Presbytery strongly pleaded for,
Independency much favored, and (says my Author) if my Memory fails me not, in
the matter of Tithes a spicing of Anabaptistry and Quakerism. One would think
by this description the name of that Book should be LEGION, and that such
pestilent Principles were needful to be retracted. It seems the Bishops who
were most concerned, durst not attacque such a numerous Army of
private-spirited Enemies, drawn-up into one Body. For himself assures us that
See Answer to M. Lowth's (...). p 22.
the Bishops and Regular Clergy treated him with more kindness then so much as
to mention any such thing as a Recantation. Nay, his Vindicator tell us
moreover that Answer to a Letter against Mr. L. p. 8.
the Prudent and Reverend Governors of their Church did admire the
Performance. Well! But what provision was made in the mean time against the
mischief and Scandal? Could this man have done the Bishops a greater
disparagement, than to tell the World they preferred a Personal Civility and a
Complementary virtue before the care of Christ's Institution, and their own most
particular Interest? But, though they were over civil to him, why had not he the
Goodness by a voluntary Recantation to give a stop to the spreading that
contagious Doctrine, if indeed he did not hold it still? He could not think it
pleased them, nor that their shows of Kindness were real and hearty. However
his Vindicatour Brags they made choice of him to undertake the Defense of the
Conferences with F. Fisher. Ibid p. 8.
Yet so, says the other, as Mr Prynn, a man of a restless Spirit and unsettled
judgment was put to the Records in the Tower to employ his busy mind. Well, but
how came he off with that Task? A fair occasion might have been taken there to
set all right again, had the Dr. pleased. But he was so far from that, that Mr.
Lowth tells him, It would have discomposed the Archbishop upon the Scaffold,
Ibid. p. 34.
had he foreseen he should have had such a Vindicatour; and that he finds
little amends there for his Irenicum Doctrins, but rather an Evident
Confirmation of them, if not doing worse. This is still more and more
obstinate; and a kind of huffing those, who had so over-civilly forborne him, by
doing still the same or worse. Yet afterward, I know not how or why, he made
some ambidextrous Retractations, which left all understanding men dissatisfied,
as well as Mr. Lowth; though he, about to publish a book of Church Government and
the Irenicum-Doctrines crossing his way hapt to be the sole man that opposed
them publicly, though multitudes of the most hearty, most Learned, Ibid. p. 27.
and most Eminent Protestants utterly dislik't them. But, first he writ to him
civilly and upon honest Conditions would have waved him. But the Dr. had got
too much head by this kind Connivence, Ibid.
and so he could get no other Answer, but Scorn and some foul play; The two
main Ingredients in the Doctors Constitution, as my self too frequently
experience. Hereupon that honest and plain-dealing Gentleman, whom all true
lovers of Christ's Institution and particularly all genuin Members of the
Church of England ought to respect for his undaunted love of Truth, and
firmness to Church-Principles, did animadvert upon him severely; Answer to Mr.
Lowth. P. 17.
as an incorrigible Wronger of such Sacred Concerns deserved. He demands in
behalf of the Church he would make a Recantation as Public as the Error,
Scandal and Offense had been. The Doctor setts on a Jack Pudding to abuse and
scoff at him; one (says my Author) who has Postscript to an Answer to a Letter
against Mr Lowth.
hackney'd out himself to write against his Conscience and Judgment, as appears
by his own Letters. A fit man for Dr. St's purpose. This pleasant Gentleman
pretended such a Recantation was already made. To which Mr. Lowth's Vindicator
(a person of a solid judgment and moderate temper, and, as is seen, p. 23. a
kind Friend to Dr. St.) replied, that all amounted to little better than a say
so. He shows that what is cited out of the General Conferences was a scurvy
palliation of the matter. P. 14.
That his Book [ The Unreasonableness of Separation] signified no more than
Motives to compliance in the Judgment of Interest or Discretion; P. 4.
and for the most part might be urged for any settled Constitution, P. 15.
even that of Geneva or Amsterdam. That any man might get easily off what He
had said; and each Party, as the Tide turned, might apply them to their own
advantage. P. 13.
That the Doctor though he pretended Mutability of Church Government in his
Irenicum, yet he had perpetually fixed the Presbytery by Divine Right
Unalterable. That the Recantation was far from hearty; in regard that, although
his Vindicator freely confesses the Fault, and Mr. Lowth to be in the right, P.
11.
yet He with the same breath reviles him. Lastly, to omit many other
particulars, That (which I have most reason to reflect on) the Dean, when he
speaks of Church Authority, takes away with one hand what he gives with the
other; P. 23.24.
That the Authority of (merely) proposing matters of Faith and directing men in
Religion, is no Authority at all; nay that they rather imply a Power in those
to whom they are proposed, at Discretion to reject them; and that it makes the
Church'es Authority, precarious, and lays her open to all manner of Heretics.
This is what I ever judged lay at the bottom of his heart; that in things
belonging to Faith, he sets the judgment of every one of his Sober Enquirers
above the Church'es. Which made me reflect so severely upon it in my Error
Nonplust, P. 123.124.
and in diverse other places of my Third Catholic Letter. But of late, the
juncture (as he hopes) being more favorable, he is gone beyond his former
self; P. 21.
for in his Second Letter to Mr. G. he confidently affirms that every Sober
Enquirer may without the Church'es He^p find out all necessary Points of Faith
in Scripture. Now, Proposing and Directing are some kind of Help, but here they
are both denied it seems; and all Help from the Church, as to the matter of
saving Faith is denied. This then seems to be the Antecedent Belief the Dr.
sets up, and thence inferrs, That a man may be in a State of Salvation in his
single and private Capacity apart, See the Answer to a Letter written against
Mr. Lowth. p. 23.
and out of all Church Society and Ecclesiastical Communion, though he live where
it is to be had; which (says the Answerer) utterly overthrows all Church
Government. This ought to give every honest man who loves Order and Government
(of what Judgment soever he be) such grounded Jealousies that he is setting up
a Babel of No-Church-men against Christ's Church, that no satisfaction
competent, unless the several Propositions be extracted out of his Books, and
either formally and expressly retracted, or else that he show that, as they ly
in his Books they bear not that wicked Sense they seem to do, neither of which
has been done. Nay, lest he should deal slipperily by Common and palliating
words, at which he is very expert; it will be farther requisite that he be
obliged to write against those ill Tenets himself, and offer convincing reasons
to prove them False; that so men may see it comes from his heart. And this done
and the Interest of Truth once in demnify'd, he is one of the worst Christians
who refuses to honor him far more than if he had never lapst. Si non errasset,
fecerat ille minus.

27. What concerns Me particularly is to note hence the prodigious Imprudence
of Dr. St. in objecting against me Self contradictions, which have long ago
been cleared; and the Dissatisfaction of two or three Roman Catholics (for I
know of no more) who became well satisfied when they had read my Books, and
compared them with my Explication; and when as He knew my self after a severe
Trial was cleared by my Judges (which he will never be;) and during the time of
it, when it was most dangerous for any to stand up for me, my Books and Doctrine
were most authentickly approved nay highly commended by most Eminent Authority:
What a madness was it for him to object falsely and against evident matter of
Fact that I retracted. Whenas all the while* he knew himself had had the
misfortune to have writ such unsound Doctrine, that his Vindicator is forced to
confess it as his best Plea, that He has retracted it; and yet though, as it is
said, he has done it on his fashion, he is still apprehended to be so hollow,
that he cannot yet gain the Belief to have done any more than palliate his
gross Errors; to be inconsistent with himself, Answer to a Let. against Mr
Lowth. p. 13.23.14.
and to take away from the Church with one hand what he gives it with the
other: Of these things he never yet cleared himself, nor can; but is still
accused of harboring the same Errors in his breast, nay to grow still worse
and worse. Which I was so far from desiring to lay open, that I civilly
insinuated it afar off in my Third Catholic Letter, p. 20. without so much as
naming his Person; that I might keep him from such Impertinent and Extrinsical
Topics, which the Reader may observe, do, for want of better, make up three
quarters of his Controversial Writings.

SECT. II. How Dr. St. settles the true State of the Controversy.
28. I Have been longer about this First Section than seemed needful. But the
Influence it has upon our future Dispute will recompense my trouble, and excuse
my Prolixity. The Second thing his Method leads him to (for hitherto it has led
him quite out of the way) is to state the Controversy. And to this end, he
acquaints us with the Occasion of the Conference; P. 15.
which was that Mr. G. affirmed in some company that no Protestant could show
any Ground of Absolute Certainty for their Faith; and that Mr. T. had promised
him that if Dr. St. were not able to manifest the contrary, he would forsake
his Communion. Will the Dr hold to these words? It Is plain here that Mr G.
demanded he should show Grounds to ascertain his Faith absolutely. Mr. T.
expected he should manifest they had such Grounds as did ascertain their Faith;
and, if he could not, was to leave his Communion: Lastly, that Dr. St. by
accepting the Challenge, became engaged to satisfy Mr T's. expectation, and to
manifest the contrary to what Mr G. had asserted; that is to manifest he had
Grounds of Absolute Certainty for his Faith; or, (which comes to the same) for
Christian Faith upon his Grounds being taught by Christ. And, how did the Dr.
acquit himself, and perform this? Why, he assigned Scripture for the Ground or
Rule of his Faith, and Universal Tradition for the Proof of the Books of
Scripture. All the company knew this before. For, both sides knew, held and
granted already that the Book of Scripture was proved by Universal Tradition,
and every one knew too that Dr St. would assign It for the Ground or Rule of
his Faith. Wherefore, unless all the company were out of their Wits, surely
something more was expected; and what could that be, but that he should
manifest his Faith was absolutely Certain by relying on that Rule, or that the
Rule he assigned, gave him, and his, Absolute Certainty of their Faith, or of
those Tenets which they held upon it. For, it being agreed on both sides that
the Sense of the Scripture was in it self True Faith, Gods Word, and as such to
be embraced, the only Question was of the sense of Scripture as to us, or as to
our knowledge of it: And of This the Dr was to show and manifest he had
Absolute Certainty by any way his Grounds afforded him; otherwise, he might
fall short or be wrong in the knowing Scriptures Sense (that is, in his Faith)
though the Letter were never so Certain. Again, by his counterposing to those
words of his [ than you can have for the points in difference between us] it is
manifest the contest was, whether he had Absolute Certainty of those Points he
held upon his Rule. What says the Dr now to this plain state of the Controversy?

29. First he changes the Ground of Absolute Certainty for his Faith into
proving the Absolute Certainty of the Ground or Rule of his Faith: P. 15. l.
32. ult. and p. 16. l. 1.2.
which transposes the Terms of the Question, and alters the whole business. For
Absolute Certainty for Faith engages him to show the Doctrine or Tenets of Faith
to be thus Certain; whereas [ Absolute Certainty of the Rule of our Faith]
makes Absolute Certainty affect the Rule, but leaves all Faith Uncertain,
unless the pretended Rule proves a good one, and renders the Doctrine of
Christian Faith, consisting of many particular Points, thus Absolutely Certain;
which himself will tell us afterward, he will not stand to. Next, he
Equivocates in the word [ Scripture] which may either mean the Letter, or the
Sense of it. Now the Sense of it being Faith, it is That only could be meant by
Mr. G. and of which it was affirmed he could not show Grounds absolutely
ascertaining it; The Sense, I say, of Scripture, could only be questioned since
the Letter was agreed to. Wherefore to allege Tradition for his Proof of what
his Grounds will not allow to it, viz. to bring down the Sense of Scripture or
Faith, and turn it off to the showing Certainty of the Letter, which was out of
Question, is a most palpable prevarication. 3. He quite forgets to show that
any Point of his Faith or all of it, (speaking of the Controverted or
Dogmatical Points as we do) may not be False, notwithstanding his Proof for the
Certainty of its Letter: which if it be, it is not Faith; unless he will say the
Points of his Faith may be so many Untruths. 4. It has been pressed upon him over
and over in First Cath. Letter. p. 22. Third Cath. Letter. p. 66.67.68.69.
my Catholic Letters to show how his Rule influences his Assent of Faith with
Absolute Certainty. It has been inculcated to him how both [ Rule] and [
Ground] are Relative words; and, therefore, that he could not pretend they were
to him Absolutely Certain Grounds for his Faith, unless he showed how they made
him Absolutely Certain of that Faith of his, which was the Correlate. Which
though the most material Point, and most strongly pressed upon him, he takes no
notice of in his whole Reply; and it shall be seen that, when he comes to touch
upon that Point (after his fashion) hereafter, he is forced to confess they are
no Absolutely Certain Ground or Rule to him at all. Lastly, that, when ( Faith
being Truth) the Question was whether he had any such Ground as could conclude
it True that Christ had taught his Faith, and consequently whether he has any
Faith at all; he slips over That, and rambles into a Discourse about more or
less Faith in Scripture, instead of showing he had any. Other shifts he has,
but these are his masterpieces: So that his whole performance, as to the
Conference, amounted to no more, than to take up the Bible in his hand, and cry
aloud [ Look ye, Gentlemen, here is my Ground or Rule of Faith; and your selves
must confess it is Absolutely Certain; and, therefore, you cannot deny but I
have shown you the Ground of Absolute Certainty for my Faith.] But if it should
be replied: Sr, an Arian or Socinian might do the same, and yet no by-stander
be the wiser for it, or more able to discern which of you has Christ's true
Faith, which not; in regard that must be decided by showing who has an
Absolutely Certain Means to know the true Sense of the Letter; the Drs
insignificant Principles carry no farther, but (as we shall see anon) to
confess plainly neither of them have any such Means of Absolute Certainty at
all. And that he cannot manifest what was expected of him and he stood engaged
to manifest.

30. The case then between us being such plain sense, what says the Learned Dr
to it? Why, besides his rare evasions lately mentioned, he tells the Reader
vapouringly his way of reasoning was too hot for Mr. G. which I have shown to
be frigid Nonsense. P. 16.
He complains that our obliging him to prove or show clearly what belonged to
him (for no body held him to Mood and Figure) is like the Trammelling a Horse.
P. 17.
That we insinuate Mr. G. is Non suited, which is far from True. Ibid.
He is peevishly angry at the Metaphor of Playing at Cards, and persecutes it
without Mercy; which is a scurvy sign that, however he pretended to a Purse
full of Gold and Silver, he is a Loser; and that he will be put to borrow some
Citations out of Authors to combat the Council of Trent, hoping to recover by
that means some of the Credit he has lost by the Nonplusage of his Reason. He
pretends he gives us good security: Ibid.
that is, for the Letter of Scripture, which was not the End of the Conference,
nor is our Question; but not the least security for its Sense, or Faith, which
was. P. 18.
He talks of Declamations and the Schools in the Savoy; and glances at my
pretending to Intrinsical Grounds; which is to maintain that Humane Authority
(which is the only thing I was to prove) is to be believed blindly, whether a
man sees any Reason why he ought to believe it, or no. Ibid. p. 18.19
He talks too of the Cardinals in the Inquisition; who, though my Just Judges,
were my very good Friends. He says my Grounds had saved the Martyrs Lives, and
he makes a rare Plea for them out of my Principles: Forgetting, good man, that
we are writing Controversy to satisfy men who are in their way to Faith;
whereas those Blessed Martyrs were not only already Faithful, but moreover
lived up to Christ's Doctrine; and, so, had Inward Experience in their
Consciences of it is Sanctity and Truth. He imagins the Jews who saw our
Savior's Miracles had no Intrinsic Grounds. P. 19.
Whereas True Miracles being evidently above Nature, are known to be such by
comparing them with the Course of Natural Causes, known by a kind of Practical
Evidence or Experience: And must I be forced to render him so Weak as to
instruct his Ignorance that the Knowledge of things in Nature is an Intrinsic
Ground, and not Extrinsical as Testimony is? He sticks close to his Friend
Lominus, right or wrong, in despite of all the Evident and Authentic
Testimonies to the contrary; whom before (for want of others to second him) he
split into Two, and now multiplies into the Lord knows how many. P. 20.
To gratify his Friend Dr. Tillotson, and excuse his, and his own silence, he
says I have retracted the main Principles in Faith Vindicated and Reason
against Raillery; which, in plain terms, is an Inexcusable Falsehood. To
explicate two or three words, and show by Prefaces, States of the Question and
many Signal passages they were Misunderstood and applied to wrong Subjects, (as
I did to the satisfaction of my Judges, and even of prejudic't persons)
signifies plainly not-to retract them: Nor shall he name any one Learned and
Orthodox man of our Church who says my Explication is not Genuin and Sincere;
whereas I have named him many, Eminent in both those Qualities, who have
attested under their hands they are such. He ends with bidding the Reader judge
what I. S. has gotten by the Confession of Parties. Ibid.
As much as in Modesty he could have wished; as appears by the Approbations of
his Books and Success in his Suit. What Dr. St. has got by the Confession of
his Party, may be seen by an Eminent man, not writing in hugger-mugger and
Disguise, but owning his Name, viz. that he Answer to Mr. Lowth. P. 17.
is accused of having Mountebankt and Quackt for full five and twenty years.
And these wretched shifts he has thought fit to use here to avoid the Point,
lets us see he has not left it yet. Nor am I to expect he should easily quit
such an Inveterate Habit, grown into a kind of Nature by a five and twenty
years Custom and Practice.

31. Now comes the State of the Question, P. 21.
as his Second Letter has craftily put it; though I conceive it was best Stated
by showing the Occasion and sole End of the Conference; to which I will hold,
nor will I be beat off from it by any Excursions either then or since. There
was a Question then put to Dr. St. in these words, Whether you are absolutely
Certain that you hold now the same Tenets in Faith, and all that our Savior
taught his Apostles. I thought I did well in putting him to answer directly
that, He was. He says by my favor he used other words. And what were those!
Why, instead of the same Tenets in Faith, and all that our Savior taught to
his Apostles, he answered [ All the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and
his Apostles*] There Is a Cloud in this carriage of his, it being against the
Clear way of honest Nature. Was the Position as it lay in the terms of the
Proposer, true; and, so, to be granted? Why did he not grant it then? Was it
False? why did he not deny it? Was it Ambiguous? why did he not, the Proposer
being present, desire him to explain it? No neither. None of these plain and
common Methods would please him. What then? He would needs change the words of
the Question in his Answer. And by what Rule? Was his Answer the same in Sense
with the Question? If not, his Answer was no Answer to that Question, but the
saying another thing on his own head. If it was the same Sense, why did he not
speak to it directly in the Proposers words? The reason he gives is, because
he is afraid of Orall Tradition lest it should vary the Sense. Whose Sense? P.
21.
The Proposer's? His Sense was fixed in determinate words, and if it were not
known, the Doctor might have known it if he had pleased. He means then his own
Sense. What? must he put what Sense he thinks fit to the Question? This is a
quaint way of Answering. And why should not the Proposer fear, as himself did
here, lest by changing his words, as he did enormously, he should change his
Sense too? But this Orall Tradition like a Spright so haunts his Fancy, that
all along (as shall be seen) he either starts perpetually into Excursions and
counterfeit Mirth, or stumbles into downright Nonsense. And this I believe
verily is the General reason of all his failings: But we are now to seek out
his particular reason of changing the words here. The last words that differ in
the Question and Answer can break no squares, for Christ and his Apostles
agreed well enough; and that Heavenly Master of theirs taught them All Faith
either by Himself or the Holy Ghost sent in his name. The danger then must be
in these words [ the same Tenets in Faith] which he changes, for his security,
into [ the same Doctrine.] Because the word [ Doctrin] signifies all in the lump
(as Second Letter to Mr. G. p. 17.
he expresses it) to show which he hoped it might be sufficient to show the
Book of Scripture; whereas the Plural word [ Tenets] might come to oblige him
to show how he has Absolute Certainty of each or any Point in particular, to
which he has a great Antipathy. And, accordingly, when he came to perform this,
he changed again the Absolute Certainty of Faith into Absolute Certainty of
Scripture. I answered. They held more to be of Faith than that the Book so
called is Scripture. He first trifles that we mean more than is contained in
Scripture, P 21.
contrary to our express words, where there is not a Syllable of containing or
not-containing all Faith. However, if I mean his assent to Points of Faith
contained in Scripture, he promises a full Answer afterward: which we
impatiently long to see. Only we entreat him, because it is a far off, he would
not lose Absolute Certainty by the way; nor fool our expectations when we come
at it, by letting the full Answer promised us, vanish away into a flat denial he
has any such Certainty of those Points at all.

32. I argued ad hominem that, P. 23.
since he confesses Tradition causes Certainty, it makes Faith as Certain as
Scripture: He seems to confess it; but denies we have such an Universal
Tradition for our Tridentin Faith. As if the Faith come down by Tradition were
not the same before and since that Council; or that the Tradition we build on
did not consist of such a vast Body of Attesters as were able to evince the
truth of a plain matter of Fact, unless those who had renounced Tradition did
club to it is Certainty. But is it not pretty to observe that he pretends not to
hold Faith to be Certain by our Tradition because it is not Universal, and yet
at the same time disputes against Tradition's being a Certain Deriver of
Christ's Faith even though it were Universal! For, his Principles allow no more
hand in our Faith to Universal Tradition, but only to bring down the Book of
Scripture, and then make that Book the only Ascertainer of our Faith. He
threatens to show the Tridentin Council had not Universal Tradition for it is
Decrees; and to give us a taste beforehand of that Treatise, he adds, Let the
matter of Tradition it self, as a Rule of Faith, be one of those Points. Well
shot Doctor! The Points he speaks of here are expressed to be Points of Faith;
and the Tradition we defend in our Controversy at present is the Human
Authority of the Church, which we make to be the Rule to those coming to Faith;
and so it is Antecedent to Faith and the Object of pure Natural Reason: And
does he in his Great Learning think This is a Point of Faith? Or is it not
possible to keep this roving Pen of his to any thing? But he designs to prove
this mighty Advantage of his Cause, and that no Catholic Tradition can be
produced against his Church in any one Point of the Additional Creed of Pius
IV. Suppose it could not; has he therefore proved he has Absolute Certainty of
the Faith he holds, in case we could not prove some other Points which we hold?
Yet he has undertaken at all adventures this Great Design, and will suddenly
publish the First Part; and, if God gives him Life and Health (he should have
said, Principles too) he hopes to go thorough the rest. As much as to say, he
designs to leave the Certainty of his Faith in the lurch, to tell the World
publicly he has done so; and, if God gives him Life and Health, will continue
to run away from that troublesome Point as far as ever he can. He should first
have answered Error Nonplust, and cleared himself from being a Man of no
Principles, before he can be fit to impugn others; unless he thinks a man may
dispute without Principles; as I verily believe he does; for his odd Methods of
Reasoning and Answering need none.

P. 24.
33. But though he has the ill luck to want Principles, he is, for all that, a
good man; and desires no more to end our Controversies but to make Salvation
our End, and the Scripture our Rule. But, if there be no Means to come at the
Sense of Scripture in those most important Articles with Absolute Certainty,
many may come (as Millions have done) to Misunderstand such places, and thence
to embrace a Grand Heresy instead of the Chief Points of True Faith; and does
he think Heretical Tenets in such concerning Points, is saving Faith. Let him
show that his Principles lay such Grounds as absolutely secure the Truth of
Faith, e're he talks such Pious (or rather Pernicious) Nonsense of a Saving
Faith. For, should it hap to be False (as by his Grounds it may) it is neither
Faith, nor the means to Salvation. He pretends I exclude all from Salvation,
who do not penetrate Intrinsical Grounds: But, it is a flam of his own coining.
Error Nonplust has long ago told him over and over, P. 143.144.
that it is enough they adhere to a Rule that is settled on Solid or Intrinsical
Grounds, and so cannot deceive them, though they do not at all penetrate, or (as
he calls it) dig into the Intrinsical Grounds, why that Authority or Rule is
Inerrable. Let the Truth of Faith be secured, and they have what is simply
requisite to Salvation; unless they be such persons as speculate or doubt, or
are to defend the Truth of Faith against Heretics, and thence come to need a
deeper Inspection and Knowledge of the Reasons which conclude their Rule does
absolutely secure the Reliers on it from Error. Caeteram quippe turbam (as St.
Austin says Contra Ep. Fund.) non intelligendi vivacitas sed credendi
simplicitas, tutissimam facit. For as for the others which are the vulgar, they
are rendered absolutely secure, or out of danger of Erring, not by the Sagacity
of Understanding* but by the simplicity of Believing.

34. I know not certainly what past at the Conference, about which he still
keeps such a do. P. 25.
It Is high time to leave it off and follow our Point. Things should have been
better managed to give us a clearer light; for want of which we are forced to
trust the Dr himself, though a party, and accept what he represents in his Second
Letter to Mr G. Only I see it was confessed on all hands that the sole End of it
was that Dr. St. should manifest he had Grounds of Absolute Certainty for his
Faith; and to that I will stick, and Level my Discourses accordingly. The Dr is
at his old shuffle again, of Scripture's Letter being certain and containing
all; neither of which are to any purpose, since neither of these reach his
Faith, which is an Assent to determinate Points. I alleged that the Certainty
of Scripture was not the Point for which the Conference was. He asks how I know
it? By the very words that express it, put down here and acknowledged by
himself p. 15. But Mr G. knew it not. That Is more than I know, or the Dr.
either. It appears not what use he would have made of it after he had proposed
some Questions to gain light what the Drs. Principles were; for the Dr. himself
confesses Mr T. cut off his Discourse by declaring himself satisfied, P. 22.
and asking Questions of his own. But Mr. G. lost the Point by asking Questions
about the Rule. Not so neither. For he was well acquainted with Common Sense,
which told him the word [ Rule] is a Relative word; and, so, is to regulate us
about the particular Points of Faith, which it relates to; and that, unless it
does this, it is good for nothing, being merely ordained for that End: which Dr.
St. either knows not, or will not seem to know, lest he should come to be
engaged to show how his pretended Rule influences any one Point with Absolute
Certainty; and yet, if it does not this, it is no Ground for the Absolute
Certainty of his Tenets or Faith. P. 26.
He says that by the Scripture they are to judge what they are to believe, what
not. By which we are to understand that he has shuffled away from showing his
Rule to be a Qualifying Principle, which is to give his Faith Absolute
Certainty, to the making it a Quantitative Measure showing what is Faith what
not, or how much is of Faith. It seems Quantity and Quality is all one with
him: and he would be Measuring his Faith, before he knows he has Any. As for
his Containing Faith so often shown to be an insignificant pretense, let him
know that between his having the Letter of Scripture Containing all, and the
Doctrinal Points, (which is truly his Faith) there intervenes a Quality in the
Rule called Clearness, or Plainness; and such a one as is able to secure the
Reliers on it that what they receive upon that Rule is not an Error, or a
Heresy, which is against Faith. It Is this he is to make out* and prove that
this Clearness is found in his Rule applied to all sincere seekers after Faith;
and, till he does this, it is a phrenzy to maintain those men can have Absolute
Certainty of Faith by means of Scripture's Letter. Yet hold him close to this
plain Point, and he will complain he is trammell'd, he should say, gravelled. But
he says, he must not come near any one Point of his Faith, because being to
show he held All the same Doctrine, etc. the word [All] made it necessary to
assign a Rule in which All is contained. Now I verily thought that All
signified Every one, but his Discourse makes it signify No one: Again, how
shall we know he holds the Same Doctrine, as he in his Answer pretended he did,
without particularizing the Points held? By this Discourse the Arians and most
of the Heretics since Christ's time held the Same Doctrine he taught; for they
all held the Scripture's Letter to be Certain, and that it contained their
Faith; yet tell him this a hundred times over, and demand how this is a
particular Rule for his Protestants, which is a Common one to all Heretics, he
is still deaf on that ear. Lastly, since Faith is Truth, instead of a Rule
containing All, he should have assigned a Rule ascertaining it All to be True,
and that none of the Tenets he holds to be in Scripture are Heretical. But he
thanks you he will not burn his fingers with handling such hot Points. He
alleges that the Mosaicall and Mohammedan Laws are resolved into the Book of
Moses and the Alcoran. P. 26.
But apply this to our Point it is as wide from the purpose as what is most. Had
there been such High and most Important Mysteries contained in those Laws as
there are in the Christian Doctrine, delivered down and professed openly by those
Bodies from which multitudes had taken the Liberty to recede by reason of the
Obscurity of the Letter of those very Laws; in that case, there ought to have
been some other Rule to secure them from mistaking that Letter, and able to
give them its true Sense; and, therefore the Certainty of that Sense being
their respective Faiths, would necessarily have been resolved into such a Rule,
in regard the Letter alone could not give and ascertain it. And it is to be
remark't, that all Dr St's Instances, Parallells and Similitudes which show
prettily and look fine and glossy, when they come to be applied to the true
Point, do still miss of being suitable in those very particulars which are only
to the purpose.

35. And now we are come to the long expected performance of showing his Faith
Absolutely Certain, P. 27.
to which he promised a full Answer formerly. He begins with telling us that
The case is not the same as to Particular Points of Faith with that of the
General Grounds of the Certainty of Faith. And what is this to say, but that
since the General Grounds are held by him to be Absolutely Certain and so
cannot be False, the Particular Points of Faith, (viz. the Trinity, Christ's
Godhead, etc.) are not in the same but a worse case and so may be False. A
fair, or rather a very foul Concession! Yet he not only says it, but will prove
it too from a Jew's having Absolute Certainty of all contained in the Books of
Moses, and yet not having it as to such a particular point, viz. the
Resurrection. I would gladly know if that point be contained in those Books?
And, if it be, how he can be absolutely Certain of All, (that is of every
Point,) contained there, and yet not be thus certain of That Point though
contained there. I ever thought that Omnis and Aliquis non had been
Contradictories; and had all the Logicians in the world on my side in thinking
so: and if the Dr. have not invented a new Scheme of Logic of his own, fitted
purposely to maintain Nonsense, and can with his great Authority make that
Logic good in despite of the whole World, he speaks Flat downright
Contradiction. Perhaps he may mean his Jew (or some other man who is not a
Jew,) may have Absolute Certainty that those Books containing all his Faith
were writ by men divinely inspired. And this he may have by the Testimony for
these Books, though he can neither read, nor understand, nor ever heard read any
one word in them: And has not this Man an incomparable Certainty of his Faith,
that knows no Faith at all? Is not this to make a man Absolutely Certain of he
knows not what? Yet, this it seems is all the Resolution of Dr. St's Faith. But
this is not the worst; for not-knowing the Contents of a Book, is a kind of
Innocence in comparison of holding many wicked Heresies by Misunderstanding it.
Which though he should do, (as do it he may, for the Drs. Principles give him no
security from doing it) his very Heresies, though they be all the whole rabble of
them that have pestered the Church since Christ's time are resolved into the
Self-same Grounds, as the Drs Faith is: For, all those Heretics believed the
Scripture to be the Word of God, and believed all that the Scripture contained
to be of Faith; whence they had all Faith in the lump, (as he expresses it) and
so had good Title to be parts of Dr St's motley all Comprehending Church. If he
denies it, let him show a soll^^ reason by his Principles why they should not;
no shadow of which I could ever discern in him yet.

36. He slides from this point, which he had no mind to come near could he have
avoided it, P. 27.
to diverse sorts of particular Points; merely that he might have a show of
saying something. For he knows well, and it has been told him above twenty
times, we only speak of such Dogmatical Tenets as have been controverted
between the Church and her Deserters: and, not to name All, we use to instance
in two Chief ones, The Holy Trinity and the Divinity of our Savior. But, here
our rambling disputant is taking another vagary quite out of the road of the
Question. Lominus has set him so agog that he has quite forgot the thing we are
about, nay even that we are writing Controversy. He is turned School-Divine on
a sudden, though he is so utterly Ignorant of it, that he cannot distinguish
between Controversy and It. He will needs fall to treat of Faith as it is a
Theological Virtue; and not only so, but moreover (that he may show us how
manifoldly he can mistake in one Single Point) of that Virtue as it is in the
hearts of those who are truly Faithful already, and have besides, well
cultivated their Souls by the Practice of Christ's Law. Whenas all this while
he knows we in our Controversy are only treating of Faith as it is provable to
those who are looking after Faith, that it is Christ's Doctrine taught at first.
Tell him of this five hundred times and make it out never so clearly, he runs
counter still and takes no notice of it. He was to write a Book, and without
mistaking wilfully all along, he saw he could not do it in any degree
plausibly. After many fruitless attempts to hold him to the true State of our
Controversy, which is about the Rule or Ground of Faith as to our knowledge, it
occurred to me that nothing could fetter him to it more fast, than to mind him
how his Friend Dr. Tillotson, whose Book he approves does himself State it. * [
When w^ enquire (says he) What is the Rule of Christian Faith? Rule of Faith.
p. 6.
the meaning of that Enquiry is, By what Way and Means the Knowledge of
Christ's Doctrine is conveyed certainly down to us; who live at the distance of
so many Ages from the time of it is first Delivery. I entreat him then for Dr.
T's sake, to remember that our Controversy presupposes Faith as it is Divine,
and treats of it only as it is Derivable down to us at this distance; and,
therefore, since the Knowledge of the Certain Means to do this, is, in our
Controversy, antecedent to the Knowledge of Christ's Doctrine or Faith, it must
be managed by Maxims of pure Reason.

37. This Point then settled, P. 28.
let us trace our Prevaricatour in his wanderings. He tells us very gravely God
is not wanting by his Grace to make (necessary) Points known to men of honest
and sincere Minds. What we demand of him is some Natural Medium or Argument
within our ken, concluding that what is held by him now is Christ's Doctrine. He
confesses he has none (for he mocks at Conclusive Evidence) but pretends God's
Grace will do it for him. We tell him that, without such Conclusive Reasons to
prove our present Faith to have been taught by Christ, we cannot maintain or
make out that our Faith is True. And he tells us God is not wanting by his
Grace to make necessary Points known to Men of honest and sincere minds. And
what man living has the Courage to assault an Adversary that comes Armed with
such a Supernatural Logic! Now all this, were it levelled right, as it is not,
is mere Petitio Principii; and, begging the Question; for it supposes
Scripture's Letter Interpretable by Private Judgments is the Rule, which he was
here to prove, and to show us how it preserves those who rely on it from
Error. For, otherwise, if it be not the Rule, did God ever promise his Grace
to those who leave a Clear and Conclusive way to follow an Obscure and
Inconclusive one? Did God's Grace ever make a Conclusion follow which did not
follow, or make the Terms cohere which were Incoherent? Or keep those from
Error who took a Way, that, for any thing he has proved to the contrary,
facilitated men to fall into it? Certainly, never was God's Grace so abused to
a wrong end, or called in at a dead lift like some Deus ^ machind to save his
Credit for bringing never an Argument that is worth a Rush. Yet, it is pleasant
to see what a clutter he keeps about the Donum Intellectus and Lumen Fidei, P.
28.
both which presuppose Faith and the Way to it, whereas all his work was to
prove the Certainty of this Later. In this lamentable condition he has left his
Rule, recurring to Invisible Gifts (the true blew Fanatic Method) instead of
producing open Arguments to prove it has any power to regulate men in their way
to Faith. Proceeding upon this gross and wilful shuffle he makes a fine
flourish of our School-Divines who have not one single word of the way and
Means by which the knowledge of Christ's Doctrine is conveyed down to us, which
is our present Point, as his Friend Rule of Faith. p. 6.
Dr. T. has told him: And then he concludes like a Triumphant Hero that I am a
Stranger to the Doctrine of our own Church, or an obstinate Opposer of it. Alas
for him! He obstinately opposes, while he cites them, the known State of the
Question; and is such a Stranger to School Divinity that he cannot distinguish
betwixt That and Controversy; and when he is taken tardy thus miserably, he
thinks to salve all with Swaggering and Vapouring.

38. At length he sums up his Performances with impertinent distinctions of all
the things he is Certain of. P. 33.
As, 1. That he is Absolutely Certain that whatever God reveals is True. Who
denies it; or what is the Certainty of God's revealing to the Certainty of his
believing right, unless he be absolutely Certain that the particular Points he
holds, were indeed revealed by God, or (to speak more pertinently to our
purpose) were taught by Christ and his Apostles? 2. He is Absolutely Certain of
his Rule, and it is containing all necessary Points. And what is he the better
for Certainty of This, if still he remains uncertain of all the particular
Articles he is to believe by it? 3. That God's Grace is requisite to Faith
formally Divine; which is granted: but what is this to the proving it by a
Natural Medium to have come from Christ, as he must do to those who are in the
Way to Faith? Conclusive Evidence must be produced for this, or the Proof must
fall short of concluding (whether we have Grace or no) and so leave it Unprov'd
and Uncertain. 4. He says, Particular Points of Faith are more or less Certain,
according to the Evidence of their Deduction from Scripture as the Rule of
Faith. This only seems to touch the Point in hand, and it touches it very
gingerly. Let him speak out and tell us whether he is Absolutely Certain of all
particulars of his Faith, nay even of a Trinity and Christ's Godhead by his
Rule; or whether any man living is absolutely Certain of them by his
Principles? If not, then all Faith may be a Lying Story for any thing he or any
man else can tell. And that this is his true Tenet is evident by his omitting
P. 33. l. 12. and 16.
here when he comes to speak of Particular Points, the words [ Absolutely
Certain] which he put to the two first parts of his Division. Nor do I like his
expression of [ more or less Certain] for since any Quality is more or less
such, by having less or more of the Opposite Quality mixed with it, it follows
that this his [ more or less Certain] must mean [ less or more Uncertain]
strange Language for a Christian to use when he is speaking of All the
Particular Articles of his Faith, and what Certainty is to be allowed for them!
And yet he calls this, the setting this Controversy about the Certainty of
Faith in it is true light. Ibid.
A pleasanter Jest than which was never spoke, were not the thing in it self so
pernicious.

SECT III. How Dr. St. Answers Our Reasons produced against his Grounds of
Certainty for his Faith.
39. HE proceeds next to answer my short Discourse demonstrating that He, and
those of His Principles, could not be Sure they had right Faith. I presumed he
could not do it; he says he has; Let Us see which of us is disappointed. It
consists of five plain Propositions. 1. God has left us some Way to know surely
what Christ and his Apostles taught. 2. Therefore this Way must be such that
they who take it, shall arrive by it at the End it was intended for; that is
know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught. 3. Scripture's Letter
Interpretable by Private Judgments, is not that Way; for we experience
Presbyterians and Socinians (for example) both take that Way, yet differ in
such high Fundamentals, as the Trinity and Godhead of Christ. 4. Therefore
Scripture's Letter Interpretable by Private Judgments, is not the Way left by
God to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught, or surely to arrive at
right Faith. 5. Therefore they who take only That Way, cannot by it arrive
surely at right Faith; since it is impossible to arrive at the End, without the
Means or Way that leads to it. The Reader may know that this very Discourse, in
substance, was proposed to him many years ago by a Worthy Lady, of whose
sincerity I believe himself does not doubt. He made a rambling Discourse of his
own against it, unappliable to any Proposition in it. The Lady, having a high
opinion of Dr. St's parts, judged it impossible a man of his Learning should
not be able to give an Answer to a few Lines in so long a time; not reflecting
how connected Truth hampers an Adversary, and is perfectly Unanswerable: So she
pressed vehemently for a Second and a Distinct Answer. After some tedious
expectation he sends another, more insignificant, if possible, than the former.
Which seen, and the Lady now satisfied that he (upon whom she most relied) had
done his utmost, she altered her Judgment; upon no other inducement than the
seeing plainly that his Principles resolved all Certainty of Faith finally into
the Private Spirit: The Drs Reflecter was set on, like an unexperienc't Perdu
Soldier, to combat it with a distinct Answer: but alas! P. 16.17. etc.
he was shown to falter or falsify in every particular. This ill success, made
the Dr. grow wary in speaking to any particular part of it; but thought it
safest here to stand aloof, and throw stones at distance, instead of grappling
with it nearer hand. His answer is, that it proceeds upon two False
Suppositions, and Overthrows the Possibility of any Rule of Faith. My first
False Supposition is, P. 34.
that there is no Certainty without Infallibility. No True or Absolute
Certainty, good Dr. For, as for your Moral Certainty it may be Fallible
enough. I must confess I hate such nonsense as to say [ I am perfectly Certain
of a thing yet peradventure I am deciev'd.] The word [ Absolute] signifies
Perfect; and Certainty, if True, is taken from the Natures of the Objects or
Things without us; and if they stand perfectly engaged by a True Knowledge of
them, they would not be what they are, if when we truly conceive them as they
are, our Conception or Judgment of them can be False, that is, if it be not, in
that particular, Infallible. This is plain Sense, and told him long ago. It has
been demonstrated also in P. 36.37.
Faith Vindicated that True Certainty and Infallibility were all one. What
answers he? Why, he makes as if he had never known or heard of our Arguments
for it; but falls to talk of the P. 35. P. 36.
Stoics Mark, Epicurus his fooleries: He learnedly mistakes the Definition, [
Man is a Rational Creature] for a Demonstration, and dislikes it at the same
time. Lastly, he tells us many other things the Ancients held or said; which
are nothing to me, who judge I know what belongs to Certainty and resolving of
Truths into their Principles, as well as they did; and do think them very weak
to stand disputing with the perfect Scepticks or convincing them by Criterions;
because all Discourse supposes something Certain to build upon, otherwise it
might go on endlessly; that is, would be to no End; and the Scepticks admitted
no Certainty of any thing at all.

40. His Application of those Preparatives is, that we are to expect no
Absolute Certainty in proving the present Faith to be Christ's Doctrine. And so
he hopes to save his own Credit for producing none, let the Credit of Christian
Faith, and the repute of its being an Absolutely Certain Truth go where it will
for him. However, to avoid the shame justly due to such a Position, he must
cast in some good words to fool his Readers; and, so, he grants that they who
use due Care and diligence may attain to a true Certainty and satisfaction of
Mind as to the sense of Scripture. But he never attempts to show that possibly
they may not do so, P. 36.
but may hap to fall into damnable Heresies as the Socinians do; who, for ought
he or I know, used as much Care and Diligence, as he and his Party use. Again,
what means Satisfaction of Mind? Is Faith ever a jot more Certain or True
because some may be Satisfied it is? Are not the Socinians as well satisfied in
mind that Christ is not God, as the Dr. is that he is God? Moreover; if the
Argument he brings to prove his Faith to be Christ's true Doctrine, does not
conclude, it is a thousand to one that Acute and Intelligent men will find the
flaw in it: And what can those men do in that case, so they be true to their
Reason, the only Light they can yet guide themselves by? Must they Assent that
his Faith came from Christ, when they see that, notwithstanding all the Proof
he brings for it, it may not be Christ's, and hazard to Embrace that Doctrine
for his Faith which may, for any thing they know, have the Father of Lies for
its Author? They must Suspend then in that case, and justify themselves by
alleging that the best Arguments, the most Learned Christians bring to prove
it, conclude nothing; Nay it is to be feared they will disgrace the Faithful as
a company of Fops, for believing upon weak Grounds; and, by showing them such,
lay a just Scandal upon the Christian Church for pretending to hold what
Christ taught, when as yet none in it are able to prove it was his Doctrine. And
how would they laugh Christians out of Countenance, if, proceeding on Dr St's
short Grounds, they should only show them a Well-Attested Book containing those
Doctrines, without ascertaining absolutely the true Sense of it, when as only
that Sense was the Doctrine of Faith; and, which is worse, when they saw
multitudes of numerous Sects at perpetual and irreconcilable variance about
that Sense! The true Rule of Faith then must be such as sets Faith above any
Peradventure of not being Christ's true Doctrine, and so, secure all who rely on
it, how weak soever, from being deceived or in an Error; and, withal, it must
be such as Intelligent men, seeking for assurance of Christ's Faith, may be
satisfied it is able to conclude it to be such, and the more Learned Faithful
Evince to Doubters and Convince Opposers, that the Faith held now by themselves
and the Church is the Self-same that Christ and his Apostles taught at First.
But Dr St. dares not affirm any of this of his Rule of Faith; therefore his
pretended Rule is none. His Instance of True Certainty attainable without
Infallibility in that point of Faith, viz. P. 36.
That Jesus was the True Messiah, Fourth Cath. Letter. p. 25.26.
is partly answered in my Fourth Catholic Letter; and his alleging it has
one strange inadvertence in it, which I wonder he was not aware of, which is,
that the Proof of it depended on the Interpretation of Scripture. He had it
seems forgot that to manifest himself to be the true Messiah, foretold by the
Prophets, was the main Point of our Saviors Doctrine; and that he did Miracles
to attest that Doctrine, and make himself known to be that Person; which
Miracles were Infallible Marks that that Doctrine of his in that point was
True. And, when the Dr. produces Miracles to abet his Private Interpretations
of Scripture, then he may have a fair pretense to lay aside the Public
Interpretation of the Church. Again, he is quite out as to the Subject of his
discourse: For though it was a Point of Faith in the Jewish Law that a Messiah
was to come; yet that this very Person, Jesus Christ, was to be that Messiah,
was no Point of Faith among them; and God's Providence, we see, took a far
better way to make it out than Private Interpretations of the Scripture; unless
he thinks Miracles, no more Effectual nor more Certain than private
Interpretations are. What insignificant nothings this Man brings for his choice
Arguments, and what pains he takes in the worst cause in the world, viz. To
maintain that Christian Faith needs not to be Absolutely Certain? And this, for
no other reason (for it is every Christian's Interest it should be so) but
because his bad Principles can afford him no Argument to prove it to be such.

41. His Pretense of my Second False Supposition, (viz. that a Rule of Faith,
P. 37.
according to me must be a Mechanical Rule, and not a Rational) is weak beyond
expression. Every Scholar knows (his Friend Dr. T. particularly who took the
same way and used the same expressions, Rule of Faith. p. 4.) that Metaphors
are translated from Material to Intellectual things, in regard we have no
Genuin Conceptions of these Later; (and indeed, most of the Language of
Christianity is made up of such expressions,) whence we can argue, by Analogy,
from the one to the other. The word [ Rule] is one of those Metaphorical
words: and, hence we say that, as a Material Rule is that by which if we draw
our Pen, it directs us to make a Right Line; so, the Rule of Faith, being
intended by God to direct us to Truth, will lead those Right who follow it and
regulate themselves by it. Does not this Metaphor look a little more Proper,
and the Discourse upon it hang better together than his likening Scripture to a
Purse? yet he utterly dislikes it, and tells the Reader I falsely suppose the
Rule of Faith must be a Mechanical or Carpenters Rule with all its Dimensions
fixed; P. 37.
and denies that himself supposes it to be such a Material or Mechanical
Rule: Nor any man sure that were not stark Mad. P. 38.
Again, do we here meddle with its Dimensions or how much is of Faith, as he
did when he spoke of his Rule? The Straightness of the draught, preserving us
from the Obliquity of Error, is the only point we aim at. Next, he denies
there is any such Intellectual Rule, P. 38.
because there may be Mistakes in the Understanding and Applying it, and
therefore Care and Diligence and Impartiality are required, else men may miss.
How? Miss though they follow it? Then it self was not Straight; and, so, no Rule:
For the very notion of a Rule is to be a Thing that has a Power to regulate or
direct us right, or keep the Understanding that follows it from missing; and to
follow it is all the Application it can need to do its Effect. Whence, all the
Care and Diligence and Impartiality he speaks of, must be employed in seeing
they do indeed follow it: for none of these can help or hinder the Rule in its
Power of directing; since it had this of it Self, independently of the Persons.
But his Rule, though all these (as far as we Mortals can discern) be used by the
Socinians in the following it, still suffers those Careful, and Diligent and
Impartial followers of it to err in Faith; Therefore it is no Rule of Faith.
But it is mighty pretty to observe that when he is pincht with plain Sense he
ever and anon runs to the old Philosophers; P. 37.
who he says, would have laughed at me for applying a Material Rule to
Intellectual things. Sure he is not well awake. I draw a Metaphor indeed from a
Material Rule to an Intellectual one, and then apply that Intellectual Rule
to Intellectual things; but I know none so mad as to apply a Material Rule to
Intellectual things; unless he thinks I am measuring Faith by a Tailors Yard,
or finding out the right Sense of Scripture by a Ruler and a Ruling pen.

P. 38.
42. But, why Presbyterians and Socinians? This insinuation (says he) has as
much folly as Malice in it, and makes as though We of the Church of England were
Socinians in those points, viz. The Trinity and Godhead of Christ. God forbid I
should be so injurious to them. I do assure him and them faithfully I intended
it as a piece of Justice to them; and put in Presbyterians instead of
Protestants because I had reason to hope those private-spirited Principles were
none of theirs, and that diverse of their Eminent Writers had owned the
Universal Tradition and Practice of the Church for their Rule of interpreting
Scripture: And I have some Ground to think they might in time have professed it
publicly, had not Dr. St's Irenicum-Doctrines Answer to a Letter against Mr.
Lowth. p. 6.
filled that Church with men of no steady Principles -- and made luke warm
Persons flock into it corrupting it is Body, -- by which means there have been
in the Church of England so few Church-of-England Men. But, why so Choleric?
Why such wincing and kicking? I do assure him I did not think I had in the
least touched him. If he be so over-apprehensive and angry withal, I fear he has
done himself more wrong in taking it to himself than I ever intended him.
Again, what means he by [ We of the Church of England?] I am told by a hearty
Member of it, and one who owns his Name too, (how true it is let the Dr's
Conscience look to it) that Answer to Mr. Lowth's Letter to Dr. St. p. 13.
he is contented to sit and sing in the bearing Branches of that Church, so
long as he fills his Pockets; but, when the gathering time is over, it is to be
cut down as that which cumbereth the Ground. By which he sees that he must
either clear himself by a candid and full Retractation of his ill Principles,
or he will have no Title to the word [ We.] But we are come forwards to his
farther Defense of his Rule, P. 39.
or rather to his overthrowing the Absolute Certainty of Christian Faith; in
order to which he asks, How can Reason be Certain in any thing, if men
following their Reason can mistake? Very easily. Because Reason is a Faculty or
a Power, apt to be actuated by True or False Principles; and, accordingly, it is
Determinable to Truth or Falsehood. But, if Reason follow any Maxim, taking it
to be a Principle to such a thing, and yet errs in that thing, then that
pretended Principle is no true Principle. Yet, says he, Ibid.
Men following the Rules of Arithmetic may mistake in casting up a Sum. And
can he seriously think that a man who casts it up False, does not decline,
while he thus mistakes, from Arithmetical Rules? May he not with as good Sense
say that Two and Three do not make Five? for all Rules of Computation hang
together by the same necessity. In a word, his Instance falters in the Third
Proposition, viz. That Two who have made use of the same way differ at least a
hundred in casting up the Sum. Which is False; and by altering the Terms
irregularly, he hinders any Conclusion from following. False, because, no two
men can differ in a Sum, unless they wrong or abuse the Rules of Computation.
Irregular; because, instead of the words [ who take that Way] found in his
Second Proposition and in our Discourse, he coggs in the words [ make use of
that way] which are not so express in sense as the word [ Take] is, which
imports following whither it leads, or making a right use of it. And it would
have been too palpably absurd to say a man takes a way who leaves it; as an
Ill-reckoner must needs leave the true Rules of Arithmetic. But those who both
Take and Follow all along the Letter of Scripture interpreted by their private
selves, and this to their power, and are skillful in Languages and in comparing
places, do yet go wrong* therefore his Way is no Way, and his Rule is no Rule.
Then follows the Triumph over my Inconsiderateness in not distinguishing
between the Rule and its Application; and I tell him the taking it, following
it, or holding to it, is the Applying it, and all the Application it can need.
Nor shall all his starting holes and tricks ever be able to evade the force of
this Argument.

P. 40.
43. His Discourse of Moral Qualifications requisite to the Certainty of Faith,
as to know the Sense of the New Testament, if applied to our present Question,
amounts to this; that no man can see the force of a Natural Medium leading to
Faith, without Humility of Mind, Purity of Heart, Prayer to God, sincere
Endeavors to do God's Will, etc. So that for want of a good Argument, he has
left off Disputing, and falls to Preaching, though he has had but ill Success in
his Guildhall Sermon. It Is granted all these are excellent means to purge the
Will from By-affections; and, by doing so, to leave the Understanding free to
see the force of the Proof, and thence infer the Truth of what is proved or
shown to our Reason. But where is this Proof, where is this Truth all the while?
Must we produce such invisible things for open Proofs? If all these Moral
Qualifications be requisite (as he says) to make men Certain of Christ's
Doctrine, he must prove that Himself and all his Sober Enquirers, which are the
Members of his private-Spirited Church, have all these Qualifications, e're we
or any man living can be certain they have true Faith. Again, how will he
satisfy Doubters, and convince acute Opposers and Adversaries what is the true
Doctrine of Christ? Will the alleging Invisible Qualifications do the work?
Moreover, he is Certain of his Faith by his Rule; and yet his Rule of Scripture
ascertains none by his Doctrine but by virtue of these Moral Qualifications.
These then are either his Rule or the best part of it. At least he maintains
here they are requisite, and that otherwise Scripture is no Rule. He must then
prove He has these Qualifications, or he cannot show he has any Rule, or any
Faith. In a word, we are disputing as Controvertists, and demand open and
intelligible Proofs; and he sends us to Invisible holes, which only God the
searcher of Hearts can find out; and is not this mighty Learned? I wonder how
he can pretend to Convert any man to Christ's true Doctrine by these Principles.
All he can do is to allege and compare Texts to prove it certainly Christ's
Doctrine; I but, Sir, says the other, how shall I be satisfied you have Humility
of Mind, Purity of Heart, etc. without which your self confess you cannot be
certain of the true Sense of Scripture at all? What Art the Doctor has to
satisfy him in this hard Point I know not. But setting the Doctor's Faith
aside, what Provision has he made for the standing Visible Body of the Church
to defend and maintain she has Christ's true Faith? None in the world by his
Principles, unless she can prove she has all these Moral Qualifications. So
that all is left to each private man's breast; and, if he has but this good
Conceit of himself, that he is endowed with all those excellent Virtues, and
fancies that he prays better than all his Neighbors, let them be Socinians,
Quakers or what you will, he is certain of his Faith merely by virtue of this
Self-conceit that he is such a Saint; since by Dr. St's Principles without firm
assurance that he is thus requisitly qualified, he can never have any assurance
at all of his Faith. Might he not as well have told us in one word, that
Himself and all his Friends are pure Saints, and know themselves to be so, and
therefore they are Certain they have these rare Qualifications, and by them
Assurance of the Sense of Scripture, or Christ's Doctrine; but that all who do
not think as they do, want those Qualifications, are of the Wicked and Children
of Darkness, and so can never have any Light to know whether they have Christ's
true Doctrine or not? This then is the rare Resolution of Dr. St's Faith. I
expected he should produce clear Arguments as became a Controvertist, and he
alleges the most hidden Means in the world as becomes an Enthusiast.

P. 14.
44. Yet the force of Truth is so great that it obliges him to confess that The
Right Way will certainly bring men to their Iourneys End if they continue in
it. I subsume; But the Letter of Scripture Interpretable by Private Judgments
does not bring the Socinians to their End, that is, to know surely what Christ
and his Apostles taught, though they continue in it; whence I conclude that
Scripture's Letter Interpretable by Private Judgments is not the Right Way to
know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught. To escape this most evident
Conclusion which utterly overthrows his whole Cause, he starts aside with one [
If] to the remote End [ Salvation] whereas the End I spoke of in my Discourse
which he is now answering, was expressly, to know assuredly Christ's Doctrine:
Then after a second [ If] he tells us Scripture was not designed as an
Infallible Way to know the Truth on Falsehood of particular Opinions by. Ibid.
l. 20.21.
What have we to do with Opinions? We speak of Points of Faith, and instanc't
expressly in the Blessed Trinity and the Godhead of Christ. Are these with him
but Opinions? Indeed, I have reason to doubt that all Points of Faith are but
Opinions with him, nay he ought to doubt they are or may be worse than
Opinions, viz. Heretical Falsehoods, unless he thinks himself absolutely Certain
of his Moral Qualifications; for it is those, it seems, must do the deed, when
all Arguments fail. As for Infallibility, there was no such word in my
Discourse, and he ought to answer my Argument in the words I put it; and not to
start into such Evasions and Logomachies. Though the allowing of Natural
Infallibility has been proved against him by Reason and Authority of those even
of his own Church, he never answers it, but barely says over again, there is no
such thing as Infallibility in Mankind but by Immediate Divine Assistance. Yet
he had the boldness or Forgetfulness to say, p. 5. that If this be not
Catholic Doctrine, then I am Infallibly Certain I. S's Letters are far from
being Catholic in their Sense. It seems than either some men are Infallible,
for seriously I take Dr St. to be a Man; or he fancies himself to be something
above the Herd of Mankind; or else sticks not at the Blasphemy to entitle the
Blessed Spirit of Peace to have inspired him with such a quarrelsome Falsehood.

45. He discourses against Tradition as it is Practical; but has he said any
thing against it as it is Oral? P. 42.
the force of which to clear Christ's Sense delivered down in the Church
consists in Catechizing, Preaching, dilating upon the Points, and explicating
themselves at large; replying to difficulties, and accommodating their
Discourse to all the Learners Exigences; All which is found in the Living Voice
of the Church and her Pastors, (as Third Cath. Letter, p. 6.7.8.
I showed him at large) and none of it, in the Letter in a Book. What answers
he to common Sense and to his own Experience too when he instructs others? why
he puts us off still with this frigid Cuckoo Answer, that he is of another
Opinion, that writing is as plain as speaking; and that words written have as
much (he ought to have said as Clear) Sense in them as words spoken. Which,
applied to our case is most palpable Nonsense, and makes all Explications
frivolous, and all Catechizers and Commentators upon Scripture ridiculous. The
force I put in the Practicalness of Tradition is, that, supervening to the Oral
delivery, or being consonant to it, it confirms it, and makes it more Visible.
But he Combats the Practicalness of it considered alone; and so impugns his own
wilful Mistake. But what says he to my discourse? He alleged that Tradition
might come down in Common Equivocal Words, and so deliver no determinate Sense.
I Third Cath. Letter. from p. 6* to p. 12.
replied that it is inconsistent with the Nature of Mankind to mean nothing by
the words they use, especially in Tenets they were to be saved by; therefore
the Body of the Church had some Meaning or other of those Words, [ Christ is
the Son of God,] and [ Christ's Body is really in the Sacrament:] But this
Meaning or Notion could not be a Common or General one, in regard, no Notion
can be common to God and a Creature, to the Substance of Christ's Body, and to
the Substance of Bread, much less to that Sacred Substance, and some Accidents
or Qualities: Therefore there could not come down any such Common Notion, by
means of those Words; wherefore, there must have descended some particular
Notion of each Point, determining the signification of the Words to one sense
or the other. This was the true force of my Discourse. I do still pretend it
Demonstrable, and let him answer it when he can; for, did he know the
Consequences it will draw after it, he would think it worth his while. He Is at
his old Logic again, which is to bring an Instance against the Conclusion, P.
46.
and is very brisk that it overthrows my Demonstration. And what says his
Instance? It says the Corinthians and Artemonites understood by those words,
that Christ was only an Adoptive Son, that is a Creature; which is as much as
to say, they understood them in a Particular Sense, which is all I there
pretended. And, so, his Instance is, as he says truly, Unlucky; but it is to
himself, not to me; for it makes good my words, and instead of overthrowing,
confirms my Discourse that Men must have understood some Particular Sense by
those words; and our Learned Dr is so weak as to think, that, when what he
brings for an Answer is so evidently for me, it makes against me. As for their
pleading Tradition for their Sense; Ibid.
surely he means a private Tradition from some former Heretics, and not the
Public Tradition of the Christian Church; or that their Heretical Tenets were
immediately delivered by that United Body of Christians; for the manifest
Falsehood of this would have been confuted by Experience and have shamed the
Alledgers: Nor could the Church, in that case, have condemned them, since they
spoke her sense. But the good Dr mistook the Pretense of two or three quibbling
Heretics for the Universal Tradition of the Church (as wicked an Error as it
was possibly to stumble upon) and then triumphs how rarely his Instance has
answered my Demonstration.

And thus ends his Reply to my short Discourse; which having done, P. 47.
he assures the Reader he has fully answered my main Argument against his Rule
of Faith. Whereas he has not so much as touched any single Proposition in it;
and trifled, or done worse, even in the ridiculous odd way he has taken to
answer it. Which confirms me more then ever it is past his skill to hurt it, and
even beyond his Courage to grapple with it.

46. His contradicting himself is still urged upon him unless he can show that
true or Absolute Certainty does not secure those who have it in any thing, from
being deceived in that thing. Again, P. 48.
in his 15th Principle he said there needed no Infallible Society of men either
to attest or explain the Scripture. I replied, that if it be Fallible, we
cannot by it be more than Fallibly Certain, and we can have no Absolute
Certainty from a Fallible Testimony. This seems very plain; for how should a
man be absolutely or perfectly Certain of a thing by that very Testimony which
not being perfectly Certain may perhaps deceive him in that very Thing? His
first Answer is, that [he understands no such thing as Infallibility in
Mankind, P. 49.
but by immediate Divine Assistance.] He understands? Is that an Answer? Does
he understand how to answer our many Arguments to prove it? By his not taking
notice of them, we are to understand, and conclude he does Not. Again he
declares that in that Principle of his he meant there needed no Infallibility
by Divine Assistance; and he utterly denies Natural Infallibility; whence it is
manifest he allows no Certainty at all but Fallibility. His Faith is in a fine
case in the mean time. He must show I say that Fallibility in the Testimony can
ground Absolute Certainty of the thing attested, and this, though a man sees that
the Testimony and himself who relies on it may be in an Error, before he can
make either the Letter or the Book of Scripture, Absolutely Certain, by
Tradition or Human Testimony, which he maintains here is Fallible. Can a man
think or say interiourly, [ I am Absolutely (or perfectly) Certain of a thing
peradventure. When that very [ Peradventure] hinders his Certainty from being
Absolute or Perfect? What answers he to this plain Evidence? Or how shows he
that a seen Fallibility is able to beget Absolute Certainty? Why, First, he
says, Ibid.
If by Fallible Certainty I mean this and that, etc. I mean? Why I mean nothing
by it but that it is a wicked Contradiction. I mean the same by it as I would by
a hirco-cervus, a four-squar'd Triangle, Green Scarlet, or whatever such
desperate words one may put together to compound strong Nonsense. How should I
mean any thing by a Compound of two such words which the Goodness of Rational
Nature, and the aversion which our understanding power has to Contradiction,
has forbid any man to use ever since the Creation? Did the Dr. or any man
living hear any Mortal man when he is about to express his Certainty of a
thing, say [ I am Fallibly Certain of it?] Yet, how often has he heard them say,
I am Infallibly Certain of such a thing? whence were the word [ Infallibly] a
different Notion from Certain, or Difference added to it as to its Genus, it
would nay must admit the Opposite Difference [ Fallibly] as is done in all such
cases: which since it does not, without straining nature, and the Language of
Mankind, it is not a different Notion, but the same with True Certainty; and
therefore in proper Speech True Certainty and Infallibility are both one: Yet,
after he has thus abused the Language of all Mankind, he has the Confidence to
tell me I make use of those words in an Improper and unusual Sense. This
farther appears by this, that our Speculators use to add Moral or some other
such Epithet to it, which are of a diminishing signification, when they would
express it is deficiency from True Certainty. This Logical Demonstration to
prove Certainty and Infallibility to be the same was alleged in Faith
Vindicated, p. 37. But we must excuse such slight Talkers from even attempting
to give an Answer becoming a Scholar to any such close Proofs; though it has been
pressed upon him in Error Non-plust, P. 49.50.
p. 92. and upon Dr Tillotson in Reason against Ra^^^ery from p. 64. to p. 67.
He only tells us what he does own, does not own, and such sleeveless sayings;
that is, he only says over again his own crude Tenets with the formality of a
Distinction or two; and places his main hopes to uphold his Credit, not in the
Strength of his Answers, but in the Weakness or Partiality of his Readers. The
upshot is, he owns clearly he has only Fallible Grounds for his Faith having
been taught by Christ; which is to assert and maintain (for it is not to be
supposed he will allow any others to have surer Grounds than his own) that All
Christian Faith may be False, and the Grounds themselves, in more Regards than
one, most perfect Nonsense.

47. He proceeds next to give us his Notion of Absolute Certainty in these
words: [ When the Evidence is the highest which in point of Reason the thing is
capable of, then there is that which I call Absolute Certainty. These words [
Which I call] are very Emphatical, and precisely True; for no man living but
himself and Dr. T. that I know of ever called it so. For, suppose the Evidence
be but very slight, and the Thing, as proposed to us, or in our Circumstances,
can give us no more, will this slight glimmering Evidence make us Absolutely
Certain of it? Again, Does he mean in point of True Reason informed by the best
Maxims to direct and establish it? This is Conclusive Evidence or
Demonstration, and the Conclusion thus deduc't is Infallibly True, because the
Maxim which legitimates the Consequence, is, as all Logicians know, Infallibly
Certain, being a Principle of our Understanding, and Self-evident; Is it this
he means? No: He does not like Conclusive Evidence in the Grounds of his Faith
by no means. To come closer, I ask him, Does he mean that True Knowledge,
conformable to the Thing, or object, fixes him in that Certainty, or (in great
part) his own aerie Apprehension? If such a Knowledge, then, since none can
truly know what is not, that Knowledge is as Impossible to be False, or is as
Infallibly True, as it is that the thing must be what it is: And, if no such
Knowledge grounds his Certainty, how is it an Absolute or Perfect one? Can his
apprehending it so make it so? Can a man be Absolutely Certain of a Falsehood,
because he apprehends that Falsehood to be a Truth, or that a thing is so when
it is not so? If not, then it is only it is being so which can be the Ground of
Absolute Certainty, and justify that Assent, and then that Assent is
Infallible, for a thing is Infallibly what it is. He Will say he took it to be so,
and that is enough. But, to omit that his taking a thing to be so neither makes
nor proves it to be so, I press farther: When he took it to be so, Did he take
it right, or did he mistake it? If he took it right, then again his Knowledge,
and Certainty grounded on that Knowledge, are both Infallible; for his
Knowledge when he took it right could not but be conformable to the Thing, and
the Thing is Infallibly as it is. If he took it wrong or mistook it, and yet be
Absolutely Certain of it, then again there may be Absolute Certainty of a
Falsehood, or that a thing is so which is not so: which is a rare kind of
Certainty indeed, especially for the Ground of his Faith; and Posterity no
doubt will owe much to his Memory for the Invention. It Is left then that he
must say he did not know whether he took it right or wrong, but apprehended he
took it right. In which case (to omit that this apprehending or thinking the
Evidence so strong as to determine assent, is the Second kind of Certainty he
assigns here before he comes to Absolute Certainty) I ask how he can possibly
think himself Certain a thing is such, when he sees he does not know whether he
be mistaken in it or no? And how a Judgment that a thing absolutely is, and a
Judgment that it may not be for any thing he knows, can be consistent together
in an Intellectual Nature, without destroying the First Principle of our
Understanding, viz. That it is not Possible the same thing should at once be and
not be.

48. I have not done with this new invented Absolute Certainty of his. It must
spring he says from the Highest Evidence which in point of Reason the thing is
capable of. Where every expression is Indeterminate and Ambiguous. Suppose (as
I urged lately) the thing be not capable of any Clear Evidence (as himself
supposes there is not for such or such a Doctrine to have been taught by Christ)
why must he needs Assent at all? Why does he not Suspend? God has endowed us
with a Faculty of doing this, as a bridle to keep us from Precipitation, and to
preserve us from running into Error; and why should we not use it, but expose
our selves to run headlong into Mistakes; both prejudicial to our Nature,
whose Perfection is Truth; and pernicious, in its Consequences, to the Conduct
of our Lives? Again, Certainty, taken from the Thing (as he says this is)
signifies a Determination of the Mind by means of the Object, and is the Genuin
Effect of some kind of Evidence; and, therefore, Absolute or Perfect Certainty
ought to be the Effect of Perfect Evidence: nor is any Evidence a Perfect one,
unless it Concludes. Now he does not like Conclusive Evidence, and so he ought
to renounce Absolute Certainty. It Is as difficult to guess what he means here
by those words [in point of Reason,] True Reason knows no Methods but this: to
Assent if the Thing be Clear, and to Suspend if it be Not; and, to conclude or
argue being the proper Act of Reason straining after Truth, what is not
concluded is not Clear, and therefore not to be accepted for an Absolute Truth
or Assented to as such; The sum then (to come close to our present Question)
is, that, Absolute Certainty of such a Doctrine's having been taught by Christ
must either be built on True Evidence of the Grounds for it, and then it cannot
consist with Deception, and so is Infallible: Or it is not; and, then indeed it
may sometimes come to Justify a great Propension, Hope or Deeming that it is so;
Or, if I conceive it to be of small concern, an unexamining letting it pass for
such, but it can never Justify an Absolute Assent. See more of this Subject,
and a perfect Confutation of this wild Assertion in from p. 64. to p. 165. and
fr. p. 173. to p. 180.
Errour-Nonplust and Discourse Fifth. P. 53.
Reason against Raillery. After many rambling sayings of his own he falls to
speak of putting an End to Controversies, especially, about Certainty and
Fatality. What we have to do with Fatality I know not; but I believe he
heartily wishes an end of This Fatal Controversy; concerning Certainty; for he
is in a miserable ross about it; being driven now to declare whether he will
deny First Principles, or renounce his Vnprincipled Doctrine. The best way I can
invent to end all Controversies, is this, that, since Controvertists are
Disputants, and are to produce their Arguments; which are good for nothing nor
can ever End Controversies unless they Conclude, those who renounce Conclusive
Evidence and instead of it bring Invisible Motives and Qualifications, may be
exposed and turned out of the Lists, as being, even by their own Confession
Insignificant Talkers and Endless Brabblers. His wrangle about Light and
Darkness, P. 51. P. 73.74.
Christ and Belial is spoke to in my Second Catholic Letter. Let him show
that his Rule, Scripture interpreted by Private Judgments, does not Patronize
Heresy as well as Faith, (which he will never do) and we will be content to
acquit him from that horrid Blasphemy of making Light and Darkness very
consistent; and Christ the Author of our Holy Faith and Belial the Father of
Heresy and Lies, very good Friends; of which wicked Doctrine, 'till he does
this, he stands Indicted.

49. I alleged that Scripture being the Common Rule to him and all Heretics,
P. 53.
the particular or distinguishing Rule must be their own Private Judgments
interpreting Scripture. Does he deny this, or show my Discourse faulty by
assigning any other that particularizes or distinguishes them? No, neither.
What does he then? Why he sends me to the old Philosophers to learn Logic. And
I tell him with many thanks, I know none, except Aristotle, a competent Master
for Me. Next, he makes Sense to be a Rule of Judging, that is an Intellectual
Rule: which I deny: For the Rule to any thing is the Immediate Light to judge
of any thing, and multitudes of intervening Knowledges are requisite to inform
us when the advertisements of our Senses are right; as is evident in the
fallaciousness of Sense in a Stick seeming crooked in water, the bigness of
things seen at distance, and innumerable other particulars. But I ought to
distinguish between the Rule of Judgment, P. 53.54.
and the Judgment made according to that Rule. And so I do, if that be all. For
the Rule is the Informer, and my Judgment the thing informed: But yet if my
Judgment follow the Information and still go wrong, my Informer was no good
Informer. The Evidence of this, and the propension of uncorrupted Nature to
believe Pastors, Fathers and Teachers, and those who were wiser than
themselves in things they were Ignorant of, did (I told him) make the
Generality of those out of the Church follow the Way of Tradition of their own
Church; and not regulate themselves in the choice of their Tenets by their
private Judgment of Discretion working upon Scripture's Letter; as is evident
in whole Nations (as Denmark) meeting in one particular Belief, and whole Sects
agreeing in the very Judgment of their respective Leaders; whence the Sense
they make of Scripture as themselves understand it, is not their Rule. First,
he quotes a Decree of the Church of England, that nothing is to be required of
any man to be believed as Faith but what is read in Scripture or may be proved
by it. But this makes against himself, unless he thinks the Generality, that
is, the Layity of that Church esteem themselves more able to judge of the Sense
of what is read in Scripture, or to prove all the highest Points of Faith by it,
than their Pastors and Church Governors are; for otherwise Nature will and
ought to incline them to believe their Judgment rather than their own in that
affair, which is to follow the Way of Tradition. Indeed, I must confess that by
the Doctor's Principles every one of his Sober Enquirers ought to prefer his
own Judgment of Discretion above the Church'es; but what He says is one thing,
what the Dictates of honest Nature teaches Mankind is another. It Is confessed,
the Layity of each Congregation judges the Sentiments of their Leaders to be
agreeable to Scripture; but I affirm withal that not one in ten thousand, when
he comes at age, lays aside Prejudice, and setts himself to consider anew by
his scanning the Letter whether his Leaders told him right, or presumes of the
competency of his own knowledge to judge or determine whether They understood
Scripture in the right Sense or no. He talks to us indeed of Helps, P. 55.56.
and how they call in the old Interpreters of the Church, and desire them to
use their own Reason, etc. But every man sees that Few or None stand
Indifferent 'till they have used all these Helps; but undoubtingly accept that
very Faith in which they were educated: And so they continue; 'till the
discoursing or reading those of a contrary Opinion, unsettles them and put them
into Doubts. Besides if those Helps he talks of are not secure from erring
themselves as to what they help others in, they may help them to Misunderstand
the Sense of Scripture in the Highest Points of Faith, and so help them to be
Heretics. And yet these are all the best Helps his Principles can Help them
to; For he assures us and maintains stoutly by affirming them all to be
Fallible in what they are to help us, that all his Helps may be deceived in
that very thing in which they are to help others: They may indeed according to
him, give a strong guess at what is Christ's Doctrine, but that is all; for he
allows none to be Absolutely Certain of the Sense of Scripture, but only of the
Letter. He proceeds after a strange rate and talks of Opinions, doubtful and
Obscure places; but avoids still to come up to those High Points of Faith,
particularly those of a Trinity and Christ's Godhead, in which he knows I
instanc't. Then he blames my Logic, for not distinguishing between the Rule of
Faith and the Help to understand it. P. 55.
And my Logic remembers its respects to his no Logic, and sends him back
word, that since an Intellectual Rule to such a thing is an Immediate Light or
Means to know that thing as his Friend Dr. T. has told him, Rule of Faith* p.
40. and is purposely framed to give us that Knowledge, nay Essentially Ordained
to that End, it is a Contradiction to say it needs another thing to lend it
Clearness, in order to give us Christ's Sense; for then this other thing would
be clearer than It as to that particular Effect; and, so, This not the Other
would be the true Rule of Faith. Yet he will needs prove this Contradiction
True, and that it may be a Rule and yet not have Power to regulate without the
help of another; And, by what Argument will he prove it? Oh, he can prove
things by better means than Arguments. He has an Instance still at hand, either
when he is pressed too close, with another Arguments or wants one of his own.
These Instances are good Serviceable drudges and are ever ready to do all his
Jobbs; and yet I doubt his Instance brought to prove a Contradiction, must it
self be of the same Chimericall Family. Let Us see it is this, that a Nurse
teaches Children to Spell and read the New Testament, P. 55.56.
and so by degrees to understand Christ's Doctrine; and yet the Faith of those
persons is not resolved into this Help, of the Nurse's Teaching but into the
New Testament it self as the Ground of their Faith. I must confess I extremely
admire at this Drs Confidence, and no less at his Imprudence that he does not
rather not write at all then perpetually put such shams as these upon his
Reader. Are we speaking of all remote helps whatsoever, or are we speaking only
of a Help for the Rule to do its Proper Effect, which is to give us Christ's
Sense or our Faith? God and Nature has helped us with a Rational Being, Eyes,
and Brains; Conversation or Masters have helped us with skill in the Language in
which the Letter of Scripture is delivered, and Tradition has helped us with the
Right Books and Copy of Scripture; Do any of these concern our present enquiry?
Are not these all presupposed to his Rule? The only Question is what help is
necessary to give his Rule (the rest being all presupposed) the Power to
regulate us in knowing the Sense of that Book or our Faith, as to those
Spiritual and most Important Articles? To do this being the Proper Effect of
his Rule, and, a Thing not being what it should be, or is pretended to be,
unless it have a power in its self to do its Proper Effect, (since it is Essence
was ordained for it) hence I affirm it must need no help to do this, but must
have it of it self; and therefore if Scripture's Letters have not of it self
Clearness enough to give those who are coming to Faith the requisite Certainty
or knowledge of what is its true Sense in those Dogmaticall Points, it is no Rule
of Faith. This is the only Point, and therefore must only be omitted: what is
this to a Nurse's Teaching to read? Or what is her Teaching to the Immediate and
Certain Light to know Christ's Sense in those Main Articles? His Friend Dr. T.
goes (by chance) a little more consonantly, and confesses the substance of this
discourse of mine, by allowing that the Letter of Scripture must be
Sufficiently Plain, even in those High Points I mention ( Rule of Faith, p.
86.87.) But it seems, that upon second thoughts fearing to be pinch't hard upon
that point, they have since that time, changed their measures.

50. Put case then one of Dr. St's Flock should say to him; Doctor, this very
Rule you bid me follow, P. 37.
to my best Judgment tells me you have erred in holding the true Godhead of
Christ; nay, suppose he should say the same to the whole Church of England,
what could He or that Church either, say to such a man according to his
Principles? They can only propose and direct, and that is the utmost they ought
to do; and, if he likes not their Proposal and Direction, they ought to let him
alone, nay commend him for sticking so close to his Rule, as he understands it,
without fearing the face of Man. For it is the greatest Injustice and Tyranny in
the world to punish a man Temporally, or (which is worse) by Ecclesiastical
Censures for following sincerely this Rule of Faith. Besides, who can tell but
this man is better stock't with Dr. St's Moral Qualifications and Inward Light
than his Judges and Pastors are? And then to vex such a Saint is to fight
against God: And therefore the Scabb'd Sheep must be let alone to run astray or
infect the Flock; let the Church and her Government go where they will. Now,
who sees not that these Principles must shatter the Church in pieces, fill her
with a multitude of Bedlam Sects, and utterly overthrow Church Government? But
what would I. S. do with such a man? Why, first I would endeavor to dispossess
him of that Luciferian Spirit of Pride, Ibid.
which such wicked Principles have tainted him with, and win him to a rational
Humility by representing how all Mankind in their several affairs seek out one
more skilled than themselves and use their best reason in pitching upon him,
and then trusting him in things themselves are Ignorant in. I would show him
how the Order of the World, the Commands of God, and his known Duty, do all
oblige him to believe the Church in such matters rather than his own Private
Interpretations; I would endeavor to show him that the Preservation of these
necessary Orders engages God's Providence to assist his Church and keep her
from Erring in Faith, rather then private Men. I would show him that, since the
only thing he doubts of is to know what Christ taught, and that God has left
some Way to make us sure of his true Doctrine, he must first find out such a Way
that, if men followed it, would secure them from Error in that particular. Nor
would it be hard to demonstrate to him that see it confessed by the Reflecter, p.
21.
Tradition is such a way, and that Scripture's Letter interpretable by private
Judgment is not that way. I would show him how impossible it is the Body of the
Church should have unanimously deserted that Way; And, amongst other things I
would inform him how weakly Dr St. had defended his Own Rule and impugn'd ours;
and, lastly, how he and others who followed another way, have been forced to
grant that all the Main Points of Christian Doctrine may be false for any thing
they know. These and such like Discourses, I hope, would at first startle him,
and at length cure him, if he were not too deeply tainted with Enthusiasm, or a
high opinion of his own Moral Qualifications and Divine Assistances: For, if he
were, he is got beyond the reach of Reason and Humane Discourse; and is not to
be helped by any thing under a Miracle, perhaps not by that neither.

51. He seems to deny People the Liberty to interpret Scripture against the
Teaching Church. P. 58.
But his discourse sounds Hollow when he comes to show he does so. Some slight
thing he says about the Sense of the Teaching Church in the best and purest
Ages; but not a word of what they owe to the present Church, which is their
Proper and Immediate Instructress and Governess; by which discourse it should
seem he holds the Church of England none of the best nor purest. The main point
is, whether, if, after having consulted the Primitive Church, and considered
what Grounds she brought for her Doctrine and Decrees, the Enquirer still likes
his own Interpretation better, he is in that case to submit his private
Judgment to the Decrees of That or Any Church; And how the Church is to look
upon him in case his private Interpretation leads him into a flat Heresy? These
are the true Points, and Tests of Dr. St's Principles and yet undiscovered
Consequences; but these are slubber'd over, or rather, indeed, never touched.
Yet he complains of me, for being Obscure; when as it is acknowledged he writes
Clearly, but it is Clearly from the Point, nor has any (...) packing the Cards,
P. 60.
etc. He says too, that it is awkward reasoning, to say nothing but
Infallibility will content him now. Pray, which is more awkward? If the Judges
acknowledge themselves Fallible, (in which case nothing can be said to be True
that is held upon their Testimony) then he allows them very much Authority, but
not upon other terms. But he is high in choler against me for saying he has an
aversion against the Churches intermeddling in matters of Faith; and imputes it
either to great Ignorance or a malicious Design to expose him to Church
Governors. But his comfort is he pities my Ignorance and despises my Malice.
This is Stately and Great. I do assure him my only Design is to oppose such
Principles as leave all to the Fanatic phrenzy of every private Interpreter;
and till he satisfies the World better that his Principles are not guilty of
this Enormity, I shall still oppose him let him huff never so high. The Point
is, how does he clear himself? Why, he says he disputes not against
Church Authority in due proposing matters of Faith; Certainly Church Authority
is mightily obliged to him. A Genuin and Learned Son of the Church of England,
speaking of this very Doctrine of his, tells him, that Answer to a Letter
against Mr. L. p. 23.
Proposals of their own nature are so far from inferring an Authority to
Command their reception, that they rather imply a Power in those to whom they
are proposed, at Discretion to Reject them; and so, in the Issue gives the
Authority to the People. Which words contain the full sense of my Discourse
here against the Dr and his beloved Sober Enquirer. Why is he then so high
against me for exposing him, when those of the Church of England have already
exposed him more than I have done? This is no great sign either of Ignorance or
Malice, when persons who are otherwise of different Judgments and Communions,
do center in the same opinion of his Doctrine as destructive of
Church Government. But it is yet more pleasant, that he will not promise he will
not dispute against Church Authority even in this due proposing Matters of
Faith, but with a Proviso, P. 60. l. 25.
that every man is to judge for his own Salvation. As much as to say, If the
Church will be so saucy or so wicked as not to let my Sober Enquirers alone to
interpret Scripture as they list, or hold what seems to their Wise Worships to
be the Sense of it, (which, with him, is judging for their own Salvation) but
will be censuring or Excommunicating them for Heretics, if they hap to err in
Christ's Godhead for example, or any other such Point, then Church Authority
have at you; for I tell you plainly if you do this I shall and will dispute
against you. It would be worth our knowing too what the pretty cautious words [
due proposing] means. There seems to lurk some hidden Mystery in that little
monasyllable [ Due] which may come to help the Sober Enquirers with an Evasion
from submitting to Church Authority, or obeying it, in case it misbehaves it
self unduly, or grows so malapert as to restrain them in their licentious
Prerogative of interpreting Scripture as their Gifted Fancy inspires them. It
looks oddly, and seems to have some ambidextrous meaning in it; but we will
hope the best till he comes to unfold it. Now, because Honorable Company is
creditable to those who are highly obnoxious, he names St. Chrysostom, St.
Austin, St. Thomas of Aquin, P. 61.
and Bellarmin as of his opnion, but with the same sincerity as he pretended
all Divines of both Churches, and even my self to hold all Necessary Points may
be found by every Sober Enquirer without the Churches Help; as may be seen
hereafter. 57. It Is indeed the General Opinion of the Fathers, that we are not
always heard when we pray for Temporal Things, or even Spiritual Goods for
others; but that our Request is always granted when we ask Spiritual Goods for
our selves. But then, it is ever understood with this restriction, that we must
not make our suit to have Knowledge or Virtue by Extraordinary ways, and
neglect the Ordinary Methods laid already by God's Providence to attain those
good Gifts. Our Question then being of understanding those difficult places of
Scripture which contain the main Articles of our Christian Belief, and whether
they can better attain to the Sense of Scripture with unerring Certainty by
their own Private Judgments, without the Churches Help, or by the Churches
Means, and Dr St's Principles asserting the former Method, mine the Later, I do
affirm, that none of those Authors hold with him, but would condemn his Tenet
for Heresy. He Quotes none of the places except Bellarmin, who speaks not of
persons looking for Faith in Scripture's Letter as to those Points, but of the
Faithful, Praying for Wisdom to live well; P. 61.
and he, as the Dr relates it, denies the Gift of Interpretation (the Dr's way
to come to Faith) is to be had by Prayer, which is our main Point. However, our
Dr pretends himself wonderfully skillfull in our Authors, because he can make a
show of Quoting them, though it be quite from the purpose. He should have kept an
Eye to the State of the Question, and brought his Citations home to it; but
this is not his way. His main art through this whole Treatise is to keep that
from the Readers sight, talk in Common, name great Authors for his Vouchers,
but never show how they savor him by applying them. And then he is safe, by
virtue of a great noise and fine Raree shows. P. 62.
He ends with railing, at the rate of a man at his Wits End; I desire him to
pacify his spleen, for no man that knows me and my circumstances, does or can
think I write to raise my self, or to be caressed (as he phrases it) by any
man. I will never court any man's favor, or fear his frowns, when I am
defending Truth.

53. But the Scene is changed, all of a sudden, and I am almost ashamed to
reflect as it deserves on what follows in his two next Paragraphs. It Is so
purely A-la-Mode of Merry Andrew; Never did Grave Man make such a Fop of
himself. But his Reason was Nonplust, and his Fancy was overheated, and this
must plead his excuse: for what could he do better in such ill circumstances?
To set right what his Raillery has so ravell'd; I declared my Tenet was, that
every man is to use his Judgment of Discretion or his Reason in finding out a
Rule which could ascertain him of all the several Points taught by Christ:
Since the Rule of Faith being antecedent to Faith, must consequently be the
Object of pure Reason. That by this Rule he was to judge for his Salvation, and
of all Controverted Points. For, if this Rule gave him Absolute Assurance that
all those determinate Points were indeed taught by Christ, then since he
acknowledged Christ's Doctrine to be from God, they were to be held by him to be
Divine and True; If it give him no such assurance of this, being in it self
Fallible, then they are not to be held Divine, nor True, nor Faith, nor the way
to Salvation; since, in that case, they might perhaps be Diabolical, False,
Heresy, and the way to Damnation. Now no such Rule does he assign us, but
leaves it to the Judgment of his sober Enquirers to find out those determinate
Points in Scripture's Letter; which, in those Articles of so profound a sense
is obscure to them. Our Judgment of Discretion is to find out a Certain Light
to walk by in those sublime passages, in which the Light of our own Reason is
very dim. His is to do as well as he can in penetrating the Sense of the
Scripture in such high passages, though he sees he may fall into Error every
step. That is, his way is indeed to be a Rule to our selves, and scorn to be
led by the Church, though there be all the Reason in the world to think Her wiser
than our selves in that affair. What says the pleasant Dr to this? Or how does
he make good his judgment of Discretion, or overthrow ours? why, First; he
laughs heartily over and over, that I come closer to take a view of his
Judgment of Discretion after 99. pages. P. 62.
As if my whole Book had been to treat merely concerning that one point, and I
had never handled it till now: whereas his Conscience knows, (but that
necessity has forced him to bid it Farewell) and every Reader sees that above
forty other Points were to be handled as they lay in my way, and that this
concerning the Judgment of Discretion, was the very last I was to speak to.
What pityfull Trifling is this? Then comes in the Game at Cards, blew apron and
Tub over and over: That I yield to his Sober Enquirer what he aimed at; that I
make the Fanatics Catholics, and his Sober Enquirer a Judge of
Controversies, and would have him judge without his Rule: Which is a continued
Series of wilful and ridiculous Forgeries: For I allow him to judge of never
a Point of Faith but by his Rule, and affirm that he is to find out his Rule by
his Reason or Judgment of Discretion. But this clear Method he casts a Mist
over all the way; and, finding that Seriousness would gravel him, he has
recourse to his beloved and still-assisting Friend, Drollery. Next, he asks,
what if the matter proposed by this Certain Authority which I have found out by
my Reason be very much against Reason? And I ask, whether the Matter under
Consideration be the Object of Natural Reason, or no? If it be not, then
Reason is to concern it self in judging of the Humane Authority of the Church
attesting it to be Christ's Doctrine, which is Subject to Reason; and not with
the Other, which is confessedly above Reason. He knows I still speak of the
High Mysteries and Articles of our Christian Belief which are Supernaturally
revealed or taught by Christ and his Apostles; and will he have the profound
Judgment of discretion of his Sober Enquirers scan them by their Reason? This
savors too strong of the Socinian. Yet he sticks not to say the same, (that is,
Natural) Reason helps men to Judge of the Matters proposed by this Certain
Authority. It makes yet worse for his Credit, that, P. 64. l. 3 4*
whereas I instance all along in the Tenets of the Blessed Trinity and the
Godhead of Christ, he stills recurrs to Points necessary to Salvation; by
counterposing which he seems to think those Mysteries not necessary to
Salvation. P. 64.
But who set the bounds of Reason? why, God and Nature, by alotting Reason for
its Sphere Natural Objects; and by so doing, precluding her from attempting to
sound the Profound Depth of Supernatural ones by her Shallow Line. He is angry
that as soon as this Certain Authority is discovered, we then cry, Good night
Reason, Ibid.
I have no more use of you. This savours yet more strongly then the former.
Would he have us, after this Certain Authority has assured us it is Christ's
Doctrine, still to suspend our Belief till we have examined the Mysteries
themselves by our natural Reason? I am loath to name what this signifies. I
omit to insist on his bad Logic, shall I say, or want of Common Sense; who,
though a Certain Authority were supposed, yet discourses all along as if the
things it proposes may still be false, or need the Examination of Reason
whether they be false or no. But this argues he has not once in his thoughts
the Notion of True Certainty, but means some Mock-Certainty or Probability by
that word; otherwise 'twas impossible such a Fancy should have a seat in his
Mind. For the most obvious and Common Light of Reason tells him that what is
Truly Certain (as what is built on a Certain Authority is,) cannot be False, nor
can need any further Scrutiny whether it be or no.

54. Next he asks, P. 65.
Are all People Capable of this Certain Reason? They are, or may be made so
according to their pitch, so Tradition be rightly represented, and not
Perverted as it was by him throughout his Sermon: For nothing is more suitable
to the Capacity of every one then is the Force of a vast Witnessing, Authority.
And, though they were not, yet being in it self Certain, it preserves even those
who are incapable of seeing the reason for its Certainty, from erring in Faith
while they rely on it, which his Rule does not. He puts Questions and gives
Answers here very kindly for his own behoof; and from such slight Grounds
concludes he may have True Faith and be saved without finding out this Certain
Authority. The later I leave to God's Mercy, which may, I hope, give him the
Grace to repent his impugning known Truths, which with him I fear is too
frequent: but he makes himself too Liberal a promise of True Faith without it.
However he expresses it modestly, and only says he may have it; that is, he may
hap to hold right in Some points of Faith by his private Interpretation of
Scripture, without Tradition of the Church; and he may hap to hold Twenty
Heresies. His fifth Head is ridiculous; for it is a pure Folly to talk of
believing the Scripture, without knowing certainly what the Scripture says. Let
him secure this, and none will refuse to yield a perfect and steadfast belief to
what Christ has taught us by it. Our knowing the Sense of it in passages
containing dogmatical Tenets of Faith is the only Point between us; In
assigning some Certain Means to do this, he is dull and flat, or else perfectly
Silent; but mighty brisk in what is nothing to our purpose. His Sixth is
frivolous, and answered with a bare denying that we hold that Tradition is only
to lead us into the Certain Sense of Scripture. P. 66.
And this he knew before, as he did five hundred things he pretends here
unknown to him. And this was but fitting. For had he owned he knew them and the
reason brought for them, he had stood engaged to Answer them: But by seeming
still not to know them, he puts us to say our Tenets and bring our Proofs over
and over again; in the mean he reaps the advantage of gaining time, and coming
off dexterously at present. His Seventh is the same with the Second, and spoken
to already. P. 67.
His citing Scripture Texts has the same fault with better half this whole
Book; viz. Something is said in common never applied to the point in hand, or
brought close to it, but left in that Raw Condition, to make the Reader think
there is Something in it, though he knows not well what. Our point is, that our
Judgment of Discretion is not to be Employed about scanning the Mysteries of
Faith by our Natural Reason, after we have found a Certain Authority proving
them to be Christ's Doctrine, or interpreting such Texts of Scripture by our
Private Judgments to gain Assurance what is to be held of Faith. The first Text
[ I speak as to Wise Men, judge ye what I say] may, for any thing he has shown
relate to Manners, or to the avoiding Idolatry spoken of the verse before,
which is known by the Light of Nature; or to something relating to or
consequent from a Point of Faith already known, as is intimated in the
following verses. Of all these they may judge, but None of these comes near our
business, as appears by the State of the Question. The Second Text is Prove all
Things. And does he think this can mean, they should consult their natural
Reason how it liked the Mysteries, or rather (in case that Text had indeed
related to them) does it not signify that they should consider well of the
Grounds why they Embraced them? The Third is, Try the Spirits whether they are
of God. And this is spoken in order to the Ancient Heretics; whose Spirits
they were to Try by examining whether they deviated from the Doctrine preached by
the Apostles; or, by looking what Grounds or Motives they produced to prove
their new Doctrine to be Christ's. The Judgment of Discretion in this Last case
we allow; and the two Former are both of them wide of our business, unless the
Second were meant of examining things by the Grounds for them. It were good to
dive into the Drs thoughts, and get light what it is he would here be at. The
Apostles (says he) allowed them to make use of their Understandings, though
themselves, the Proposers were Infallible. What mean these dry Common words?
Does he mean they were to Understand what it was the Apostles taught? This is
the Duty of every Hearer, Catholic and Protestant, and the very End of all
Teaching and Preaching; and, so, it does not reach the peculiarity of his
Judgment of Discretion. Does he mean they were to examine whether the Apostles
were Divinely-inspir'd or not? This was very laudable in them; for this is to
use their Reason e're they allow their Authority, and is the very Judgment of
Discretion we recommend; but he is here impugning our Judgment of Discretion,
and so cannot mean thus. He is then contending for a Judgment of Discretion
which shall scan the Verity of the Points of Faith themselves, or the Matters
proposed even by a Certain Authority, by his Natural Reason. I am loath to fix
a censure upon Common words; but I must tell him that if he means so, and that,
though we receive the Tenets of a Trinity and Christ's Godhead (for example) upon
a Certain Authority, we are still to suspend our Assent, till our Great
Judgment of Discretion shall consider well of the Matters proposed, and reject
them if such uncouth Articles seem disagreable to Natural Reason, P. 65.
(his useful Servant not yet discarded:) If this be his Tenet, as it seems to
be, then I must tell him his Principles are perfectly Socinian. Whether he
follows those Principles in his particular Tenets I am not to judge; but such
Edging and Leaning toward those Principles do, I conceive, oblige him to
satisfy the World he is not that way Affected.

P. 65.
55. But what if men differ about this Certain Authority wherein it lies, and
how far it extends? I answer the Authority our Question proceeds on is the
Humane Authority of the Church deriving down Christ's Faith: Nor do I know any
Catholic who ever impugned that, but one unknown Nameless Author Lominus; whom
here out of his constant love to sincerity he is pleased to call [ Others.]
But, in case any should differ about it, it being a thing Previous to Faith,
and, therefore, subject to our Natural Reason, all I can say is, the better
reason must carry it. He knows well how many most Eminent Catholic Writers
have approved and followed in their Writings the same way of Controversy I
take. But he is not now in such good circumstances as heartily to acknowledge
any thing. He is put to his shifts; and counterfeit Ignorance does him as much
service as any of the rest. But how proves he that when we have found a Certain
Authority we must not follow it and rely on it? Plain sense tells us we may and
ought. Why, he says it is putting out our Eyes, Ibid.
throwing our selves headlong from a Precipice, and there is an End of
Controversies. Is not this mighty Learned? Another man would think that a
Certain Authority were the only way to preserve us from all these
Inconveniences, and keep us from erring, especially in matters only Knowable by
Authority. But our Dr has a Judgment or Discretion of another mold than Reason
has framed for him. In the mean time what Answer gives he to my Reason for the
contrary position, and that the relying on a Certain Authority is to keep our
Eyes in our Head still? Third Catho. Letter. p. 102.
[In doing this we do not at all relinquish our Reason, but follow and exercise
it? For, nothing is more Rational than to submit to an Authority which my
Reason has told me is Abso, lutely Certain, in things which the same Reason
assures me can no other ways be known Certainly but by that Authority. This
seems plain sense, and comprizes the whole Point; and for that very reason he
thought it not safe to meddle with it; but, instead of doing so, to amuse the
Reader with From p. 60. to p. 69.
Seven impertinent Discourses of his own; and thus it is he Answers my
Catholic Letters.

56. Hitherto he contented himself to impugn me with False Suggestions, nimble
Avoidances, pretended Ignorance of our known and oft-repeated Tenet, and with
merry Conceits; P. 69.
but now he thunders out his dreadful Indignation against me, with Angry
Viper, Venomous Froth, Spleen, Gall, etc. By which he gives us to understand
that the place I pressed upon was very raw and sore. At the end of my Discourse I
repeated Dr St's Second Letter to Mr G. p. 21.
his avowed Position, that Every Sober Enquirer may without the Churches Help
find out all necessary Points of Faith in Scripture. This being a Paradox, so
pestilential in its self, and so Pernicious to Church Government, and to all
the Dearest and most Sacred Concerns of Christianity, I could do no less, out
my Zeal for those Best Goods, than brand it with these just Censures, viz.
Third Catho* Letter. p. 104.
that it was the very First Principle, nay, the Quintessence of all Heresy;
Fanaticism in the Egg; perfect Enthusiasm when hatched, and downright Atheism
when fledged. This I said, and thus I justify my Charge. To make private men
competent Interpreters of Scripture as to all necessary Points of Christian
Faith, without the Churches Help, and yet not to furnish them with any Certain
Means of not erring or mistaking its Sense, is the very First Principle of all
Heresy; For, Augustine. Tract. 18. in Joan.
Non enim natae sunt Haereses nisi dum Scripturae bonae intelliguntur non been.
No Heresy has any other source, but when the Scriptures good in themselves are
understood in an ill Sense. Next, let this wild licentious Principle, that they
need not the Churches Help to find out all Necessary Points in Scripture,
settle in the Heads of the Mobile, it is perfectly consequent that they must
judge that whatever the Church holds contrary to what they conceive is the
sense of Scripture, is either False or Unnecessary; and in case the Church
judges that what They hold is a Grand Heresy, and therefore that the contrary
Tenet is a Necessary Point, and therefore subjects them to Her Censures, they
must hate the Churches Government as the worst of Tyrannies that would oblige
them to forgo their Rule, renounce their Faith, and obey Man rather than God.
In a word, this Principle naturally leads them to contemn the Church and her
Pastors, as neither able to help them in their Way to Faith, nor to Govern
them in it; Unless the Dr means by Governing, that the Church Officers are to
see, that each of them follows their own Fancies, and decline not from such
Tenets (let them be never so Heretical) as their wise Judgment of Discretion
has thought fit to embrace, which is Fanaticism in the height. Again, the
Conceit of this self-sufficiency codling as I may say, in the hot Brains of
many of those Fanatics, enfranchized thus blessedly from the Churches
Government, Dr St. still assuring them they cannot miss of knowing Gods Will in
such Points so they but pray for Wisdom; and Common Sense telling them they are
no Scholars, nor have this Knowledge by Humane Means; it follows necessarily
that they must think their Prayer is heard, and that they have it by Divine
Inspiration. Whence they will imagine the Holy Ghost buzzes Truths in their Ears
like a Be in a Box, which is perfect Enthusiasm. And. it will come pat to
their purpose, and help forward very well, that Dr St. when he stood engaged to
show or produce his Proofs that his Faithful have Absolute Certainty of their
Faith, that is of the true Sense of Scripture, confesses plainly no such Proofs
are producible and recurrs to Moral Qualifications and many other Invisible
Requisites to give men assurance of it; which are impossible to be known by
Human Reason, being only Knowable by God Himself. Whence, Nature obliging all
men to guide themselves by some sure Light in things of Infinite Concern, and
all Motives that should appear outwardly to Reason, being, according to him,
Cloudy and Dark, it directs them necessarily to seek for this sure Light
within; and so become Enthusiasts. In the mean time not to speak of Atheists
who are Bystanders and confirmed in their Atheism by seeing such Bedlam-doings
amongst Professors of Christianity, imbued with no better Principles than what
he gives them; the more refined and ingenious sort of Mankind, who are too wise
to be led in the dark, and strain their best endeavors to search after solid
Grounds, by which they may be perfectly assured of Christ's Faith, or the sense
of Scripture, in such Points; and find that none such could be brought by the
famous Dr St. but that, when he was most highly engaged to produce his Proofs
for that most important Point, he recurrs still to holes as dark as the private
Spirit; What can they do other (were there no better Grounds than his
producible) but conclude that there is No Certainty of Christian Faith at all,
and that the Greatest Professors and Writers do by their Carriage confess as
much; and thence come to apprehend that Religion is a mere Cheat to keep up the
Interest and Ambition of those who look for rich Livings, and affect to have
many Followers; which will bring them to a Mepris of Religion it self, and so
dwindle into Atheism. This is the Natural Progress of Dr St's Principles. From
which ill Consequences he shall never clear himself till he shows us the Light
and Method giving him and his No Church men Certainty of the Sense of
Scripture; and this such an Absolute one as can in True Reason beget and
justify a most Firm and Unalterable Assent that the Tenets they hold are indeed
Christ's True Doctrine; and till he restores to the Church and her Government
that necessary Authority of which his ill-contriv'd Principles have robbed her:
Let him not think to acquit himself by telling us here of his allowing the
Church a Power of Proposing and directing in Faith. A Learned Son of the Church
of England has Answer to a Letter against Mr. L. p. 23.24*
told him A Private Person may do the Former; and that the Later is such a
Liberal Grant as was given to the Statues of Mercury, which of old were set up
to direct passengers in their Way, and leaves Men much at like Liberty to
regard either. More is justly and prudently required, viz. A Power to make her
Declarations Law; and this as to Matters of Faith, Ibid.
and not only in things belonging to Order and Decency; otherwise the Later
without the Former, makes (as he argues very well) some kind of Fence about the
Church against Schismatics, but lays her open to all manner of Heretics.

57. This just Censure of mine, upon the Drs. Principles, was such a Choak-Pear
to him, that it is no wonder he keck't at it so vehemently. The Great Credit he
had got (whether for defending Christian Faith, or no, the Reader is to judge)
made him scorn to bring it up again and retract it: But he uses all the Arts
imaginable to Palliate and Excuse it, and those such wretched ones that it is a
shame to mention them; and, certainly, never was so Heavy a Charge so Miserably
refuted. He says confidently this Doctrine of his is owned by all Men of
Understanding in both Churches. Whereas, P. 70.
if he can show me any one Catholic who maintains that he can have any Faith
at all or ground such a Firm and sacred Assent upon his own private
Interpretation of Scripture without the Churches Help in those most sublime and
necessary Articles which have been dubious and contested between the Church and
any Heretic, (of which only we speak) he will do more than Miracle. But I am
mightily mistaken; he will name one, and who should that be but I. S. himself:
What a boldness is this, to make me his Patron to defend him in that very
Position which I am in this very place Impugning? Well but what says I. S. Why,
he says that every man is to judge for his own Salvation, and of the best way
to his Salvation, and of all the Controversies between them and us, and
especially of the true Grounds of Faith, and all this without the Churches
Help. Now I. S. says indeed that a man coming to Faith does by his Reason find
out the True Rule and True Church; that thus he Judges for his own Salvation,
by using his Reason to find out a Rule Ground or Way to right Faith which is to
bring him to Salvation; that, by his Rule thus found out, he Judges of all our
Controversies, in judging that to be Christ's true Doctrine which that Rule
recommends as such: but is this to judge of Points of Faith without the
Churches Help, when that very Rule by which he judges of them is avowed by him
to be the Churches Testimony? Above all, does he not all along declare his
abhorrence of finding out Faith in Scripture's Letter by private Judgments,
which is the Drs Position? And must I. S. still be of the Drs Sentiment, though
he in all occasions contradicts it, disputes against it, and baffles it? What
will not this nonplust man say, when he is put to his Shifts! Any Common words,
though when applied to particulars they be directly contrary to him, must be
presumed to be for him; in despite of a long and constant Tenor of all
circumstances, and whole discourses to the contrary: whoever peruses my Third
Catholic Letter from p. 99. to the End, will see that my way of Judging for
our Salvation is as opposite to his as one Pole is to another, and he has the
incredible Confidence to make them the Same. At length he hopes to come off by
alleging that he spoke it only by way of Supposition, that If one may without
the Churches Help find out the Church's Authority in Scripture, P. 71.
then why not all necessary Points of Faith? And, was this All he said? Indeed,
he craftily introduc't his Position Conditionally; but did he not, after the
words [ Dr St's Second Letter to Mr. G. P. 21.
Then every such Person (viz. any sober Enquirer) may without the Church's
Help find out all necessary Points of Faith] Espouse the Position it self,
which had been thus introduc't; and this most Peremptorily; by immediately
subjoyning these words [ which is a Doctrine I am so far from being ashamed of,
that I think it most agreeable to the Goodness of God, the Nature of the
Christian Faith, and the Unanimous Consent of the Christian Church for many
Ages.] And will he now tell us after all this Positive asserting it, that it
only proceeds upon a Supposition, a why not, and a Parity of Reason. He objects
I answer it not. Why! was it an Argument? or must I stand answering every
voluntary saying of his (which are infinite,) every Supposition, and every why
not? If I must needs speak to it, the Imparity of Reason consists in this, that
the Church being constituted by God to instrust the Faithful in their Faith,
it was but fitting Scripture should be Clearer in those Texts that concern the
Churches Governing them in Faith and their Obligation to hear her, than in the
particular Points, which they were to be assured of by her Teaching. Besides,
the Former Point viz. the following the Church's Instructions and being
governed by her in their Faith, is a kind of Moral Point, whereas the other
Points were, many of them, Sublime Mysteries; and therefore, not so easily
Intelligible without a Master. And St. Austin had beforehand confuted his
pretended Parity of Reason, by telling him, that Aug. lib. 1. contra Cres. con.
cap. 33.
Proinde, quamvis hujus rei, etc. Wherefore, though no Example of this thing were
produced out of the Canonical Scriptures, yet the Truth of the same Scriptures
is held by us even in this Matter, when we do what seems good to the Universal
Church, which the Authority of the same Scripture Commends. And, because the
Holy Scripture cannot deceive us, whoever fears to be deceived by the Obscurity
of this Question, let him consult the same Church concerning it, which (Church)
the Holy Scripture demonstrates without any Ambiguity. Where he clearly
intimates the infallibility of the Church; that it is to be consulted in dubious
Points (and all Controverted Points, of which we speak, have been called into
Doubt) which makes its Help very Needful; and, (which I chiefly insist on)
that its Authority is Clearly and without any Ambiguity demonstrated in
Scripture; whereas yet in his Second Book de Doctrina Christiana, he
acknowledges the Obscurity of Scripture in diverse places, Obscure quaedam dicta
densissimam caliginem obducunt. Some things, spoken obscurely, involve us in
thickest Darkness; And if any be Obscure then surely those necessary and High
Mysteries of our Faith, which are of such a Deep Sense, must be such, when they
come to be scanned by Eyes as yet unenlighten'd with Faith; as the same Father
cited in my Fourth Catholic Letter has also told him. P. 31.32.


58. After this he sums up his Performances, and tells us in short how he has
erred at large. P. 73.74.
Next he gives us a lame excuse for his Indirect Answer to the Fourth Question
proposed at the Conference, and in effect only commits over again the same
Faults he was charged with, a little more formally, as his fashion is, and then
calls it an easy Answer; and if it be an answer at all, I must confess it is an
easy one; for any man may with ease answer a thousand Objections in a trice at
that rate: nothing is easier than to omit all that is objected. But I dare
undertake that whoever reads my Third Catholic Letter. p. 37.38.39.40. where
four several prevarications were charged upon him in giving one single Answer
to Mr. G's Question, will judge it so far from easy that it is Impossible for
him to answer even with any degree of plausibility. But with this sleightness
he slips over most of my Objections in my Letters, and supplies the defect with
confident Talk, or a Scornful Jest. But, because his main shuffle is his
altering those words of the Question, [ All the Divine Revelations of Christ
and his Apostles] into [ All matters necessary to Salvation*] and this is his
constant evasion, we will examine it more particularly in order to the sole End
of the Conference to which all the particular Questions were to be directed,
viz. his showing Grounds of Asbolute Certainty for his Faith. 1. I ask, with
the good leave of his Jest, Does he think Christ and his Apostles taught any
unnecessary Points? If not; why did he use such cautious diminishing
expressions, and instead of All their Doctrine, put, All matters necessary to
our Salvation? 2. Christians are wrought up to the Love of Heaven, the
Immediate Disposition to it, by Motives, and Some may need more than Others;
nay the variety of Peoples Tempers and Circumstances is so Infinite that scarce
two persons will precisely need the same. He is to acquaint us then how he
knows, or how he can make out, that every man shall, by reading the Scripture,
be sure to find his own Quota of Motives adjusted and serving for his
particular Exigencies? 3. Is he Sure they cannot err as to what is necessary to
their Salvation? If, provided they do their best, they cannot, then every man
is so far Infallible; which the Doctor has denied hitherto to all Mankind but
to himself. If they can err in matters necessary to Salvation, then doubtless
many will err, and how can error Save them? 4. Though all cannot err in all
Moral Points, yet can he show us any thing securing them from Erring in all
those Articles of Faith held by the Church, and renounced by her Heretical
Dissenters ever since Christ's time? If he cannot, (and he declines showing us
they can, nay he by his Doctrine confesses they may) then they may be Saved though
holding all the Heresies that ever were; in which case I doubt he will scarce
find them competent Assurance of their Salvation. Again, how knows he but the
mixture of many of those gross Errors may not as much deprave their Souls as
their understanding plainer places will edify them; especially if the Church
interposes, and Excommunicates them for Heretics? For his Grounds forbid them
to meddle with those high Points, but leave the whole Scripture to their
scanning, and his approved Friend Dr. T. says they are Rule of (...). p. 86.7.
Plain, and so are subject to their profound Judgment of Discretion. 5. He must
tell us how must Church-Disciplin be exerciz'd upon such a Miscellany of
Heterogeneous Members of which many obstinately deny, what others
pertinaciously affirm? 6. Is the holding the Godhead of Christ, and that God
died to save and redeem Mankind, a Matter Necessary to Salvation? Or is it
enough to hold it was only a Man to whom they owe that highest Obligation to
Love him? Let him speak to this at least; For I am not to expect but his aerie
wordish Divinity makes him look upon the Mystery of the most Blessed Trinity as
on a kind of dry Speculation. Though, were it seasonable to dilate on that
Article, I could show him that, besides it is exceeding Usefulness to the
sublime Contemplatives, the most Sacred and most Influential Points of
Christian Faith, and the main Body of Christian Language, and the Truth of it,
depend on it is Verity. Lastly, Who told him that all sorts of People who are
yet Unbelievers and looking after Christ's true Doctrine, shall by reading
Scripture come to all-saving Faith? Has he it by Divine Revelation, or by
Reason? Or, will he recurr to Divine Assistances to keep Particular Persons
from Error, and yet deny them to the Church? If so, how proves he This at
least? I wish he would speak out fairly and heartily to these Points, and make
something cohere: For I profess with all sincerity I cannot for my heart make
any Idea or Sense of this Motly Church which his Principles would patch up. The
several Members of it hang more loosely together than if they were tied to one
another with Points: Nay, they agree worse than Fire and Water, and all the
several Contrarieties in in Nature: for they are distanced by direct
Contradiction of one to the other. Whence they are utterly incapable of any
kind of Coalition; there being no imaginable means left to refract the
irreconcileably-opposit Qualities of his Affirmative and Negative Faithful, or
reduce so many Independent private-spirited Members into one Compound. He is to
show us then how the parts of this Rope of Sand (as it may more fitly be
called) must hang together. I much fear it will be Invisibly, by virtue of
their being of the Elect, and at the same rate as the Terms coher'd in the
Invisible Proofs he alleged to show us he and his Followers had Christ's true
Doctrine.

59. We shall never have done with this Purse of his. P. ^5.
He is so fond of the pretty Similitude that he puts it here over again at
large, and spends incomparably more time and pains in defending it, than he
does in making out the Absolute Certainty of his Faith; though he both stood
engaged to do it, and any good Christian too would think it were far more worth
his while. Had he done this, the rest might have been more fairly compounded,
and his Purse have remained unransack't. However, he thinks it suits well with
the Conceit he had of Scripture, but I am sure it suits not at all with our
purpose, his showing the Absolute Certainty of his Faith. Hence I Third Cath.
Letter from p. 41. to p. 48.
told him that Scripture's containing Faith was impertinent to the whole drift
of the Conference; That the only business was how to get the Gold and Silver of
Faith out thence with Absolute Certainty; and how to secure those that aimed to
enrich themselves by it, that instead of extracting the Pure Gold of Truth by
understanding right those high and most Inestimable Articles, the ransackers of
it did not draw out thence the Impure Dross of Error and Heresy. Lastly, that
he ought to have put two Purses. One, the Heads and Hearts of the Faithful,
into which the Apostles put this Heavenly Treasure of Faith by their Preaching;
the Other, the Book of Scripture into which they put it by Writing; and that
Faith was properly in the Former only, in regard Truth is no where Formally but
in the Minds of Intellectual Beings; whereas it was only in Words Written as
in a Sign; that is, no more properly than Wine was in a Bush; and that
therefore the former had incomparably Better Title to be the Purse (if no
Metaphor else would serve his turn but such an odd one) at least it ought not
to have been quite set aside. But the Dr. without troubling himself much to
mind what any body says but himself (by which Method of Answering, he has left,
above forty parts for one, of my several Discourses unanswered) will needs have
Scripture to be the only Purse, and Containing Faith shall be enough for His
purpose, Ay, that it shall, though it be to No purpose. And, so, he tells us,
that If all the Doctrine of Christ be there, we must be Certain we have all, P.
76.
if we have the Scripture that contains all. And I tell him what common Sense
tells all Mankind, that a man may have all Aristotle's works which contain all
his Doctrine, and yet not know or have one Tittle of his Doctrine: Nor, by
consequence, has the Dr. one jot of Christ's Doctrine by having merely the Book
that contains it. Shall we never have done with this ridiculous and palpable
Nonsense? How often has it been proved against him in my Catholic Letters that
the having a Book which contains All Faith as in a Sign (for words are no more)
argues not his having any Faith at all, unless he knows the Signification of
that Sign? Let Us examine then the meaning of the word [ have.] A Trunk has the
Book of Scripture when that Book is laid up in it; and that Book contains all
Faith; and, so, that Trunk may by his Logic have all Faith. Dr. St has the
same Book, and by having it, has according to him, all Faith too. I ask, Has he
all Faith by having the Book, any other way then the senseless Trunk has it. If
he Has then he has it in his Intellectual Faculty as a Knowing Creature should
have it; and, if so, he knows it, that is, he knows the Sense of it as to
determinate Points in it, for All Christ's Faith consists of those determinate
Points: But he still waves his having Knowledge of determinate Points, and
talks still of Faith only as contained in Scripture in the lump; and, it is in
the lump in the Book too lying in the Trunk; whence, abstracting from his
Knowledge of the particulars of Faith, the wooden Trunk has all Faith as much
as He. He Will say, he believes implicitly all that is contained in Scripture
whether he knows the Particular Points, or no: But is not this to profess he
believes he knows not what? Or is Implicit Belief of all in the Book, Saving
Faith; when it is the virtue of the Particular Points applied to the Soul's
Knowing Power, and thence affecting and moving her, which is the Means of
Salvation? He tells us, indeed, (for he must still cast in some good words)
that he pretends not it is enough for Persons to say their Faith is in such a
Book, P. 76.
but -- Now did I verily think that the Adversative Particular [ But] would
have been followed with [ they must be sure it is in it.] But this would have
made too good Sense and have been too much to the Point. His [ but] only brings
in a few of his Customary lukewarm Words which are to no purpose, viz. that
they ought to read, and search and actually believe whatever they find in that
Book. He means, whatever they fancy they have found in it; for he gives neither
his Reader nor them any Security, but that after their Reading and Searching,
they may still believe wrong. He skips over that Consideration as not worthy,
or else as too hard, to be made out, and runs to talk of things Necessary and
not Necessary. I wish he would once in his life speak out and tell us how many
Points are Necessary for the Generality of the Faithful, and whether God's
dying for their Sins be one; and then satisfy the World that the Socinians, who
deny that Point, do not read, search and actually believe what their Judgment
of Discretion tells them is the Sense of Scripture; and yet, notwithstanding
all this, do actually believe a most damnable Heresy. But still he says if a
man reads and considers Scripture as he ought, and pray for Wisdom, he shall
not miss of knowing all things necessary for his Salvation. So that unless we
know that he and his Party do pray for Wisdom and not pray amiss, and consider
Scripture as they ought, none can be Certain by his own Grounds that He and his
good Folks have any Faith at all, or that their Rule directs them right. He
would make a rare Converter of Unbelievers to Christ's Doctrine; who, instead of
bringing any Argument to prove that what his Church believes is truly such,
tells them very sadly and soberly, He has right Knowledge of it and is sure of
it, because he has considered Scripture as he ought and begged Wisdom of God.
But if this sincere Seeker hap to reflect, that these pretenses are things he
can never come to know, and that Socinians and all other Sects equally profess
to consider Scripture as they ought and to pray for Wisdom too, and yet all
contradict one another; he must, if he have Wit in him, and light upon no
better Controvertists, think Christians a company of Fops; who can show him no
assured Ground of Faith, but such a blind one as it is impossible for him to
see; and would have him believe that That is a Certain Means for him to arrive
at Christ's Faith, which every side, as far as he can discern, do equally make
use of, and yet are in perpetual variance and Contention with one another about
it: So that our Doctor got deep into his old Fanaticism again; and, which is
yet something worse, would have pure Nonsense pass for a Principle to secure
men of the Truth of the Points of Faith we believe, and be taken for a good
Argument in Controversy. Certainly, never was weaker Writer, or else a Weaker
Cause.

60. I am glad he confesses that a Rule of Faith must be Plain and Easy, and
that, otherwise, P. 77.
it could not be a Rule of Faith for all Persons. Let him then apply this to
the Dogmatical Points which are only in Question, and show it thus Easy to all
Persons in those Texts that contain those Articles, and his Work is at an End.
But alas! that Work, though it is his only Task, is not yet begun; nor, for any
thing appears, ever Will. For it is a desperate Undertaking to go about to
confute daily experience. What new Stratagem must be invented then to avoid it?
Why he must slip the true Point again and alter it to an Enquiry, Whether the
Scriptures were left only to the Church to interpret it to the People in all
Points, or whether it were intended for the General Good of the Church, so as
to direct themselves in their Way to Heaven, and consequently, whether it may
not be opened and understood by all Persons in Matters that are necessary for
their Salvation. What a rambling, what a clutter of Questions is here, when he
knows, and it has been repeated near a hundred a times over, that our only
Question is, whether the Letter of Scripture be intelligible by all sorts
coming to Faith in those Revealed Articles which are properly Christian with
such a Certainty as is fit to build Faith upon. But this is one main part of
his Confuting Talent, to throw in twenty Questions so none of them be the right
one. However, though he will not keep the Way, he will triumph unless we follow him
out of the Way. To his Questions then I answer 1. That none but Madmen ever
thought or said that the Church was to interpret it as obscure to the People in
All Points. For, ordinary Moral passages, such as the Ten Commandments are
plain enough of themselves. Why did he not Instance in the Trinity, the Godhead
of Christ and such like, which and only which we say are Obscure? Because, that
had been to speak to our purpose, and he thought it safer for him to suggest
other matters which were not all to purpose. 2. They were intended for the
General Good of the Church, to direct them in their Lives, and, so in their Way
to Heaven; and to that end are freely read by all that can understand Latin,
and might likely have continued permitted to all even of the most vulgar
capacities, had not men of his Principles made them think themselves, when they
had got a Bible in their hands, wiser than the whole Church. Whence they came
to wrest them to their own Destruction, and, therefore, it being now not for
the General Good of such proud Fools, the Church took care they should not be
promiscuously allowed to all, though indulged to many, even in the Vulgar Tongue,
and explained and preached to All by their Pastors. Lastly, None knows
distinctly what he means by Matters necessary to Salvation; He should mean such
as those sublime Points so often repeated; but then he must make out such
passages can be understood by all Persons looking after Faith with unerring
Certainty to secure their Faith from being so many Falsehoods or Heresies; But
he was not able to do this, though he pretended the Rule for all persons must be
plain and Easy. As far as I can guess by a man's words whose whole Discourse is
made up of Reserves, he mistakes the Rule of Manners for the Rule of Faith; and
thus meant it is indeed plain and Easy, but as it is such it is nothing to the
Question in debate, which is of Christian Faith, and so it is nothing to our
purpose. I, but Bellarmin says, Scripture is a Rule, and that a Certain and
Infallible one. But when it comes to the proof he speaks only of the Old
Testament, P. 78.
and this as to the Law, Testimonies, or Commandments, which are easily
intelligible as being either Levitical Ordinances, or Moral Precepts. I, but
Christ proves his Doctrine by the Scripture, and confutes the Sadduces from
them. Well, give us such an Interpreter of Scripture as Christ was, and we
shall not doubt but they will prove his Doctrine, and confute all the Heretics
in the World. His referring the Pharisees to Scripture was ad hominem; for they
allowed the Scriptures yet would not believe his Miracles; Though sure Dr St.
will not say but Christ's Miracles were in their own Nature more convincing
Arguments than Interpretations of Scripture made or allowed by the Pharisees.
But what is all this to our purposes. I gave three senses of the word [ Rule] in
my Third Catholic Letter, P. 82.83.
and showed him in which of those Senses it was and could only be called a Rule
in our circumstances. But I might as well have spoke to a deaf man: He must
either counterfeit he never heard of it, or he saw he must be baffled. Common
Words are his constant refuge, and to speak distinctly exposes him to be
Nonplust. His Friend Rule of Faith. p. 40.
Dr Tillotson maintains that a Rule of Faith is the next and immediate Means
whereby the Knowledge of Christ's Doctrine is conveyed to us. Does he pretend
that Learned Cardinal holds Scriptures Letter to be such a Rule for all People
coming to Christian Faith to know certainly its sense in these High Mysteries,
without the Churches Interpretation? The Dr knows he abhorrs the Tenet as the
source of all Heresy. Yet he quotes him on to say that Nihil est notius, Nihil
est Certius, nothing is more known, nothing more Certain than the Scripture; P*
78.
and immediately applies it against me for saying that the Third Cath. Letter
p. 43.44.45.
Sense of it as to the Understanding the Mysteries of our Faith was not easy to
be got out of the Letter. But where is his Sincerity? Not a syllable has
Bellarmin of Scriptures being so known as to its Sense, nor any thing that
looks that way. Bellarm. de verbo Dei. Lib. 1.2.
He speaks only of the Canon or Books being most known by the Consent of all
Nations who for so many Ages acknowledged its highest Authority; and that it is
most Certain and True (in its self) as not containing Humane Inventions but
Divine Oracles. So that our Learned Dr is exceedingly brisk when he gets the
Sound of any word on his side, no matter whether the sense be for him or
against him. If he can but gull his Reader dexterously his work is done. For a
Transition to treat of a Rule, he tells the Reader that I have spent Twenty
Years hard Labor about it. I have indeed Employed some years and much pains in
writing several Treatises to settle Christian Faith (as to our knowledge of
it) on a Sure Basis, which he and his Copartners are still Undermining; and I
glory in the Performance. In return, I will not tell the Dr that Mr Lowth says
he spent a longer time (that is Answer to Mr Lowth's Letter. p. 17.
full Five and Twenty years) in a worse Employment. I shall only say that I
have through God's Blessing, in less then two Months time, writ a little
Treatise against his Principles called Error Nonplust, which he has been
fifteen years in answering; and all his Quirks will never enable him to give it
even a plausible Reply in fifteen more.

61. And now we are come to scan the Nature of a Rule: Which being a Point to
be managed merely by Reason, the Reader must expect that one of us must
necessarily speak perfect Nonsense. For, however both sides may talk prettily
and plausibly when the business is handled in a Wordish way of Glossing
Citations, and such knacks of Superficial knowledge where the waxen ambiguous
expressions may be made pliable to the Writers Fancy; yet the Natures of Things
will not brook they should be Injured, but will Revenge themselves upon him
that wrongs them by exposing him to the shame of speaking perfect
Contradictions. I Third Cath. Letter p. 81.
alleged that the word [Rule] speaks Rectitude, and that such an Evident one
as preserves those who regulate themselves by it from Oliquity or Deviation;
that is, in our case, from Error. After the Dr. had played the Droll a while
upon particular words taken asunder from their fellows, P. 79.
as is his usual manner, he grants, There wants but one word to make it past
Dispute, viz. who effectually regulate themselves by it. Now the word Regulate
has clearly an Active Signification; whence, it being impossible an Action
should be without an Effect, it follows that Efficiency or Effectuallness is
involved in it is Notion: So that, to do a thing Effectually does not signify
any better degree of doing a Thing, but only to do it really and indeed. He
pretends [ Regulating] is an Ambiguous word, and therefore he assigns it a
double Signification. One of them is, what a Man does in Conformity to his
Rule: And Common sense tells us that as far as a man acts Unconformably to his
Rule, he is not Regulated by that Rule, whence, to act conformably to a Rule is
the self same as to be Regulated by the Rule to which he is to conform. This
then is one Signification of Regulating; and it is a right one; for to regulate
one's self by a Rule is nothing else but to Act conformably to it. Lets see the
other sense of the word Regulating. It Is this. To P 79. l. 25. p. 80. l. 20.
Profess P. 79. l. 27.
Declare and P. 80. l. 22.
Own to conform to a Rule, but not conform to it, that is, not follow that Rule
or Regulate themselves by it. Now, only to Profess, declare, and own to conform
to a Rule and not conform, is not to-follow it or Regulate themselves by it. So
that our Learned Dr. has given us here Two sorts of Regulating; One, which is
Regulating, the other which is not Regulating. Let us put an Instance. The Rule
of Justice is to pay every man his own: Now comes an unconscionable Debtor, and
maintains he has followed that Rule or Regulated himself by it in some Sense;
because he has professed, declared and owned he has followed that Rule, though he
has not Effectually and Indeed done so. Is not this a special way of Regulating
himself by the Rule of Justice, and a most Cheap way for a Man to pay debts
without disbursing a farthing? Yet he may justify himself by Dr. St's
Distinction, and maintain that he has paid them Professingly, owningly, and
declaringly, though not Effectually. Yet the Dr. is mighty fond of this choice
Distinction, and says All Mr S's Subtlety vanishes into nothing by plain and so
easy a Distinction. P. 80. l. 28.
Notwithstanding, as Nonsensicall as it is, he will bring two Instances to make
it good, viz. That there is one sort of Regulating which is Not-Regulating. The
one is of a Ciceronian, who Declares he orders his Speech by his Manner, and
yet for want of Sufficient skill and Care may use Phrases which are not
Cicero's. Now, it is plain that to Regulate himself by Cicero is to use his
Phrases; and can he then regulate himself by Cicero when he does not use his
Phrases? Can he be truly said to Regulate himself by him, when he does not use
his manner of speaking, merely because he Professes and Declares he does it? Or
can he be said to regulate himself by a Rule in that very thing in which he
Deserts that Rule and regulates himself by some other Author or his own Fancy?
Did ever Common Sense go so to wrack! If he says he intended to follow Cicero
but mistook, I understand him; but intending to do a thing is not doing it;
intending to get Riches is not to get Riches, otherwise none need be poor. His
Second Instance is, that some may Profess that Christ's Commands are their
Rule, Ibid.
and yet through their own Fault may deviate from them or Sin. But can Sinners
with any sense be said to regulate themselves by Christ's Commands, when they
Sin merely because they profess to follow his Rule of Life? Or can any man of a
settled Brain (Dr St. still excepted) pretend a Sinner can be said to be
regulated by that Holy Rule, and deviate from it, or Desert it at the same
time? So that his Instances as well as his Distinctions are pure Folly and
Contradiction. These Performances, we must think, qualify him to laugh at my
Admirable Logic for not allowing his palpable Nonsense; whereas himself is
still caught stumbling in the plainest paths of that Common Road to True
Learning. I could wish some of Dr St's Friends would advise him soberly to fall
to Quoting and Gleaning Notes, and then stitching them handsomely and
Methodically together; where he is in his own Element; for in that Wilderness
of words he may take his full vagary, and scribble to the World's End, without
much danger of meeting with Conclusive Evidence, which he so dreads and hates;
but certainly his Talent lies not in this crabbed way of close Reason. The rest
of his Discourse here is imposing upon me that I make men incapable of
deserting the Rules of Christian Faith and Virtue: though he knows in his
Conscience I have told him the express contrary above twenty times. All I
pretend to in my Discourse from the Nature of a Rule, is, that If followed, it
will secure the Followers of it from Error: But I no where ever said but All
Free Agents, or all Mankind may desert those Rules, and, by deserting them,
fall into Error and Sin too, unless supported by God's Grace. He asks if it be
possible for men to misunderstand a Certain Rule; and I tell him, it is, P. 81.
in case it be not Clear as well as Certain: And Third Cath. Letter p. 6.7.8.
I have already shown him that the Living Voice and Practice of the Church (our
Rule) has so many ways of delivering clearly her own Sense, (or Christ's
Doctrine) that the Generality cannot fail of understanding it right; however
diverse Souls to whom this Rule is not so well applied, remaining less
cultivated by their own Carelessness or the Negligence of Pastors, may hap to
misunderstand some Points. Nor can they run into Error so as to fix in it, P.
81.
while they think to follow the Rule: For, knowing they are to receive their
Faith from the Church, they take not upon themselves to judge of Faith, as his
Sober Enquirers do, whom he allows to judge of Scriptures Sense without any
Certain Teacher to preserve them from Error and Heresy; whence such men became
fixed and unretractable, by fancying they have Gods Word on their side; while
the others continue docil and capable of the Churches Instruction upon any
occasion: And, when it comes to be discovered (as in likelihood it will be) by
their expressions that they have any Misconceit concerning Faith, it obliges
them to seek to be better informed by the Church, their Mistress, whom they are
willing to hear and believe; and the Church too becomes obliged to rectify
their Mistakes, and instruct their Ignorance.

P. 82.
62. I have spoken formerly of his Necessary Points. Only I am to observe here
that he avoids very carefully with If's, the telling us whether any of the
highest Mysteries of our Faith be necessary for Salvation. But must we still be
put off with that frigid Evasion that such sublime Points are as intelligible
now at this distance from the time of the Apostles, though only couch't in a few
words in a Book, as they were when spoke by those Living Teachers; who
doubtless not only delivered their Sense in a few set words, but (such Points
needing it) explained it and dilated upon it, to settle it better, and sink an
express conceit of it deeper into the minds of their Auditors? Can it be
imagined but that many of the People; and the Pastors especially, put their
doubts, and asked them Questions, concerning the Points of Faith they had
Preached, and received pertinent Answers; none of which a Book could do. How
ridiculous a pretense then is this! Yet this is his best shift: For, unless the
Book have This or an Equivalent Virtue to make Clear its Sense, it cannot have
the Plainness or Clearness requisite to a Rule of Faith. He contends that, if
those Points be necessary to Salvation, they must be so Plain that we may be
Certain of our Duty to believe them. Which retorts his Discourse upon himself;
for if those two sublime Articles there spoken of be Necessary for the
Salvation of the Generality (which cannot be denied without accusing the
Primitive Church of Tyranny for casting those out of the Church who denied
them) then they must be Certain, one way or other, that it is their Duty to
believe them; and, since he does not think fit to say this Duty can be
Certainly shown them by the Letter of Scripture, it follows that this Duty to
believe them, must be made Certain by the Testimony of the Church delivering
them. It Is easy to be seen the whole force of his Discourse here is built on
his begging the Question, that Scriptures Letter as understood by Private
Judgments, is the Rule of Faith; and that it is plain in all Necessary Points:
Which he ought not to do without showing us first which Points are Necessary,
at least those of the Trinity, and Godhead of Christ, if he think them so, and
then proving his Rule is Plain in all such Points; and not still to suppose,
presume upon, and occurr to that which is yet under Dispute, Vngranted, and
Unprov'd. Let me then mind him of one piece of Logic, which though it be not
Admirable, yet it is Solid and never regarded by him. It Is this, that no
Argument has any force upon another, but either by its being so Evident that he
must forfeit his Reason to deny it, or Granted by his Adversary; so that he
must either Argue from something Clear of it self or made Clear by Proof, or
else argue Ex concessis from the Party's own Concession. By which Rule if all
the Reasons he brings here were examined, it will manifestly appear he has not
spoken one word of True Reason against me in his whole Answer. I do here
Challenge him to show me so much as any One Argument of his that has either of
these Qualifications: and to encourage him to such a performance, if he can
show me any One such, I promise him to pass all the rest for valid and good. I
end with desiring the considering Reader to reflect on the Drs Discourse here
p* 82. and upon an exact review of it to determine whether Principles are not
deeply laid here to make the Socinians and many other known Heretics, Members
of his Church, and to free them from Church Censurers. For if they find not in
Scripture that the Apostles Preached the Trinity and Godhead of Christ in clear
and Express terms, and with this Connotate, [ as necessary to Salvation] they
cannot be Certain of their Duty to believe them, the Consequences of which I
need not dilate on. His own Church is more concerned to look to his Tenets than
I am.

P. 83.
63. He triumphs much that I grant Some may be saved without the Knowledge of
all Christ Taught; He means, those Spiritual Points so often mentioned. But, if
he knew how little advantage he gains by it, he would not think it worth his
taking notice of. What may be done in an abstracted case is one thing; what, if
they live in a Church, and hold Heresies contrary to Christ's and the Church's
Doctrine, is Another. Some Catholic Divines treating of Faith do mantain that
to hold There is a God, and that He is a Rewarder and Punisher, is Simply
enough for Salvation if they live up to those Tenets; whence they conceive
hopes that Nebuchadnezzar was saved though he was no Jew. But what is this to our
case? Christ has left us a Body of Doctrine; and since he did nothing
Unnecessary for the Salvation of Mankind, this being the End of his Coming and
Preaching, each Point conduced to that End either immediately or by
Consequence, whence by the way it is a Folly to expect the Apostles Taught such
Points as necessary to Salvation, others as not necessary, since no Point was
Unnecessary for the Salvation of Mankind; except when they said for
Distinction, Dico ego, non Christus, or used some Equivalent expression. But to
return, God has also settled a Church to conserve that Doctrine of Christ
Entire. Whence, if any falls into Heresies contrary to that Doctrine by
Misunderstanding Scripture's Letter in such passages, it is her Duty to cast
them out of the Church and deliver them over to Satan, for their contumacious
Pride in preferring their own Private Judgments before the Judgment of their
Pastors, and the Church whom God appointed to Teach Them. Whence, I do assure
him I do not hold that any one such Privative Unbeliever will ever be saved,
though he holds some Points which, of their own Nature might suffice for
Salvation. For, such a man believes nothing at all but upon his own Self
conceit, and the very Ground of his Faith, let him prate of Scripture as much
as he will, is Spiritual Pride; which Vice alone is enough to damn him, even
though he held all those Points of Christ's Faith to a Tittle. Hence follows that
either the Primitive Church (as hinted above) was very uncharitable in
Excommunicating those who dissented from those High Articles; Or else, the Rule
of Faith must be so Plain and Clear that it must preserve those from Heresy who
follow it, and render them Inexcusable who by deserting it do fall into the
opposite Heresies: And, therefore, that we may bring our Discourse back to the
Question, he must either prove his Rule of Faith thus Qualified, or It Is no
Rule. What follows to p. 85. is mere Drollery; which gives all the seeming
Strength to his Weak reasoning. Only he has a fling at Transubstantiation,
which is a Topic of course in his Controversy. He thinks it is Unnecessary to
the Church; but the Church it seems thought it necessary to define it, in her
Circumstances; and I humbly conceive the necessary occasion of defining it was,
because such as He Equivocated in the Tenet of the Real Presence; and
(according to the Drs late Distinction making Not-Regulating to be one sort of
Regulating) would needs have the word [ Reall] to mean [ Not-Reall] whence it
was judged expedient to put it past quibble by such a rigorously-express
Definition. And I much fear this vexes the Drs Sacramentarian Spirit far more
then Transubstantiation it self. I omit, that he has forgot here the Common
distinction of what Points are necessary Necessitate Medij, and what
Necessitate Praecepti. I suppose because this Later did not suit with his
Levelling Principles, which set the Church and his Rabble on even Ground as to
Matters of Faith.

64. I alleged that those Articles of the Trinity and Christ's Godhead were
Fundamental Points; and therefore if his Rule could not Absolutely Ascertain
People of all sorts coming to Faith of those Articles, it could assure them of
None, and so is no Rule of Faith. He runs quite away from the Points, and
thinks he has done enough to say, It is Absolutely Certain that God has
revealed the Fundamentalls of our Faith. P. 85.
But the Question sticks still, Are you Absolutely Certain by your Rule that
the Trinity and Christ's Godhead are Christ's Doctrine or signified with
Absolute Certainty by Scripture's Letter? To this he says nothing, but shifts
it off most Shamelessly to another thing. Let him set himself to do this which
is his Task, and we will undertake to examine the Nature of his Medium, and show
it Inconclusive. I alleged that there is Experience, by the Socinians taking
the same way, that his Medium or way to be Certain of this is not Certain. He
again turns off Experience that the way he takes is not Certain, to Experience
of his Inward Certainty, or his Inward Persuasion. And asks briskly, whether he
or I know best? A pleasant Gentleman! Why does he not confute all my Book by
that Method? Does he think it is enough to show he is Absolutely Certain of the
Sense of Scripture as to those Points, with barely saying, he knows he is thus
Certain of it better than I? What wretched Shifts are these? In pursuance of
this new Method of Proving and Confuting He asks again, How comes Mr. S. to
know we are not Certain when we say we are? Ibid.
Because, when you are most highly Concerned, and stood Engaged by promise to
show this Absolute Certainty, and are Pressed to it Vehemently, and upon the
brink of losing your Credit for not doing it, you still decline the showing you
have any such Certainty for the Sense of Scripture as to those Points. Still he
asks, Are not we Certain because some (that is, the Socinians) are not Certain?
No, Sir, not barely for that reason; but because the Socinians proceeding upon
the Same Rule, are so far from being Certain of the Sense of Scripture as to
those Points, that they esteem themselves Certain by the same Scripture of
Heretical Tenets Point Blank Opposite to those Points. Common Reason assures us
no End can be compassed without a Means, and therefore you can never show us
You are Certain, till you show us you follow a better Way, rely on a firmer
Ground, and Guide your selves by a Clearer Light to make you Certain of
Scriptures Sense in those passages, than They do: which you can never show,
and, as appears by your wriggling from that Point by the most untoward Shifts
imaginable, dare not Attempt. But some are uncertain of Orall Tradition, nay
Censure it: I do not know one man but holds and reverences it. It lies upon his
Credit to name those who Censure it: For Lominus is a Chimaerical name and
signifies no body that he knows. But suppose Some did; yet it being an object
of Natural Reason, they and I in that case, could not proceed on the Same
Grounds or Reasons; as his Protestants and the Socinians do upon the Same Rule
of Faith.

65. I alleged that by his Principles, he could be no more Certain of his
Rule, then he is of the Truth of the Letter of Scripture, in regard the Truth
of the Sense of Scripture depends on the Trueness of the Letter. Does he deny
this? Or does he show that without the Care of the Church preserving the Letter
Right all along, he can have any Such Certainty of the Letter? He not so much
as Attempts either. I alleged farther that he cannot be thus Certain of the
Right Letter without having the same Certainty of the Right Translation or the
True Copy; nor that any Copy is True, unless it be taken from the First
Original. Does he deny this? Or does he show that all these may not fail if
the Churches's Care be set aside? No, neither. What Shift has he then? Why he
says, 1. That some of us are Concerned to Answer this as well as He. P. 86.
Not at all, for those who say that Part of Faith is Contained in Scripture, do
not, for all that, say that their Faith is built on Scripture's Letter
interpreted by any but the Church; nor do they say but the Church without
Scripture could have ascertained them of their Faith. 2. He says, This strikes
at the Authentickness of the Vulgar Translation. Not at all: For we have other
Grounds to go upon which they have Not. 3. He skips, after bringing some words
of mine for what they were never intended, from the Translation, to the Canon
of Scripture, which are a Mile wide from one another, P. 86. l. 26.27.28.
that so he may, however he speeds in all the rest, at least talk plausibly of
the Concurrent Testimony for the Canon. In order to which, he stands up a
Patron for those Christian Churches of his who thus concurred; and will not
condemn them as not truly Christian till their Cause be better heard and
examined. Yet it is Evident from his Second Letter to Mr. G. p. 25. that some of
those Churches were Arians, Nestorians, and Eutychians, condemned for Heretics
by most Ancient General Councils; which he blames, it seems, for declaring so
rashly against them, and reprieves his Friends from their Censures till a
fairer Hearing. It had been happy for them, had Dr. St. presided in those
Councils, for he would doubtless have dealt with them very kindly, and have
clapped them head and tail together with good Catholics, into one Latitudinarian
Bill of Comprehension. 5. I alleged that the same Sense in the heart of the
Church enabled and obliged Her to correct the Copy when faulty in Texts
containing Points of Faith; which, instead of showing it Incompetent or
Disagreeable to the Nature of things, he confutes most Learnedly by pretending
that Atheists and Unbelievers would be scandalized at it. P. 87
Whereas they would be much more scandalized to see no Certain Means assigned
to preserve the Letter right from the beginning (the very first Originals being
lost) and all left, (the Churches Care set apart) to so many contingences of
Translating and Transcribing. 6. We must prove it first to be impossible for
the Sense of the Church to vary in any two Ages. As if this had not been proved
already, and never yet answered but by Shuffles and Evasions. 7. He frames a
Plea for the Arians against the Nicene Council from my Principles: but very
untowardly, for the Arians allowed the Copies, and quoted Scripture as fast as
Catholics did, and yet Erred most abominably; which makes against himself.
Lastly, P. 88.
he tells us that it is a pernicious Principle, a miserable Account, etc. At
which I wonder not. For, every thing is miserable and pernicious with him that
makes the Church good for any thing. Yet he Dr St's Sermon at Guild Hall. p.
11.12.
could grant the Churches Testimony was needful at first to abett the Truth of
the Gospells; and she enjoyed that Privilege in Aug. in Epist. Fund.
St. Austins time; and I wonder how she came to lose her Title to God's
Gracious Providence and Assistance, or how she came to be disabled in the
following ages to preserve the Letter uncorrupted in those Texts that contained
known Points of Faith. It seems, Translaters, and Transcribers (for the most
part Mercenary) are Sacred with him, and admirable Preservers of the Letter;
but, alas! the Miserable Church is good for nothing. I have Third Cath. Letter
p. 82.83.^4*
already told him why I hold Scriptures Letter no Rule, how it is sometimes
called a Rule in an improper Sense, and why that Sense is improper, and his
Friend Dr. Tillotson has told him what a Rule of Faith means Rule of Faith. p.
6. and p. 40.
in our Controversies; but he never heeds either: but runs on here with
frivolous descants upon an ambiguous word, and will needs take [ Rule] in a
Sense never meant, nor possible to be meant in our circumstances. He Is not
satisfied with the Care of the Council of Trent in correcting the Copy. But let
him remember I spoke there of Texts of Inferior Concern, not of those that
concerned Faith. And why is he not satisfied? Did she not do her best in the
present Circumstances? P. 88.
How will he prove it? Because Clemens the 8 th recalled and corrected the
Bibles put out by Sixtus the 5 th for an exact Edition. But, if both did their
best, according to the Observations were made in their time, and the Light they
had then, neither of them were to blame. But all this Humane Diligence amounts
not to Absolute Certainty as I. S. requires of us: And is it not more reason I
should require it of him than he of me, since he makes it (Scriptures Letter)
the Proper Rule of Faith, which he knows I do not, and yet, which is pleasant
he calls upon me aloud to declare as much, and then he knows how to answer. And
now I know the true Reason why he has answered nothing hitherto, viz. because I
had not declared what I had owned in all my Books near a thousand times over.
But we have lost our point by answering a multitude of Impertinent Cavills.
It Is this. The Sense of Scripture cannot be Absolutely Certain, unless there be
Absolute Certainty the Letter is right: Nor can there be Absolute Certainty the
Letter is right even in Texts relating to Faith by his Principles, which deny
this was performed by the Churches Knowledge of the Points of Faith, but by
making out with Absolute Certainty how the Letter was by some other Means
secured from being wrong. This he never attempts even in this very occasion
when it lay upon him to do it; and, therefore, for all his empty flourishes he
has said just nothing. Nor has shown or defended that even the Ground of his
Faith, Scriptures Letter, is Absolutely Certain. Besides his Discourse still
beats upon this mistake that We do not hold the Letter Absolutely Certain in
such concerning Texts; whereas we only say He cannot prove it to be such by his
Principles; and he makes our words good with not performing it, or so much as
attempting it. Only he tells us for our comfort, that as to Books, Copies, P.
91.
and Translations, he has as high a Certainty as the thing is capable of; and
then it is Madness to expect and require more. So that, though it happen that the
Certainty be but a very slight one, his kind of Faithful and Converts may
take their choice whether they will be Fools if they will believe it, or Madmen
if they will not. He tells us indeed faintly the Faith previous to Divine
Faith, may have Absolute Certainty; but if it only may have it, it may not have
it. In the mean time, what is all this voluntary Saying, to his Proving that he
has really and indeed Absolute Certainty of those Books, Copies, and
Translations. It Is his Proofs we looked for, and not bare Narrations of his own
weak Tenets, with which he thus puts us off continually.

66. But how strangely Insincere (if any such carriage could after so frequent
use of it be strange in him) is the Dr to pretend we hold it is in any Churches
Power to correct Original Texts because they contradict the Sense of the
present Church. These words he puts into Italick Letter as if they were mine;
but he cites no place, and I do assure the Reader I have neither such Words nor
Sense. The first Originals are not extant, and so cannot be corrected; and
those called Originals, which are already acknowledged, ought as little to be
corrected as the other, in Texts belonging to Faith. All the Power we give the
Church is to correct succeeding Copies upon occasion, in Texts relating to the
Articles of our Faith, when they deviate from the Faith of the Church, or
(which is the same) from former Copies allowed by her universally.

67. I desired the Dr to satisfy us concerning the Number of Books requisite to
a Rule of Faith, and how many will just serve the turn; as also whether some
Book, for any thing his Principles can assure us, were not lost. This lay upon
him to prove, and this with Absolute Certainty, if he would have Scripture an
Entire Rule of his Faith; How proves he it? P. 92.93.
Why, he makes me mightily concerned to lessen the Authority of the New
Testament; and that I charge the Christian Church with a Gross Neglect. For all
this Noise, he knows well enough that I agree with him, that it is not in the
least probable the Churches should suffer any such Book dispersed among them to
be last, nor do I so much as suppose they did. What I say is, that he who holds
all Humane Authority Fallible, can never prove it True they delivered down All;
unless he can convince the World that a Fallible Medium can prove a thing True;
which he cannot do without proving that What may be False is True. Nor can he
do This, without proving the same thing may be and not be at once. I wish then
he would set himself to work, and prove this abominable First Principle to be
False; For, otherwise, This alone will confute all the substantial parts of his
Book, and convince every man of Common Sense, that his Grounds, confessed by
himself to be Fallible, can never make out, that it is True that he has either
Right Letter, or Right Sense of Scripture, or that no Book is lost, etc. and so
there is an End of his Problematical Faith. I must confess that to prove First
Principles False is something difficult; but I have reduced the business to as
narrow a compass as I can, that he may make short work of it. He recurrs at
present for want of some Clear Proof, P. 93.
to Gods Providence concerned in preserving Books written by Divine
Inspiration, Of which none doubts. But, why should not God's Providence be as
much concerned in preserving his Church from Erring in Faith that so both all
those Books, their Letters and Sense might be kept right as far as was
Necessary? Or, why was God's Providence the Less for making the Churches Care
and Help the Means to preserve both the Books and Letter of Scripture from
suffering detriment? Lastly, why must his Providence be confined to only
Translaters and Transcribers?

68. Dr St. in his second Letter to Mr. G. p. 32. made the Canon of the New
Testament the Rule of his Faith. To show the Inconsistency of his Tenets, and
utterly overthrow his Pretense of that Rule, I First Cath. Letter. p. 58.59.
alleged, that If the whole Canon be his Rule, then his Rule was deficient for
some hundreds of years till the whole Canon was Collected and Acknowledged. I
pressed farther, that, since it must take up some time e're those several Books
were Spread and accepted, sometimes the Primitive Church had according to his
Principles, but Three quarters of their Faith* Half of their Faith, or less,
and so were but Three-quarters or Half-Christians, according as the several
pieces came by degrees to be Universally accepted. For no man of Sense can
doubt but that it cost some time e're the Churches, so diffused, heard of all
those Books, and much more e're they could be perfectly satisfied of the
Universal Testimony of the Church Ascertaining them to have been writ by men
Divinely inspired; in regard it was of most Dangerous Consequence to accept
that for Gods Word, which was not beyond all doubt such. So that we may with
reason imagine that some Churches had at first but Two or Three Books of
Scripture, others but Four or Five that were well attested or could be relied
on in such a High Concern. Add, that there were diverse false Gospells and
Spacious Books given out under the names of having the Apostles or Apostolical
Men for their Authors; which must have redoubled their care, and made them
backward to receive any that were not Authentic, which would take up still
more time to examine thoroughly. To press my Argument still more home, I urged
that perhaps, according to him, they had no Faith at all during that long
Interval; because wanting other Books or sufficient warrant to rely on them,
they, by consequence wanted a Multitude of other Texts, with which they might
Compare those they already had, which is one part of his Method to find true
Faith in Scripture. To show more the Inconsonancy of his Doctrine, I noted
that, notwithstanding all this, Second Letter to Mr G. p. 31.
he declared that he looked upon the Primitive Church though so ill furnished with
his Rule, as on the Best Arbitrator between us in all our Controversies about
the Sense of the doubtful (that is Controverted) places of Scripture. Now, one
would verily think this pressing Discourse, following the Point in Question so
Close and pursuing it so Home, were exceedingly worth his while to Answer, if
he could; since it touched his Rule and his Cause to the quick. Now lets see
what he says in their Defense. The Substance of his Answer (for all the rest is
impertinent) is a most doughty and most weighty word [If] If God (says he) has
so Abundantly provided for his Church that there may be a full Revelation of
all Points of Faith in the rest, P. 95.
then the disputing the Authority of such an Epistle (meaning that to the
Hebrews) does not derogate from the Compleatness of the Rule of Faith. What Is
become of his Sincerity and Moral Honesty, which he so professed to Love? Did I
speak of the Epistle to the Hebrews? Did not I, not only speak of but most
Expressly discourse all along of those many or most Books of Scripture, not
Universally known and accepted at the very first, but by degrees spreading and
gaining in Process of Time the Credit of being Authentic? Does not my
Discourse that by his Principles [ The Primitive Church had but Three quarters
of her Faith, half her Faith, or less] bar this Shamming Pretense that I speak
only of that Epistle? Or does he think I meant that that single Epistle was
half or three quarters of the Canon of Scripture? And now, Reader, I beg thy
leave to insist here upon this Prevarication as an instance of one great Part
of his Method in Confuting. He picks out a word or two which may best serve him
to slip away from the Point; and turn it to quite another business, but leaves
the whole Stress and full import of the Argument Unanswered. It were tedious
still to reflect how often he has done thus in this pretended Reply to my
Catholic Letters: But, whoever compares his several Answers to the
respective places he pretends to speak to, will see how dull and insignificant
they are; though if he be read alone, especially with an Implicit Belief of his
dealing fairly, they look very jolly and brisk. However to divert the Readers
Eye he is even with me in another Point. I said the accepting or not accepting
Books whether in the Latin or Greek Churches was an Act of Prudence Antecedent
to the Judgment or Determination of any Church, Third Cath. Letter. p. 57.
and so could not make or mar the Latin Church's Infallibility in her
Judgment or Decrees. He falls into a gross mistake of the word [ Antecedent]
and erects a Trophy of Victory upon his own Error. To clear which it is to be
observed that our Divines admit Prudentiall Considerations in any Church, even
though held Infallible, Previous to her Decrees, and yet do not hold that Church
is Infallible in those Acts of Prudence which are thus Antecedent. Now, though
the whole Series of my Discourse there shows clearly that I spoke of an
Antecedency in the Course of Humane Actions, or of a Prudentiall Deliberation
Antecedent to an Absolute Decision; he turns it to an Antecedency in
Chronology, or of more Ancient Writers; P. 96.
and when he has applied that word to a wrong matter he has the Vanity to
insult. But, he says, I say not a Syllable to his proving hence the Roman
Church was not then believed Infallible. Surely he never considered what he
pretends to Answer; for by saying it was not only an Act of Prudence Antecedent
to any Degree, I show there was no occasion to show what was then believed of
her Infallibility or not believed. Again, since the Certainty of that Epistles
being writ by St. Paul depended on Testimony, other Churches might perhaps know
that better for some time than She. But, the worst is, he was preparing for New
Questions, to avoid the danger in keeping to the True one. For he knew the
Infallibility of the Church we are here defending, is that of Tradition in
delivering down the Doctrine of Christ; and he does not, sure, judge it a Point
of Christ's Doctrine that the Epistle to the Hebrews was writ by S. Paul. Add,
that when the Church of Rome did Decree any thing at all in that matter, it was
for the Reception of that Epistle; in doing which he will not, I hope, say she
Erred. So that our great Dr is out in every particular in which he shows such
Confidence, or rather he is to talk very Confidently whenever he is out, that
he may not seem not to be out.

69. He puts my Objection against his Universal Consent, P. 97.
of the Testimonies of Marcion, Ebion, Valentinus and Cerinthus, who (as he
makes me say) rejected the Canon of the New Testament; and then asks, Could any
man but J. S. make such an Objection as this? And, I may, I hope, ask another
Question; Could any Man but Dr St. put such a Gull upon his Adversary and the
Reader too? Now, if I used such words as [ who rejected the Canon of the New
Testament] I spoke Nonsense; for those Heretics were dead long before that
Canon was settled: But if I did not, then he has abused me and our Readers too,
and done no great right to himself. Let Eyesight decide it. In my Third
Catholic Letter. p. 59. (the place he cites) line 11.12. my express words are,
The Consent of all your Christian Churches for Scripture; and he instead of [
Scripture] puts down as my words [ The Canon of the New Testament.] I can
compassionate Humane Oversight (for it may hap possibly though it can never
knowingly to be my own Case) and not too severely impute a mistake in altering
my Words, and by them my Sense: Yet I must needs say that to put those wrong
words in the Italick Letter to breed a more perfect Conceit they were mine, and
quote the very page in the Margent where no such words were found, to make me
speak Nonsense, looks a little Scurvily; especially, because when men have
their Eyes upon the very Page, as he had, they have an easy and obvious
direction to the words too. But, why do I make such a Spiteful Reflection on
him as to call them His Christian Churches? Because he would needs allow other
Sects, as perfectly Heretical as they were to be [ Dr St's Second Letter to Mr
G. p. 24.25.
Christian Churches] though he was put upon it to give them a distinct Character;
and here again he grants them to be parts of the Christian Church, P. 98.
though they be cut off by Lawful Authority from the body of Christianity. Next,
that I may speak my conscience, because I fear, by many passages in his Books,
by his ill-laid Principles, and the very grain of his Doctrine and discourses,
he judges all to be good Christians who profess to ground their Faith on
Scripture, let them hold as many Heresies as they will. And, lastly, for his
fierce anger here against me for calling those Heretics, viz. The Arians,
Nestorians, etc. which have been Condemned by General Councils, (for I concern
not my self with his Greeks or Abyssins or any others) Excrementitious
Outcasts, P. 102.
and that I sling such dirt in the face of so many Christian Churches. And is
not this to cry, Hail fellow, well met? But my Cause (he says) is desperate,
because I call such men Knights of the Post. Yet he knows the Fathers often
complain of Heretics for corrupting the Scripture; and the Testimony of the
Churches Truly Christian was Absolutely Certain, without calling in so
needlessly Blasted Witnesses. Moreover I told him that the Universal Testimony
he produced did attest the Books, but it must attest the Chapter and Uerse too
to be Right, nay each Significant Word in the Verse, otherwise the Scripture
could not assure him Absolutely of his Faith. Can he deny this? If the Chapter
or Verse he cites be not True Scripture, or if any material Word in the Verse
be altered can he securely build his Faith on it? What says he to this? Does he
deny it, or show that His Grounds reach home to prove these particular Texts or
Words to be right, by Universal Testimony or any other Medium? Neither of them
is his Concern: What does he then? Why he complains how hardly we are satisfied
about the Certainty of Scripture and that we are Incurable Scepticks. P. 99.
Sure he dreams. We are Satisfied well enough; but his Vexation is that we are
not satisfied of it by his Principles; and how should we; if, when it was his
Cue to satisfy us, he will never be brought to go seriously about it? And why
must we be Scepticks; when as we both hold the Rectitude of the Letter our
selves in Texts relating to Faith, and Assign a way to secure it Absolutely,
which he cannot? Must all Men necessarily be Scepticks who allow not his No-way
of doing this, though they propose and Maintain a certain way that can do it?
This is a strange way of Confuting. He says There are different Copies in all
Parts to examine and Compare. It Is these very Copies that are in Question,
whether they give Absolute Certainty of every Verse or material Word in the
Letter of Scripture, and we expected he should have shown how they did so, and
not barely name them, and say there are such things. But the main Point is,
Must those who are looking for Faith run to all parts of the World, and examine
and Compare all the Copies e're they embrace any Faith? This looks like a Jest:
Yet it is a sad, though a mad Truth by his Principles. For without knowing this,
Scripture cannot be their Rule; and he will allow no way to come to Faith but by
Scripture; So that, for any Assurance he can give them, (even of his Necessary
Points) they must e'n be content to stay at home, and live and dye without any
Faith at all. He ends. And Thus I have answered all the Objections I have Met
with in J. S. against our Rule of Faith. Here are two Emphaticall words [ Thus]
and [ Met] of which the word Thus has such a pregnant Signification and teems
with so many indirect wiles and Stratagems that it would be an ungrateful task
to recount them; and the word [ Met] is as Significant as the other. For how
should he Meet those that lay in the way, while he perpetually runs out of the
Way.

SECT. IV. How solidly Dr. St. Answers our Arguments for the Infallibility of
Tradition.
70. BUt now he exerts his Reasoning Faculty, which he does seldom, P. 100.
and will answer Mr G's Argument for the Infallibility of Oral and Practical
Tradition. With what success we shall see anon. But, first he will clear his
bad Logic for letting the Argument stand yet in its full force, and falling
very manfully to Combat the Conclusion: and though Common Sense tells every man
this is not to Answer but to Argue, yet he will have Arguing to be Answering
for all that. It Is his Interest to do it solidly, for he has all the World, who
in their Disputes follow the contrary Method, to confute. His main reason to
prove that Arguing is a good way to Answer is because the Argument attempts to
prove a thing Impossible, and that it is contrary to Sense and Experience to say
the Latin and Greek Churches do not differ in what they receive upon Tradition;
P. 101.
and so the same Answer that Diogenes gave to Zeno's Argument against Motion by
Walking, will serve the turn. Let Us examine this parallel, in which consists the
substance of his Defense of his bad Logic. Does all the World see that the
Generality of the Greek Church proceed upon Tradition in what they differ from
the Latin as certainly and evidently as they see there is Motion? Have not I
produced in my First Catholic Letter, p. 35. reasons enough to show him how
disputable this point is, none of which he so much as mentions? Did not I there
p. 13. quote him out of his own book Peter Lombard, saying, that the Difference
between the Greeks and Latins is in Words and not in Sense? Nay, Thomas a Jesus,
Azorius, etc. who were of the same Judgment? And could not these Learned men
see a thing manifest to Sense and Experience? Our point then is nothing like
that of denying Motion, nor is it contrary to Sense and Experience, but such as
bears a Dispute amongst intelligent Men and Great Scholars, and therefore,
even by the Drs own Discourse, an Argument or Instance, brought against the
Conclusion was no Answer to the Premises of the Argument brought by Mr. G. and
so all the Division he runs upon it here is perfectly frivolous. Nor was Mr G.
obliged either to grant or deny the Greek Church had Erred, but was to insist
on an Answer to his Argument; because the Dr had played foul play, in attacking
his Conclusion when he was to answer his Proof; which if admitted, no Discourse
could possibly proceed. For, let us suppose Dr. St. had been to argue, and had
brought this Instance of the Greek Church; would he have thought it fair that
Mr G. when he was to answer it, should have brought the Argument he made use of
in the Conference, and have bid him prove that two Churches following Tradition
differed in Faith, notwithstanding his Demonstration that they could not? Or,
would it be held a competent Answer to his late Book against the Council of
Trent, to bid him prove it had not followed Tradition, notwithstanding all that
a multitude of Learned Catholic Authors had writ to the contrary? I took heart
then indeed, as he says, seeing the Dr so Nonplust, P. 102.
but it is his own fiction that I resolved to grapple with his Instance, it
being impertinent to do it in those circumstances, and so he may thank himself
if he were disappointed. I was tied to the known Laws of Dispute, and not bound
to dance after his Pipe when he strays from all the Clearest Methods of
Reasoning. I objected that himself had defended the Greek Church from Erring in
his Rational Account; which spoils his own Instance of a Church going upon
Tradition and Erring. He calls this Trifling, and says the Dispute was about Mr
G 's Argument. Yes; but these words were not brought to abet his Agreement, but
expressly to show the Drs Inconsonancy to himself, and his Unconscienciousness
in arguing from the Greek Churches Erring; whereas it was his Opinion it did
not Err. And though Mr G's Answer may be pretended not to be so pat to the
particular Demand, yet it was apposit to the main Point that no Church did at
once adhere to Tradition and Err at the same time. For which I gave my reason,
P. 103.
because if each Successive Generation followed their Fathers Tradition from
the beginning, the last Son must believe as the first did. This was too hot to
handle, P. 104.
and so it is answered with Good Night to the Greek Church; which is Learned
beyond expression. Lastly, upon my saying, He might as well have instanc't in
the Latin Church it self, without running so far as Greece; he takes hence an
occasion to accept of the Challenge, though it did not look like one, being only
spoke occasionally; and threatens us not with a bare instance but a whole Book
against us: He may use his pleasure; though I must tell him it looks but cowardly
to threaten when he is running away from his business, undertaken and not yet
performed; and leaving the Absolute Certainty of his poor destitute Faith in
the suds. One would think it had been the more Compendious Way to overthrow our
Cause, to answer five or six lines if he could have done it. But, he had a mind
to be at another Work more suitable to his Quoting Genius, and hoped to draw us
after him from a Conclusive and short way of Discoursing to an Endless one, of
answering every frivolous misunderstood or misapplied Citation.

P. 104.
71. But now he will show us how it is Possible to adhere to Tradition and yet
err. A hard Task, if applied to our business! For, since to adhere to Tradition
is still to believe what was delivered, to show that those who adhere to
Tradition do err, is to show that they who still believed the same Christ
taught did not believe the same Christ taught. A Point so Evident that his
Reflecter could not but grant it. Yet let the Dr alone; I dare hold a good
wager on his side that he can by his confuting Method and his Logic prove
direct Contradictions to be True without any difficulty, or, as he calls it
here, with an Easy Distinction. He begins with two Senses of Adhering to
Tradition. One of adhering to it as the Rule and Means of conveying matters of
Faith. The other for adhering to the very Doctrine taught at first and truly
conveyed down since by Tradition. That is, there are two sorts of Tradition or
Delivery; One is Tradition, the Other is not Tradition or Delivery, but the
Points delivered. Parallel to this is his Distinction of Traditionary
Christians. To what purpose is it, to talk Sense to a man who is resolved to
run still so wildly into Nonsense? Do but see, good Reader, with what care I
had forestalled this very Absurd Distinction in my Third Catholic Letter, p.
4.5.9.12. and showed how he had deformed Tradition into all the untoward Senses
man's wit could invent, by making it now signify Articles, now Power, now
Points delivered; yet to convince the World that he cannot or rather must not
speak Sense, he is at the same work again as briskly as ever: And good reason:
Contradictions are better Friends to him than Principles: for nothing more
confounds the Reader, which is all he looks after; and to confound him with a
show of Distinguishing, which Nature intended for a way to clear things, does
it with a better grace. The same work he makes with the word [ Traditionary]
and, though he were told what we meant by it First Letter, p. 8. and Second
Letter, p. 52. yet it is never acknowledged, but he still runs his Division upon
it, as if it were some Ambiguous or Mysterious Word, till he has put the whole
Tenor of the Discourse into Confusion. Once more I tell him, and desire the
Reader to witness it, that he already knows what we distinctly mean by those
words: and, if he will not acknowledge it and speak to the Sense we give it
upon our assurance that we never took them, nor ever will take them otherwise,
he speaks not to me, nor gives a word of Answer; but, as baffled men use, runs
for shelter to mere Brabbles and Impertinencies.

72. And Now that is, P. 105.
after he had laid Contradictions for his Principles, he comes to give a Clear
and distinct Answer to our Demonstration of the Infallibility of Tradition. And
no doubt by Virtue of such Grounds he will do wonders. Mr. G's discourse was
distinguished by me in my First Letter p. 8.9. into four parts or Propositions;
of which, the First is, that All Traditionary Christians believe the same to
day which they did Yesterday, and so up to the time of our Blessed Savior. Now
he knows that by Tradition we mean an Immediate Delivery, and this from day to
day; for it would not be Immediate if it were at all Interrupted; and by [
Traditionary] those who followed this Rule of Immediate Delivery and do
Actually believe the say to day which they did yesterday; and that, if they do
not this, they desert this Tradition by Interrupting Immediate Delivery, and so
cease to be Traditionary Christians. All this he already knows for it has been
told him over and over: Whence he cannot but know, though he thinks not fit to
Acknowledge it, that the Proposition is Self-Evident, and plainly amounts to
this, that They who believe still the same do still believe the Same; and the
word [ Traditionary] was only made use of to express those Persons in one word,
because it had been tedious still to use so Many. Could any man but this
Gentleman undertake to combat a Proposition so formally, which is in Sense
Identicall and Self-Evident? I took him to be one who would own his Humane
Nature which obliges every man to assent to such Clearest Truths, and so vainly
hoped he had nothing to say to it. But, as he says very true, I was mistaken:
P. 105.
for he has many things to say to lay open the Notorious Fallacy of it in every
Clause. How? Every Clause? Why, there is but one Clause in the Whole; for the
adjoined words [ and so up to the time of our Blessed Saviour] are the most
Essential part of it, and distinguish Christian Tradition from that of
Heretical Traditions begun since Christ's time. So that the Dr makes account
that One signifies Many. This is but an ill Beginning; and I do assure the
Reader all the rest is not a jot Wiser. But, now come the Notorious Fallacies.
Why did I not say that All Christians are Traditionary? Or that All Christians
have gone upon this Principle? Because many are called Christians especially by
him, P. 106.
who have deserted this Principle, and so have no Title to be called
Traditionary: But principally, because if we speak of True Christians, that was
the thing to be Concluded; for those men are not such, who Disacknowledge a Way
of knowing Christ's Doctrine, which is proved to give them Absolute Certainty of
it. So that it is a Notorious Fallacy, according to Dr St's new Logic, not to
make the Conclusion the very First Proposition of an Argument; and the Fallacy
lies in judging that the Last thing should not be the First. Hitherto then this
most Learned Logician has not taken one step, without stumbling into a manifest
Contradiction. One Single Clause is Many Clauses. Self-Evident Propositions are
Notoriously Fallacious. Words, whose meaning have been particularly explained
to him over and over, and so can have but one Sense as we speak of them, may
have Many Senses: Adhering to and following Tradition is not adhering to it and
not following it, and the Conclusion or End of an Argument is to be the
Beginning of it, or the Proof is to be the Thing Proved. Nor is this any
wonder: for it is but fit that Self-Evident Truths should only be opposed by
Self-Evident Contradictions.

73. After these Noble Performances, P. 106.107.
he falls into his old track of Dividing and Subdividing, he talks of Evidence
from the Word of God, from the Guides of the Church, he runs to Infallibly
holding to Tradition, (not spoke of Yet, but following in the Argument) he
tells us they may go upon another Rule etc. Anticipating thus all the following
discourse, and complaining all is not proved at once, when as we are as yet but
at the very first words of the Proof. There is no End of the Faults and
Failings of these Sinful self-Evident Truths; Falsehoods and Contradictions are
Saints to 'em: P. 107.
It supposes falsely (he says) that the Change in Faith must be so sudden and
Remarkable, whereas it was Graduall, and so to pitch upon such a Precise and
Narrow Compass of time is very Unreasonable. Lastly, to Illustrate and complete
his Answer with an Instance, he tells us, that by the same Method one may
demonstrate it to be Impossible that any Language should be Changed. By which
we may gather that Dr St's Incomparable Skill in Philosophy, and deep
Inspection into the Natures of Things, makes account that Truths are of the
same Nature with Quantitative Things or Bodies. All Corporeal Motions, amongst
the rest Sounds or Speaking, have a Thousand Indeterminate Degrees between any
two determinate Points. Does he think it is so with Truths and Falsehoods? Or
does he imagine the Thoughts of the Christian World could take a Walk of two or
three Hundred years between Is and Is not? Did he never hear that Truths
consist in an Indivisible, that he thus compares them to Quantitative or
Divisible Natures, and judges the Comparison so apposit? Putting then once the
true Notion of the Points in the Head and Heart of the Christian Church, (and,
if they were never there the Apostles lost their labor) the least Change in it
must change the Point. Did he never reflect why a Tenet is Metaphorically
called a Point? And that it is because a Point is Indivisible? The putting in
the Proposition [ to day and Yesterday] is to express the Immediateness of
Tradition. Others, amongst the rest the Council of Trent, and many of the
Fathers, particularly St. Athanasius, call it [ Delivering down by Hands] and
the hands of the Children must be Immediate to the hands of their Fathers, else
the one could not receive what the other Delivers. Nor do I, or any man living,
know how, if the whole Church should be in an Error but one day, by deserting
the Rule of Faith, they should ever retrieve True Faith again, having forsaken
the only way to it. Of such consequence it is that the Means of conveying down
Christ's Faith be Immediate, even from day to day. And thus Dr St. has begun to
answer Mr G's Demonstration, by keeping such a huge pother about a Proposition
Evident by its own Light, and pretending more faults in it than even a wise man
could have shown in the Arrantest Falsehood. But he has not done with it yet:
the most Essential part of it remains yet behind; [ And so up to the time of
our Blessed Saviour] Now the Proposition speaks of Believing the same all that
while; P. 108.
and he confutes it with talking of Claiming and Pretending to follow it.
Whence, since to believe the same that was delivered, is Actually following
Tradition, his distinguishing Talent has afforded us two sorts of following
Tradition: One which is really and indeed following it, the other is only
pretending to follow it and not doing so; that is, there is one sort of
believing the same or of following Tradition, which is not-following of it,
which is still of the same Learned Strain.

74. The Second Proposition is [ And if they follow this Rule they can never
Err in Faith] what says he to this? If they follow this Rule, that is, believe
the same from Christ's time that was taught at first, do not they believe the
same Christ Taught! One would verily think that this is as Evident as it is
that, to believe the same is to believe the same. True, it is so, and therefore
it is with him Self-Evidently a mere Fallacy. P. 108.
Certainly never was any Mortal Man such an Enemy to Common Sense. But it is
his constant humor to talk big when he is at a perfect Nonplus. Well, but how
proves he it is a mere Fallacy. Why 1. He grants that those who believe Christ's
Doctrine cannot Err. P. 109.
And is not this a rare Answer? We both grant that Christ's Doctrine is True,
and consequently that who hold it cannot Err: All this is Presupposed to our
Question, and so is no part of it. But our Point is how we shall know assuredly
what is Christ's Doctrine? Or by what Means shall we come at it? 2. He says, They
might mistake in this Rule; It has been shown him, Third Cath. Letter, p. 6,
7.8.9* and in many other places upon occasion, that they could not mistake in
this Rule; and he never takes notice of it in his whole Answer, and yet has the
Confidence to object it afresh. 3. He says, P. 109.
They might follow another Rule. This too has been proved against him, nay it is
here proved in the Fourth Proposition of this very Argument; for by proving
they could not innovate in Faith, it is proved they (that is the Body or
Universality) could not desert Tradition. But what a shift is the Dr put to? Do
we contend here they could follow no other? All the Proposition pretends to is,
that If they follow this Rule they cannot err in Faith. What says he to this?
Can they, or can they not? If they cannot, then the Rule is a good Rule, which
is all we labor to prove here, the rest is proved in the Fourth Proposition.
And if they can err, though following it then, since to follow it, is still to
believe the same, the Dr must say that the same Faith though still conveyed down
the same is not the same it self was at first; which is a direct Contradiction.
Not one single word of Answer then to the Proposition has he given us, only he
affirms stoutly it is Fallacious (a very Cheap Answer to any Argument that is
too crabbed and difficult) but he cannot for his heart tell where the Fallacy
lies. The Conclusion is naught, that he is resolved on, but he has nothing that
is pertinent to say to the Premises or Proof. Yet, something he must say for a
show; and, so, he will show some other ways that Errors might come in. And
perhaps I can show him twenty more; P. 109.
but, still, what is this to the Point? Can Errors in Faith come in while men
follow this Rule of Tradition, that is while they continue to believe the same
that was still taught immediately before, and this ever since Christ's time?
This is our only business.

75. Since I must now run out of the way after our Straggling Disputant, I
desire first the Reader would remark, that the Proposition he is now answering
is this, [ If they follow this Rule (viz. Tradition) they can never err in
Faith;] as also that by [ Tradition] is meant the Public Testimony of the
Church of -- what was delivered as Christ's Doctrine. His first particular way
of introducing Errors, is, by the Authority of False Teachers. But was
Tradition followed, Ibid.
while they followed their Authority? If it was, then the Christian Church was
a False Teacher, and her Public Testimony attested false Doctrine to be
Christ's; which if he holds, let him speak out, and see how all Christians will
detest him. If Tradition was not followed but deserted when men were led by
False Teachers, what is this to us? or whom does it oppose? For it is plainly to
abet Tradition, to say that none could follow False Teachers, but they must at
the same time desert It. It Is hard to conjecture then what he meant by
alleging de Molinos unless it were to make his Friend Dr Burnets Book
concerning Molinos sell. It Is no news that False Teachers may introduce
Errors; and that that man pretended the Public Testimony of the Church, or
that his whimsies were Christ's Doctrine delivered down from the beginning, is
both unheard of and Incredible. His Second way of introducing Errors, P. 110.
is by Enthusiasm. Very well. Did the Testimony of the Christian Church tell
them that Enthusiasm was Christ's Doctrine? If he says it did, he makes the
whole Christian Church in some Age to have been a pack of hare-brain'd
Enthusiasts. If it did not, then it is an honor to Tradition that they deserted
it when they fell into that Spiritual Madness. His Third way is by a pretense
to a more secret Tradition. But was this pretense to a Secret Tradition a
pretending to follow the Public Tradition of the Church? If it was not, it
opposes not our Tradition but credits it. And if he says it was, then he makes
what is Secret to be Public, which is a Contradiction; and the very alleging
this makes him in some manner Guilty of that old Failing of his. His Fourth is,
P. 111.
Differences among Church-Guides about the Sense of Scripture and Tradition. I
have Third Cath. Letter p. 6.7.8.15.
already shown him that it was impossible the Generality, especially of
Pastors, should not know the Sense of Tradition; and, as for some Church
Guides differing about the Sense of Scripture, it was equally impossible they
should Err in Faith, as long as they interpreted Scripture by the Rule of the
Church's Tradition; and, when they once left that Rule, instead of being any
longer Church-Guides, they became generally if they were any thing, Eminent
Ringleaders of Heretical Sects; which gives a high repute to our Tradition,
even by their erring when they deserted it. His Fifth way how Error might come
in, is too great a Veneration to some particular Teachers -- which made their
Disciples despise Tradition in comparison of their Notions. And were those men
Followers of Tradition who despised it? His 6th is, By Compliance with some
Gentil Superstitions, etc. But did Tradition or the Church's Testimony deliver
down to them these Heathenish Superstitions for Christ's Doctrine? Or rather,
would it not have preserved men from them, had nothing else been attended to
but that Rule? P. 112.
His 7th and last is by Implicit Faith, that is, that when a man had found a
Faithful Guide to direct him, he should submit himself to be Guided by him in
things in which he could not guide himself. A very dangerous case indeed! But
the Antidote to this malicious suggestion is, that the same Church that they
believed, condemned all New Revelations, and adhered only to what was
delivered. He could have added an Eighth way how Errors in Faith come in, had
he pleased, and That too such a one, as had done a thousand times greater
mischief than all the rest put together; viz. Private Interpretations of
Scripture; which every man knows has been the source of all the Heresies since
Christ's time. But this being the sole Ground of his Faith, it was not his
Interest to let his Readers know it had been the Ground of all Heresy.

76. But what is all this to the Point? Or how is the Demonstration lost if many
men erred upon diverse other accounts so none erred while they followed
Tradition? Unless he proves this, he establishes our Demonstrations by his
showing how multitudes erred who were led by other Motives and by his not being
able to produce so much as one Instance of any that erred by adhering to It.
What Noise and Triumph should we have had, could he have alleged so many
Heretics sprung up by grounding their opinions on mistaken Tradition, as it is
known have arisen by grounding their wicked Tenets on misunderstood Scripture?
But alas! though that were exceedingly to his purpose, not one such Instance
could he bring. P. 11^*
He talks a little faintly of the Arians, Pelagians, Nestorians, etc. not
disowning Tradition. But does he hope to persuade any man of Sense those
Upstarts durst ever go about to put out the eyes of the World by pretending
their Heresies were delivered down as Christ's Doctrine by the Public Testimony
of the Church in their days, or outface the present Church that she her self
had taught them what she knew themselves had newly invented? Or would she have
condemned them had they spoke her thoughts or followed her Doctrine? With what
Sense can any of this be imagined? The Tradition then which they went upon was
Citations of some former Authors, which they misunderstood, (the very Method Dr
St. and his fellow-Quoters take now adays) or else the Judgment of a few
Foregoers; of whom some might speak ambiguously, others perhaps hanker'd after
their Heresy. It Is very hard to guess what Dr St. would be at in alleging so
many ways how Error might be introduc't. That it might come in, and by Various
ways no man doubts. That it came in merely by following Tradition or the
Churches Testimony he says not. That particular Multitudes might be seduc't by
deserting Tradition, is equally granted, and needs no Proof. And that it came
in though Men Adhered to Tradition (which was the true Point) he goes not about
to prove nor seems so much as to think of. Besides most of the Ways he assigns
if not all, are so many Desertions of Tradition which highly conduces to
Strengthen our Argument; while he impugns it: Yet surely that could not be his
Intention neither. I cannot imagine then what all these seven Formal Heads are
brought for, but to make a Show of none knows what. Sometimes, I incline to
think he is combating the Fourth Proposition, proving the Body of Traditionary
Christians could not innovate in Faith but either through forgetfulness or
Malice. And yet I cannot fix upon this neither; both because he names not these
two defects before he shows us his other ways of Erring; as also because we are
not come as yet to the Fourth Proposition where all the Stress lay, but have
spent all our time in confuting the First and Second, which were Self-Evident.
But, if that be his meaning as he intimates p. 112. to escape replying to the
Fourth Proposition, then let him know that, whatever his unsound Principles
say, whoever deserts the Testimony of God's Church whether by the Authority,
(or rather No-Authority) of False Teachers; or, by Enthusiasm, the root of
which is Spiritual Pride; or, by following Secret Traditions against the
Public Authority of the Church; or, by adhering to a Sense of Scripture
contrary to what Tradition allows; or by too great a Veneration to some
particular Teachers; or by Compliance with Heathenish Superstitions; or, by
whatever other Motive, is Guilty before God of a Heinous Sin, and it must
spring from some degree of Malicious or Bad disposition in his heart. For he
cannot but See that himself or his Leader breaks the Order of the World by
disobeying, rising against and preferring himself before those whom God had set
over him to feed, direct, instruct and Govern him. Of which Order, and of the
Goods coming by it, and the Mischiefs which attend the Violating it, none of
Common Sense, whom some by-affection has not blinded, can possibly be Ignorant.

P. 112.
77. He concludes with these words [ If then Errors might come into the Church
all these Ways; What a vain thing it is to pretend that Orall Tradition will
keep from any possibility of Error!] Ah, Dr. Dr! Where Is your Love of Moral
Honesty? Where Is your Sincerity? Where your Conscience? Did ever any man
pretend that Tradition will keep men from any Possibility of Error whether
they follow it or no? Were not our most express words put down by your self, p.
108. l. 27.28. [ If they follow this Rule they can never Err in Faith.] And
must those most important words be still Omitted, and no notice taken of them
but only in an absurd Distinction, making See above. 72. and 74.
Adhering to Tradition or Following it, to be Not-Following it? Is this Solid
Answering or plain Prevaricating? Again, what Nonsense does he make us speak by
omitting these words? Is it not a Madness to say, a Rule will direct them Right
that do not Follow it? That a Means will bring a man to his End, who does not
use it? That a Way will keep a man from Straying in his Journey who does not
walk in it? Yet all these Contradictions we must be Guilty of by his leaving
out the words [ If follow'd] It Is pretty too upon review of his words to
reflect on his Craft [ It Is vain to pretend that Orall Tradition will keep -- ]
whom was it pretended to keep from any Possibility of Error? He should have
added [ the followers of it] but because he had Slipped this all along, he leaves
the Sense Imperfect, and the word [ keep] must want the Accusative Case after
it, due to its Transitive Sense by the Laws of Grammar, merely to avoid his
putting the Right one, because it would have been unsuitable to all his
foregoing Discourses, which never touched it. But, since he speaks still what
Causes of Error he has shown, though I have already manifested, that all those
Causes were accompanied with Malice in the First Deserters of Tradition, yet to
enforce our Demonstration the more, I discourse thus. If Tradition could be
deserted or Innovation in Faith made by the Generality of Christians (for none
ever said or doubted but Many Particulars might do so) it must either proceed
from some Defect in their Understandings or in their Wills. A defect in the
Will is called Badness or Malice; whence, if they wilfully Innovated, it must
spring from some degree of Malice. If in their Understanding; then it must
either be in that Power as Apprehending, or Knowing Christ's Doctrine; or as
Retaining it. It could not be in the Former, for none doubts but the body of
the Church, particularly the Teachers who were to instruct the Rest, did very
well Comprehend Christ's Doctrine in the Beginning, and the many Third Cath.
Letter p. 6.7.8.
Clear ways Tradition comprizes to deliver it down, renders Faith Intelligible
still to each succeeding Age. Wherefore since the Defect cannot be in their
Understanding or their having Christ's Doctrine in their Hearts, it must be (if
any where) in that knowing Power as it is Retentive, that is in their Memory.
But, it was absolutely impossible the Generality of the Church should be so
weak as to forget in any little determinate part of Time (by which Immediate
steps Tradition proceeds) what was Taught and Practiced a little before; or
Considering the Motives to keep them firm to it) so Wicked as to conspire to
Alter it purposely. Therefore whatever Contingency there must be in some
Particulars, it could not be that the Generality of the Church should have
altered it, or consequently, Erred in Faith. Wherefore this Conclusion stands
yet Firm, the Premises remaining yet Untoucht: Since he neither shows nor can
show more Faculties in Mankind engaged in the Perpetuating the Former Faith
than these Two. Add, that he does not even Attempt to show that the Causes he
produces can have the Power to prevail or carry it against the force of
Tradition; and, unless he does this, all he alleges signifies nothing. But his
Especial Reason why he gives no other Answer (he should have said none at all)
to our Fourth Proposition, P. 112.113.
is, because he intends to show in a particular Discourse, how the Errors and
Corruptions he Charges on the Church of Rome did come into it. That is, we
cannot have an Answer to Two lines but by perusing a Large Book. I would desire
him to resume the Force of all his little Testimonies, and Conjecturall
Descants upon them, with which that book abounds, and to be sure they Conclude
the Point; which he shall never do. And unless he does this, he only shows he
has taken a great deal of pains to no kind of purpose; since he leaves a
presumed Demonstration in its full force, without bringing so much as a
pretended Conclusive Proof against it. Indeed, it is a great shame for him to
pretend it; for it is to profess publicly to the world that he can produce
Better Arguments against the Papists then he can for his own Faith; and that he
cannot Answer the Argument, or say any thing to the Premises, yet he will
revenge himself upon the naughty Conclusion, when he catches it alone, and
unback't with any Proof for it.

78. Next, he will prove that our way of resolving Faith into Christ's and his
Apostles Teaching, by the Infallibility of the Church's Human Authority or
Tradition, is Pelagianism. But never was such a Malicious and Silly Charge so
impotently defended. We were told (says he) that Divine Faith must have
Infallible Grounds, P. 113.
and when we come to examine them we find nothing but what is Natural. Here
again our whole Controversy is lost, and a new State of the Question is
obtruded. Faith as it is formally Divine has for its Grounds the Divine
Authority* But are we in our Controversy Examining it as it is Formally Divine?
Do either of us allege Miracles, or any Arguments that Proves it to be such?
Is it not Confessed and Supposed by both Parties that the Faith Taught at first
was Divine; and are we to Examine what is Confessed and Granted? Or, that
Supposition being agreed to, have we any more to do, but to prove what was the
Doctrine taught at first, by Assigning a Certain Method of Conveying it down to
us? He proceeds; And now to avoid the Charge of Pelagianism, this Divine Faith
is declared to be mere Human Faith. Alas for him! Does not Divine Faith stand
yet on it is own bottom, the Divine Authority, because Human Authority, gives
those who yet know it not, Assurance of its Derivation to us? The Immediate
effect then of our Tradition is Human Faith; the Remote effect is to give us
knowledge of a Doctrine of Faith which is Divine; not proved to be such by
Tradition, but acknowledged to be so by our Mutual Concession. But how
shamelesly insincere the Dr is to object that I Changed this purposely to avoid
the Charge of Pelagianism: whenas he knows I had told himself the same in
Error Nonplust, some years before any Contest arose about my Writings? Does he
not cite my words here, that this Human Faith had by Tradition, leads us to
what is Divine? Human Faith is the Way or Means to know Divine Faith; And cannot
we obtain the favor of him to intermit a while his constant Nonsense, and
allow the Means to be distinguished from the End? He goes on: And so Human Faith
must have Infallible Grounds, but Divine Faith must shift for it Self. Can any
thing be more Trifling? What Shifts is Faith put to for Grounds, taken as it is
formally Divine, in a Controversy which supposes it such; in which case no
Proof nor Grounds for it need be produced? Do those that holds the
Infallibility of the Churches Humane Authority deriving it down to us, deny but
the Verity of the Mysteries thus derived, as in themselves, depend on Divine
Revelation as on their Formal Motives? Do not these two consist well together?
May not Faith depend on the Divine Authority in it self, and as it was made
known at first, and yet not be known to us who live now but by Humane
Authority. Can he be Certain of Christian Faith by his own Grounds, but by the
Book of Scripture, and yet does not himself say, that the Certainty he has of
that Book, depends on Tradition or Humane Authority, and consequently that
Humane Faith is the way to know Divine Faith? What Quacking then and
Mountebanking is this, to make me a Pelagian for doing the same himself does
and publicly avows; omitting in the mean time my Answers which at large Third
Cath. Letter. from p. 18, to p. 28.
cleared beforehand, all that he has here so weakly and insincerely objected?
Lastly, he tells us, that if Divine Faith fixes not on the Infallibility of
Tradition, then we may have Divine Faith without it. Yes, by his Enthusiastic
Principles, but not by Connatural ways; since himself must acknowledge that
neither the Letter nor Sense of Scripture is Absolutely Certain without it.

79. It would be very pleasant to see how this Gallant Caviller would prove St.
Paul a Pelagian Heretic. That Blessed Apostle affirmed that Fides per auditum,
Faith comes to our knowledge by Hearing: For the Certainty of the Primitive
Faith was resolved into the Certainty of the Senses, as the Means to come to
the first knowledge of the Doctrine, and of That Sense more particularly,
because Preaching was the Way of instilling Faith then. Now comes Dr St. and
(having prayed, I suppose for Wisdom beforehand) tells that Holy Apostle, that
Divine Faith must have Infallible Grounds, but that the Certainty of the Senses
is merely Natural; That he runs from Divine Motives to Humane ones. He asks him
smartly, what Infallible Ground is there for this Divine Faith, and where it
fixes? If not on the Certainty of the Senses, then we may have Divine Faith
without them. If it does fix on their Certainty, then Divine Faith is to be
resolved into Natural Means. And what is this but Pelagianism? Thus the
stupendiously Learned, and more then supernaturally Enlightened Dean of St.
Paul's, has clearly proved St. Paul himself an arrant Pelagian. But, if St. Paul
should answer as I do that he spoke not of Divine Faith, or the Doctrine of it
as in it self, or as it is formally supernatural, but only of Divine Faith as
standing under Natural Means for us to come to know it, then it would follow
that it would require higher Grounds to be resolved into as it is Divine, and
yet, for all that, that he could have no Faith at all, nor certainty of it,
unless by Miracle, but by virtue of these Natural Means to give him knowledge
of it. But our Verbal Controvertist never reflects that there may be diverse
Resolutions made of Faith as it is controverted, according to the nature or
exigency of the Dispute. Against a Deist that holds it not Divine, it is to be
resolved into the Divine Authority, and this must be shown to be engaged for
it, by those Motives of Credibility which prove it to be such. But this is
quite besides our present Dispute, since both parties grant it; and,
consequently all his Discourse here is quite besides the purpose.

80. I doubt not but the Dr would have had another fling at St. Paul for
Pelagianism, in case he would not allow that a Pious Disposition of the Will
did make the verdict of the Sense of Hearing Certain, and piece out the
Deafishness of the Auditors, when that Sense had some Imperfection; as he does
here, by making me a Pelagian for saying the Will's Assistance cannot make an
Argument if it be defective. P. 114.
Especially should we both say, that Dr St's Moral Qualifications, Purity of
Heart, Humility of Mind, and Prayer for Wisdom, would not make a deaf Ear hear
well, or a bad Argument conclude. For both our cases are perfectly Parallel;
since we both speak of the Way to come at the Knowledge of Divine Faith. But
his Logic, I see, would have his Readers (when an Argument drawn from mere
Nature is proposed which is short of Concluding, let it be in Physics,
Metaphysics, or what he will, for it alters not our case) shake their heads
very piously, and answer [ Truly Sir, though I see your Reason does not conclude,
or satisfy my Understanding, that the thing you would prove is True, yet out of
a Pious Inclination to the Cause, I will call in my Wills Assistance, and out
of pure Goodness think it does conclude, and that the Thing is for all that,
really True. I would wish him by all means to maintain still that it is
Pelagianism to deny that the Inconclusiveness of an Argument is supplied by the
kind-heartedness of the Will. Nothing in the World but this can justify all his
Insignificant Proofs, and make them pass for valid and good ones. P. 114.
It Is ridiculous he says, to allege that I resolve all into Christ's and the
Apostles Teaching. Why? Is it not agreed on between us, that Christ is God, and
his Doctrine Divine? And is not this to bring us to Divine Faith, if we prove
it to be His Doctrine? Or is it not enough for our purpose when it is confessed
on both sides that Christ's Doctrine is Divine? Why is it then ridiculous to
profess we do this? Because Caelestius and Pelagius did the very same. Ibid.
And so I must be a Pelagian still; that is resolved on. Those Heretics did
indeed pretend their Heresies were Christ's Doctrine; But this is no
particularity in Them, for every Heretic since Christ's time did the same;
else they had not been Heretics, but Pagans, Jews, Turks, or Deists: But, we
go no further upon this Principle than they did. Why? Did they ever allege,
Ibid*
that the Tradition or Immediate Testimony of the Body of the Church, delivered
down their Doctrine for Christ's? Or durst they disgrace themselves by going
about to avail themselves of such an open and Notorious Lie? This he should
have proved solidly and clearly: But, instead of proving it, he barely says it;
and who will at this time of day believe his word? And yet, if he does not
this, every sincere Reader must see that he has sacrificed his sincerity to his
spite against Catholics, and judges Slander and Calumny no Sin. Observe here
by the way his consistency with himself. In his Second Letter to Mr G. p. 9. he
affirmed, that we resolved All into mere Humane Faith; and here he confesses we
resolve all into Christ's and his Apostles Teaching. Had not I then good reason
to ask him if Christ was a mere Man, it falling in so Naturally? Yet he is
mighty angry at those words, and says he gave no occasion for them, and imputes
it to Malice. I do assure him that I used those words to show that by resolving
All into Christ's Teaching, I resolved Faith finally into what is confessedly
Divine. Why he should take it so to heart, or apply it to himself when it was
not in the least intended, his conscience best knows. However, it puts him to
make a Profession of his Faith in that point; which I heartily pray may be
sincere.

82. The last point which he thinks fit to take notice of, P. 115.
omitting (by his favor) many which were more concerning, is, that the Council
of Trent Dr St's Second Letter to Mr G. p. 23.
disowns a power of making Implicit Articles of Faith contained in Scripture to
become Explicit by its Explaining the Sense of them. He proves this, Because
the Church of Rome does not pretend to make New Articles of Faith, whereas to
make Implicit Doctrines to become Explicit, is really so to do. This a little
varies from what he said in his Second Letter; nor can I find a word of making
New Articles of Faith pretended there, and I am sure there are none such in
that place. Yet still he would put it upon the Council to introduce some
Articles by new Explications of Scripture; but he only says it, not proves it;
and so, till Proof comes, let it rest upon his bare Word, which signifies
little. Other Answers I have given to this Point, ( Third Cath. Letter, p.
64.65.) which since he has taken no notice of, I shall presume they stand good
in their full force.

83. He concludes with these words, [ But, because the Council of Trent does
pretend to Apostolical Tradition for the Points there determined, and the
showing that it had not Catholic and Apostolic Tradition, is the most
Effectual Confutation of the present Pretense of Oral Tradition, I shall
reserve that to another Discourse; part whereof, I hope, will suddenly be
published.] Now who sees not that, since a Demonstration for the Infallibility
of Tradition is the most Effectual, and most Compendious Proof that is
Imaginable; and unless it be answered, most necessarily concludes the Descent
of that Faith from Christ which is held upon it; and that the Evidence of such
a Proof consisting in the Necessary Connection of the Terms which are used in
it, has the Self-same force whether the Council of Trent, or any Council, had
ever been held, or not; who sees not, I say, that this is a mere plausible
Shift to avoid the shock of our Arguments and to run the Field by the
still-necessary; and Still Friendly Assistance of his former bad Logic, viz.
of Arguing against the Conclusion instead of Answering the Premises? And,
therefore, that his proper Conclusion, had he spoken out Heartily, should have
been this. [ But, because I was neither able to show the Absolute Certainty of
Christian Faith by my Principles, nor to make out, that the Rule I have
Assigned does influence any Point of Faith, so as to prove it to be Absolutely
Certain, that it is Christ's Doctrine; nor yet able to Answer their close
Arguments against the Absolute Certainty of Mine, or for the Absolute Certainty
of the Catholic Faith, therefore to come off handsomely before I utterly lose
my Credit, I think it the safest and wisest Expedient to let the Premises
alone or pass over them with some slight touches, and to Combat the Conclusion
by Quoting of Authors, and tacking the Two disperate Matters together as well
as I can, so to make a kind of Transition from the One to the Other, I will set
my self to write against the Council of Trent. A business which will take
mightily in this Iuncture; Nor will many Readers much concern themselves in
case they should observe it, how I have dropped the Question, or shrunk away from
my Adversary.] And so a good Journey to the Drs* Rambling Pen, till I meet him
next in the Field where we fought Last: Whither, in the behalf of Christian
Faith, whose Certainty he has here Vndermin'd I do recall and Challenge him.

The Concluding SECTION.
84 HItherto of Doctor St's Sins of Commission; viz. of his Groundless and
Impertinent Calumnies, his manifest Falsehoods against his own Knowledge, his
constant prevarication from the Question in every respect, and this quite
thorough his whole Answer; his bad Logic laid open in many Instances, his
Shifts and Evasions, his Paralogisms, Cavils and Contradictions. Now follow his
Sins of Omission. By which I do not mean his Failing to give a good Answer to
those Arguments he thought fit to take notice of; for this, as has been shown
in every Particular, would spread one Universal Blot over his whole Book; but
his not so much as Attempting to give the Reasons I alleged to prove them, or
other particular Omissions charged upon him, any Answer at all, or taking the
least notice of them.

85. To begin with my First Catholic Letter, or the Answer to Dr. St's First
Letter to Mr. G. Why might we not know the particular Reason how Mr. T came to
be satisfied; First Catho. Letter. p. 4.
this being of such special Concern, and laying so precise an Obligation upon
us to clear that Point? but changing his making a Secret of Mr. T's convincing
Reason, which was required of him, p. 3.4. into his making a Secret of the
Ground of his Certainty, (p. 16.) Why did he turn it off to Mr. G. to show that
the Doctor's Protestants have not Absolute Certainty of their Faith, P. 4.5.
when as he had taken it upon himself to show they had? but instead of giving a
Reason for that carriage of his, to deny his own express words ( First Letter,
p. 7.) which put the Proof upon Mr. G. and then, to turn Absolute Certainty of
his Protestant Faith, which consists of a determinate Number of Points, P. 6.7.
into Certainty of Scripture; which perhaps may not signify so much as one
Point of Faith, unless he show Absolute Certainty that the Letter of it is
rightly understood in those Texts that contain those Points? which he is so far
from showing that he not so much as goes about it. Why no Reply to our Proof
that Mr. G. has, by doing his own work, at the same time performed what the
Doctor would needs have put him upon; P. 8.
viz. proved that Doctor St's Church has no Certainty of its Faith? Why
concealed he the true Meaning of the word [ Traditionary] given by us, Ibid.
but took it purposely in another Sense, and then rallied upon it? P. 8.9.
Why no notice taken of our Explication of those words [ If they followed this
Rule] declared by us to mean the [ Believing still the same] which had
forestalled his ill-grounded Descant upon them ( p. 108.109.) and why no regard
to that most Important Conditional Proposition, but starting aside to ways how
Errors might come in by not following it; which instead of Answering, asserts
and makes good our Tenet? P. 10.11.12.13.14, 15. and p. 33.34.35.
Why no Reply to our several Reasons brought against his intollerably bad
Logic, showing at large from many heads the absurdity of it, and that the
Subject of our Argument, as impugn'd by his Instance, was not at all like
Zeno's denying of Motion; which Reasons had prevented and utterly defeated his
pitiful Defense of it here? Why nothing to the unavoidable force of our
Argument, P. 18.
manifesting it to be Self-evident that Tradition is a Certain Rule? Why does
he not justify his palpable Prevarication from the whole Question laid out at
large and proved against him, P. 21.22.
p. 21.22. Why not a word of Answer to my Discourse showing Absolute Certainty
and Infallibility to be the same? P. 23.
Why does he no where distinguish himself and his Protestants from all sorts of
Heretics owning the same Common Rule; P. 25.26*
by showing us by what Particular Means he is more Certain of the True Sense of
Scripture then they were, and thence differenc't from them by his having some
particular Rule or Way to arrive at True Faith which they had not; This being a
Point of the Highest Importance in our Controversy, and most Earnestly pressed
upon him over and over? And yet for all his flourishes about Criterions he has
said nothing to those Reasons, only he has made a slight Discourse of his own,
p. 53.54. but never showed any particular Means securing his Party from Erring,
more than the vilest Heretics used. Why little or no regard to my Reasons
showing that Scripture Interpretable by their private Judgment of Discretion is
not the Rule which the Generality of Protestants rely on; P. 26.27.28.29.
which, if true, utterly overthrows his whole Pretense to That for his Rule? He
blunders indeed about it in clear words, and tells his own Tale very prettily;
but he has not answered my Reasons, as the Reader may discern, who is pleased
to compare them with his Reply. Lastly, why no Answer to each particular
Proposition of my Short Discourse, P. 30.31.
or shown it inconnected, demonstrating that none who followed his Rule can
have Assurance that what they believe is Christ's Doctrine* But instead of this
Duty, bringing pretended False Suppositions against the Whole, which supposed
nothing but that we could have no more Reason to judge the Socinians Insincere,
or Careless, or less Skillful in the Sense of words than we have to think He is?

86. These are his Omissions in Answering my First Catholic Letter. As for my
Second; since his Title pretends an Answer to them All in General, and he
referrs us to another able to speak for himself, meaning his Reflecter, we are
to imagine he makes account he has Answered them All, by Himself or by his
Proxy, But, good God! what an Answer has that weak man given us? His Discourse
is a Chain of Sand. It Is a mess of Controversy dish't up in Sippets; a mere
Hash of Repartees, or reason torn into Rags. A Discourse, as every man knows,
has it is true Force by the Constant Tenor of it; and this Tenor is shattered
all to pieces by a new invented Method of short Dialogues; where he makes me,
at his pleasure, say as little at a time as he lists, and he plays upon it as
much as he pleases: I must break-off just where he thinks fitting, and he
Enlarge against an imperfect Discourse, unassisted by it is Comparts, as long as
he Judges convenient. Now he is at the beginning of my Book, and immediately at
the Middle or End of it; gathering thrums-ends of little Sentences, which he
patches together so aukwardly that they have no Connection at all but what his
unskillfull or Partial hand bestows upon them. If we expect Reason from him,
he tells us he never undertook to Prove but to Reflect. A very pretty come off!
P.
I wonder what Answer is proper to a man who proves nothing, nay not so much as
Undertook it! Thus much for his Method: But the Tricks and Shifts in managing
it are Innumerable: It Is almost as easy to determine how many words may be made
of the four and Twenty Letters, as to trace all the Anagrams he makes of my
Sense, by weaving it in his loom to suit his own Fancy or Interest. When our
Question is only about a Certain Rule of Faith, he alters it when he lists, to
a Certain Rule of Life (p. 33.) as if we pretended Scripture not Clear in
Moral Points: by which means he turns the whole Question to a quite different
Subject. His Contradictions are frequent, for he never speaks of the Nature of
any thing that concerns our Dispute but he constantly falls into that
irrecoverable lapse. As he turned the precise Duty of proving into the Needless
Impertinency of Reflecting, so tell him of Falsifications he tells you ( p.
52.) he meant them for Ironies. And, indeed his whole Reflexionary (if I may
call it so) is nothing but a continued Irony; it being very hard to know when
he is in Jest, when in Earnest: Only he garnishes his Scorn with demure
pretenses of Charity and Civility, that so he may affront his Adversary with a
more plausible Garb of Affected Gravity and Godliness.

87. As for the strength of his Reasons, since one Instance is held by Dr St.
and him a Competent Answer to a pretended Demonstration, I hope one pregnant
Instance how he quite misses the whole matter in hand, may be allowed
sufficient to render insignificant his Hopping and Skipping Dialogues, by
showing plainly that his ill-levell'd Reflections hit not me, but Squint aside
to other Subjects. E're I come to my Instance, I desire the Reader to bear in
Remembrance (for I cannot repeat it too often because my Adversary is resolved
never to take notice of it) that, Our Controversy Supposes as agreed to by both
Parties that Christ's Doctrine is Divine, and that our Whole Question is about
the Means to bring down to us those Sublime Spiritual Articles of Christian
Faith, with such a Certainty and Clearness as may oblige us to assent firmly
and unalterably, that what we hold concerning them now at present is the
self-same that was taught by him and his Apostles; and consequently is Divine
and True. Next, we affirm that the Letter of Scripture not being Clear to
people of all sorts looking after Christ's True Doctrine, in those Texts which
relate to such High Points, the best way to satisfy such men that those
Articles came down invariably from Christ is the Humane Authority of the
Christian Church. And, Lastly, that the Credibleness of this Authority is
proved by Intrinsical Mediums, taken from the Natures of Things lying level to
our Reason, which contribute to support it from being liable to be deceived or
to deceive us in that affair: viz. from the Nature of Man, who being a Rational
Creature cannot possibly act without a Motive or a Reason; and is withal
endowed with such and such Faculties belonging to such a Nature; As also from
the Practical Nature, and Highest Import of the Doctrine to be delivered, and
the Nature of those most powerful Motives obliging the Generality to whom they
are applied, to transmit down faithfully a Doctrine held Divine; and, Lastly,
from the Nature of diverse Circumstances of the Universe. All which are laid out
in my Second Cath. Letter, p. 57.58.59.60. To which nothing but a very slight
return (with many Omissions) has been given us by Him, and nothing at all by Dr
St. though these (as the Reader may see if he pleases to review them) be the most
forcible part of that Treatise to prove the uninterrupted Perpetuity of
Tradition hitherto, on which the Resolution of our Grand Question mainly
depends. It Is enough, it seems, for such a trifling Reflecter, at the end of
his Pamphlet, to call the passages he has omitted, amongst which are the
Natures of those things, Hedges and Puddles; and close Reasons drawn from them
frisking Fancies; and that is all can justly be expected from one who seems to
be a sworn Scholar to the Great Professor of Learned Jests and Ingenious
Prevarications.

88. These particulars concerning our Tenet, known to all that have read our
Controversy, being reflected on, let us see how this Gentleman represents it,
and how profoundly he discourses against us. In his 12th Page he will needs
repeat our Tenet, or (as he with much Formality is pleased to call it) the
Lesson I have taught him: which, put into distinct Sentences, he makes to be
this. 1. Your Churches Authority is Human Authority. Answ. Our Church'es
Authority is also Divine, and as such it is the Rule of Faith to those who are
already Faithful: But in our Controversy, which is about the Way for men to
come to Faith, it is not proper to allege any other than her Natural or Humane
Authority, consisting of a vast Body of Men both able and obliged to testify
such open matters of Fact as is the Delivery of a Doctrine so Qualified by those
that educated us; And the Reason is because 'till men come at Christ's Faith
they can only guide themselves by their Reason; whence the Credibility of that
Authority must be provable by Reason against those who shall deny it. 2. He
says, It has force to prove the Truths which depend upon it. Yes; it has force
to prove to us this matter of Fact, that those Truths descended from Christ;
but not the Intrinsical Truth of any one Article in it self. To do this is the
work of Divine Revelation, not of Humane Authority. 3. It has this force and
concludes against such as own its Veracity, but it deserves no Assent further
than Reason gives it to deserve. Well then, since we bid him guide himself by
his Reason e're he admits it, will he at least admit it and yield assent to it,
when Reason shows him it deserves it? This is all we desire of him; and it is a
very reasonable request in us, for it only desires he would not renounce his
Reason and forfeit his Manhood. Now come his Conclusions from mistaken
Premises: Hence I conclude, Seeing We admit not your Church'es Authority, nor
own its Veracity it proves nothing to us nor concludes any thing against us.
From what Antecedent is this Conclusion drawn? Did we ever press him to admit
it blindly; the Point is, will he renounce his Reason when it tells him this
Authority ought to be believed? This is our Tenet and should have been taken in
e're he had inferred any thing at all: but then it would have marred his
Conclusion and his admirable Method of taking every Discourse of mine to pieces
and never putting it together again, and so it was thought expedient to neglect
it. His next Conclusion is, Seeing Articles of Faith depend not on Humane
Authority, your Church'es Authority can have no effect on Humane Nature to
oblige to a Belief of them. Where we have near as many Faults as Words. For,
First, Articles of Faith in themselves or as to their Intrinsicall Verity,
depend only on the Divine Authority as their Formal Motive; but, as to us, or
as to our knowledge of those Articles Now, which were taught by Christ long
since (which is our only business) a successive Human Authority, the most
strongly supported of any that ever was in the World to convey down a matter of
Fact of Infinite Concern, is the properest way to Attest them; whence all those
Articles, in that regard do depend on that Human Authority, after the same
manner as even himself also holds the Book of Scripture does. Secondly, What an
Incredible Folly is it, not to distinguish between those Articles which were
Taught at First, (and, so, are Divine) as in Themselves, and the same Articles
as Knowable by us Now to have been Taught Long ago? nor to reflect that our
Controversy only treats of them under this latter Consideration? Nor to know
that, as thus Considered, All Articles of Faith not only May but Must
necessarily depend on Human or Natural Means, since without Such they cannot
be introduc't into our understandings connaturally, nor by any way but by
Immediate Inspiration, which is perfect Enthusiasm? Nor Lastly, not to advert
that even the Divinity of Faith depends, in some sort, on Natural Means? St.
Paul tells us Faith comes by Hearing; and, if so, then Faith depended on
Hearing as to its coming to be Known by us. Nay, as Christian Faith was
Formally from God, it depended thus on Miracles, which could not be known to be
such but by their being above the Course of Nature; nor could they be known to
be above the Course of Nature unless the course of Nature it self had been
fore-known, the Knowledge of which is only Natural or Human. Thirdly, His
following words in this Ridiculous Conclusion, show him utterly ignorant of our
whole Question; otherwise he could not with any degree of sincerity have put it
upon us, that we hold the Human Authority of our Church obliges to a Belief of
the Articles themselves; whereas what we hold is, that it only obliges us to
Assent they came from Christ, or were inerrably delivered down by the Church's
Testimony. Fourthly, By leaving out all mention of what is most particularly our
Tenet in this Point, he puts it upon us to hold that Human Authority has effect
upon Human Nature of it self; whereas we never presumed or affirmed it either
had or ought to have any but by Virtue of the Reasons which vouch't for its
Veracity, nay, I both Affirmed and Proved the direct Contrary. His Third
Conclusion is, Seeing all its Credit depends on its Intrinsicall Reasons
produced, till they be produced we are not bound to give any Credit to it. No,
nor bound to mind them much it seems, nor Answer them fully when produced; as
appears by his omitting the most forcible Reasons for the Certainty of
Tradition's Continuance as was Lately shown. But why is this made a distinct
Conclusion or disjoynted from the rest, whereas it was the most necessary and
Essential part of our true Tenet? Because the Method he so Religiously
observed throughout his Dialogue-Answer, which is to shatter asunder the entire
Sense of every passage, would not allow it. His Fourth Conclusion is, When
these Reasons shall be produced, its Testimony has but the Nature of an
External Motive, not of an Intrinsicall Ground. Answ. Intrinsicall Ground? To
what? To Christian Faith as it is Divine? 'Twas never pretended, nor can it
belong in any regard to our Question, since it is not disputed between us, but
Acknowledged by us both, that Christ's Doctrine is Such. Means he then it is not
a Proper Medium to prove Christ's Faith derived to us who live now? How can he
even pretend to show that so vast a Testimony is not proper to Attest a
Notorious Matter of Fact, viz. what Doctrine was Delivered immediately before,
and this throughout every Age, Year, or Day? Again, what means he when he says,
Testimony is not an Intrinsicall Ground? What man in his senses ever said or
thought it? We spoke indeed of Intrinsicall Grounds to prove the Credibleness
of that Testimony, but not a word have we even hinting that Testimony it self
is an Intrinsical Ground to any thing. If he will needs be talking Nonsense let
him take it to himself, and not put it upon me. Lastly, why is not an
Extrinsicall Ground or Testimony proved to be such by Intrinsicall Reasons
sufficient in our case? This should have been shown, but for this very reason
it is not so much as taken notice of either by him or his Master. In a word, he
uses some of our words, taken asunder from the Context of our entire Sense;
then blends them confusedly together on any fashion, without any kind of order
or respect to the true Question; he gives us Relative words without telling us
what they relate to; he puts upon us Tenets we never advanced or held, but the
direct Contrary. And the witty Gentleman would still persuade his Reader he is
Repeating his Lesson I have Taught him, when as all the while he deserves more
then a Ferula for his rehearsing it wrong, or rather saying it Backwards. Then
follows his Grand Conclusion as the Flower of all the foregoing ones, which we
may be sure hits the Point Exactly; And therefore (says he) either your
Position overthrows your Church's Authority, or It your Position. Most
Excellent? My Position is about Tradition which is the Self-same thing with the
Church's Authority; and this precious Scribbler will needs have the same thing
to destroy it self. A fit Upshot for a Discourse without sense.

89. We see by this one Instance there is scarce one Line, nor many Significant
Words in this half-page of his, but runs upon Enormous Mistakes. And, does he
think I have nothing else to do but to stand Rectifying still what he all along
takes such Care and Pains to put into Disorder? Especially, since those few
things that are pertinent, are abundantly spoke to in my Third Catholic
Letter, and this present Reply. I must entreat the Dr to excuse me if I have no
mind to break his Young Controvertists, and teach them how to Manage. Mr G. did
him, I hope, no disparagement in making me his Substitute; but it is not so
gentile in him to set such a Fresh Man upon my back. I Will have nothing to do
with his little Iourney-Men or Apprentices till the World be satisfied that
their Master himself is a better Artist. And, if it shall appear that even the
Learned Dr St. is able to make nothing of so bad a Cause, it is neither
Discreditable to me nor any Disadvantage to the Truth I am defending, P. 2.
if I neglect such a Sixth-rate Writer who confesses himself unworthy to carry
his Books after him.

90. The Omissions in answering my Second Catholic Letter are as many as that
Letter it self contains: since his untoward Method renders all his Talk,
Twitching and Girding at little sayings of mine, utterly insignificant. Whence,
that whole Treatise as it is in it self, stands yet Entire, unless the Dr can
show by his new Logic that to mince half a Book into Fragments is to Answer
the Whole.

91. Thus the Dr has trickt off the answering my Second Cath. Letter. But his
Omissions in Answering the Third are both numerous and most highly Important,
and he is to render an Account of all this long Roll of his Neglects. Why did
he not clear himself of his altering there the Notion of Tradition into
Articles and Powers of doing this or that, Third Cath. Letter* from p. 4.5.
shown at large, p. 4.5. Why answers he not the several Reasons, P. 5.6.7.8.9.
proving against him, that Tradition brings down the Sense of Christ's Doctrine,
and not only Common Words; in the Clear Delivery of which Sense consists one of
the main Properties of a Rule, viz. its Plainness to People of all sorts who
are to be regulated by it? And why, instead of performing this necessary Duty,
does he ( p. 43.) after having vapour'd that It Is bravely said if it could be
made out, does he not so much as mention the Reasons by which it was made out;
but ramble into such Nonsense ( p. 43.) that He and his Party (who are
Deserters of Tradition) cannot mistake it; that Tradition (or the Church'es
Human Testimony) being the Rule of Faith is a part of Christ's Doctrine, etc.
Why no Excuse for his deforming the meaning of that plain word [ Tradition]
into many unsuitable Significations, and putting it in all shapes but its own?
P. 11.12.
Why no Defense of his most ridiculous Drollery, in paralleling Tradition or
the Testimony of God's Church to the Relation of two or three partial Witnesses
of his own side in favor of their fellows? Or for his Inconsonancy to himself
and his Insincerity in thus perverting it still when he was to impugn it; P. 12.
whenas he took it very right when it made for himself? Why not a word to my
Clearest Demonstration, that it is impossible but Tradition must bring down a
Determinate Sense of the Tenets it delivers, which he answers not at all, P.
13.14.15.
but only brings against Conclusion an Instance of the Corinthians and
Arlemonites (p. 45.46.) which as far as it pretends they pleaded Tradition for
their Heresy, (taking Tradition as we do for the Immediate Testimony of the
Church) is both False and Senseless. P. 16.17.18.
Why no Answer at all to that most Concerning Point proved against him, that
the Church has Power to declare diverse Propositions to be of Faith, not held
distinctly before, without any prejudice at all to Tradition? And why no notice
taken of my most Evident Proof that we make Christian Faith as it is Formally
Divine rely on the Divine Authority, notwithstanding our Tenet, that the
Church'es Humane Authority is the Means to bring us to the knowledge of
Christ's Doctrine; and that the asserting this Later is not to overthrow the
Church'es Authority in matters of Faith, as he objected? As also that the
Venerable F. W. was not an Adversary to our way, and that Lominus his Book the
Dr relied on was no Argument that my Doctrine was faulty even in the opinion of
my Judges; P. 19.20.21.
Why gave he no reply to any of these, but still run on with his former
Calumnies, as if nothing had been produced to show his manifest and Wilful
Mistakes? P. 22.23.24.25 26.27.
Why no Answer to my Reasons proving at large the impotency of his malice in
charging Pelagianism, more than to repeat a few of words for a show, that this
Humane Authority leads us to what is Divine, and there stopping; whereas the
very See Third Cath. Letter p. 24.
next words [ Yet not by its own force but by virtue of the Supposition agreed
upon that Christ's Doctrine is such] had spoiled all his pretense? P. 26.
Why no notice taken of my Citation out of Error Nonplust writ against himself
fifteen years ago; which forestalled all his rambling Mistakes, and by
consequence, showed him strangely Insincere, in dissembling his knowledge of my
Tenet so expressly declared. P. 28.


92. Why no Plea alleged to justify his shuffle from the Grounds of his
Protestant Faith in particular to the Grounds of Christian Faith in Common; nor
to excuse his next Shuffle, and Nonsense to boot, in making [ Faith] by virtue
of an id est, to signify the Grounds for his Ground of Faith; and turning [
Certainty of Scripture] into a long ramble, viz. into [ Certainty of the
Grounds on which we believe Scripture to contain the word of God. P. 30.31.
] Why not a word of Reply to my Discourses, there and in many other places,
showing that Scripture's Containing Faith is nothing at all to our purpose, but
the Getting out from Scripture it is true Meaning or Sense, this only being our
Faith; and that his Faith is still Uncertain unless there be Certainty that
such and such Articles Are Contained there. Which Point though it be of the
Highest Consequence, yet he never sets himself to Solve our Arguments against
it, in his whole pretended Answer; but he runs on still in the same Error, as
if nothing had been alleged to show his Discourses insignificant and
frivolous! Why no Answer to my Discourse proving that a Rule or Ground is none,
if it carry not thorough to the particular Points, especially to those which
are most Fundamental, unless granting it in effect ( p. 36.) and allowing no
Absolute Certainty to any particular Point of Faith, may be called an Answer?
P. 32.
Why no Excuse for his Skewing Comment upon his own Answer (which spoke of
Absolute Certainty of all Christ's Doctrine, which consists of such and such
particular Tenets) to the Writings of the Apostles; whereas there was not a
word of Writing in Mr. G's Question or in his own Answer either? Nor any notice
taken of my Argument, P. 32.33.
manifesting that a Resolution of Faith speaks Connection of the Motives that
are to prove it Christ's Doctrine, to the Points of Faith; laid home to him in a
Close Discourse demonstrating the Necessity it should be such. P. 33.34.
Why no Account of his distinguishing between Christ's Doctrine and that of the
Apostles; that so he might mis-represent Tradition, and alter the Question from
a Public to a Private Delivery? Why no Reason given of his not Resolving his
Faith into the Apostles Preaching, but only into their Writing; I mean, P.
34.35.
no Answer to my Reasons why he ought to have resolved it into the former, at
least, Equally? P. 35.
Why no Answer to my Reasons, showing from his ill-laid Principles, that
Perfect Contradictories, Points of Faith and wicked Heresies, opposite to them,
are both Equally Certain? Why no Excuse for his Shuffling from the New
Testament's Containing all the Divine Revelations, P. 36.37.
to the Church'es making men fix by degrees upon the Certain Canon of it, which
is there shown (and indeed appears of it self) to be a quite disparate
business? Why not the least Excuse for his most abominable fourfold
Prevarication in answering to one single Question, exposed there at large; P.
37.38.39.40.
and why no Defense or particular Explication of his beloved Sufficient
Certainty, nor any Application of it to the Nature, Ends, and Uses of a firm
Faith, that any Point is Christ's true Doctrine, showing that his feeble Motives
are sufficient for those particular purposes? P. 42.43.44.45.
Why, to make his odd Similitude of Scripture's being a Purse, apposit, does he
not show us some Certain Way, how the Gold and Silver Points of Faith (as he
calls them) may be got out of it, without danger of extracting thence the
impure Dross of Error and Heresy instead of True Faith? Again, to make it
square, why does he not rather make the Heads and Hearts of the First Faithful
the Purses, since (as was shown him) Faith is more properly Contained there
than in a Book? P. 45.46.47.
Or, if he will needs make use of an Improper Container of Faith too, why does
not he put two Purses; viz. the Souls of the Faithful, and the Scripture? And
why not a word of Reply to my Plain Reasons why he ought to have done both
these? P. 48.49.
Why no Answer to my Reasons proving that All the Points of Faith are Necessary
for the Salvation of Mankind, and for the Church; otherwise than by rambling to
Transubstantiation (p. 84.) and that he sees no Necessity of it: Which makes
his often-alledg'd Distinction of Necessary and Unnecessary Points, brought to
avoid the Question, perfectly frivolous; and why runs he still on with the same
Distinction in this pretended Answer without taking off the Exceptions against
it, by only crying Alas for him! when I asked him, If Christ taught any
unnecessary Articles: P. 49.
and by saying they are not equally Necessary, p. 33. Why nothing to justify
that his Assent of Faith may not be False, and so, no Faith? Why no Reply to my
Reasons, that, notwithstanding his pretended Grounds, He has no Absolute
Certainty that even the Letter of Scripture is Right; whereas, if it be not, he
can have no Certainty but all is Wrong that is grounded upon it; since, in that
case he may embrace a Grand Heresy for True Faith? P. 51.52.53.
Why no Answer to my plainest Argument, showing how Christ's Doctrine, continued
all along in the Breast of the Church, is the best Means to correct the Letter
in Texts that contain Faith? Why no Reply to my many Reasons, P. 53.54.55.56.
showing that the Ancient Church allowed our way of Tradition, and disallowed
his of Scripture privately Interpreted? Why does he not confute my Discourses,
P. 56.
manifesting that he can have no Absolute Certainty by his Principles of the
Number of Books; or of each Chapter, Verse, P. 57.
and Material Word in each Verse that concerns any Point of Faith; without
doing which, he cannot pretend to have Certainty of the Letter, nor,
consequently, of any one of those Points? P. 58.59.
Why no Reply to that Important Objection, that if Scripture were the Rule of
Faith, the Primitive Church had, for some time, but half or three-quarters of
their Faith, or less, (and so, by his Principles, were but three-quarters or
half Christians) according as the several pieces came by degrees to be spread,
accepted, or universally acknowledged; nay perhaps no Faith at all, as was
there shown; and why did, he instead of replying, See above.
turn it off to the single Epistle to the Hebrews, and to an Insignificant If?
Why, when it was objected that diverse of his Christian Churches doubted of
diverse Books of Scripture, and some late Brethren of his of some others, does
he again turn it off (as to the former) to the Canon of Scripture made
afterward; P. 59.
and to the later says nothing? P. 60.
Why not a word to my Clearest Proof that our Tradition or Testimony for
Doctrine is incomparably more large in its source, which gives it its chief
force, than his is for Scripture's Letter? Why does he not clear himself of his
preferring his Sober Enquirer before the Church, P. 61.62.23.64.65.
the unreasonableness of which was urged home against him, nor justify his weak
discourses in some sleigter passages laid open, p. 64.65. Why not a syllable of
Answer to that most highly-concerning Discourse, and which, if it stands in its
full force, overthrows all the whole Fabric of his Doctrine, viz. that a Rule
or Ground are Relative Words, and therefore Scriptures Letter cannot be an
Absolute Certain Rule or Ground, unless its Ascertaining virtue affects the
Articles known by it? This Point has been pressed upon him so vigorously, P.
66.67.68.69.70.71.
and pursued with so many forcible Arguments that there can be no plainer
Confession that his Cause is lost than not to attempt to answer them;
especially, since the hinge of the whole Controversy depends upon it. It was
his Concern too to avow or disavow his dear Friend Dr. Burnet's Position,
making his Sober Enquirer judge of Councils; but he would not be so candid. Why
declines he the giving us satisfaction that he does indeed hold the Testimony
for Scripture Absolutely Certain, by making out from the Nature of the Things
why it must be so? P. 71.72.73.74.
See, Reader, how it was there demanded of him and urged upon him to do himself
and his Faith that Honor and Credit; Yet he is perfectly deaf to all
solicitations of that kind. And the Reason is, because, should should he do
this as he ought to do, he must necessarily make the Church Infallible, and
rely upon her Infallibility for the Certainty of Scriptures Letter; and should
it come to be proved that it is easier to transmit down the same Doctrine than an
Exact Copy, this would oblige his Sober Enquirer to be led by her in matters of
Faith. A condescendence not to be submitted to by his Fanatic Friends; both
because their First Principle is to think themselves wiser than the Church; as
also, because to prove this would make the Knowledge of Christ's Doctrine too
strong by Proofs and Outward Means, which their Gifted and Inspired Genius
(impossible ever to be proved but by doing Miracles) cannot away with. To
proceed, Why clears he not himself from being obliged by his Principles to own
a Brotherhood with all Heretics who profess to follow Scripture as much as he
does; P. 75.
by showing some Absolutely Certain Means to distinguish his Faith from theirs;
Did not the doing this mainly concern his Credit, when it was severely
objected, and shown that he had given just occasion for this Suspicion of all
comprehending Principles? Why no Account given of the Absolute Certainty of
Particular Texts, and the most significant Words in each of them, as well as of
the Canon or Number of Books; P. 76.
without which, let the Canon be as Certain as it will, it is impossible for him
to know assuredly whether what he holds be True Faith or Heresy? Why no Answer
to my Objection that to be the Word of God is not sufficient to make Scripture
a Rule, P. 77.
unless it has withal Perspicuity or Clearness, to give those who read it and
rely on it, Absolute Certainty of its true Sense, or Faith, in those high
Mysteries and Spiritual Points controverted between the Church and her
Deserters? P. 78.79.80.
Why no Reply to my Confutation of his smartest or rather Only Argument to
prove Scripture a Rule, given by me particularly to every Branch of it? Is not
a business of such high Consequence worth his Defense, his whole Cause, (as far
as it is managed by him) standing or falling by his maintaining or deserting
that main Proof for it? Why does he give us no Grounds that elevate Faith (as
it depends on the Rule ascertaining us it came from Christ) above Opinion; P.
81.82.
whenas it was charged upon him that he had no such Grounds, and he was loudly
called upon to produce them; but to aggravate the fault, to call here ( p. 41.)
all the Points of Christian Faith (there spoken of) Particular Opinions? Why
takes he no notice of the several Senses of the word [ Rule] and in which of
those Senses it is taken properly, P. 82.83.
and why it must necessarily be taken in such a Sense in our Controversy; but
instead of doing this, run on wilfully mistaking it still? Why not a word in
Confutation of an Infallible Judge, P. 84.85.
as that Point is stated by me? P. 85.
Why did he not accept my Challenge that he could not show me any one Solid
Proof in his whole Treatise that he could maintain; since the doing this had
been a great Blurr to me, and a high Credit to himself; nay the very offering
at it, might have kept our Readers in some Suspense whether he were perfectly
baffled or no, whenas his total declining it is a plain Confession he does not
think fit to stand to any one Proof he has produced? P. 86.87.88.
Why no Reply to my Discourse demonstrating that a Rule must be the Immediate
Light to know the Thing in order to which it is to regulate us; and, therefore,
that, however he pretends to Scripture, yet his own Interpretation, or the
Means he uses to Interpret it, is unavoidably his Rule? As also that the
Testimony of all Christian Churches did not recommend to him such a Rule of
Faith; and that a Testimony for the Letter confessed by himself to be Fallible,
stood in great need of his Logic to make what is built on it to be Absolutely
Certain? P. 89.90*
Why not a word to the Testimony of that Ancient and Holy Father, and most
Solid Controvertist, St. Athanasius; which quite overthrows the whole Scheme of
his Doctrine, and makes all his Sober Enquirers Unbelievers or Infidels? And why
no Excuse for his not putting amongst his Helps the Judgment of the present
Church, at least of the Church of England; (this being both an easier Help than
it is to use his other painful Methods to understand Scripture right, and more
agreeable to the Order of the world.) especially, since he stands impeacht of
destroying Church Government as to any thing belonging to Faith? Why does not
he show us how Mr T. could be a Sober Enquirer, whom he defends for so suddenly
settling his Enquiry and Resolving, P. 90.91.
though he did not use those Means which the Dr himself affirmed his Sober
Enquirers were bound to use; especially, since this carriage of the Dr's shows
him very willing to contradict at pleasure even his own Principles, and to
dispense with those Obligations he himself had imposed, when it suits with his
Interest? Whence every considering man must necessarily conclude he holds not
heartily and steadily to any Principle at all. P. 93.94.
Why should not his Sober Enquirers trust the Church rather than themselves;
and why no Answer to the Reasons why they should? Why does not he confute my
Discourse, P. 95.96.97.98.
proving that a Judge proceeding upon an Inerrable Rule is Infallible; and that
it is no prejudice to the Church, that those whom she has cast out, or are her
Enemies, deny her to be such? Why answers he not my Particular Reasons against
his kind of Judgment of Discretion, P. 99.100.101.102.103.
or the Reasons given for ours, but makes impertinent Discourses of his own at
random, without regarding either our Objections, or our Proofs; nay, when he
had occasion, without acknowledging their Distinction, P. 70.
but most unconscionably pretending them to be the same; whereas their
Difference and perfect Opposition to one another, is laid out there very
largely and particularly.

And now, Gentlemen, I request even those who are the most Partial of his
Friends to count over the Pages cited in the Margent; and, if you find by an
exact Review that I have neither misreckon'd them, nor misrepresented his
Answers; be pleased to frame thence an Impartial Judgment of his prodigious
Confidence in pretending in his Title that this every-way-Defective Treatise
is, In Answer to my Catholic Letters; whereas he has given no Answer at all
(to speak with the least) to the Fortieth Part of them; and, as for that small
inconsiderable pittance he has attempted to reply to, it has been shown you by
detail, with what incredible Weakness or worse, he has performed it. I entreat
you also to reflect that the passages he has left unanswered, are not Trivial
or Slight ones; but all of them, Pertinent; almost all of them, Substantial;
and, by far the greater part, of vast Import; as coming up close to our main
Point, the Absolute Certainty of Christian Faith, (that is, as to its having
been taught by Christ,) by our respective Principles. So that, in case They,
and the Reasons for them, be left standing in their full force, as they yet
stand, his whole Cause is utterly lost; and himself convinced not only to be no
Good Defender of Christian Faith, but withal no Steady Holder that his Faith
is truly Christian, or derived from Christ; Or, if he holds it to be such at
all, it must be by Enthusiasm, or Fanatic Inspiration, not upon truly Rational
or (which is the same) Conclusive Grounds. He will say perhaps he has touched
upon some of those Particulars; nay, now and then, made long Discourses against
diverse of my Positions. But, all this he might have done though he had had never
an Adversary. To Answer is to Solve the Arguments of another, not to find fault
with his Conclusions and make Discourses on his own head; a Method which any
Judicious Reader may observe runs thorough his whole Book. Whence I am not tied
to Reply to such Impertinent and Irregular Prevarications; but only to defend
and stand by my Reasons; and it is a Courteous Condescendence, not a Right due
to his Carriage, that I have replied to them at all; since my Arguments,
according to the Laws of Disputation, must be granted to stand firm 'till they
be overthrown. Yet, notwithstanding I was not obliged to humor his Illogical
Proceedings, I do not know of any thing that is Pertinent and of Moment that I
have over-past; and I could have spoke it with more assuredness, had he quoted
the Pages in my Letters all along as I did in him, especially when I cited him;
but he would not expose himself to that disadvantage, lest the Reader should by
that means be directed still to my Discourses themselves; and comparing them
with what he had said to them, see how Frigid, Indirect. or utterly
Insignificant his pretended Answers were. Though I say I know of no such passage
omitted, but what has been already replied to and forestalled in my former
Letters, or in Error Nonplust, yet, in case he still contends I have, let him
single out those which he judges the strongest, or any page in this Answer of
his own which concerns the Certainty of Faith as we treat of it, that is of
Christ's Doctrine as it is Knowable by us at this distance from his time, and I
do promise him a very punctual Reply to each particular Passage, one by one. He
would much oblige our Readers and me too, if instead of Answering he will
needs fall to Arguing, he would please to pick out what is most Pertinent and
Weighty, and let each single Point be debated apart. This would give a far
Clearer Light to our Readers: And for their sakes, if he will not do this
himself, I shall (as my leisure serves) do it for him. In the mean time I am to
demand of him publicly as my Right, both a punctual Reply to the long Roll of
these his important Omissions, and also a Defense of his Trifling Performances:
And, in case he denies to give me and the World that Satisfaction, since none
who knows him can think he wants Wit and Parts to do it, if feisible, it must
necessarily be concluded his Cause wants Truth.

Your Well wishing Friend and Servant in Christ, J. S.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Five Catholic Letters are to be sold at Mr Matthew Turners, Bookseller at
the Lamb in High-Holborn.


