THE SENTENCE OF THE COURT OF Holland, Zealand, and Friesland, AGAINST Mr.
Simon van Halewyn, Burgher Master of Dort. AND Robert de Pille du Plessis,
Emissary of the French King: Pronounced July the 31st. 1693.

Containing a full Account of the whole Intriegue for the carrying on a Peace
with France, and the Project of it made by the said Halewyn.

Printed at the Hague by Order and Authority of the States General.

Done out of the Dutch.

London: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
MDCXCIII.

Mr. Simon Van Halewiin 's SENTENCE.
WHereas Mr. Simon van Halewiin, born at Dort, and Burgher-Master Senior of the
same place, at present Prisoner in the Gatehouse of the Court of Holland, has
confessed without torture, and being without Iron-Fetters, that he went out of
this Country last year about three Days after the Fight of Steenkirk, to travel
into Germany and Switzerland.

Partly (as he says) out of curiosity to enquire into the Present State of the
Frontiers of Germany and France: And

Partly to inform himself, if possible, by Monsieur Amelot the French
Ambassador in Switzerland, of the King his Master's Intention concerning a
General Peace in Europe.

That by both these Designs (as he farther says) he has had no other aim than
to acquire more Knowledge and Experience by which he might regulate his Conduct
to the best advantage of the Public, and to a fuller discharge of his Duty in
the administration of the Affairs of his Country.

That the Prisoner, being arrived at Solethurne in Switzerland, had addressed
himself to the forementioned Amelot; asking him,

1st. If he was able to give him any information of the King his Master's
Intention about a General Peace.

2dly. If his Master was inclinable to deliver up some considerable Frontiers
to secure the Spanish Netherlands, and this Country.

That the said Ambassador had answered him to both in the affirmative; but
telling him also, that he was not able, nor empowered to give him any
Particular; that this was work for a Treaty; but yet if the Prisoner would be
pleased to stay there some time, then he (the Ambassador) would write to Court,
and give him certainly a positive Answer.

That he had replied, That it was not convenient for him to stay there any
longer, to prevent several Reflections.

That the said Ambassador having asked him, Who he was, and if he had any
Relations and Friends in the Government; the Prisoner answered him, That his
Name was Simon van Halewyn; that he was Burgher-Master Senior of the City of
Dort; and that he had a Brother who had yet a greater power in the Government.

That the said Amelot during their Conversation, having asked him further, What
success he thought that King James might have had in his intended Descent, in
case the French had not been beaten at Sea? the Prisoner answered him, That it
would have been a very weak Enterprise, considering the general aversion the
English had for King James.

That the Prisoner to refute some Arguments which Amelot had made use of to
show how much this State ought to desire a Peace, told him; That it was true
enough, that the most considerable Families of our Country suffered very much
by heavy Taxes, as having great Estates in Land, which carried the greatest
Burden; but that the Merchants were very gently treated for the benefit of
Trade; that the Taxes on real Estates could cause at the worst but a change of
their Masters, which did not at all concern the State in general, and
considered in abstracto; adding withal, in order to the clearer proof, that the
present War did not lessen the Power of the State; that although there were
some losses in Trade on one hand, yet that they were repaired on the other, by
a considerable Sale of the Manufacturies; and that it was certain that there
were much more Ships built now, than before the War.

That even their Losses at Sea did not incommode them very much, since the
greatest part of their Ships and Cargo were insured; and that it was in vain to
imagine that there was no difference if the Loss were sustained by the
Proprietors or Insurers, because the latter sufficiently repairs it, by what
they gained from Ships that safely arrived in the Harbor; and that the result
of all was, that those who stood in need of the Goods, were to pay a greater
price for them.

These and several other Arguments the Prisoner avers that he made use of, in
order to exaggerate the power of the State.

The Prisoner says farther, That the said Amelot having asked him if there were
some grounds to hope, that some of those that were at the Helm of the
Government, were inclinable to a peace? he answered him, that this did depend
upon the particulars of the Proposals relating to it; and that except some
considerable Frontier places were delivered up to the Spanish Netherlands,
there was no true Dutch man who would not rather sacrifice the last Slyver he
had, than to think of a peace.

That after some other Discourse, the Prisoner agreed with the said Amelot,
that he the said Amelot was to send him some body to let him know by word of
mouth an answer of the two above mentioned Questions, and that a printed Book
should be sent to the Prisoner as a Token that the King did continue in his
Inclination for a general peace, and that a Messenger should follow.

That they had further agreed, that the Prisoner, as a Token that he had
received the Book, should send a Letter of Trade to one Handecourt, living at
Paris in St. Honore-Street, at the Sign of the Arms of England, which should
also serve for an Advertisement that he was arrived in the Country.

That the Prisoner told the said Amelot, that whereas he might perhaps make a
tour into England, it would be necessary to let him know what time a Messenger
would be sent him, for fear of his being disappointed; and that to assure him
the Letter came from Monsieur Amelot, a certain Mark should be put upon the
outside of it.

That according to these concerted Measures, the Prisoner received last Harvest
the said printed Book, with two Letters of a different date; one of which gave
him notice, that he was to receive the said Book, and the other was accompanied
with it.

That the said Letters were signed Finberlon, which the Prisoner judged to be a
fictitious Name; that he showed them to no body, and burned them a little time
after the receipt of them.

That the Prisoner had sent a Letter to the said Handecourt, of which the
following Copy was seizd amongst his Papers.

I'Ay bien receu vas deux lettres, datees de IN onzieme et quinzieme de ce
mois, je tacheray a fair vendre vos actions de Novembre, selon les ordres que
vous m'y donnez. Je voudrols que vous me pouviez envoyer au plutost mon conte,
car il faut que l'ajuste icy mes Affairs, avaunt que je puisse fair mon voyage
d'Angleterre, qui press d'autant plus que les bleds montent icy aa un prix
excessif, and si on y veut faixe le negoce, que nous avons prosette, it faut
qu'on le fasse au plutost, car pour fair un achapt vonsiderable en detail it
faut du temps pour prendre ses mesures, et si on ne le fait pas en detail, il
n'y arien a gagner.

The same in English.

I Have received your Two Letters, dated the 11th and 15th of this Month. I Will
endeavor to sell your Actions of Novembre according to your Orders; and I wish
you would send me speedily my Accounts, for I would fain adjust my Affairs here
before I go into England, which cannot be put off very long, considering the
excessive Rate that Corn is risen to, and sold at here; and if we will trade in
it according to our Project, we must do it speedily, because there is much time
required to buy a considerable Quantity by Parcels, and if it be not done by
Parcels, nothing is to be won.

The Prisoner says, That he had disguised his hand in this Letter, and put a
false Name to it, because he was willing to avoid the Offense, which in case of
discovery it would have given to those that did not like he business.

He adds, That by these words in the Letter; Je voudrois que vous me pourriez
envoyer au plutost mon conte. (I wish you would send me speedily my Accounts).
He understood the Person that was to be sent to him; and that by the following
words, he did not understand the business of a Peace, the gaining of Friends,
and the working out of that Peace.

That afterward, according to his agreement with Monsieur d*Amelot, a certain
Frenchman, named Roberti de Pille du Plessis, being arrived at Dort, had met
him there in an Inn, called the Logement van de heeren. That the said
Frenchman asked the Prisoner, if he was the Man that had been with Monsieur d'
Amelot in Switzerland, and whether he had received the formention'd Book; and
he having assured him of both, the said Roberti discovered himself to him, and
acquainted him with the reasons of his coming.

That the Prisoner having asked the said Roberti what Conditions he had to
propose for a Peace: The said Roberti answered him, That he had no orders to
make any overture of it, and that at that time he was far from giving any
Satisfaction about the Questions the Prisoner had proposed to Amelot: The said
Roberti on the other hand asked him, Whether the Prisoner had any thing to
propose to him relating to a Peace with this State and its Allies? To which the
Prisioner replied, he had not; that it was contrary to the Agreement made with
Monsieur Amelot, who had promised to inform him what Sentiments the Court of
France had about a General Peace; and that thereupon having pressed the said
Roberti to endeavor to see himself put in a condition of giving the Prisoner
some satisfaction about the said point, the said Roberti promised him, that he
would not fail to do it.

That after some time the Prisoner having asked the said Roberti whether he had
received an Answer of a Letter which he had promised to write into France, in
order to know the Proposals the Court of France was willing to make for a
Peace; the said Roberti answered him (as he says) that he had both writ, and
received an Answer about it, which was, That the Court did not think fit to
explain her self about the Particulars before she knew what succes Monsieur
d'Avaux would meet with at the Court of the King of Sweden, whom he was to
entreat to offer his mediation for a Peace between the Confederates and France.
And that since that time the Prisoner did remain in these Terms with the said
Roberti.

That the Prisoner went afterward with the said Roberti to a Countrey-house of
his at Abbenbroeck, where they remained two or three days together.

That during their stay there, the said Roberti having told the Prisoner, by
way of discourse, that he could not comprehend the form of the Government of
this State; the Prisoner explained it to him, as also that of the City of Dort
in particular, which the Prisoner said, was yet more intricate.

That in recompense of it, the said Roberti informed the Prisoner of the
present State of Affairs in France.

The Prisoner says, that he had no other Design in carrying the said Roberti to
his Country House, but to discourse with him about the Architecture of a House
he was building there.

He protests, that he had never asked any Money of the said Roberti, but that
riding from Abbenbroeck, and being near the Sluice, the said Roberti had offered
him a considerable Sum for the better carrying on of his Building.

That the Prisoner having refused the acceptance of it, by telling him: Que ses
petites affairs n'avoient pas besoin de ce secours, i. e. That his small
Affairs did not stand in need of such a Supply, the said Roberti replied: Que
si ce n'estoit pas pour le batimet, que ce fut donc pour la petite oye, i. e.
That if it was not for his Building, it should be for his little Pleasures.

He further adds, That at the same time the said Roberti offered him this
Money, the Prisoner told him, that he looked upon it as a great piece of Villainy
to accept of any Bribe. That he had always wondered, that in the former Wars
some had been found here, who had been so far warped and corrupted by it, as to
abandon the general interest of Europe; and although he had no aversion to the
receiving of an honest Recompense from those from whom he might lawfully
receive it, yet that he hated all Bribes.

That since that time, the Prisoner has had several other enter views with the
said Roberti, wherein he always told him, that whereas the Court of France
might easily have imagined, that he had not desired any one should be sent him
to treat about indifferent Matters, but about the agreement of some favorable
Conditions for a Peace, he was willing to let him know, That as soon as he
should be assured of the French King's Inclination for a Peace, he was
inclinable to make an overture of it to the Magistracy of the City of Dort, who
should afterward propose it to the Assembly of the States of Holland, that so
in due time it might be taken into their mature Consideration.

And although the Prisoner confesses that he had perused the Articles of the
Treaty concluded between this State and the Confederates, by which an Agreement
was made, on what grounds a Peace was to be concluded; that no Treaty about it
ought to be set on foot without a general Concurrence, and that every one of
them should acquaint the other with what might happen to them in particular,
that should tend toward it: Yet he alleges in his Defense,

That a Declaration of War does only prohibit an unlawful Correspondency to the
prejudice of the State.

That it is agreed on all hands, That to endeavor to procure a Peace, is not
at all prejudicial to the State; that it is so far from that, that those who
employ themselves about some honest means of obtaining it, should be looked upon
as Criminals, that they rather deserve to have a Stature erected them, and that
he was willing to do it, tho it was at the peril of his Life.

Afterward having desired leave to speak with freedom, the Prisoner said, That
being before the High Court of Justice of his Country, he had a great mind to
convince them, that it was none of his fault, that Lives and Estates were
sacrificed to men; and that he would rather dye, than see it longer continued,
and to play on dobbe dobbe dob, and fan fare for the King of England.

Whereupon being ordered to retire, the words were recorded by the Clerk; and
the Prisoner being called in again, and the words read to him, he was asked if
they did not exactly correspond with what he had said; to which he answered,
That he was not able to repeat the very same words, which he had spoke in the
heat of his Defense; but that his meaning was, That he thought it was so far
from a man's being looked upon as a Criminal to the State, for endeavoring by
honest means to promote a Peace, that he rather deserved to be commended for
it; and that he should sooner wish to dye this very moment, than see things
reduced to such Extremities.

That he had never had so ridiculous a presumption of his own capacity, as to
think himself able, nor that indeed he had been willing to procure a Peace, a
work of so great consequence, against the general Opinion and the Sentiments of
others; but that he thought that in case some solid and reasonable Proposals of
peace should be offered, it being a thing so necessary and so salutary for this
State, that every true Patriot would have readily, without any other reason,
have embraced them; the Prisoner withal assuring his Judges, that what Steps
soever he had made in this Affair, they were occasioned by nothing else but a
sincere Intention of his to promote the true Interest of this State.

That, in fine, the Prisoner at a time when some suspected persons, who were
seized at the Hague, at the Sign of the King of Spain, had wrote a Letter to
the said Roberti at Amsterdam without either Name or Date, and having his Hand
disguised therein, with the following Contents: On vient de me dire que l'
host au Roy d' Espagne and quelques Espions sont arrestez c' est a vous a
prendre vos mesures. I am just now informed that the Landlord and several
Spies, lodging at the Sign of the King of Spain, have been seized. It belongs
to you to take your Measures accordingly.

That by this he would have given the said Roberti to understand, that possibly
some search might be made after him too, and that he had endeavored to prevent
the finding out of the Correspondency which he entertained with the said
Roberti.

The Prisoner confessing that he had undertaken all this without giving notice
of it to any body, and without being empowered by any of the Princes now in
Confederacy with this State, either to make, or to receive any overture for a
general Peace.

All which being opposite to the Duty of a good Subject, much more to that of a
Magistrate, and most of all directly contrary to the concluded Treaties, as
also to the several Proclamations of the State, which expressly had forbidden
all Subjects whatsoever of this Country, to entertain any correspondency or
commerce directly or indirectly, either by Letters or other means, tending to
the prejudice of this Country, with France or its Subjects, upon pain of being
proceeded against as declared Enemies of the State, and they being besides
things of an ill aspect, and of a dangerous consequence, deserving to be highly
punished for the Example of others:

For these Reasons,

The said Court, after a mature deliberation, and a full examination of all
things relating to this Affair, administering Justice, in the Name, and by the
Authority of the Supreme Magistracy and Lordship of Holland, Zealand, and
Friezland, has condemned the said Prisoner, and does condemn him by these
Presents, To be carried to a secure place, to remain a Prisoner there during
life, declaring also all his Goods and Estate to be confiscated for the use of
the Supreme Magistracy, and condemning him besides to the payment of all
Expenses of Justice, according to the Estimate of the said Court. Actum in the
Hague by our Lords and Masters, Matthews Gool, Benjamin Fagel, Seigneur Vander
Weer, John Munter, Francis Keetlaer, Paul Andrew vandr Meulen, Charles Filips
van Dorp, Iman Cau; Anthony Slicher, and Frederick Roosenboom, Senators of
Holland, and pronounced July the 31st, 1693.

Signed, Ant. van Kinschot. Robert

Robert de Pille du Blessis's SENTENCE, Pronounced by the Court of Holland,
Zeeland and Friezland, July the 31st, 1693.
Whereas Robert de Pille du Plessis, seven and fifty Years old, born at Clamsy
in Burgundy, at present Prisoner at the Gatehouse of the Court of Holland has
confessed without Torture, and being without Iron-Fetters,

That he has been sent hither by the French King last Year, to treat about a
Peace.

That he has received some Instructions about it by the French King, but that
having read them over and over again, and consequently knowing the Contents of
it by heart, he had burnt the Written Copy at Mons, partly because he did not
think it safe passing through an Enemies Country, to keep it about him, partly
to execute the Orders which he at parting received from that Court.

That at Mons he had received a Pasport from the Elector of Bavaria, which the
Governor of that place had obtained for him under the Name of Robert du
Plossis, Picture Drawer.

That he had also been provided with a Passport from Monsieur dei Neuf ville
Envoy of the King of Poland at the Court of France, containing amongst other
things, that he was a dealer in Pictures, going into Poland in order to carry
to that King some Pictures, which he had bought for him by his Orders.

That with these Passports he arrived in the Spanish Netherlands, from whence
he came to the Hague in January last, without any Passport from this State.

That according to his Orders received from the Court of France, he had
addressed himself to the Burgher-Master Senior, Simon van Halewyn, asking him,
If he was not the person that had been with Monsieur Amelot in Switzerland; and
having afterward told the said Burgher-Master who he was, and the reason of
his coming, he had asked the said Burgher-Master, if he had not received a
little Book as a Token that some body should be sent to him.

That the said Burgher-Master having answered him in the Affirmative, the
Prisoner had further asked him whether he had any Proposals to make relating to
a Peace.

That the said Halewyn had answered him (as the Prisoner pretends) that it was
not time yet, that the face of Affairs was changed, and that the Prisoner must
allow him some time to take some new Measures.

That he had thereupon asked the said Halewyn (as he says) if there was then no
hopes left, and if it was fit for him to depart; Halewyn had answered him, No,
but that he should wait some time to see if some favorable opportunity, and
some good Disposition in the State should offer it self.

That he had talked at several times and places with the said Simon van
Halewyn, and concerted within several Measures about this Affair.

That after their first enterview, they had met at several times at the
Voorhout, a place before the Court at the Hague; and that about a Month ago
being come to the same place about Seven a Clock at Night, according to the
said Halewyn's Assignation, the said Halewyn had told him, That he had a
written Project about him, but that he had refused to deliver it to him, nor to
trust any body with it, because he had writ it with his own Hand.

That the said Halewyn had carried the Prisoner to the Ouden doole, where he
had dictated to him the said Project.

That the said Halewyn had brought with him to that purpose some Paper, but
finding no Ink there, the Prisoner had found himself obliged to write it into
his Tables.

That the said Halewyn after having dictated to him the said Project, had burnt
the Original of it.

That afterward the Prisoner having told the said Halewyn, that tho they were
in a Tavern that yet they had drunk no Wine, and that people might very well
suspect they were come thither for some other purpose than to drink, the said
Halewyn had poured out some Wine upon the Floor, and into the Chimney.

That the Prisoner has sent the said Project in a Letter into France the 19th
of February last, the Contents of which are,

That to prepare things for a Peace, it would be necessary to engage the King
of Sweden to offer his Mediation about it to his Majesty of Great Britain and
this State.

That there should by no means be made any Proposals of it, before they were
assured that these Provinces were in a Humonr to accept it.

That the means to bring them to it, were to endeavor secretly and cunningly
to give a full prospect to those that had the greatest Interest and Authority
with the Deputies of this State, of the sad Consequences that would attend a
further Continuation of this War, to all the States in General, and to each in
Particular, managing every body according to his Humor and Inclination.

That although they were sensible enough of the Inconveniences of the War, that
yet this was not sufficient, but that it was necessary to gain some Deputies
that would undertake to animate the rest by some bold Example.

That no body was more proper for it than the two Brothers, Halewyn, as being
Persons of great Credit, and of a competent Knowledge of Affairs.

That over and above, the City of Dort, who had the first Vote of all other
Places, might by her Advice, and manner of proceeding, teach others that were
more timorous to despise the hatred of those that were not pleased with it.

That after the Two Brothers had been gained, and the King of Sweden disposed
to the offering of his Mediation, that then the Memorial which was to be
presented about it to the States General, should be concerted with the said Two
Persons, who best knew how to humor it.

That after this Memorial was presented to the States General, and received by
the said Provinces, and consequently brought into Holland, that then the
respective Deputies should take it into their Consideration, except those of
the City of Dort, who should instantly declare that they had already embraced
it, that the other Deputies might acquaint their Principals with it.

That to this purpose, it was necessary to gain the Eldest of the said Brothers
by some Interest of Family, and to render them Masters in the said City of
Dort, which being governed by a Commonalty might be easily appeased with words
alone.

These the Prisoner says, were the Content of the Project, although the said Simon
van Halewyn expressly denies to know the least thing of it and that the Prisoner
protests, That Simon van Halewyn has always told him, that his Brother had not
the least knowledge of it, nor that the Prisoner has ever talked with the Eldest
Halewyn, or any other Person.

That the Prisoner has further declared to the Court, That he has sent several
other Letters to the Court of France relating to this Affair, and especially
one dated Febr. 13. 1693. by which he had informed that Court that Simon Van
Halewyn had told him, That the two Joint-Fleets were to be Reinforced by a
Squadron of Thirty Men of War.

That although the Prisoner had denied to have offered any Sum of Money to the
said Halewin, yet that he has confessed, That taking a walk with him at
Abbenbroeck, and talking about his Building, he had said to the said Halewyn,
upon his own account only, and by way of Compliment, That the King his Master
was rich enough to offer him a little Present to the promoting of his Building,
but that it seemed the said Halewyn had made no Reflections on it.

That nevertheless; the Prisoner had writ into France for Money, and that
thereupon he had been imprower'd by the French King in a Letter dated the 4th
of March last, (which was intercepted during his Imprisonment) to promise to
Simon van Halewyn, the Sum of Twenty thousand Crowns, in case he could by his
Credit, and that of his Friends, persuade the City of Dort, to give such an
Example to tho other Cities in Holland, that thereupon a Peace might ensue.

All which being, such Proceedings, as in no Country where there is any
Justice, ought to be suffered, as tending to the Destruction of the General
Quiet and Tranquillity of the State, and the causing some Difference and
Animosity (if possible) between the Confederates and this State; and
consequently deserving Punishment for an Example to others:

For these Reasons,

The said Court, after a mature Deliberation, and serious Examination of all
Matters relating to this Affair, administering Justice in the Name, and by the
Authority of the Supreme Magistracy and Lordship of Holland, Zealand, and
Friezland, has condemned the said Prisoner, and does condemn him by these
Presents, To be carried to a secure Place, where he is to remain Prisoner
during this War, and to be kept on his own Expenses; and does Banish him out of
Holland, Zealand, Friezland, and Utrecht, without Liberty of returning thereto
under pain of a severer Punishment, declares all his Goods confiscated to the
profit of the Supreme Magistracy, and condemns him besides to all the Expenses
of Justice, according to the Estimate of the said Court. Actum at the Hague by
our Lords and Masters, Matthews Gool, Benjamin Fagel, Seigneur Van Fer-Weer,
John Munter, Francis Keetlaer, Paul Andrew van der Meulen, Charles Philips van
Dorp, Iman Cau, Anthony Slicher, and Frederick Roosenboom, Senators of Holland,
and pronounced July the 31st, 1693.

Signed, Ant. van Kinschot.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Richard Baldwin.
A New, Plain, Short, and Complete French and English Grammar; whereby the
Learner may attain in few Months to speak and write French correctly, as they
do now in the Court of France. And wherein all that is dark, superfluous and
deficient in other Grammars, is plain, short, and methodically supplied. Also
very useful to Strangers, that are desirous to learn the English Tongue: For
whose sake is added a Short, but very Exact English Grammar. The Third Edition,
with Additions. By Peter Berault.

A Brief Disquisition of the Law of Nature, according to the Principles and
Method laid down in the Reverend Dr. Cumberland's (now Lord Bishop of
Peterborough's) Latin Treatise on that Subject. As also his Confutation of Mr.
Hobb's Principles put into another Method. With the Right Reverend Author's
Approbation.

The Tragedies of the Last Age, considered and examined by the Practice of the
Ancients, and by the common Sense of all Ages; in a Letter to Fleetwood
Shephard, Esquire The Second Edition.

A short View of Tragedy; its Original, Excellency, and Corruption* With some
Reflections on Shakespeare and other Practitioners for the Stage Both by Mr.
Rymer Servant to Their Majesty's.

Travels into diverse Parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's
Order to discover a new Way by Land into China; containing many curious Remarks
in Natural Philosophy, Geography, Hydrography and History. Together with a
Description of Great Tartary, and of the different People who inhabit there.
Done out of French. To which is added, A Supplement extracted from Hakluyt and
Purohas; giving an Account of several Journeys over Land from Russia, Persia,
and the Mogul Country to China, together with the Roads and distances of the
Places.

Liturgia Tigurina: Or, The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, usually practiced,
and solemnly performed in all the Churches and Chapels of the City and Canton
of Zurick in Switzerland, etc.

Memoirs concerning the Campaigne of Three Kings, William, Lewis and James, in
the Year 1692. With Reflections upon the Great Endeavors of Lewis the 14th to
effect his Designs, of James the 2d to Remount the Throns. And the proper
Methods for the Allies to take to hinder both.

Bibliotheca Politica. Or, A Discourse by way of Dialogue, upon these
Questions, Whether by the Ancient Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom, as
well as by the Statutes of the 13th and 14th of King Charles the II all
Resistance of the King, or of those commissioned by him, are expressly forbid,
upon any Pretense whatsoever. And also, Whether all those who assisted his
Present Majesty King William, either before or after the coming over, are
guilty of the breach of this Law. Collected out of the most Approved Authors,
both Ancient and Modern. Dialogue the Ninth. Where are also to be had the
First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Dialogues.

An Answer to the Late King James's Declaration, dated at St. Germains, April
the 17th. S.N. 1693. Licensed by Mr. Secretary Trenchard.

Nevil Payn's Letter, and some other Letters that concern the Subject of his
Letter. With short Notes on them; for the Clearer Information of the Members of
Parliament. In Order to Nevil Payn's Trial.

The Charge of the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Warrington, Lord Delamere, to
the Grand Jury at the Quarter Sessions, held for the County of Chester, on the
11th of October, 1692.

An Account of the late Terrible Earthquake in Sicily; with most of its
Particulars. Done from the Italian Copy printed at Rome.

Reflections upon the Late Horrid Conspiracy contrived by some of the French
Court, to Murder His Majesty in Flanders: And for which Monsieur Granvall, one
of the Assassinates, was Executed.


