ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a Paper, Entitled, The SPEECH OF THE LATE Lord RUSSEL,
etc.
THE words of Dying Persons are apt to give the deepest impressions upon the
Minds of the Living; and though possibly there is no point in which I am more
tender, than in treading upon the memory of such, who are out of the capacity
of making their own Defense; yet resolving to comport my self with all decency,
which I would do if the person were living, I think it a necessary duty to
endeavor to hinder the spreading of that Contagion, which has proved so fatal
to the pretended Author of this Speech, and I fear will prove so t^ ^^^^rs, if
they be not charitably undeceived; and truly, if the Dissenters, who do so
g^^edily swallow down all that is said in that Paper, as if the supposed Author
were a Martyr, and the words as true as Gospel, do not open their Eyes to see
the wondrous Contradictions, which Providence has so visibly opposed to those
Insinuations, my fears for them are extraordinary, that they are hardened to
their own destruction; and let them be never so angry, I will do all I can to
prevent the mischief they will certainly pull upon their own heads, whilst they
prepare it for others.

I confess I have the utmost difficulty to believe this Speech to be the Lord
Russel's, and cannot but suspect the finger of Job to be in it; and my reason
is, because there is so much Panegyric, as is not at all consistent, either
with the modesty or humility of a Person born of worthy good Parents, and who
has had the advantages of a Religious Education, as it is there expressed, for
he could not then miss of the Divine Precept of the wisest of mere mortal Men,
Let another Man praise thee, and not thine own Lips. The office of making
Inventories, of the Virtues as well as Goods of the deceased, and the care of
embalming their Memories as well as Bodies, has ever been committed to the
discretion of their Friends, who may without Vanity or Ostentation say those
things, which would no ways become themselves. And since that unfortunate Lord
tells us, He could never consent to do a base thing, I think it is a service to
vindicate him from the most indecent and abject of all Follies, the blazoning
himself, and proclaiming his own Praises, which is at the least one third part
of that sheet of Paper.

But to let pass the Panegyricks as the most innocent, though not most wise, I
shall only give them this Remark: That whoever was the Penman of that Paper,
has not done it without a most injurious design, of insinuating into the heads
of the intoxicated Rabble such a Poison as may turn them round, since the
natural and easy inference from thence is, That this Gentleman being a person
of those Excellencies, and innocent as he averrs of the Crimes for which he
dies, the Loss is the greater, his Case the harder, and the Injustice done him
so much the worse. And we are not unacquainted how far ill Men carry on their
Reflections, to the disparagement of the Justice both of God and Man, and to
run the wild Mobile into the utmost Frenzies of Extravagance against, and
detestation of the Government and their Governors.

I shall not insist upon some Expressions, which seem next to Equivocation, as,
his living and dying of the Reformed Religion, a true and sincere Protestant,
and in the Communion of the Church of England, and many suchlike; words so
ambiguous, that all the several Sects will pretend to an interest in him; and
though the scandal of suffering for High Treason be not very reputable for any
sort of Men, yet I am glad for the sake of the Loyal Church of England, that he
does not say he is of the Reformed Church of England as by Law established,
which teaches all her true Children not only not to conspire or act Treason
upon any pretense whatsoever, but not so much as to Curse the King in a thought
in their safest Retirement from discovery or danger, even in their Bedchamber.

That which I would chiefly lay my stress upon, is the obviating some things
which are of malicious and dangerous consequence, not only to the Government,
but to the Dissenters from it, who, I fear, may for want of his giving Glory to
God as he ought, become more obstinate, in persisting in the belief of their
mistakes, which, without Repentance, will certainly prove fatal to them
possibly in this World, but certainly in the next.

And first I observe that the great scope and drift of the Speech is to
persuade foolish people that they are in the utmost danger of Popery, as
particularly P. 2. I did believe and do still (says he) that Popery is
breaking in upon the Nation. This very Topique has already cost this Nation 40
Millions of Treasure, and 100000 lives, and one which was more valuable than
them all, that of our late Martyred Sovereign King CHARLES the first, for whose
innocent blood, I fear divine Vengeance is now calling the Dissenters to an
account, and making inquisition for blood. With this fear of Popery it is that
the people have been so far mislead, as to give the late Conspirators hopes to
be assisted by them, even by the confession of this Speech to undo us all, to
Murder the best and most Gracious of Princes, and subvert the easiest of all
Governments. And now let all the world judge who knows best, or is most likely
to prevent the (...) in of Popery, the King, who upon all occasions has
condescended so far as to avow to his people, that he will do all that lies in
his power to keep out Popery, or my Lord Russel's Speech, which affirms to the
contrary; it is not only good manners to believe the King, who is as an Angel
of God, rather than all the malicious Speeches of men to the contrary, but I do
aver, that whoever gives credit to this Calumny, against the Kings avowed
Declaration, the known rule and practice of the Law to suppress Popery, is not
only an uncharitable and ill Christian, but a most disloyal Subject, since it
is notorious, that this old Shaftsbury's cloak of fear of Popery, is the very
mantle of Rebellion.

The next thing is the innocence of this Gentleman, which is very positively
aversed in the spoken Speech, where it is said, in the words of a dying man, I
profess I know of no Plot either against the Kings life or the Government.
What? know of no Plot? I profess it is boldly said, and I doubt not but will be
readily believed by the whole Party. But it were well for them if it had been
as plainly proved, and truly had the Speech stopped here without the following
comment upon the Text, it would have been some difficulty to have expounded it,
and others may do what they please, but I cannot chufe but attribute the
Printing and industrious dispersing of this Speech to a superior hand, which
has appeared so marvellously visible in the discovery of this hellish Treason.
What so many discourses as are confessed, of the feazibleness of seizing the
Kings Guards, p. 3. my Lord exclaiming against it, and asking if the thing
succeeded what must be done next, etc. the Duke of Monmouth tells him, my Lord
Shaftsbury and some hot men would undo us all, and asks him at another time,
Did you ever hear such a horrid thing? and yet to say he dies innocent, or
knows of no Plot against the King's life or Government, I protest I stand
amazed at the contradiction; for the Evasions are too silly and thin, to think
that the horrid thing was only killing the Guards, or that which would undo us
all, was some disorderly thing or other which the hot men would do, if great
care were not taken. Alas! that any man should be so weak himself as to think
to impose upon others such foolish inconsistencies. No certainly the horrid
thing, such as was never heard of, that would undo us all, must be Crimes of
another nature than this palliating Speech insinuates, and can be of no other
import than Treasons of the blackest complexion. And after the knowledge of
such things, to say a man knows no Plot, and that he dies innocent, cannot be
said unless Plotting and knowing of it be no Treason, and that the same person
may be the greatest Criminal, and the most innocent at the same time.

I would fain be Answered one Question: And that is, What should this discourse
about seizing the Guards be so often debated, and to what purpose can it be
supposed to be done? He must be stupid that does not see it carry Treason in
the face of it; either in Seizing or Assassinating the Kings Person, or both
successively, but still the knowing of this must be misprision of Treason. It
was well my Lords Council knew better things, when they advised him not to
confess matter of Fact plainly, for if he had confessed as much as this Speech
does, he would have saved the Witnesses a labor, and the easy and willing
Jury, as the Speech calls them, would not have had occasion to withdraw from
the Bar for their Verdict: The Law says, there are no accessaries but all are
principals in Treasons. He confesses, he was pressed with this, that he was
acquainted with these heats and ill designs and did not discover them, page 3.
and infers this is but misprision of Treason at most; but his Lawyers knew
better; and though it can do him no service, yet because it may do others who
think not revealing Treason no Crime, or that the bare difcoursing it is so
little a thing, I will give the opinion of one of the Oracles of their Party
Mr. St. John's in his Argument concerning the attainder of the E. of Strafford,
as I find it in Dr. Nalsons 2d Vol. of Collections published the other day,
folio 196* where he proves, that bare Machination to raise War, is Treason: He
gives several instances, and one most remarkable as follows. In the 3d year of
King Henry IV, one Balshal coming from London, found one Bernard at plough in
the Parish of Ofley in the County of Hertford: Bernard asked Balshal, What
news? he told him, that the news was, that Richard II. was alive in Scotland
(which was false for he was dead) and that by Midsummer next, he would come
into England: Bernard asked him, What were best to be done? Balshal Answered,
get men and go to King Richard. In Michaelmas Term, in the 3d. year of Hen.
4th. in the Kings Bench, Rot. 4. This advice adjudged Treason.

One Story in Q. Eliz. time practiced to Levy War, nothing done in pursuance of
a practice, the intent adjudged Treason, and he Executed upon it, even before
the Act of the XIII. Eliz. which made intention Treason during Her Life: For
this Case was adjudged in Hillary Term, the Parliament begun not 'till the
April following.

Now let us infer, if Seizing the Kings Guards and making them Prisoners, which
cannot be done without Arms, be Levying War, and Levying War be Treason, and
the debating this matter be also Treason, and there can be no accessories but
all Principals in Treason, and my L. Russel was at many of these debates, and
acquainted with these ill designs, What becomes of his innocence? most
assuredly in the sight of God and Man he is Guilty.

Nor is he so innocent neither in that commonly called Gentile Quality, which
he seems next to his pretended innocence so much to value himself upon, that,
he says, he hopes no body will imagine that so mean a thought should enter
into me as to go about to save my self, by accusing others. It seems he could
then, if he had not thought it base and mean; but truly if he had too much
gallantry to save his Body, he ought to have had enough Religion to save his
Soul. And I tremble to think that some persons, who should have done otherwise,
have dealt so unfaithfully with him, as to let him dye glorying, and impenitent
of two most horrible sins.

For first, here is a most manifest Perjury, which by this not accusing all he
knew guilty of these heats and ill designs, he stands manifestly in Articulo
Mortis, convict of, by his own Confession. For as a Member of the Commons
House, how often, as well as in other capacities, he has fworn by the
Omnipotent God, upon the Holy Evangelists, the Oath of Allegiance, of 3 Jac. To
do his best endeavor to disclose and make known to His Majesty his Heirs and
Successors, all Treasons, and Traitorous Conspiracies, which he shall know or
hear of to be against him or any of them: And yet out of a piece of Gallantry,
it is too mean a thing to accuse others. So brave a thing it is to break the
Oath of God, and without infinite Mercy, to leap headlong into Damnation, and
excuse it as a piece of Bravery. O! wretched Conductors of this poor Gentleman's
Soul, to let him pass into Eternity with that dreadful Imprecation annexed to
this Oath, of So help me God, unthought of and unrepented of! There were some
things said at Shepheard' s by some, the Speech tells us, with more heat than
Judgment. These things ought, by the force of this Oath, to have been revealed,
upon the, no less, danger than renouncing all help from God, and all hopes of
happiness, and it will be a poor plea for a shivering soul before the dreadful
Tribunal of infinite Justice, to say as the Speech does, that he did then
sufficiently disapprove them; when he was under the indispensible obligation of
a most solemn and sacred Oath, and of the forfeiture of mercy and Heaven bound
to disclose and reveal them to the King.

Nor is it a little sin, whatever men may think, not to give Glory to God, by a
public acknowledgment and repentance for that Guilt and those Crimes, for which
his justice has brought any person to such public and exemplary punishment.
For besides the injustice which is done to the Righteous Judge of all men, in
not vindicating his Glory by a clear and ingenuous confession; it has this
dangerous influence upon others, that thereby they are hardened in their
impenitency, and even after death a person may become criminal and accessory to
all the ill and dangerous consequences which may be the effects of this
supressing of truth.

I pray God some people be not sensible of this, to their utter Ruins: For I
cannot without strange apprehensions see the people swallow this deadly draught
of Poison, and endeavor to stifle the most horrid and barbarous Conspiracy,
the most clearly proved, and most miraculously both detected and disappointed,
that any Age or Story can parallel. A Conspiracy which would have laid these
Nations weltering in Blood, and would have made our Posterity the most absolute
Slaves to Tyranny and Usurpation of any in the Christian World. And it amazes
me to hear people talk, That what these Conspirators did, was only for
preservation of the Protestant Religion, and not against the King's Life, when
the Sun is not more clear than this discovery, that nothing could so entirely
have ruined the Government and the Reformed Religion as this Conspiracy, had it
taken effect, was designed to have done.

There are a Thousand other things might be said, and very necessarily, but I
thought it more proper, though with too swift a hand, to do something toward
the stemming of the Tide, than to let it overrun all the Banks for want of a
little early care to stop the first breaches, and I doubt not but some others
will give this Speech a more deliberate Answer, than can be expected from these
hasty lines, which are the effect of a perfect duty and Loyalty to my King,
zeal to the Glory of God, and the good of all my fellow Subjects, excuses I
hope sufficient to procure a Pardon for a Paper writ, it may be, with more
affection than any other Ingredients which might have rendered the composure
proportionate and exact.

God preserve his sacred Majesty's person, the whole Royal Family, the
Government, our Religion, Lives, Laws, and Liberties, from the Conspiracies of
such men as think Treason Innocence, and concealing it a Glory, and may all the
yet secret Machinations of wicked Achitophels and Rebellious Absaloms be for
ever defeated and discovered.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, over against the Inner Temple Gate in
Fleet Street, 1683.


