A Serious ADVICE TO THE African and Indian Company.
IT is proposed that the Directors may be pleased to Call not only the General
Council, but as many of the Partners of the Company as can be had now in time
of Parliament; In Order to consult the common Concerns of the Company, where
the True Interest of the Company may be Calmly and Seriously considered,
without Passion or By-ends; And if by them, it be found expedient, the
following Proposals may be debated, agreed unto, or rejected, and that others
may be added, or put in their place.

1 mo. That a Dutiful and Earnest Address may be made to the King and
Parliament, Representing the Injuries done us by England, in order to such
Redress as the Nature of the thing will bear, and for preventing of future
Injuries.

2 do. That since hitherto we have received much Loss, and little Gain, if any,
by our being united under one Sovereign with England; And that the Opposition
which occurs in the Interest of two distinct Kingdoms under one Sovereign, are
not only Embarassing, but often times hurtful, especially to the weakest; That
therefore the Union of the two Kingdoms, either entirely, or at least as to
mutual Trade amongst themselves, may be now seriously intended, and speedily
prosecuted, as hitherto it has been only pretended, and Treated rather in Jest
than Earnest, by which, great Evils that threaten Britain, may be prevented:
Or if this be impracticable, or on any Account rejected. The King and
Parliament would be humbly Supplicated to Explicat our mutual Interests, so
that we may be not be used by our Neighbors of England, during our Nominal
Union with them, as Slaves in time of War, nor as Aliens in time of Peace: Of
both which, hitherto we have had many sensible Experiments.

3 tio. Since it was thought that we might Legally Possess a part of the
Isthmus of Ameria, where the King of Spain pretended Right? Though he had
Garrisons and Possessions nearly Adjacent; On this Ground, that he was not in
actual Possession of the very Place; That now we may Address His Majesty, as
King of England, to allow us the like Privilege and Faculty in the Isles and
Continent of America, nearly Adjacent to the English Plantations, where we may
have better Neighborhood, and may claim more favor than from the Spaniard.

4 to. That the Privileges, granted to Our Company, having been Rendered
ineffectual hitherto, by what Occured, That therefore now, we may Supplicat the
King and Parliament, for a further Prorogation of the time of our Privileges;
And likewise, in consideration of our very great loss, And that this Project of
Ours tended more to the National advantage, than to any private Gain. Viz The
settling of a Colonie in America, in order to Vent our Native Products, by a
Canal of Our own, and for bringing to us needful things from Abroad, in return
of our own Goods, and not by the wast of Our Stocks; And what is for a Common
Good* should be sustained for a Common Stock, That therefore, the King and
Nation may Contribute to the Resturation of Our Company; For which end it is
humbly proposed.

It is proposed, that since Wine imported in so great quantity as is usual, is
so far from being of necessary use, That it may rather be esteemed seperfluous,
and yet a Prohibition of its import absolutely is not acceptable to the People:
That his Majesty may dispense with a 4th part of the Custom and Excyse of
Wines, Imported be the common Stock of the African Company.

This proposition will be the more acceptable to the Nation, If the Wines so
savoured be restricted, only to the Wines Imported for the returns of their
Exported Fish allenarly; And whereof sufficient prooff is made, that they are
returned on the Company's Account, and by the product of their Exported Fish.

Or if additional custom of a 4th part more than is paid presently for Wines,
be added on all Wines not Imported be the Company on the return foresaid.

Its owned, that this will give the Company the whole benefit of the importing
of Wine, which is no hurtful concession, since a prohibition of 3 parts of 4
of the Wine that is Imported will not only be Legal, but perhaps most fit; Yet
since the generality of People are so defireous of its Import: And that it is
consumpt is not by the poor, but by those who have Money to spare; The
Importation of it may be the less grievous, That the profit thereof should go
to support this Company, who whose designs and Trade will be so beneficial to
the Nation; And by this, other Merchants will be thereby induced to Employ
their Stocks on the other things which are necessary for the Nation, whereby
the Nation may be better furnished in all these Materials, such as Timber,
Iron. Salt for Fishing. Copper, Flax, Hemp, Soap. Ashes, materials for Sugar,
etc. By which Manufactories will certainly be increased: Idle hands Employed,
and the poor sustained: Whereas now Merchants Employ their Stocks upon Wines,
and neglects the Materials of other Manufactories. So that the Privilege of
Importing of Wines, being only in the African Company's hands will both be some
Advantage to the Company, and a General Good to the Nation.

And if the same Privilege were granted to the Company on Tobac^o, would be on
the same Grounds desirable, and this would encourage the Company to bestow a
great part of their Stock upon Fishery. And since the Design and Result of the
African and Indian Trade will be without doubt to the Nation in General; And
consequently to every Individual person in it, and that in Justice a common
Good should have a general Concurrence and Support; And that the generality of
the Nation, especially the Great Men and Burrows, have professed a great and
Extraordinar Zeal for the Concerns of this Company; And that private Persons
have now Expendit on their private Stocks above 200000 lib. Sterling on this
design, albeit the profit was indeed the result of the Nation, and is not now
to be reattempted without a considerable support from the Nation, Therefore,

That three Months Cess yearly, for 3 or 4 years, may be imposed in savours of
this Company, with this provision, That at least a third part thereof be
employed on Fishings on the Scottish Seas, whereby the Money so employed will
indeed come to the common National profit, and almost to every Person in it; In
so much that if this Quota of Money were put in the hands of good Managers, it
is positively asserted, that it could not be so advantagiously Employed even
for the particular Persons of the Nation who contribute this Cess, as it may be
for promoving a Fisherie, and an Indian Trade in this Companies Hands, as the
Sequel of this Paper will show.

And to the effect it may be Managed aright, it is proposed, that a General
Council of the Company may be called presently, and three of every State, And
some of the Kings Officers may join with the said Council, for establishing the
Government thereof, in such Methods, and such Hands, as shall be by them judged
most expedient, and that the Directors of the said Company thereafter shall be
obliged to give Account of their Proceedings from time to time, that so the
Nation may see how their Money is employed.

And to demonstrat, how much Benefit this may bring to the Nation in general,
and that therefore the Nation should not grudge to encourage and sustain a
Company, which has already ventured so far for a National Concern, and will
Undoubtedly continue so to do, if sustained. I shall take an Example from one
Branch, viz: Fishery.

The Proposer and two or three other of his Friends, did in the latter end of
August last, provide for making twelve Last of Herrings at Dumbar, and ordered
for every Last two Barrel of French Salt, at six pound per Boll, and three
Bolls of Scots Salt at two pound per Boll, and Cask and Hoops, which unmade,
did cost about nine pound per Last, which is all the Expense that was bestowed
on a Last, I mean, of Foreign Commodity, in all amounting to 27 pound per
Boll: For the Fish, the Cowpers, Wedges, the Servants Hyre and Meat, and
carrying them from Dumbar to Leith, was all bestowed on Scotsmen; So was the
payments made to the Fishers, the Fishers Boats, Netts, and Provisions were all
Scots, and so was the price of the three Bolls of Scots Salt, viz: six pound;
And consequently all the Expense on Foreign Goods for the Last, extended only
to 21 pound. This Last was sold at Leith for ten pound the Barrel, inde per
Last 120 pound, and at the same time the Bush Herring was sold at 15 pound the
Barrel, which will extend to 180 pound Scots the Last, and yet in Bush fishing,
there is no money expended on Foreign Commodity; But the said 21 pound per
Last, is salted in the foresaid manner. By which it plainly appears, that we
did give out but 21 pound of money upon our Last; Yet if this Last had been
fold to a Foreigner, at Leith etc. at the foresaid price of ten pound the
Barrel, Scotland had gotten 99 pound from the Foreigner, which was pulled out
of the Sea: And albeit perhaps we who thus employ our money on this Fishing,
made no exuberant profit, yet the whole 99 pound accresced to the Stock of
Scotland, which in a 1000 Last so made, Scotland would have acquired of
Additional Stock 99000 pound, in less than four Months time, and if 10000 Last
were so taken, there would acc^ess to the Stock of Scotland thereby 990000
pound; And since the Herring taken by Bush Fishing, are acquired at little more
Expense on Foreign Goods, and yet are considerably more valuable than the
Dumbar Herring, 500 Bushes at 30 Last per Bush* and Loadning but twice in a
year; inde 30000 last; Which sold at 14 lib per Barrel, and deduceing from that
the price of the Foreign Salt and Timber of the Cask; There will at least
remain 12 lib. per Barrel free which in 30000 Last cannot amount to less, then
Three Million, or 3000000 pound Scots, of Addition to the Stock of Scotland; in
less than 6 Months time: But if the Bushes, should Load thrice in a Season (as
in all probability they may, because of the nearness and convenientness, of the
Harbors both in the North and West Seas; Then the Gain accruing to Scotland.
would be four Million and Five Hundred Thousand pound Scots; And the same
Fishers, Servants. and Boats, may be Employed the other half Year, on
White-Fishing; Which all, who understand Fisheries, says, is more valuable,
then the Herring; And it that also, or the half thereof, were Yearly acquired
to Scotland; How soon would it raise this Nation, from its present poverty; and
banish all Beggary, by Employing all hands, that could Work, and acquire and
India at our Doors. And the Practicableness hereof, is made out, from an
undoubted Experiment be our Neighboring Nation, the Dutch. who have risen by
this Trade: from the Pover Staten to be indeed, an Hogen Mogen Staten: And
beginning with five Bushes, in Enckhatiusen, They have increased to above 1500
Bushes, consumed in Europe; And Europe will consume four times as much if they
had them.

Some Frivolously Object, that the Dutch take so many, and Cure them so well,
that there will be neither Room nor Esteem for Our Fishery; To which I Answer,
That there is Market in Europe and Africa for twice as many as both Holland and
We can take, For Meat and Drink never wanted Merchants. 2dly, I offer these
Considerations to your Serious Thoughts; The Hollanders, who have bad Harbors,
and dear Provisions, and lie from the Herring Fishing above 600 Miles, and the
Schoal of Herring Sweaming from Zeatland to the Mouth of the Firth of Forth,
are never 10 Leagues from some covenient Scots Harbor, so that in a modest
Computation We may Unload twice or thrice for their once, If not four times: By
which advantage alone, We are able to Undersell them, with Gain enough to Out
selves; But to this advantage, add the numbers of Our Idle People, which are
had for small hire, the Cheapness of Our Mear and Drink, the shortness of time
that our Loadning is a making, for what they must Employ on every Loadning of
Theirs. We may perform in less time by a third, And so by these advantages, We
may Sell cheaper than they can. And yet a greater than all these, We having the
opportunity to use the same Hands, Men and Ships, in Whit^ Fishing for the
other half of the Year, and the White Fisheries lying also convenient near our
Ports, will give Us advantages in Fishing, above what the Hollanders can have;
So that if there be more Fish taken, than there be Market for, the loss must
fall upon the Hollanders, and not upon Us. And for the Imaginary advantage they
have, for Cureing their Fish better than we do, Experience has Refuted that,
For our last Fishery Company did Cure the Fish better than the Hollanders did,
in the opinion of all Europe, and got better Price for their Fish; And indeed
the opportunity we have for performing a great part of that Work on Land, does
help us much to Cure them better, than the Hollanders can.

I crave leave to Entreat Our Company, earnestly to consider this Proposition,
for Employing some considerable Stock on Fishery, for albeit it do not bring an
Exuberant Gain at every time, yet the Gain will be considerable frequent and
constant, and ten per Cent or less, three or four times in the Year, (which the
Herring and White Fishing betwixt them may afford) is a great Gain; And mean
while tho the Company Gain not above Eight per Cent, Eighty per Cent will be
added to the Stock of SCOTLAND: And by this means, the Company will R^quite to
the Nation Tenfold, what the Nation will conferr upon them; And that not for a
Year two or three, but for this and succeeding Generations. And the constant
Gain arising from this, may in so far (prove a constant Fond, for sustaining an
America Collonie, in some Tenible Place, and suitable to Our Power and Stock:
And Pray, consider and Compare this with fixing a Colony on the Expense of Our
Capital Stock, with out a Future Fond to support them, or Probability of
present Entertainment for them.

Since the whole project of this African Company, did proport a greater view of
a General National good, then the advantage of particular Persons concerned
therein; And that the Company has already, both Ventured and lost, no less
then 33 Months Cess of the whole Nation, given out of a few private Purses; And
it being apparent, that this Company if they prosecute the designs of Fisherie,
and SCOTS Manufactories, which will Improve the National Stock, in manner
abovementioned: And that by the product of their Labors, Care, and Direction,
the Nation may be evidently enabled, and enriched, and the Company enabled also
thereby, to establish an American Collony, and manadge an AFRICAN and INDIAN
Trade: That for Capacitating this Company; To prosecute so great a good for the
Nation, and to repair in some measure their great Loss, on the National design;
And to evidence, that the Representative of the Nation, are desireous to
Support a common Good, and to evince, that these Patriots who are Justly
incensed by our National and Companys Loss, show that their Zeal is on so
generous an Account, and not for Humor or private designs. Here they have an
opportunity to demonstrat it.

It would appear that none can justly reclaim, at this National Contribution;
since it is evident, that this private Company has already, and will yet
bestow fare more than the gift from the Nation will amount to; And yet the
Nation in general will gain three to one, for what the whole Company will gain,
as appears in the Compute of the Fisherie, where the Nation gains Ten to one,
with the Company; And I boldly say were the whole three months Cess yearly,
given by the Nation Employed on the Fisherie alone, the Company who Manages it
on that Trade, would scarce have so much gain as should be reasonably allowed
on the Supervisors of such a Stock; And the whole rest of the gain, which will
be above 80. per cent, being expendit in, and on the Nation; Could not be so
equally distribut for the good, and use of the Nation, and every province
thereof, were it in their own hands, as it will be, by putting it fot this end,
and in this method, in the hands of the Company, for all of it will be Employed
on working People, and in an Universal extent; And so it will be some favor
to the Company, a great increase of the National Stock, and a great Charity to
the Poor: And an certain method for increase of Shipping and Seamen, and in
short it will Undoubtedly put the Nation into that course, by which it must
rise to Riches and Strength, if ever it rise. And this Favor craved, being of
so Universal benefit, should indeed be rather pressed upon the Company, then
begged by them?

These few Overtures and Considerations I hope shall receive many Additions
from others, with which no Body shall be more ready to concur in with Candor
and Zeal, then I shall be, or to give my Reasons, if I differ in opinion, As I
am well pleased, that others do by me, in what I have proposed for it is
neither thanks nor applause, but the true good both of our Nation and Company I
aim at, It Is true I shall be very sorry to find useless Overturs offered, which
may Embarass, or hurtful ones, which may imped the Effects, which I believe
both the King and Parliament, intend for us; nor do I think that a greater
prejudice can be done to the Nation and Company in our present Circumstances,
then are such Insinuations, which either ought not, nor cannot be granted.


