Error Non-plust, OR, Dr. STILLINGFLEET Shown to be The Man of NO PRINCIPLES.
WITH An ESSAY how Discourses concerning Catholic Grounds bear the Highest
Evidence.

Multum necesse est ut Propheticae and Apostolicae Interpretationis Linea
secundum Ecclesiastici and Catholici Sensus Normam dirigatur. Vinc. Lir. cap.
2. Printed in the Year, 1673.

PREFACE TO THE Learned of this Nation.
IS it possible then that Error can admit Principles? Or (which is equivalent)
that Truth cannot admit any, but must be quite destitute of such firm Supports?
Or is it even possible that Falsehood dare so much as pretend to such Evident
Grounds, and offer to make good her Pretense, and not sink in deepest Disgrace
for laying Claim to a thing to which it must needs be Evident she has not the
least Shadow of a Title? Certainly, whoever considers attentively that
Principles are (properly speaking) First Truths, either Absolutely, or with
Restriction to such a matter, and withal that these must be most perfectly
Self-evident, and other Principles con^ining upon the former, must needs
partake a very high degree of Conspicuousness by their near approach to those
great Luminary Truths, will, upon the joining these two Consider^tions, easily
conclude such a Pretense Unmain^ainable, if things be rightly stated and
proposed. Besides, since all True Judgments are built on the Things being such
as we judged it to be, and what^s True is Impossible to be False, it must needs
follow that (all Circumstances taken in) it was Impossible, and so, a
Contradiction, the Thing, at what time we framed that right Judgment of it,
should have been otherwise then it was. A Contradiction I say; for that which
is in the Thing or Object an Impossibility, is a Contradiction in our Minds
informed by that Object. Whence results this Great and Clear Truth, that Every
Error necessarily involves a Contradiction, and every Truth a First Principle;
and that, though not in Formality of Expression, yet in Reality of Sense they
are both of them such.

And is it possible that these Best Evidences now spoken of should be held
Obscure or False; or that Contradictions (their Opposits) which Principle all
Falsehoods, should gain the repute of Clearest Truths? Surely, there must needs
be a strange perversion of Nature somewhere, when such Monsters in Rationality
can obtain the Esteem of being Legitimate Production^ of Reason: And, this must
be either in the minds of the Persons to be informed, who are violently swayed
by Passion or Interest to those of their own Party, so as not to consider at
all What Evidence there is in what they say, but to accept themselves and cry
up to others any piece of Empty Rhetoric, Plausible Talk, or pretty Irony for
solid Conviction: or else in the Discoursers who are to inform those Readers;
and the Chief Engine with which they work upon their want of Skill is to talk
indeed of Principles, because it is the highest Credit that can be to be thought
to have such Invincible Grounds: But they never look into the Nature of
Principles and thence make out to their Readers what kind of Sayings those must
be which can deserve that Excellent Name, lest they should disgrace themselves
and shame their Cause; while the whole strength of their Discourse is built on
this, that those Propositions they rely on are indeed Right Principles; and
yet, when looked into, are no more like what they are pretended to be then so
many old Wives Tales.

It seems then to me both most Conducive to the Clearing of Truth, as also the
most Candid and Equal way of proceeding to look first into the Nature of
Principles, and by laying it open to determine thence what Propositions deserve
that name, what not. For, if I rightly perform this, and it appear thence that
Dr. St. has indeed produced such Grounds as have in them the true Nature of
Principles and proceeded upon them, all his Discourse thus built, must
necessarily be Convictive, and the Result of it a Certain Truth. But, in case
he has not produced any such, his whole Discourse is convinced to be mere
Trifling and Folly.

A Principle then, taken as distinguished from other Propositions or Sayings,
involves two Perfections in it is notion: Evidence and Influence upon some other
Truths that partake their Evidence from It. For, were it never so Evident in it
self, yet, if it derived none of that Evidence to another, nor had Relation to
any thing besides it self, it might be indeed in that case a Great Truth, but
it would no more be a Principle, then that can be said to be a Beginning which
has neither Middle nor End, nor any thing following it. Evidence is twofold,
Self-Evidence and Evidence by way of Proof. The former belongs to First
Principles as has been at large proved in Reason against Raillery, Disc. 2.
and 3d. Evidence by Proof, belongs to Subordinate Principles, which are
Conclusions in respect of those above them, and yet themselves Influential to
prove other things. And the Evidence of these must be resolvable finally into
Self-evident ones, otherwise it would follow that all Proof must proceed higher
and higher in Infinitum, and so nothing could ever be proved at all. Now other
kinds of Evidence besides these two (speaking of Speculative Evidence) are
unimaginable; since it is most manifest, that what is neither Self-Evident, nor
made-Evident is not Evident at all.

Hence is seen, that it is Impossible, the nature of Principles once rightly
understood, Error (on whose side soever it be) should maintain it is Pretense
to Principles; Since it is Impossible that any thing should either be
Self-Evident or Made-Evident which is not a Real Truth; as also Impossible that
what is Evident any way (or, which is all one, a Truth) should patronize or
abett Error. This way then of managing Controversies is perfectly Decisive;
For which reason I have frequently pressed his Party to it in my Letter to my
Answerer and other places, and have been seconded therein by the Learned and
worthy Author of Protestancy without Principles; but none was ever found so
hardy to attempt it, till this man of Mettle, hoping his tinkling expression
and gingling wit would baffle even Truth it self, took the Confidence to talk
of what he never understood. However he is to be thank't by us both and
acknowledged a Generous Adversary, that, laying aside at present those
frivolous Inconclusive ways of quoting Authorities which himself holds may
deceive us in all they say, as also those Insignificant Devices of Pretty Jests
and other Rhetorical Dexterities, he accepts our Challenge to such a manner of
Fight, as must necessarily be Fatal to one side and Victorious to the other.
Had he stated also the nature of Principles exactly, and shown his to be such,
how formidable a Goliath had he appeared, and how terrible a man of his hands?
whereas now, if it comes to be discovered that what he called a Sword, or a
Canon, is indeed but a Bul-rush, or Pot-gun (a Pygmy's proper weapons,) that
is, if it be proved that those things he bragged of and relied on as
Principles, are in Reality but so many Paradoxes or Impertinences, I hope we
may s^^cease our Fears, and turn them into a more pleasant humor.

Though the Prognostic be very obvious what he can do in this case, yet who
knows but for once he may work an Impossibility, who (as will appear in the
ensuing Treatise) has told us so many Contradictions. In the mean time, if he
thinks fit to attempt any Reply, it is Evident from the former Discourse what he
is to do, unless he will strangely Prevaricate from his Duty; viz. either to
disallow my settling here the nature of Principles, and state them better, that
is either to deny that they are to have any Evidence or Influence at all; or
else, if he allows it, to make out that his pretended Principles have those
Qualifications; which is best done by resolving them into First Principles and
connecting them distinctly with their respective Consequences. And let him
remember that, till he does this, he neither defends Himself against my present
Answer, nor gives a home Reply to Protestancy without Principles (whatever gay
things or things he says to particular passages in it) since himself
acknowledges these Principles of his were intended an Answer to that Book* and
out of the nature of both Treatises they appear to be the proper Return to it.

I have no occasion, nor is it my intent here to write against the Church of
England or any of her Legitimate Sons: rather I must declare that, in case they
all hold as M. Thorndike (a Man of Eminent Learning and Esteem amongst them)
declares himself to do ( Just weights, p. 159.) that the Scripture interpreted
by the perpetual Practice of God's Church is the Ground of Faith, which
implies, that Practical Tradition is that which gives them Christ's Sense or
Faith, and so is their Rule I must heartily applaud their joining with
Catholics in the main Point of all, and which settled is apt to unite us in
all the rest. What I impugn then here is a pestilent Tenet, destructive to all
Episcopacy, and the very Essence of Church; making Church-Governors Useless in
their main Duty of Teaching Faith to their Flock, and Lame in that of
Government: For, if every private man is to rely on his own Interpretation, he
ought neither believe nor Obey the Church when the contrary seems to his Fancy
to be grounded in Scripture; and, if that man do but allege he judges in clear
in Scripture, and consequently that the Church is corrupt and errs: I see not
with what Justice, according to these Principles, the Church can either
excommunicate him or bind him to his Duty.

I expect Dr. St. will object, that I deny diverse of his Principles which some
of ours have granted; for his Friend Dr. T. and he abound in such slight
Topics; To which, though I could answer, that unusquisque in sensu suo abundat
in productions of Human Reason, yet I need only allege Dr. St's ambi-dextrous
and ambigu^us way of contriving his Principles to look so with different faces
that even the same man may sometimes apprehend them to mean thus, sometimes
otherwise. Besides, all his Confuters aim not at one End: Mr. E. W. intending
only to show they conclude not the Point they pretend, and which is
superscribed to them: Mr. N. O. to show their Destructiveness to Government;
while I take for my task to discover their Oppositness to all Logic; True
Learning, and Common Rationality, and that there is nothing at all in him of
what was pretended, neither Principles, Consequences, Connection, Conclusions,
Reduction, Influence nor End: Nor must he think that every thing that is
granted by any for dispute s^ke is allowed for good by the Respondent; it is
frequent to express we grant things which we only pass as nothing to the main
Point which is to be concluded; nor can Dr. St. pretend with any reason that
others have yielded them to be Principles whereas I deny it: The Author of
Reason and Religion, p. 650. has pithily declared his (...) of them and their
true merit, in (...) words: -- Whether the forementioned Principles be True,
False, Controverted, or Obscure, no Verity peculiar to (...) be deduc't from
them, -- which expresses their want of Clear Evidence, and so quite degrades
them from the Dignity of Principles.

If any think the Title prefixed to this Book forestals immodestly the Readers
Judgment; my Reply usust be, that I hope for Readers of more Prudence then to
receive Prejudice from so easy an Occasion. A Counterfeit Modesty sprung from
Skeptical Despair or Disregard of Truth will naturally dislike such
Expressions; but those who heartily hold there is such a thing as Truth and
entirely love It, will esteem the open avowing her complete victoriousness both
Fitting and Necessary: and that she conquers at present, I have all the best
Maxims of Rational Nature engaged for my Security.

INDEX.
ABsolute Certainty of Faith asserted. p. 21. 22. 50. 51.

Attributes of God not engaged to preserve private Interpreters of Scripture
from damnable Errors. p. 81. to 85. Not to be argued from alone. p. 32. 33.
much less from Power alone. p. 33. 34.

Certainty how abusively taken. p. 164. 165. 166. 168. 173. 174. 179. 180. True
Certainty asserted and from its deepest Grounds explained. p. 167. 168. Moral
Certainty in Faith discust, p. 176. 177. 178.

A Christian Life Spiritual. p. 8. 9. 54. 55. 191. to 195.

The Church turned with the heels upward by Dr. St. p. 96. 97.

His six Conclusions examined. p. 211. the nature of Conclusions laid open. p.
222.

Faith in Catholics Rational, p. 29.

Infallibility requisite to Faith. p. 92. to 96. 104. 158. 159. 162. how found
in the vulgar, how in others p. 133. to 157. Mankind how Infallible and in
what. p. 186. to 189. Necessary to the being of a Church. p. 232. 233. 234.

Principles agreed to by both sides examined p. 7. 8. etc. shown to be twofold
p. 12.

Principles not agreed to, examined. The 1st p. 20. the 2d p. 22. the 3d. p.
23. the 4th p. 24. the 5th p. 26. the 6th p. 30. the 7th p. 31. the 8th p. 35.
the 9th p. 38. the 10th p. 53. the 11th p. 72. the 12th p. 73. the 13th p. 81.
the 14th p. 85. the 15th p. 90. the 16th p. 96. the 17th p. 104. the 18th p.
106. the 19th p. 114. the 20th p. 128. the 21th 22th 23th p. 130. the 24th p.
159. the 25th p. 163. the 26th p. 171. the 27th p. 173. the 28th p. 179. the
29th p. 181. the 30th p. 185.

Rule of Faith distinctly cleared. p 44. 45. 49. 54. 55. etc. Unanimously held
by Catholics. p. 45. 46. How held by the Council of Trent. p. 47. 48.

Scripture not the Rule p. 60. to 69. p. 79. 80. How perfect, p. 86. 87. etc.
109. to 113.

Sophistry in Dr. St. laid open p. 25. 26. 27. 28. 30. 31. 74. 75. 131. 132.
161. 164. 165. Ignorance in Divinity p. 191. 192. In Logic, p. 228. 236. 237.
His Performances reduced to their proper Principles, Contradictions. p. 236.

Tradition the Rule of Faith p. 45. 46. 141. 142.

Union how to be hoped. p. 51. 52.

Writing how capable to be the Rule of Faith. p. 36. 37. 38.

Errata.
PAge 2. line 4. receive. p. 11. l. 21. perfectly. p. 15. l, 2. disparate. p.
32. l. 1^. then we can p. 45. l. 12. Again. p. 67. l. 27. dele and this as far
etc. to the end of the 4th line after. p. 81. l. 29. dele of. p. 84. l. 2.
Endeavorers. l. 29. Endeavorers. p. 104. l. 4. dele we. p. 10^. l. 5. his. p.
124. l. 5. and. p. 131. l. 30. dele in the. p. ^. 2. l. 11. infallibly. l. 23.
then. p. 834. l. 17. be False. l. 20. about. p. 159. l. 22. if. p. 1^0. l. 14.
as. l. 15. dele be. p. 167. l. 11. dele if. p: 173. l. 18. to a higher degree.
p. 177. l. 23. which are. p. 181. l. 2. degree. p. 184. l. 24. ground. p. 185.
l. 15. reason given. l. 18. keep men. p. 187. l. 14. is. p. 188. l. 14.
dissatisfaction. l. 21. some. p. 192. l. 5. conformable. l. 16. it. l. 26. by
her all. p. 193. l. 17. our. p. 198. l. 2. received. p. 199. l. 14. in wisemen
in this point. p. 202. l. ult. The 5th and 6th. p. 214. l. 3. dele to. p. 216.
l. 12. its. p 221. l. 18. Dr. St. p. 234. l. 18. applying it. p. 235. l. 23.
produced one. p. 250. l. 9. not.

THE FIRST EXAMEN CONCERNING Dr. Stillingfleet's Design in this Discourse, as
expressed in his TITLE.
1. IN the first place, the Title superscribed to this Discourse, and
signifying to us the Nature and Design of it, is to be well weighed; that so,
we may make a right Conceit of what we are justly to expect from Dr. St. in
this occasion: It Is this, [ The Faith of Protestants reduced to Principles.]

2. Now Principles, as we have discoursed in the Preface, must either be
Evident to both Parties, or at least, held and granted by both; else no
discourse can proceed for want of Agreement in that on which all Rational
Process is grounded. Also, they must be Proper for the End intended, or
Influential upon the Conclusion which the Arguer aims to evince: otherwise, if
the thing in question deceive not its Evidence and Truth from them, though
those Propositions be never so evident in themselves, yet they cannot be to It,
or in this Circumstance a Principle, whatever they may be in others. Wherefore,
to make good this Title, Dr. St. is to produce nothing for a Principle, but
what is either granted at first by both Parties, or else is of so open and
undeniable an Evidence, as all the World must see and acknowledge it; such as
are either first Principles, or those which immediately depend upon them, and
are comprehended under them: or, if he builds on any Propositions as
Principles, which are not thus evident but need Proof, he is at least to render
them evident ere he builds upon them, And, lastly, he is to apply them close to
that which he professes to conclude from them; otherwise, he can never show
them to be Principles in this occasion, any more than one can be a Father who
has no Offspring, or than any thing can be a Ground which has no
Superstructures.

3. Next, we are to consider what Dr. St. means by the word [ Faith] in this
place. And, I hope, he will not think I injure him in supposing he has so good
thoughts of the Faith of Protestants, as to hold it is more than a bare Opinion,
whose Grounds may all be false: For if so, the Assent of Protestants as
Faithful, may possibly be an Error, and all the Tenets they profess to be
Truths, and hope to be saved by believing them, liable to be proved nothing,
perhaps in reality but a company of Lies. If then (as in this supposition he
must) he hol^s the (...) of Protestants Impossible to be Fa^^e, he is (...) to
reduce it into (...) Grounds and Principles as are likew^^e Impossible to be
False; and, consequently, if it relies on Authority, he is to bring Infallible
Authority for it; all that is Fallible (as Common sense teaches) admitting
Possibility of Falsehood in whatever is grounded on it. Such Grounds then or
Principles he is obliged to produce for the Faith of Protestants, in case he
holds it may not perhaps be an Error for any thing he or his Church knows But,
in case he judges this Assent or Belief of Protestants may be True Faith though
the Grounds of it may be False, then he ows me an answer to Faith Vindicated,
where the contrary is proved by multitudes of Arguments; not one of which has
yet received one word of sober Reply from him or Dr. Tillotson; though, as
appears by the Inferences at the end of that Book, it most highly concerns them
both to speak to the several Reasons it contains.

4. In the third place we are to reflect what may be meant by the word [
reduc'd] in the said Title. And, since all Truths not self-evident, nor known
by immediate impression on sense, are at first derived or deduced from
Principles; this word [ reduc'd] having a signification directly contrary to
the other, intimates to us, that Dr. St. makes account he has begun by putting
the Faith of Protestants which is the Conclusion, and brought it back (for so
the word [ reduc'd] imports) to Principles; whereas it is Evident to every
Scholar, he proceeds in a way quite contrary to what he here pretends. First,
laying six Principles agreed on, then thirty others, which, since they go
before his Conclusions we are to think he meant for Principles too, and thence
drawing in the Close, six Inferences or Sequels; which is most manifestly to
deduce from Principles, not to reduce to them.

5. But, however it be blameable in one who owns himself a Scholar, especially
pretending the rigorous and learned way of proceeding by Principles, not to
understand the nature of the Way himself takes; yet let us kindly suppose that
Dr. St. out of an unwariness only, made use by chance of an improper word;
which being but a human lapse, is more easily pardonable; especially, since the
Method he here undertakes, viz. to begin with Principles, is (if rightly
managed and performed) the most honorable for a Scholar, and the most
satisfactory that may be, and, so, deserving to make amends for many greater
faults. Let him then by [ reduced to Principles] mean deduced from Principles]
yet since both reducing and deducing, imply the showing a Connection between
those Principles, and what is pretended to be drawn from them; and this either
Immediate, as to every particular Conclusion, or Mediate: We are to expect Dr.
St. should still show us this Connection: which is best and most clearly done,
by relating each of his six Conclusions to their respective Premises or
Principles: that so, by this distinct proceeding and owning particularly whence
each Deduction follows, we may be better enabled to discover the Goodness of
his Consequences, and thence discern clearly the Truth of those Conclusions;
which we are to suppose, his Intention in making those Discourses.

6. In the last place we are to weigh very well what is meant by that signal
and particularizing word [ Protestants:] for it is the Faith of these and these
only, which he undertakes here to reduce to Principles. And I will have the
kindness for him, as to suppose he so much zeals the Purity of the Protestant
Church, as not to defile her with the mixture of Anabaptists, Independents,
Quakers, and such like, much less the most abominable Socinians who deny the
Trinity, and the Godhead of Christ. Therefore, these being secluded from the
notion and name of Protestants, we are encouraged by this Title to expect such
a Discourse as is not proper for Socinians, or any of those other Sects to
allege for themselves; otherwise it might and ought with as much right be
entitled The Faith of Socinians, Quakers, etc. (as the Faith of Protestants)
reduced to Principles.

The sum then of what we are by this Title to expect from Dr. St. is this; viz.
to show us such Grounds for our Assent to Points as divinely revealed, as are
Impossible to be Erroneous; and such as are not competent Allegations for
Socinians, Arians, etc. but proper to Protestants only: Also, that these
Grounds or Principles are such as are either self-evident or made evident. And
this he is obliged necessarily to do, unless he will sustain either that
Socinians, Fift-Monarchists, etc. are Protestants; or, that the Faith of
Protestants is but Opinion; or, that there can be any Principles which are
neither evident of themselves nor by means of others, that is, no ways evident,
or not evident at all: Or, lastly, that he can show us any Conclusion reduced
to Principles, or deduced from them, without showing us that it is connected
with them. This then is what Dr. St's words bid us expect from him; let us see
now how he answers this expectation.

Second Examen.
Six Principles agreed on by both sides examined, and their Import and Use
weighed.
1. HE begins with laying down six Principles agreed on by both sides; and they
are (as to the main) all of them very True and granted by us, if rightly
understood: wherefore in case any ambiguous word do occur, I am to explain it,
that so our perfect concurrence with him in admitting them may be rightly
apprehended, and the discourse more unoffensively proceed, in case these
Principles should come hereafter to be made use of. They are these.

1. That there is a God from whom Man and all other Creatures had their Being.

2. That the notion of God does imply that he is a Being absolutely perfect,
and therefore, Justice, Goodness, Wisdom and Truth must be in him to the
highest degree of perfection.

These two first are rigorously and literally true, and worded very exactly.

3. That man receiving his Being from God, is thereby bound to obey his will,
and consequently is liable to punishment in case of Disobedience.

This Proposition is also most true; yet that it may more thoroughly be
penetrated and rightly apprehended, it were not amiss to note, that though the
word [ obey] generally amongst us signifies doing some outward action willed by
another, yet in this occasion it is to signify also, nay principally, the
exercising Interior Acts of our soul, viz. of Faith, Hope and Charity; in
which kind of Acts consists our Spiritual Life, as we are Christians. That then
this Principle may be better understood, I discourse it thus; that, Because
God, as far as concerns his own Inclination (or rather Nature) precisely, out
of his overflowing Goodness will all Good, and amongst the rest, the Means to
Eternal Happiness to his Creatures; and the Believing in Him, Hoping all good
from Him, and Loving him are such Virtues or Perfections of the Soul as are apt
and connatural means to raise and dispose it toward the attainment of Bliss or
Fruition of the Deity, hence he wills that man should believe on him, hope in
him, and love him; whence are apt to follow the outward observances of his Law,
and if they follow not out of these motives they are not properly virtues or
truly Perfective of the soul in order to its Last end, nor available in the
least to the attainment of Bliss; nor Acts of Obedience to God's will, nor in
true speech the keeping his Commandments. God therefore willing us Happiness to
be attained through the proper means to it, it follows that those who disobey
this Holy will of his, that is, those who do not cultivate their minds with the
said Virtues of Faith, Hope and Charity, become liable by such their
disobedience to eternal misery; as wanting through this neglect, the Proper
Means which is to elevate them to the capacity of attaining Heaven.

4. That in order to Man's obeying the Will of God, it is necessary he know
what it is; for which some manifestation of the Will of God is necessary, both
that Man may know what he has to do, and that God may justly punish him, if he
do it not.

5. Whatever God reveals to Man is infallibly true, and being intended for the
Rule of Man's obedience may be certainly known to be his Will.

I approve very well of these two Principles. And to this end I make it my
request to the Proposer of them, that the word [ manifestation] and [ certainly
known] may be understood in their proper signification for that which is True,
or Absolute Certainty; and not be taken abusively as Dr. T. still takes it for
such a Certainty as is indeed Incertainty, as is shown at large in Reason
against Raillery and Faith vindicated. Again, that we may know whether this be
a Principle agreed to by both sides, as Dr. St. pretends, I shall first put
down our Tenet, which is; that (at least) the Pastors of the Church, who are to
teach the Faithful, convert Unbelievers, (amongst whom are many acute wits) as
also to defend their Faith, and make out the Truth of it, may, nay must have
Infallible Grounds, and so be Infallibly or Knowingly Certain of what God
revealed to Man, that is, of their Faith. If then Dr. St. grants the wisest
portion in Gods Church to be thus Infallibly Certain of their Faith, we agree
with him in this Proposition; but if he denies this kind of Certainty to them,
and consequently (there being no middle between Infallible and Fallible) says
they, and so, the whole Church is only Fallibly-Certain of what they believe;
he both speaks nonsense, and lays for a Principle agreed on by both sides,
that which is absolutely denied by us, and indeed the main point in Controversy
between us.

6. God cannot act contrary to those Essential Attributes of Justice, Wisdom,
Goodness and Truth in any way which he makes choice of to make known his Will
unto man by.

This Principle is absolutely granted, having no Fault in it, but that it
expresses not all the Truth it ought; for God not only cannot act contrary to
those Essential Attributes, but he is obliged by his very Nature to act
perfectly according to them, in making choice of such a Way or Rule to make
known his Will unto man by, as shall be (all things considered) most proper for
Mankind; that is, most suitable to the respective Capacities of those who are
to be led by it, that so their Acts of Faith (as far as they spring from the
Provision of motives laid by God) may be pefectly rational; and also most
effectual to the end for which God intended that Rule and Faith which depends
on it.

These are the six Principles Dr. St. proposes as agreed to by both sides;
which (in the main, and thus understood) are of so universal a Nature, and such
sacred Truths, that if he draws any necessary consequences from them to the
establishing the Faith of Protestants, or overthrowing that of Catholics
(which latter seems chiefly intended) his Victory is likely to be very
complete; If he does not, but rather makes no use at all of them in concluding
from them what he pretends, and his Title imports, it must needs be understood
that they were only produced to make a plausible show, and to prepare the
Readers mind to Apprehend he must necessarily conquer all before him, having
such sacred Principles engaged in his Patronage.

One thing more I am to add on this occasion; which is, that no discourse at
all can proceed, unless all the Principles be agreed to by both sides; for, if
the Person against whom we argue deny our Principles, it is a folly to hope by
means of them, to force him to admit of the Conclusion depending solely on
those Principles for its Truth and Evidence. But we are to reflect, that an
Adversary may two manner of ways grant us our Principles; either voluntarily
and of his own accord; or else forcibly, that is, convinced by strength of
Argument, if the Principles be subordinate ones, and so can admit Proof; or for
fear of shame from Human Nature, if they either be First Principles, or that
the Controversy by discourse be reduced to that most Evident Test. Since then
Dr. St. makes account we yield him but these six voluntarily, we are to expect
from him such manifest proofs for the other thirty, as may make us by the
clearness of their Evidence, or under the penalty of having Mankind our Enemy
for deserting Rational Nature, assent to their verity: otherwise, there is no
hopes for him to conclude any thing at all, while we are at liberty to deny
every thing he builds on. But alas! how far is it from such Talking Disputants,
even to think of such performances; though the necessity of his duty, if he
pretends to Principles, obliges him unavoidably to it.

Third Examen.
Sifting the first nine Principles that seem to concern the Nature of Divine
Revelation in Common, and its several ways.
AFter these six Principles agreed on, follow thirty other Paragraphs, or
whatever else we may guess it fit to call them; and they are introduced by this
Transition.

These things being agreed on both sides, we are now to inquire into the
particular ways which God has made choice of for revealing his Will to mankind.

I expected that since Dr. St. had promised us to reduce the Faith of
Protestants to Principles, he would after he had put down the Principles
voluntarily agreed to by both sides, have pursued the Method himself had made
choice of, and have produced next, the Principles made use of by him in this
particular matter which we are not voluntarily agreed on; and either have
maintained them to be First Principles, and so, self-evident; or else
subordinate ones, and deriving their Evidence from those First, and therefore
have shown us their derivation from them, or Connection with them. This had
been a Method becoming a man pretending to ground himself on Principles,
especially in a discourse where this, and this only was pretended; for by this
means it might, as reason requires, have been examined first, whether those
Principles had subsisted or no in themselves; which, if they had, then only the
Consequences had needed Examination; and so the Business of Truth had been
quickly decided.

2. But, instead of this candid and clear and Methodical proceeding, thirty odd
kind of Sentences, Sections, Paragraphs, or I know not what, come hudling in
one after another, of such uncouth fashions, such desperate and disagreeing
natures, so void of coherence with one another, that none knows well what to
call them, not even Dr. St. himself, as appears by the Carriage of the matter.
Some of them seem deductions from the Principles agreed on. Others seem to
contain Entire discourses of themselves. The Illative particle [ therefore] or
its Equivalent, which necessarily Ushers in all Conclusions, is so rarely heard
of here, that one would verily think they were all Premises or Principles; but
this Conceit is again thwarted, because diverse of them are merely Hypothetical
Propositions, involving sometimes such a condition as never was put; others are
bare voluntary Assertions and False into the bargain. Some few of them pretend
modestly to own themselves deductions from some other Paragraphs, but yet only
hint it afar off, as it were, not speak it out plainly, as if they feared some
danger: Others pretend to draw a Consequence in their Close, not at all
following from the part foregoing. Lastly, the whole mass of them hang together
like a rope of ^and for want of declaring their Relation to others; and, though
now and then they counterfeit a semblance of some slight coherence, yet their
whole Frame is loose and ill-built for want of an orderly and visible
dependence of one part on another. Now, this odd variety in their Complexions
puts an attentive Considerer at some loss what to name them; no Apellation
fitting the thirty but that which is common to such Quantities of matter or
Multitudes of lines (whether it be sense or nonsense) such as are Paragraphs,
Sections, and such like: since their motly nature will neither let us call them
Deductions, nor Conclusions, nor Principles, nor Propositions, nor Discourses,
nor Inferences, nor Postulatums, nor Axioms, nor Maxims, nor Proofs, nor any
thing of any such nature; and yet all this while the superscription is, The
Faith of Protestants reduced to principles.

3. It were not amiss for all that, to consider what Dr. St. himself calls
them, and to hope thence for some better knowledge of their nature than we
could attain to by our own Consideration. But he is at variance with himself
about the point, no one common name being capable to fit them all, where the
things to be named are of so many Parishes or Families. All he does (as appears
by his Transition) to make them all taken together, amount to an Inquiry into
the particular ways which God had made choice of for revealing his Will to
mankind. I do not by any means like this Insignificant word [ Inquiry] It Is so
very safe, that it is absolutely Inconfutable. Had he said heartily and plainly,
[Here follow the Principles not agreed on voluntarily which therefore I will
make Evident, that my Adversary's Reason may be forced to acknowledge their
verity, and by that means my discourse proceed, and way be made toward some
Conclusion] he had offered me some play, for then I might possibly have
discovered the weakness or Inevidence of his Principles, or the slackness of
his Consequences; but now all my Attempts are defeated by this one pretty word
[ Inquiry] for though I should hap to confute every line in all the thirty
Paragraphs, yet still after all this, none can deny but he has inquired into
the Point in hand, whether he have produced one word to evince it, or no: Thus
Dr. T. (in his late Preface) got rid of the hardest and mainly concerning
passage in Sure-footing, by virtue of two insignificant words, alleging that
he had [ sufficiently consider'd] it in his Rule of Faith, which words were
perfectly verified, though (as appears in Reason against Raillery Disc. 8th) he
readily granted all I contended for as to that point. Once more I desire our
Learned Readers to reflect on the different manner in which I and my
Adversaries bear our selves toward one another. I heartily avow my Grounds to
be Evident Principles, my Consequences to be necessary, my Arguments to be
absolutely- Conclusive or demonstrative; and by so doing I offer them all the
fair play imaginable; and, (trusting to the invincible force of Truth) expose
my self freely for them to lay hold of my discourse where they see it their
best Advantage. They on the other side make a show indeed of bringing their
Faith to Principles, because the very pretense is honorable; but when it comes
to performance are so far from owning the Principles they proceed on for such,
that (except in those six agreed on, which, as shall be shown, are not one jot
influential to the point they are aimed to evince) they not so much as name the
word [ Principle] nor vouch any Argument Conclusive, or any Consequence to be
Necessary, much less heartily affirm such in particular to be thus qualified;
but hide and obscure all these in one dow-bak'd slippery word [ Inquiry] by
which means none can tell where to take any sure hold of any part of their
Discourse.

4. Notwithstanding that Dr. St. is thus shy to name these thirty Paragraphs,
Principles, in regard they are so monstrously unlike those Clear and Evident
Truths, which use, and ought to bear that sacred name; yet it is manifest by his
carriage he meant them for such, and would have them thought such too; for they
immediately follow after the six Principles voluntarily agreed on, as if they
were the other sort of Principles, not voluntarily agreed to; and all of them
antecede his six Conclusions or Sequels which he puts immediately to follow out
of them. Again, the Running Title superscrib'd to them is, [ The Faith of
Protestants reduced to Principles:] All which manifests to us beyond Evasion
that he makes use of and relies on them as Principles, though he be something
bashful to call them so directly. Wherefore in compliance with his Intention,
we will for once strain a word to the highest Catachresis that may be, and by a
strange Antiphrasis, call Black, White, and all these Paragraphs, Principles.

5. Yet, though there be nothing of candid and clear and consonant to any
maxims even of Natural Logic in this Discourse, yet I must allow that there is
as much cunning and slight and Sophistry in it, as could well be stufft into so
narrow a room: Wherefore, that I may not be like him, I shall openly profess
before hand what I undertake, viz. to show plainly that he has not spoke one
efficacious word to the purpose he intended; that is, he has not produced any
one Principle, one Reason, one Argument, either settling in the least, the
Faith of Protestants, nor unsetling that of Catholics. This will be seen by
our Examination of each particular Principle in order, and the Answer to them.
To which I now address.

1. An entire Obedience to the Will of God being agreed to be the condition of
man's happiness, no other way of Revelation is in it self necessary to that end;
than such whereby man may know what the Will of God is.

Love of God above all things, and of our Neighbor for his sake being the
Fulfilling of the Law, does by consequence include in it self eminently an
Entire Obedience to the Will of God, and is agreed to be the Condition of man's
Happiness. Yet this Love or Charity presupposing Hope, and both Hope and Love
presupposing Faith as their Basis; both of these do by consequence come within
the compass of Obeying the Will of God, and are in their several manners and
according to their several natures [ Conditions of man's Happiness.] as I doubt
not but all sober Protestants will grant.

Again, Faith being part of our Obedience to the Will of God, and so, commanded
by him, and it being against those Attributes of God agreed on by both sides,
to command Man to act contrary to the right Nature himself had given him and
established it Essential to him, that is, contrary to true Reason; Also, Faith
being a Virtue, and so agreeable to right Nature, nay more, a supernatural
Virtue, and so, perfecting and elevating Right Nature or True Reason, not
debasing or destroying it; it follows, from these and many other Reasons
alleged in Faith Vindicated, that this part of our Obedience called [ Faith]
must be rationabile obsequium, a Reasonable Obedience, and that our Assent
called [ Belief] taking it as imposed by God, is conformable to Maxims of Right
Reason, and that it perfects, and not in the least perverts Human Nature. But
it is directly opposite to Human Nature as given us by God, or to Right Reason,
to assent and profess that Points of Faith are True (as the Nature of
Christianity settled by our Savior enjoins us) in case we are to rely solely
on the Divine Authority for the formal Motive of this our believing or holding
them such, and yet when we come to doubt concerning their Truth, cannot
possibly arrive to see any Grounds absolutely Certain, that the Divine
Authority is indeed engaged for the Truth of the said Points. Also, it is quite
opposite to Human Nature to love Heaven above all things, in case there be not
Grounds absolutely certain that God has told us there is such a thing as
Heaven, or such a Blissful state attai^^ble by us in the sight of Him:
wherefore, when Dr. St. says no other way of Revelation is in it self necessary
to this end, or to the Entire Obedience to Gods Will, than such whereby man may
know what the Will of God is; we are to mean by the word [ know] that at least
the governing part of Gods Church, or Ecclesia docens, may be absolutly-certain
that the Points of Faith, (the assenting to and professing which, and grounding
upon them Hope and this all-over-powering Love of Heaven, the main part of our
Obedience) are True or Impossible to be False. If then Dr. St. takes the word
know in this signification, this Principle is granted: if in any other, or for
a great Hope only that they are True (as I fear when it comes to the point, he
intends no more) I must for the Reasons here given, and many more alleged in
Faith Vindicated, and Reason against Raillery, deny that no other way of
Revelation is necessary, and put him to prove it, which he neither has done,
nor can do.

2. Man being framed a rational Creature capable of reflecting upon himself may
antecedently to any External Revelation, certainly know the Being of God and
his dependence upon him; and those things which are naturally pleasing unto
him; else there could be no such thing as a Law of Nature, or any Principles of
Natural Religion.

I suppose he means by the word [ God] the True God, and then it is not so
evident that every Man in the state of corrupt Nature may arrive to know him,
however some few may, and in the State of Right Nature, All. And in case he
takes the words [ certainly know] in their proper signification, then he may
consider how ill his Friend Dr. Tillotson discourses, who professes not to
have, even with the assistance of Christianity, that Certain Knowledge of the
Being of God, which (as Dr. Still says) was attainable by the mere Light of
Natural Reason.

3. All Supernatural and External Revelation must suppose the truth of Natural
Religion; for, unless we be antecedently certain that there is a God, and that
we are capable of knowing him, it is impossible to be certain that God has
revealed his will to us by any supernatural means.

If he means here Priority of Nature; it is to be granted; for this Proposition
[ God has reveal'd] implies and presupposes as its basis [ God is] But, if he
understands it of priority of Time, as I conceive he does, then I both deny the
Proposition, and the validity of the Reason given for it. For, it is Evident
both by Reason and Experience, that manifest and Convictive Miracles (which are
supernatural and external Revelations) done before the Heathens, who yet know
not the true God, in Testimony of Christianty, at once or at the same time made
it certain that he whom we adore is the True God, and also that God revealed
his will by supernatural means: and so it is not Impossible (as Dr. St. here
affirms) to be certain of such a Revelation, without knowing any time before
hand that there is a God, nor must All Supernatural and External Revelation
needs suppose the Truth of Natural Religion, that is, of the Knowledge of the
True God, as he pretends; since such a Revelation may cause that Knowledge, and
so antecede it, not be antecedent to it.

4* Nothing ought to be admitted for Divine Revelation which overthrows the
Certainty of those Principles which must be antecedently supposed to all Divine
Revelation. For that were to overthrow the means whereby we are to judge
concerning the Truth of any Divine Revelation.

This Discourse seems at the first show to carry so clear an evidence with it,
that nothing appears so Irrational as to doubt or dispute it. And indeed it is
no less, if the words in which it is couched be not equivocally taken, but
still be meant in the same sense. To prevent then the growth of a witty piece
of Sophistry which I foresee creeping in under the disguise of an ambiguous
word, I am to provide against it with a distinction both pertinent and
necessary to the present matter.

These words [ Divine Revelation] may either mean the way or Act of Revealing,
or else they may mean the Thing divinely revealed, that is, the Point of Faith:
which differ as showing and thing shown, or as an Action and it is Effect. In
the same manner as the word Tradition is sometimes taken for the Way of
Delivery, sometimes for the Thing or Point delivered. When they are taken for
the one, when for the other, partly the circumstances and the aim of the
discourse determine, partly some annexed particle or variation of the word; so
that, if they be taken for the Thing revealed or delivered, and be expressed
singularly, it is called A Divine Revelation, or A Tradition; If plurally,
Divine Revelations, or Traditions. Now it seems something doubtful in whether
sense it be taken here, for. 1. he speaks of the Way of Revelation, which can
only mean Revealing, and in the two following ones it is taken in the same
sense as appears by the words [ God has reveal'd] found in the Third. But this
matters not much, so it be here taken in the same sense throughout; which I
fear it is not; For, the word [ Revelation] is here made use of thrice; and, in
the first and last place it seems plainly to mean the Points revealed; in the
middle the Way or Act of Revealing; yet the two following Principles incline
the doubtfulness of the Expression to mean the Points of Faith themselves;
Though this be, to speak moderately, by far the more preposterous and absurd
Tenet, as shall hereafter be shown. But I am to provide for both parts since I
am to skirmish with such an ambidextrous Adversary; and therefore, applying
this discourse to his Proposition, I distinguish thus, and grant that Nothing
ought to be admitted for Divine Revelation (taking those words to signify the
Act of Revealing) which overthrows the Certainty of those Principles which must
be antecedently supposed to the Act of Revealing: Also I grant that nothing
ought to be admitted for Divine Revelation (taking those words to signify
Points of Faith revealed) which overthrows the Certainty of those Principles
which must be antecedently supposed to those Points. This is candid and clear
dealing, and far from that sophistical and equivocating ambiguity which
(contrary to the Genius of Truth) he so constantly and so industriously affects.

5. There can be no other means imagined whereby we are to judge of the Truth
of Divine Revelation, but a Faculty in us of discerning Truth and Falsehood in
matters proposed to our Belief; which if we do not exercise in judging the
Truth of Divine Revelation, we must be imposed upon by every thing which
pretends to be so.

Here are many quaint things to be considered. For, if Dr. St. means that we
cannot judge of Truth without a Faculty to judge of Truth, it is a (...)
Principle, though very litt^^ (...) his purpose. But it is most (...)
para^oxical to say that no other means can be imagined to judge of Divine
Revelation, but such a Faculty. For, if there can be no other means imagined
but this Faculty, then This is all the means; and so those Knowledges which are
to inform and direct this Faculty are no means at all: whence all motives to
Faith, Rule of Faith, all Teaching, nay Scripture it self are to no purpose;
For none of these are our Faculty of discerning Truth and Falsehood.

Again, what is meant here by [ Divine Revelation?] If it be meant of the
formal Act of Revealing, then it is False that there can be no other means to
judge of its Truth but a Faculty in us of discerning Truth and Falsehood in
matters proposed to our Belief: For these Matters are Points of Faith, and it is
a madness to think we must begin with examining their Truth ere we can know
that God has truly or indeed revealed them; since the Knowledge that God has
revealed or spoken is had ordinarily by natural means antecedent even to the
Revelation it self, much more antecedent to those Points; viz. by the Rule of
Faith, which shows the Divine Authority engaged for their Truth. But, if he
means by Divine Revelation the things or Points divinely revealed, and (as
appears by those words [ matters proposed to our belief] he bends strongly that
way) then the sense is evidently this, that we must judge the truth of the
Points of Faith by exercising a Faculty of judging of the Truth of those
Points: And since to judge is to exercise our Faculty of judging, it amounts
plainly to this, that we must judge of the truth of Points of Faith by judging
of the truth of points of Faith; which is an Identical Proposition and
perfectly true, but not at all to his purpose. Yet it is too: for it is
creditable now and then to speak clear Evidences, however in reality they prove
Impertinencies.

But if Dr. St. means nothing but that we must use our Faculty of discerning
Truth and Falsehood, that is indeed our Reason even in Assenting to things above
Reason, or to Mysteries of Faith, he says very right: For it is most Rational to
believe that to be True which God, who is essential Verity, has said; and
exceedingly Rational to believe God has said it, or (which is all one in our
case) that Christ and his Apostles have taught it, upon an Authority Inerrable
in that affair. And thus my Faith may be most Rational without exercising my
Reason in scanning and debating the Truth or Falsehood of the matters proposed
to my Belief, or examining the Points of Faith themselves. Nay more this Method
of his is most preposterous and absurd; For, the Mysteries or Points of Faith
being elevated above the pitch of our ordinary Natural Reason, and such, (for
the most part) in which Gods Infinity most exerts (as we may say) It Is utmost,
but the Knowledge of the Rule of Faith which is to ascertain to us the Divine
Revelation or that God has told us them, lying level to our Reason as informed
by natural Knowledges; hence, to relinquish the method of examining the Truth
of Divine Revelation by those Knowledges which lie within our own ken, and to
begin with those which are most elevated above it (as it is to comprehend the
extent of Gods Infinite Power) is both against all Art and Common sense: Both
which tell us we must begin with what is more easily knowable and thence proceed
to what is less Knowable. Nor is there any danger of being imposed upon by
everything that pretends to be Divine Revelation (as the Dr. scruples,) as long
as we are Certain that God cannot lie, and that God has said this; for these
put, the thing is most certainly True.

6. The pretense of Infallibility in any person or Society of men must be
judged in the same way that the Truth of a Divine Revelation is; for that
Infallibility being challenged by virtue of a supernatural Assistance, and for
that end to assure men what the will of God is, the same means must be used for
the trial of that, as for any other supernatural way of God's making known his
Will to men.

Here the words [ A Divine Revelation] which he now first uses, give us to
understand that Dr. St. means a Point of Faith and not Gods Revealing it or
Divine Revelation; which words he used formerly. And this is farther confirmed
by his saying that that Infallibility which is challenged by virtue of a
supernatural Assistance must be judged in the same way that the Truth of a
Divine Revelation is: For, such an Infallibility through supernatural
Assistance of the Holy Ghost, consists in the Sanctity of the Church, which is
a Point of Faith, and so the words [ A Divine Revelation] which he joins and
parallels to it, must mean a Point of Faith also. Whence is discerned what
mavelous dexterity Dr. St. has used to gain a notable Point against us, and
how smoothly he has slided from Gods revealing Faith to us, or the Act called
Revelation, to the Points of Faith revealed: In hope by this confounding one
with another to persuade his unattentive Reader; that, because it is the only
right way of procedure to begin with the using our natural Reason so to judge
whether God has Revealed such a point or no; therefore it is fit to begin with
the same Method in examining the Points of Faith themselves which pretend to be
revealed, and thence conclude whether they be indeed divinely revealed or no:
which how absurd it is has lately been shown.

But to come closer and apply this to his present Discourse. The Pretense of
Infallibility by virtue of supernatural Assistance must indeed be judged in the
same way that the truth of a Divine Revelation is; for both of them being
Points of Faith must be judged by the same way all other points of Faith are;
viz. by the Evidence there is that the Divine Authority cannot deceive, and
that it stands engaged for those Points.

7. It being in the power of God to make choice of several ways of revealing
(...) Will to us, we ought not to dispute from the Attributes of God the
necessity of one particular w^y to the Exclusion of all others, but we ought to
enquire what way God himself has chosen; and whatever he has done, we are
sure cannot be repugnant to Infinite Justice, Wisdom, Goodness and Truth.

I do not remember to have heard that any man living ever went about to dispute
from the Attributes of God alone, the necessity of one particular way to the
Exclusion of all others, nor does it appear how it is possible to do it without
considering also the Nature of those several ways of Revealing: in doing which
if we come to discover that only one is (as things stand) of it self sufficient
for that End, and all others pretended to by those against whom we dispute
depend on It for their Certainty, then they can safely argue from the
Attributes of God, particularly his Wisdom that none but this could have been
actually chosen by him. So that Dr. St. seems here to counterfeit an imaginary
Adversary, having never a Real one. This will better appear if we attempt to
frame a Discourse from Gods Attributes alone. In endeavoring which it will
appear that all we can argue from that single Head is this; that, What Is
disagreeable to Gods infinite Justice, Wisdom, Goodness, and Truth cannot be
willed by him, and what is agreeable can. Now who sees not that this signifies
nothing either to the Exclusion or Admission of any particular Way, unless we
subsume thus, But this or that is most agreeable or disagreeable to the said
Attributes; whence follows, therefore it is to be admitted, or rejected by him.
Whence it is clearly seen that no Argument can be drawn from those Attributes
alone without taking in the consideration of the nature of the Way it self, and
its sufficiency or insufficiency, as Dr. St. himself confesses in common at the
end of the 8th Principle, though he perpetually avoids to examine the particular
nature of his Way, and its Fitness of mankind to build Faith upon its evidence.
Yet let us see at least though it be so plain a point how weakly he proves that
we are not to argue from those Attributes, It being (says he) in the power of
God to make choice of several ways, etc. we ought not to dispute from the
Attributes of God the necessity of one particular, etc. so that the Argument
stands thus, Because it is within the extent of Gods Power, therefore it crosses
not but agrees with all those other Attributes; otherwise, if it did, we could
with good reason argue from them against Gods having made choice of such a way.
Now this reason of his is so palpably absurd that I admire the meanest Divine
living could stumble upon it. For what man who holds God Omnipotent can doubt
but that his Power can reach to reveal his Will to every single man by hourly
Apparitions, the flying of Birds, nocturnal Dreams, or throwing of Dice upon a
Fortune-book: yet no wise man will doubt but were we to inquire what is the way
fit for God to reveal his Will to mankind by, we should reject these as
misbecoming Gods Wisdom, etc. and for the same reason all others but one, in
case noneX but that one were of it self qualified to do that Effect as it
ought, and so befitting Gods Wisdom to make choice of it; and yet,
notwithstanding all this, it might lie within the the compass of the Power of
God to choose several others.

It follows; but we ought to enquire what way God himself has chosen; and
whatever he has done we are sure cannot be repugnant to Infinite Justice,
Wisdom, Goodness and Truth. All this is yielded to, unless he means this to be
the only way of arguing from Gods Attributes, as he would seem; which I must
deny, and demand of him why it is not equally Argumentative to say, This way of
Revealing or Rule of Faith, as both Experience and Reason shows, is evidently
incompetent to give Faith that Certainty which its Nature and the many Effects
to be produced by it, and Obligations incumbent on it, require it should have;
therefore I am sure it is repugnant to Gods Justice, Wisdom, Goodness and Truth,
and so can never have been chosen by him. Or thus; God is infinitely Wise, Good,
Just and True; therefore he has not chosen a way so Incompetent to those Ends.
In the same manner as out of the known Incapacity of a sieve to draw water, or
to ferry one over the Sea to the Indies, we may conclude demonstratively that
it is unbeseeming Gods Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Justice and Truth to assign
that for a Means to attain that End: Or, if God in some extraordinary case
intends such a Miracle, it is necessary all those who are to use those means be
absolutely assured of this wonderful Assistance; otherwise if they compass not
that End, but perish in the Sea, they may blame their own presumptuous rashness
(which would needs tempt God) for their miscarriage and not God, who never
bound himself by promise in frequent and ordinary transactions to bring about
Effects miraculously by Imcompetent Causes. How weakly Dr. St. presumes rather
than proves that God has chosen Scriptures Letter to be the Rule of Faith will
be seen hereafter.

8. Whatever way is capable of certainly conveying the Will of God to us may be
made choice of by him for the means of making known his Will in order to the
happiness of Mankind. So that no Argument can be sufficient a priori, to prove
that God cannot choose any particular way to reveal his mind by, but such which
evidently proves the Insufficiency of that means for conveying the Will of God
to us.

First, Taking the words [ certain conveying] to mean Absolute Certainty as I
proved before in this, and in diverse Treatises of mine to be requisite, I am
next to distinguish the word [ capable] which may either mean that the Way in
common may possibly bear it, in case it shall please God to use his best Power
to improve it, and make up its defects with all the Assistances it can need. Or
it may mean that such a way or manner, as it stands now on foot in the world
(for example the Scriptures Letter as it is now contrived) is of it self capable
of conveying the will of God to us with absolute Certainty, without needing any
other Thing to regulate us in the understanding it. Whatever is capable in the
later sense I grant may be made choice of by God for the means of making known
his will: For, this being supposed to have in it self actually all that is
requisite for such an effect, is fitting to be made use of by God, whose
Wisdom and Goodness it becomes (when he acts not miraculously) to use every
thing as it is or according to its nature established by the same Wisdom. But
I deny that what is capable in the former sense may always be thus made choice
of by God; For, however such a way in common may be made capable to do that
effect, if it should please God to exert his Power to support its natural
defectiveness, as is exemplifi'd before in Dreams, Apparitions, and those other
odd methods there mentioned; yet it is unsuitable to Gods Wisdom, Goodness or
other Attributes to show himself so extraordinarily in things which reach the
Generality of Mankind, and this for a perpetuity, and so ought to be allowed
only his ordinary Concourse; especially if other means be already placed in
the world able to perform this with a constant, orderly and connatural
assistance. If then we can prove the Insufficiency of any Particular means
(taking it alone as it is now found extant) belonging to such a way in Common,
for example of the Scriptures Letter as it now is, to give Mankind Absolute
Certainty of Gods sense, or Faith; then, however the way of Writing in Common
can possibly be supported by Gods Infinite Power so as to be able to work the
Effect of thus Certifying us of its sense, yet not being such of its own
nature, taking it as it stands now thus contrived, it is not a fitting
Instrument for Gods ordinary Providence to make use of for such a general
Effect as is the Certifying all sorts of people of their Faith.

9 There are several ways conceivable by us how God may make known his will to
us; either by Immediate voice from Heaven, or inward Inspiration to every
particular person; or inspiring some to speak personally to others; or
assisting them with an Infallible Spirit in Writing such Books which shall
contain the Will of God for the benefit of distant persons and future Ages.

All this is granted and much more; for there are innumerable other ways
conceivable how God may make known his Will to us, besides those here
recounted, in case we regard only Gods Power to do it, and set aside his
Wisdom and other Attributes; namely those four ways mentioned by me above, and
multitudes of other such. But, out of all these, Gods Wisdom, which has
pre-establish'd the nature of all things, will make choice of That which is
fittest to perform the Effect intended, that is, to certify absolutely the
first delivered Faith to us who live now. And, left it should be too early
understood which Way is best for that End, which would forestall and render
void Dr. St's future discourses, he therefore very politickly quite leaves out
any peculiar mention of our Rule of Faith, which one might have thought
deserved a place amongst the rest. Leaves out I say, for those words [ or
inspiring some to speak personally to others] suit better with Prophetical
Messengers than with the Tradition of Gods Church. Wherefore, premising this
Note, that it is agreed Christ and his Apostles taught and settled the whole
Body of Faith at first, and therefore that there needs no more for us to know
Gods Will now, but to find out what is the best means of conveying the same
down to our days, I beg leave to supply Dr. St's. neglects, and to insert into
the middle of this. these words, [ or else by the way of open Attestation of a
world of Immediate Christian Fathers to a world of Children by living voice and
constant practice of what they had learned by their daily sensations.] which
had Dr. St. done, any considerate Reader, whom his much talking of Gods Power
and what God may do, had not diverted from reflecting that his Wisdom determins
his Power in ordinary and General Effects to do what accor^ing to the
established natures of things is the fittest means to compass such an end,
would quickly have inclined to judge this the most connatural and fittest way,
and therefore actually to have been made choice of by God; being assisted or
supported by the basis of Human Nature according to its Sensations which are
naturally framed to receive right Impressions, and according to his Rational
Faculty, which determins him to speak Truth still in open and undisguisable
matters of Fact; and, if that Body of men called the Church had any effectual
means of Goodness in practice amongst them, super-assisted also by Grace not to
v^ry from right Faith, and knowingly deliver a False for a True one.

And thus ends the first Division of Dr. St's. Discourse promising to reduce
the Faith of Protestants to Principles. In which I observe but a few things
even hinted that can make for his purpose: and not so much as any one of them
proved, but either slightly and slily insinuated, or dexterously brought in,
not by Connection of Terms, (far be any such piece of Confidence from so Learned
and profound a Jeerer at Demonstration) but by the virtue of some pretty
Equivocation. I remind the Reader of the chief of them by putting some of my
opposite Propositions, each of which is made good in its respective place.

1. An Entire Obedience to the Will of God is principally performed by a
heartily-assenting Faith, a Lively Hope, and an Ardent Charity, and not by
outward actions otherwise than as they spring from these; therefore the way of
Gods revealing his Will to us, or the Rule of Faith which grounds these, must
be absolutely-certain or Impossible to be False.

2. The Nature of the Mysteries or Points of Faith are more removed from our
knowledge than those Maxims which assure us that God revealed them; therefore
it is not proper to begin with examining those Points but the Grounds for Gods
revealing them.

3. This way of proceeding is perfectly secure; for, the Divine Authority being
granted veracious, if there be Infallible Grounds that God has said them, those
Points are Infallibly True: If not, they are not Points of ^aith; and so, not
worth examining whether they be True or no.

4. Gods Power alone gives us no Light what is or is not the Rule of Faith, but
his Wisdom, Goodness, etc. joined with the Knowledge of the Fitness or
Unfitness of the Thing pretended to be so.

5. Gods Wisdom makes choice of that way to reveal his Will to the Generality
of Mankind, which, according to its nature as now established, is a capable or
fit Instrument to such an Effect; and not by that way which is only capable to
do it by an extraordinary working of his Power.

These may serve for Antidotes to the opposite Positions, if he thinks fit to
own them. For, though he is able to deliver himself as clearly as most men, if
he pleases, yet he affects all over this discourse a strange perplexed Intricacy
and Ambiguity* and he puts down his Principles in the same manner as a crafty
Lawyer who had a mind to bring an Estate afterward into dispute, pens
Writings. Much shifting wit there is in them, but nothing of candid, clear and
down right. And this Intricacy is made greater by his unconnected way of
discoursing; no man living being able to discern in better half of his
odd-natur'd Principles what influence they have, either Immediate or Mediate,
upon any thing following. The rest of what is contained in these nine, are
either Absurdities, already laid open; or else Impertinent Truths, as will be
seen by their uselesness in the Process of this Discourse.

A Discourse CONCERNING The Rule of Faith, Necessary to the better clearing the
following Principles.
THe several Ways of Revealing, (at least as many as Dr. St* thought fit,)
being proposed, he goes about in the next place to establish one of them, viz.
Writing, to have been intended by God to be the Rule of Faith, or, the fittest
means to ascertain Faith to us who live now; and this he does in the first five
Principles* Whence he proceeds to reject the Infallibility of any Church
whatever either to attest or explain those Writings; and this he attempts to
prove in the five ^ex^.

On this occasion it were not amiss to declare before hand, what I mean by Rule
of Faith, or rather to repeat something of that much I have writ formerly
concerning that point in my Second Appendix to Surefooting, and elsewhere; that
so (all equivocation being taken away) it may more clearly be seen where the
Point sticks on Dr. St's. side, as also that his understanding me to have
different sentiments from some Catholic Divines in this matter may be removed;
for, if I understand my self or them, there is no variance at all between us in
the Thing, but only in the Word.

It being agreed then amongst us all that what Christ and his Apostles taught
is Gods Word, or his Will, and the Means to Salvation; all that is to be done
by us, as to matters of Faith, is to know with Absolute Certainty what was the
first taught Doctrine, or Christ's sense; and whatever can thus assure us of
that, is deservedly called the Rule of Faith. Now, the word Rule made use of to
mean a Spiritual or Intellectual Direction, is Metaphorical, or translated from
some Material thing, as most words that express Spiritual Notions are; and it is
one of those kind of Metaphors which are transferred from one thing to another
for some Proportion or Resemblance between them. For, as a Material Rule is
such a thing, as, if one endeavor to go according to it, and decline not from
it, preserves one from going crooked; so, this Intellectual Rule called the
Rule of Faith, is of that Nature, that, if one go according to it, and swerve
not from it, it preserves one from going wrong or from erring, in his knowledge
of what is True (or First-deliver'd) Faith; and Faith being intended for
persons of all sorts or Capacities, the Rule of Faith must be able to preserve
even those of the meanest Capacity from Erring in Faith while they rely upon
It.

Agian, this being the Proper and Primary Effect of the Rule of Faith, and
every Nature that is, having essentially in it self a Power to produce of its
self, and without the Assistance of any other its Primary Effect (or rather
being it self that Power) as man to discourse, Fire to burn, etc. it follows
that, since to preserve all that rely on it in right Faith is the Proper
effect of the Rule of Faith, what has not in it self the Power to do this, and
this of its self, independently on any thing else but on God (who establishes
the Natures of all things to be Certain Powers to produce their Proper Effect)
is not in true speech a Rule of Faith: Since then not one Catholic in the
World holds that Scriptures Letter of it self and independently on something
else ( viz the Church's Tradition attesting the Truth of the same Letter, and
Interpreting it) has in it self Power thus to certify persons of all
capacities of Christian Faith, without possibility of Erring, nor any one but
holds the Churches Authority is able alone to do this Effect, (since it is known
and confessed it actually performed this in the beginning) there is not one
Catholic that I know of who holds either that the Scripture is the Rule of
Faith (taking the words in this sense) or that any thing but the Churches
living voice and Practice, or Tradition is It; and, so taking the words
properly, as I do, they all agree with me.

On the other side, taking those words [ the Rule of Faith] for any thing that
contains Faith, or that may signify it with absolute Certainty to people of all
sorts, not of it self, but merely by virtue of another, whose Power of
Asserting the Truth of the Letter in those Passages (at least) that concern
Christian Faith, and of unerringly Interpreting it lends it to be thus
certainly significative of Gods Will; taking, I say, [ Rule of Faith] in this
sense, as some of ours do, I grant with them that Scripture is a Rule of Faith.
So that still I agree with them in the Thing; only I dissent from them in the
word, and judge that this Container of Christ's Doctrine, as now described, is
but improperly called a Rule of Faith; as not having in it self the nature of
such a Rule, that is, not, having a Power in it self, and of its self thus to
ascertain Faith by absolutely engaging the Divine Authority.

This Distinction now given I learned from the Council of Trent; which no where
says that Scripture is a Rule of Faith, as it does expressly of Tradition (
Sess. 5.) but only that it contains Faith, as also Tradition does; but whether
it contains it in such a manner that all those who are to have Faith by relying
on it, may by so doing, be absolutely secured from erring, which is requisite
over and above to make it in true speech deserve the name of a Rule, the
Council says nothing. I am sure it is far from saying that people of all sorts
reading the Scriptures and attending solely to the Letter as interpreted and
understood by their private selves, shall be sure never to err in right Faith;
nay, it engages not for their security from erring so much as in any one point;
which yet ought to be said, if Scripture in it self, and of it self have the
power of regulating them in their Faith or be a Rule. Rather the Council by its
Carriage says the direct contrary; for, though being about to define against
Heretics it professes to follow in its definitions the written word, yet it is
observable See Sure Footing 2d Ed. p. 145, 146.
that it no where builds on any place of Scripture, but it professes at the same
time to build its Interpretation of that place on Tradition; which evidently
argues that though Scripture in the Judgment of the Council contained the
Point, yet that which indeed regulated the Council in its Definitions, was the
Tradition of the Church, as it also expressly declares where ever it defines.
And I dare say that there is not one Catholic in the world who thinks the
Council knew not both what and how to define against Luther and Calvin at that
time, without needing to seek its Faith anew in Texts of Scripture; which
plainly concludes that the Council was not regulated by It, or looked upon it
as her Rule, but only considered it as of a sacred Authority and available
against Heretics professing to rely on Scripture, and accusing the Church for
going contrary to the Word of God. Nay the Council defines that none should
dare to interpret Scripture contrary to the sense which our H. Mother the
Catholic Church has held and does hold; which clearly takes it out of private
hands, and makes the sense of the Church, ever held, the only Interpreter of
Scripture, especially in matters of Faith, and extends to all Scripture; which
unavoidably makes it no Rule of Faith.

I am sure the Distinction now given shows my sentiment consistent, if not
perfectly agreeing with that Common Opinion of our Divines, that Scripture is a
Partial Rule; or that Scripture and Tradition integrate one complete Rule. For
they clearly mean by those words that Faith is partly contained in Scripture,
partly in the Tradition of the Church. So that what they had an eye to in so
doing was not the Evidence requisite to a Rule, but only the degree of Extent of
Scripture to the matter contained in it; whence it is evident they meant only
that Scripture contained some part of Faith, which I perfectly allow to it, and
perhaps more.

This is my Judgment concerning the notio^ of the Rule of Faith and what is
such a Rule; and these my Reasons for that Judgment: If any one thinks he can
go to work more Logically and exactly in finding out the true nature and notion
of a Rule, and show me I take it improperly, I shall heartily thank him, and
acknowledge my mistake. But I never yet discerned any such Attempt, nor do I
see any reason to fear any such performance. And I much doubt should any
Catholic Divine out of a Charitable Intention of Union (which I shall ever
commend and heartily approve) trusting to the Equivocalness of the word, say
Scripture is the Rule or a Rule, I much doubt (I say) that, when the thing
comes to be examined to the bottom, it will scarce tend to any solid good; for,
however Words may bend, yet the true Grounds of Catholic Faith are Inflexible;
and we must take heed lest, while we yield them the Word, they expect not (as
they may justly, having such occasion) that we should grant the Thing properly
signified by that Word; which if they do, we must either recede, or else forgo
Catholic Grounds.

But now the difference between me and Dr. St's party is in the very Thing it
self, and this as wide as Contradiction can distance us. For Rule of Faith. p.
118.
Dr. T. (whom he still abetts) makes it possible that he has neither True
Letter nor True sense of Scripture: that is makes his Rule of Faith, and
consequently his Faith built solely on It, possible to be False. And all that
go that Way fall unavoidably into that precipice, while they admit no Grounds
but what are Fallible, as I have shown at large in Faith Vindicated and Reason
against Raillery. Whereas I still bear up to the Impossibility that Christian
Faith should be a Ly, and consequently I maintain that the Rule of Faith which
engages the Divine Authority on which its Truth solely depends, and without
engaging which it might be all False, must be Impossible to be False, or
Infallibly certain. And hence, taking my rise from the Nature of Faith, in
which all Protestants and indeed all that have the name of Christians (except
some few speculators) agree with me, viz. that, taking it as built on those
Motives left by God for his Church to embrace Faith, that is, taking it as it
ought to be taken, it is above Opinion and Impossible to be False; hence, I say,
building on this mutual Agreement, I pursue a solid Union, which I declare my
self most heartily to zeal; Hoping that this point once distinctly cleared
against the Sophisms and blinding Crafts of some weak Heterodox Writers, it
will quickly appear that it is every man's Concern, who is of Capacity, to look
after such Grounds that the Divine Authority (on which the Truth of all Faith
depends) is engaged for the Points he holds, as are absolutely Certain or
Impossible to be False. And I make account, that, were this quest heartily
pursued, it would quickly appear, both by others Confessing the possible
Falsehood of theirs, as also by enforcing Reasons, nay by Dr. Tillitsons
yielding to the sufficiency of this Rule, Rule of Faith p. 153. Reason against
Raillery p. 190, 191, etc.
even when he was to impugn it, that nothing but Tradition or the Testimony of
the Church can be such a Ground. Perhaps also it might be shown that both more
learned and more sober Protestant Authors have owned the admitting Tradition
and a reliance on the Churches Authority for their Faith, and for the true
sense of Scripture in order to the attaining true Faith, than those are who
have maintained this private-spirited way so zealously advanced by Dr. St. of
leaving it to be interpreted by every vulgar head; to the utter destruction of
Church, and Church Government. This is and shall be my way of endeavoring
Union, which beginning at the bottom, and with our mutual Agreement in so main
a point that it bears all along with it, viz. the Absolute Certainty of Faith,
is hopeful to be solid and well built, and, so, Effectual; if it please God to
inspire some Eminent and Good Men to pursue home a Principle which themselves
have already heartily embraced. If not, I have this satisfaction that I have
done a due right and honor to Christian Faith, and given it that advantage by
asserting its perfect security from error, as, Gods Grace assisting, is apt to
make it work more efficaciously both interiourly and exteriourly in those who
already possess it.

Fourth Examen.
Sifting the the ten following Principles concerning the Letter-Rule and Living
Rule of Faith.
THe right nature of the Rule of Faith being thus stated, it is high time to
address to our Examen how Dr. St. from Principles settles us such a Rule
beginning from his tenth.

10. If the Will of God cannot be sufficiently declared to men by Writing, it
must either be because no Writing can be Intelligible enough for that end, or
that it can never be known to be written by men Infallibly assisted. The former
is repugnant to common sense, for words are equally capable of being
understood, spoken or written; the later overthrows the possibility of the
Scriptures being known to be the word of God.

I have already said, and in diverse books manifoldly proved, that no
declaration of God's will, or (which is all one in our case) no Rule of Faith,
is sufficient, con^^dering the Nature and Ends of Faith, (...) obligations
arising from it, but (...) to be false, and built on Infallible Grounds. This
premised, we are to inquire, whether Writing be the best Way for thus assuring
it in all Ages to the end of the world. To come then closer to our Answer.

We are first to reflect again what Dr. St. means by the Will of God, at least
what he ought to mean by it: For, these words at the first sight, seem to
signify only some External Actions commanded by God to be performed or
avoided; and it is the Dr's Interest they should be taken only in this sense;
for such a will is more easy to be signified by Writing than some other things
of a more abstruse, spiritual and dogmatical nature, which yet are of absolute
Necessity to be believed by the Church, such as are the points of the Trinity,
Incarnation and Godhead of Christ who died for us: since then Gods Will extends
not only to aim at Mankinds Attainment of his Last End or True Happiness, but
also to provide for the best means to it, or, to give us knowledge of those
Motives which are apt to create in man a hearty Love of Heaven above all things
(the best Condition of Man's Happiness or Immediate disposition to it) it
follows that the holding all those Tenets which contain in themselves such
Motives, do all come within the compass of the Will of God. To omit many
others, I will instance in two Points, of main Concern and Influence toward
Christian Life; namely the Godhead of Christ, and the Real Presence of Christ's
Body in the Sacrament. Now, who sees not how wonderful an Ascendent both these,
if verified, must needs have over Christian hearts? Can any Amulet of Love be
so charming, or apt to elevate to the Love of God above all things, as to be
ascertained that he who was really GOD, Infinite in all his Attributes, and
Infinitely happy in himself, should, purely out of his overflowing Goodness
toward miserable mankind, take his nature upon him, become his Brother, Friend,
Physician, Master, nay suffer for his sake many hardships during his life, and
at length buffeting, scourging, crowning with thorns, and a most cruel death on
the Cross; and to keep the remembrance of these many Benefits warm in our
hearts to give us after a wonderful manner his most precious Body and Blood in
a Sacrament instituted for that end; by this means not only reviving the memory
of the former incomparable love-motive, but also adding new Incitements to that
best of virtues by our apprehending lively that he so dearly embreasts and
embosoms himself with us by his uniting himself to us through his corporal
presence, that so our souls may by means of the Love springing from this
consideration, feed on, and be united to him Spiritually? On the other side, if
these be not Truths, but that the Church may perhaps err in embracing them,
who sees not that the Church it self is Idolatrous (at least, materially) in
giving True Divine Honor which is Proper only to the Creator, to a Creature?
Each of these two Points then is of that High concern as to Christian Life and
Practice, that it must needs be of its own nature either a most wicked and
damnable Heresy to deny or else to assert it: Wherefore it is the highest
Impiety to imagine that God has left no Way to ascertain Mankind whether these
two Points (omitting many others) be True or False; since it is unavoidable they
are, if True, the greatest and most efficacious helps to Christian Devotion
that can be; If False, the greatest Hindrances to the same; as corrupting the
best Devotions of those Christians into Idolatrous worship. The Knowing then
the truth of these and such like, being most certainly willed by God, we are to
expect such a Rule of Faith as is declarative of these, and such as these, with
Absolute Certainty.

Let us now consider whether Writing be the best means for such an end; which
if it be not, it may certainly be concluded from Gods Wisdom, Goodness, etc.
that it has not been made choice of, or intended by God for it. But it is
observable that Dr. St. perpetually waves any Discourse of this nature, and
chooses rather to argue from Gods Power; which though I have already shown how
Incompetent and Absurd it is, let us examine at least what works he makes of it.

If (says he) the will of God cannot be sufficiently declared to men by
writing, it must either be, etc. I must distinguish the words [ cannot be
declared by writing] as I did formerly; and affirm that they may either mean,
that the Way of Writing, as taken in the whole latitude of its nature and
standing under Gods Infinite Power ordering it with all possible Advantage to
the end intended, cannot sufficiently declare Gods will, as to such Points: or,
they may mean that Gods Revelation of his Will by Writing, so qualified as it
is now actually found in the Scripture, cannot sufficiently, or with absolute
Certainty declare Gods Will as to the Points aforesaid to men of all capacities
in all future Ages. Taking them in the former sense, I deny the Proposition,
and say that Gods will as to such Points can be sufficiently declared by
Writing. For, it is absolutely within the compass of Gods Power to contrive a
Book on that manner as might define exactly, or else explicate at large in what
precise sense every word that expresses each point of Faith is to be taken, and
to provide that it should never be taken in that book in more than that one
sense; or, if in more, to notify to us in which places it is taken in a
different meaning. He could also have laid it so, that a hundred or two of
Originals of these Books might be preserved publicly in several distant
Countries from the Beginning, which might by their perfect Agreement bear
Testimony to one another; and, so assure us the Text was kept hitherto
inviolate even to a tittle, and also remain a Standard to correct all the
multitudes of Diverse Readings which, as experience shows us, is apt otherwise
to set the Copies at variance with one another. He could also have so ordered
it that the Original Languages might have been as well understood by the
Generality of the Church as their own is, and so have avoided the Uncertainty
of Translations: Again, lest crafty Heretics should at any time for the
future, by wittily alluding places, or playing upon words, or other
Sophistries, pervert the sense; Gods Power could have caused a Book to be
written after the manner of a large Prophecy, foretelling that in such a time
(...) place, such and such a Heretic should arise, perverting such and such a
Point, and forewarn men of his Sophisms and Errors. This and much more might
have been effected by Gods Power to establish Writing such an absolutely
Certain and Intelligible Way: which why his Wisdom should not have done, in
case Faith be an Assent which, while it relies on the Ground God has left for
Mankind cannot be an error, (as it may be if none can be absolutely certain
both of the Text and sense of Scriptures) I would gladly be informed:
Especially since Dr. St. tells us here (Princ. 15.) there is no need of an
Infallible society of men, either to attest or explain them, and all that is
Fallible (as common sense tells us) falls short of elevating it above
possibility of being an Error: whence follows that there being no means on
foot in the world, Tradition of the Church failing, or being set aside, to
secure us absolutely of this; it can only be had by the Extraordinary Operation
of Gods Power securing the Letter of such writings, and rendering those
VVritings themselves perfectly Intelligible in the manners assigned, in case
VVriting be indeed the RULE OF FAITH.

VVriting then can be the Rule of Faith, or able thus to ascertain Faith to us
if Gods Infinite Power undertakes the framing it such as I have expressed; but,
because experience tells us it is not so ordered, let us leave this Platonic
way of considering how thing, should be in that supposition, and following the
Aristotelian, consider things as they are; and accordingly examine how G^ds
Wisdom has thought fit to order such Writings actually; and thence gather
whether (however it is agreed between us, they be most excellent for other uses
and ends) they were ever intended by the same Wisdom for a Rule of Faith. To
evince the contrary of which, (not to repeat those many Arguments I have
brought elsewhere,) I fartner offer these Reasons.

First, If the Writings of men divinely inspired were meant for a Rule of
Faith, then either all such Writings, as such, are therefore to belong to that
Rule, or some only; If all, then since some Writings granted to have been
written by such persons are known to be lost, it may be doubted, nay it ought
to be granted that the present Written Rule is defective in the nature of a
Rule, unless it be well made out that those divinely-inspir'd Writings which
were lost were of another Nature then these extant, and therefore that they had
no part in being a Rule: The Proofs for which point ought to be very pregnant
and convincing; otherwise it may be questioned whether any Books writ by men
divinely inspired had in them the nature of a Rule, or were intended for that
end by God. And this is particularly enforced, because, Dr. S^ here (Princ.
28.) makes Scripture the Rule and Measure of what we are to believe; and if the
Measure fall short, it is to be feared the thing measured or Faith will fall
short likewise. But, if he says only some of those divinely-inspir'd Writings
were sufficient, it is very necessary it should be made out how many are
needful; that so it might be thoroughly understood what are the precise Grounds
of Christian Faith: concerning which yet there is much difference in opinion
amongst those who hold the Letter-Rule; which signifies that none of them know
distinctly what themselves assign or hold to be that Rule. Or, if he says that
only those which Gods Providence has preserved are that Rule; then he must
either say that Gods Providence therefore preserved these because they
contained holy Doctrine and were writ by men divinely-inspir'd, or were apt to
benefit future mankind; and then, by the same Reason, those which perished
should have been preserved too; or else, that God preserved these in particular
because these which remain are, besides those qualifications, Proper and
Sufficient to be the Rule of Faith. And then he begs the Question, and supposes
his own Tenet true, even while he is proving it so.

Nex^, supposing the Originals of these Books now extant to have been once the
Rule of Faith* it was requisite the Church in the beginning should have looked
upon them as such; and consequently have made account for the first 300 years
(till when they were not collected or universally proposed) it had no Absolute
Certainty or Entire Body of their Faith. But, of this we hear not that any had
the least Jealousy, or that they looked after Books of Scripture as Things
without which the Church was not either absolutely Certain of its Faith, or had
not all its Faith.

Again, had those Books been then the Rule of Faith as (considering that some
of them were unacknowledg'd, one scattered here, another there accidentally) is
senseless to imagine. Yet, how can we ^ow, or, future Ages hereafter have
Absolute Certainty that some substantial word or other is not altered, omitted,
or inserted in those places that concern the main Points of Faith (for example,
the Godhead of Christ, or the Real Presence) in case there be no Infallible
Authority to attest the Truth of it, which Dr. St. denies here Princ. 15. It is
not evident he must say that none of these can be made out with Absolute
Certainty, and consequently confess with Rule of Faith. p. 118.
Dr. T. that all this may be otherwise; unless he have recourse to Gods
Extraordinary Assistance to the multitudes of Transcribers and Translators,
because of the Necessity the Letter should be thus preserved still unchanged,
in regard otherwise none could say his Faith is True: which again begs the
Question, and supposes it the Rule of Faith instead of proving it so.

Farther, Let the Letter be supposed exactly like the Original, how will that
Letter secure from all possible Error all that rely on it, as the Rule of Faith
ought, or, to use Dr. St's words (Princ. 15.) reveal so plainly the whole will
of God, that no sober Enquirer can miss of what is necessary for salvation? Now
if they cannot miss of what is necessary for salvation, they must needs hit on
it, and so are in a manner Infallible, as to that point, while they rely
thereon. To put it to the Trial, let us consider what Disputes there are out of
Scriptures Letter, between Socinians and their Opposers about a Trinity and the
Godhead of Christ: and what between Catholics and their Adversaries about the
Real Presence. How many Interpretations of [ This is my Body.] How many
Allusions of one place to another in both those Points to hammer out the Truth,
and these agitated on both sides, by Bodies of eminent men, excellent Scholars,
Acute Scripturists? Must every sober Enquirer, and every private ignorant
person who sincerely endeavors needs hit on the right, and judge better of
these Points than all those Learned men? Or, must we needs conclude that all
those learned Enquirers found in each of those vast different parties are mad
or Insincere? I wish he would prove this: It Is his best Interest, and would
give his Argument some likelihood; which till then has none: for the Fact being
so notorious, how earnestly they all endeavor to find out the Truth of these
points by the Letter, none will judge but that if their Heads or Hearts be not
strangely disordered by Folly or Insincerity, the Letter which should inform
them, is strangely incompetent for that end. But it is remarkable how neatly Dr.
St. skips aside from the Point. He undertakes not to give us any Assurance that
his sober or sincere Enquirers shall by virtue of this his Rule of Faith, find
out that any one point of his Faith is an Absolutely Certain Truth, but only
that he shall not miss of what is necessary for salvation, that he shall not
err, or at least, not be damned for it. So that, for any thing appears by his
discourse, let him but read the Scripture, though he holds nothing but Error by
so doing, yet he is still in the way to salvation by the very Reading and
Running into Error. But this deserves a particular reflection hereafter.

Lastly, the very nature and Genius of the Scripture, as it now is, shows that,
however it be excellently Useful for perfecting the Lives of the Faithful in
many regards, yet it was never intended for the Rule of Faith. For, (to omit
innumerable other reasons frequently alleged by our Authors,) Its several
parts were evidently writ on several emergent occasions, and have not the least
semblance as if the whole had been purposely compiled to deliver an entire Body
of Faith. Nor does it observe any method tending to clear each several Point.
For, it neither begins with defineing or explaining every word made use of in
signifying those Points, which is the best means to avoid Equivocation, the
Ground of all mistake: nor does it pursue home the evidencing any one Point, by
making us aware of the sinister senses in which each word expressing that Point
might seem to be taken; nor does it put objections against each Tenet, and
establish us in the right Apprehension of it by solving them, nor distinguish
by laying common Rules to know when the words are to be taken properly, when
Metaphorically, much less tell us particularly in which places each word is to
be taken thus or thus: nor can it justify with absolute or Infallible
Certainty either its Text or Copy to be substantially like the Original, nor
(if we may trust Dr. St. here Princ. 15.) can any Authority on Earth supply
that necessary duty for it: nor, (it being requisite to compare one place to
another so to find out the sense) does it tell us which place is to be compared
to another as its proper Explainer, nor of the two alluding places which is to
stand firm and be taken as the Letter lies; which to bend its signification in
correspondency to that other; without fore-knowledg of which it is pure folly to
think to avail our selves by comparing Places. None of these things, I say, are
found in the Scriptures Letter as it lies; which notwithstanding, and perhaps
many other such like, it had been agreeable to Gods Wisdom and Goodness to
have given it, in case it had been intended by him for a Rule of Faith, or such
a Direction by relying on which, people of all capacities might have so
well-grounded an Assent to those Points, as is impossible to be an Error while
they thus rely on it; which Assent in Christian Language we call [ Faith]

On the other side it is evident that of some Points it gives only accidental
hints here and there without insisting upon them amply or explaining them
fully; and that Book which was most designedly intended to assert Christ's
Divinity, was yet so far from putting it out of all dispute or preserving it
from being opposed and called in question, that never yet did Heresy prevail
so much against Gods Church as did the Arians, who denied that very Point of
Faith. But what needs more to evince this Point than these two Arguments, one a
priori, the other a posteriori. All words are either Proper or Improper and
Metaphorical; of which Proper ones express that the Thing is indeed or in
reality so: but Improper ones that it is not indeed or in reality so: whence it
happens that in matters of so exact Truth as Points of Faith (especially when
the Points are of main Concern) it imports a plain Heresy either to take a
Proper word for an Improper, or, an improper one for a Proper: For example,
those Texts expressing that God has hands, feet, repents, grieves, is moved by
our Prayers, etc. are, if taken properly wicked Heresies and destroy the
Spiritual and unchangeable nature of the Godhead. Also, to take those words
Christ is man, suffered, died, rose again, etc. improperly, are wicked Heresies
too, and take away the main supports of our salvation: This being so, it
follows that the absolutely-certain Knowledge when the words of Scripture are
taken properly, when not, being determinative of what is true Faith, what
Heresy, it must be had from the Rule of Faith it self, and so from the Letter
of Scripture, if that be indeed the Rule. But this Knowledge is not had from
the Scriptures Letter; for this must either be done by that Letters signifying
in each place expressly or equivalently that the words are properly or
Improperly there taken, which is Impossible to be shown, nor was ever
pretended; or else by signifying the contrary Point in another place; and this,
as far as the bare Letter carries, or abstracting from all Interpretation, can
only signify that the Letter in one place seems to contradict it self in
another place; and this, as far as the bare Letter carries, or abstracting from
all Interpretation, can only signify that the Letter in one place seems to
contradict it self in another place, which is far short of giving us an
unerring security which side is Truth. Or, if it be said, the Letter alone
gives us not this security without some Interpretation, then this
Interpretation performs what the Letter (if it be a Rule) ought, but could not,
and determines with Absolute Certainty when the words are taken properly, when
not; that is gives us our Faith; and consequently that Light or Knowledge,
whatever it was, which the Interpreter brought with him, and had it not from
the Letter, gave us the right sense of Scripture; and, so, It, not the
Scripture was the True Rule of Faith.

From the Effect, or a posteriori I argue thus: We experience that Great Bodies
of men of diverse sects, with equal earnestness (as far as appears to us) go
about to find their Faith in the Scriptures Letter, and equally profess to rely
upon Gods Assistance to that end; wherefore either we must be forced to judge
that none of those several sects do sincerely desire to find True Faith in the
Scriptures, and so by Dr. St's Principles no sort of men in the whole world has
right Faith: which quite takes away all Christianity; or else we must think all
of them truly desire to find right Faith in the Scripture, and rely on Gods
help to assist them, In which case, since the fault is not in them taken as
applying themselves to their Rule, and relying on it, and yet it is mani^e^t
they differ (that is one side errs) in most Fundamental Points, as in the
Trinity, Divinity of Christ, Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament,
etc. it follows unavoidably that the Faul^ is in those persons in holding it
their Rule, for, in case they erred not in holding it to be a Rule, that is in
case it were indeed apt to ascertain them absolutely if they applied it, and
that they did actually apply it, it is impossible they should have ever erred.
Scriptures Letter then is far from securing men of all sorts, while they rely
on it, from Error; since whole Bodies of men, and, amongst those, multitudes
of great Scholars and learned Scripturists err grievously and that in most
Fundamental Points, even while they rely upon it: Which if it destroy not the
nature of a Rule, I know not what does. This Discourse being forelaid, we shall
be able to make shorter work with his Principles, to which we now address.

Whereas then in his tenth Principle, he contend; that the will of God can be
sufficiently declared to men by writing. I answer, That by Extraordinary
Contrivances and Actings of Gods Wisdom and Power it may; but that this will
avail him little, since it is evident that de facto God has not thus exerted his
Wisdom and Power in making Scriptures Letter fit for that End; whence we
conclude that it was never meant for a Rule: and, whereas he says that words
are equally capable of being understood, spoken or written; I deny it
absolutely; for nature teaches us that the countenance and Carriage of the
Speaker, the Accent of the voice, the giving a due and living Emphasis to the
words, with the whole Complexion of Circumstances in which the Speaker is
found, and which generally are not unknown to the person to whom he speaks;
and, amongst these, principally, his applying himself pertinently to the
present exigency, Thoughts and Expectation of the Hearer: All these, I say, and
many others give Living voice an incomparable Advantage over Dead Characters in
point of Intelligibleness and Expressiveness: And, though Dr. St. may contend
that whatever advantage in signifying, That has over This, may possibly be put
in writing and expressed by means of many large Explications writ by the person
himself that was to deliver his mind, yet he can never show that those
Multitudes of words in those very Explications have the same degree of
Significativeness and Intelligibility as if they had been spoken viva voce by
their Author; since they will still want all or most of the Advantages now
spoken of, which manifestly determine the signification of words. To omit, that
all this will little make for his purpose when he comes to apply it; since
Scripture has no such large Explications writ upon it to supply that less
clearness of expressing which the way of writing is necessarily subject to, if
compared with that of speaking: much less if daily practice go along with
living voice to declare men's minds, as is found in Tradition.

As for what he adds, and builds on, that Scripture may be known to be the word
of God: If he means it may be known to be such according to the Grounds he
proceeds on, he ought either to have put it amongst Principles agreed on by
both sides, or else have proved it; which he no where attempts, but afterward
(Princ. 15.) very solidly and learnedly disproves and confutes: while he denies
the necessity of any Infallible society of men to attest or explain those
VVritings; For, since in the bare Letter as it lies, there are found many
passages which contradict one another, and, abstracting from all Interpretation
and Attestation of the Letter, no part of it is to be held truer than other
(for if it once lose the repute of being Gods word, as in that case it must,
it is all equally liable to be false) it follows that if there be neither any
men Infallible in attesting nor in explaining those Writings, all the World may
be deceived in performing both those duties; and, so, all Mankind may be
deceived both in judging the Scriptures which we now have to be the same book
which was writ at first, since there is no INFALLIBLE Attestation of it, and
also may be deceived in judging there are not Contradictions in it, since there
is no Infallible Explanation of it to secure it from many such Imputations,
Evident in the bare Letter taking it as un explained or uninterpreted. Any man
of reason would think that to leave Scripture in such a pickle, were but a
slender provision to give it such a Certainty as will fit it to be a Rule of
Faith, if he but reflects that that Rule must be the Basis of all our Knowledge
that God ever revealed any thing at all; that is, of all Mankinds way to
salvation.

But suppose it thus granted that the will of God can be fufficienty declared
to Men by writing, in the manner declared above, let us see what follows.

11. It is agreed among all Christians that although God in the first Ages of
the World did reveal his mind to men immediately by a voice or secret
inspirations, yet afterward he did communicate his mind to some immediately
inspired to write his Will in Books to be preserved for the benefit of future
Ages, and particularly that these Books of the New Testament which we now
receive were so written by the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ.

This is granted: only it is not agreed among all that bear the name of
Christians of what nature this benefit is which God intended men in future Ages
by the Scriptures, whether of strengthening them in Faith, and stirring them up
to good Life, or teaching them their Faith at first and assuring it to them nor
how this benefit comes to be derived to the Generality, whether by Immediate
reading and penetrating it themselves: or, through the Preaching and
Instruction of some others deputed by God for that end, who have Faith in their
hearts already by some other Means: But we are to expect Dr. St. will in the
process of his discourse clear this point solidly and thoroughly, for it is the
main hinge of all this Controveesie: He goes forward thus.

12. Such Writings have been received by the Christian Church of the first
Ages, as Divine and Infallible, and being delivered down as such to us by an
Universal consent of all Ages since, they ought to be owned by us as the
Certain Rule of Faith; whereby we are to judge what the Will of God is in order
to our salvation; unless it appear with an Evidence equal to that whereby we
believe those Books to be the Word of God, that they were never intended for
that end because of their obscurity or Imperfection.

This whole Paragraph amounts to one Proposition, which is this, such Writings,
(viz. penned by men divinely inspired for the benefit of future Ages) received
at first, and delivered down ever since as Divine and Infallible, are to be
held the Certain Rule of Faith, unless there be Evidence of their
Defectiveness, equal to that of their being Gods Word. Which is a bare
Assertion, neither proved from any Principle agreed or not agreed on, and
therefore perfectly Groundless, and unprov'd; and False into the bargain,
though the main stress of his whole discourse relies on it. Now that it is False
I prove, because its Contradictory is True. For, there may be writings penned
by men Divinely inspired and delivered down to us as Divine and Infallible, and
yet we need not be bound to hold them the Rule of Faith, though we have not
equal Evidence of their defect as we have that they are the Word of God. Since
to be writ by men divinely-inspir'd, to be Divine, Infallible, and the word of
God, signifies no more but that they are perfectly Holy and True in themselves,
and beneficial to mankind in some way or other; and this is the farthest these
words will carry; but that they are of themselves of sufficient Clearness to
give sincerely-endeavouring persons such Security of their Faith while they
rely on them as cannot consist with Error (which is requisite to the Rule of
Faith) these words signify not: They may be most Holy, they may be most True
in themselves, they may be exceedingly Useful or Beneficial to mankind, and yet
not be endowed with this Property, which yet the RVLE OF FAITH must have. And
whereas he says they are for these reasons to be owned for the Rule of Faith
(that is we are for these reasons to judge and profess them such) unless it
appear with an equal evidence, etc. that they are defective; sure he never
understood what Judging and Professing is built on, who can make such a
Discourse: Our Assent or Judgment is built on the Grounds or Reasons which
conclude the thing to be as we judge, and not on our seeing nothing to the
contrary: for, in case the reasons produced conclude not the thing to be so,
the not appearing to be otherwise will avail nothing to conclude it so: All it
can effect is to make us maintain our liberty of suspense and Indifferency that
so we may be void of forestalment or prejudice and free to believe it when
competent or conclusive Reasons shall appear to evince it. What then Dr. St. is
to do, is to produce Conclusive Reasons to evince that the Letter of Scripture
has such a perspicuity and other Perfections belonging to such a Rule as must
ground that most Firm, Unalterable and (if rightly grounded) Inerrable Assent
called CHRISTIAN FAITH, and this considering the Nature of Faith, the Effects
which are to proceed from Faith, and Obligations issuing from it, and Incumbent
on the Faithful, as such; But in stead of performing this necessary Duty of
his, to argue as if, though the Reasons he brings conclude it not, yet it must
needs be so because we have no Evidence it is not so, is, so pleasant and new
invented a way of arguing, that he must find the World a new Logic, and
Mankind it self a new nature ere he will arrive by means of such Discourse at
any Conclusion.

And, whereas he seems to build much on the word [ Equal,] alleging that we
must, for the reasons there given, hold the Scriptures the Rule of Faith unless
it appear they are defective with an Evidence [Equal] to that whereby we
believe those books to be the word of God: It Is absolutely denied, not only for
the reason lately given in common, that, none can be bound in reason to hold or
own any unprov'd Position; but particularly because of the peculiar nature of
the thing we are discoursing of; For, the Rule of Faith being that which is to
tell us God said such or such things, or engages the Divine Authority for their
Verity, if we should happen to misuse Scriptures Letter, by letting loose
people of all capacities to rely on it as their Rule of Faith, then, in case it
should peradventure not have been intended by God for this end, but for some
others, we expose our selves and others to the desperate danger of running into
Endless Errors by this misusage of Scripture, and of adhering to those Errors
as firmly as if God himself had spoke them; that is, we hazard erring
irrecoverably in matters which ate the proper means of salvation, and
blaspheming God daily in making him the Patron of Lies. In this case then there
is particular caution to be used, and so, if upon sincere and strict
Examination it be but any thing dubious that Scripture was never intended by
God for a Rule of Faith, we can never be obliged to hold or own it for such,
especially not having any Certain Argument to conclude it such; much less must
we be obliged to hold it to be such unless we have EQVAL Evidence of its
Unfitness to that whereby we believe those Books to be the word of God, unless
Dr. St. will say that nothing ought to restrain a man from hazarding the
greatest mischiefs in the world but perfect Evidence, that no harm will come of
it. So that still his main business, and without which he does nothing at all,
remains yet to be done; which is, to bring solid convincing Proofs that God
intended Scripture, or his Written Word for the Rule of Faith; that is, for
such a Rule as people of all sorts relying on it should be Infallibly or
absolutely-secur'd from Error by so doing. In making good which concerning
Point he has hitherto trifled exceedingly. Nay himself here is afraid to own
the Goodness of his own Proof; otherwise he would never have thought it fit to
annex those words, Unless it appear with an Evidence equal to that whereby we
believe those books to be the word of God, that they were never intended for
that End because of their obscurity or imperfection. For, the Evidence whereby
it appears those Books are the word of God must be conclusive (else according
to his Grounds, we can never conclude one word of Faith True) and so an
Evidence equal to it must be Conclusive likewise: If then he had thought his
reasons to prove Scripture the Rule of Faith were Good and Conclusive, Common
sense would have forbid him to add these cautious words Unless it appears with
an equal evidence, etc. for Common sense tells us no Conclusive reason can
possibly be brought for the Negative, if Conclusive Reasons be once produced,
or be producible for the Affirmative; It appears then by this behavior of his
on this occasion that he distrusts that either he has produced any Conclusive
reason for that main Point of Scriptures being intended for the Rule of Faith,
or that any can be produced.

Lastly, That we may give perfect satisfaction to this Fundamental Principle of
his, though perhaps there is not Evidence Scriptures Letter was never intended
for the Rule of Faith equal to that whereby we believe those Books to be the
Word of God, in regard we believe this upon the Authority of Gods Church which
is supported with the whole strength of Best Nature and Supernaturals, yet we
have rigorous and Conclusive Evidence that it is not penned in the very best
way imaginable to avoid all ambiguity of words and forestall mistakes, as being
immediately inspired by God, whose works are perfect, if it had been intended
by him to be our Rule of Faith, it ought to be. And I shall presume I have
already brought Conclusive Evidences both a priori and also a posteriori in my
answer to his 10th Principle to evince that it has not in it the nature of such
a Rule, nor consequently was it intended by God to be such a Rule. How
incomparably excellent soever it be for other Ends for which it was indeed and
solely intended. But omitting all the rest at present, I remind him of one
(which I cannot too often repeat) and enforce it upon him thus. He cannot deny
but the Points of a Trinity, and Christ's Godhead are most Fundamental Points of
Faith, he cannot deny but both Protestants and Socinians rely on the Letter of
Scripture for the sole Rule of their Faith, and sincerely endeavor to know the
meaning of them, which is all he requires on the Persons side: He cannot deny
but that, notwithstanding this, one party holds There is no Trinity, and that
Christ is not God, the other that there is a Trinity, and that Christ is God,
and so one side erres most Fundamentally: He cannot deny but, Error being a
Defect, there must be a fault somewhere to beget this Error, that is, either in
the Persons judging of what the Rule of Faith tells them, or else in judging
that to be a Rule which is not the Rule; for in case they err in neither of
these, it is impossible they should err or misconceive at all in matters of
Faith. He cannot deny in any reason, but the persons on both sides being such
acute men and excellently well versed in the Letter of Scripture have both
Capacity enough, and apply that Capacity to their power by as great a Diligence
as any; nor can he in Charity deny but they sincerely endeavor to know the
meaning of it in such points. Therefore he cannot deny but the persons
attending to the Rule are faultless either in understanding Scripture in these
points, if it be to private Understandings clearly intelligible, or Will to
understand it if they could; and indeed it is Incredible they should not will or
desire this, since they use such exact diligence in it, and solemnly profess to
rely on the Letter alone, or that did they indeed slight the Letter or
purposely decline relying on it, their bias should not manifestly appear in so
long time, and they be branded for Evident Insincerity: He cannot deny then but
the Persons are faultless as to their Capacity and Will to understand the Rule;
therefore, unless he will renounce his Reason, he cannot deny but the Fault
must be in the same Persons, judging that to be the Rule, which is not; and
consequently that the Letter of Scripture is not alone and of it self clear and
Intelligible enough to preserve private men, both capable and diligent and
relying solely on It from possibility of Error, no not from actually Erring in
most Fundamental Points of Faith, nor consequently has it in it the true nature
of the Rule of Faith, and so, since God never intends any thing should do what
its Nature reaches not to do, that is should do what it cannot do, it is
manifest Scriptures Letter was never intended by God for that End, or to be
such a Rule.

13. Although we cannot argue against any particular way of Revelation from the
necessary Attributes of God, yet such away as writing being made choce of by
him, we may justly say, that it is repugnant to the nature of the design, and
the Wisdom and Goodness ^f God, to give infallible assurance to persons in
writing his Will, for the benefit of Mankind, if those Writings may not be
understood by all persons who sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them
in all such things as are necessary for their salvation.

It is not yet proved, nor ever will, that God has made choice of the Way of
writing for a Rule of Faith, nor designed it for that end, nor that the benefit
he meant Mankind by such Writings was to Ground their Faith on what appeared to
their private Judgments to be the sense of the Letter; therefore it is no wonder
if all persons stould hap to misunderstand it even in such things as are
necessary for their salvation, notwithstanding their sincere endeavor to know
the meaning of them, since God has never promised that any who takes a way
never intended by him for such an End, shall infallibly arrive at that End by
such a Way; nor is the Wisdom and Godness of God at all concerned in
preserving any from Error if they take such a Way, especially if we reflect
upon these following Considerations.

First, That God has no where engaged his word to secure every single or
private man from Error who shall sincerely endeavor to find his Faith in the
Scripture, in case he rely on his own private Judgment and neglect to hear his
Pastors: whence if such private persons rely on Gods promised Assistance to
such an End, they rely on what neither is, nor ever was, and so no wonder their
hopes fail them, if those Hopes be groundless.

Secondly, They cannot but know, if but meanly versed in the world; that whole
Bodies of men, and amongst them diverse of great learning, interpret Scripture
several ways in very concerning points of Faith, and it must needs favor of a
proud self-conceit in any person to think God regards his single self more than
he does whole Bodies and Great Multitudes.

Again, it cannot without a strange Unreasonableness and Uncharitableness be
imagined or judged that not one person of those many who adhere to the opposite
Tenet as clear to them in Scripture according to their best Judgment, does
sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of these Sacred Books; and, if they do,
then Common sense tells this private person that the whole Foundation on which
his Hope is built, is unsound; and that more is requisite than the Letter of
Scripture and a sincere endeavor to understand it; and that if these suffice
to direct him right, they ought for the same reason be sufficient to direct
another; and so he ought to doubt whether himself or those others proceeding on
the same Grounds and having the same Means, be in the right, that is, he ought
to doubt of his Faith no better grounded.

Lastly, This private man belongs to some particular Church, and so has Pastors
and Governors set over him to teach and instruct him, and those too (as we will
suppose) read and rely on the Scriptures; Also, he must judge this Church
sincerely endeavors to know the meaning of Scriptures; for this being the
requisite condition to find right Faith, without this his Church has no right
Faith, and so is no Church: now for a private man who is subject to such a
Church, and ought to be taught by the Pastors of that Church, not to submit to
the Judgment of that Church and his Lawful Pastors, as to the Sense of
Scriptures or his Faith, even though they be sincere endeavors as well as he,
but to adhere to that for his Faith which appears to his private self to be in
the Scriptures, though he contradict and defy all the Church he his a member of
in so doing (which he ought to do, if he proceed on this Principle that
Scriptures may be understood by all persons who sincerely endeavor to know the
meaning of them in all things necessary for his salvatiou, for he ought not for
any man's sake relinquish his Faith or its Rule.) I say, to behave himself thus,
as in that supposition he ought, is such an intolerable, ma apert Presumption,
so Senseless and Unnatural and Self-condemning a Rebellion, and such a Fanatic
Spiritual Pride, as I much doubt will give a man but small title to hope for
Especial Assistance from Gods Wisdom and Goodness,

At present I only remarke the Faults of this Principle which are these.
First, That it supposes God has made choice of, or designd the Scriptures to be
this Rule of Faith for private persons. Next, that Gods Wisdom and Goodness is
Engaged that it be thus Intelligible to every sin^ere Eadeavourer! Neither of
which is in the least proved or proveable. Lastly, when he comes to the close;
instead of making it so intelligible as that all sincere Endeavors might thereby
be absolutely secured from erring as to the Truth of their Faith, (which is the
Duty of the Rule of Faith) seeing very well these slight Grounds were not able
to carry so far, he substitutes in their room these waty words [ in all such
things as shall be necessary for their salvation] so that though they err in
all the main points of Christianity, yet for any thing we know, or these crafty
common words inform us, they have still all that is needful to save them, that
is though they go wrong all their lives they are still all the while in the way
to Heaven. But, I suppose Dr. St. means that no more is necessary for any ones
salvation than just as much as he can understand in Scripture. Which I wish he
would once begin to set himself to prove and make out by some convincing
argument: I am heartily weary of speaking still to his unprov'd and voluntary
Assertions.

14. To suppose the Books so written to be imperfect, i. e. that any things
necessary to be believed, or practiced are not contained in them, is either to
charge the first Author of them with fraud, and not delivering his whole mind,
or the Writers with Insincerity in not setting it down, and the whole Christian
Church of the first Ages with folly, in believing the Fullness and Perfection of
the Scriptures in order to salvation.

As far as I apprehend, the foregoing Principle was intended to show that
Scripture was sufficirntly Intelligible to be the Rule of Faith, and this under
examination is to prove it to be the measure of Faith as he calls it, Princ.
28. and all he contends here is that it CONTAINS all that is necessary TO BE
BELIEVED and practiced. And, that we may not multiply disputes, I grant those
Holy Books contain all he pretends, some way or other either Implicitly or
Explicitly; either in Expressed words, or by necessary con^equence. But, that
those Books contain, or signify (for they are the same) all that is to be
believed and practiced, so evidently that all persons who sincerely endeavor to
know their meaning, and this for all future Ages, may thence alone (as his
discourse aims to evince) that is, without the Churches interpretation, arrive
to know what is necessary for their salvation, with such a Certainty as is
requisite for the Nature and Ends of Faith, and the Obligations annexed to it, I
absolutely deny, and if he means this by the word [ Perfection] which he adds
to [ Fulness] I deny also that either the first Author can be charged with
Fraud, since he promised no such thing; or the Writers with Insincerity, since
they were not commanded, nor did intend thus to express it; nor, as far as
appears, had any order from God to set down his whole mind, but only writ the
several pieces of it occasionally: nor did the Christian Church in the first
Ages, ever attribute to Scriptures such an Intelligibleness as that private
persons should ground their Faith upon their Evidence without needing the
Churches Interpretation, if we speak of all points necessary to Mankinds
salvation, as he seems and ought to do. And here I desire to enter this
declaration to all the world, that I attribute not the least Imperfection to
the Holy Scriptures; Every thing has all the Perfection it ought to have, if it
can do what it was intended to do, and in the manner it was Intended. Treatises
of deep Philosophy are not Imperfect, if they be not as plain, as plainest
Narrative Histories; no not if they be ita editi ut non sint editi, in case
they were meant as a matter for the Author to explain and dilate upon to his
Scholars; nor are the Laws Imperfect, though they often need Learned Judges to
interpret them. Nor are we to expect that the Prophecy of Isaiah should be as
plain as the Law of Moses. The Immediate End of writing each piece, as far as
appears to us, was occasional, St. Paul's Epistles were evidently so; nor can I
doubt but they were perfect in their kind, and apt to signify competently to
those to whom he writ what he intended; so that, if they had any farther doubt,
they might send to ask him, or do it viva voce; and yet we see that even in
those days when the complexion of all the Circumstances was fresher and nearer
then now, some unlearned persons erred damnably in mistaking and misconceiving
them, that is, while they went about to frame their Faith out of them; It Is
questionless also they relied upon them as Gods Word, or dictated by the Holy
Ghost, else they had not so built upon them, or adhered to them. They might
sincerely endeavor too to know their meaning; yet, if the Writings were
disproportioned to their pitch they migh Err damnably for all that. What
farther End God intended the H. Scriptures for, appears not by any Express
either promise or declaration of our Savior; but out of the knowledge that
they were writ by persons divinely inspired and the Experience the Church had
of their Usefulness toward Instruction and Good Life, joined with the Common
Knowledge we have that all Goods that come to the Church, happen through the
ordering of Gods Providence, hence we justly conclude (as Dr. St. well says)
that they were intended and writ also for the Benefit of future Ages. And from
their Usefulness and the success of their Use, we may gather how God intended
them for the Church. The Learned and stable sons of the Church read them with
much fruit to excite their wills to Goodness. The Pastore of the Church make
excellent use of them in exhorting, preaching, catchising, etc. and in many
other uses of this sort they are excellently beneficial, which are so many that
were it now seasonable for me to lay them open at large as I truly hold them,
none would think I had little Reverence for Scriptures; but in deciding
Controversies, or finally silencing Heretics, as the Rule of Faith ought to
do, by the unavoidable evidence of the Text to private persons no use was ever
made of them (alone) with any success as the Fathers also complain; Unless the
the Churches Authority, going along, animated the dead Letter in dogmatical
passages, and showed the sense of the places to have been perpetually held from
the beginning, and so give It the Sense, Majesty Authority and Force of Gods
Word, elevating it thus above the repute of being some private Conceit or
Production of Skill and Wit interpreting the Letter. Scripture then is perfect,
or has all due to the nature God intended it; if, duly made use of as the
Churches best Instrument, it be able to work those Effect^ spoken of, though it
be not so Evident or self-authoriz'd as to be the Rule of Faith. We give it
absolute Pre-eminence in its kind, that is, above all other Writings that ever
appeared in the world; but we prefer before it Tradition or Gods Church, which
is the Spouse of Christ, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, and consisting of the
Living Temples of the H. Ghost, for whose sole Good, as its Final End,
Scripture it self was intended and written.

15. These Writings being owned as containing in them the whole Will of God so
plainly revealed, that no sober enquirer can miss of what is necessary for
salvation; there can be no necessity supposed of any Infallible society of men
either to attest or explain these Writings among Christians, any more than
there was for some Ages before Christ of such a Body of men among the Jews, to
attest or explain to them the VVritings of Moses or the Prophets.

He that owns this, must own it without reason for any thing appears yet; for
Dr. St. has afforded us hitherto nothing to prove this point but a few words
craftily laid together, which, when looked into, have not a jot of reason in
them. And the like empty inside we find in this present Principle. For, if the
whole will of God be plainly revealed in Scripture, then in case nothing else
be requisite to understand Gods will but the disposition of soberly enquiring
(as he puts no other) it must follow that no sober Enquirer can miss of knowing
there the whole will of God; and since every Article of Faith is part of Gods
Will, it would follow hence that every sober Enquirer may understand all Faith
in Scripture, which yet the Dr. is not disposed to say; as appears by his
avoiding to put down what the tenor of his discourse required, namely, that
the whole will of God is so plainly revealed in Scripture that no sober
Enquirer can miss [of knowing his whole will there;] and instead of it
substituting, that the whole will of God is so plainly revealed in Scripture,
that, no sober Inquirer can miss of [what is necessary for salvation] which
words may be true though they fall far short of knowing the whole will of God
by that means.

Next, it is very material, and it would be very requisi^e to know how a man
must be qualified to be a sober Enquirer. In order to which, we may reflect
that (as was said before) it ought in reason be judged Gods will that we should
know whether Christ be God, and whether his Body (and consequently Himself) be
really in the Sacrament; lest we either want the best Incitements to Devotion
if he be, and we judge he is not; or else commit material Idolatry by judging
him to be so, when he is not so. Now I would have him clearly show ( clearly, I
say, for all depends upon it, according to his Grounds) in what either the
Roman- Catholics or the Socinians fall short in point of being sober
enquirers; for it is plain they must both fall short of being such if the whole
will of God be clearly revealed in Scripture, since the former holds Christ is
really in the Sacrament; the other, that he is not God, the contrary to both
which I suppose Dr. St. holds to be the true sense of Scripture.

Farther, if there can be no necessity of any Infallible society of men either
to attest or explain those Writings, it is Evident there can be no need of a
Fallible society of men for those Ends. For if Writings which are attested or
explained by a Fallible Society of men be the Rule of Faith, or the Grounds God
has left us to build our Faith on, and it be evident that a Fallible
Attestation or Explication may possibly lead us into nothing but Error, it
would follow that God himself may possibly have led all Christians hitherto and
still leads them to the end of the world into actual Error; since a reliance
on Fallible means of knowing the Letter and Sense cannot possibly raise any
Assent beyond possibility of being Erroneous. There needs therefore by Dr. St's
discourse neither Infallible nor Fallible Societies; and so according to his
Principles, farewell all Church, both Catholic and Protestant, as far as
concerns these two main Duties, on which all else depends.

Again, though all this were true, and that the Scriptures were owned as
containing in them the whole Will of God so plainly revealed that no sober
Enquirer can miss of what is necessary to salvation, and that therefore there
needed no Church to explain them. Yet it is a strange Consequence that therefore
there can be no necessity of any Infallible society of men to ATTEST, them, or
to witness that the Letter of Scripture is right. This is so far from following
out of the former part of his Disc^^^se that the contrary ought to follow;
(...) prejudicing his own pretense, that (...)conduces exceedingly to it; for,
certain^y, his sober Enquirer would less be in doubt to miss of what is
necessary to salvation in case the Letter, on which all depends be well
attested, than if it be not, and most certainly an Infallible society of men
can better attest that Letter than a Fallible one, and those Writings can with
better show of reason be owned to contain in them the Will of God, if their
Letter be attested beyond possibility of being wrong, than if left in a
possibility of being such; for if the Letter be wrong, all is wrong in this
case. It might seem wonderful then what it is that thus byasses Dr. St. against
his own Interest; And I wish I had reason to think it were not a kind of Innate
Antipathy against not only our Church but Church in Common, and a desire to
attribute as little to it as he can possibly though he hazard some prejudice
to his own Cause and even all Christian Faith into the bargain. His whole way
of discourse here bends strongly toward the taking away all divine Institution
of Pastors (for this would oblige the people to hear them) and levelling all
into a Fanatic Anarc^y. I would gladly interpret him otherwise; and imagine
that perhaps he means that, since it is owned the Scriptures thus contain Gods
will, therefore there needs not be supposed any Infallible society of men
either to attest or explain them; but I cannot conceive he should think
Scriptures Letter must be owned to be right without some either Fallible or
Infallible Authority to attest it to be such; or that, however he may
sceptically dread no Authority can be Infallible, yet that he will deny but
that it were good there were such an Authority to attest Scriptures Letter, nay
needful too in case he heartily held that Christian Faith built (according to
his Grounds) solely on that Letter may not possibly all be a Ly; which common
sense tells us, it may be, in case we may all be deceived in the Truth of the
Letter.

Lastly, That for some Ages before Christ there was no Necessity of such a Body
of men among the Jews to attest or explain to them the VVritings of Moses and
the Prophets, is first not proved, and yet Dr. St. builds upon it as
confidently as if it were evidently concluded, or else Self-evident. Next, what
mean those words [ for some Ages before Christ?] If the whole time of the
Mo^ai^al Law; then it is evidently false, since ( Deuteronomy. 17. v. 10, 11* etc.) God
commanded upon pain of death to do according as some persons he had appointed
for that end should explain the Writings belonging to that Law; and if these
men had not some way or other been secured from Error, God by commanding the
subject Laity under so heavy a penalty to act as they adjudg'd, had both led
them into actual Error, and punished them thus grievously in that case for
adhering to Truth; which are too horrid blasphemies to be heard or imagined.
But, if they mean only, for some time of that Law, or some Ages immediately
before Christ when the Synagogue was most corrupt, this implies a Confession
that such a Society was necessary in the Ages foregoing; and then Dr. St. is to
show us why it was not equally necessary in the later as in the former, and not
suppose it gratis. Nor was the Synagogue ever more corrupt than in our
Savior's days, and yet we see how severely he enjoins the Jews of that time to
obey the Scribes and Pharisees because they sat in Moses his Chair; which it
were blasphemy to say Christ could do, if he had not secured their Doctrine
from being Erroneous, that is, preserved them Inerrable in that Affair. Add,
that were all granted, yet there is far more necessity of explaining the
Scriptures now, than at that time: For the Law was in a manner all of it,
either matters of Fact to be done, or Moral Duties and so agreeable to nature;
whence both of these were far more easily expressible in proper language, and
consequently Intelligible, than the sublime, spiritual and mysterious Tenets of
the Law of Grace; which are more hard to be expressed in per words; and being
more removed from our knowledge, the natures of the Things are more hard to be
penetrated, and so those words more difficult to be rightly comprehended and
understood without an Interpreter, than were those other.

16. There can be no more intolerable usurpation upon the Faith of Christians
than for any person or society of men to pretend to an Assistance as Infallible
in what they propose as was in Christ or his Apostles without giving an equal
degree of Evidence that they are so assisted as Christ and his Apostles did;
viz. by miracles as great public and convincing as theirs were; by which I
mean such as are wrought by those very persons who challenge this
Infallibility, and with a design for the Conviction of those who do not believe
it.

Thus the Dr. makes sure work against the Infallibility of any Church; which
overthrown, his single self nay any private man or woman that has but
self-conceit and confidence enough to proceed openly upon these Principles of
his, is upon even ground with the best nay all the Churches in the World at the
main point of understanding and determining what is Faith, what not: Nay more,
may defy all the Governors of all Churches in the World, if he or she be but
conscious to themselves that they sincerely endeavor and soberly enquire for
the true meaning of the divine writings; for these being their Rule of Faith,
and being assu^ed by Dr. St. that they cannot miss, if they soberly enquire, of
what is necessary for salvation, and being informed by common Reason that it is
a point very necessary to the salvation of a Christian, or one who is to follow
and adore Christ, to know whether he be God, and so may without fear of
Idolatry have Divine Honor given him or no; these things being so, in case it
should seem to the best judgment of such a man (and let him be, for example,
one brought up in the Church of England and newly turned Socinian) that Christ
is not God, he ought not to relinquish his Rule of Faith at any rate, nor what
he judges the Scriptures sense of it (this being his Faith) but maintain it
boldly against all his Pastors; talk, and quote Scripture as briskly as the
best of them all; desy them to their faces, nay, dye in defense of his
interpretation of it, and be a special Martyr though he take his death upon it,
that all his lawful Pastors and the whole Church of which he is a member, are
most hainons Idolaters for giving the worship proper to God, to a man. In this
case it is plain, the Church cannot pretend to oblige him to believe her
interpretation of Scriptu^e; Alas! all such power is quite taken out of her
hands by these new principles; not to act exteriourly as she does; for that
were to oblige him to deny his Faith in his Actions and carriage, and this in
so heinous a point as committing flat Idolatry, and which his Rule of Faith
tells him is such. Nor to acquiesce so far as to hold his tongue and not
contradict the Church; for it is both ingratitude to God who has so plainly
revealed it to him in Scripture, not to stand up for his honor so wickedly
violated by the Church; and withal most uncharitable to his neighbor not to
communicate to him the light he has received by such plain Revelation from
God's word, and to endeavor his reducement from so grievous an Idolatry,
especially if this man be a Minister of the Church of England, whose Office and
Duty it is to hold forth or preach what he judges God's word: Nay, though it
were a Layman or a Lay-woman, all is a case; why may they not with as much
reason make known so concerning a truth plainly revealed to them, as Aquila and
Priscilla did of old. As for all power of the Church to restrain them that is
quite thrown out of doors. Humane commands can have no force when the best
duties to God and man are neglected by obeying; and the more the Church is
obstinate and opposes this private man or woman, by so much greater is the
necessity of his (or her) informing the Church right, and standing up for the
Truth.

Hereafter more of this: at present let us see how he destroys infallibility
in the Church, which is his chief design, and indeed it makes very much for his
purpose; for I so far concur with him, that if it be but fallible in attesting
or explaining Scripture, it is little available to the grounding Christian
Faith, so that if infallibility be but overthrown and these Principles settled
in its stead, every private man is a Church; which (our corrupt nature loving
liberty) will no doubt be very taking, and please the rabble exceedingly. He is
so earnest at his work that he stumbles for have. For, first, who did ever
pretend to an infallibility equal to what was in Christ or his Apostles, as his
words import? Christ was essentially infallible; the Apostles by Immediate
Inspiration from God: The Church pretends indeed to be infallibly assisted, but
that she pretends to have it either essentially as God has it, or by way of
immediate inspiration, as the Apostles had it, is a thing I never yet learnt.
It Is enough to justify her constant claim of infallible assistance, that she
have it mediately, or by means of the ordinary working of natural and
supernatural causes, so she but have it. And to have it this way seems far
more agreeable to reason than the other of immediate inspiration, as to have by
way of immediate inspiration was far more fitting for the Apostles; For neither
was it in their days accepted by a great portion of the world that Christ was
God, or his Doctrine truth, that so they might receive it transmitted from the
foregoing divinely assisted Church, that these and these doctrines were His,
but they were the First that were to propagate this doctrine; and publish and
make out the Truth of it: not could their own testimony avail to the end
in^ended; for what could they testify? That Christ said thus, and did such and
such miracles to testify the truth of his doctrine, or that the H. Ghost
inspired them? The latter was latent, and the hearers had but their own words
for it; the other was patent indeed, and so fully Convictive to those who knew
and conversed with them, and were acquainted with the Circumstances, but to
remote nations, whither two or three of them were to go and Preach, it
signified little, and depended upon their bare words. Hence Miracles were at
first (and shall till the end of the world in like cases be) absolutely
necessary, to make such unheard of Tenets enter and sink into the hearts of
great multitudes how circumstanc't soever. But, when afterward a World, or
vast Body of men were by those Extraordinary Means settled unanimously in a
firm belief that Christ was God, or at least that his doctrine was true, there
could need no more but to know it was continued down all along the same, to
make deserters of his Church (against whom we dispute at present) accept it;
and it being visible, audible and practical, and so subject to sense; hence
Attestation of the foregoing Age to the Age succeeding was the most Proper way
to continue it down; and perfectly Certain, being now grown so Ample and Vast;
and the Attesters being Intelligent Persons, and having the sense of Christ's
Law written in their heart, could deliver and explain themselves pertinently to
all arising difficulties, and clear all possible misunderstandings, which the
dead Letter could not; and so this Living rule is perfectly Intelligible too. I
omit here the Supernatural assistances, which those who comprehend what most
effectual means of Sanctity there is in the Doctrine, Sacraments, and
Discipline of the Church, and consequently (as appears by diverse excellent
effects of it) the Product also of those means, or Holiness in great multitudes
of the Faithful, will see and acknowledge, do incomparably strengthen the
Authority of the Church, in delivering down right Faith.

Hence appears our D^s. unreasonableness intimated to us in this principle:
That though Connatural and Ordinary means be now laid in the world to continue
Christ's doctrine from ou^ time forwards, and were laid in the first Age to
continue it along hitherto: Though Common Reason and (as I remember) St. Austin
have taught him that, into the place of Miracles succeeded the consent of
Countries and Nations; though Mr. Baxter, whom perhaps he holds as Holy a
Father, as great a Saint, and as eminent a Scholar as St. Austin himself, have
told him in his More Reasons for the Christian Religion, etc. p. 32. That
humane testimony may be so circumstanc't as amounts to a natural infallible
certainty, instancing in the existence of King James* and our Laws being made
by King and Parliament (which how Dr. T. his Scholar will like I know not) and
so the Churches infallibility in Faith to the end of the world might descend
down to us by testimony to have been the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles,
without needing New miracles done still to evince it: Nay, though himself in
correspondency to both these Doctors, does in his Rational account p. 205. make
Tradition of the same use to us now which our Eyes and Ears had been, if we had
been actually present when Christ delivered his Doctrine and wrought his
miracles, and so could as well certify us of the first taught doctrine, as if
we had seen and heard it, and consequently of the Infallibility of the Church
in case that were a point of Doctrine taught at first; yet now, one of his
principles must be, that no Argument though never so strong and convictive, no
Tradition how well qualified soever it be, nor any Plea in the world though
never so legal and evident, shall acquit the Church from a most intolerable
Usurpation if she challenge Infallibility, but down right Miracles, full as
great (observe his ^igour) public and convincing as were those of Christ and
his Apostles, and wrought by those very persons that challenge this
infallibility, nay, and wrought with a design too for the conviction of those
who do not believe it. How shrewdly sure this Rome^destroying Principle is
laid! But if one should ask seriously whether a Convincing reason to prove this
infallibility, I mean such a one as evidently concluded the point, might not do
without a miracle, I know no rational man that ever would deny his assent upon
such a condition; nor would Dr. St. perhaps in another occasion; but here, oh
here it is another case! His hatred against the Church of Rome's Infallibility
is so vigorous that he professes to desy Demonstration it self, that is,
renounce Humane Nature rather than admit it; nothing but Miracle with all the
nice cautions imaginable shall serve the turn. A notable resolution, and only
parallel to his whom nothing would satisfy of the truth of Christianity, but
the miraculous appearance of his Angel Guardian: but the Miracle not being
granted him, he died an Atheist.

In a word, if the Church ever usurpt't the pretense of Infallibility, I hope
she first invaded it at one time or other: Now, since as long ago as St. Paul's
time she we was called by that good man Columna and Firmamentum veritatis, The
Pillar and Ground of Truth; which words ill consist with a Fallible proposer of
such truths as belong to her sphere o^ points of Faith, he ought to show and
make out when the Church lost that Title and pre-eminence; otherwise, since she
is found claiming it now, and actually holding and possessing it upon the
tenure of Tradition as promised her by Christ, we have very good reason to
hold, she never usurped it at all, but inherited it by a continued line of
Succession from the beginning of Christianity to this very day: Nor has it ever
seemed Intolerable to any but to those whom nothing would content but new
fangled Innovation, and altering the long-establish'd doctrine of Christ,
deliverd down perpetually from his time.

17. Nothing can be more absurd then to pretend the necessity of such an
infallible Commission and Assistance to assure us of the truth of these
writings, and to interpret them, and at the same time to prove that Commission
from those writings from which we are told nothing can be certainly deduced
such an assurance not being supposed; or to pretend that infallibility in a
Body of men is not at liable to doubts and disputes as in those books from
whence only they derive their Infalliblity.

The first part of this Principle is granted as to the Absurdity of the
Position, abating the Degree of it; for, I take it to be equally or more absurd
not to assent to the Infallibilty of a great body of men (which is all that is
pretended) whatever Reason or Tradition appear for it, without an evident
Miracle. The second part is likewise granted, in case it suppose (as it seems
to do) the knowledge of their Infallibility derived only from those very books
which they recommend, and in passages which they are to explicate, ere they can
be sure of such an infallibility. Otherwise, it is possible a book; obscure in
multitudes of other passages may be clear in that one which relates them to the
Church or that body which they are to hear and obey as to the proper
interpreters of the Scriptures in Dogmatical and controverted passages which
belong to Faith. But the Dr. should do well to show us any society of men or
Church, that pretends to build her Infallibility only on the Scriptures
interpreted by that very Infallibility. Otherwise it will not touch our Church
who claims the Supernatural assistance of the Holy Ghost upon her Rule of
Faith, Tradition: and, as for her being naturally supported from error in
attesting former doctrines it is grounded by those who discourse of that point
upon Humane nature as to its infallible Sensations and on its Rationality,
which renders it incapable to do any thing without a motive, as they must do,
should they transmit a not-deliver'd, that is, an evidently-new doctrine for an
old or delivered one.

18. There can be no hazard to any person in mistaking the meaning of any
particular place in those books, supposing he use the best means for
understanding them comparable to that which every one runs who believes any
person or society of men to be infallible who are not; for in this later he
runs unavoidably into one great error, and by that may be led into a thousand;
but in the former God has promised either he shall not err, or he shall not
be damned for it.

This whole Paragraph is built on a false and unprov'd supposition, viz. that
any Adversary of his believes any society of men to be Infallible which is not.
Other faults there are in it, and that good store; as, granting in effect here
what he lately denied, that a man using the best means for understanding
Scripture may mistake the meaning of any particular place, though not with a
hazard incomparable to that of the other: whereas, if Scripture be the Rule of
Faith as he contended, it is impossible that a man relying and proceeding upon
it, and using that means in the best manner he can possibly, should come to
err in his Faith; for in this case the man having done all that can be done by
him as to the understanding the Rule, the fault must needs be in his judging
that to be a Rule which is none.

But this main and fundamental error is coucht in the last words; [ in the
former, God has promised he shall not err, or shall not be damned for it,
what mean [ in the former case, etc.] This certainly and nothing but this, if
we may trust his own words; in mistaking the meaning of any particular place in
th^se books supposing he use the best means for understanding them: Now it is a
strange thing to me, that God should promise that a man mistaking the meaning
of these books should not err in so doing: But omitting this slip of Dr. St's.
Reason or memory; I ask what means this disjunctive promise, either of not
erring or not being damned for it? Why it means that Dr. St. knows not well
himself what to say to the point, or whether he should stand to it or no, that
a man using the best means for understanding Scripture, that is, according to
him, the best means lest by God for him to arrive at Faith, should not err,
and therefore he warily subjoined [ or he shall not be damned for it] and then
he thinks himself secure enough from confute; it being a hard thing to conclude
of any particular well^ meaning man when he is damned, when not; whereas it
might perhaps be no such hard matter to prove whether what he held was true or
not.

I could ask him whence or how he comes to this assurance of God's disjunctive
promise here so confidently asserted, on the truth of which the salvation of so
many souls necessarily depends? Not by Tradition: For this would make him rely
on a society of men, or a Church, which he hates with all his heart; not by
Scripture, for this would make the same thing be the proof to it self: not by
Reason, for we are to suppose he has done his best in that already, and yet (as
is shown) has effected nothing. But I would demand of him seriously; did God
ever promise that if one takes such a way as (for want of a due
intelligibleness in proportion to his capacity) is not able to secure him from
error, he shall not err, or that if he will needs be wiser than his Pastors
and choose a Means for such an end which God never intended for that end, he
shall yet be sure to arrive at that end by that means; or that, if by relying
on it and erring, he shall happen to fall short of sufficient means, he shall
notwithstanding miraculously be saved without sufficient means? These are the
points he is to consider well, and speak to, and not thus confidently call
every thing a Principle which he thinks fit to say on his own head, though
never so extravagant. In a word, let him prove Scripture to have in it the
nature of a Rule of Faith, or (which will fall into the same) to have been
intended by God for that end, that is, to be of it self such to people of all
capacities that soberly enquire, as secures them from erring in Faith while
they rely on it, and this of it self without needing any society of Men, or
Church to attest or explain it, and then I shall yield his discourse to run as
currently as his own heart can wish: but in proving this, he hitherto has and
ever must fall short most miserably.

He has often, as I noted formerly, instead of saying his Rule of Faith should
preserve those who endeavor to follow it from error or from missing of truth,
substituted those words, cannot miss of what is necessary for their salvation,
and such like: The examination of which words I have reserved till now; and,
that I may do him all right imaginable, I will press his Argument (or rather
indeed bare saying) in behalf of Scripture as far as my reason can carry it.
None can deny but that the knowledge of a very few points are sufficient for
well-meaning particular persons, as appears by the Iewe^ that were saved, and
many silly and weak Christians since; nor can it be denied but every one that
reads Scripture or hears it read by one they dare trust, may understand some
few good things, to which if they live up heartily (and if they do not it is
their own fault) they shall be sure to be saved: And as for such points as a
Trinity, Christ's Godhead, Real Presence, and such like, the knowledge of them
(even in case they are truths) is not of necessity to salvation, since none
doubts but it is, absolutely speaking, possible to be saved without knowledge of
them since many have been actually saved who never heard of any such points.

Having impartially said in short the best I could in Dr. Sts. behalf, and much
more than he has said for himself; let us see now what ought to be replied in
behalf of Truth. To make way to it, I premise these Maxims. 1. That according
to the Ordinary course of God's Providence, men are saved by means. 2. That All
points of Faith, are to some degree Means of salvation. 3. That according to
the several Circumstances and Exigencies of particular persons, one needs more
Means than another. 4. That, therefore, it must be said some have miscarried
because they had no more of those means of salvation applied to them, who might
yet have been saved had they had more. This being so, how great a presumption
and madness it is to affirm that every man who reads the Scripture shall be
sure to understand there so much as is sufficient means for His salvation; or
motives to work up his soul to a disposition for Heaven, considering his
Exigencies, without needing the knowledge of other Points which contain other
Motives ten times more forcible perhaps to move and excite him to true interior
goodness? Is it not manifest, that (considering men's several capacities, which
it is a perfect Phrenzy to think they must needs be perfectly adjusted to their
spiritual necessities) one may as well say that every one who throws a Die upon
a Fortune book shall most certainly light on his own Lot, as that every one who
reads Scripture shall, let his exigencies be what they will, find motives
sufficient for his salvation? If Dr. St. says that some one or two Points have
proved sufficient for some few, therefore they might have served All if they
would, and that God's goodness toward Christians obliges him to no more; I
reply, First, That he speaks against nature, since it is evident some temptations
require greater Motives to overcome them than others, and no man can assure us,
that those who have fewest motives shall not have the strongest temptations.
And if it were but rightly comprehended that it is Love of God which unites us to
him, and so saves us, and that it is for want of this those miscarry, who do
miscarry, it would be easily understood that many excellent and incomparable
motives, as the Godhead of Christ and such like are lost to weak souls, and
consequently Heaven, by their not understanding them; and not only so, but by
the necessary connection of truths with one another, while they misunderstand
the Scripture, and so, by their holding opposite to such great truths oppose in
their thoughts other points of Faith, those also lose their motive force,
whence their souls become tainted with multitudes of erroneous Maxims and
Practices. Secondly, this answer takes away the necessity of all other points
of faith but of such a few of them only, which have hapt by the very especial
assistance of God's preventing and assisting grace to have accidentally (as it
were) sufficed to have saved some few.

If he says that, proceeding on this manner, none can hold an error; for they
are to hold nothing but what they see to be evidently there, and in all other
things which they see not they are to suspend. I would know what should hinder
them from thinking they see that to be evidently there, which is not evidently
there; since it is acknowledged the vulgar or Generality are but bad judges and
distinguishers of a true Evidence from a Counterfeit one; besides, there are in
the open Letter as it lies, many Heresies; and if they know these to be such,
how can they be sure of any thing they read there to be True, since nothing is
plainer in the letter than are those Heresies; unless it be said that natural
or moral Maxims taught them these places are to be literally understood, and
did not tell them so of the other; and then, they are beholding to those Maxims
and not to Scripture for their faith, since in that case It has taught them no
more than they knew before. Again, may not an acute wit make out to the
generality of D. Sts. Faithful, that to know the meaning of Scripture right,
they must compare one place with another; and then, by doing so dexterously,
make them believe a thousand Errors to be pure Scripture, and God's Word,
which are not. Much more might be said on this occasion; but I only make one
reflection on this Principle, and so proceed.

His intent in it is to show which Party runs greater hazard. The Adherers to
Scripture used on his fashion, or those who hear the Church; and he would run
us down by virtue of an unprov'd Supposition, that the Church is not
Infallible. To offer him fair play, let us grant him all the advantages he
pretends to in Scripture, and let him grant us all we pretend to secure us, in
the Church, and then compare the two hazards together; nay more, let us
condescend as much as himself can imagine, even so as to abate the
Infallibility of the Church, and to grant that she is Fallible; and yet the
very light of Nature will stand on the side of our Faithful against his. For,
this teaching them that Superiors are to be obeyed, and their Teachers to be
heard and believed in things not known to be against God's Command, and
experience telling them that Scripture is often times liable to dispute in
passages that to both sides seem clear; both Humility, Prudence, Obedience, and
the due care of their Salvation and all Virtues that can be concerned in this
kind of action, incline them strongly rather to adhere to what Persons wiser
then themselves, or their Pastors conceive to be the meaning of Scripture, than
to what seems so to themselves, in opposition to the same Pastors and
Multitudes of other Christians, who are evidently of greater knowledge, and, as
far as they can be informed, of equal sincerity.

19. The Assistance which God has promis't to those who sincerely desire to
know his will, may give them greater assurance of the Truth of what is
contained in the Books of Scripture, than it is possible for the greatest
Infallibility in any other Persons to do, supposing they have not such
assurance of their Infallibility,

God has promis't no Assistance that those should arrive at their end who take
a way disproportioned to that end; otherwise God should oblige himself to work
constant Miracles as often as well-meaning people out of weakness should act
imprudently. Next, if men desire sincerely to know Gods will and be humble (and
if they be not it is doubtful their desire is not sincere as is ought) they
will, as God's command, the Order of the World, and common Reason obliges them,
be rather willing to trust their Pastors who are better qualified for such
Knowledge, and whom God has set over them to instruct them, what is the sense
of Scriptures, than trust their own private shallow judgments. And, it is
observable that Dr. St's. discourse all along concerning this point, is a plain
begging the Question; For, if God have left a Church and commanded the
Faithful to hear it, and conform to it is Faith, and consequently to receive
the sense of Scripture as to Points of Faith from it, then there is no
necessity of Scripture's being intended to be plain to all Capacities of it
self, nor of thinking men may sincerely desire to know God's will in
Scriptures, and use due means to understand it, without making use of the
Churches Judgment in that affair; upon which false supposition Dr. St. wholly
builds his otherwise perfectly ruinous discourse; Wherefore, his supposition
being denied, I must reply, that those who sincerely desire, to know Gods wisl,
have a certain virtue in them called Humility; and this teaches them not to
overween in their own opinion, but to think that their Pastors appointed by God
to teach them are generally wiser then those who are to be taught, and that
those who are wiser know better than those who are less wise. A little of this
plain, honest, rational Humility would quite spoil all Dr. St's discourse, and
convince all his Principles to be a plausible piece of Sedition and licentious
presumption, tending of its own nature utterly to destroy all Church and
Church Government; and, if applied to that Subject, Temporal too.

I should be glad to know what means the word [ such] in the last line; if he
means Infallible, and that the Church pretending to Infallibility must have
Infallible Assurance that she is Infallible, it is asserted by us; and his
supposition that she is not, is absolutely denied: For the Church is Infallibly
certain that Christ's promise to her shall not fail; and also Infallibly
certain by constant Tradition and the belief of good Christians in all Ages
that Christ has promised her this Security or Immunity from Error in Faith,
none questioning it but those who have rebel'd and revolted from her.

In a word, this whole Principle is Faulty, being built on a False and unprov'd
Supposition; and were the Supposition granted, and that the Church were
Fallible, still it were false, that his Faithful would have greater Assurance
of their Faith than ours, as has been partly now shown, and more amply in my
Reply to the foregoing Principle.

Recapitulation.
The Sum then of Dr. St's Performances in these ten Principles of his, which
most Fundamentally concern his Faith, and the pretended Reduction of it to
Principles, is briefly this; that he has not brought so much as one single
Argument proving either that Scripture's Letter is the Rule of Faith, nor that
Tradition or the Infallible Testimony of Gods Church is not it. And as for the
particular Maxims or Sayings of his, on which he chiefly relies, they have been
one by one disproved, and the opposite Truths established; As,

1. That Faith being such an Assent, as when built (as it ought to be) on the
means left by God for mankind to rely ou, is impossible to be False, and so
that Means or the Rule of Faith being necessarily such as while men rely upon,
it is impossible they should err; These things, I say, being so (as I have
largely proved in Faith Vindicated, and the Introductory Discourse to this
present Examine) Dr. St. has not so much as made an offer or attempt, to show
that Scripture is the Rule of Faith.

2. That since it is agreed God can contrive Writings sufficiently Intelligible
for that End, or sufficiently clear to ascertain those who rely upon them of
their Faith, and yet, on the other side, it is evident God has not de facto done
this, or contrived such Methods and ways as our Reason tells us evidently, are
proper means to keep those Writings called the Scriptures from being thus
mis-understood by several Parties, even in Fundamental Points, as we
experience they are it follows hence most manifestly that God never intended
the way of writing for the Rule of Faith.

3. Since several Parties of excellent capacities in understanding words
aright, and both owning Scripture for their Rule, and applying themselves with
greatest diligence to know the true sense of it, do notwithstanding differ in
those Fundamental Points of a Trinity and the Godhead of Christ; it is manifest
that Scripture is not able so secure those who rely on it to their power of the
Truth of their Faith, and so is not the Rule of Faith.

4. Again, since in passages that concern Faith the knowing whether the words
be taken properly or improperly is that which determines what is Faith, what
not; and this knowledge is not had from Scripture, it follows, that Scripture
is not the Rule of Faith.

5. God has no where promised that he will still assist those who sincerely
endeavor to compass an end, in case they take a way disproportioned to attain
that end; and which way was (consequently) never intended by him for such an
end: for this were to engage himself to do perpetual Miracles, when ever any
one should act irrationally. Wherefore, unless it be first solidly proved that
Scripture is the Rule of Faith, or apt of its own nature to give those who rely
on it Inerrable security of the Truth of their Faith while they thus rely on
it, and consequently that it was intended by God for such an end, none can
justly lay claim to God's assistance, or tax his Justice or Veracity if they
fall into Error; Much less, if they neglect those Duties which Nature makes
evident to them, and common Christianity teaches, viz. to obey and hear their
Governors, Pastors and Teachers ordained by God, and rely on their own private
Wit, or God's Immediate Assistance to their single selves rather than to those
Public Officers of the Church God had appointed to govern and direct them, for
this intolerable spiritual Pride is so odious and pernicious that it most
justly entitles them to delusion, Error, and Heresy.

6. Hence, since God has left some means for Faith, and it is Blasphemy to say
that those who rely according to their utmost power on the means left and
Intended by God to lead Men into Truth, can, while they do so, run into Error;
which yet private understandings (as was seen) may, relying on the Written
Word; it follows (...) unavoidably that some other way is left (which is not
Writing) to secure the Relyers on it from Error in Faith, or to be to them the
Rule of Faith.

7. Scripture not being the Rule, and Christ's Doctrine being once settled and
accepted in the Christian part of the World, by means of Miracles, there needed
no more but to derive it down to future Ages; and, this Doctrine being
Practical, and, so, objected to to our Senses, Testimony was sufficient to do
it, so it were sufficiently qualified, that is, the best and on the best manner
supported that any ordinary means can be; such was the Testimony of the Church
(or Tradition) which, besides what is found in humane Testimony, has also the
whole body and joint force of supernatural motives to preserve the Testifiers
Attentive and Veracious.

Thus the Church or the Christian Society of Men being established Infallible
in delivering down Faith, needs not prove her Infallibility by Miracles; but
it is sufficient the Faithful believe that Christ promis't to protect her from
Error (and consequently to believe the An est of her Infallibility, or that
she is infallible) upon the same Rule they believe all their Faith and the
Scriptures too, viz. upon Tradition; and that her Controversiall Divines who
are to defend Faith, by way of Reason or Argument prove the Quid est of this
Infallibility or make out in what it consists or in what second Causes this
ordinary and constant Assistance is founded, and consequently prove it is force
by such Maxims as ground the Certainty of Humane Testimony, and (if the Reader
comprehends them) by the strange efficacy of supernatural motives also
conspiring to strengthen Nature as to that effect of rightly testifying the
Doctrine received and believed to be Christ's.

8. There is no Necessity then of proving this Infallibility merely by
Scripture interpreted by virtue of this Infallibility; Nor do the Faithful or
the Church commit a Circle in believing that the Church is Infallible upon
Tradition. For first, taking them as Faithful precisely they are merely
Believers not Reasoners, or such as put one proposition artificially before or
after another. Next, they believe only the supernatural Infallibility built on
the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, that, is, on the Churches Sanctity; and this
is proved by the Human Testimony of the Church to have been ever held since the
beginning, and the force of the Human Testimony of the Church is proved by
Maxims of mere Reason. Add that the Certainty of such a va^t Testimony is
self-evident practically; in the same manner as it is self-evident that the
Testimony of all England cannot deceive us in telling us there was such a man
as King James: whence no Circle can possibly be committed, if it be believed
for it is own sake, or rather known by its own light though there would be if
discoursing it rationally we should put the same Proposition to be before and
after it self.

9. Since those who have the least capacity of penetrating Scripture, and
consequently (according to Dr. St.) have the fewest Motives of good life
applied to them may frequently live amongst greatest Temptations, that is, in
circumstances of needing the most; It Is a blind Undertaking, and no securer nor
wiser, than idle Fortune-telling, to bear men in hand that persons of all
capacities who sincerely Endeavor shall understand Scripture in all such
things as are necessary for their Salvation.

10. Since it is most evident that private Judgments may err in understanding
Scripture but not evident that Christ has not promised his Church Security from
erring in Faith, they run the greater hazard by far who rely on their private
sense of Scripture, then those do who rely on the Church; especially, since the
Church denies not Scripture but professes to go according to it, and so in
common reason is likely to comprehend its meaning far better than private men;
but most especially since our Moderns when they first began to rely on their
own Judgments of Scripture for their Faith, revolted from hearing the Church,
and rebelled against Pastors and lawful Superiors, which both Gods Law and
the light of Nature taught them they were to follow and submit to.

Thus our new Apostle of the private spirit of Gifts and new Light, has
endeavored to pull down the Church and subvert the Foundation laid by Christ;
and instead thereof to set up as many Churches as there are private and proud
Fancies in the world. Each of which may by this devilish Doctrine defy the
Church for Teaching him his Faith; or for governing him as as a Church, that
is, governing him as one of the Faithful; for she can bind never a subject in
conscience to any thing but what her self and each man judges to be True and
Sound; wherefore, if any or each private person understands Scripture another
way then she does, he is enfranchised by his Rule of Faith (which he ought not
relinquish) from her Authority; she may in that case wish him well and pity him
as every old wife may also do; and he in return may wish well to the Church end
pity her; She may endeavor to admonish and instruct him better, so to pluck
him out of his Error; and he in requital, that he may not be behind-hand with
the Church in Courtesy, may with equal nay better Title admonish the Church of
her failing, and endeavor to pull her out of her Error, or (as the new phrase
is) reform her; for, being conscious to himself that he reads the Scripture and
sincerely endeavors to know the meaning of it, he has all the security of his
Faith, (and consequently of the Churches being in an Error,) that may be; Nor
can he being thus gifted, want Power to preach to her and others; For,
certainly the World would be most perversely ordered, if they who are in Error,
should have License and Power to propagate their Errors, and those who follow
Truth should have no leave to propagate Truth. Thus the Church has lost all
power, that is, has lost her self, being able neither to lead nor drive her
equally-gifted Subjects: so that her exercising Jurisdiction over them would by
this wicked Doctrine be a most Tyrannical persecution, and every such private
man's refractory Disobedience (see the wonderful gifts of the private spirit!)
would become a most Glorious Confession of Christian Faith; and every Rebel
acting against the Church, (so he be but so self-conceited as to judge he knows
more of God's mind in the Scripture then all the Church besides) would by this
Doctrine (in case the Secular power should think fit to curb his Insolence) be
a most blessed Martyr, such, no doubt, as John Fox'es were.

The Fifth Examen.
Sifting the Eleven remaining Principles, which seem Chiefly to concern the
nature of Faith.
WHoever has perused the foregoing Examine, and reflected well upon what a
sandy Foundation Dr. St. has built his Faith, will doubtless expect that he
will assign it such a nature as is of no exceeding great strength; for fear
lest his weak Grounds' should not support his Superstructures nor his Proofs
carry home to his Conclusions.

Now the Conceit which the Generality of Christians have of Faith, importing
it is true Nature, is that it is such an Assent as is impossible to be an Error
or False; Whence follows, that its Grounds are likewise such: And indeed, since
all hold, That Faith is an Immovable and Unalterable Assent which is to bide
by us and we by it all our whole lives till we arrive at our future state, the
Region of Light, where we shall see facie ad faciem, who sees not that it must
be held; and so (since there can be no Necessity to hold a thing to be what
it is not) must be Impossible to be false? for, otherwise were we to hold it,
that is, were it self possible to be False, it ought to be held Alterable, when
ever more Light should appear discovering it to be an Error. To evince this
Truth I have produced multitudes of Arguments in Faith vindicated, none of
which has been thought fit to be replied to, though mine and Faith's opposers
still craftily persist to insinuate the contrary Error; But I will at present
make use only of one, which will, I conceive, best conclude the Point between
us. For, Dr. St. makes Scripture the Rule of Faith, and so speaks of Faith as
standing under what he conceives the firmest and clearest Ground, and which was
left by God for Mankind to embrace Faith. I do the same when I assert the
Churches Testimony or Tradition to be the Rule. So that neither of us speak of
the particular odd ways by which some persons casually come to have Faith, nor
of Faith as had by such means, but of the common road-way left by God for
Mankind to attain to Faith, and of Faith as standing under such a Means or
Rule. Upon this Agreement if we join issue, and proceed, it seems that nothing
but evident Obstinacy against manifest Truth can hinder us from agreeing in our
Conclusion. For since, if we may be deceived in believing even while we follow
the direction of that Rule which God himself has appointed to light us to
Faith, it would follow that there is no means imaginable likely to do that
effect, as also that God himself had deceived us, which is both Blasphemous and
Impossible, it must follow, That Faith built upon the Rule left by God (whether
Scripture or Tradition) must be Impossible to be an Error, and consequently
its Ground or Rule must be Impossible to be False or Erroneous. Wherefore Dr.
St. is obliged as well as I am to hold heartily this double Conclusion, and, if
he attempts to discourse of that point, to make it out, that the Rule he
assigns is such as cannot leave us in Error and our Infinitely-perfect God in
the blame. How far short he has fallen hitherto of making out his pretended
Rule of Faith ( viz. Scripture as standing under the Judgment of every private
person) to be Impossible to suffer men to err while adhering to that way, is
already shown; How heartily now he asserts Faith it self, built on the Means or
Rule left by God, to be Impossible to be Erroneous or False, comes next to be
examined.

20. No man's Faith can therefore be Infallible merely because the Proponent is
said to be Infallible: because the nature of Assent does not depend upon the
objective Infallibility of any thing without us; but is agreeable to the
Evidence we have of it in our mind^s; for Assent is not built on the nature of
things, but their Evidence to us.

This Principle begins with a Fallacy of non causa pro causa: For what man in
his Wits ever said or held, that Faith must therefore be Infallible, merely
because the Proponent is said to be Infallible; must a mere saying, that is, a
saying neither self-evident nor proved, be held a competent Ground to build the
Existence of any thing upon? But let us suppose that Dr. St. by the words [ is
said to be] meant [ is] or [ proved to be] as is indeed our true Tenet, let us
see how he confutes us.

Our Tenet is, that in case the Proposer of Faith be Infallible, all that rely
on It for that particular are by so doing Infallible likewise. He argues
against us from the nature of Assent which he says depends not on the
Objective Infallibility of any thing without us, but is agreeable to the
evidence we have of it in our minds. If he means by the words [ depends not]
such a dependence as is Immediate, I grant it; For our Assent being an effect
wrought in our Soul, and a Result of some foregoing knowledges, notions or
natures of things within us, which produce that Assent if it be a Conclusion;
or compound it if a First Principle; it is impossible any thing without us, and
staying there, without evidencing it self to our minds, or breeding some
Interior discovery of it^elf there, should beget any Assent at all concerning
it. But, if he means by those words that our Assent depends not mediately, or
depends not at all on the Object without us, as his large Expression seems to
signify, then it is absolutely denied; For the Evidence of the Thing in us, is
an Effect of the nature of the Thing without us; nor could evidence of the
Thing in us cause Assent without such dependence on the Object or Thing without
us, for, unless by means of the Object and dependence on it, this Evidence it
self could not be. The last words, [ For Assent is not built on the nature of
things but their evidence to us] is but a Tautology or short rehearsal of the
reason lately given, and so needs no new Answer.

Yet, however D. St. for want of Logic expresses himself ill and confusedly,
there is notwithstanding a kind of knot in in his discourse, and I shall lend
my best Assistance to loose it; but, first it will be necessary to put down his
three next Principles, since they all seem to club into one Dilemma against
Infallibility (...) Proponent.

21. It is therefore necessary in order to an (...) Assent, that every
particular person be infallibly assisted in judging of the matters proposed to
him to be believed; so that the Ground on which a necessity of some External
Infallible Proponent is asserted, must rather make every particular person
Infallible, if no Divin Faith can be without an Infallible Assent; and so
renders any other Infallibility useless.

22. If no particular person be Infallible in the Assent he gives to matters
proposed by others to him, then no man can be Infallibly sure that the Church
is Infallible: and so the Churches Infallibility can signify nothing to our
Infallible Assurance without an equal Infallibility in our selves in the belief
of it.

23. The Infallibility of every particular person being not asserted by those
who plead for the Infallibility of a Church, and the one rendering the other
useless (for, if every person be Infallible, what need any representative
Church to be so!) and the Infallibility of a Church being of no effect if every
person be not Infallible in the belief of it, we are farther to inquire what
certainty men may have in matters of Faith, supposing no external Proponent to
be Infallible.

Ere I begin my Discourse I am to note Dr. St's. shuffling way of contriving
his Sentences here, or of penning his Principles as he call's them. His 21st
contends it is necessary to Infallible Assent that every particular person be
infallibly assisted in judging of the matters proposed to him to be believed.
And the 22d in consonancy to it, mentions the Infallibility of particular
persons in the Assent they give to matters proposed by others to them, which
clearly signify that Faith cannot be Infallible unless we have Infallibility or
Infallible Knowledge of the Points of Faith; for what can [ matters proposed to
us to be beleev'd] signify else? On the other side in the 21st Princ. he seems
only to aim at proving, there must be Infallibility in us that the Proponent is
Infallible. Also Princ. 22. he concludes, that to our Infallible Assurance
there is required equal Infallibility in our selves in the belief of the
Churches Infallibility. And lastly, Princ. 23. he concludes, the Infallibility
of the Church of no effect if every person be not Infallible in the belief of
it. Which expressions are of quite different sense from the former; and require
not In^^llibility in the in the matters proposed to believed, as did the other,
but only in knowing the Proponent to be Infallible. Now, because I have no mind
to cavil but am heartily glad when he gives me occasion to handle any good
point, I will not take him as his former words sounded, it being perfect
Nonsense to require evidence of the Points. Proposed ere we can be certain of
the Authority that Proposes them (for what need can there be either of any
Proposer, or of knowing him Infallible, if we be Infallible certain
antecedently of the Points themselves,) but I shall willingly pass by those
expressions as effects either of a strange Unwariness, or of a crafty Preparing
for future Evasion, and discourse of the Later Thesis; For in truth it hints at
a very excellent difficulty, though he proposes it but ill and pursues it worse.

I will therefore clear his discourse from his contradictory expressions, and
put it home and close as well as I can, and so as I hope himself will not say I
at all wrong it. He seems them to argue thus. Objective Infallibility in
another ( viz. the Proponent) avails nothing to make my Faith or Assent
Infallible, unles I be also Infallibly certain that the Proponent is
Infallible, wherefore ( in case Infallibility be requisite to Faith] every one
of the Faithful must be also Infallible. But this renders both these
Infallibilities useles and Insignific^nt; for the Infallibility of the Church
is of no effect, if every person be not Infallible, and if every person be
Infallible what need any Church Representative or Council be so: Therefore,
this Doctrine of an Infallible Proponent is frivolous and Inconsistent.

To make way toward the clearing this considerable difficulty, I premise these
few Notes.

1. That a man may be Infallible, or out of the power of being deceived in some
particular thing two manner of ways: Either, from his penetrating the reasons
which conclude the thing to be as he judges, that is, from his knowledge that
the Thing is so, which we may fitly term Formally Infallible. Or else by
adhering, not through Knowledge, but accidentally as it were, to some thing
which is a real Truth, though he penetrate not the Grounds why it is True; or
by adhering to the Judgment of another person in some thing or Tenet whose
Judgment is indeed well grounded and Certain as to that Thing, though he see
not it is so. And such a man may fitly be said to be materially Infallible. Both
of them are absolutely secured from Error or Infallible Fundamentally by the
Thing's being such as they judge it to be, that is, (in our case) by relying on
a Proponent which is Infallible; and they differ only in the ways by which
they come to rely upon that Proponent; the one being led to it by perfect Sight
that the thing must be so, or that the Proponent must be Infallible; the other
perhaps blindly, at best not out of clear discernment embracing that Judgment,
yet, as long as he adheres to the Judgment of another man who cannot be
deceived or in an Error as to that thing, himself is actually secured from
possibility of erring; and so, Infallible or Incapable to be in an Error
likewise. To this difficulty I had regard in my Faith vindicated when I
distinguished between Faith's being True in us, and True to us. For the
blindest Assenter that is, though he stumble upon a Truth, yet if he really
hold it, his Judgment is truly and really conformable to the Thing or Object,
and consequently True or Impossible to False, and so himself undeceivable or
incapable to be in an Error in holding thus: yet, if we go abut to relate that
Truth which is in him, to evident reasons or Grounds in his mind, connaturally
breeding that Conformity of his Judgment to the Thing, there is no such thing
perhaps to be found; whence, it is not True to him, or evident to him it is True,
since he sees not or knows not that it is True; yet still, as I said before, he
is Infallible or Impossible to be in an Error while he adheres to it as True,
because that Judgment of his is in reality comformable to the thing.

2. It Is requisite and necessary that the Assent of Faith in every particular
Beleeyer be at least materially Infallible, provided it be built (as it ought)
upon the means laid by God for Mankind to embrace Faith, that is, upon the
Right Rule of Faith. For (omitting many other mischiefs and Inonveniencies)
otherwise, as was lately proved, it would follow that God, who is essential
Truth, did lead Mankind into Error, in case relying sincerely on what God
ordered them to rely on, their Judgment, by so doing, did become Erroneous.

3. It Is requisite and necessary that the Assent of Faith in diverse particular
Believers be formally Infallible, or that those persons be Infallibly certain
by Evident Reason, that the Authority or Rule of Faith they rely on cannot
herein deceive them. Else Great Wits and acute Reflecters whose piercing
understandings require Convictive Grounds for their Faith, would remain for
ever unsatisfied; nor could the wisest Christians sincerely and heartily Assent
to, nor with Honesty profess the truth of their Faith, nor could any prove it
True to establish Rational doubters in it, or convert men of exact knowledge to
it, or convince Heretics calling the Truth of it in question. Nor could
Governors and Leading Persons with any Conscience or Credit propose and Preach
the Truth of Faith to the Generality: Also it is Truth being otherwise
unmaintainable, the best vigor of Faith and it is efficacy to work through
Charity, must needs be exceedingly enfeebled and deaded. It Is necessary then
that the Grounds of Faith be both Conclusive of it is Truth, and also penetrable
by those whose Proper work it is to make deep Inspection into them; whence they
will become formally or knowingly-Infallible that the Authority they rely on
for Faith's Conveyance cannot possibly deceive them.

4. Besides these men who are to be Formally Infallible in the Grounds of
Faith, and so able to discourse of those Grounds, and make out their Absolute
Certainty by way of Skill or Art, there ought to be moreover another sort of
men in the Church Formally-Infallible in discerning the True and distinct
notion of each Point of Faith and this is the proper work of the Governors of
the Church. For these, by reason of their State of Life, which is to meditate
on God's Law day and night, their perpetual Converse with the Affair of Faith,
by Preaching, Teaching, Catechizing, Exhorting; their Concern to overlook their
Flock lest any Innovatour should infect them with Novelties; their Constant
Addiction to observe exactly their Rule, Tradition, the Standard by which they
govern themselves in distinguishing the true Faithful from revolting Apostats.
or Heretics; their Duty to be well vers't in the Doctrine of Fathers, and Acts
of former Councils, and according to these soberly and gravely (not quirkingly
and with witty tricks) to understand and interpret Holy Scripture: These
Eminent Personages, and Chief Magistrates and M^sters of the Faithful being
t^us furnished with all requisite endowments to give them a most dist^nct and
exact knowledge of the doctrine descended to them by Tradition, and of the
sense of the Church, in case any Heretic revolts openly from the formerly
deliver^d Faith, these Men, I say, are by the Majesty and sway of their most
venerable and most ample Authority to quash and subdue his petty party newly
sprung up; and either reduce him to his duty by wholesome advice and discipline,
or, if he persists in his Obstinacy to cut him off solemnly from the Church by
Excommunication, that so the sounder Faithful may look upon him (according to
our Saviors command) as on a Heathen or a Publican^, it being thus made
evident, that he stands against all his Superi^urs, and rebels against the most
sacred Authority upon Earth. Or, in case that Heretic cloak his poisonous
doctrine in a^biguous expressions, or goes about to pervert the words used
formerly by the Church, by drawing them to a sinister sense never intended by
Her; They, being perfectly acquainted with the language and sense of the
Church, are to invent and assign proper words to express the Churches sense,
and such as are pertinent and effectual for the present juncture and exigency
to defeat the crafty Attempts of those quibbling Underminers of Faith: or else,
they are to clear the true sense of the former words used by the Church by
declaring in what meaning the Church takes and ever took them; And sometimes
too, beating the Heretic at his own weapon, Scripture's Letter, by avowing
this to be the sense in which the Church ever took such and such places. Hence,
they are said to define Faith, that is, to express in distinct words it is
precise Limits and bounds, that so no leaven of Error may possibly intermingle
it self; and, to seal and recommend their Acts by stamping on them the most
Grave, most Venerable, and most Sacred Authority in the whole Christian world.
Now, that this Authority of the Church Representative is Infallible in knowing
the Points of Faith, and that on the best manner is proved hence, because, if
such a Learned Body, consisting of the most Eminent and Knowing Personages in
the world, can be deceived while they rely on the Means left by God to preserve
mankind from error in understanding the Points of Faith, it is evident no man
in the world can be ^^cur'd thereby from Error, and so the Means would be no
Means to arrive at Truth, but rather a Means to lead men into Error, since
they erred relying solely on that, which, it being supposed to have been
intended by God for a Contrary end, is absolutely Impossible.

5. Though the Substance or Essence of Faith consists in believing what is True
upon the Divine Authority certainly engaged for those Truths, which is the
Formal Motive of Believing, and therefore it is enough for trne Faith that the
^Generality of the Church or the Vulgar be materially Infallible in their
Faith; yet it adds evidently a great perfection to Faith that they be Formally
Infallible, and that the Faithful see with Infallible Certainty that the
Divine Authority is actually engaged when they believe. First, because Faith is
an Intellectual Virtue, and so to proceed knowingly upon it is Grounds, makes it
more Agreeable to the Understanding and Perfective of it. 2. Because the more
evident it is, that the Divine Authority is engaged, the more heartily those who
reverence it, are disposed to submit their Judgments by believing: whence Faith
in such Persons is more lively, firm and Immovable, also more Efficacious and
(if other Considerations be equal) more apt to work through Charity, than it is
in others. Moreover, such Faithful are incomparably more able to satisfy and
convert others; being able (as is supposed) to make ^ut evidently the Grounds
of their Faith; Wherefore, every thing being then in it is perfectest state when
it is able to produce it is like, or another of it is own kind, it is a sign that
Faith in such men is Ripe, Manly, and Perfect; since it is able to propagate it
self to others, or (as S. Paul phrases it) gignere in Evangelio. Whence, those
who are to convert souls and propagate Faith, are obliged to labor all that
may be to accomplish themselves in this particular, lest they fall short of
this Perfection which seems properly and peculiarly due to their state. For
it is not so opprobrious to the Layity to be unable to perform this, but it is
highly so to them, because they are lame without it.

6. Notwithstanding this, it is God's Will that all the Faithful should be
formally Infallible in their Faith, or know Infallibly the Grounds of Faith
cannot be False, as far as they are capable. For, this being (as was lately
shown) a Perfection in Faith, and God, who is Essential Goodness, not being
Envious, but desirous his Creatures should have all the Good they are capable
to receive, especially such goods as tend to the bettering their souls and
promoting them toward Heaven, it follows that he wills them this Perfection in
Faith, as far as it can stand with the Universal Order of the World, or the
particular natures of Things, that is, as far as they are capable to receive it.

7. He has therefore ordained such a Means by which to know his Will as far as
concerns our Belief, or what he would have us believe, that is, he has
constituted such a Rule of Faith, that it is Certainty may be most easily
penetrable by all degrees and sorts of the Faithful. Whence follows most
evidently that Tradition and not Scripture is that Rule. For, of all ways of
Knowing and Ascertaining imaginable, nothing is more easy to be comprehended
or to satisfy people of all sorts then is that of Witnessing Authority; as we
experience in their perfect belief of K. James or K. H. 8ths existence, and
such like. The Grounds of which Truths, not needing to be learnt at School, but
being either inbred or by an ordinary converse with the world instil'd into
them, nothing is easier then for the wiser sort of them to fall into the
account of it of themselves, occasion being given; as also to awaken, as it
were, those dormant Knowledges in the Vulgar, and make them reflect and see
(not with a clear and distinct sight as do the wiser portion of the Church,
but) with a gr^sse and confused, yet solid Knowledge, and suitable to their
pitch, that a Rule of such a nature is Certain; and so, those who professedly
own and proceed upon it are in the truth; they who reject it, in an Error;
Whereas yet they are utterly Incapable by any Maxims in their rude
Understandings either to know that the Letter of the Scripture, on the
rightness of which all depends was preserved from Error, among so many
Translatious and Transcriptions; or that the Sense is necessarily such as they
conceive it to be, amidst such multitudes of Commentators and Sects wrangling
about the meaning of that Letter; nor yet are they competent Judges of the
skill of all those several Sects and sorts of men whom they see and hear differ
about the sense of it. Tradition then of the Church being thus proved the Rule
of Faith, it is both farther shown how Unreasonable, Unnatural and Unsafe Dr.
St's private-spirited Rule of Faith is, and also (even hence) demonstrated
against him here that Tradition of the Church is Infallible; since being by
this moans proved to be the Rule appointed by God to light Mankind to their
Faith, it is impossible that those who rely and proceed upon it, should be led
into Error, and also Impossible that Faith it self thus grounded should be
False.

But I needed not have gone thus far to confute D. St's four Principles now
under hand. The four first Notes had abundantly given them their Answer; and
it is time we now begin to apply them to that purpose.

Whereas then he grounds them all on our Tenet, That No Divine Faith can be
without an Infallible Assent, he may please to know that we only mean by those
words there materially Infallible, or so as cannot possibly be an Error: and
in this sense we own the Position, and so must he too unless he will speak
open blasphemy; For, Divine Faith being a believing upon the Divine Authority,
and (as we both suppose) upon some Means laid by God himself by which he
proposes to us what we are to believe, by telling us he has said it, in case an
Assent thus Grounded could possibly be an Errou^, it would follow necessarily
that God himself would be the Cause of that Error. The Substance then of Faith
could be preserved, and the Chief End of Faith (our Salvation) on some fashion
attained, were there no more than this, that is, though never a man in the
whole world did know or could come to know that the Rule of Faith were
Infallible; provided none in the Church did speculate, and so, looking into the
Grounds of his Faith, and finding them (as far as he could see) Inconclusive,
did begin to suspect the Truth of it; nor any out of the Church did oppose
Faith; For the Faithful would in that case be in actual possession of those
Excellent Truths called Points of Faith, firmly assented to by their
Understandings, which were apt to produce those Good Dispositions of their
Wills, called Virtues; in the same sort (though not in the same degree) as they
do now; and, by means of them, they might arrive at Heaven. Thus the Dr. may
see that all he builds on is a pure mistake; and that all the Faithful may be
thus Infallible in their Assent, and thus Infallible in judging the Proposer
does not, nay cannot deceive us; nay Infallible in judging thus of the matters
proposed to us to believe, and yet not one man be Infallibly sure by way of
Evident Knowledge that the Church is Infallible; because all this proceeds not
in the least (in this supposition) from the reach of any man's Intellective
Faculty, but purely from the Goodness and Conclusivenesse of the Grounds laid
by God, and his good Providence which led those men to embrace them, though
they neither penetrate nor went about to discourse them, but simply to believe
them; on the same manner as our ruder unreflecting vulgar are led now. But, in
this case, were all the World no wiser, the wisest in the Church would be no
wiser then the weakest and rudest vulgar now mentioned; wherefore, both for
that reason, and many others 'assign'd in my 3d and 4th Note, it was absolutely
requisite to the Church, and so becoming God's Providence to order that it
should be otherwise; and that the Conclusiveness of those Infallible Grounds on
which God has founded our Faith should be penetrable by those who set
themselves to such speculations, or fall into doubts concerning them, according
as the exigencies of the Church shall be found to need such helps.

If this will not serve Dr. St. (I am sure it will serve to defeat all his
Arguments) I shall farther tell him that the Generality or main Body in the
Church is formally Infallible in judging the Church to be such in delivering
down the First-taught Faith, as I have proved in my 6th and 7th note and
elsewhere. Besides my reasons given there and in other places, I must desire
him and the rest of my Readers that in conceiving how this may be, they would
take their measures from the Absolute Certainty such people are capable of in
Parallel matters, and not from their Ability to explain or defend this
absolute Certainty, or their Constancy in adhering to it if combated by
plausible reasons; for he is a very mean Reflecter upon Nature, who observes
not that the Vulgar have Absolute Natural evidence of many Truths, which yet
they can neither give reason for, declare, defend, nor, perhaps (through levity
incident to such weak souls) do very firmly adhere to; and no wonder, since so
great a man as Sextus Empiricus speculated himself out of the Conceit of the
Certainty of his Senses; of which yet none doubts but Nature, till he began to
pervert it by wrong speculations, had given him as Infallible Certainty as to
any other, Also, they are to reflect how Infallibility) or, which is all one,
Certainty) may be in a thousand different degrees according to the greater or
lesser Capacity of the subject; which they will best comprehend by reflecting
with how different a Clearness many things appear to us now we are at Age, and
how dimly when we were young, which yet we were absolutely Certain of at that
time. Nor yet does one of those Infallibilities spoken of render the other
Useless; for they may either be about different Objects, as if the Church
Officers were formally Infallible in knowing what particular Points came down
from Christ's time, and penetrat^ng the distinct Limits of each point; and
those other Particular persons be only Infallible in judging the Church to be
so; as it happens in many Controvertists, who are well instructed in the
Grounds of their Faith, yet not so well verst in the nature of particular
points, but believe them only by Implicit Faith; or else one of their
knowledges may be more Clear and distinct than the others, and so serve to
perfect and advance it, in the same manner as Art does Nature. Least of all can
it follow that the Infallibility of the Church Representative is needless; for
This is not intended to teach the Faithful their Faith at first, nor do I
remember ever to have seen a General Council cited in a Catechism; but this is
performed by the Church Diffusive by her Practice and Language, and by her
Pastors in their Catechisms, and Instructions; But it is use is to secure and
preserve Faith already taught and known, from receiving any taint by the
Equivocating Heretic, and to recommend it more Authoritatively to the
Faithful, when cleared. And, whoever reads my 4th Note will see so many
particularities in the Members which compound a Representative Church above
others who are purely Parts of Ecclesia Credens, that he cannot in any Reason
judge them Useless, though those others be in an Inferior degree Certain of
their Faith too, For all this while the word [ Infallible] which seems to have
so loud a sound, and is made such a monstrous piece of business by the Deniers
of it, is in plain Terms no more but just barely Certain, as I have proved
Faith Vind. p. 37. 38. and Reason against Rail. p. 113.

To come closer up then to my Adversary; His 20th Principle which speaks of
Assent in common is wholly built upon a False supposition, that it can only be
Grounded upon Evidence; For however indeed in perfect Reflecters that are
unbyast, Evidence of the Object or of the Credibleness of the Authority, is
always requisite to breed Assent, yet Experience teaches us that Assent, in
weak and unre^lecting persons, is frequently built on a great Probability,
sometimes a very little one, and sometimes men Assent upon little or no reason
at all, their Passion or Interest byassing their wills, and by it their
Understandings, and this many times even against such reason as would be
Evident to another. Again, matteriall Infallibility, which is enough to that
Assent we speak of, precisely and solely considered, depends solely, at least
Principally, on the Object, contrary to what is there asserted. And, whereas he
says Princ. 29. that the Infallibility of every Particular person is not
asserted by those who plead for the Infallibility of a Church, he sees by this
discourse it both is and must be Asserted, and that we maintain that every
particular person must be materially Infallible or incapable of erring while he
relies on the Grounds laid and recommended by God; that is, while he believes
the Church, which yet is far from rendering the Formal Infallibility of the
Church useless; unless he will say, that because it suffices for the pitch of
weak people, (whose duty it is not to maintain and make out the Truth of their
Faith) that they be simply in the right, or void of Error, and that they see
after a gross manner that the thing is so, though they cannot defend it;
therefore there is no need that those whose duty it is to do so, should be able
to penetrate the Grounds of Faith, and, so, explicate, prove and maintain it to
be True. Nor will it follow, that though the Generality were after a rude and
gross manner formally Infallible in their belief that the Church is Infallible,
and therefore that the Points she proposes are all likewise Infallibly-true, it
will not follow, I say hence, that a greater and clearer and more penetrative
degree of Formal Infallibility is useless in Church Governors; for, as appears
by my 4th Note, there are many other things to be done by them of absolute
necessity for the Church, which far exceed the pitch and posture of those dull
Knowers of the lowest Class, (which is the next degree above Ignorance) and are
unauthoriz'd to meddle in such affairs. Unless he will say, that Art is
needless because there is Nature, or that there needs no Judges to decide such
Cases in which the Law seems plain. And thus much for the clearing this
concerning Point. In the rest of his Principles I shall be briefer.

But I must not pass over his Transition to them, which is this [ We are
further to enquire what Certainty men may have in matters of Faith, supposing
no External Proponent to be Infallible.] And he need not go far to satisfy his
Enquiry: For, it being most evident by the Disputes between the Protestants and
Socinians that Scripture needs some External Proposer of it is true meaning in
such kind of Points, as also some External Proposer or Attester that this is
the true Text of it (on which all is built.) Also it being evident that Dr. St.
(Princ. 15.) denies any Infallible Proposers of either of these, and that here
again he pursues close the same doctrine; Lastly, this Proposer being such,
that, however we can have Certainty without It that the Divine Authority is to
be believed, yet we must depend on It for the Knowledge when and where it is
engaged, that is, we must depend on It for the Certainty of our Faith; It
follows, that in case this Proponent be not Infallible, it can never be made
out with Infallible Certainty that the Divine Authority stands engaged for the
Truth of any one Point of Faith, and consequently that the Certainty men have
in matters of Faith is not an Infallilible one. And if it be not an Infallible
Certainty which Faith has (as he no where challenges, but very laboriously
disproves it) he need not go far to enquire or learn what Certainty it must
have; for Common Sense tells him and every man who has the least spark of
Natural Logic, that, if Faith must have Certainty (as he grants) and have not
Infallible Certainty, it must either have Fallible Certainty or none at all;
there being no Middle between them; and so, we must make account, that because
it overstrains D. St's weak Grounds to assert Faith to be Infallibly Certain,
therefore his next Attempt must be to overstrain Common Sense, and to the
inestimable Honor of Christian Religion, maintain that all Christian Faith is
Fallibly-Certain. But he must do it smoothly and warily; and, however he named
the word [ Infallible] loud enough and often enough when he was confuting it, yet
he must take heed how he names the word [ Fallible] Certainty when he is
asserting it, lest it breed laughter or dislike; though it be evident out of
the very Terms that he who confutes Infallible Certainty must maintain Fallible
Certainty, sf he maintains any. But now he begins his defense of Faiths
Fallible Certainty, and it is fit we should listen: Monstrous things use to
challenge and even force Attention from the most unconcerned.

24. There are different degrees of Certainty to be attained according to the
different degrees of Evidence, and measure of Divine Assistance; but every
Christian by the use of his reason and Common Helps of Grace may attain to so
great a degree of Certainty from the Convincing Arguments of the Christian
Religion and Authority of the Scriptures; that, on the same Ground on which men
doubt of the Truth of them, they may as well doubt of the Truth of those things
which they judge to be most Evident to Sense and Reason.

I wish D. S. had explained himself here what he means by [ different degrees
of Evidence] whether some Glances or likely Appearances of Truth called greater
or lesser Probabilities; or such Intelle^tual Sights at the least of them
discovers the thing, th^^ evidenc't, to ^e be indeed so, or True. I suspect
much he means the former, because th^se are the most proper Grounds for
Fallible Certainty which he is now going to establish whereas the Latter sort
of Evidences would hazard to carry too far and to beget Infallible Certainty,
which would quite spoil his most excellent design of settling the Fallible
Certainty of Faith* for those Evidences which show the thing to be True, show
it at the same time to be Impossible to be False; whence it is a thousand to one
that such Evidences as these would utterly destroy his beloved Fallible
Certainty, and endanger to introduce again by necessary and enforcing
consequence that Popish Doctrine of Infallibility which he had newly discarded

When he adds that every Christian may by the means here assigned attain to so
great a degree of Certainty etc. I had thought he had meant Certainty of the
Points of his Faith; but my hopes were much defeated, when, coming to the
Point, he flies off to his Christians not doubting the Truth of the convincing
Arguments of Christian Religion and of the Authority of the Scriptures; For
this is far wide of our purpose and his Promise, which was to reduce the Faith
of Protestants to Principles; whereas these words signify no more but not to
doubt of Christianity being the True Religion, or Scriptures being God's word;
but reaches not to what are those points of Christianity or determinate sense
of Scripture in particular, which constitutes Protestantism, and only concerns
our debate. Now it is evident that the Roman Catholics profess not to doubt of
the convincing Grounds of Christianity, nor yet of Scripture, but to hold that
Christianity is the only-Tr^e Religion, and that the Scriptures are Holy and
God's word: and yet we differ so much from Protestants that he thinks us
Idolaters. What we are then in reason to expect from Dr. St. is, that he would
bring us Grounds for the Certainty of his Faith as to determinate Points; viz.
Christ's Godhead, a Trinity, Reality or not-Reality of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist and such like; and those so certain as that we may as well doubt of
what we judge to be most evident to sense and Reason, as doubt of them, as he
here pretends; and not put us off with Common words in stead of particular
Satisfaction concerning his Faith and the Certainty thereof.

I would ask him then how it comes to pass that the Socinian whom he will not
deny to have both use of his reason and common helps of Grace, and both the
convincing Arguments of the Christian Religion and Authority of Scriptures to
make use of, how, I say, he comes so to fall short of Evidence and consequently
Certainty springing from that evidence concerning Christ's Godhead (which is a
Fundamental Point of Christian Faith,) that he doubts it, nay utterly denies
it, whereas yet the Protestant having the same means to work with, judges he
has evidence and Certainty grounded on that evidence that Christ is God; yet
all this while they dissent not at all in things most evident to Sense or
Reason? I much fear our Drs. big words concerning his degrees of Evidence and
the Certainty of his Faith built on those degrees will, when examined, amount
to a very obscure evidence and a Problematical kind of Assuredness; much like
those comfortable lights which both parties have when they lay even wagers at
Cock-fighting and such games; giving good hopes to both sides, but good
Security to neither. But, so it ought to be, if the Grounds of Faith be not
Infallibly but only Fallibly-Certain. which is all he is bent to prove.

25. No man who firmly Assents to any thing as True, can at the same time
entertain any suspicion of the falsehood of it; for that were to make him
certain and uncertain of the same thing: It is therefore absurd to say that
these who are Certain of what they believe, may at the same time not know but
it may be False; which is an apparent Contradiction, and overthrows any Faculty
in us of judging of Truth and Falsehood.

This Principle and the next were, I conceive, intended to preserve the Dr's
and his Friends Credit against the Inference at the end of Faith vindicated and
diverse other Passages, showing them either to be far from good Christians in
holding that all Christian Faith may possibly be an Error and Lying Imposture,
or else very bad Discoursers of their own Thoughts whilst they equivalently
expressed themselves in diverse places to be possibly in an Error in all they
believe, nay more all Christians in the whole world to be in the same
condition. This, if justified, cannot but reflect on them, being so concerning
a Lapse, and I have at Dr. St's brisk instigation charged it home in Reason
against Raillery; though I still expres't my self to incline to the more Civil
and more Charitable side; and rather lay the blame on their Understandings then
on their Wills and Intentions. Which Book had Dr. St. seen when he writ this,
he would have discerned the triflingness of these weak excuses. But let us see
what he says.

His First part is built on a most gross and senseless Error, which is, that
he who firmly assents to a thing as True is Certain of it, as appears by those
words, [ for this were to make him Certain and Uncertain of the same thing.] I
wonder exceedingly where the Dr. ^earn't this notion of Certainty? Not from
Mankind I am sure, at least not from those who had the use of their Reason.
For all these already know it to be Evident that a man may firmly assent to a
thing as True, and yet that thing be False; must that man therefore be Certain
of that Falsehood, and that it is, though in reality it be not? We experience,
that opposite parties firmly assent to contrary Tenets as True; for example,
the Socinians firmly assent, that Christ is not God, We and the Protestants
that Christ is God; Catholics assent firmly that they are not Idolaters when
they make use of Holy Images in Divine Worship: D. St. firmly assents they are;
at least he would persuade his (...) by his Books he does so: Are all these
opposite sides Certain of their several Tenets because each side firmly assents
to them as True. It were an excellent world for Heretics if this notion of
Certainty would take: For these being ^bst^nate in their Errors no men more
firmly assent to Falsehoods then they; and questionle^s the Generality of them
judged what they held, True too: nay, they must all do so, if they once be put
firmly assenting, as in our case: for to assent to a thing is to judge it to be
indeed True; By which means all Heretics in the world are Certain of their
Errors; and, if they be Certain of them Common Sense tells them they ought to
hold what they are Certain of. Again, ^light Probabilities make many weak
people firmly assent, so does Passion and Interest* yet they are all by this
new doctrine Certain of what they hold, and so all is well. It Is now come to
light what kind of Certainty D. St. intended to pr^scribe for Faith after he
had rejected Infallibility; namely, such a Certainty as one might have whether
the Thing be True or no, merely by virtue of firmly assenting to it as True.
And in this sense I think I may say he is Certain of his Faith, and I hope he
will be so civil as to requite me with maintaining that I am certain of my
Faith too, for we ^oth firmly assent to them as Truths, and so we are both very
good friends, and by the same method so are Turks and Jews atton'd to
Christians. Nothing is so proper to reconcile Contradictions, as a Chimaera,
viz. a Fallible certainty, or such a certainty as is none: Identical
Propositions are mere toys to them; or, as Dr. T. says, good for nothing; But
Fallible certainty, or Certainties that are no Certainties, can work wonders,
and even do more then miracle. Ridiculous Folly! not to see that when any one
says [ I am certain af such a thing] all mankind understands him to mean he has
such Grounds as infer that thing is as he says, and not only that he has a Firm
Assent to it as True, without intending that he has any Grounds to enforce the
Truth of it. This is what I often reflected upon in Dr. T. ( Reason against
Railery,) that his discourse still aimed to take the business of Certainty out
of the hands of the Object, and put it constantly upon the Subject, and to make
account he was sure the thing was so, because he verily judged it, or did not
doubt it to be so; And Dr. St. is here carrying on the same wise plot to which
he begun to make way in his 20th Princip. where he told us that Assent is not
built on the nature of things but their Evidence to us' Indeed, if he speak of
an Assent which it matters not whether it be True or False, or, rather which is
or may be False it is merely built on our own Fancies and Conceits (which I
suppose he must mean there by the word Evidence) But if the Assent we speak of,
and to which himself applies it, be that of Faith, which must necessarily be
True; both It and the Evidence which immediately breeds it must forcibly either
be built on the nature of things, or else on nothing, and so both the pretended
Evidence is a False Light, and the Assent it self False and Chimerical. On the
other side, in case if the Evidence and consequently the Assent be built on the
Nature of things, which are Footsteps of Gods Infinite Wisdom in which he has
imprinted all Created Truths, and established them under penalty of the highest
Folly and Contradiction to be inerrably what they are; it follows, that; in
case the Evidence had from those things be indeed a true Evidence or a right
Knowledge of their natures, our understanding Power will be the same within as
they are without, and so Inerrable in it is Assent and It Is Certainty built on
those natures; so that as their Metaphysical verity immediately depending on
God, is fixed by that Essentially Unchangeable Being in a participated (but yet
absolute) unchangeableness in being what they are; so Formal Verity or Truth in
us being an Immediate effect of those Natures thus established, working upon our
Understanding transfuses into It, that is, into our Knowledge, and consequently
our Assent an^ Certainty such a proper effect of themselves as suits with the
Subject in which it is received, viz. an Intellectual Unchangeableness or an
Unchangeableness built on Knowledge of those Natures, that is an
Infallibleness. No wonder then both our Drs. in their weak discourses fly off
so from depending for their Assents or Faith on the Objects or Natures of
things, and recurr still to the Subject, for by this means Common Sense is
driven out of the world, and Nonsense and Contradiction grow in great request.
And, first, Infallibility or true Certainty is radically destroyed, which
otherwise (according to the discourse now made) must forcibly be admitted: then
Fallible Certainty comes into great Credit, or such a Certainty as is firmly
assenting to a thing as True whether ^t be true or no; that is, such
Certainties as are no Certainties but Wilful Adhesions; such a Faith as is no
Faith but Fancy; such a Religion as is no Religion but Folly or Interest; and
such Truths as are no Truths but possible Falsehoods: In a word, the Object set
aside and the dependence of our Assents upon things without us, as the Dr.
would have it, the subjects are at Liberty to hold and say what best likes the
spirit within them, or their voluntary Fancy; in which consists the glorious
Liberty of D. St's Blessed Reformation.

I grant him then that no man who firmly assents to any thing as true, can at
the same time entertain any suspicion of it is Falsehood. But I deny that this
plea will either acquit him or Dr. T. from the imputation of making Christian
Faith possible to be False which was objected; for why may not this man who
firmly assents to a thing as true, now, or to day, both suspect and see it to
be False to morrow, unless he can show that that Assent of his depends on the
Object or is built on the unchangeably-fixt natures of Things, which Dr. St.
denies in express terms, Princ. 20. or what can establish him in his Assent of
Faith, if that do not? Is it not evident he may change if he may see true
Reason may be brought against it? What would do him credit in this case is to
offer to make it out that, (Assent requiring Evidence, and, so, Firm Assent
Clear Evidence,) he has this Clear Evidence from the Object to ground this Firm
Assent, for then we may be sure his Assent will be Unalterable and
solidly-grounded, or Impossible to be False, as becomes Faith; not desultory,
Inconstant and weakly-built, as is the nature of Opinion. But this my two
Adversaries must not do: For how can they pretend to an Unalterable Assent, if
Assent be not built on the nature of Things only which are Unchangeable? or how
to Clear Evidence, if they may, notwithstanding that Evidence be still
deceived: as they must say all the Church may in the Grounds of their Faith if
Infallibility be denied: Or lastly, how will their Evidence be Clear, if the
nature of M^ral Things will not bear so clear an Evidence or afford us so much
light of themselves as by it to conclude absolutely the Thing is so; as when it
comes to the point I foresee both these profound Admirers of Moral Certainty
will heartily maintain, and Dr. T. in his Prefa^e to his Sermons p. 29. in
express terms blames me for expecting in the Grounds of Faith.

And whereas he says, it is absurd to say that th^se who are Certain of what
they believe, may at the same time not know but it may be False. I grant it
absurd; nay more, I affirm that in case they be truly Certain, that is, in case
their Certainty be taken from the Thing or Object, then not only they may not
kn^w at the same time, but it may be False, but not at any time ever
afterward, unless the thing it self hap to be in that regard Alterable. For
true Certainty is built on the thing's being as it is, and nothing can ever be
truly known to be otherwise than it is: But, if he takes Certainty in a wrong
sense for a Firm Assent to a Thing as True, however that Assent be grounded;
then, though upon supposition he firmly Assents, he cannot at the very same
time be shaken in that Assent or not firmly Assent, yet he is far in that case
from any Knowledge or Intellectual Certainty one way or other: because he
regards not the Thing or Object, whence only true Knowledge can be had,
whatever he deems or imagines concerning the truth of that which he firmly
assents to. La^tly, these Excuses are quite besides the purposex: I never
accused their thoughts; They are beyond the reach of my sight; but their
Discourse and Writings I can see, and discover that they make Faith possible to
o^ False, as I have shown at large in Reason against Ra^ll^ry: I meddle not
then with what they assent to, or whether or no they can or do hold the
contrary; what I objected was that their words in their books imported the
possible Falsehood of Faith: for which they yet owe satis^action to all
Christians for the common Injury done to Faith, and as yet they have given none
at all.

26. Whatever necessarily proves a thing to be true, does at the same time
pr^ve it Imp^ssible to be False; because it is Impossible the same thing should
be True and False at the same time: Therefore they who assent firmly to the
Doctrine of the Gospel as true, do thereby declare their belief of the
Impossibility of the Falsehood of it.

The first part I easily grant, and the reason for it to be most valid. And,
for the same reason, I expect he will in counterchange grant me this
Proposition, that whatever words say, prove or imply a thing possible to be
False, do at the same time say, prove, or imply that it is not necessarily true.
And then Dr. T. must consider how he will avoid the force of it, who makes
Scripture the sole Rule of Faith, or the only means for Mankind to be assured
of their Faith, and yet ( Rule of Faith, p. 118.) professes that both the
Letter and Sense of it are possible to be otherwise than the Protestants take
them to be; which, in case they take their sense of Scripture or Faith to be
True, must mean, possible to be otherwise than True, that is, possible to be
False. Whether his own contrary Positions hang together or no, is not my
Concern.

As for his Inference, I deny that assenting (being an Interior Act) is
declaring ones belief. But I suppose he meant it thus. Therefore they who
[declare they] assent firmly to the doctrine of the Gospel as True, do thereby
declare their belief of the Impossibility of the Falsehood of it; and thus, this
is readily also granted; only in requital I expect he should (for I am sure he
must) grant me this counter-proposition, that therefore they who declare their
belief of the possibility of Falsh^od in Faith and it is Grounds, or of the
Letter and Sense of the Gospel, do thereby declare they do not assent firmly to
the doctrine of the Gospel as true. Which done, let Dr. St. and his Friend look
to the Consequences of it. It lies still very heavy upon their Credit as
Writers, and ever must till they retract it. No sincere Protestant who loves
his Faith more then their Writings, will ever be brought to endure it, if he
once set himself seriously to consider it.

27. The Nature of Certainty does receive several Names, either according to
the nature of the proof or the degrees of the Assent. Thus Moral Certainty may
be so called, either as it is opposed to Mathematical Evidence, but implying a
firm Assent upon the highest Evidence that Moral things can receive; Or, as it
is opposed to higher degrees of Certainty in the same kind. So Moral Certainty
implies only greater Probabilities of one side than the other; In the former
sense we assert the Certainty of Christian Faith to be moral, but not only in
the latter.

This Principle is pernicious to Human Nature as well as to Faith, and
destructive to all Principles in the world that are true ones and not like it
self.

First, it designs to give us the several Names which the nature of Certainty
does receive, but it does indeed acquaint us with some species or kinds of
Certainty, unless he will say that the moral Certainty he assigns to Faith is
of the same kind with Probability, which I perceive he is loath to own. Next,
to what purpose is it to discourse of one or more sorts of Certainty or to
distinguish it is Notion, unless we first knew the Common notion of Certainty it
self. The word Moral which is one of it is Differences, and chiefly intended to
be explained here is hard enough of it self alone; but when to this shall be
added a new difficulty of not knowing what [ Certainty] which is the Genus
means, we are like to make a wise business of it. Now, all the Knowledge we
have hitherto gained of Certainty in a discourse purposely intended to make us
under^tand the Certainty of Faith, is this, that it is a firm Assent to a thing
as true, and that there may be a Fallible Certainty, both manifestly implied in
his discourse: where, all that we can gather of the Nature of Certainty by the
former, is that perhaps it is a fixing or resting in some Tenet without any
ground; and by the later that it is a Chimaera or Nonsense. Thirdly, he
distinguishes Certainty according to the nature of the Proof, or the degree of
the Assent; but I vehemently deny it as the most absurd Position imaginable,
that there can be any kind of Certainty taken from the degrees ^f the Assent in
contradistinction to the nature of the Proof, for this would make as if the
Subject's or person's assenting more or less did constitute some Certainties
without any kind of nature of Proof, that is without any regard had to the
Object.

After this he acquaints us with one kind of [ Mor^l Certainty] Watch, he says
is opposed to Mathematical Evidence. Now I neither discern how Moral and
Mathematical come to be opposite to one another, more then Moral or Physical,
and Metaphysical or Theological; less do I see how Certainty an^ Evidence have
such an Opposition and A^tipathy; I thought they might have been both on the
same side: but I conceive that the goodness of Natural Reason made him at
unawares join Certainty to Moral, and Evidence to Mathematical; thereby
confess^ng that this Moral Certainty, (as he apprehends it) is indeed the Issue
of no kind of Evidence at all but of mere Obscurity, or at best of some
conjectural glance of Likelihood. But he describes or gives us some distinct
Knowledge of this Moral Certainty, telling us that it implies a firm Assent
upon the highest Evidence that Moral things can receive, and this he assigns to
Christian Faith. Where, first I would know whether this Moral Certainty here
mentioned, be an Infallible Certainty, or a Fallible one; and I presume he will
answer it is a Fallible one, for Infallible and Moral Certainty are opposite;
which is a fair beginn^ng toward the ascertaning Faith. Next, I would desire
him to speak out heartily and tell me whether this Moral Certainty put Faith
absolutely out of possibility of being False; or whether, notwithstanding this
Certainty, it may with Truth be said, that still absolutely speaking all
Christian Faith may be an Error or Mistake of the world. I presume he will not
say it is absolutely Impossible it should be all a Mistake because it is so
protected by this Moral Certainty; for he makes this a less degree of Certainty
than Mathematical Certainty is, and Dr. T. has told us there can be no degrees
in Absolute Impossibilities; besides, I see not how a Fallible Certainty can
establish any Tenet Impossible to be False, for an Infallible Certainty, which
is incomparably above that, can do no more. And yet, for all that, it is
dangerous to his Credit, (for it is indeed blasphemous) to say that all
Christian Faith may possibly be a lying Imposture for any thing any man living
knows; or that all the Christians in the world, though relying and proceeding
to their power on the Means God has appointed to establish them in True Faith,
may notwithstanding be possibly in an Error. I suppose then he will recurr to
his late excuse and tell us, that no man who firmly assents to any thing as
true can at the same time entertain any suspicion of it is Falsehood. But this is
nothing to our purpose. It Is not his Judgment but his Doctrine which stands
impeach't; not his Thoughts, but his Words, and Discourses; let him clear those
to the world, and I am to remit secret things to God and his own Conscience. I
leave then him and his Fr^end to shuff^le about for better Evasions, which I am
sure can never be candid and Scholar-like, but some learned quirks and Jeers,
and address my self to a farther examination of this worthy Principle. 3ly,
then I would ask, whether the Firmness of this Assent which he says here Moral
Certainty implies, be taken from the Object, or from the Subject? I suppose he
will say here from the Object, because he says it is upon the highest Evidence
Moral things can receive; but I perceive him disposed even while he says so to
blame the Things for receiving no more. I doubt he should rather blame himself
for receiving no more from those Moral Objects, who are both as able and as
ready to afford him perfect Evidence as perhaps any other things in Nature, did
he dispose himself to receive it. For, are not Moral things as firmly
established in their respective determinate natures as Natural and Mathematical
things, from which Establishment all our Science is taken? Is not a will as
Certainly a will, and Liberty as necessarily Liberty as a Triangle is a
Triangle? Again, are not Voluntary, Liberty, Virtue, Vice and such like, very
Intelligible words, and consequently the Natures of Moral things Knowable as
well as others in other Sciences. I wonder then why the Evidences of Moral
things cannot be as high as that of Mathematical things, since the natures of
both are equally Firm, both natures can be known, and so engaged in our
discourses of them and from them, and all science or Evidence springs from
engaging the Natures of things.

The Sum then is, Dr. St. has given Faith excellent good words, in telling us
it is Moral Certainty implys a firm Assent upon the highest Evidence Moral
things can receive: but, looking to the bottom of his meaning, he intends it
only a Fallible Certainty or such as may still permit it to be False; and so
the right descant upon his fine words is in true construction this. He allows
Faith such a Certainty as is Uncertain; such a Firmness as may both bow and
break; such an Evidence in it is Grounds as is Obscure, and consequently makes
it such an Assent as is Irrational: All which and much more must needs follow
from this rejecting Infallible Certainty in the Gronnds of Faith. If he thinks
I wrong him, let us put it to the test; Let him take the best of those
Evidences or Proofs which ground his Moral Certainty, and put it with the help
of a little Logic into a Syllogism or two, and then tell me whether it does
necessarily conclude the Truth of Faith or no. If it concludes, why does he not
say Faith is absolutely Certain, but mince it with Moral? If it concludes not,
how can all the world avoid but his pretended Evidence is Obscure; his
pretended Certainty built on that Evidence, Uncertain; the Firmness of that
Assent, Infirm; and the Assent it self to a Conclusion thus unprov'd, and no
ways Evident (in a man capable to comprehend what ought in due of Right Reason
cause Assent) privatively Irrational, or Faulty.

28. A Christian being thus Certain, to the highest degree of a firm Assent,
that the Scriptures are the Word of God, his Faith is thereby resolved into the
Scriptures as into the Rule and Measure of what he is to believe; as it is into
tht veracity of God as the Ground of his believing what is therein contained.

A Christian who is no better Certain then thus; that is by Grounds allowing
only such a Certainty as is not absolutely or truly Conclusive of the Truth of
Faith (as Dr. St. intends no more by his Moral Certainty) is not Certain at
all: As appears farther by the next words, Certain [ to the highest degree of a
firm Assent.] the meaning of which must be that this highest degree of a firm
Assent either is the same with the Certainty he intends his Faith according to
his former doctrine, and constitutes or explicates it; or else that at least it
helps to make up this Certainty, that is perfect it within it is notion, and
make it more a Certainty or a better Certainty; which makes the Conclusiveness
or Evidence had from the Object needless to create a Certainty, and signifies
thus much in plain Terms [ Think or imagine what you will, so you imagine it
strongly, and hold it stiffly, you are as Certain of it as may be.] Had he said,
A Christian is or may be thus Certain by such a Proof had from the Object as
was truly Conclusive of the Thing, how Genuin, Coherent and Clear had his
Expression been, which now is forced; Incongruous and Obscure? how Agreeable to
Reason and the nature of Certainty as all Mankind understands it; which now is
most Irrational and Unsuitable to the same Nature? How Honorable and
Creditable had it been to his Cause, and to himself too as a Writer? But men
that have not Truth on their side, and consequently are quite destitnte of
found Principles and true Grounds, must not dare to speak Sense. Himself told
us ( Princ. 20.) that the nature of Assent is agreeable to the Evidence we have
of it in our Minds, let him remember then that the highest degree of a firm
Assent requires in reason the highest gree of Clear Evidence to beget it, which
yet he lately denied to be had from Moral things, and attributed it peculiarly
to the Mathematics. So that all is Incoherent, all is Common and big words,
hollow and so of a loud and high Sound, but without any determinate Sense.

Again, how does it follow, that because a Christian is thus Certain that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, that therefore his Faith is thereby resolved
into the Scriptures as into the Rule and Measure of what he is to believe?
There is not the least show of consequence for this, unless he had first proved
that God had intended to speak so clear in the Scripture as every private
Understanding should not sail of being secured from mistake while it relied
upon It; as also that God had spoken to us no other way but by the written
Word, which he has no where proved, nor can ever prove. And, if the former of
these (as experience tells us it is) be wanting, it is not a Rule to those
Persons; if the latter, it is not necessarily the Measure of what they are to
believe.

29. No Christian can be obliged under any pretense of Infallibility to believe
any thing as a matter of Faith, but what was revealed by God himself in that
Book wherein he believes his Will to be contained, and consequently is bound to
reject whatsoever is offered to be imposed upon his Faith which has no
foundation in Scripture, or is contrary thereto; which Rejection is no making
Negative Articles of Faith, but only applying the general Grounds of Faith to
particular Instances, as because I believe nothing necessary to Salvation, but
what is contained in Scripture, therefore no such particular things which
neither are there nor can be deduc't thence.

If Christians were bound to hold that God had revealed his whole Will in that
Book, and this so clearly that all or most Chri^tians could not miss of
understanding it right so as thereby to be absolutely Certain of their Faith,
then indeed the first half of his Principle here runs very currently and
smoothly: but these rubs lying still in the way which Dr. St. has not in the
least removed, they being also satisfied by the General Conceit of
Christianity, and by the Nature and Genius of Christian Faith, that it cannot
possibly be an Error or Lie, and, consequently, mu^t have such Grounds as
cannot possibly permit all the world to be in an Error while they rely on
them, that is, Grounds which are Infallibly secure, and, on the other side,
observing both by experience and Reason that Scripture is not such a Ground as
that private Understandings applying to it, are thereby perserv'd from
possibility of erring (as Dr. St. also confesses in his next Principle) hence
they are invited strongly to conceive that God has left some Persons on earth
easily to be found who may supply what is wanting of Clearness to Scriptures
Letter in the highest Points of Faith; and that God will some way or other
perserve them from erring, and that while thus protected by God's signal
Providence (whether this be performed Naturally, Supernaturally, or both ways)
they cannot Err in that Affair, or in acquainting us with right Faith. So
that, unless Dr. St. make out solidly that Scripture has in it the true nature
of the Rule of Faith, of it self and without needing any Church, he must expect
in reason that the very nature of Faith will necessarily incline all sincere
persons, who have due care of their souls and of finding out true Faith, to
believe the Infallibility of the Church.

And, whereas he says that their rejection of such Points which have no
Foundation in Scripture or are contrary thereto is no making New Articles of
Faith, but only applying the General Grounds of Faith to particular Instances,
he discourses therein very consonantly to his own Grounds were they worth any
thing; Yet, I have one thing to propose to his Consideration, which is, that to
justify his Reformers he must produce Grounds full as good or rather better for
the Rejection of those Points as for his Faith; or to speak more distinctly, he
must have as perfect (or rather perfecter) Certainty for these two Propositions
[ Nothing it to be believed which has no Foundation in Scripture] and [ This or
that rejected Point has no Foundation in Scripture] as he has for any point of
Christian Faith For, since upon the Evidence they had of these two Propositions
they disobeyed and rebelled against their then lawful Superiors and Church
Pastors, and broke Church-Union, which was evidently forbidden by God's Law,
and so the preserving Union and obeying them, is a point of Faith, and which
themselves confess is such and binds them as such in case the reasons for their
imposing New points be not valid, that is, if these two Propositions on whose
Evidence they relied when they alleged they were wrongfully imposed, and
thence rejected them, be not True; it follows that they must at least have
equal Evidence (nay more, for bare Equality would only Balance them in a
doubtful suspense berween either side) that those Propositions on which they
grounds their Rejection of those Articles, and disobedience to their Pastors
aad Superiors, are True, as they have for their Faith. And, if the Grounds of
this Rejection ought to be more Certain then the Grounds of their Faith, there
is either some thing wrong in the pretended Grounds of their Faith, or else
their Negative Articles ought to be allowed the honor of being Points of Faith
too, since their greater Certainty gives them fair and equal Title to it, if
not Absolute Preemin^nce.

30. There can be no better way to prevent men's mistakes in the sense of
Scripture (which men being Fallible are subject to) than the considering the
consequence of mistaking in a matter wherein their salvation is concerned: and
there can be no sufficient reason why that may not serve in matters of Faith,
which God himself has made use of as the means to keep them from Sin in their
lives: Unless any imagine that Errors in Opinion are far more dangerous to
men's souls then a vicious life is, and therefore God is bound to take more care
to prevent the one then the other.

The Dr. being conscious to himself that he had, notwithstanding all his
promises to reduce Faith to Principles, and to prove it is Certainty, left it
still Uncertain, thought it his best Expedient to close his blind Principles
with a speeding one, which (to the shame of all Principles) should maintain
that it need not be Certain; though he couches this sense warily as it behooves
him.

He seems to ground his Skeptical Discourse on this, that Men are Fallible, and
so subject to mistake the sense of the Scriptures. I wish he would speak out
once in his life and tell us plainly whether all Mankind be Fallible in every
thing or only in some things, and in some Circumstances? Again, whether he
means that men are naturally Fallible, or supernaturally, that is by means of
God's Infinite Power, if it should set it ^elf to deceive them. If the later,
it is not, nor ought to be our Question; for no man who has any Reverence for
God or his Attributes, will ever think that he will do Miracles still to lead
Mankind into Error, but rather judge it becomes his Goodness to provide, in
case the Good of the world or the Church should require that some extraordinary
thing be done, that Mankind should have notice of it by some Certain way to
prevent his Erring, as it happens in the case of the Eucharist. Taking him then
to mean that man is naturally Fallible, we enquire further; Is all Mankind
(however one sense or another accidentally may be insincere in one or another
particular) yet is all Mankind naturally Fallible in their daily Sensations, or
which is all one, are the Senses of all Mankind so framed as to convey wrong
Impressions into his Knowing Power? If not, they cannot err naturally: nor do
I think Dr. St. will say our Senses thus and in this are Fallible; If he does,
I know not what to say of him; which is, that he is a perfect Pyrrhonian and
unworthy of Mankind's Conversation or Discourse with him; for, to what end
should men discourse with him, if, all his Senses being Fallible, himself knows
not whether they discourse or no? I ask still further, Are men naturally
Fallible in some things not had immediately from sense, for example, in knowing
that the world was on foot a year before we were born? or in First Principles,
as Aequale est aequale sibi, An Equal equal to it self? Or in a Conclusion
immediately depending on such Principles, as that therefore three lines drawn
from the Center to the Circumference are equal, and such like? I think he will
not say it. We see then Men are capable of Infallibility or Certainty of their
own nature: wherefore they can aim at it and desire it, especially in Faith,
which is of so high a Concern to their Souls and the basis of all their
Spiritual Building, therefore, both for that Reason and very many others
recounted and enforced by me in Faith Vindicated and elsewhere, they ought to
have this Certainty (especially since the Truth of Faith is neither Proveable,
Maintainable nor professible without it) in case such a Certainty be not in it
self Impossible, and that it is not so, I have said something both in my Reason
against Raillery, p. 64. to 67. and p. 112. to p. 116. as also in this present
Treatise in my Answer to the 27. Principle.

But, setting this aside, we will proceed and demand still farther; Are men
deceivable in knowing what one another means in ordinary Conversation or
domestic affairs? Can the Ma^^er and the Man the Mistress and her Maid
understand one another? Or, in case some ambiguous Expression intermingle it
self, cannot the Speaker upon the other's signifying his dissatisfaction,
absolutely clear his doubt, and make himself be thoroughly understood?
Experience tells us they can, and that they may as easily be mistaken in their
Sensations as in such kind of Expressions. We see then Men are Infallible in
many things, and even in understanding words aright in same cases. If then they
be Fallible in understanding Scriptures, and this in the main and Fundamental
Points of Christianity, as was shown above, it is evident this Fallibility is
not to be refunded totally into the Subject or Man (since he is capable of
Infallible Certainty in other things) but into the want of Clearness in the
Letter of Scripture (as to such Points) in proportion to private
Understandings, and consequently that it was never intended by God for their
Rule of Faith; since, though both sides rely on this, yet one (even while doing
thus) is still in an Error; and such an Error as is a Heresy.

Since then what we hold is, that men are Infallible in affairs belonging to
Faith, and this while they rely on the Grounds left by God for them to embrace
Faith, I would ask him in a word, whether he holds all men may be deceived in
that very affair even while they do this to the best of their power? If he says
they can, it is unavoidable all the Christian world may possibly be now in an
Error, and all Christian Faith be a mere lie: As also, it is evident, that in
that case God would have left no ordinary means to secure his Church or any man
in it from Error; and lastly, that God leads men into Error, since they
acting to the best of their Power (as is supposed) their Error cannot be
refunded into them but into the de^ectiveness of those Means, that is their
want of Perspicuity or sufficient Plainness to their addicted and
faithfully-endeavouring Understandings, even as to those main Points.

Thus much to show how craftily Dr. St. to avoid reflection on the Unfitness of
the Rule he assigns, puts it only upon men's being Fallible, and how
unreasonably he behaves himself in so doing: Let us now see how he provides
against this Fallibility lest otherwise all Mankind should err in their Faith.
He tells us that there can be no better way to prevent men's mistakes in the
sense of Scripture, which men being Fallible are subject to, than the
considering the consequence of mistaking in a matter wherein their Salvation is
concerned. Well, put this Consideration in men, are any of them by virtue
thereof yet Infallible, or secured from erring in understanding Scripture? If
not, all mankind may yet according to his Grounds be in an Error in matters
belonging to Faith, and so all Christian Faith may still possibly be False,
notwithstanding all the Provision put by him to secure them and It. But if this
render them absolutely secure from Erring, then we may hope God's Church too
may have the grace given her by God as well as a private man, to consider the
consequence of mistaking also, I am sure it as much concerns her, and so the
Church (or, as he calls it a Society of men) may also be Infallible in
understanding and explaining Scripture; and, by this means, we are come about
again to an Infallible Proponent, which we have so zealously labored to avoid.
In a word, after he has put all Means left by God to be Certain of our Faith,
and all the diligence and care possible to be used by man to lay hold on those
means, let him either acknowledge that any particular man in the world, and so
a fortiori God's Church or any S^ciety of men exactly following and relying on
those Means to arrive at right Faith, is by so doing Infallible in that thing
or in interpreting Scripture, and by consequence that Christian Faith is
Infallibly Certain, or else confess that, notwithstanding all means used, all
Christian Faith is still either not Certain at all, or else Fallibly Certain,
which is a piece of most profound Nonsense; and, were it sense, signifies plain
all may be False.

The later half of this Principle, is still more admirable Nonsense than the
former, and shows how meanly he is verst in solid Divinity; he conterposes
there the Certainty in matters of Faith, to that which God has made use of as
the means to keep men from Sin in their lives; as if Faith were not intended by
God to make men Virtuous and the Certainty of Faith the most effectual part of
those means. But because I see Dr. St. though he have a very good wit, yet by
reason of his sole Application to verbal Divinity, which never reaches the
Ground or Bottom of any thing it talks of, is very Ignorant of what is meant by
Christian Life and it is opposite Vice, or Sin, I will take a little pains to
inform him better. He may please then to know that it suting best with God's
Wisdom to govern the world by way of Causes and Effects, he carries on the
course of his Ordinary Providence even in Supernaturalls by means of
Dispositions The whole design then of his Goodness is to plant those
dispositions in our Soul by means of Religion as may make us most comfortable
to himself, that so Ascensiones in cord nostro disponendo, asceendamus de
virtute in virtutem donec videatur Deus Deorum in Sion. That is, by Ordering
those rising Steps in our heart we may ascend from Virtue to Virtue till the
God of Gods be seen in Sion. Hence the life of a Chri^tian, as such, is
spiritual, and the Proper way for him to worship God is in spirit, that is by
Spiritual Acts or Habits to perfect his Soul, or that part in us which is
Spiritual, and dispose is for Heaven; But Error is also spiritual, and yet is
far from perfecting our Soul, therefore Truth must go along with it, and so we
are to worship God in spirit and Truth; Hence, the first of virtues, in
priority of Nature is true Knowledge of God, and of the motives or means to
attain him, and the only way for the Generality to arrive at these is by
believing his Divine Authority upon some way of Revelation which gives his
Church and by her and all others Absolute Certainty it is engaged; by which
means we are perfectly secure that what we proceed upon is God's sense, or
Truth, which is the Basis of all our Spiritual building. Out of these
Knowledges are apt to spring Adoration, Reverence, Hope, and Love of him above
all things, in Christian Language called Charity, the Queen of all Virtues,
(major autem horuni Charitas, says St. Paul) and out of this Love of God above
all things, Love of our Neighbor as our self; in the heartiness of which, or
the having that Rational disposition in our hearts to do as we would be done
to, consists the keeping all the Commandments of the Second Table; which is
also our good; for, so, more undisturbed by Passion, or vexation from the
Exterior World whose order we violate in transgressing against these, we are
more free to practice those other virtues which are to elevate us toward
Heaven and fit us according to the measure of out pitch appointed by God, for
the Attainment of Bliss. Hence is seen what is meant by sin or vice; For, this,
being formally a defect, is only a want of the opposite good Disposition or
Virtue. The chief Vice then is Hatred of God, or a very sleighting and
perfectly deliberate dis-regard and Posthabition of his Incomparable self, our
Final Bliss, to a Creature; next, Despair, Irreverence, Infidelity, totally, as
in Heathenism, or in some particular, as Tur^ism, Judaism, Heresy: In the last
place comes the want of that due Love of our Neighbor for God's sake as leaves
our Will disposed (as far as that motive carries us) to do him any injury for
our own temporal Convenience; in which consists the violation of the
Commandments of the Second Table. Insomuch as, though a man commits not one of
those Acts there forbidden, out of the motive of Worldly Honor, Civility, Fear
or any other such like, yet if he wants that rightly-grounded Interior Love of
his Neighbor and builds not his Avoidance of harming him on that motive, that
is, if he be disposed to commit them all for any thing that motive would hinder
him, however in the sight of man or Exteriourly he keeps those Commandments,
yet is he guilty of them all Interiourly or in the sight of God.

To apply this then to our present purpose. It Is seen hence that Faith is the
Basis of all virtuous Life, and consequently the want of it the ruin of all
virtue and the ready way to all Vice and sin: For, external Acting or Avoiding
are nothing to Christian virtue, unless they spring from a Christian motive:
and it is only Faith which gives us those Motives; and the stability,
well-groundedness or Truth of Faith, which renders those Motives effectual.
Wherefore, unless the Faithful be materially Infallible while they believe God
has revealed such and fuch things, that is, unless God did indeed reveal them,
and so their Faith be really True; all Gods worship and Good life is ill-built,
ruinous and falls to the Ground: And unless some of them, or those who are
capable to understand it to be True, be formally Infallible, it would work less
effectually in all those who should re^lect that they saw not but it might be
False, or be made so reflect by others who were enemies to Faith; nor could the
Truth of Christian Faith be defended, or made out, or be Justifiably
recommended to others as True, nor with Wisdom and Honesty be professed True, by
those who judge themselves capable to look through it is Grounds and yet see
nothing Conclusive of Truth in them. Wherefore this Fallible Certainty of his
destroys all Efficacy, all Defense and even Essence of Faith, and consequently
radically subverts and overthrows all Christian Virtue, and all true Goodness.
Which, I attest the Author and Finisher of our Faith, is the true reason why I
with so much zeal and Earnestness oppose him and his Friend, for advancing
Uncertainty, and consequently Skepticism in Faith, however they and their angry
passionate party are pleased to apprehend me.

I perceive Dr. St. will hope to evade by saying that Christian virtue may be
upheld by the Certainty we have of some Points of Faith, though others be
Uncertain: which Points, to make his Uncertainty of Faith go down the better,
he calls here Opinions. But, if he means by Opinions the Tenets of a Trinity,
Christ's Godhead and Presence in the B. Sacrament (all most highly concerning
Christian Life one way or other) in which we discern great parties differing
who all ^dmit the Scripture and use the best means to interpret it as far as we
can perceive; nay, and consider the consequence of mistaking too, which he
makes the very best means of all: If, I say, these and such as these be the
Opinions he speaks of, and counterposes them to means to keep men* from sin in
their lives; and that the Rule of Faith he assigns leaves whole Bodies of
Reliers on it in actual Error in such Fundamental Points of Faith and of most
high concernment to good life, as has been shown, even while they proceed upon
it; it is evident it is not the Rule God intended his Church and mankind to
build their Faith on, and so none can presume of security of mistake by relying
purely upon it; but all of Concern not known before by some other means, that
is all which it alone holds forth, may be also liable to be a mistake likewise;
unless some other Authority more ascertainable to us then it abets it is Letter
in such passages as are plain because they are either merely Moral or
Narrative; or explain it is sense in others which are more spiritual and
supernatural and so more peculiar and Fundamental to Christianity.

Recapitulation.
To meet with the absurd Positions expressed or else implied in the Doctrine
delivered here by Dr. St. in these last Eleven Principles of his, I take leave
to remind the Reader of these few opposite Truths established in my former
Discourse.

1. That Assent called Faith, taken as built on the Motives left by God to
light Mankind to the Knowledge of his Will, (that is taken as it ought to be
taken, and as it is found in the Generality) is for that Reason Absolutely (that
is, more then morally) Certain, or Impossible to be False.

2. Though the Nature of Assent depend immediately on the Evidence we have of it
in our minds when it is Rational; yet in case it be True, as the Assent of Faith
ought to be, it must necessarily be built and depend fundamentally on the
nature of the Thing; since without dependence on It, this Evidence it self
cannot possibly be had.

3. A man may be materially Infallible, or out of possibility of being actually
deceived in judging the divine Authority is engaged, by adhering to another's
Judgment who is Infallible, or in the right in thus judging, though he
penetrate not the reason why that other man comes to be Infallible. Also he who
is thus Infallible, being in possession of those Truths (relieved upon the
Divine Authority as the Formal motive of believing them) which Truths as
Principles beget those good Affections in him in which consist our Christian
Life: such a man, I say, has consequently enough (speaking abstractedly) for
the Essence of Saving Faith, though he be not Formally or knowingly Infallible
by penetrating the Conclusiveness of the Grounds of Faith.

4. To be thus materially Infallible, or thus in the right in judging the
Divine Authority is engaged, is requisite and necessary for the Essence of
Faith; otherwise the believing upon the Divin Authority when it is not engaged,
and so perhaps the believing and holding firmly to abominable Errors and
Heretical Tenets might be an Act of Faith; to assert which, is both absurd and
most impious.

5. It Is requisite to the Perfection of Faith to be formally or Knowingly
Infallible that the Divine Authority is engaged. For, since it hazards Heresy
and Error to judge that the Divine Authority is engaged for any point when
it is not, it ought to breed suspense and caution in Reflecters till they see it
engaged: and consequently the better they see this the more he^rtily they are
apt to assent to the point upon the Divine Auth^rity: So that the Absolute
Certainty of the Grounds which conclude the Divine Authority engaged, betters
and strengthens the Act of Faith.

6. However it be enough for the Faith of those whose downright rudeness lets
them not reflect at all, to be only Materially Infallible that God's Authority
is engaged, yet it is besides of Absolute necessity to Reflecters who raise
doubts, especially for those who are very acute, to discern some reason which
cannot deceive them, or to be formally or knowingly Infallible that it is indeed
actually engaged for those points. Otherwise it would follow that provision
enough had been made by God to satisfy or cause saving Faith in Fools, and none
at all to breed Faith wise men; which, without satisfaction in this in point is
in possible to be expected in such through-sighted Reflecters. The same Formal
Infallibility is necessary for the wisest sort of men in the Church, both to
de^end Faith and establish it is Grounds in a Scholar-like way, as also for
their Profession of the Truth of Faith, and other Obligations incumbent on them
as Faithful, and lastly, for the Effects which are to be bred in them by
Faith's Certainty.

7. Though then the Rule of Faith needs not to be actually penetrated by all
the Faithful while they proceed unreflectingly, yet it ought to be so
qualified that it may satisfy all who are apt to reflect and so to doubt of
their Faith; that is, it is Ruling power ought to be penetrable or evidenceable
to them if they come to doubt: and also so connatural and suitable to the
unelevated and unreflecting thoughts of men of all sorts, that it be the most
apt that maybe to establish the Faithful in the mean time and preserve them
from doubting of their Faith. Both these are found in Tradition, or Testifying
Authority, and not in Scripture's Letter. That therefore, and not This is the
Rule of Faith.

8. Infallible Certainty of Faith being rejected, the Moral Certain^y he
substitutes must either be a Fallible Certainty or none; this later is Impious,
the former is nonsense; Wherefore all Dr. St's Discourse of Faith, while he
rejects Infallibility, must forcibly have the one or the other of these
Qualifications.

9. A firm Assent to a thing as True renders no man Certain of what he thus
assents to; for so Heretics might be truly Certain of all the pestilent
Errors they hold, so they but firmly assent they are True.

10. Faith being the Basis of all Christian Virtues, on which all our spiritual
Edifice is built, and from whence we derive all the Certainty we have of all
that concerns it, ought by consequence be better grounded and firmer then any
or all it is superstructures. Also, it is ill Divinity to counterp^se matters of
Faith to the Means to keep men from sin in their lives, since Matters of Faith
or Christ's doctrine is the very best of those Means; or to pretend that Errors
in Opinion (I suppose he means in Faith, that being the point) are not more
dangerous to men's. Souls than a vicious life; for this supposes Faith no part
of a Christian Life, nor Infidelily, Heresy; Judaism or Turcism to be vices:
which, by consequence, degrades Christian Faith from being a virtue, contrary
to the Sentiment of all Christianity since the beginning of the Church.

I shall hope from any impartial and Intelligent Reader who is a Christian,
that he will acknowledge these Posi^ions of mine bear a clear Evidence either
in the^ s^lves, or in their Pr^ofs; and consequently, that the opposite ones
advanced either Explicitly or Implicitly by Dr. St. are both Obscure and
(which is worse) Untrue.

The Total Account of Dr. St's Principles.
THus have I spoken distinctly and fully to Dr. St's. Principles. It were not
amiss to sum up their merits in brief, and give a short character of them; that
so it may be seen how infinitely short they fall of deserving so Honorable a
Name. But, first, we are to speak a word or two to the Principles agreed on by
both sides: of which the First and Third are great Truths, and the word, God
and Obedience due to God, now and then barely named; but no kind of
Conclusions, are drawn from those two particular Propositions influential to
the End intended, viz. to reduce the Faith of the Protestants to Principles;
whence, though they are most Certain Truths, yet, as standing here, they are no
Principles.

The 2d and 4th which concern God's Attributes, are not at all used neither.
For he cannot use them alone to evince Scripture's Letter is the Rule, unless
he first prove that Scripture's Letter is the fittest for that End, and that
therefore it become Gods's Attributes to choose it; which he no where does: and
whereas he would argue thus, Princ. 7. God has chosen it for a Rule, therefore
it is agreeable to his Attributes; it is both Frivolous, because all is already
concluded between us if he proves God has chosen Scripture for that end, for
then it is granted by all it must be agreeable to his Attributes; and also
Preposterous, for he makes that the Conclusion which should be, in case he
argued from God's Attributes, the Principle: For his Argument ought, in that
case, to run thus; Gods Wisdom and Goodness has chosen that for a Rule which is
wisest and best to be chosen; but Scriptures Letter is such; therefore he has
chosen it for a Rule.

The 4th and 5th are either never made use of by him as Principles, or else
they make directly against himself; For Fallible Certainty, only which, having
discarded that which is Infallible, he sustains, can never make any one know
what is God's will.

This is an ill beginning, and a very slender Success hitherto; let us see next
whether he has better luck with his own Principles.

The first, taking the words literally and Properly as they ought to be taken
in Principles, is against himself: for he confesses there that such a way of
Revelation is in it self neccessary to our Entire Obedience to God's will, as
may make us know what the will of God is; but common sense tells us that
Fallible Certainty (which only, having rejected Infallible Certainty he can
maintain) is far from making us Know: This Principle therefore is either
against himself, or, if he means to go less by the word Know than what is apt
absolutely and truly to ascertain, it is nothing to his purpose; for so, it can
only settle Opinion and not Faith.

The second is Useless, Impertinent, and in part False.

The Third is False and Impertinent to boot,

The Fourth is Ambiguous, and, taken in that sense, when distinguished, which
he seems to aim at, it is absolutely False.

The 5th is Absur^d, Preposterous and against all Art, in putting us to argue
from what is less known to what is more known; and withal totally False.

The 6th is Sophi^tically Ambiguous and in great part False.

The 7th builds on a groundless pretense, and contains a notorious (...).

The 8th is to no purpose; or sin^^ (as appears in the Process of his
discourse) he means by the words [ Certainly] and [ Know] only Fallible
Certainty which is none at all, he cannot possibly advance by such a discourse
toward the settling us a Certain Rule of Faith. Besides he either supposes
Scripture, as it now stands, Sufficient, which is to beg the Question; or else,
he confounds God's Ordinary Power working with the Causes now on foot in the
world, which only concerned the present point, with his Extraordinary, or what
he can possibly effect by his Divine Omnipitence:

The 9th only Enumerates the several ways how God may be conceived to make
known his will, and, in doing so either minces or else quite leaves out the
Tradition of Gods Church: as if it were Inconceivable God should speak to men
by their Lawful Pastors in the Church; whereas yet himself must confess that
in the beginning of the Church Faith either was signified and certify'd by that
or no way.

The 10th goes upon a False Supposition and includes two Fallaces, called by
Logicians non causa pro causa, or assigning a wrong Cause, and omitting the
True one; Also, it is in part False, in saying words are equally oapable of
being understood spoken or written: and lastly, it confounds again God's
Ordinary Power with his Extraordinary.

The 11th makes account there is no benefit of Divine Writings but in being the
Rule of Faith, which is against Common sense and daily Experience.

The 12th comes home to the point; but it is perfectly Groundless, Unprov'd,
False, and as full of Absurdities of several sorts as it can well ^old.

The 13th begins with a False Position, proceeds with a False and unprov'd
Supposition, and endeavors to induce a most Extravagant Conclusion only from
Premises granted kindly by himself to himself without the least Proof.

The 14tb contains three False and unprov'd Suppositions: viz. that God
promis't his Church to deliver his whole will in Writings; or that the Writers
of Scripture had any order from God to write his whole will explicitly; or,
that the primitive Church believed it to have such a perfection as to signify
(without needing the Church) all saving Truth to every sincere Reader with such
a Certainty as is requisite to Faith.

The 15th begins again with a False and unprov'd Supposition, and draws thence
a consequence not contained in the Proof, and, in part, against the interest of
his own Tenet; and, Lastly, brings in confirmation of it an Instance which
makes against himself.

The 16th putts upon Catholics a Tenet they never held, and is wholly False,
Irrational and Absurd: assuming gratis this position, that nothing but Miracle
ought to serve, whether there be other Means laid or no; Or, that no Proof but
Miracle can possibly be sufficient to satisfy men's Reasons in a thing Subject
to Reason. For, the Natural Assistance of the Church is such of it self, and
the Suppernatural, supposing the knowledge of Sanctity in the Church, is as
plain Reason as that the greatest motives to Goodness, and Interior Goodness
caused by those motives, will make those good men who have it act as good men
ought and are apt to do.

The 17th proceeds wholly upon a False Imputation laid on our Church, and on
his confounding most absurdly the notion of the Church with that of the
Schools; or rather taking a few speculative Divines, and those the weakest, to
be the Church.

The 18th is again built on an unprov'd Supposition (of which kind of Grounds
he is still very free) and on a falsely pretended promise from God so to secure
any private-spirited Contemner of the Church that he shall be in the way to
Salvation whether he Err^ or no; though (as common sense and the Order of the
world gives it) he forfeit both his Reason and his Virtue by not hearing his
Lawful and Learned Pastors rather than his self-conceited Ignorant self.

The 19th has the same Faults with the former, and is wholly False, even though
his own Supposition, mentioned in the close, were freely granted him, which
it is not.

The four Principles following are made up of these Errors. 1. That we hold
that no man can have a True and saving Faith unless he sees and knows that the
Proponent is Infallible. 2. That the nature of Assent (when rational) depends
not on the Object. 3. That one cannot have an Infallible Assent in Faith
without Infallible Assistance to judge of the Points of Faith themselves. 4.
That there is no middle between no particular person, and every particular
person being formally Infallible; whereas my Tenet is that some must be so,
most may be so, and all need not be so. 5. That because all must be materially
Infallible, or in the true Faith, but know not how they are so; therefore it is
useless that any should know how to make out those Grounds, to settle, explain,
and defend Faith and it is Certainty. These with his self-contradiction are the
jarring Elements which compound these four terrible Principles, with which he
hopes to undermine and blow up the Churches Infalibility, and the absolute
Certainty of all Christian Faith.

The 24th gives good words in common of Certainty and Evidence, but he means by
the former Fallible Certainty, by the Later only some Probability or
Improbability, so it but appears so to the Subject. And is a total
prevarication, from Settling the Truth of Faith to not doubting the Truth of
the Scripture; of which there is no question.

The 25th holds forth a most wicked and gross Absurdity, destructive of all
Certainty, Evidence, Faith, Christianity, and even Manhood, viz. that to
Assent firmly to any thing as True, is to be Certain of it: And intimates two
others, viz. that a man who is now Certain of a thing, may at another time know
that thing to be False, though not at the same time; as also, that such a
Certainty is competent for Belief or Faith.

The 26. speaks Evident Truth in the beginning of it, but is nothing available
to his cause, but rather against him. The Inference thence is False, being
defectively expressed; and when rectified, is also a clear Truth, but highly
prejudices himself.

The 27. is utterly (...) of common Sense, Certainty, Faith and Christianity.

The 28. Principle is a weak and inconsistent Discourse.

The 29. supposes Scriptures Intelligible enough in all Points of Faith without
the Church, and to contain expressly God's whole will, o^ every Article of
Faith, or at least with such a Ground of it there as that it is deducible thence
by private understandings with a Certainty competent for Faith; none of which
he has at all proved, nor ever will.

The 30th and last confesses all men liable to Error in Faith, though relying
on the Means left by God to secure them from it; which evidently makes that
means to be none: and assigns a way for their best security, which all Erring
Sects in the world (as far as we can discern) take, and yet still err. And,
lastly, for an Upshot, he makes account, like a Solid Divine, that our
Christian Life is not at all Interior, but only Exterior; and, consequently,
that Faith is no part of a Christian's Life, nor the means to the other parts
of it, nor Infidelity and Heresy a Sin or Vice; and then all is safe, and his
Principles stand firm: for then it is evident that every private man may reject
the Church at pleasure, and be sure to understand as much in Scripture as is
necessary to Salvation; for, if these be no sins, and so do not damn a man
either immediately or mediatly, there is nothing that will. But indeed, in Dr.
St's kind of Reformation, they are rather to be accounted Cardinal and
Fundamental Virtues. Such Senseless Principles ought to produce no better Fruit;
for this suits their Practice and his Principles: Rebel against God's Church,
break the most Sacred Order of the World, and do but talk stoutly and with a
bold grace and a pretty way of Expression of Scripture and God's Word, and then
all is Holy and Good.

Reflecting then back on the nature of Principles, and considering that to
deserve that name they must necessarily have in them two Qualifications, viz.
Evidence in themselves, and Influence upon some other Propositions which are to
derive their Evidence from them; and it being manifest, both out of this short
Review, and much more out of the full Replies to each of them, that not one of
those which D. St. here calls Principles, but is either Vnevident and False; or,
if True, Impertinent and void of any the least Influence upon the Point he
aimed to prove by them: They are clearly convinced to have nothing in them like
Principles, or entitling them to the honor of that name; and that he might
with far more reason have called them, Conceits, Paradoxes, Quodlibets, or
Crotchets. And I know no better way for him to vindicate them, but to entreat
his Fellow-Hater of Infallibility Dr. T. who has a special gift at* See his
Preface to his Sermons, p. last.
putting Principles into Categorical and Hypothetical Syllogisms, to undertake
these; that so the world may see the rare consequences that arise from them; to
which, lest he should fail his Friend, we now address.

The Sixth Examen of Dr. St's Six Conclusions.
ANY man, who had either heard of Logic or reflected a little upon Nature,
would verily have thought that such obscure Principles should necessarily have
produced more obscure Conclusions, since the Evidence of the Later, being
derived only from the former and participated from them, must needs be found in
a lesser degree of Perfection in these, than is the Evidence of those former
from whence it is borrowed and caused. But herein consists Dr. St's Masterpiece;
that though his Principles be never so dark, his Conclusions are yet as light
as Noonday. But I m^st not forestall the Reader's mirth. What I am to do is to
declare in short what kind of things Conclusions ought to be; in doing which I
will say no more than all men of Art in the world, and all who understand
common reason will yield to be evident.

A Conclusion, then,

1. Is a Proposition which follows out of Premises which are it is Principles.

2. The Knowledge of it is Verity depends on our knowing that the Premises
(it is Prinples) are True.

3. Therefore, the verity of these Premises must be more known to him whom we
intend to convince of the Truth of the Conclusion, than is the Truth of the
Conclusion it self; otherwise it is in vain to endeavor to convince him of this
by the other.

4. The Consequence or Following of the Conclusion out of the Premises, or the
Con^uxion between them, must be made known; for if by virtue of this Coherence
it follow not thence, it may be perhaps a great Truth, but it is not at all a
Conclusion.

5. To do this, it is requisite that each particular Conclusion should either be
put immediately after it^s particular Premises, or else be related to them;
otherwise, how shall any one be able to judge whether they cohere or no, if he
know not what things are to cohere.

Lastly, the Conclusion must be such as that in the granting it the victory of
the Opponent consists; and so it must come home and close to the very point in
difference between the two disputing parties. These short Notes duly reflected
on, we advance to a nearer view of his pretended Conclusions.

They are introduc't with these three dry words [ It follows that]. And here is
our first defeat: The Consequences are Six, the Principles Thirty; and yet no
light is thought fit to be given us, which Conclusion follows out of which
Principles; but we are left to grope in the dark, and guess at a thing, which
(as shall be seen hereafter) no Sphynx or O^dipus can ever make any probable
nor even possible conjecture of. I wonder to what end he with such exact care
noted all both Principles and Consequences in due Order with numbering Figures:
was it only to give us a sleeveless notice that there were just Thirty
Principles and just Six Conclusions? I see no such great Mystery or
Remarkableness in that observation as should deserve such a Caution or Care. He
should then either have omitted these, or else, to show them useful, have
afforded us a few Figures more, relating each Conclusion to to it is respective
Premises or Principles. But the reason of this Carriage is manifest: For, had
he done this, we might have examined what coherence each Conclusion had with
it is Premises, and whether it followed from them by necessary consequence or
no: Also, whether the Premises were more Evident then it self was: and all
those other Properties of a Conclusion lately noted; without which it is the
height of Nonsense to call any saying a Conclusion. Had these considerations
come to the Test, his Consequences had come off as ill or worse than his
Principles. Let themselves tell us whether I wrong them or no.

It follows that

1. There is no necessity at all or use of an Infallible Society of men, to
assure men of the Truth of those things which they may be Certain of without,
and cannot have any greater assurance, supposing such Infallibility to be in
them.

This Proposition is so far from being a Conclusion from any Principles, much
less from his, that it is self-known to all men of common sense, and amounts
indeed to a first Principle. For, an Infallible Society of men, so
circumstanc't as he describes, is most evidently needless, and to no purpose;
and so this Conclusion amounts in plain Terms to this Identical Proposition,
only paraphrased a little, What Is needless is needless, Or, it is to no purpose
to put that which is of no purpose when put, or of no purpose to be put: Which
are known by the Light of Nature, and so cannot admit Proof. Is not this a rare
man, who first lays such obscure Principles as need Proof, and so ought to be
called Conclusions; and then pretends to infer such Conclusions as cannot
possibly need proving, being selfevident, and so ought rather to be called
First Principles? What I desire at present is that he would please to acquaint
us out of which of his ^o Principles it follows, that what needs not, needs
not. If out of none, this is no Conclusion, though it be a most Evident Truth.

2. The Infallibility of that Society of men who call themselves the Catholic
Church must be examined by the same Faculties in man, the same Rules of trial,
the same motives, by which the Infallibility of any divine Revelation is.

This is of the same nature with the foregoing. For, the former part, which
says that this Infallibility must be examined by the same Faculties in man, is
as plain as it is that nothing can be examined without a Faculty or Power to
examine; or, that nothing can examine but what can examine, which is Evident
beyond all possibility of Proof: Or, was ever any man in this world so silly as
to imagine that, whereas we must use our Reasoning Faculty in judging the
Infallibility of any Divine Revelation, yet perhaps we are to make use not of
the same Faculty, but of our Loco-motive, expulsive or Retentive Faculty, in
examining the Infallibility of the Church?

As for the rest of it; if he means, by Rules of Trial and Motives, the maxims
and Reasons we have for holding the Truth of any thing (as he can mean no
other) then it is manifest that, taking Divine Revelation for a point of Faith
revealed, it is Infallibility is to be examined by the same means other Points
of Faith are, and so it is to be concluded Infallibly True, as other points of
Faith also are, because the Divine Authority is shown to be engaged for the
Truth of it. Again, taking those words to signify the Act or way of Revealing,
which goes before Faith, and so is the Object of mere natural Reason, it is
evident its Infallibility is to be examined by the same Maxims as the
Infallibility of other Human Authorities also are, or rather, thus taken, the
Infallibility of the Church testifying delivered Faith, and the Infallibility
of the Divine Revelation are one and the same thing. So that, Distinguishing
his words to clear his sense, his Conclusion plainly amounts to this, that [
Points of Faith are to be examined in the same manner as Points of Faith are to
be examined;] or else [That Things of such a nature Subject to Human Reason,
are to be examined in the same manner as things of that nature Subject to Human
Reason are to be examined.] Or rather, which will fit both of them, that [
Things of any nature are to be examined as things of that nature are to be
examined.] which is so evident to all men of common sense that it cannot need
Proof, and can scarce admit any; I am sure is never proved by him: That is,
it is no Conclusion drawn from any of his Principles, but putting in stead of [
the same Rules of trial and Motives] these words [ the same way] which includes
them both equivalently, it is only a Repetition of his 5th and 6th Principle,
and continues the same affected ambiguity in the word Revelation as he used
formerly; nay and is the same nonsense too, in case he takes Revelation in
either place for a point of Faith revealed, and the Infallibility of the Church
for that only which is built on Natural Assistance, that is, for it is Human
Testimony: for so it is most manifest the same motives neither are nor can be
common to both. For Points of Faith are received upon Authority as their proper
Motive, and are Relative to That; and the Human Authority of the Church depends
on Maxims of mere natural Reason, and not at all on Authority: which evidence
they depend upon different motives, and so must be examined by motives which
are not the same.

This pretended Conclusion then is no new Proposition from his Premises, as a
Conclusion ought to be, but the self same with them; and is either
self-evident, or else a mere piece of Folly and Nonsense, that is (the Terms of
it being cleared) both False and unprov'd, and so again no Conclusion, which
must be made evident or Proved.

3. The less convincing the Miracles, the more doubtful the marks, the more
obscure the sense of either what is called the Catholic Church, or declared by
it; the less reason has any Christian to believe upon the account of any who
call themselves by the name of the Catholic Church.

No man in his wits could any more doubt of this then of what is most Evident by
the Light of Nature; for, Convincingness of Miracles, Evidence of the Marks,
and Sense of the Church, being evidently Means or Reasons to believe, this
Conclusion, putting less of (...) these Reasons, amounts in plain Terms to this
Indentical Proposition [ Where there is less reason to believe, there is less
reason to believe] which is Dr. St. can show possible to follow out of any of
his Principles as Premises, as he here pretends, he will do more then Miracle.
For he has not there proved in the least that our Miracles are less
conv^ncing, our Marks doubtful, our sense obscure; nor so much as mentioned
those points, much less gone about to confute our pretense of their
Convincingnesse and Evidence: and, without doing this, to pretend this is a
Conclusion, and that it follows from his Principles, whereas it is incomparably
more evident then the best of those he makes use of, is to abuse the common
regard due to his Readers, and to declare he makes account they never knew what
belonged to ordinary Natural Logic, or the Common Light of Reason.

4. The more absurd any Opinions are and repugnant to the first Principles of
Sense and Reason which any Church obtrudes upon the Faith of men, the greater
reason men shill have to reject the pretense of Infallibility in that Church as
a grand Imposture.

This is just such another as the former* For it being self-evident that
Absurdities and Contradictions are not to be held; and self-evident likewise
that that which recommends such things to our belief (...) to be rejected; this
pretended Conclusion amounts to this plain Truth that [ What has more reason to
be rejected, has greater (or more) reason to be rejected:] which is an
Identical Proposition, so plain that it cannot need or admit Proof; and, if it
did, or could, there is not the least semblance of any thing offered in his
Principles to prove it by, nor any sentence or clause in them concerning that
matter, which has the tenth part of the ^lear Evidence that shines in this
Proposition which he pretends follows from them, as a Conclusion.

5. To disown what is so taught by such a Church, is not to question the
veracity of God, but so firmly to adhere to that, in what he has revealed in
Scriptures, that men dare not out of love to their souls reject what is so
taught.

The first part of this, is of the same nature with the former: For the words [
such a Church] and [ so taught] meaning absurdly and repugnantly to First
Principles, the Truth of it is full as self-evident to all Christians who hold
God the Author of Truth, as it is that [ The Author of Truth is not the
Author of Lies.] The rest of it, which would seem to put the opposite to the
foregoing part, and tells us that to disown what is so taught by such a Church
is firmly to adhere to what is revealed in Scripture, etc. is absolutely False;
for to disown what is so taught by such a Church, amounts to no more but to
hold to the First Principles of Sense and Reason in points conrrary to those
Principles, obtruded by that Church; which a man may do and yet be an Athiest,
for any thing Dr. St. has brought to make him adhere to Scripture: for I much
doubt that a professed Fallible Certainty, for such wonderful and extraordinary
Points as he will be bound to believe if he becomes a Christian, will scarce be
able to give him full satisfaction of their Truth, if he guide himself by the
First Principles of Reason, as Dr. St. pretends he should. Nor is it in Dr.
St's love of his Soul, as he like a Saint pretends here, but Humor and
Interest, to adhere so firmly to his private Interpretation of Scripture for
his Rule of Faith; which he cannot but see has not in it the nature of such a
Rule, nor consequently was ever intended by God for such an end: since,
renouncing Infallibility in men, he must confess that all possible means being
used to find out Truth by Interpretations of Scripture no better grounded, it
still leaves all the Reliers on it in a possibility of being mistaken (as
himself also confesses Princ. 30.) that is, Insecure that their Faith is True,
or only Fallibly Certain of their Faith.

Before I proceed to his sixth and last Conclusion, it were not amiss to
examine these according to the No^es put down formerly containing some
Qualifications necessarily belonging to all Conclusions; and to show by their
want of all those how utterly unlike these five last are to what they pretended
to be. And first, not one of them follows out of his Principles as from their
Premises, as I showed in each of them. 2. Their Verity is known and evident to
all Mankind independently on those Principles of his. 3. Their Verity is more
known than is that of those Principles. For, speaking of the main import and
weight of them (abstracting from some particular words and phrasing his
notions) they are all in a manner self-evident and Unexceptionable; whereas his
thirty Principles are liable to multitudes of exceptions, as has been shown in
the proper Answers to each. 4ly and 5ly The Consequence, Connection or Following
of these pretended Conclusions out of their Premises is not so much as
attempted to be shown, nor any one of them related to any Principle or
Principles; but all the Figures which distinguish both the one and the others
stand for Cypher^ and are useless. Lastly, were all these Conclusions, granted
him, yet still he is never the nearer having proved or compas't what he
intended. For, suppose we granted that there can be no necessity of an
Infallible Society of men to do that which can be done as well without them?
What if the supernatural Infallibility of the Church must be examined by the
fame Faculty and the same ways Points of Faith are, or it is Natural
Infallibility the same way it is Natural or Human Authority is examined? What if
we have less Reason to believe it, if it is Miracles be less convincing, it is
Marks more doubtful, and it is sense more Obscure; and greater reason to reject
it, the more absurd it is opinions are, and repugnant to the first Principles of
Sense and Reason? What if to disown such Doctrines be not to question God's
Veracity? What, I say, if all these were granted by us (as they would have been
very readily at the first, though he had never skirmish't and flourish't and
kept this pother with laying so formally six Principles agreed on by both
sides, and then thirty other of his own?) yet, he is not one jot the nearer the
reducing the Faith of Protestants to Principles which was promis't us at the
beginning, and so we ought to expect the performance of it when he had deduc't
his Conclusions, which use to infer the Intent proposed to himself by the
disputant, and to come home to the very point the Arguer would be at. Indeed,
if he could show us solidly that Infallibility in a Church were useless; that,
examined by such ways and means as it ought, it would be overthrown and could
not stand the trial; that it is Miracles were Unconvincing, it is Marks
Doubtful, it is Sense declared by it Obscure, or that it is Opinions were indeed
Absurd and Repugnant to the First Principles of Sense and Reason: very great
matters had indeed in that case been done against our Church and Faith, yet
still nothing at all to the establishment of his own. A Catholic might in that
case have indeed lost his own Faith, and be to seek for another, but never find
any merely by means of these destructive Positions alone; unless Dr. St. can
settle him some other Ground built on better Principles and such as are
competent to settle Faith on, which Fallible Certainty (were it sense) will
never reach. So that were all his Conclusions hitherto freely granted, he is
still as far from having attained what he proposed to himself and promis't
others, as at the beginning, Nor can* it be imagined why he makes us this
mock-shew of Consequences, but only, that as at the beginning he put down most
undeniable and most sacred Principles agreed on both sides, so to make his
Readers apprehend beforehand he must needs conquer who had such sure Cards to
play (though by his shynesse to make use of them and apply them home it
appeared he had no Title to them.) so now he puts five undeniable Propositions
for Conclusions to make weak nnattentive Readers imagine he had actually
conquered, for nothing sounds a more complete Victory, that to in^ferr evident
Conclusions; But the ill luck is, not one of them is a Conclusion, not has that
kind of Evidence in it which is peculiar to such Propositions, viz.
Evidence-had by means of Proof, but they are all evident of themselves or
self-evident, and so a good plot is unluckily spoiled,

I have yet one thing more to say to them, that they have all of them evidently
the Nature of Premises in them, and would do extraordinary service to his
Cause taken in that capacity (as far, I mean, as he ayms to overthrow the
Catholic Church) if the badness of it would let him pursue them and stand by
them and apply them. To show which I will put them down in a clear method, that
it may be seen where the point sticks. The First Conclusion then has in it the
Nature of a Major Proposition; and put in a Discourse, stands thus.

That Infallibility without which men may be Certain of Faith, and cannot have
greater Assurance of Faith were it put, is not necessary to be put.

But suoh is the Infallibility of the Church of Rome.

Therefore the Infallibility of the Church of Rome is not to be put.

The second stands thus, (if it can at all concern the purpose.)

That Infallibility which is to be examined by the same Faculties, Rules of
Trial and Motives by which the Infallibility of any Divine Revelation is,
cannot bear the test, but must be overthrown.

But the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church is to be thus examined.

Therefore it cannot stand the test, but must be overthrown.

The Third stands thus.

That Church whose Miracles are less convincing, marks more doubtful, sense
more obscure, has less reason to be believed.

But such is the Church of Rome.

Therefore she has less reason to be believed.

The Fourth thus.

The Infallibility of that Church whose Opinions are absurd and repugnant to
the First Principles of sense and reason has great reason to be rejected as a
Grand Imposture.

But the Infallibility of the Church of Rome is the Infallibility of such a
Church whose Opinions are absurd and repugnant to the First Principles of Sense
and Reason.

Therefore it is Infallibility ought to be rejected as a Grand Imposture.

The Fifth thus.

They who disown Doctrins thus absurd and repugnant to the First Principles of
Sense and Reason do own and not question therein the veracity of God.

But we ( in disowning the Roman Church) disown such doctrins; Therefore, We in
so doing own, or do not question the Veracity of God.

By which discourses it is evidently seen that the natural posture and place for
these five Propositions, in an attempt to overthrow the Roman Churches
Infallibility, and to excuse the Protestants for not obeying her, as is here
intended, (for they are nothing at all to the reducing the Faith of Protestants
to Principles, which they were pretendedly brought for) is to make them the
Major Propositions, where the Chief Principles to all Conclusions use and ought
to be placed. It Is evident also that these Premises or Principles stand firm
in their own undeniable Verity; and the only Thing for him to do is to make
good all the Minor Propositions; which done, all the Conclusions must
necessarily follow, and so his work is done; as indeed it always ought to be
when the Conclusion is inferred. Whereas, making these Major Propositions the
Conclusions, it is manife^ he is to begin again and argue from them, when he had
concluded, and so was at an end o^ his discourse. So that it is most palpably
Evident, that Dr. St. most absurdly, unskilfully and prepo^cerously made those
his Principles which were obscure and ungranted and had hundreds of Exceptions
against them, and so needed proof, that is, made those his Principles which
ought to have been his Con^lusions; and put those for his Conclusions which
were in a manner self-evident and must be granted by all Mankind, and which
naturally ought to be the Majors in any discourse on this Subject; that is, he
mistook Principles for Conclusions and Conclusions for Principles; which
perhaps was the reason he made use of those words [ reduced to Principles] in
stead of deduc't from Principles; intimating thereby, that his Conclusions were
all of them indeed Principles. Did ever Logic and Common Sense go thus to
wrack?

His 6th* Conclusion remains yet to be spoke to, and it is this.

6. Though nothing were to be believed as the Will of God, but what is by the
Catholic Church declareed to be so, yet this does not at all concern the
Church of Rome, which neither is the Catholic Church, nor any sound part, or
member of it.

This is far from being self-evident as were the former, but of it self as
obscure as may be, and in that regard is capable of being a Conclusion, had
there been any Premises to infer it. It comes home also to the point as far
as his Intent was to impugn Catholics; for were that which it contains
concluded, it would import no less than the utter overthrow of the Roman Cause.
But, where are the Premises or Principles which are to infer it? Must every
bold and unprov'd saying, and which begs the whole Question, be called a
Conclusion whether it have any Principles or no to prove it by? If then it have
none, why does he put it for a Conclusion, and so pretend he has concluded it?
If any, why does he not show us them, and relate to them? Is there any thing
more important then to be acquainted with those perilous all-overturning
Principles on which a Conclusion so desperately destructive to Rome is
grounded? Or, may we not justly suspect that not giving us notice with which of
his Insignificant thirty Principles this Romantical sixth Conclusion had any
Commerce, he was conscious to himself it followed from none of them; and yet
notwithstanding having a mighty mind to be thought to have concluded it, he
therefore very politickly called his own saying a Conclusion. I know he has
pretended elsewhere Idolatrous worship (forsooth) has corrupted her and made
her unsound, and twenty other Flaws he finds in her; But then he ought to have
made this Proposition be related to those Discourses, and not pretend they
follow out of his thirty Principles where not a word to that purpose is found.

Moreover, these Churches now in Communion with Rome were once true Churches;
how came they then, or when, to be now so rotten and unsound: Let the time be
assigned when by altering their Faith and worship they became corrupt: Let the
persons, place, manners of beginning, proceeding and other circumstances be
particularized, that so a matter of Fact of this manifest and concerning nature
may be made credible: Above all, how it happened that matters of this notorious
and important nature should remain unrecorded, and still believed that no such
change was, and this upon the score of a testifying Authority, so great, that
it must be confessed even by our enemies, that it was never heard since the
Foundation of the world, that so many vast Nations should swallow so prodigious
an Error so tamely in a most manifest and most concerning matter of Fact, and
which, if it be indeed an Error, none can be absolutely secure of the
Existence of any former Kings or Actions done before our times, much less of
the Authority or Text of any Book in the world. But, I suppose, if these things
be pressed, the best answer will be some Text of Scripture, as that the Enemy
sowed Tares while men slept; which, interpreted by Dr. St's private spirit,
shall sanctify to us this prodigious piece of nonsense, that the
Roman Catholic Church altered her Faith and Christian practice, and yet none
observed it or took notice of it; that is, that those many Millions of her
Subjects begun (as they must at one time or other if she indeed altered her
Faith) to believe and practice otherwise then they did, yet none of them knew
they did so: All slept, and were wrapped up (God wot) in the dark night of
Ignorance, till owl-ey'd Luther even at that midnight of Infidelity most
blessedly espied the Light of the Gospel dawning, and showed it to Dr. St's
Predecessors.

Now, whoever reflects how considerable a Part of Christianity those Churches
in Communion with Rome make, and how many abominable Corruptions or Sicknesses
there are in her, if those of Dr. St's Private-spirited Church may be trusted,
will with good reason conclude that the Church has as many diseases in her as
an old horse, and very few limbs of her free; so that it will appear she for
whose sake whole nature was made is the greatest Monster for wretchedness, and
that her condition is more miserable then any other thing in nature: and
consequently, that God's Providence has a slenderer care of his Church then of
the most trifling toy in the world; which ill suits with the great wonders and
extraordinary things he has done for her; as being made man, dying for her, and
such like.

It were good too to know how long a memb^^ of the Church may remain unsound
ere it be time to cut it off; also, whether it can be cut off, or who are
likely to cut it off: without which the Churches case must needs be most
desperate, to be almost from top to to^ as full of diseases as she can well
hold, and no means extant to give her help. But alas, it is so evident that
there are none in the world but her self and some few Sects that have
manifestly gone out from her, and it sounds so unnaturally, to say the Tree can
be cut off from it is branches, that whatever such Talkers may say in common,
yet come once to put it in execution the Absurdity of the Practice of it
bewrays the Falsehood of Tenet.

But to come closer to this voluntary saying of his; Either the Church of Rome
relies for the Certainty of her Faith, on, the right Rule of Faith appointed by
God, or she does not: If not, she has no Faith at all, but only Opinion
(however she may hap to be in the right in many Points she holds) for her
Assent will want the Certainty requisite to Faith, as not being built on the
stable Grounds God had laid to give it that Certainty; and, if the Church of
Rome have no Faith it is impossible she should be a Church, or any part of a
Church, sound or unsound, as wanting what is most Essential, True Faith; and so
Dr. St. has provided rarely well for the Mission of his own Church; for, if
ours were no Church, she had no Church Authority; and if she had none her self,
it is evident she could give none: whence will follow that the Reformed Churches
derived nothing which was Constitutive of a Church from any foregoing one, but
were wholly erected anew; and then I would know what Authority, under that of
Jesus Christ who constituted the Church at first, had power to constitute it
anew. But if Dr. St. says, that the Church of Rome relied on the Means left by
God to ascert^^ Faith, then it is manifest that doing so she could not err in
Faith, and so is as sound as may be, whatever our Talking Disputant says. Since
then there is no middle between [ relying on the Means left by God to ascertain
Faith] and [ not relying on it] and so that Body in Communion with the Roman
Church must necessarily do one of them; and if she does rely on it she must
needs have all true Faith, and so be very healthful or sound; if she does not,
she m^st needs have no True Faith at all, and so not only lose her Health but
her Essence too, which by consequence un-churches the Reformers also, it were
good Dr. St. would consider the point over again, and not talk thus any thing
at random without proof.

As for his saying (for saying things craftily, and prettily is his only
Talent) that the Church of Rome, by which I presume he means, as we do, those
Churches in Communion with the Roman, is not the Catholic Church, this will be
best decided by settling the Certain Rule of Faith, and then, by applying of
it, to consider whether any body out of her Communion have not deserted that
Rule; which if they have, they will be proved thence to have no Faith, nor
consequently to have in them the Essence of a Church; and so if this defect
appear in them all, they can be in true speech no parts of the Church; in which
case it must necess^^ily follow that those in Communion with the Roman are the
Catholic Church. Let us begin with Grounds and pursue them by close
discoursing and things will easily be decided: but this Talking Voluntaries,
this countersfeiti^g and pretending to Principles and Conclusions when there is
in reality neither the one nor the other, is good for nothing but empty show.

These excellent performances having emboldend this man of Confidence to
conceit he has done wonders, he sounds the Triumph of his own Victory in these
words.

This may suffice to show the validity of the Principles on which the Faith of
Protestants stands, and the weakness of those of the Church of Rome.

These words give us occasion to reflect back on his Promise and his
Performances: His Promise was to reduce the Faith of Protestants to Principles;
What he has performed is this. He has not yet laid one Proposition which is to
him a Principle; (that is, which he makes use of to conclude what he designs)
but what is both Obscure and False; He has settled no Faith at all but brought
all into Opinion, by discarding Infallible, and maintaining only Fallible
Certainty. And had he indeed settled any Faith, yet he has not produced own
word to settle the Faith of Protestants in particular, but all will equally fit
a Socinian or a Quaker; and his way of managing his Rule will much better suit
with a Quaker or any Fanatic than with a Protestant. Also, in stead of
reducing to Principles, he at first begins to deduce from Principles, and in
the process of his discourse he puts Conclusions for Principles, and Principles
for Conclusions; and so reduces and deduces, that is draws backwards and
forwards, blows and sups both at once.

In a word, the Total sum of his Heroic Atchievments amounts to this. He has
laid thirty Principles, which wanting either evidence or else necessary
Influence upon what he pretends to prove, are no Principles: He has so reduced
to those Principles that he makes six Conclusions follow, that is, he deduces
from them; and, so, he has so reduced to principles, that he has not reduced to
them. He has put that for a Rule, which wanting power to direct aright those
who are to rely on it, is evidently no Rule; He has attributed such a Certainty
to his Faith, as is a Fallible one, that is no Certainty but a Chimaera: and
consequently he has so Principl'd Faith as makes it no Faith, but Opinion only.
He has made six Propositions so follow out the thirty, which for want of
necessary coherence with them do not follow; Lastly, he has made those to be
Conclusions which for want of Premises, and by reason of their greater
Evidence than is fonnd in his Prin^iples, and for many other regards, are not
Conclusions but rather Principles. All which is shown in their proper places.
So that, his perplexing Intricacy in contriving and posturing his words oddly,
being once unravelled, their affected ambiguity cleared, and his
Insignificances and Incoherences laid open, the Common Light of nature will
inform any Attentive and Intelligent Reader that Dr. St. has not reduced the
Faith of Protestants to Principles, but that his whole discourse attempting it
is reduced to Contradictions. Yet in confidence of his vast performances he
ventures upon this grand Conclusion that shall strike all dead.

From all which it follows that it can be nothing but wilful Ignorance,
weakness of Judgment, strength of prejudice, or some sinful passion, which
makes any one forsake the Communion of the Church of England, to embrace that
of the Church of Rome.

But with how much greater reason may I conclude, that (in case the Church of
England owns his way of discoursing her^, and holds not that the Tradition,
Practice and Sense of Gods Church is to give us that assurance of the meaning
of Scripture as to build Faith on it, but that it is to be left to every priv^te
man's Fancy to be his own Judge in that affair) nothing but either an
Invincibly-weak Ignorance, or the wicked Sin of Spiritual Pride; making private
men scorn to submit their Judgments to persons wiser than themselves, or to be
taught by their lawful Pastors whom God has appointed for that end, can make
any man remain in the Communion of the Church of England, and not unite himself
to the Communion of the Church of Rome. Especially, since they all hold that
Faith cannot possibly be False, and so must hold that the means to Faith cannot
possibly lead the reliers on it into error, and yet (if but meanly verst in
the world) they must needs experience that those who do rely on their own sense
of Scripture differ in most Fundamental points of Christianity, and so, oneside
necessarily err in so doing.

FINIS.
TRANSITION TO THE Following Discourse.
HAving thus totally defeated Dr. St's. Attempt to reduce his Faith to
Principles, and shown that in stead of performing this, all the most
substantial parts of his Discourse are reduced to so many Contradictious, it
may perhaps be expected I should assert the Truth of my own by showing that
it is built on such Firm and Evident Grounds. But I presume I have already
performed this in my Sure-footing and its Corollaries, as also in Faith
Vindicated and its Inferences; and, if it shall appear needful or be required
of me by Learned Men, it may perhaps hereafter be brought into a closer and
more rigorous Form. Yet, that it may be seen how easily our Discourses
concerning the Certainty and Ground of Faith are resolvable into Evident
Principles, I shall annex for an Instance a small Peace of mine; which, though
it was never pretended to be a severe Process by way of Principles, but only
meant for a connected Discourse, yet I doubt not but I shall show that each
main Joint of it where it speaks assertively, has a Firm and Evident Principle
at the Bottom, giving it Stability and Evidence, and through virtue of these
Qualifications, rendering it Solidly and Absolutely Convictive^

THE METHOD* To Arrive at SATISFACTION IN RELIGION.
1. SInce all Superstructures mn^t needs be weak whose foundation is not surely
laid; He who desires to be satisfied in Religion, ought to begin with searching
out, and establishing the Ground on which Religion is built; that is, the First
Principle into which the several Points of Faith are resolved, and on which
their Certainty, as to us, depends.

2. To do this, it is to be considered, that a Church is a Congregation of
Faithful, and Faithful are those who have true Faith; Wherefore, till it be
known which is the true Faith, it cannot be known which is the true Church.
Again, A Council is a Representative, A Father, an Eminent Member of the
Church, and a Witness of her Doctrine; Wherefore, till it be known which is the
true Church, it cannot be known which is a Council, or who a Father. Lastly,
Since we cannot know which is Scripture, but by the Testimony of those who
recommend it; And of Heretics we can have no security that they have not
corrupted it in favor of their false Tenets; neither can we be secure which is
Scripture, till we be satisfied who are the truly Faithful, on whose Testimony
we may safely rely in this affair.

3. Wherefore, he who sincerely aims at Satisfaction in Religion ought first of
all to find out and establish some assured Means or Rule by which he may be
secured which is true Faith; For till this be done, He cannot be secure either
of Scripture, Church, Council, or Father, but having once done this, is in a
ready way to Judge certainly of all; Whereas if he begin with any of the other,
or indeed argue from them at all, till the Rule of Faith be first settled, he
takes a wrong Method, and breaks the Laws of discourse, by beginning with what
is less cortain, and indeed to him as yet uncertain; and in effect, puts the
Conclusion before the Premises; unless he argue, Ad Hominem, or against the
personal Tenets of his Adversary, which is a good way to Confute, but not to
Satisfy.

4. And, because the Rule of Faith must be known before Faith can be known, and
Faith before Scripture, Church, Councils and Fathers; it appears, that to the
finding out this Rule no assistance of Books will be requisite, for every one
who needs Faith, is not capable to read and understand Books: There is left
then only Reason to use in this Inquiry; And, since People of all Capacities
are to be saved, much sharpness and depth of wit will not be requisite, but
plain N^tural Reason rightly directed will suffice.

5. This being so, the Method of seeking satisfaction in Religion, is become
strangely both more short and easy. For, here will need no tedious turning
over Libraries, nor learning Languages, nor endless comparing voluminous
Quotations, nor so much as the skill to read English, all being reduced to the
considering one single Point (but such an one as bears all along with it) and
this too comprehensible, (as will appear) to a mean understanding. Again, the
large debating particular Points in a controversiall way is by this means
avoided. For, when the Right Rule of Faith is certainly known, then as
certainly as there is any faith in the world, all that is received on that Rule
is certain, and of faith. Not but that it is of excellent use too, to cherish
and strengthen the faith, especially of Young Believers, by showing each
particular Point agreeable to right Reason and Christian Principles, and
recorded expressly in, or deduced by consequence from the Divinely-inspired
Books.

6. Lastly, This Method is particularly suitable to the Nature of sincere
Inquirers; who, if they want the liberty of their own Native Indifferency, and
be awed by any Authority whatever before that Authority be made out, cannot but
remain unsatisfied, and inwardly feel they proceed not according to Nature and
the conduct of unbyast Reason; Whereas, when the Authority is once made
evident, Reason will clearly inform them that it becomes their Nature to assent
to it.

7. But how will it appear that it is so easily determinable by common Reason,
which is the right Rule of Faith? Very evidently. But first we must observe,
the Assent called Faith, depends upon two Propositions, [ What God has said is
true] and [ God has said this] out of which two necessarily follows the
Conclusion, that this or that in particular is true. Of these two we are
concerned only in the later: For to examine Why God is to be believed when he
has said any thing, which they call the formal Motive of faith, is not a Task
for those who own Christianity. But all we have to do is to find out What God
has said, or (which in our case is all one) What Christ has taught; and that,
whatever it be which acqnaints us with this, we call THE RVLE OF FAITH; as
that, which Regulates our belief concerning Christ's Doctrine, or the Principles
of Religion. Now I affirm i^ may be obvious Reason be discovered which this
Rule is; and that by looking into the Nature of it, or considering what kind
of thing it ought to be; which is no more than attentively to reflect what is
meant by those two ordinary words, RULE and FAITH.

8. And both of them acquaint us that the Rule of Faith must be the means to
assure us infallibly what Christ taught. For, in case a Rule, though we apply
it to our power, and swerve not from it, leave us still deceivable in those
points in which it should regulate us; we need another Rule to secure us that
we be not actually deceived, and so this other and not the former is our Rule.
Next, Faith (speaking of Christian Faith) differs from Opinion in this, that
Opinion may be false; but Faith cannot: Wherefore the Rule of faith, both as
it is a Rule, and as it grounds Faith, doubly involves Infallibility in its
Notion.

9. Let us apply this to Scripture and Tradition, (for setting aside the Light
of the private Spirit grounding Phanaticism, there are no more which claim to
be Rules of faith) and see to which of them this Notion fits; that is, whic
has trnly the Nature of the Rule of faith. And this is performed by examining
which of them is of its own Nature, if applied and held to, able to assure us
infallibly, that Christ taugbt thus and thus.

10. And for the Letter of Scripture, not to insist that, if it be denied, as
many, if not all the parts of the New Testament have been by some or other; or
mention that those who receive the Bo^ks, do often and always may doubt of
almost any particular Text alleged, whether some fault through Malice,
Negligence, or Weakness be not crept into it; in which Cases the Letter cannot
evidence it self, but needs another Rule to establish it* I say, not to insist
upon these things, which yet are undeniable, We see by experience Multitudes of
Sects differing from one another, and some in most fundamental Points, as the
Trinity and Godhead of Christ; yet all agreeing in the outward Letter. And it
is not only Uncharitable, but even Impossible to imagine that none among so
v^st Multitudes do intend to follow the Letter to their power, while they all
pro^ess to reverence it as much as any, read it frequently, study it
diligently, quote it constantly, and zealously defend the sense which they
conceive of it, fo far that many are even ready to die for it: Wherefore it
cannot be suspected but they follow it to their power; and yet it is so far from
infallibly teaching them the Doctrine of Christ, that, all this
notwithstanding, they contradict one another, and that in most fundamental
points. The bare Letter then is not the Rule of Faith, as not being of its own
Nature able to assure us infallibly, though we follow it to our power, what
Christ has taught* I would not be mistaken to have less Veneration than I ought
for the Divine Books, whose Excellence and Usefulness as it is beyond man to
express, so peradventure among men there are not many who conceit this deeper
than my self; and I am sure not one amongst those who take the confidence to
charge us with such irreverent thoughts: But we are now about another Question.
They are the Word of God, and their true Sense is Faith; We are enquiring out
the Rule of Faith; whose office it is not to satisfy us that we ought to believe
what God has said, which none doubts of, but What it is which God has said. And
I affirm, That the Letter alone is not a sufficient means to assure us
infallibly of this; and the experience of so many erring Thousands, is a
lamentable but convincing proof of it.

11. On the other side, there needs but common sense to discern, That TRADITION
is able, if followed to ones power, to bring infallibly down to after Ages,
what Christ and his Apostles taught at first. For; since it means no more but
delivery of Faith by daily Teaching and Practice of Immediate Forefathers to
their respective Children; and it is not possible that men should be ignorant
of that to which they were educated, of that which they daily saw; and heard
and did; let this Rule be followed to ones power, that is, let Children resolve
still to believe and practice themselves what they are taught by, and practiced
with their Fathers; and this from Age to Age; and it is impossible but all
succeeding Children which follow this Rule, must needs from the Apostles time
to the end of the World, be of the same Faith which was taught at first: For,
while they do thus, there is no change; and if there be no change, it is the
same. Tradition then, thus understood, has in* it the Nature of the Rule, of
Faith, as being able, if held to, to bring down infallibly what Christ and his
Apostles taught.

12. We have found the Rule of Faith, there remains to find which body of men
in the World have ever, and still do follow this Rule. For, those, and only
those, can be infallibly assured of what Christ taught, that is, can only have
true Faith* Whereas all the rest, since they have but Fallible grounds, or a
Rule for their Faith which may deceive them, cannot have right Faith, but
Opinion only; which may be false, whereas Faith cannot.

13. And first, it is a strong presumption that those many particular Churches
in communion with the Roman, which for that reason are called Roman Catholics,
do hold their Doctrine by this infallible Tenure; since they alone own
Tradition to be an Infallible Rule, whereas the Deserters of that Church write
whole Books to disgrace and vilify it: And, since no man in his wits will go
about to weaken a Tenure by which he holds his Estate, it is a manifest sign
that the Deserters of that Church hold not their Faith by the Tenure of
Tradition, but rather acknowledge by their carriage that Tradition stands
against them; and that it is their Interest to renounce it, lest it should
overthrow their Cause: Wherefore, since Tradition [. 11.] is the only means to
derive Christ's Doctrine infallibly down to after Ages, they, by renouncing it,
renounce the only means of conveying the Docttine of Faith certainly to us, and
are convinced to have no Faith, but only Opinion. And not only so, but even to
oppose and go point blank against it, since they oppose the only-sure Method by
which it can with certainty come down to us.

14 Besides, since Tradition (which I always understand as formerly explicated
to be the Teaching the Faith of immediate Forefathers by words and practice)
has been proved the only infallible Rule of Faith, those who in the days of K.
Henry VIII. and since have deserted it, ought to have had infallible certainty
that we receded from it formerly: for, if we did not, but still cleav'd to it,
it could not choose but preserve the true Faith to us; and if they be not sure
we did not, they know not but we have the true faith; and manifestly condemn
themselves in deserting a Faith, which for ought they know was the true one:
But, Infallible Certainty that we had deserted this Rule, they can have none,
since they neither hold the Fathers Infallible, nor their own Interpretation of
Scripture; and therefore unavoidably shipwaack themselves upon that desperate
Rock. Which is aggravated by this Consideration, that they built not their
Reformation upon a zealous care of righting Tradition, which we had formerly
violated, nor so much as Testimonial Evidence (as shall be shown presently)
that we had deserted It; but all their pretense was that we had deserted
Scripture: and, because they assign no other certain means to know the sense of
the Holy Books but the Words, and those are shown to be no certain means [.
10.] it is plain the Reformers regarded not at all the right Rule of Faith, but
built their Reformation upon a weak Foundation, and incompetent to sustain such
a building. Whence, neither had the first Reformers, nor have their Followers,
Faith at all, but only Opinion.

15. On the contrary, since it is known and agreed to by all the World, at what
time all Deserters of our Church, of what name soever, broke from us; as also
who were the Authors and Abettors, and who the Impugners of such New Doctrins;
besides, in what places they first begun, and were thence propagated to others:
but no such thing is known of us even by our Adversaries, whom it concerns to
be most diligent Searchers after it; seeing they are in a hundred minds about
the Time when, and the Persons who introduced these pretended New Doctrins of
ours, which they say vary from Scripture; as may be seen by their own words in
several Books, and amongst others, one called, The Progeny of Protestants, and
this for every point in which they pretend we have innovated: it is plain that
when we charge them with deserttng the known Doctrine of the former Church, and
the Rule of Faith, we speak open* and acknowledged evidence; when they accuse
us of the same, their charge is obscure and unknown even to the very Accusers;
nay, plainly proved false by the necessity of the things being notorious, if it
happened, and the constant disagreement of those who allege it, when or how it
happened.

16. I say Notorious; for, since Points of Faith which ground all Christian
practice, are the most concerning Truths in the World, it cannot be but the
denial of such Truths must needs raise great commotions before the opposite
Truths could be nniversally spread; and the change of Christian Practice and
Manners which depend on those Truths, must be wonderfully manifest and known to
every body; wherefore; had we been guilty of such a change, and introduced New
Tenets, and propagated them over the Christian world as is pretended, it must
needs be manifestly and universally known that we did so; neither is it
possible the change should be so Insensible and invisible, that our very
Adversaries cannot find it out; especially this alone making their Victory over
us so certain and perfect. For, seeing we own TRADITION as an Infallible Rule,
We are irrecoverably overthrown, if they make out that we ever deserted It:
and, surely, nothing should be more easy than to make out That, than which, if
True, nothing can possibly be more Notorious.

17. Moreover, since it cannot be, that Multitudes of men should profess to
hold points both infinitely concerning and strangely difficult to believe, and
yet own no ground upon which they hold them: if we ever, as it is said we have,
deserted Tradition, we must, till the time we took it up again, have proceeded
upon some other Ground or Rule of Faith: And, because none ever charged ^s with
proceeding upon the Letter of Scripture or Phanaticism, and besides th^se there
is no other but Tradition, it is plain we never deserted, but always stuck to
Tradition.

18. Besides, it is impossible that that Body of Men which claim for their Rule
of Faith, an uninterrupted Tradition from the Apo^^les days, should not have
held to that Rule of Faith from the beginning: For, otherwise they must have
taken it up at some tim^ (...) other, and by doing so, profess to the (...),
that Nothing is to be held of Faith, but what descended by an uninterrnpted
delivery from the beginning; and yet at the same time acknowledge that all they
then held was not so descended, but received by another Rule, this of Tradition
or uninterrupted Delivery being then newly taken up; which is so palpable a
Contradiction, that, as Humane Nature could not fall into it: so, if it could,
the very pretense would have overthrown it self, and needed no other
confutation.

19. Add to this, that none of tbose many Sects who from time to time have
deserted our Church's Faith and Discipline, and so become her Adversaries, ever
yet pretended to assign the time when we took up this Rule of Tradition; and
yet a change in that on which we profess to build all the rest, must needs be
of all changes the most visible, and most apt to justify the carriage of those
Revolters. Wherefore, it is demonstrably evident on all sides, that, as this
present Body of men, called the Roman Catholic Church, does now hold to
Tradition, so their Predecessors uninterruptedly from the Apostles days did the
same; that is, did hold to it ever. And, since it is shown before [. 11.] that
this Rule, if held to, will certainly convey down the true Faith unchanged to
all after Ages, it is likewise demonstrable, that they have the true Faith, and
are the truly Faithful, or true Church.

20. And hence by the way, is clearly seen what is meant by UNIVERSAL
TRADITION, and where it is to be looked for and found; which puzzles many men
otherwise very judicious and sincere; who profess a readiness, nay, a duty to
follow Universal Tradition, but they are at a loss, how we may certainly know
which is Ie. For, since it is evident that to complete the notion of the
Universality of Mankind, (for example) it were absurd to think we must take in
brutes too, which are of an opposite nature to Mankind, but it is sufficient to
include all in whom the nature of Mankind is found; so, to make np the notion
of Universal Tradition, it were equally absurd to think we ought to take in
those in whom the nature of Tradition is not found, but its Opposite, that is,
Deserters of Tradition or their Followers; but it is sufficient to include those
in whom Tradition is found as in its Subject, that is, Adherers to Traedition,
or Traditionary Christians. All, therefore, that have at any time deserted the
Teoching and Practice of the immediately foregoing Church, how numerous and of
what name soever they behave no show of Title to be parts of Universal
Tradition,; and only they who themselves do, and whose Ancestors did ever
adhere to it, how few soever they seem, are the only persons who can with any
sense pretend to be those, of whom, as Parts, Universal Tradition consists.
Whence also that Rule of Vincentius Lirinensis, directing us to hold that which
is believed in all places, all times, and by all, which is so mis-apprehended
by our Modern Dissenters, is clearly understood; viz. by taking it with
Restriction to all those who hold to Tradition. For, otherwise, should we not
restrain it to those only who have adhered to the Rule of Faith, but enlarge it
to the utmost extent of the words, so as to comprehend also those who have
deserted that Rule, nothing could possibly be held of Faith whlch any Heretic
had ever denied: and so, in stead of being a Rule to dist^nguish or know what
we are to believe, it would by thus confounding right Faith with all the
Heresies in the world render it utterly Impossible ever to know what is Faith,
what not, or discern Christ's true Doctrine from Diabolical Errors. But to
return whence we digrest.

21. It follows from the former discourse, that those men who stick to
Tradition, can, by applying that their Rule, certainly know who have true
Faith, and which body of men is the true Church; likewise, that a
Representative of that Body is a true Council, and that an Eminent Member of it
delivering down to the next Age the Doctrine believed in his, whether by
expressly avouching it the Chnrches sense, or confuting Heretics, is a true
Father. Lastly, they can have Infallible Certainty both of the Letter and Sense
of Scripture, as far as concerns Faith: For, if any fault which shocks their
Faith, whether of Translator or Transcriber, creep into any passage, or, if the
Text be indeed right, but yet ambiguous, they can rectify the Letter according
to the Law of God written in their hearts, and assign it a sense agreeable to
the Faith which they find there; between which and that of the Holy Writers,
they are sure there can be no disagreement, as being both inspired by the same
unerring Light.

22. Contrariwise, those that follow not this Rule, and so are out of this
Church, of what denomination soever, First; can have no true Faith themselves:
It Is possible indeed and usual that some, and not seldom, many of the Points to
which they assent, are True, and the same the truly Faithful assent to, yet
their Assent to them is not Faith; for Faith (speaking of Christian Faith) is
an Assent, which cannot possibly be false; and not only the Points assented to,
but the Assent it self must have that distance from Falsehood, (as is proved at
large in Faith vindicated) else it is not Faith, but degenerates into a lower
Act, and is called Opinion: Now the strength of an Assent rationally made,
depends upon the strength of its Grounds; and all Grounds of that Assent called
Faith, (I mean such Grounds as tell us what Christ taught) besides Tradition,
are proved (. 10.) weak and none: Without It, therefore, there can be no true
faith. Next, for want of that only Infallble Ground they cannot have Certainty
which is true Faith, who truly Faithful, which the true Church, which a true
Council, who a true Father, nor lastly, which is either the Letter or Sense of
Scripture in Dogmatical passages that concern Faith. And, since they have no
Certainty of these things, they have no right, nor ought in a Discourse about
Faith be admitted to quote any of them; but are Themselves, and the whole Cause
concluded in this single Inquiry. Who have a Competent, that is, an impossible
to be false, or Infallible Rule to arrive at Faith.

23. The solid Satisfaction, therefore of those who inquire after true Faith,
is only to be gained by examining who has, or who has not such a Rule. This
METHOD is short and easy, and yet alone goes to the Bottom. All others, till
this be had, are superficial, tedious, and, for want of Grounds, Insignificant.

The Former Discourse Reduced to Principles.
TO show the precedent Discourse built on most Firm and most Evident
Principles, and such as I have described in my Preface, I request the Reader to
look back with attentive Consideration upon it is several parts, and he will
discern that

. 1. The First Paragraph is only a Descant upon this Proposition [ The Ground
is to be laid before the superstructures] or (which comes to the same) that [
He who builds must build upon something;] or, to put it in more Immediate Terms
[ What Is First is to be begun with] that is [ What Is First is to be First]
which is resolved finally into this Proposition supremely Identical [ A thing
is to be what it is.]

. 2. The Second relies on that famous Maxim of Logicians, that [ The Definition
is more known then the Thing defin'd] which is self-evident speculatively: For
the words once understood, it comes to this that [ what clears another thing
must be clearer it self;] that [ What explains, must explain] The latter part
of it implies, that in plain things depending on Authority [ Honest men are to
be trusted before Knaves] which is self-evident practically.

. 3. The third is but an Inference from the two foregoing ones, and manifestly
depends on the same self-evident Principles.

. 4. The Fourth is a farther Deduction; and (since to satisfy rationally is to
make men know one way or other) plainly amounts to this [ What Is to be known by
all must be possible to be known by all] which is as self-evident as it is that
[ That cannot (or is impossible to) be done, which is Impossible to be ^tne.

. 5. The Fifth is only a short Descant upon the foregoing parts of this
Discourse, and so is reduced into the same Grounds with them.

. 6. The Sixth is as evident as it is that [Men are not to Assent upon Authority
( or believe) if there be no Reason for it] or that [Rational Agents are to act
rationally.]

. 7. The Seventh states the Question concerning the Right Rule of Faith, and
shows the way to look after it by virtue of this plain Truth, [ The Meaning of
the word signifying any natune is the nature signified by that word:] or, which
is the very same [ What Is meant by any word is meant by that word.

. 8. The former part of the 8th is resumed into this clearest Truth [ What
leaves us in need of a Rule is not a Rule] or [ A Rule is able to regulate]
which is perfectly equivalent to this [ A Rule is a Rule.] The Second Part
averrs, that Faith (taking it for an Assent upon the Motives laid by God which
cannot lead into Error) is not (it is opposite) Opinion; which is equivalent to
this [ Faith is Faith.]

. 9. The Ninth only directs our Application of the two preceding Paragraphs to
the same purpose.

. 10. The former part of the Tenth is full as Evident as it is that [ Those who
are not Scholars (as the Generality of the Faithful are not) cannot be
satisfy;d rationally in those things which require Scholarship] which, since to
be satisfied rationally signifies to know, imports thus much that [ Those who
cannot know, cannot know.] And the second part is as clear as it is, that [ That
is not the Way which multitudes take and yet go wrong] which, since a Way is
that which is to carry one right, is as palpably self-evident as it is that [ A
Way is a Way.]

. 11. The Eleventh which contains the main and in a manner the only point, has
two parts: One, that Mankind cannot be Ignorant of what they see, and hear, and
do. For, since both Reason and Experience tells us, that Senses in Men are
Conveyers of Outward Impressions to the Knowing Power, should Impressions upon
those parts not be conveyed thither, they would, in that case, not be Sensitive
or Animals, and so no Men: And, did they not perceive when such Impressions are
conveyed as they ought, they would be destitute of a Power receiving Knowledge
by Senses, and so again, no Men. So that this first part is as evident as it is
that [ Mankind is Mankind.] And the Second part of this directly engages this
Identical Proposition [ The same is the same with it is self.] that is, both of
them are self-evident, or immediately implying what is so.

. 12. The Twelfth has nothing new but what is built on this Manifest Truth [
None can be assured without Means to assure] which, since [ Means] speaks that
by virtue of which as a necessary requisite an End s to be compas't, that is,
without which it cannot be compas't, amounts to this self-evident Truth; [ That
cannot be done which cannot be done.]

. 13. The Thirteenth has for it is Basis this undeniable Verity; It Is presumable
that they who constantly maintain a Tenet do hold the same Tenet and judge it
available to their Cause, or for their purpose, and that They who write against
it and vilify it do not hold it in their hearts, nor judge it to be available
to their Cause. Both which are perfectly the same with this Proposition which
Practice makes self-evident. [ Men not Frantic or in some high Passion will
not act directly against their own Interest or to their own overthrow;] or to
this which is self-evident speculatively [ Rational Agents left to their nature
will act as they are, that is, rationally. The rest of this is shown to be
self-evident in our Discussion of the 11th.

. 14. The Fourteenth supposing the Evidence of the 11th, 13th, and 10th is
reduced to this clear Truth [ They act irrationally and unjustifiably who
relinquish a Rule Infallibly-Certain upon Uncertain Grounds] or that [ It Is
better to proceed upon Certainty than Vncertainty] which Nature teaches all
Mankind.

. 15. The Fifteenth contains these two Truths for it is supporters, both of them
self-evident practically. [ That charge is Irrational which is grounded on a
Thing unknown to the Accusers, and that Rational which is grounded on matter of
Fact notorious to the whole Christian world.]

. 16. The Sixteenth subsists by virtue of this Evident Truth [ An Universal
Change in matters both manifest to sense and most concerning must needs be
Notorious.] which engages that Principle [ Man is Sensitive or an Animal.]
Whence, this being a direct part of the Definition of Man, it is consequently
Self-evident.

. 17. The Seventeenth is reduced to this plain Proposition [ Men of Reason
cannot hold and own themselves and propose to others Points most difficult to
believe, upon pretense that they came from Christ, and yet yield nor own any
reason why they held they came from Christ] or thus, [ Men either have or else
yield no Reason where there is most need of both:] which comes to this that [ A
pressing Necessity (which is the most violent of Causes, and which in our case
strains Humane Nature and if it act nor, frustrates it of it is end) has no
Effect at all] which destroys all Causality, and consequently all Science in
the World.

. 18. The Eighteenth is as plain as it is that Mankind (amongst which were in
all Ages persons of great Wit and Goodness) in matters of highest moment and
which require the best and surest Ground can continue to hold such things, and
yet confess the Ground on which they hold it naught and Insufficient; or upon
second Thoughts going about to settle a better, palpably and directly
contradict their own pretense; which is to say [ Where there is most need of
reason men do not use it at all] And, since Effects are not done without
Causes, (which in our case are Motives) and the greatest Necessity is the most
powerful of Motives or Causes, if that move them not to act rationally nothing
will do it; and so it implies by consequence the contradictory to this
Identical Proposition [ Rational Agents are capable to act rationally.]

. 19. The Nineteenth has the same Basis with the 16th and 17th.

. 20. The 20th is merely this Identical Proposition dilated [ All in any kind
are the Universality (or All) in that kind.

. 21, The Twenty First and Second are Grounded on those Evident Truths [ Those
who have Means to arrive at an End can arrive at that End; and those who have
not means cannot.] And, since [ Means] speaks that which makes an End
compassable, they amount to this [ That wh^^^c^^ be done can be done, and that
which cannot, cannot.]

. 22. The last Paragraph, supposing the foregoing ones True, is of the same
strain; and full as evident as it is, that [ None can arrive at an End without
what is Necessary to arrive at that End] or that [ That cannot be done which is
Impossible to be done.]

Postscript.
Having thus attempted to reduce the main Parts of my Discourse concerning the
Ground of my Faith to First Principles. it is required of Dr. St. that in
maintaining his, he would not decline the same Test: This if he thinks it safe
to undertake, it will quickly and evidently appear on whose side Truth stands.
And this is mainfestly his Task who pretends to Principles. For he must either
vouch those he produces to be First Principles, or reducible to the First, else
he must confess them to be none at all.

I have little hopes he will think it fit to expose his Discourses to this
Noon-day-Evidence; nor indeed will the Genius of Error endure such a Trial as
the going about to connect it with First and Self-evident Truths: for what
Communication can that Darkness have with this Clearest Light? and I conceive
it was Clearness of Style, that is, a Grammatical or Rhetorical Clearness, and
not a Logical or Rational one, (which consists in resolving his Discourse into
First Principles,) that Dr. Tillotson boastingly attributed to him in his
Sermon-Preface; for himself (as is evident by his whole way of writing) never
dreamed of any other. It Is more to Dr. St's purpose (which is to keep things
from being understood) to avoid by all means this discovering Method and all
arguing from the nature of the Thing (whence he foresees no small danger of too
great Evidence is likely to spring) and to lead his Reader into a Wilderness
of Words (whole Libraries of Authors) where, by his way of managing Citations,
which is by Criticizing, upon ambiguous words and phrases, they may dance in
the Maze till they be weary. I hear he is about this stratagem; and that he
ayms, out of some high Expressions of the Fathers concerning the Excellency and
Self-sufficiency of the Scriptures to prove the Vselesness of the Church to
ascertain Faith. But, alas! how he will be defeated? Not one Testimony of any
Authority will be found which comes home to his purpose, or proves that private
men need not the Churches Interpretation ere they can securely build their
Faith on it?

To save him therefore the labor of collecting and Printing multitudes of
these to no purpose; and his Readers from the fruitless toil of troubling
themselves with Impertinences, I produce him one out of Vincentius Lirinensis
worth thousands; for it speaks with as high Reverence of Scripture, and of it is
Fullness, Perfection, and Self-sufficiency as any, perhaps more; and so he
cannot not with any reason except against it; and being intended purposely to
speak to this Point must needs be the most apposit decider of the Question that
can be; not to add the Acceptance and Esteem that Excellent Treatise of his
ever had from the Church, which argues it is perfect Conformity to the Churches
Sense in settling and stating the Right Rule of Faith.

I transcribe then from this Ancient and Learned Father his whole Second
Chapter (in his Treatise Entitled Against the profane Innovations of Heresy)
which is this.

Hic for sit an requirat aliquis, etc. Here perhaps some may ask, since the
Canon of the Scriptures is perfect, and enough nay more th^^ enough suffices to
it self for all things, what need is there that the Authority of the Churches
Sense should be joined to it? Because all men do not take the Holy Scripture,
by reason of its depth, in one and the same meaning, but diverse men interpret
it is sayings diversely, so that as many Opinions in a manner as there are men
seem possible to be drawn thence. For Novatian expounds it one way, Photinus
another, Sabellius another, and Donatus another; Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius,
take it in one sense; Apollinaris, Priscillianus in another sense: Jovinian,
Pelagius, Coelestius understand it thus; and lastly, Nestorius otherwise. And
therefore it is very necessary by reason of so great windings of so various
Error that the Line of the Prophetical and Apostolical Interpretation may be
directed according to the Rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic Sense.

From which place we may Note,

1. That though he allows the Canon of Scripture perfect and sufficient for all
things, yet by showing it Interpretable diverse ways, and this by Great and
Learned men, and so that they fall into multitudes of Errors by those
Inerpretations, and thence requiring the Authority of the Churches Sense as
necessary to understand it right so as to build Faith on it, he plainly shows,
that Scripture alone is not sufficient for this End, since it needs another to
atchieve it. And hence it is not said simply [ it suffices for all things] but
[ Sufficit sibi ad^omnia, It is sufficient to it self for all things] which can
only mean that it has all the Perfection due to it is own nature (as I showed
above, p. 87, 88, 89.) or is sufficient for the ends God intended it for,
reckoned up by S. Paul to Timothy, amongst which no such thing is found as,
sufficiency of Clearness to every sober Enquirer, so as to build his Faith on
his private Interpretation of it, without the direction of the Churches Sense;
only which will come to Dr. St's purpose. Since then I allow Scripture all
Sufficiency and Perfection but this of being sufficiently clear to private
Understandings so as to build their Faith on their own Interpretations of it, I
allow it all this Learned Father or the Ancient Church ever did.

2. It Is observable that he puts not the fault in the Persons, but gives for
the reason of their misunderstanding it, the depth or deep sense of the
Scriptures: which argues that though some few out of wickedness wilfully
mistake, yet the General reason of the miscarriage is the disproportion of the
Seripture to private Understandings in Dogmatical Points of Christianity, as I
constantly maintain.

3. He calls the Interpretation of it [ a Line;] which is Flexible and
Dirigible; and the sense of the Catholic Church the Rule; which lies firm, as
apt to direct another; and so with me he makes the sense of the Catholic
Church the only Rule of Faith.

4. This Sense of: he Church is intimated to be Antecedent to all
Interpretation of Scripture, and therefore the Church must have had this Sense
or Knowledge of Faith by Tradition; there being no other way becoming Gods
Ordinary Providence but these two.

5. These things being so, it is most Evident that when in the former Chapter he
mentions the Authority of the Divine Law (meaning the Scripture) and the
Tradition of the Catholic Church, he meant them jointly, as appears expressly
by the very next words beginning this present Chapter; nor did he speak there
of the means of bringing men to Faith, as the Rule of Faith ought to do, but of
keeping them in Faith or preserving them from sliding into Heresy; and since
he attributes in this Chapter, Convictiveness of what is Faith only to the
Churches Sense; it is manifest all that remains to be attributed to Scripture is
Agreeableness of it is Letter (if a good Pastor expound it) to the present Faith
of the Church; to see which, exceedingly comforts Faith in the hearts of the
already-Faithful, who must need's have a high Reverence for the Holy Scriptures
Authority.

The whole strain then of my Discourses here against Dr. St. concerning the
Rule of Faith is perfectly consonant to this Learned Father of the Church and
to all Antiquity. Only our frequent and close Contests with our acute Modern
Dissenters have obliged us to a more Scholar-like way of distinguishing our
Notions exactly which the Ancients did not, and (Faith being contained in two
things, the Scriptures and the Breast of the Church) of determining which of
them is the Proper Ascertainer of Faith to all the Faithful and those which are
to be converted; and so in true and exact Speech the Rule of Faith; and both
this Father and Evident Reason give it to be the Church.

What then Dr. St. is to do in this Point; if he makes any such Attempt, is to
allege Convincing Testimonies that the Ancient Fathers held Scripture so plain
to every Sober Enquirer as to give him such Certainty that he may safely build
his Faith on his own Interpretation thereof, without needing the Churches; when
he produces such Testimonies as come home to this or an Equivalent sense he
will work wonders; and, unless he does this, he does just nothing. But I
foresee two unlucky difficulties; one, that he will not find one Testimony of
any Authority which excludes the Church from this Office, as himself directly
does; next, that could he produce thousands, he would spoil them all at the
next word, and render them Inconclusive, that is, Insignificant, with telling
us very soberly they are all Fallible as to that effect; and consequently were
perhaps in an Error in all they say.

FINIS.

