A LENT-Sermon Preached in the Cathedral Church AT NORWICH, UPON A SHROVE
SUNDAY.

BY ROBERT SEPPENS Rector of Hingham in Norfolk.

LONDON: Printed by M. C. for William Oliver, Bookseller, in the Marketplace
in Norwich. 1679.

To the very much Honored Sir Philip Woodhouse Baronet.
Most Honored Sir,
I Have profaned your name so far, as to prefix it to this trifle, not because
I think it worthy of your sight or acceptance, but because it may be
subservient to my design; and my design in this Paper is to give some check to
the Luxury of this Age, and to retrieve the Ancient Discipline of the Church
concerning Maceration of the Body, and to effect that, to recommend the example
of great St. Paul the Apostle, and other Apostolic men who were followers of
St. Paul, even as he was of Christ. It was a celebrious Sermon of Seneca,
though a Heathen man, non ideo natus sum ut mancipium fiam corporis, I was not
therefore born that I might become a slave of the Body; which you have somwhere
illustrated by a Divine Poem, but made more illustrious by your Divine Life;
for though you and your Ancestors have been renowned for your Hospitality and
Noble Housekeeping, yet I dare avouch it, there is no Ascetick living uses
more moderation and abstinence, in eating and drinking than your self. The
Ascetick is in a manner forced to it by the Rules of his Order, but you do it
out of pure choice. What Minucius Foelix says of the first Christians, they
did vivere grandia, live great things; I may say of you; you do vivere grandia,
you live above the rate of the vulgar, you live above the rate of persons of
your own Rank and Quality; you live above the rate of us Ecclesiastics. There
is no Ecclesiastic of us all spends more time in Holy Reading, and takes more
pains in searching into the deep things of Theology than your self. There are
more great things of your life I could mention, as your great Loyalty to your
Prince, your immense Charity to all Dissenters from you, your profound
humility; but I am afraid I shall trespass upon your Modesty, as St. Ignatius
the holy Martyr in one of his genuine Epistles says, (...), they which commend
me scourge me. I shall add no more but only this petition, which is, that you
would pardon my presumption in using your name, and give me leave to subscribe
my self what I really am,

Most Honored Sir, Your humble Servant Robert Seppens.

A SERMON ON
1 COR. ix. 27. But I keep under my body and bring it into subjection.


I Am come the second time upon a Shrove-Sunday (I cannot tell whether by
chance or choice) to perform the Pulpit-Office of the day; and I know not how I
should better manage that Province, than by minding you of the approaching Fast
of Lent, nor how better to dispose you for that, than by presenting you with a
Map of St. Paul's Austerities. If I should propound unto you this day the
example of Christ's forty days fast in the Wilderness; you would say happily,
that was Miraculous: quis sicut Dominus Deus noster? who is like unto the Lord
our God? who by the power of his Divine Nature could support the frailties of
his Human: well therefore we press not Christ's example, but humanum dicimus
propter infirmitatem, we speak after the manner of man because of your
infirmities. I bring you the example of a man, a mere man, that was (...) of
the same Passions we are of, to direct you, and encourage you to the Christian
Combats with your flesh in the following time of Lent.

Whether St. Paul or the other Apostles kept the Fast of Lent formally, I know
not, there are some in the world bold to avouch it: but if they did not, this I
am sure of, they practiced the duties of Lent precisely; and if we could but
once agree about them, we should never fall out about the time. If it once be
granted that the duties of Lent be lawful, and needful, surely there must be a
time allowed them: for omnia tempus habent, there is a time for all things
under the Sun. And that the Apostles observed the duties of Lent strictly, St.
Paul is my Record in this place, who in the end of this Chapter Exhorting the
Corinthians to contend and strive for the heavenly prize of Salvation, by a
double example shows after what manner they should do it. 1 Cor. ix. 25.
First by the example of the Pugills, and Pancratiasts in the Grecian Combats.
There every man, etc.

And if they keep a strict regiment over their bodies to obtain a poor Silver
Game, what should we do for the Golden prize of Salvation? And then by his own
example derived from theirs; I therefore so run, not as uncertainly, so fight I
not as one that beats the air. But I keep under my body and bring it into
subjection.

So my Text (you see) contains officium quadragessimale a Lent duty practiced
by St. Paul, or to keep our selves to the Metaphor of fighting, a Christian
Combat, (as St. Augustine says) Quadragessima diebus implendum, to be fought
in days of Lent, wherein are four things to be observed.

1. Pugil, the Champion, I.

2. Antagonista, the adversary he fights against, his body.

3. Modus pugnandi, the manner of his fighting, (...), I keep it under.

4. Victoria, the victory he gets by this manner, I bring it into subjection.

I begin with the first, The Pugil, or the Champion, St. Paul, I. St. Augustine
thinks that St. Paul's name was changed from Saul to Paul, quia ex superbo
factus est modicus. Paulum enim modicum est, because at his first Conversion he
was turned from a proud man to be an humble man, for Paulus signifies little in
Latin. Whether that was the true cause of the mutation of his name or no I know
not. But that St. Paul, was Paulus little in his own eyes, appears by this:
That even now when he had made a progress in Christianity, when he had advanced
to a great degree of sanctity, yet he behaved haved not himself proudly, not
presumptuously, not securely, he accounts not himself a Conqueror, but a
fighter still. So fight I.

St. Paul was now a Saint of great perfection, and by looking upon the state of
vulgar Christians; he might have justified himself by negatives as the Pharisee
did, Lord I think thee, I am not as other men. He was Spiritual, when they were
Carnal, he was strong when they were weak, he was a great proficient, when they
were but incipients in the School of Christ.

He was now an Apostle, in journeying often, in painfulness and weariness. In
planting of the Gospel he had labored more abundantly than all. 1. Cor. xv. 10.

Not more abundantly than any one, but more abundantly than all together:
Novissimus in ordine, primus in meritis, though he was last in order called to
the Apostleship, yet he was first in labors, quia extremus licet, plus omnibus
laboravit, though last, yet he labored more than all.

He was now a glorious Confessor in bonds and imprisonment. It was given to
him not only to believe but to suffer also for the name of Christ. He had gone
through various dangers, perils at Sea and perils at Land: Who of us could have
endured half so much abroad, and not thought he might have had a supersedeas
from this severe discipline of mortification?

He was now acquainted with Visions and Revelations, he had been taken up into
the third Heaven, and there heard things unutterable. Who could have been
partaker of those exaltations, and not thought he had been exempted from the
toilsom condition of warfaring men? But see here the excellency of St. Paul's
temper: neither the sanctity of his life, nor the labors of his calling, nor
the greatness of his sufferings, nor the height of his exaltations, nor the
honor of his Divine Assumption could make him secure, nor puff him up with
conceits of his own inconcussibility, but he remains a fighter still. When
Moses came down from talking with God upon Mount Sinai, It is said the skin of
his face shone, but he wist not of it. Though St. Paul's life so shined before
men, that they might see the luster of his sanctity; yet he himself wist not of
it: for he saw not what he was, but what he was not; not what he had, but what
he wanted; not how short others came of him, but how short himself came of the
mark he aimed at. He considered not so much what height of Grace he had
attained to, as what danger the highest degree was exposed to; and so not
contenting himself to have apprehended, but forgetting those things, that were
behind, he reached forth toward the things that were before, and pressed
toward the mark of the prize of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ.

Hear this then, thou that live in pleasure and dwell carelessly, that
say regina sum, I am rich, and clothed with Scarlet, that singest to thy
soul the fools requiem, Soul take thy ease, thou have much Goods laid up for
many years:

That say with them in St. Bernard, Sufficit nobis, meliores esse nolumus,
we have enough, we desire to be no better. Quae insania est, non quantum potes
omnino facias cum nescis penitus quid tibi ad salutem sufficit? What a madness
is it in thee, not to do all thou can for salvation, when thou know, when
thou have done the most thou can, that the Righteous shall scarcely be saved?
Art thou more holy than St. Paul? Did he after such large acquisitions in
Christ's Kingdom still contend for more, and do thou content thy self with a
modicum, a little upon a Knives point? Gid St. Paul still hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, and art thou satiate and cloyed with a little bit or
moisel? Had St. Paul done so much, and yet not sure of the Crown? And do thou
who have not done half so much, boast of thy assurance? Nay did St. Paul after
all this, fear lest when he had Preached to others, he himself should become a
castaway? And do thou boast of thy Victory? Do not thou see, that the
tallest Trees are most exposed to the violence of storms and tempests, and the
highest buildings to the injury of wind and weather? And do not thou know,
that the higher our station is in Grace, the more obnoxious we are to the
Devils Temptations? For it grieves him (says Tertullian) to see in the Saints
of God tot mortis opera diruta, tot damnationis titulos erasos, itaque
observat, oppugnat, obsidet. He marks them, he assaults them, he besieges them
with the most exquisite temptations he has: knowing if he overthrows them,
their falls will prove like falls of mighty Cedars, beating down a great
company of lower shrubs before them. And therefore be not high minded but fear,
and work out your salvation with fear and trembling: considering we are not
comprehensores, comprehensors, but viatores travelers; not in patria, our own
Country, but in via upon our way thither; not in triumpho, but in militia, not
in triumph but in warfare, and quamdiu in certamine sumus, nulla certa est
victoria, as St. Jerome, so long as we are in the Combat, there is no victory
certain. Let the same mind be in you, that was in St. Paul who for all his
perfections, for all his sanctity gave not over the study of mortification, I
keep under my body, etc.

I pass to the second part. The Antagonist he fights against, his body, corpus
meum my body. The skill of a Soldier is tried by his adversary. As St. Paul
was an old Soldier of Christ, so he had many enemies to encounter in his
Christian warfare, but quae pestis efficacior ad nocendum, Boctius.
quam familiaris inimicus? what plague is more powerful to hurt a man, than a
familiar enemy? And what more familiar, than a man's own body.

But that we labor not of ambiguities, we must distinguish here betwixt
concupiscentiam corporis, and substantiam corporis, the lust of the body and
the substance of the body. My body comprehends both, but principally the Lust
of the body, less principally the Substance of the body.

Principally (I say) the Lust of the body. That there is concupiscence
remaining in the best Saints of God while they live here ad agonem, and
certamen, I suppose is a truth granted by all good Christians. That that
concupiscence is an adversary to us is in terms expressed by St. Paul. The
flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. v. 15. And by St. Peter, Dearly beloved, I
beseech you as pilgrims and strangers abstain from fleshly lusts which war
against the soul, 1 Pet. ii. 11. And if it lusts against the spirit, and wars
against the soul, it is an adversary sure, and a most dangerous adversary too;
because it fights not propriis viribus, by its own strength alone, but as a
Confederate with the World and the Devil, it betrays us into their hands. The
prince of this world comes and has nothing in me, says our blessed Savior,
John xiv. 30. and therefore could do him no hurt: because he had nothing in him
to work upon, but when the Prince of this world comes to us, he has something
in us to take part with him against us. And therefore he orders the matter so,
that he tempts us not outwardly by word or sign, nor immediately by himself,
but most commonly by the mediation of the flesh. As when he came to Eve, he hid
himself in a creature, ut dolo hominem supplantaret, quem viribus nequiret,
that he might overthrow her by fraud whom he could not by force: So when he
comes to us he hides himself in the flesh, and so much the more difficult he is
to be resisted, quia interius oppugnans de nobis contra nos roboratur, as
Lombard, because he fighting within us strengthens himself of us against us.
The Messenger that was sent to buffet St. Paul, was stimulus in carne, a thorn
in the flesh. Leo calls the flesh lustrum Diaboli, the Devils Den. Another one
vallum Diaboli, the Devils trench: because by that the Devil fortifies himself
against us. And is not the World it self, that other Enemy of ours, assisted by
the lusts within? For all that is in the world, is the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 John ii. 16. All the baits and
snares the world does use to entrap us, could no us no hurt, were it not that
the flesh did lust after them, and by the senses as so many Cinqueports, and
windows, let in the temptation.

No marvel then St. Paul begins first with that, his flesh and the lusts of it.
The best way to be secure from the Enemy without the Walls, is to dispatch the
Traitor within. The best way to strengthen our selves against a Foreign Enemy,
is to weaken his Confederates at home. The Flesh does not fight against the
Soul it self alone, but it is Confederate with the World and the Devil, in
whose Territories their Castles and Fortifications stand: and therefore the
best way to overcome them is to Mortify the Lusts within: as St. Augustine,
Qui foris nos oppugnant intus vincimus, vincendo concupiscentias, per quas
nobis dominantur. They which assault us without, we overcome within, by
overcoming our Lusts, by which they rule over us. One being asked therefore
what was honestissimum bellum, the honestest war, answered, quod contra
concupiscentias carnis, which was made against the Lusts of the Flesh; and that
principally, no question, St. Paul fought against.

But the Body it self, in some moderate sense, for that is an Adversary, in a
respect subordinate, by reason of its Alliance, and Relation it has to the
Lust within. For though inorditnae Lust, and Concupiscence be not only in the
Body, but in the Soul also: yet you may observe in the Language of the
Scriptures it takes the denomination chiefly from the Body; It is called the
Flesh, the Lust of the Flesh, our Earthly Members: and why so?

First, because, though the Body be not the house alone where it dwells, yet it
is the Shop wherein, as a Potter upon his Clay; it forms and frames the Idols
of filthiness, and puts them in execution;

Dum serpit in carne, in venis aestuat, intrat ossa, conditur in medullis,
fervet in sanguine and in vitiorum phrenesim sic erumpit, says Chrysologus: It
creeps in the Flesh, it boils in the Veins, it enters the Bones, it is hid in
the Marrow, it grows hot in the Blood, and so breaks out into a frenzy of
wickedness.

2. Another Reason, why it takes the nomination from the Body, is, because
thereby it is cherished and maintained, nutriuntur cum carne, and vitia carnis,
says Bernard, the Lusts of the Flesh are nourished with the Flesh it self. We
know it by experience, when the Body is plied, and forced with delicious Fare,
when the Veins are full and the Blood boils high, when Spirits are lively the
Lusts within are kindled. If we be so happy as not to find it, yet God himself
found it so amongst his own people, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15. When Jeshurun waxed fat,
he kicked, and Jer. v. 7.8. When I fed them to the full they were as fed horses
neighing after their neighbors wives. We see by the pampering of the Body the
Lusts within were kindled; and to use the Body always too friendly is nothing
else but to open a Shop wherein keen instruments are made to wound our own
Souls. St. Basil records of Plato, that considering of the great nocument that
comes by too much indulging of the genius, he caused the Academy of Athens to
be built in a very unhealthful place, that he might by that means cut off the
too much prosperity of the body, as they do luxuriant brances from the Vine.
Plato was esteemed a Divine Philosopher, yet St. Paul was a greater Divine than
he, for he being (...), taught of God, knew that the body of death within him,
had such Alliance to his mortal body without him: That if his Body were always
rampant, his Lust would be so too, to prevent which mischief St. Paul kept a
strict regiment over his body. I keep under my body.

And so I come to the third part, Modus pugnandi, the manner of his fighting, I
keep it under. The word in the Greek is very Emphatical, (...), and signifies
primarily, to strike under the Eyes or on the Face, as Cuffers do, wherefore
Erasmus renders it, lividum facio, I make it black and blew- Beza renders it
contundo. The vulgar Latin castigo, I chasten it. Which Translation soever we
follow, two things are employed in it.

First, St. Paul's earnestness, and therefore he speaks in opposition to the
(...), the skirmishing in sport and pastime, which went before the solemn
fight, wherein they only beat the air and not their adversary.

Before the Combats of old, to which St. Paul here alludes, there were certain
preparations used in jest to the solemn fight, by brandishing of the Weapon;
whence came that phrase in Seneca, aliud est ventilare, aliud pugnare; it is one
thing to brandish the Weapons in the air, another thing to fight. Now St. Paul
to show that he was not in jest, but in earnest, says he did not beat the air
but his body, directed his blows upon his adversary. There are many in the
world that do aerem verberare, beat the air with words and talk of
mortification, that brandish their Weapons often in the air, yet when they come
to use them, like the children of Ephraim, who being harnessed, and carrying
Bows gave back in the days of Battle. Fine Masters, that as St. Jerome says,
pleno ventre disputant de jejunio, dispute of Fasting with full Bellies. St.
Paul did not so, he showed not what he could do, but did, what he ought to do,
he beat not the air with boasting and ostentation, but he directs his blows
upon his adversary, not as beating the air, but I keep under my body.

But in the second place, as the word (...) implies his earnestness, so it does
his austerity in maceration of himself with some hard usage, for he could not
cuff his body, or beat it black and blew, nor chasten it without some severity
used toward it.

It seems then the Flesh is not to be overcome with courtesy, and fair usage,
but some self-castigation, and afflictions. As Medicines seldom cure the part
affected, unless they put us to some grief and pain: no more do these
afflictions of our selves unless they put the Body to some pain and grief. That
Rule that Caligula would have observed by his bloody Executioners, Ita feri ut
sentiat se mori, strike him so, that he may perceive he dies; it is good to use
sometimes in a holy severity against our selves, strike our selves so, that we
may perceive we dye. Let the sense of pain be answerable to the pleasure we
have taken in sin. It Is not warm weather, or fair Sunshine days; that kills
the Vermin of the Earth; but Frost and Snow and cold Winter storms. It Is not
the favoring and sparing of the Ground that destroys the Weeds and Briars, but
the rending Plow and Harrow that breaks up the Earth: so it is not the
favorable and courteous using of the body, that subdue the Lusts of it: but
the Plows and Harrows of mortification. It Is not every one that has gotten
dominion over his Lusts, but qui passus est in carne, he that has suffered in
the flesh, has ceased from sin, 1 Pet. iv. 1. Well then so far we are gone in
the manner of St. Paul's fighting with the body, as to see it was managed with
much earnestness and severity. But in particular what Weapons St. Paul used in
this Combat with his Flesh, or what we are to use when we enter the Lists, yet
we know not. And therefore as Gideon said to the Angel, when he sent him
against the Midianites, obsecro, Domine mi; in quo? wherewith shall I go
against them? So now it may be demanded, obsecro, mi Domine, in quo? wherewith
shall we fight against the Body? To make way for the demonstration of that, I
shall make some propositions to you, and leave them to your consideration.

What think you of David's humiliation, lying upon the Ground, hard Lodging? And
David fasted a fast, and lay all night upon the earth, 2 Samuel xii. 16.

What say you to Ahabs Sackcloth, and coarse Clothing in the time of his
humiliation? Though Ahab was a wicked King, yet his humiliation so far pleased
God, that it turned away his judgments from him. See thou (says the Lord to
Eliah) how Ahab humbles himself before me, because he humbles himself before
me, etc. 1 King. xxi. 29. and how did Ahab humble himself before him see v. 27.
And Ahab put on sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted and lay in sackcloth. But
further, what think you of Timothies (...) drinking of water, for so it is
certain he did till St. Paul relaxed the rigor of his discipline, Drink no
longer water but a little wine, for thy stomachs sake, and thy often
infirmities, 1 Timothy v. 23. But these are all now antiquated, and out of use,
and not likely to be retrieved. Well, therefore I urge them not, I press them
not. But three things there are, that I must and will commend unto you, whether
you hear or whether you will forbear, as fit means to be used for this purpose,
because we are sure St. Paul himself used them in these Combats with his body,
for twice he makes mention of them in 2 Cor. vi. 5. and Chap. xi. 27. In
labors and watchings and fastings. One good Weapon for the subduing of the
Body, and the Lusts of it, is labor and diligent employment in our lawful and
honest calling: for omnis otiosus est in desideriis (says St. Jerome) every
idle man is lustful. St. Paul took so much pains in planting of the Gospel that
he flew, (as St. Chrysostom says) all over the world, (...). Eusebius writes
of Origin, that ad corporis libidinem refraenandam non exiguos exantlavit
labores, for the bridling of the Lusts he took great pains. And for this cause
Cassian writes, that the Monks in Egypt were not suffered to be idle, but they
got their livings with their labors. They said one to another, non est viri
sudorem timere, it is not for a man to fear the sweat of his brows. And for this
cause St. Augustine writ his Book, De opere Monachorum, of the labor of Monks.
Sure I am, when these were laid aside, given over in their Monasteries, upon
pretense of contemplation, and speculation only; wantonness and filthiness
crept in at the gates of idleness.

The Flesh loves ease, and idleness, and by idleness falls into luxury and
wantonness. As Rome did when Carthage was destroyed, and Greece subjected, for
want of employment abroad, they drowned themselves in all kind of vices, and
filthiness at home. While David was employed in his wars, we read of no
inordinate Lust that Reigned in him. While Solomon was employed in building of
the Temple, we read of no wantonness he fell into; but when he was idle at
home, then his Eyes went after strange women. Therefore, onus asino, lay a
burden upon the Ass and he will leave kicking. That Counsel that the Wiseman
gave, Ecclus. xxxiii. 26, 27. concerning an evil servant, is good to be used
toward the body at sometime. A Yoke and a Collar bow down the neck, so do
torments an evil servant, send him to labor, that he be not idle, set him into
work as is fit for him. If he be not obedient, lay on him more heavy Fetters.

A second Weapon for the subduing of the Flesh is Watching, rising in the night
to Praytr, and Holy Reading, breaking of our sleep sometimes for Devotion. St.
Paul was not only in labors but in watching, nay in watching often. Eusebius.
says of Origin, That as in the daytime he took great pains in the study of
Divine Learning, so he spent great part of the night in so doing. And Socrates
of one Macarius a holy man, that giving instructions to one about continence,
told him that nunquam cepit somnum ad satietatem, he never slept to satiety for
the space of twenty years. The flesh like the sluggard in the Proverbs is ever
craving a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands, and
give it what it craves, it grows unruly. St. Paul exhorts the Romans, Chap.
xiii. To walk honestly as in the day, not in Chambering, and Wantonness. St.
Paul joins here Wantonness (...) lying in Bed, and they commonly go together,
or follow one another. The beginning of Concupiscence is that in the fourth of
Amos, They stretch themselves upon their beds. If thy Enemy grow too strong for
thee, the weapon of watching is good to subdue him. Suetonius records of
Caligula the Roman Emperor, that when he was about to make an Oration he would
threaten sometimes, stricturum se lucubrationis suae telum, he would draw the
weapon of his night watchings. O if thy Lust do infest thee, do but draw
vigiliarum telum, the weapon of thy night Prayers, and that will curb it. Watch
and Pray that ye enter not into temptation.

The third weapon to be used in these Combats with the Flesh is Fasting. St.
Paul was not only in Labors, and Watchings, but in Fastings too. The Flesh is
molestus cliens, a troublesome client ever crying (...), let me not be hungry,
let me not be dry. Now to hold it to Michaius commons, modicum panis, and
pauxillum aquae, a little bread, and a little water, will grieve it much and
afflict it; and therefore all the Saints of God made use of it, in their
Combats with the Flesh, but David of all others was most dextrous at this
Weapon. I chastned my soul with fasting, Psalm xxxv. my knees grow weak through
fasting. And St. Jerome records of Hilarion, that old Ascetick, that if any time
he found any mutining of his Lusts, he would threaten, fame te conficiam, and
stti. I will wound thee with hunger and thirst. This was the weapon, that all
the old Soldiers of Christ were famous at, who lived and dyed in the Holy Wars
of Christ, that I may say of that as David did of Goliahs sword, There is none
to that. The first dart that ever the Devil flung at the soul of man, was by
Gluttony, primum Diaboli spiculum, and one weapon God has given us to wound
that body of sin is Fasting. Fasting nails the Flesh to the Cross of Christ.
Fasting tames the frankness of Nature. Fasting subdues the rebellion of Lust.
Fasting overthrows the fortifications of Satan, and undermines the Palaces of
Wantonness, so there is none to that, take it abstractly, but in conjunction
with the other two excellent means for keeping the body under.

But it may be objected against the use of these out of Ephesians. v. 29. No man
ever yet hated his own flesh, but loves and cherishes it, even as Christ his
Church. By using of these disciplines over our bodies, we shall hate our own
Flesh.

I answer, all castigation, and affliction is not an effect of hatred, some
proceeds of love. A Father chastens his Son, yet loves him still, Christ
chastens his Church, yet loves her well; whom God loves, he chasteneth. I hope
St. Paul did not hate the incestous Corinthian, when he delivered him unto
Satan for the destruction of his Flesh, that his Soul might be saved in the day
of the Lord, much less do we hate the Flesh, when we chasten it so, that our
Soul may be saved in the day of the Lord. It Is a good Apology that St.
Augustine makes for those Asceticks in his time, Non enimcorpus suum, sed
corruptiones, and pondus oderunt, they don't hate their bodies, but the
corruptions of them, and afterward, when they seem by Continence, and Labors
to persecute their bodies they do it not that they may have no bodies, but that
they may have their bodies subjugated and ready to every good work.

Secondly, It is further objected that this discipline smells of Superstition.
St. Paul condemns (...) not sparing of the body for a piece of superstition,
Col. ii. and 1 Timothy iv. 8. he opposes this (...) this bodily exercise to
Godliness, and says, it profits little.

I answer it is true, but St. Paul speaks not of all afflictions of the body,
nor all bodily exercise, for then he should condemn his own practice in the
Text, but he means such affliction of the body, as is without knowledge, and
moderation. And if this bodily exercise be used without knowledge of the right
use, and end of it, making it a part of Divine Worship, meritorious of
Salvation, a thing that does please God, ex opere operato, without any further
aim or respect, then they are not excusable.

Or Secondly, if it be used without moderation so as to destroy nature. As
those flagellantes in Hetruria of whom Hospinian writes, that they wandering up
and down openly cut themselves with Cords and Whips, and kept a bloody Festival
for the space of thirty three days, and then thought their sins to be expiated,
and themselves reconciled unto God. And those Monks of Palaestina of whom
Evagrius writes, that they fasted sometime five whole days, and so afflicted
themselves with their (...) the supererogations of watchings, and labors, that
they lay upon the ground, as dead men unburied.

These were immoderate in discreet afflictions, and so to be condemned. But yet
as Zanchy upon the second of the Colossians, Exercitia haec per se improbari
non possunt, circumstantiae hae omnia damnant. These exercises can be disliked
in themselves, it is their circumstances that spoil all: for as he alleges out
of Athanasius, (...). These bodily exercises are good, if they be with knowledge
of the right use and end of them, and such moderation as they destroy not
nature, nor make it unserviceable to the Soul. In themselves they are lawful
and laudable, agreeable to the word of God, and the practice of the Saints of
God in the purest times. They are profitable too, as for mortification of the
Flesh, so also for other excellent ends.

As first, the Elevation of the Soul, and sharpning of the mind to Heavenly
Meditation. Tanto enim gloriosius men's ad superiora fertur, quanto diligentius
ab inferioribus concupiscentia cohibetur, The Soul does advance more gloriously
toward Heavenly things, when the Concupiscence is most dililigently kept from
earthly things. D. Aug. de opere Monachorum.
Infirmitas carnis vigorem mentis exacuit, The infirmity of the Flesh does
sharpen the vigor of the mind. That therefore the strength of the body may
pass into the virtues of the Soul, non turpibus flammis medullae aestuant, etc.
Let not the Marrow boil with filthy flames, let not the hidden incentives set
the Soul on fire, let not the wandering sense wantonise the enjoyment of various
delights, those hinder the comforts, and refreshments of the Soul, and quench
the flame of spiritual consolation. The Soul is never better devoted to
Heavenly things, then when the body is estranged from carnal pleasure. Whom
shall he teach knowledge? whom shall he make to understand doctrine? them that
are weaned from the milk and from the breasts, Isa. xxviii. 9.

2. Moderate afflictions of the body, as they serve to dispose the mind for
Heavenly flights: so they are profitable to amerce our selves for our sins in
Repentance. Amongst other fruits of Godly sorrow St. Paul reckons up
indignation and revenge, 2 Cor. vii. 11. it is not possible says Calvin, quin
anima Divini judicii horrore percussa, parts ultionis in exigenda de se poena
occupet, that the Soul being stricken with the horror of Gods judgment, but it
must take some revenge upon it self by some punishment; And reason requires,
that as the body has been partaker with the soul in the Commission of sin, so
it should partake of the punishment with the Soul in Repentance for sin; and
seeing we are to judge our selves in Repentance to prevent the judgment of God,
good reason we should judge our selves impartially, severely, and so as it may
be as God himself will judge us.

Now it is his rule, quantum glorificavit se, tantum date illi tormentum, so
much as she has glorified her self, give her so much torment. To macerate then
the flesh in some degree; is but Righteous judgment. You may rely upon Calvin's
judgment in this, quia severiores in nos sumus, eo debemus sperare magis
propitium Deum, The more severe we are to our selves, the more propitious we
ought to hope God will be to us.

And therefore though we favor not those indiscreet and immoderate afflictions
of the body that have heretofore been used by some (...) Zelots, and that are
now in the Roman Church practiced, yet we are sorry there is in the world such
general dislike of the discipline of Mortification, that was used by the
Apostles themselves and holy Christians in the purest times. To see that men
are grown such lovers of themselves that they will endure nothing against their
ease, and pleasure, to see the extremity of such foolish zeal that to avoid
that (...) not sparing of the body, which St. Paul touches upon, they directly
run into that (...) that wantonness of the body, that all Christianity
condemns. That to avoid that superstition they understand not, they run counter
upon his practice they do understand and ought to follow. To avoid the
suspicion of being (...) abstemious, they turn plain Borborites wallowing in
all Carnal Lusts and Pleasures. To avoid the danger of symbolising with the
Papists, they run with the Heathen into all excess of riot. And as we are sorry
to see these things, so we are bold to open our mouths wide in this solemn
assembly, and complain of it, as one cause of the grand impiety, lewdness and
debauchery of these times. That men on Fasting days, Ember weeks, and the time
of Lent, when they should go to Joels doctrine of turning to the Lord with
fasting, and weeping and mourning, they go to Jaels Butter and Milk in a Lordly
dish, wrap them warm, and lay them down and take their rest; that they turn
their fasting days into feasting days; instead of watching in night to Prayer,
sleep away all Prayers in the day; instead of taking of revenge on themselves
for their sins, let no pleasure of the Spring pass by them. Men have found out
an easier way of going to heaven then St. Paul knew, or the Saints in after
ages, they can go now a deliciis ad delicias from the pleasures of this world,
to the pleasures of another, when the Church calls to lamentation and mourning,
behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating flesh and
drinking Wine. Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die, Isai. xxii. 12.
That what Tertullian in his Book Contra Psychicos invidiously spoke of the
Orthodox. Quorum charitas in cacabis, quorum spes in ferculis, quorum fides in
culinis, etc. whose Charity is in their Boilers, whose Hope is in their Dishes,
whose Faith is in their Kitchen, whose Dressers are their Altars, whose Cooks
are their Priests, whose God is their Belly: What St. Jerome was wont to say of
his Country where he was born, In patria mea Deus venture est. In my Country
every man makes his Belly his God. And what Sir Edwin Sands says of the Roman
Church in his Europae Speculum, That for a man, who were desirous to save his
Soul when he dies, and yet deny himself no pleasure while he lives, there is no
such Church as the Roman is, I fear me, may be spoken of ours in regard of our
practice, Nay it is spoken by them in effect. They call us the locusts in the
Revelation; our song is esca ventri, and venture escae, we live by the Flesh
Pots of Egypt, and by the Flesh Pots of Egypt we will die, we live by the
graves of lust, and by the graves of lust we will be buried.

Suffer therefore a word of Exhortation, and it is but the word of St. Paul to
Tymothy. Suffer hardness as good Soldiers: and that of St. James, Be afflicted
and mourn, let your laughter be turned into mourning, etc. These Austerities I
have commended to you are neither Popish, nor Superstitious, they were
practiced by St. Paul himself, the great Apostle. And if we will be Cristians
indeed we must be Paulianists in this point, be followers of him, even as he is
of Christ. Let not the popular clamours affright you from these undertakings,
alas they speak evil of those things they understand not. Let not the fears of
weakness deter you. Ideo sancti viri infirmiores se esse faciunt, quia si
fortes, sancti vix esse possunt, Therefore Holy men make themselves weak,
because if lusty, they cannot be Holy. Let not the fear of pain, and suffering
retard you. Noluit Deus hominem ad immortalem beatitudinem delicato itinere
pervenire, God would not have men come to everlasting blessedness in a way
strown with Roses. And yet there is no such bitterness in the matter, but will
be recompensed abundantly by the using of it. What St. Paul says of Gods
chastisements, I may say of these, and with that conclude this part of my Text.
No chastning for the present seems joyous, nevertheless afterward it brings
forth the peaceable fruits of Righteousness unto them which are exercised
thereby.

In now com to the fourth, and last part of my Text, the victory of St. Paul
got by this manner of fighting (...), I bring my body into subjection. In the
word before St. Paul alludes to the cuffers, here he alludes to the wrastlers
in the Grecian Combats. The wrastler that could by art, or force oppress his
adversary, and get him down, had the title of a Pancratiast, such a Pancratiast
was St. Paul, who by blows and hard usage oppressed his body, and brought it
into subjection. It Is not enough to Combat with the Flesh, and the Lusts of it,
there is a victory to be obtained. The Flesh is ambitious of Rule and Dominion,
and for that purpose as Semiramis did mentiri sexum, belie her Sex that she
might get into the Throne of her Son Ninus, so the Flesh and the Lusts of it do
mentiri sexum, pretend to Liberty, Zeal, and Conscience; and if by any means it
gets into the Throne, there is no Tyrant more Tyrannical, no brute more
brutish, nor fury more furious, than the Lusts reigning, witness the fearful
Tragedies acted in every Age, in every part of the World. As therefore God
ordained that man should rule over the woman, Genesis iii. 16. so Genesis iv. 7. he
has ordained that man should rule over his Concupiscence. His desire shall be
to thee, and thou shall rule over him. The Pronoun him, and his, may refer to
sin, as the antecedent, and be rendered thus, Under thee shall the desire of
sin be, and thou shall rule over it, and Mr. Calvin himself grants this to be
as commodious and agreeable to the Grammatical sense as the other, Under thee
shall his desire be, and thou shall rule over him.

In Philosophy they tell us, that the inferior part is naturally apt to obey
the superior, and the superior to govern the inferior, though in the fall
the souls of men received such wounds and bruises, that the Reason does not now
govern the Sensuality, imperio despotico, as a Master governs his Servants, but
imperio politico, as a Magistrate governs his people, which oftentimes fall
into Seditions and Mutinies against him.

But in Christian Philosophy we are taught by our Lord and Savior Christ.
Matthew. xix. 12. That there be Eunuchs, which have made themselves Eunuchs for
the Kingdom of Heavens sake. And how can any make themselves Eunuchs without
subjugation of their bodies, bringing their bodies in subjection. St. Paul does
command all Christians to mortify their earthly members, and evil
Concupiscence, and how can they mortify their Concupiscence, and make it dead,
unless they rule over it. St. Augustine in his Book against Julian the
Pelagian, having discoursed largely of Concupiscence, and the evil of it, yet
at last says, It is sub potestate animae, under the power of the soul by the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in corpore mortis castiganda, in the body of
death to be chastened, and if it were not, how could St. Paul in truth proclaim
it to the world that he had made experiment of it, and done it? The Chemists
talk much of the Philosophers stone, but they never show it. St. Paul uses no
Rodomontadoes in commendation of his Art, but propounds the operations of it in
his own example, as a great Ascetick. And the only Artifice whereby the Holy
Apostle did all this, was the abridging of himself the use of his Christian
Liberty: whereas he as a Christian had a liberty to use all indifferent things
freely, yet he would not use his liberty, he wrought with his hands, watched,
fasted, and used many hardships, he needed not to have done: whereby we see
Christian Liberty consists not in a free use of all indifferent things, but in
a persuasion of Conscience, all things are lawful. All things are lawful for
me, but all things are not expedient for me, 1 Cor. vi. 12, 13. Though we have
liberty to eat all kind of meats, yet we must use this liberty so, as still to
keep the body in subordination to the Spirit, that we may be able to deny our
selves a lawful pleasure when any thing makes it more expedient, as it is when
the Church requires us sometimes to fast for the humiliation of our souls and
the subjugation of our bodies. It Is a memorable resolution of our great
Apostle, 1 Cor. viii. ult. verse, If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat
no flesh so long as the world stands. Is it lawful for St. Paul to renounce the
eating of flesh so long as the world stands, to avoid the scandal of one weak
brother, and is it not lawful for a Christian to forbear the eating of flesh
for a time to avoid the scandal of his Superiors? I would fain know in matter
of scandal, whether it be a greater offense to go against the judgment of some
weak and ignorant man, by assed only by his own fancy and prejudice, than
against the judgment of the whole Church, wherein there are so many wise, and
holy men, and they backed by the Authority of an Established Law? Well then
seeing some fasting is sub praecepto, under a command not only of God but of
the Church also, that in casu scandali, we are not to infringe the Authority of
the Magistrate to gratify the humor of some ignorant Christians. It would be
our wisdom to show our affections and obedience to the Church, whereof we are
members, and in some measure to conform our selves to the Laws of fasting, that
are there in force. I conclude with that excellent Counsel of St. Peter, 1 Pet
ii. 16. As free and not using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness. In
which words there are two things obvious (...) concession, as free, and then a
caution, not using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness. All Christians are
made partakers of a glorious liberty by Christ, no question, but then here is a
caution, not using their liberty as an occasion to the flesh, which they do
undoubtedly, whenever they confront the just Laws of the Church, whereof the
King is Supreme Governor, and fall foul upon that Law, 13, 14. Verses, to which
the Counsel of St. Peter is subservient, They use their liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness.

FINIS.

