A DISCOVERY Of The Groundlesness And Insincerity Of my Ld. of Down's
DISSUASIVE. Being The Fourth Appendix to SVRE-FOOTING. With A Letter to Dr.
Casaubon, and Another to his Answerer.

By J. S.

Habentes Speciem quidem Pietatis, Virtutem autem ejus abnegantes. Et hos
devita, 2 Timothy 3. 5. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXV.

Corrections of the Press.
Page 25^. l. 11. my Lds. p. 265. l. 25. have added. p. 267. l. 24. Ephrem. p.
270. l. 26. sense. p. 279. l. 11. Truths. p. 281. l. 14. the head. p. 293. l.
21. thing. p. 307. l. 2. thus, It. p. 301. l. 1. unproov'd. p. 319. l. 1.
Characters. p. 320. l. 21. from the words. p. 327. l. 4. Schism.

FOURTH APPENDIX. Subverting Fundamentally and manifoldly my Ld. of Downs
DISSUASIVE.
1. I Had observed my self and was informed by others what harm my L. of Down's
DISSUASIVE did to diverse persons; yet I found also that it wrought different
Effects in his Protestant Readers according to their respective abilities of
understanding. Those who were thoroughly Intelligent universally dislikt it as
a very weak and ungrounded Discourse; but the middle or rather meaner sort of
Scholars who have sufficient capacity to apprehend the Sense of an Objection,
yet not enough to weigh by Principles and so comprehend the force of it, nor to
distinguish between Church and Schools, much less the Sagacity to dive into the
many Sophistries, Artifices, and Indirect dealings which mis-used Rhetoric can
employ to delude men's eyesight, were many of them startled, and entertained a
high conceit of it. To which helped, that their well-meaning and natural
sincerity permitted them not to suspect, and so be aware of any deceit in a
discourse managed all along with so much formal Gravity and shows of the
greatest Piety that could be: For a grave carriage being, where Nature is not
perverted wilfully, the proper Effect of a sincere Earnestness and perfect
Seriousness in the heart, and, Piety being conceived to be that which ought to
heighten supernaturally that interior disposition, they are consequently apt
to breed in the observer of them a conceit of the greatest Seriousness in the
world; Nay even, to those who are very weak and mean well, it gains the
Affecter of this way so much Authority that it persuades those who esteem them
for it they have perfect Assuredness of what they so soberly write or affirm.
Whence follows that this kind of grave and seemingly pious demeanor,
especially if carried on with a Constancy, is the most Effectual Engine in the
world to inveigle rational souls which are not aware of the craft or by looking
into Principles above it, whither the Discourser pleases: And I conceive our
Country has already so much felt its lamentable Effects out of Pulpits in the
beginning of the late troubles, that all reflecters on it are sufficiently
warned not to think all to be the solid gold of Truth which glitters with
Saintly shows. Now, in this consists the most efficacious part of my L. of
Downs Dissuasive; the rest, whether Reasons or Citations being very ordinary:
And, 'twas this exceeding Plausibleness, and, by means of this, Harmfulness of
that Treatise, which obliged me to alter my Resolution, and make the Answer to
it a fourth Appendix to Sure-footing, which I had refused to the suggestion of
my first Thoughts, hoping some other would lay it open more at large. But how
shall I go about to answer it: For, as Sampson's strength lay in his hair, the
weakest part that can be found in a man, so the chief Virtue of the Dissuasive
lies in the Godliness of its style; which being mere voluntary words and most
unapt to make up Propositions expressive of connected Sense or to compile a
rational Discourse, it is by consequence the weakest piece of performance which
can possibly spring from a reasonable Creature; Yet with this weapon I am
soonest beat; nothing being more averse to my Genius than to Saint it in
Scripture-phrases (a performance in which, I confess, a Quaker would easily
worst me, and would even put the Dissuader himself very hard to it) especially
in a Controversy, which ought to be a severe proof of the Truth of the point
under debate. The way then which suits my humor best, and, as I hope, is most
efficacious to conclude and satisfy, is to examine by Principles whether there
be force of Truth at the bottom, grounding the Disluader's long Invective. If
there be, it ought to have all handsome advantages of Expressions allowed it;
If not, it is no more, as to the Harmony of Truth, but the running a great deal
of division upon no Ground.

2. I shall suppose the Reader of this Appendix has already perused and
weighed the force of my Reasoningsin SURE FOOTING; which done, he will easily
comprehend the strength of this Reply, and the manifold weakness of my L. of
Downs DISSUASIVE. All Truths being connected, it follows that every Error is
by consequence opposite to all Truths, and They to it. Hence each single Error
lies open to be confuted many ways, if the method of Reason or Connection be
taken. I take therefore that method; because, by its privilege of bringing
things to First-Principles, it is apt to undermine and blow up Error from its
very Foundations. Eight several mines I lay to perform this Effect; each of
which Ways is alone sufficient to do my work.

First Way.
3. THe First is to allege that my L. of Downs has not one First or
Self-evident Principle to begin with, on which he builds his Dissuasive from
Catholic Faith. If I wrong him, let him do himself right by pointing it out
and showing that it is opposite to our Churchees Doctrine; which if he does, I
here yield my self absolutely confuted. In the mean time I have proved that
Traditiones Certainty is the First Principle of CONTROVERSY, and am confident
in the Invincible force of Truth that all the Wit in the World cannot confute
that position. And if it stands, he is convincet not only to want the First
Principle of the Science we are to discourse in, but (his Cause forcing him to
renounce Tradition's Certainty) to go point blank against it, and so to
invalidate to our hands all he shall write as a Controvertist; and how weakly
he behaves himself where he goes about to lay other Principles, shall be shown
when I come to answer his First Section. Now, seeing all Reason has force by
relying on the Truth of the Premises, and they are known to be true either by
being First Principles themselves, or by being finally resolvable into others
which are such, it follows there can be no true Reason where there is no First
Principle. Till he shows us then that he builds his Dissuasive on some First
Principles, it will follow his whole Endeavor is to dissuade not by way of
Reason but Fine Words, which are indeed the Substantiallest, strongest and most
efficacious part of his whole Book.

Second Way.
4. THe Second Way is to exclude him all right to allege either Scriptures,
Fathers or Councils; I add, Reason, History or Instances, (See Corol. 12. 15,
16, 18, 19.) And, it is done thus. All discourse supposes that Certain on which
it builds: But, if Tradition or the way of conveying down matters of Fact by
the former Ages testifying can fail, none of these are Certain: therefore a
Protestant or Renouncer of Tradition cannot with Reason pretend to discourse
out of any of these: that is, (Reason being Man's Nature) he has lost his
natural right to allege any of these in way of proof. Now, that none of these
are Certain if Tradition be renounced is shown thus. Scripture's Letter as to
its Incorruptedness, nay its very Being, is Uncertain alone, or without
Tradition, as is confessed by Protestants, and proov'd Sure-Footing Disc. 3d, and
4th. So are Fathers and Councils too; For, Fathers being Eminent Witnessers to
Immediate Posterity or Children of the Churches Doctrine received, and Councils
Representatives of the Church, their strength as Proofs, nay their very
Existence is not known till the notion of Church be known, which is part of
their very Definition and to which they relate. Nor is the Being or Nature of
Church known, till it be Certainly known who are truly Faithful or have true
Faith, who not; which must be manifested by their having or not having the true
Rule of Faith: Wherefore, since the Properties of the Rule of Faith do all
agree to Tradition our Rule, and none of them to theirs, as was evidently and
at large shown there in my five first Discourses: it follows, the Protestant or
Renouncer of Tradition knows not what is either right Scripture, Father or
Council; and so ought not to meddle with them, nor allege them. Again, since
pretended Instances of Traditions Failing depend on History, and Historical
Certainty cannot be built on dead Characters but on Living Sense in men's
hearts delivered from age to age that those passages are true; that is, on
Tradition; it follows, that, if the way of Tradition can fail, all History is
Uncertain; and consequently, all Instances as being matters of Fact depending
on History. And, lastly, since Reasons are fetched from the nature of things,
and the best Nature in what it is, abstracting from disease or madness,
Unalterable, is the Ground of the human part of Christian Tradition, and most
incomparable strength is superadded to it as it is Christian by the
supernatural Assistances of the Holy Ghost ( Disc. 9.) it is a wild conceit to
think any piece of Nature or Discourse built on it can be held Certain, if
Tradition (especially Christian Tradition) may be held Uncertain.

Third Way.
5. THe Third Way is to examine the Method he takes in dissuading. For, common
sense telling us it is not to be expected any should be able to perform any
thing unless he takes the right way to perform it, it is Evidert he cannot be
held in reason to have power to dissuade, unless the Method he takes be proper
to that Effect, that is, not common to that Effect and a contrary one. Now, to
dissuade is to unfix the Understanding from what is held before; which includes
to make it hold or assent that what it held before Certain is False or at least
Uncertain. The Way then he takes must be evidently able to oblige to some kind
of Assent, nay, as he handles it (for, I suppose he aims to make them hold as
Protestants) to Assent to the contrary; which therefore must needs require the
Evidentest Method imaginable, obliging their Reason to conclude that a man who
takes this way of Discourse cannot but make good what he says; at least, that
it may be strongly hoped from his method he will do it. This reflected on, let
us weigh the Method my Ld. takes in his Dissuasive; and, if it be Evident to
every ordinary capacity, that, as to the Godly part of it, the Quakers outdo
him; and, as to its quoting part the Smectymnuans used the same against the
Protestants to confute Episcopacy (for They too quoted and gloss'd Scriptures
and Fathers both) and indeed every Sect that has not yet shaken of the shame to
disrespect all Antiquity; then it is also Evident that this Method is Common to
those Discourses which have in them power to satisfy the Understanding, and
those who have no such power. Now, that being most evidently no Method or Way
to such an Effect, which many follow and take, yet arrive not at that Effect,
it is plain to Common Sense that my Ld. of Downs miscalls his Book a Dissuasive
and that it can have in it no power of moving the Understanding one way or
other, unless he can first vouch some Particularity in the Method he takes
above what is in others, in which we experience miscarriage, and himself
professes we, though taking it, miscarry in it. Let us then search after this
Particularity in his way of writing. Is it that he brings some stronger or more
unavoidable sort of Testimonies then were ever yet produced by others? No:
Every Scholar sees they are so common that they have been hundreds of times
produced, and himself (p. 1. and 2.) acknowledges their vulgarness. But perhaps
he invalidates all the Answers our Controvertists have given to those
Testimonies and presses them farther against us, beyond what any has done yet!
Quite contrary. He barely and rawly puts them down as if this were the very
first time they had seen light, nor takes the least notice of any Answer at all
given to them formerly. But it may be he lays Grounds to distinguish and press
home his Testimonies, and so gives them their full weight which others have not
done. Alas, no; I fear he never thinks of that, but judges (if we may conclude
from his carriage) the deed done, so he but quote; nor can I see one Principle
laid in his whole Book strengthening any one Testimony by bringing it to its
Ground, Experimental Knowledge in the Author he cites, that the Churches
constant Voice and Practice manifested this her Sense; but as they are put down
carelessly, so they are past over slubberingly, without the least enforeing them
by way of laying Principles: Is he at least Particular in his Sincerity and
Ingenuity? I know not how they will be satisfied with it who read his late
Adversary Impeaching him for the contrary Vices, and some passages in this
present Appendix, Where, lies then this Particularity in his Method, without
which his Dissuasive can never in reason be held Creditable? I speak
ingenuously and from my heart; All the Particularity I can observe in it lies
in these two things; First, that he huddles together multitudes of his own
sayings, without any pretense of proof for the most part, and when he brings
any they are such as we have spoken of. Next, that instead of enforcing his
Proofs by way of Reason, he overflowes strangely with godly language and
Scripture-phrases; with which plaufible manner of Expression most unreasonably
and unnaturally he strives to combat the Wills of his Readers, before he has
brought any thing able to satisfy their Understandings.

6. Yet, though his Method have no particularity in it as to its quoting part,
who knows but it may be very particular as to its Rational part, that is, full
of Proofs which conclude evidently or Demonstrations! But I am so far from
feeling the force of any one such Proof in his whole Book that I cannot discern
its very Existence, or even any Attempt of that kind; and I dare affirm my Ld.
of Downs never meant it or dreamed of it. If he have any such I request his Lp.
would in his Reply single them out from all the Pious and Inconclusive Talk
which swell his Book, and I promise them very heartily to lend them a due and
respectful Confideration. But I am sure he will neither pretend he has any, nor
attempt the having any if he but reflect that a Demonstration is a Proof which
has in it a virtue of obliging the Understanding to Assent, and that it obtains
this virtue by building on Intrinsecal Mediums; that is, on Proper Causes or
Effects, of which it is impossible the one should be without the other. This
clearing Method only the Champions of Truth dare take, and the Defenders of
Error must avoid under penalty of having their Cause quite ruined and crush't
to pieces. And this severe Method of finding Truth, relying on the Goodness of
my Cause, I fear not to take and stick to in Sure-Footing as appears there by
my Transition: which sufficiently shows the Particularity of my Method; I
expect now my Ld. of Downs would show me the particularity of his, or renounce
all right and Title to Dissuade.

7. I have been something longer about laying open the Necessity of a Proper
Method to dissuade ere one can in reason hope to perform that Effect, because I
see plainly that, in the pursuit of Truth, Method is in a manner ALL; and, that
it is impossible any Controversy should hover long in debate if a right Method
of concluding evidently were carefully taken and faithfully held to. I have
told my Ld. of Downs where he may see mine; and I desire him earnestly as he
loves Truth either to admit it as Conclusive and follow it, or show it
Inconclusive and propose us a better to begin and proceed with Evidently: And,
that I may more efficaciously endeavor to bring him, nay provoke him as far as
I may with Civility, to a Method particular and proper to dissuade, I declare
here before all the world that I know his Cause to be so unable to bear it, and
hope himself is so prudent, that he will never either venture to allow our
Method competent to conclude evidently, nor yet go about to establish a better
of his own.

Fourth Way.
8. THe fourth Way of disanulling my Lp's whole Endeavors, is to speak ad
hominem and challenge him thus. Your Grounds allow neither Fathers to be
Infallible in any Testimony you produce from them to dissuade with, nor yet
your self in interpreting Scripture; nor (I conceive) will you say that you see
with Infallible Certainty any Proposition you go about to deduce by Reason (if
there be any such in your Dissuasive) to be necessarily consequent from any
First or Self-evident Principle, therefore You are Certain of nothing you
allege in your whole Book. If then His Lordship would please to speak out
heartily, he ought to say; I know not Certainly that any thing I say against
your Religion is true, yet notwithstanding I would fain dissuade you from
holding the Faith of your Forefathers, and to relinquish a Religion you judge
unalterable and hope to be saved by holding it. Which were it professed and
delivered ingenuously as it lies at the very bottom of his heart, his Lp's
Dissuasive would be a pleasant piece, and lose all power to move any Child of
common Sense, nay the vulgar Reason of the wild Irish would be too hard for it.
Now, that this ought in due candor to be professed, in case neither the Fathers
nor Himself be Infallible in any saying or Proof of theirs, is thus Evidene't.
For, since to be Infallible in None, hic and nunc, (taking in the whole
Complexion of assisting Circumstances) is the same as to be hic and nunc
Fallible in All, or Each, and if they be Fallible or may be deceived in Each,
they can be Sure of None; it follows that who professes the Fathers and Himself
(though using all the means he can to secure him from Error) Fallible in Each,
must, if he will speak out like an honest man, confess he is Sure of None. Let
then my Ld. of Downs either vouch Infallible Certainty in himself reasoning or
Interpreting, or in the Authorities he cites, (I mean Infallible considering
their endeavors in complexion with all the means on foot in the world to
preserve them so) or else confess that, notwithstanding all means used by them
they are in each Saying and Proof Fallible, and so himself sure of never a
Motive he brings to dissuade with. Now, to see so Eminent a Writer and chosen
out on purpose (as he professes) by the whole Church of Ireland, go about to
combat a settled Persuasion, held sacred, unalterable, descending from Christ
by Attestation of Forefathers the Way to Bliss, etc. and bring no better
Arguments to do it but such as are (were he put to declare it and would speak
out) confessedly Uncertain, is so far from being a competent Dissuasive from
Catholic Faith, that it is when laid open (which is here performed) as good a
Persuasive for the Generality of Catholics to hold steadfastly to it as man's
Wit can invent; and far better to the weaker sort of Speculaters than to
demonstrate the Infallibility of the Ground of Faith. Such advantage Catholic
Faith gains by the Opposition from her Adversaries, if they be rightly handled,
and their Discourses brought to Grounds.

Fifth Way.
9. THe Fifth Way is built on the fourth, or, indeed on the Protestants
voluntary Concession. For they granting they have no Demonstration for the
Ground of their Faith, must say they have only Probability, and consequently
that Faith quoad nos is Uncertain, or (to use their own Expression) that Faith
in us is an Assent cui non subest dubium, of which we have no doubt, yet cui
potest subesse falsum, or. possible to be false, which amounts to this that
Faith at large is but highly probable, much less their Faith as
contradistinguisht from ours. Probabilities then being of such a Nature that
they do not absolutely weigh down the scale of our Judgment) I mean while they
are seen to be but Probabilities as is my Ld's case) it follows that if there
be Probabilities for the other side, the way to dissuade from It is to put all
those probable reasons in the opposite balance, and then, by comparing them,
show they have no considerable weight, counterpos'd to those he brings for his
Tenet. Now, that there is no Probability for our side is very hard to be said,
since the whole world sees plainly we still maintain the Field against them,
nay dare pretend without fearing an absolute baffle (which must needs follow
had we not at least Probabilities to befriend us) that our Grounds are
Evidently and Demonstrably Certain; nay more, dare venture to take the most
clearing Method imaginable to stand or fall by, and withal are bold to
challenge them that they have no Evident Grounds to begin with, nor dare
venture to pursue that evidencing Method. But my Lds own words in his Liberty
of Prophesying, Sect. 20.. 2. will beyond all confute evince it, ad hominem at
least, that we have Probabilities, and those strong ones too on our side. I
pick out some, leaving out other weighty ones which hisExpressions had too much
deformed. His words are these. Such as are the Beauty and Splendour of their
Church; their pompous Service; the Stateliness and Solemnity of the Hierarchy;
their name of CATHOLIC, which they suppose their own due and to concern no
other sort of Christians (he ought have said, which the established use of the
word and derived riv'd down to the Successors of those who first had that
Name, forces all, even their Adversaries, to give them when they speak
naturally; and makes them despair of obtaining it for themselves) The Antiquity
of many of their Doctrins; The Continual Succession of their Bishops; their
Immediate derivation from the Apostles; the Title to succeed S. Peter; the
Multiteudand Variety of people which are of their Persuasion; Apparent Consent
with Antiquity in many Ceremonials which other Churches have rejected; a
pretended and sometimes an apparent Consent with some elder ages in many
matters Doctrinal; the great Consent of one part with another in that which
most of them affirm to be de fide; the great Differences which are commenced
amongst their Adversaries: Their happiness in being Instruments in converting
diverse Nations: (he should rather have said, All) The Advantages of Monarchical
Government, the benefit of which as well as the Inconveniences they daily
enjoy; the Piety and Austerity of their Religious Orders of men and women; the
Single Life of their Priests and Bishops; the severity of their Fasts, and
their Exterior Observances; the known Holiness of some of those persons whose
Institutes the Religious Persons pretend to imitate, etc. After which he
subjoyns. These things and diverse others may very easily persuade persons of
much reason and more piety to retain that which they know to have been the
Religion of their Forefathers, which had actual Possession and seizure of men's
understandings before the opposite professions had a name. Thus he. By which
words it is Evident we have Probabilities and high ones too, on our side; else
how could they be able very easily to persuade persons of much reason?
especially, they having as he says more piety; or more then much, that is very
much; which argues rather that those motives for Catholic Faith were suitable
to Piety or Truths; ot at least exceedingly-seeming-Pious; so as the great
Piety of those persons, neither checked at the practice according to those
Motives, nor their much Reason reached to a discovery of their Fallaciousness.
Whence, we may gather farther than those Motives so standing for us, are to be
rankt in the highest degree of Probability. For since those Persons are confessed
to be very Pious, that is, very Good, and, so, unapt to be byast by Passion,
and withal to have much Reason, it is plain the Cause of their Assent to
Catholic Faith must be looked for in the Object, and have a wonderful
appearance at least of Evidence or highest Probability which is able to conquer
and satisfy so Rational and sincere Understandings. This being so, my Ld.
cannot in reason own himself a Dissuader, nor pretend his Discourse has power
to dissuade any from our Faith, unless he put down the whole force of what we
build our Faith on together with his motives why he judges it false, and then
compare or weigh those reasons together, and so conclude his absolutely
preponderating. I doubt those very motives deliverd faintly by himself though
an Adversary, are such, as, had he laid them open at large as he does his own
Objections, he would have been infinitely puzzled to find others to
overballance them with any show of Reason. But I will not put him upon so large
a task: Let him only consider on what Grounds the Rule of our Faith is built,
to wit on sensible and unmistakable matter of Fact from age to age, and this
unmistakableness confirmed supernaturally by the concern of the Thing, obliging
the Believers best care to preserve it, and by the Goodness implanted in their
hearts by Christ's Doctrine, which kept lively awake that care (as it is at
large laid open in Sure-Footing) and then compare it with Descanting upon
Scripture's Letter by Human Skills, which is the Ground of the Protestants
Faith as contra-distinguish't from ours, (or rather of their Dissent or
negative Tenets) and show those Grounds preponderating ours, and then his
Reader will have some encouragement to heed his Dissuasive, otherwise he can
have none.

Sixth Way.
10. A Sixth way is to demand of his Lp. if he will undertake the pretended
Evidences he produces whether Reasons or Citations have not also been
(pretended at least to be) answered by Learned men on our side, and that the
Indifferent part of the world have judged the Catholics were so evidently
concluded against by the Protestants, that they were not able in reason to
reply. However he ought to have alleged that in the Evidences he brings the
Protestants have had the last Reply, that so at least there may be some slight
conjectural likelihood they were Unanswerable or Convictive. This, I say, seems
in reason fit to have been voucht, and (as Natural Method requires it) placed
at the very Entrance of his Book, so to give the Reader some faint hopes his
perusing it might be perhaps to some purpose. What does my L. of Downs? He
professes at the very beginning of his Introduction the direct contrary; For he
confesses there that the Evidences on both sides (in questions of difference
between our Churches) have been so often produced, etc. It will seem almost
impossible to produce any new matter, or if we could (observe how unlikely he
makes it he should conclude any thing) it will not be probable that what can be
newly alleged can prevail more than all which already has been so often urged
in these Questions; He should after the words [ so often urged,] have added and
never answered, otherwise the often urging signifies nothing as to
Convictiveness. Yet, careless of this, he proceeds; But we are not deterred
from doing our duty by any such considerations, as knowing that the same
medicaments, etc. Which, waving the pious Rhetoric, to any Understanding man
signifies directly as much as if he should profess, I am resolved to write a
Book against the Papists whatever comes onit, or whether it be to purpose or
no. For, to confess he brings nothing but common objections without undertaking
to manifest they were never satisfactorily answered, is to carry it as if
merely to transcribe were sufficient to convince; especially, since the being
often urged, is a very probable Argument they have been also often answered.

Seventh Way.
11. THe Seventh way to confute him is to run over his whole Book, bringing it
into Heads; and then by disabling those Heads, overthrow the Book it self;
noting first that I guide my Quotations by its Third Edition in Octavo.

First then we will distinguish it into the Matter of His Dissuasive, that is;
those things on which he builds his pretense of Dissuading; and the Manner of
it, or the Way he takes to manage that matter.

The matter is divided into his Authorities and his Reasons: We Will begin with
his Authorities. And, because we have found and showed Dr. Pierce's so famed
Sermon to be the very Idea of inefficacious quoting: it is but reason we should
manifest how the Dissuasive participates of its Nature, by ranking the
Citations produced in it under those ten faulty Heads which comprehended the
other's Authorities.

To the First Head belong that of Senensis p. 21, and 49. Those two p. 34.
Those p. 46, and 52. Maldonat's p. 55. Those p. 68. Those noted with b, c, d,
e, and f. p. 88. AEneas Sylvius p. 89. Those three so maliciously and wilfully
misrepresenting the Catholic Tenet. p. 94. To which add that of S. John p.
104. That cluster of Citations p. 111. and that which follows. Elutherius and
S. Ambrose p. 113. His Scripture p. 121. His general muster of such as wished
reformation of manners in the Church 125, 126. Now, to vindicate these
Testimonies his Lp. should show to what purpose as a Controvertist he alleged
these more than for show. I note that all these fall also under the 2d, and 3d.
Head, and perhaps diverse of the others.

To the 2d. Head appertain, Those of Tent. Bas. Theop. Alexandrinus in the
Preface. Tert. p. 28. S. Cypr. and Dionysius p. 57. Ambrose, Hilary and
Macarius p. 58. Olympiodorus and Leo p. 59. His Scripture p. 60. and 61. Justin
and Origin p. 69. Eusebius and Macarius. p. 70. Ephren and Nazianz. p. 71.
Those p. 83, and 84. Origin p. 85. Lyra and those noted g, h, i, k, l, m. p.
88, and 89. The Council of Eliberis and S. Austin p. 100. Cyprian. p. 110, and
114. Those p. 115, and 116. Against all these it is charged that they are raw
and unapply'd, only saying something in common which comes not home to the
point. Wherefore to validate them His Lp. must show the contrary.

To the third belong those p. 28. Those p. 42. Innocent. p. 47, and p. 92.
Clemens and Origin. p. 98. Epiph. p. 100. Those p. 104, 105, 106, 107. The
Extravagants p. 113. Those p. 117. and 123. Chrysostom. p. 119. Of these he is to
show that he has levelled them directly at a question rightly stated. I charge
him with the contrary, and add that most of his other Citations fall under this
Faulty Head.

Under the 4th are rank't those p. 29, 30. Those p. 49. 50, 51, 56. Lombard p.
64. A castro p: 67. S. Austin p. 73. S. Gregory p. 118. Canus. p. 119. These
either impugn a Word for a Thing, or some Circumstance or Manner for the
Substance.

Under the 5th the whole page 48. and all those p. 62. which are evidently
Negative; and, so, Inconclusive.

Under the sixth are comprehended his First p. 20. and his Second p. 21.
Bellarmin and Gerson p. 24. Albertus p. 43. Roffensis and Polydor Virgil p. 45.
His first Citation p. 64. Which we affirm to be the Saying of private Authors,
or Schoolmen which others do or may contradict. To this Head also belong all
those in a manner in his two last chapters, that is, in the better half of his
Book.

To the 7th Head are related that of S. Ambrose in his Preface. S. Austin p. 5,
and 6. Of the Emperors p. 12. Leo the 10th. p. 16. Pius the 4th, p. 17. the
Ephesin Council p. 23. The Council of Trent p. 25. Those three p. 37. Nazianz.
p. 58. Tertull. p. 69. The two first p. 73. Those three p. 87. and that p. 90.
Those first p. 98. S. Greg. p. 100. His descant on the 7th Synod p. 101. 102,
103. Symmachus p. 114. And, lastly, my Ld. of Downs his Testimony of himself
the page before the Title page, so strangely misrepresenting the Mind of that
Frontispiece. These I affirm to be false and not to signify the thing they are
expressly quoted for. Diverse of them also are direct Disingenuities, with a
craft in the managing of them which argues design, and are inexcusable by
mistake.

To the Eighth belong those of Athanasius, Lactantius and Origin in the
Preface. S. Chrysostom p. 72. Theodoret and Gelasius p. 74. In which it is easy
to be made appear, the words are ambiguous.

Those of the 9th, or Sayings of Writers on his own side are not worth
mentioning: nor yet the 10th. or pieces of Scripture interpreted by himself;
unless he will show us he proceeds on Evident Principles in sencing them, which
so force the meaning he gives them that they can possibly bear no other. Till
he does this, all his glosses are presumable to have no other foundation but
mere strength of Fancy; and since he professes (p. 9.) that his Dissuasive
wholly relies on Scripture, that is on the sense he conceives it to have, the
common mode of interpreting Scripture by Fancy which reigns so in the world,
will make any sober man doubt, unless he show us the evident Principles which
necessitated his Interpretation, that his whole Dissuasive is perfectly built
on his own Imagination.

The Dissuasive has two or three other faulty Heads of Citations besides those
mentioned; as Vnauthentick ones: such is Origens p. 98. and that against the
7th. Synod p. 103. Those also which cite an Author but no place where they are
to be found as S. Cyril p. 99. And lastly, brought to impugn Faith, but
speaking only of Alterable practices, as those p. 123. which he is to show
Authentic, well-cited and Pertinent; And as well of those as the former he is
to make good if he will go to work like a solid man that they have in them the
true nature of Testimonies, and such Certainty as may safely be relied on for
Principles of those serious Discourses he makes upon them. See Sure-Footing p.
172, 173, 174.

12. But that I may do right to the Dissuader, I am to confess ingenuously that
he has in him one Citation which has in it the true nature of a Testimony, or
depending on the Author's Knowledge had by Sense of the present Doctrine of the
Church at that time. Now, though it be the Testimony only of one single Father,
and so I am not in severity bound by Catholic Grounds which vouch only
Consensus Patrum, (which I understand to mean a Consent of so many and so
qualified as is apt to convince) to answer it, and not at all by Protestant
Grounds which yield them all Fallible; yet I have that regard for any thing
that tends (though remotely) to Solidity, that I will even remit something of
my own advantage to give it a respectful Consideration. The Testimony is of
Gennadius cited by my L. p. 58, and 59. thus. For, after Christ's Ascension
into Heaven the Souls of all Saints are with Christ, and going from the body
they go to Christ, expecting the resurrection of their body, with it to pass
into the perfection of perpetual bliss. To which my Ld. subjoyns, and this he
delivers as the Doctrine of the Catholic Church. I take this excellent
Testimony as put down by himself, to do which the usage of St. Greg.
Nazianzen's immediately foregoing, gives me small encouragement. In answer
then, I affirm that this Testimony so insisted and relied on as against us, is
as plain a declaration of the Faith of our Church at present as any now-adayes
Catholic could pronounce. For, since no Catholic holds that any goes to
Purgatory but they who die Sinners to some degree, and that all who are Saints
are with Christ in Heaven, as is evident by the Churches common language
affirming constantly the Saints are in Heaven, and never that the Saints are in
Purgatory, but the Souls only, it is manifest that the words are as expressly
for us as we our selves could invent or wish.

I hope it will not wrogMethod, if on this occasion I show how Protestant
Writers speed when they bring against us any Testimony of a Father speaking as
a Father, that is, declaring that he delivers the sense of the Catholic
Church; however in other Testimonies which speak not narratively, or matter of
Fact, the very nature of words joined with the variety of their Circumstances
must needs afford room for ambiguity and several Glosses. I affirm then that
this Testimony not only is not in the least opposite to us, but is directly
opposite to the Protestants in another point of Faith in which we differ. To
discover this let us reflect on the words [ After Christ's Ascension into
Heaven the Souls of all Saints are with Christ,] and ask what mean these words
After Christ's Ascension? And first it is Evident it puts a distinction between
the Souls of Saints before Christ's Ascension and After it in some Respect, and
what is this Respect? most expressly this that the Souls of the Saints After
Christ's Ascension go from the body to Christ, that is, that before the
Ascension none did. The avowed Doctrine of the Catholic Church, prosessing that
those who die Saints in the Law of Grace go straight to Heaven, but that the
best Saints before our Saviors dying for them and Ascending with them, did
not. Whence also we hold that Christ's descending into Hell, was to free them
from that State of Suspense and Want of their strongly desired and hopet for
Bliss. According to that Hymn of S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, in the
Common Prayer Book, so often said over by rote but never reflected on, When thou
had overcome the Sharpness of death thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to
all Believers: Signifying plainly that no Believers sound Heaven open for them
till after Christ's death. By the Success of this one Testimony is seen how
utterly the Protestant Cause would be overthrown by way of Testimony as well as
Reason, were Citations distinguished, brought to Grounds, and those only
admitted from the Fathers in which it is manifest they speak as Fathers or
Witnessers of what is the present Churches doctrine.

To close up this Discourse about the Dissuader's Citations. He is to show us
first that they fall not under the Faulty Heads to which they are respectively
assigned, or under diverse others of those Heads. Next, that they have in them
the nature of Testimonies: And, lastly, (which is yet harder) that though they
have in them the nature of Testimonies, their Authority is Certain and their
language unambiguous so that they may be safely relied on for Principles or
Grounds of a solid Discourse; This if he shows of any one citation which
strikes at our Faith, I promise him very heartily to subscribe to the validity
of all the rest.

13. Thus much for his Authorities. Next should follow a Refutation of his
Reasons produced against our Faith; for, as for those against our SchoolDivines
or Casuists they concern not me as a Controvertist: Let him and them fight it
out. Now, Reasons that strike at our Faith must either be against the Ground of
Faith, and those shall be considered in my Answer to his First Section; or
against, points of Faith: And these, may proceed two ways; First by showing
those points Incomprehensible to our Natural Reason, or unsuitable to our Faney;
and this way he frequently takes, making a great deal of game upon such
subjects, as any Atheist may do by the same way in points common to him and us.
But this hurts us not in the least; in regard we hold not Mysteries of Faith
Objects of Human Reason; nor Spiritual Things the Objects of Fancy; and, so,
these Reasons need no farther Answer. The other way Reasons against Points of
Faith may proceed, is to show those Points contradictory to some Evident
Principles, at least to some other known or else acknowledged Truth? And these
were worth answering; But such as these I find none in his whole Book, rather
that he builds his slight Descants or Discourses on some controvertible Text
or Citation, relying on them as firmly as if they were First Principles.

Indeed p. 65. the Dissuader tells us of a Demonstration of his for the Novelty
of Transubstantion and that a plain one too: But, I shall manifest shortly from
the very words of the Author Peter Lombard, on which his Plain Demonstration
relies, that it is either a plain mistake or plain Abuse of him; nay argues the
direct contrary to what the Dissuader product it for.

Some Consequences also he deduces ad hominem against diverse points of our
Faith, built on our own Concessions or Allowed Truths taken from the Fathers;
by which he attempts to overthrow it: But these Consequences are so strangely
Inconsequent, and those tenets he would counterpose so far from Contradictory,
that it is hard to imagine whence his Reason took its rise to leap into such
remote conclusions. I Will instance in two, found p. 49, and 50. That the
Conflagration of the last day, and the Opinion of some Fathers that the Souls
were detained in secret receptacles till the day of Judgment, do both destroy
intermediate Purgatory. Which Consequences if he will make good, I will vield
his whole Book to be Demonstrative and Unanswerable.

In a word, all the good Reasons he brings, are taken from some of our Divines
writing against others, and he has done himself the right to choose the best;
which levelled against the opinion of a less able Divine in stead of a point of
Faith, must needs bear a very plausible show.

14. Next follows the Manner how he manages this Matter; which in the civillest
Expressions I use I must call so many sleights to delude his Reader; and those
so craftily coucht that none but a Scholar can discern the snare.

The first and Fundamental one is his wilfully mis-stating the Question all
over. As p. 16. when he confounds the making new Symbols or Creeds, which
signifies the putting together into a Profession of Faith Articles
formerly-held (as did S. Athanasius and the Nicene Council) with making new
Articles. All his whole Section 3d. of Indulgences, which he makes to signify
merely those which pardons sins or pains after this life; whereas yet himself
confesses p. 40. that those were not defind by our Church. So also his next
Section of Purgatory, by which we mean a Penal State for those who die
imperfectly contrite, and from which they are deliverable by the prayers of the
Church Militant: Instead of which he impugns sometimes material Fire, sometimes
the duration of it. It were tedious to reckon all his Faults in this kind,
scarce one point escapes this voluntary misprision; that is, he scarce
discourses steadily (though perhaps he may glance at it accidentally) against
one point of our Faith rightly stated or as taken in the declarative words of
our Church. Now, common Honesty telling us that if one be to impugn any man's
Tenet, the first thing natural method leads him to is to put down that man's
very words professed by him to express his Tenet, and not what others deem,
conceit or talk about the same matter; my Ld. ought in due candor have first
produced the words of the Council of Trent, and then have leveld his opposition
against them: and not have told us what School divines say about the point; or
(having thus conceald the point it self) argued against some Circumstance or
Manner of it instead of the Substance. Now this kind of carriage so evidently
preternatural, and so constantly used, forces me to judge it sprung from
voluntary Insincerity and not from Accident or Inadvertency.

15. His second Disingenuity at once Evidences and aggravates the former. It Is
this, that, when by such a management he has made the point odious, he uses to
bring in our Churches Tenet in the rear; and, whereas Her speaking abstractedly
frees her absolutely from the invidious particularities he would fasten on her
Faith, he (as if he had resolved to abuse her, right or wrong) makes that very
thing which should clear her tend to disgrace her more: As is seen p. 40. where
he is forced to confess our Church defined Indulgences only in general terms
(that is, none of his former Discourses so particularizing touched her or her
Faith) and then cries out the Council durst not do this nor the other: That is,
she durst not do, and consequently did not do, what all his former discourse
would persuade the world our Church had done: Worse then this is his Instance
p. 60. where after he had pretended in the whole 4th. Section to impugn
Purgatory, which he had confounded with School-opinions to p. 45. with the time
of delivery p. 48. 51. 56. with a state of merit or demerit p. 57. 58. with his
own Parenthesisses p. 59. and told us some stories of Revelations and
Apparitions which seemed to him most ridiculous; Lastly confounded it with
Simon Magus his Opinion, Plato's or Cicero's conceit, and Virgils Fiction;
After all this he adds, this doctrine which in all the parts of it is uncertain,
and in the late Additions to it in Rome is certainly false, is yet with all the
Faults of it past into an Article of Faith by the Council of Trent. Now these
big words All the parts of it, the late Additions, All the Faults of it, and
all these said to be past into an Article of Faith by the Council of Trent,
would make one think that Council had defined all that medley he had huddled
together, for Christian Faith; but looking in the Council, not a Syllable of
any of these is to be found, but barely these few words, that There is a
Purgatory, and that the Souls there detained are helped by the prayers of the
Faithful. Where we see but two parts at most, for there are but two
Propositions in the whole definition: Again, the late Additions which he says
are defined by the Council can be but one at most, that is, the second
Proposition, that those Souls are helped by the Faithfull's prayers; And lastly,
when he says this Doctrine of Purgatory with all its Faults is past by the
Council into an Article of Faith, the large word All its Faults can mean only
the same second Proposition; there being nothing defined, besides the very
doctrine of Purgatory it self, but this. Which kind of carriage of his, so
sinisterly descanting on the point all along, not pretending to put down our
Tenet at all till toward the End, then deforming it to be a bundle of God
knows how many Faults defined for Faith, putting all these upon the Council of
Trent, and yet avoiding to put down the words of the Council at all (though so
few) lest they should discover he had lavish't out at random, show evidently
the Dissuader stands not much upon Conscience or Sincerity, so he can color
and hide his disingenuities, and he is the greatest master of that craft I ever
yet met with. Now, to avoid this Calumny (it being frequent in his book) I
discourse thus, Points of Faith are Supreme Truth which stand in the abstract,
and it is the work of Divines not of the Church-Representative to draw long
trains of Consequences from them, and dive particularly into the Manners how
they are to be explicated, or into their Extents if it be some Power: Nor is
this particular in the point of Indulgences or Purgatory, but is found in all
the other points of Faith, as every learned Divine knows very well. Again, it is
against the Principles of Universal and Supreme Government for a Church
Representative defining Faith to descend out of its highest Sphere and engage
in particularities (especially if they belong not to them, as School-opinions
do not) but only to order in common, and leave the Application of their Common
Orders to those who are to execute, or to Inferior Officers; and, should they
engage in particulars which are both below their highest office, and oft-times
contingent and uncertain, they would commit the greatest imprudence in the
world. Since then my Ld acknowledges here p. 40. that the Council orders all
hard and Subtle questions concerning Purgatory, all that is suspected to be
false, and all that is uncertain, and whatever is curious and superstitious,
and for filthy lucre be laid aside, he should have shown that it befitted a
Council's Gravity to descend to particulars, or to define negatively to the
School-opinion concerning the Churches Treasure, and not rather order in Common
and leave it to Inferior Officers to execute as circumstances should work upon
their Prudence: which is, that in Opinions which pretend a Subordination to and
Coherence with Faith, Divines should first clear their Incoherence with it ere
They engage their Authority against them, and then to do it efficaciously being
backed with the Majesty of the Council's Orders.

My Lds words that the Fathers of the Council set their Doctors as well as they
can to defend all the new, curious and scandalous Questions, and to uphold the
gainful trade, is indeed to the purpose, but withal (by his leave) an
unhandsome and most false Calumny against so many Persons of Honor and
Quality; and so Invidious a Charge, that could he have proov'd it, he had not
slubber'd it over so carelessly without offering any proof for it but his bare
word; nor with a slight proper to himself, immediately after he had directly
charged it, have half recanted it with However it be with them: that is,
whether they did any such thing or no, as he had so lately and so pressingly
challenged them to have done. And this I note as a Third Head of his
disingenuity, frequent in his Book; that he brings very good proofs for diverse
particulars which concern not our Church, but when it comes to the very point
and which directly strikes at her, his own bare word, We know, or, it is
Certain, (p. 54. l. 22. p. 62. p. 63. p. 67. etc.) is the best Argument he
produces.

16. A fourth disingenuity is his Perverting wilfully the Intention of
Catholic Authors. How he has dealt with the Council of Trent in the two late
mentioned points of Indulgences and Purgatory is already shown. In like manner
has he treated the Expurgatory Indies; For, whereas by the word Purgari and
emaculari in a Citation of his own p. 21, it is manisest they meant but to
amend Corruptions of the late by the Ancient Copies, he makes as though out of
gripes of Conscience (forsooth) that the Fathers were not right on our side,
they had therefore purposely gone about to corrupt the Fathers themselves, (p.
18. and 19.) so to make them on our side because we could not find them so. An
Attempt impossible to fall into head of any man not stark mad; For this
altering the Fathers could not have served our turn unless we had made it known
and published it; and, if made Public could not be imagined to do the deed
neither, for the Fraud must needs be made as Public as the Book: So that an
Action thus intended must be a Human Action without a Motive or Reason, which
is a Contradiction. Worse is what follows p. 21, and 22. but withal the malice
of it is more easily discoverable: For it is evident by the particulars he
mentions in those Indexes or Tables that the Printer or Correcter who made them
was an Heretic, and put in those Tables what his perverseness imagined was
found in the Fathers: Whence it was but fit his whole Index should be expunged:
Not that we fear the Fathers, but that we disallow the wicked intentions of the
Index-maker, who abuses the Fathers to injure us.

So p. 62. he would make Catholics themselves dissatisfied of the Ground of
Transubstantiation, because they say it is not expressed in Scripture: as if
Catholics held that nothing could be of Faith but what is expressly found there;
whereas he well knows they universally teach and hold the contrary. But his
abuse of Peter Lombard p. 64. and 65. is very remarkable, though perhaps it
might spring out of his little Experience in School Divinity. To make
Transubstantiation seem a Novelty he would persuade his Reader Lombard says,
he could not tell whether there was any Substantial change or no: Whereas that
Author Did. 10. brings Testimonies of the Fathers to prove it, and concludes
thence that It Is evident that the Substance of Bread is converted into Christ's
Body, and the Substance of Wine into his Blood, which is what the Council of
Trent calls Transubstantiation. And there ends that Distinction; After which
immediately succeeds the 11th. De modis Conversionis, of the Manners of this
Conversion; and of these he says he cannot sufficiently define whether this
Conversion be Formal, or Substantial, or of another kind. So that Substantial
here supposes the Conversion of the Substance of Bread into Christ's Body, and
is put by him only to signify one of the manners of this Conversion; which he
explicates to be, Sic Substantiam converti in Substantiam ut haec essentialiter
fiat illa, that one Substance is so converted into another Substance that the
one is made essentially the other. Whereas others who also hold
Transubstantiation do yet explicate that Conversion by putting the body of
Christ to succeed under the same Accidents in place of the Substance of Bread
annihilated. Now this Manner of Conversion (called by him a Substantial Manner,
in opposition to Formal, which he makes to be a Conversion both of Substance
and Accidents, and not in Opposition to the change of one Substance into
another) he leaves Undefin'd; but the Conversion it self of the Substance of
Bread into the body of Christ which is our point, he both defines, hold, proves
out of Fathers (Disc. 10.) and calls them Heretics that deny it: How
unfortunate is my L. to quote an Author as not holding Transubstantiation,
then to call that Citation a plain Demonstration that it was not known in his
days; whereas he both professes to hold it, and, by alleging Fathers for it,
evidences he holds it was held anciently; and, lastly, gives my L. such hard
language for not holding it himself. Whether it be likely my L. should light by
some accident in reading Peter Lombard only on the 11th. Did. and never read
or light on the end of the 10th. let Indifferent men judge. I only desire the
Reader to observe how ill my L. comes of with his plain Demonstration, and to
remark that he ever succeeds worst when he most ayms at a good and solid proof;
the reason of which is because Truth being Invincible, the nearer one closes to
grapple with her the worse still he is foiled. Those few Instances may suffice
for the 4th. Kind of the Dissuaders disingenuities, which is to pervert the
Intentions of his Authors; of which sort, were it worth the pains, I would
undertake to show near an hundred in my Lds. Dissuasive. This piece of Art
being now so customary to him that it is even grown into a second Nature.

17. His fifth kind of disingenuity is a most wilful one and most frequent too,
for it takes up far the better half his book. It Is this that he rakes up
together all the less solid or ill Opinions and Cases (and sometimes deforms
the good ones) of some private Writers in the Church which he will needs lay
upon the Church her self as Mistress of our Faith. Nay, so strangely unjust he
is in this Particular, that whereas it evidently clears our Faith, disengages
the Church, and shows it but Opinion when other Catholic Doctors
uncontrolledly write against such an Opinion or Explication, himself often
alleges that very thing which should clear the Church, and and makes use of it
to her farther disgrace; First, making the School and Church, Private Opinions,
or Explications and Faith all one; and, at next, that the difference amongst
such Opiners and Explicaters argues our difference in Faith; How strange a
malice is this! Was there ever any time since the Apostles in which there were
not in the Church diverse persons and even some Governors bad in their lives,
and also Erroneous in their Opinions, when the Abstractedness of Christian
Faith restrained not their Understandings from descending to particulars nor
secured them in such discourses depending much upon human Sciences? Do not the
best Champions of Protestants object to the Ancient Fathers themselves such
Errors in Opinions? Yet no ancient Heretic was ever so weak as to make that an
Argument against the Church of those times. Did not many Protestant Writers
holdmany Roman Catholic Tenets, as may be seen at large in the Protestants
Apology? Yet no Catholic in his Wits thought therefore the Church of England
her self was Roman Catholic, I have heard that one of their Chief
Ecclesiastical Officers, namely Bishop Bilson, writ a book purposely to justify
the Hollanders Rebellion against the King of Spain, maintaining that Subjects
might in some Cases rise against their Sovereigns and turn them out of their
Government? And yet Catholics are far from that peevishness to esteem the
Protestants disloyal in their Principles but honor them highly for the
contrary Virtue, even though they are pleased to permit us their
Fellow Sufferers for the same loyal Cause, to be abused and branded publicly
for Traitors by every disloyal Scribbler. And, to come nearer home, did not my
L. himself formerly write some strange Opinions, (I need not name them) yet no
Catholic was ever so absurd as to charge his Church with those Tenets. But,
which is yet far worse, he imputes to the Catholic Church such licentious
Cases, which not only Private Authors may and do freely contradict but even
Mulritudes of Church Officers, namely almost all the Bishops in France in
Diocesan Synods, nay the Head of the Church himself has disapproov'd in
condemning the Apology writ for them. Yet, for all this, all must be our
Churches fault whether she will or no; and our Doctrine, though she condemns it.
Was ever such a disingenuous Writer heard of! But what aggravates most the Case
is, neither the Church of England nor the Archbishop of Canterbury, nor any
Officer or Bishop of hers that we heard of did ever in any solemn Act blemish
those Authors cited in the Protestants Apology by condemning their Books, nor
yet those writ by the Dissuader, though they judged them amiss; but, on the
contrary his person is advanced and chosen for their Champion; and yet our
Writers are soberer and more candid than to impute to their Church any of these
not-yet-disavow'd Faults, whereas my Ld. (for want of better Proofs) will needs
clap upon our Church any misreasonings of private men, though our chief Church
Governor and many Inferior ones have discountenanc't and blemish't them. Nor
is it only every defect human nature is liable to in reasoning or acting which
must be made our Churches Crimes, but every unfavorable Circumstance Man's
Nature can light into, and their defective Effects are all made by the
Dissuader's Logic to spring from mere Popery; nay the very National Rudeness
of his wild Irish is (in his Preface) confounded by his carriage with our
Churches Doctrine; and the Inability of their Teachers with much Rhetoric
complained of, and charactered to be Popery, when himself enjoyes the revenue
which should educate them better and encourage them.

Against this kind of unreasonable procedure in the Dissuader, I levelled those
Corollaries from Corol. 31. to. 40. which I entreat my Reader to review and him
to consider particularly. In the mean time I would ask him on this occasion a
few short Questions. May not any one remain a Catholic, and never hold or
practice these Cases and Opinions? Do not Catholics impugn them as much as
Protestants? Does he find any of those Opinions or Cases in our Catechisms, or
any Command of our Church to hold or act them, nay even in that most common
point of extending Indulgences to the next world; but they who will use them,
may, who will not, need not? How then does he hope to dissuade from Catholic
Religion, by impugning that which touches not that Religion nor concerns any
ones being of it? And why does not he rather fear all sober men will see his
aim by this declamatory kind of Opposition to endeavor to gain credit as a
great Anti-papist, and not to convince solidly his Readers, whose experience
(if they know any thing) enables them to give a ready and satisfactory answer
in their own thoughts to all those Questions I have now ask't, and so, to
confute near three parts of His Book. He saw it himself, and though he carries
it on all along as if he were willing all should be thought the Doctrine of our
Church or Faith, yet, fearing the Calumny is too manifest to be cloak't, he
provides excuses and Evasions before hand, in his Title (p. 127.) saying, The
Church of Rome, AS IT IS AT THIS DAY DISORDERED, teaches doctrines and uses
practices which are in themselves or in their immediate CONSEQUENCES direct
Impieties, etc. So that he speaks of our Church precisely as having some
disorders in her, and that they lead to ill only by Consequences drawn from
such disorderly Tenets; and who is the drawer of these Consequences? Himself.
But, grant his position that there are Disorders in the Church (I mean not in
Faith, held Universally and obligatorily, but in unobligatory Opinions and
Practices) I ask does he think there was ever any time in which there were not
some Disorders in the Church, or ever will be while Original corruption lasts?
Does he (...) the very time of the Apostles was exempt from such frailty; or
that S. Paul complained for nothing of the Pastors in those primitive and
purest times ( Phil. 2. v. 21.) that Omnes quae sua sunt quaerunt non quae sunt
Jesu Christi! Again, thinks he it any wonder that a disordered Tenet or a
Falsehood in a point belonging to manners is apt to lead by consequence to ill
actions; none doubting but that as Virtue is the connatural Effect of Truth, so
is Vice of Falsehood. What has he got then by this kind of Proceeding, taking
up better half his book? Only this, he has proov'd there is Original Sin in
the world, and so it is Effects, Ignorance and Interest; Again, let him consider
how disputative an Age this last Century has been, and what infinite multitudes
of Writers concerning Opinionative Points of all sorts have been in our Church,
how voluminous, how descending to particulars, or Cases, and this both in
School Divinity, Morals and CanonLaw; and then let him speak seriously whether
he can conceive it possible in human Nature, there should not be much
Contingency in such an Universality depending on their private Reasons; whereas
scarce two men debating the same point particularly, can light into the
self-same Consequences, but differ in their deductions. Thinks he it possible
many should not be Ignorant and so miscarry casually, many Passionate and
incline to some Tenets because suitable to their humor; many conceited of their
new Inventions, and thence, judging their Consequence to be connected with the
point of Faith, cry it up to be de side in their opinion, and allege that,
denying this, you by consequence deny Faith? This being so, nay impossible to
be otherwise, and every Reader that sees the Dissuader's unreasonableness
against us easily judging he would pick out the worst Instances he could find
in that Infinity of Authors, and (the very complexion of his style being
wholly Invidious) expose them to shame with all the most disgraceful Rhetoric
so great a wit as his heightened by that bitterest of Passions could deliver;
he will easily be able to make an Estimate what he may judge of my Ld's
performance in this kind.

18. But now whates all this to to our Church? For his Title p. 127. tells us
it is the Church of Rome which teaches such Doctrins and uses such Practices,
etc. The Notion of Church, as one would conceive, is terminated and bounded
precisely within the limits of its Definition, a Body of the Faithful; and
Logic tells every one who understands it, that, since we work by abstracted
notions, or conceive a thing now thus, now otherwise, we must not confound
those notions but hold strictly to the formal meaning of the word which
expresses the thing we undertake for. We are then to expect in honesty, that,
since the Dissuader charges all those Doctrins and Practices on our Church, all
his Testimonies to fasten them on her should be of our Churches words, or
Expressions of the Churches Faith; we need not doubt then but they will all be
Definitions of General Councils. Let the Margent inform us. The first Citation
is of Navarr's Enchiridion, a private Casuist. The 2d. of Reginaldus, another
Casuist. The 3d, and 4th, of Sotus and Medina, two other School-Divines. Then
comes in Reginaldus again, and then Sotus again; and in this tenor he proceeds
for 133 pages; that is from p.127, to p. 260. not quoting the Council of Trent
past 3, or 4. times (but once, as I remember, the words of that Council) and as
often abusing it by his strange misconstructions.

19. For instance take his first Quotation of that Council p. 135; which I the
more insist on, because on that occasion I shall lay open his crafty and
voluntary defiling every point he touches with most abominable
misrepresentations, and those vizarded with an outward form of Holiness and
such devout expressions as a Saint from Heaven would scarce (...), lest prudent
men should think it too much; which I intended for a SIXTH Head of his
disingenuities.

After then p. 133, and 134. he had made all the most odious Cases he could
pick out the Roman Doctrine, because the books of three or four Authors perused
and allowed by two or three others as not opposite to Faith, (See Coroll. 33.)
that is, the private Reasons of half a dozen Divines conceived so, which he
amplifies beyond all bounds of moderation, that one would judge a General
Council or Provincial one, at least that many Church Governors or Bishops had
recommended those Cases to be held and followed; at length he tells you sadly
p. 134. that This, though INFINITELY INTOLERABLE, yet it is but the BEGINNING OF
SORROWS; Then follow the SUPER-INFINIT Sorrows themselves; the first of which
Sorrows is the Council of Trent's Doctrine; and, if it be Naught, it is certainly
the Chief of them, and so (had I a word to express it so high which the
Dissuader's Rhetoric would easily reach) it should be phrased something above
Super-infinit; in regard by the Sacredness of it is Authority it would be a
Ground and an Abetment to all the wicked Cases issuing from it. Ere I come to
examine it I premise this note that such Testimouies as This are only to my
Ld's purpose if he will argue against our Churche^ Doctrine; In the success of
these then lies the whole Trial of our Cause. We have seen how he has sped
formerly in his plain Demonstration, and his only efficacious Testimony of a
Father; let us see how he thrives in this, which we must acknowledge beyond all
Evasion to express the sense of our Church.

20. His last. then p. 134. begins with describing a true and Perfect
Contrition and its Sacred Recommends as sufficient to blot out Sin; All this is
well, nor is there, as far as I know, a Catholic in the world that was ever
taught otherwise; what follows? Yet, says he, the Church of Rome does not
allow it to be of any value unless it be joined with a desire to confess their
sins to a Priest, saying, that a man by Contrition is not reconciled to God
without their Sacramental or Ritual Penance actual or votive. And this is
decreed by the Council of Trent, etc. Then comes thundering in a Declamation
fraught with such Invidious yet Holy Rhetoric that any honest unexamining
Reader would almost lay his Salvation on it, he had all the Reason in the world.
Which things (adds he) besides that is against Scripture, and the promises of
the Gospel, and not only teaches for Doctrins the Commandments of Men, but
evacuates the Goodness of God by their Traditions, and weakens and discourages
the best repentance and prefers repentance toward men before that which the
Scripture calls Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. And
there ends his paragraph, in which his passion was in such have that he forgot
to add an Also to answer to the word Besides. Now Ld have mercy upon usl What
strangely wicked Doctrine is this which can occasion such a clutter of Devotion
and Invectiveness jumbled together! Attend Reader, and from one Instance which
I picked not out purposely, but took the first that my discourse led me to
accidentally, learn the nature of all the rest; for scarce one passage in his
whole book is free from this Fault.

The Council Sess. 14. as it is commonly reckoned, (not 4th, as perhaps his
Printer mistook it) c. 4. speaks of Contrition; which it distinguishes into
Perfect Contrition, the same my Ld describes; and declares that It reconciles a
man to God before this Sacrament (to wit, of Penance) be actually received;
and Imperfect or Attrition, springing from Consideration of the vileness of
Sin, or fear of Hell, not from Love of God as its motive; and to this it
requires actually the Sacrament of Penance, this being properly efficacious to
advance by Preparations to it beforehand, (which Attrition gives them will to
make use of) and the whole course of Exercises in it or belonging to it, that
Attrition into perfect or properly call d Contrition: And (speaking of the
first sort or proper Contrition,) It adds farther, that Reconciliation to God
is not to be ascribed (ipsi Contritioni sine Sacramenti voto QUOD IN ILLA
INCLUDITUR) to Contrition without desire of the Sacrament WHICH IS INCLUDED IN
IT; that is, in Contrition. Thus the Council. I note

First, the Dissuaders craft in not putting down the words of the Council. A
practice frequent with him (as I showed before) and purposely omitted, as
appeared evidently then and will do more now, because not at all favorable to
his insincere humor of deforming all he meddles with.

Next, by this means, he, handling only Perfect Contrition, makes our Church
require actual or votive Penance to Its Sufficiency; Whereas the Council
expressly voids any necessity of actual Penance to this or proper Contrition,
and only requires it to Attrition.

3ly. He omits the words which is included in it; which put down had disanull'd
all his whole discourse and cleard our Church from all his Calumnies; For this
shows the Councils sense to be that Contrition alone, if qualifyed as it ought
to be, reconciles to God; but that to be qualified as it ought to be, it
includes a purpose or desire of doing other duties incumbent on the sinner by
reason of his Sin; and signalizes this particularly of his duty to the Church
in resolving to come to the Sacrament of Penance. Let us parallel it. Suppose
the Council had said. True sorrow for sin will save you; but not, unless you
have a will to restore what you have stolen, for otherwise your sorrow is not
true, in regard true sorrow for Sin includes a will to rectify what sin had
disordered. Where Is now the occasion of my Lds. ranting declamation of the
Councils going against Scripture, and the promises of the Gospel, teaching for
Doctrins the Commandments of men, of evacuating the goodness of God by
Traditions, of weakening and discouraging the best Repentance, and of
preferring Repentance toward men, before that which the Scripture calls
Repentance toward God and Faith in our, Ld. Jesus Christ. Yet, supposing that
sinners are commanded by Christ's Law to give account of their Souls to the
Church and receive their Absolution and Penance from her, as well as they are
to restore what is stolen, the case is undeniably parallel.

But, since many other duties are included in Contrition, as an obligation to
restore credit or goods unjustly taken away, to repair temporal damages our
Neighbors have incurred by us, and the spiritual ones of Scandal, asking
pardon for affrontive Injuries, curing our former Uncharitableness and
wordliness by giving Alms, and such like: a purpose of all which, if our
Contrition be right, ought to be included in it; it is worth Enquiry why the
Council particularises this of coming to the Sacrament of Penance. And to
Catholics who understand the nature of that Sacrament, the Answer is so easy
that it is needless. For, after the heart is contrite or substantially turned,
there remains no more to be done but to wash of the tainture of bad
Inclinations Mortal Sin uses to leave behind it, and to make Satisfaction to
our Neighbor or the World: Wherefore, because the wholesome Sacrament of
Penance, rightly used, is ordained and apt of its own Nature both to wash away
those remaining stains by sorrowful and penal actions enjoined by Church
discipline, and also to ty men to the Execution of all due Satisfaction to the
injured World; hence, the heart being truly converted interiorly, this
Sacrament is the most Efficacious means to set all else right, and so to come
to it is the only remaining duty (as including all else) and for that reason
it is particularly expressed by the Council that true Contrition must include a
purpose to come to it; because, if true, it must needs include a desire to take
the best means to rectify what is amiss. And, lest a Sinner should be apt to
conciet and say within himself thus, I am truly sorry for my offending God,
there is then no more to be thought on; the Council most prudently declares
that, That will not do unless they desire likewise to set right what they had
disordered, of which the Church is to be the Judge and careful Overseer, and so
it is their duty to the Church to let her take Cognizance of it. The Dissuader
did ill then to phrase it Ritual Pennante, as if only a dry Ceremony had been
enjoined by the Council ere the Soul could be reeoncild to God, whereas it is a
Sacrament of its own nature executively satisfactory of all the kinds of
duties, and efficaciously reparative of all the disorders which are the Arrears
and Effects of a sinful Action: But he did worse to omit the Councils words,
and so leave out totally Quod in illa includitur, which heartily put in had
made all his Process to no purpose: But worst of all, when he could not but see
all this, to inveigh against so innocent, so rational, charitable and wise
Proceedure of this Grave and Venerable Council with the harshest Expressions
that ever were clad in Holy Language. And, it were good my Ld. who is so high
against our Casuists, would let us know by what Cases he guides himself in his
whole Book, where he sprinkles Scripture Holy Water all over as if every thing
were a Devil he met with, and here particularly, in wilfully publicly and
causlesly calumniating not a private person, but an whole Council consisting of
so great a multitude of the most Grave, most Venerable, and most Sacred
Personages in the whole Christian World.

21. A seventh kind of his Disingenuities is his Exaggerating and magnifying
manner of Expression; by virtue of which he can make any mote seem a Beam; and
though the Fault would ly in a very small room, perhaps require none at all,
yet, as men blow up Bladders with wind, he can so swell and puff it up by
plying it with his aerie Rhetoric, that it looks as big as a mountain; whereas
come near it, examine and grasp it, that will not now fill your hand which
before took up the whole prospect of your Eye. He can also by placing things in
false lights make even the greatest Virtue seem a Vice, and then make that
new-created vice a monstrous one; Both which were visibly discovered in our
last Instance out of the Council of Trent.

22. I pass by many other of his petty Disingenuities; as his interposing
Parenthesisses of his own; speaking most confidently where he has least Ground,
so to make up the want of this with abundance of the other. His confounding
good Cases with bad; Some private Bigotteries with acts of true Piety; Books
approved by the Church with those of private Authors; understanding spiritual
things grossly and materially; as in his whole business of Exorcisms: In which,
were I in as merry an humor as his Lp. is there, I could make his discourse
there far more ridiculous than he makes any thing found in the Churches Ritual,
which book we are only to defend or he to object, if he would deal heartily.
Himself confesses the Inquisition of Spain corrected one of those Books, he
names, and I know no obligation any man has either to use or abet the others;
and then to what purpose were they brought against the Church?

23. The last greatest and most notorious disingenuity is his most unworthy and
most Intolerable Calumny against all Catholics that they are Traitors, and
unfit for human Society. He names not these words but that he endeavors to
have the thing believed by his Readers appears thus: The Title of his third
Chapter, p. 260. is this: The Church of Rome. teaches Doctrins which in many
things are destructive of Christian society in General, and of Monarchy in
special. We see here what he charges on our Church: and, since it is known all
Catholics not only are obliged to hold, but to hold as Sacred and of Faith
what the Church of Rome teaches, nay, to be ready to die for that Faith, it is
plain his Endeavors are to make us pass in the Opinion of his Readers for
persons who hold Treason and Villainy Lawful, nay Sacred, and that we are ready
to die and hope to be saved by such damnable points of Faith. Nor will his
false-hearted Pretense, p. 462. exempt any, while it is known that nothing is
more deeply rooted in our hearts than our obligation to believe as the Church
believes and teaches. In particular he assures his Reader, p. 462. that, No
Contracts, Leagues, Societies, Promises, Vows or Oaths, are sufficie^nt
security to him that deals with one of the Church of Rome: And p. 279. that the
Doctrins of our Church are great Enemis to the Dignity and Security, to the
Powers and Lives of Princes.

It Is not fit we should use here the Language proper to express what is the due
return and genuin brand for so malicious a Calumny: But perhaps it were not
unfit nor injuring the modesty of Subjects humbly to beg Protection for our
Innocence against the virulent tongues and pens of our uncharitable accusers;
whom neither Reason nor Experience will restrain from going on still to
stigmatize us all with the Faults of a few rash (or sometimes misconstru'd)
Writers. But when writes the Dissuader this? After such fresh Testimonies of
the unanimous Loyalty of Catholics to His sacred Majesty and his Royal Father,
spending their lives and Fortunes in his service. And against whom? Against a
Multitude in which are found very many Noble and Honorable Personages, and
many thousands of others very considerable and remarkable for their Fidelity.
How strange a Wickedness is it then to calumniate so highly and so publicly so
many eminently deserving and Honorable Subjects of his Majesty! Now, the
mischiefs naturally apt to flow from such a Calumny are these. It breeds ill
Correspondence between our Fellow Subjects and us, and makes us ill looked upon
by them, which violates Civil Unity so necessary for the Peace and strength of
a Kingdom; especially being between those two parties who have ever been so
friendly and brotherly in their Affection and Allegiance to their Prince, and
Fellow-Acters and Sufferers for his Cause; It discourages Loyalty to see that
after such best Testimonies of it we are not even able to obtain a bare
acknowledgment that we are Loyal, but that it shall still be lawful for any one
at pleasure to brand us for Traitors, and this publicly in print in the face
of all England? And lastly (were not our known Fidelity too strong an Antidote
for his malice) it tends to breed a conceit in our Governors that we are not
to be endured in any State, and only fit to be ruined and extirpated; not to
mention the breach of Charity ensuing such unworthy Criminations, which must
needs breed very many Feuds, and unneighbourliness between private persons all
over England and Ireland: Nor will there be ever any hearty Union in Church or
State, till thatwicked Uncharitableness of affixing upon a whole party the
faults of some few be totally laid aside.

24. Now on what does my Ld ground these horrid Charges against our Church, or
how proceeds he to make them good? After the old fashion, of quoting the
private Opinions of a few Authors, viz. Emonerius, Father Barnes, Emmanuel Sa,
Tolet, Vasquez, Navar, etc. Now my Ld supposes his. Readers are to be credulous
silly Asses, and to believe that these private Casuists or Discoursers are the
mouth of our Church; that she by them declares what we are to believe; that
such private Discourses are so many definitions of our Churches Doctrine or
Faith: That these Discourses are held by our Church to be Constant and Certain
(for such all Catholics hold her Doctrine or Faith to be) whereas every Child
knows these and such like Opinions are controllable and changeable as the Moon;
that they were taught by Christ and his Apostles, whereas any one may and
himself does quote who first invented them: that they who deny or impugn them
are Heretics, whereas yet others do and any one may write against them at
pleasure. Lastly, that these Points are all Divine Revelations, whereas the
very nature of the thing shows and himself confesses they are all Human
deductions. These Madnesses which are my Ld's First Principles in this whole
Chapter and the Chapter foregoing, that is, in better half his book, if his
Reader will be such a Bedlam as to yield to, then all his discourse is as sure
as Gospel; but if not, then it is Evident such Pretenses are flat and most
unconscionable Calumnies against our Church.

Little better is his quoting two or three particular Acts of some Popes: does
he think the words Church and Pope are Equivalent, or that the word particular
act signifies Doctrine or Faith that he should think three or four Acts all in
several kinds, that is, one in each kind, argue the Churches Doctrine or Faith
in those points. This in case he deals truly with those Popes; but I know he is
apt to deform all he meets with, and I see he does that of Pope Clement p. 268.
which makes me suspect the rest. That Pope extinguish't the Templars; and
consest that de Jure he could not do it, but that he did it ex plenitudine
potestatis. Here my Ld so interprets de Jure that he makes the Pope disown any
Justice in doing it, that is own an Injustice in doing it, for that is my Ld's
Intention in wresting those words; which being impossible to conceive the Pope
should prosess of himself, it is clear he meant by de Jure the same we mean by
the words [ by Law] that is, that there was no positive Law of the Church
impowering him to dissolve them, yet, the Exigency requiring it, his Office
might give him a natural right to do it; by which if Governors might not act
in great Emergencies, but must be tied to let all go wrong because it happens
no provision is made against it in any written Law; All Churches, Kingdoms,
Cities, nay Families would be at the same loss the Spanish Master was at, who
hiring a proud Servant and agreeing with him that he should do nothing but what
was concluded between them and writ down, a while after falling in the dirt
under his horse, and calling to his man to help him out, he told him he would
first consult his written Paper whether that were put down there or no; where
not finding it, he let his Master ly. But the case of Pope Clement is far from
the Envy he would asperse it with: for why may not the Pope dissolve the
Templars by his Power without Law, whereas Christian Princes and the Church
universally complained of them, and moved him to it, and so their Consent went
accompanied with this action of their Chief Governor.

25. He has only two passages in that whole Chapter which even seem to
concern our Church. One of the Council of Trent concerning a point of Practice
put down by him thus, p. 266, 267. That if a man have promised to a woman to
marry her, and is betrothed to her and has sworn it, yet if he will before the
Consunimation enter into a Monastery, his Oath shall not bind him, his promise
is null, but his second promise that shall stand, and he that denies this is
accursed by the Council of Trent. Thus my Ld.; where he tautologizes and lays
it out at large to amplify it the more, adds the words has sworn it, not found
in the Council, but put in by himself because he was resolvd we should be
Perjured, and avoids, (as was his frequent custom) to put down the Councils
own words in a distinct Letter; so that his additions, may be safer and in more
hope to escape too open shame. But to the point, I ask my Ld. as a Divine; Does
not he hold Heaven our last End, consequently that all our Actions are to be
steps toward it, consequently that there can be no ty to embrace any state of
life in case it appear upon mature consideration of circumstances highly unapt
and dangerous to the attainment of Bliss? I ask again; would not my Ld. himself
renounce actually living with a wife if he in his conscience judged so, but
keep his promise let his Salvation go whether it would? If he sees this
plainly, then the difficulty consists not in breaking a promise made to a
Temporal end, subordinate to our spiritual Last End for our Last Ends sake, but
in this whether such a Case can be put. I propose him one; may not a man come
to see by better knowledge of his Spouses humor, her newly-discover'd
dishonesty, the Inconveniences he shall incur by her ill-condition'd Friends,
and many such like, that such a Cohabitation tends to make his whole Life a
hell upon Earth; which case is very possible and sometimes happens, to the
eternal and temporal ruin of both parties, and the Infinite Scandal to the
World? In this case does he not think in his conscience it had been better in
all respects they had been parted ere Matrimony had been consummated? If then
the man or woman to redeem their rashness in so lightly promising chose to
debar themselves from all future hopes of marriage, and quite forsake the world
to serve God in a Religious Life, it at once clears the reality of the
Inconvenience, and the persons Intentions, and satisfies Temporal expectations,
nay ennobles in the conceit of good Christians the Attempt by the knowledge, as
far as any human Action can give of any Intention, that the person had no base
End in his Action, but that which is infinitely Best. Oh, but this will break
all Contracts, Leagues, Vows, etc. Let not my Ld. fear, there is too much
Original sin in the world, for very many to run rather to a severe Life in a
Monastery, and there to make vows of Chastity than to go to bed with their
Brides. By this may be judged how my Ld. jumbles some good Cases with other bad
ones, and makes all equally naught, did my design of an Appendix give me leave
to trace him through them all.

26. His next passage seeming to touch our Church is alleged, p. 265. Thus it
is affirmed and was practic't by a whole Council of Bishops at Constance, that
Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, etc. This is something now, being the
Affirmation (I suppose he means or would be thought to mean definition) and
Practice of an approved General Council. Attend now, Reader, for here the
Dissuader once or twice at least in a whole Chapter ayms to speak to the
purpose.

But first, what a favor is this of my Lds. not to put down the words of the
Council where it affirms this? For this had made the case plain and the fault
unavoidable. Next, (which is yet a greater kindness) he not so much as cites
the place in which this Affirmation is found; and to disabuse the Reader, I
assure him faithfully there is no such place or words found in the Council. To
say that Safe Conduct given by Lay men absolved from the Secular Court but not
from the Ecclesiastical, is quite another thing from his Invidious Proposition,
and withal very Rational; For why should it, since both their Cauies and Laws
are distinct? Whereas to violate Faith given, and upon this score because the
party to whom I gave it is an Heretic, which my Ld. falsely charges, is most
unmanly, nay Diabolical. Yet, though it lay in the Churches power to proceed
Juridically her way, yet it lay in the Emperors to hinder or differ the
Execution if any public Concern made it prudent. But what I stand upon (with
leave of others) is that no safe Conduct was promised them to return, but only
to appear and have a fair trial. My reason is, because in the Safe Conduct
given by the Council to Hierom, (and we may with reason conceive it was
equivalently given to both) we find it given with this conditional clause,
Justice being still preserved; Also, Appear according to the tenor of thy
foresaid writing to answer to those things which one or more will object to
thee in the cause of Faith, that thou may receive and perform in all things
the accomplishment of Justice. Which implies that he was to expect Justice from
the Council if he cleared not himself. Again, a disciple of Husse's who writ
his trial and death, and professes himself as much verst in the particulars as
his senses could make him, complains indeed of safe conduct given by Sigismund
in Writing of coming and returning; yet, putting down the very form of Safe
Conduct, no such thing as returning is found in it. Nor did Hus in all his
defense complain of Safe Conduct violated, except when he was first bound,
which was upon occasion of his flying and being brought back. Nay, the Emperor
always threatened Hus that he had rather burn an obstinate Heretic than defend
him. In a word, all this clamor is built on the Testimony of the Hussites, and
an imperfect relation writ in Dutch by an unlearned Catholic, which was
greedily caught at by such as leapt for joy to find any licks thing to
bespatter the Church with, and startling some unattentive and too credulous
Catholics, drive them, zealous of defending the Council, to an unwarrantable
position; which Tenet and its practice my Ld. himself knows well the Generality
of Catholics hate and detest as much as himself.

Eighth Way.
27. THe eighth and last Way is to pick out as well as I can those Propositions
or Principles my Ld relies on, and show their Weakness; which is sufficiently
performed by singling them out, and then naming them PRINCIPLES, they are so
quite unlike what they are called. Now his Principles he lays in his first
Section: I mean, his main and Fundamental Propositions, which because he relies
on, yet never proves, we are from his carriage to take for Principles and Self
evident to him, though he himself calls them not so; for it is dangerous to them
who have not Truth on their side even to mention the word Principle, Evidence
or Demonstration.

His First concerning Scripture I shall speak to anon.

A second seems to be this p. 6. We all acknowledge that the whole Church of
God kept the Faith entire and transmitted faithfully to the After-ages the
whole Faith; that is, to the Ages next after the Apostles, as he expresses a
little before, called by him p. 7. the first and best Antiquily, and signified
to mean the First three Ages. Now the Positive part of this Principle is good
and Assertive of Tradition, but withal unapt to stead him. The Negative part
of it, or that the third Age transmitted it not to the fourth, and so forwards,
implied in his Discourse, would only stead him; but it is left unproov'd, and
so is a Voluntary Assertion, and strangely ridiculous. For, if the first two
Ages kept the Faith entire and transmitted it to the third, it is Evident the
Third was able to transmit it to the fourth, and so forwards; wherefore, it
being Evident from the Concern of the Thing it was also willing to do so, it is
demonstrable it did so. This Principle then on which he so much builds is
either not for him, or else highly against him.

28. Another main and Fundamental Proposition (or Principle) is found p. 7. and
as the former concerned the Tradition of the Church, so this and the three
following ones concern the Authorities of Fathers. The present Roman Doctrins
(says he) which are in difference were Invisible and unbeard of in the first
and best Antiquity. That is, no Heretic had arisen in those days (or in the
first three hundred years) denying those points, and so the Fathers set not
themselves to write Expressly for them, but occasionally only; and yet, by his
leave, our Controv^^^^^^ are frequent in citing them for diverse points,
especially for the Ground of our Faith, the Churches voice or Tradition, to the
utter overthrow of the Protestant Cause. So far this improov'd and main
position, disannulling all use of the Fathers of the first 300 years in our
Controversies, is from not needing proof or being Self evident.

29. It may be his respect and value for the Fathers of the next Ages will make
amends for this rashness. He tells us immediately after, that in the Succeeding
Ages, secular Interest did more prevail, and the Writings of the Fathers were
vast and voluminous, full of Controversy and ambiguous Senses fitted to their
own times and questions, full of proper Opinions, and such variety of sayings,
that both sides eternally and Inconfutably shall bring sayings for themselves
respectively. Now, if they be so qualified that both sides may eternally
dispute out of them, and neither be ever able to confute the other or conclude,
then let him speak out and say all the Fathers after the first 300 years are
not worth a straw in order to decision or Controversy; nor yet the Fathers of
the first 300 years because they spoke not of our points in difference; and so
there is a fair end of all the Fathers and of his own Dissuasive too for that
part which relies on them, which looks like the most authoritative piece of it.
The Reader will easily judge now whether we (as he charges us, p. 18.) have
many gripes of Conscience concerning the Fathers that they are not right on our
side, or the Dissuader. Our constant and avowed Doctrine is (that the Testimony
of Fathers speaking of them properly as such, is Iufallible; that in two Cases
they speak as Fathers; that is, when they declare it the doctrine of the present
Church of their time, or when they write against any man as an Heretic or his
Tenet as Heresy. Some complexions of Circumstances also may be found out by
much reading and comparing several considerations which make it Evident they
speak as Witnesses; though it be more laborious and tedious to compass a
Satisfaction this way. Whereas (as appears by our Dissuader) the Protestants
neither acknowledge them Infallible, nor indeed Useful. And this is my Ld's
FOURTH PRINCIPLE, which with the former destroys the Efficaciousness of all
the Fathers, and invalidates all that part of his own Book which should seem
weightiest.

30. Notwithstanding the two former Principles to invalidate the Fathers, it
may still be said by the Catholics in behalf of their validity (as was by me
now) that the Sayings of Fathers as Witnesses are Convictive; and therefore it
should seem sit my Ld did lay another Principle to provide against that. He is
not unmindful of it, but has taken order about it. For, though p. 9. he tells
us the Fathers are good Testimony of the Doctrine delivered from their
Forefathers down to them of what the Church esteemed the way of Salvation; yet
that is to be understood according to the Rule premised p. 8. thus. Things
being thus it will be Impossible for them (the Catholics) to conclude from the
sayings of a number of Fathers that the Doctrine they would prove thence was the
Catholic doctrine of the Church, because any number that is less than all does
not prove a Catholic Consent. So that unless each single Father affirm each
single point to be of Faith or the Doctrine of the Catholic Church (which,
morally speaking; is Impossible to happen) it follows by his words that it is
Impossible to conclude thence the Catholic Doctrine of the Church; which
amounts to this, that it is Impossible to conclude any thing in Controversy from
the Fathers even taken as Witnesses. And this is his FIFTH PRINCIPLE. A strange
conceit, that it should be Impossible to know the Consent of all England in a
matter of Fact, (for example, the late war) without speaking with each single
man in the whole Nation. Yet this is his Discourse when he says that no number
less than all can prove a Catholic consent.

31. Yet some use certainly he allows of the Fathers for all this, else why
does he quote them. Yes, and the Principle (which I reckon his SIXTH,) by
virtue of which he enforces them is this, p. 8. The clear saying of one or two
of those Fathers truly alleged by us to the Contrary will certainly prove
that what many of them (suppose it) do affirm, and which but two or three as
good Catholics do deny, was not then a matter of Faith or a Doctrine of the
Church. I wish my Ld. had been so Ingenuous as to have made use of this
Principle when he charged our Church it self with the mistakes of a few Writers
contradicted, not by one or two, but sometimes by a whole Nation. But this
Principle shows 'twas not Reason in him but Will and Interest which made him so
hot. As for his Principle it self, it subsists not at all. For is it not known
that more than one or two, that is S. Cyprian and the African Fathers denied
the Baptism of Heretics Valid, yet the Contrary was notwithstanding found and
defined to be Faith and the Sense of the Church. Let him consider how perfectly
he engages himself in the very Sphere of Contingency and recedes from
Universality, the Sphere of Certainty, when he comes to rely on one or two;
unless he can show those one or two strangely supported and upheld by Universal
Nature or concurring Circumstances. It Is possible even one or two Lawyers may
hap to be ignorant of two or three Acts of Parliament. But, my Ld is still the
best confuter of himself, as appears lately by this present Principle applied
to his former carriage against our Church; To himself then let him answer. I
conceive that if one or two's (not denying it to be of Faith or affirming
expressly it is not-of-Faith, he engages not so far; but) bare denying a point,
argues what many do affirm, to be not-of-Faith; a fortiori, one or two's
affirming positively that to be of Faith and the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church which many others barely deny, argues it is of Faith: 'Twas of Faith then
what Gennadius cited by himself, p. 59. affirms, that After Christ's Ascension
the Souls of all Saints go from the body to Christ; This being so, let him
reflect what himself asserts, p. 49. that Justin Mariyr, Tertullian, Victorinus
Martyr, Prudentius, S. Chrysostom, Arethas, Euthimius, and S. Bernard affirm
none go to Heaven till the last day. Either then Gennadius his Testimony
delivering the doctrine of the Catholic Church is Inefficacious, and yet it is
incomparably the best, nay the only Efficacious one in my Lds. whole book, or
else according to him many Fathers (and not one or two only) denying a point
is no argument but that point may be of Faith. Whether all those Fathers held
so or no is another Question and requires a longer discussion.

32. Fathers then are useless to the Dissuader, as having according to him no
virtue at all of settling the Understanding; Yet he must make a show of them,
else all is lost; and so he tells his Readers, p. 8. as if all were well, two
things, both very remarkable. The one, that, notwithstanding, In the prime and
purest Antiquity the Protestants are indubitably more than Conquerours in the
Fathers. A high Expression! but, compared with what he says; p. 7. that in
those times our present differences were unheard of, it signifies that they
miraculously more then conquer, where (if his words be true) no mortals else
could either conquer or even attacque For how should one fight against such
points in difference from those Fathers who never heard of those points! The
other is, that even in the Fathers of the succeeding Ages the Protestants have
the advantage both numero, pondere and mensura, in number weight and measure;
which, joined to his words at the bottom of p. 7. that each side may eternally
and inconfutably bring sayings for themselves out of those Fathers, which
signifies that it is to no end or purpose to allege them, amounts very fairly
to this, that he brags Protestants have a far greater number of Citations which
are to no purpose than Catholics have; that those Citations which have no
possible force of concluding or no weight at all, do weigh more strongly for
them than for us; and, lastly, that they have a greater measure than we of
proofs not worth a rush with which they can bubble up their books to a
voluminous bigness. And we willingly yield them the honor of having a very
great advantage in all three, in case they be such as his own words qualify
them, to wit that each side may Eternally and Inconfutably allege them.

33. We come now to his main and most Fundamental and (in comparison) his only
Principle, p. 9. laid out thus. We do wholly rely upon Scriptures as the
Foundation and final resort of all our Persuasions, but we also admit the
Fathers, etc. To finish our Discourse about the Fathers will make way to the
Scripture. What means admitting as contradistinguisht to relying on? Not,
relying on; that is certain, for it is contradistinguisht to it; And yet to
allege any thing for a Proof as they do Fathers, and not to rely on it, is to
confess plainly (for Truth will out) that they allege them merely for a show.
He says they admit them as admirable Helps for the Understanding the
Scriptures and good Testimony of the Doctrine delivered from their Forefathers.
Have a care my Ld.: This supposes the Certainty of Tradition; For, if there be
no Certainty of delivery, there is no doctrine delivered, nor consequently any
thing for them to testify; and so the words good Testimony (unless our Ground
of Continual Tradition stands) mean directly that they are good for nothing, as
your former Discourses or Principles made them. But I ask, is their
Interpretation of Scripture or Testimony Certain? If not, why should they even
be admitted? Or how can Uncertain Interpreters and Witnessers be admirable
Helps to interpret right and good Testimony? I fear my Ld. can only mean they
are Admirable Helps as Dictionaries and Books of Criticisms are to assist his
Human Skill about the outward Letter. (which is a rare Office for a Father) and
not to give him the inward Sense of it or the delivered Doctrine of the
Catholic Church; for, unless All conspire to speak to the same point, if any
one be silent concerning it, it argues not (according to my Ld. p. 8.) a
Catholic Consent, and so is far beneath an admirable help. And this is what we
reprehend exceedingly in the Protestants, that they love to talk gaily in
common of any Sacred or Grave Authority for an affected form or show; but not
at all value the Virtue or Power of such an Authority, not judge interiorly
they have any worth valuing. They would credit themselves by pretending
Fathers, yet at the same time lay ways to elude them at pleasure; or (which is
their very temper, springing from their renouncing Living and determinate
Sense, and adhering to dead unsenc't words) they study to speak Indeterminately
and confusedly, not particularly and closely.

34. Do I wrong them? Let my Ld. clear me; His First Principle is by him
expressed to be the Scripture: and, on this Expression he so strongly builds that
p. 10, 11. he concludes thence, and Certainly too, thus. The Religion of our
Church (says he) is therefore certainly Primitive and Apostolic, because it
teaches us to believe the whole Scriptures of the old and New Testament, and
nothing else as matter of Faith. What mean the word Scriptures? Any determinate
sense of it, or the dead Characters? Alas, their Church is far from teaching
them the first, or from having grounds to own such a pretense; but puts the
Book in their hands and bids them find the sense of it or their Faith, for
there is their Rule. It Is the bare Letter then unsenc't he means by the word
Scriptures, and so he must say it is the outward Cuaracters his Church teaches
us to believe, and nothing else as matter of Faith; that is, their whole Faith
has for its object, Ink thus figured in a Book; A worthy Argument to prove
their Church is certainly Primitive and Apostolic: whereas itis known, Faith
was before those Characters; and besides, if this be to be Apostolical, we owe
nothing to the other Apostles for our faith, but only to those six who writ.
But we mistake him, he means neither sense of the word Scripture, and hates
these distinctionswith all his heart which would oblige him to either. He meant
to talk of Scripture indeterminately and confusedly, which might make a fine
show, and yet expose him to no Inconvenience by giving any particular account
of his meaning. His Inference from this his First Principle, being an Immediate
one, will utterly overthrow the Papists without doubt; Therefore (says he p.
11.) unless there can be New Scriptures we can have no New matter of Belief, no
new Articles of Faith. No my Ld: Yes, as long as by Scriptures you mean no
determinate sense of Scriptures, but the bare Letter only, whose sense is
fetched out by Interpretations, and these (as we experience) depend on menes
private Judgments and Fancies; if menes Fancies may vary every hour, you may
have diverse Interpretations every hour, and so new Articles of Faith every
hour. Is not this a mad kind of arguing, to conclude as absolute an
unerrableness in Faith, as if they had not only a determinate Principle but
even as self-evident and unmistakable as the First Principle in Metaphysics to
guide themselves by, whereas our daily eysight and their own sad experience
every day teaches us by the practice of this Principle, and yet their differing
in the Sense of Scripture in most high and most concerning Points, that the
Speenlation is naught, and the Principle it self a false and mis-guiding Light.
Nay I doubt my Ld. himself has no hearty value for this his First Principle,
though he says he wholly relies on it; For I never saw Protestant Book in my
Life thinner and sleighter in Scripture-Citations than is his Dissuasive: so
that if that be his First Principle he makes little use of it.

35. Many other Propositions or Supposals are implied in his book to give it
force. As that It matters not how a Citation is qualified so it be but
alleged. It Is no matter whether the question be rightly stated or no. The
Tenets of our Church are not to be taken from the use of definitions found in
approved Councils, speaking abstractedly, but from the particular Explications
of some Divines. Every Foppery is a proper Effect of the Churches Doctrine.
Points of Faith ought to be comprehensible to Reason, and Spiritual things
suitable to Fancy. The Act of an Inquisition, Sayings of a few Divines or
Casuists are all Catholic Faith and the Doctrine of the Church. That is
rationally dissuasive which is confessedly Uncertain. No Answer was ever given
to the Citations or Reasons produced in the Dissuasive. Talking soberly and
piously about a point is oftentimes as good as prooving it. That it is
Self-evident Scripture's Letter can bear but one Interpretation as wrought upon
by Human Skills. These and multitudes of such like, though not expressed yet run
implied in his carriage all along this book, and supposed true to give it any
force; yet so evidently false and weak, that to pull them out thence and make
them show their heads, is enough to confute them.

I conclude, and charge the Dissuader that he not only has never a Principle
for his Dissuasive to subsist by, but farther, that it is Impossible but himself
should know in his own Conseience that he has none, nay more that the
Protestant Cause (and the same I say of all out of the Church) can have none.
The first part of my charge I have manifoldly prooved in this present Appendix;
The other part of it which charges him with Consciousness of having no Grounds,
has two branches; and; for the former of those I allege that the ways he
takes all along to manage his Dissuasive, are so evidently studious, so
industrious, so designed and perfectly artificial, that, though one who is
guided on in a natural way is oftentimes not aware of his thoughts or their
method till he comes to reflect, yet it is Impossible he should not be aware of
his. which he postures with such exquisit craft and such multitudes of
preternatural sleights to render his Discourse plausible. For the later of
those Branches namely, that he cannot but know the Protestant Cause can have no
Principles, to make it Evident I discourse thus ad hominem, what I have proved
in Sure-Footing out of the nature of the Thing. It Is their most constant and
avowed Profession, and his p. 9. that they do wholly rely upon Scripture as the
foundation and final resort of all their Persuasions. This being so, Fathers
and Councils are not held at all by them, but as far as they are agreeable to
Scriptures; that is, their Testimony has no basis of Certainty from themselves
or of their own, but what they participate from Scripture. Wherefore either
they are No Principles, or else Subordinate ones to their First Principle,
Scripture. Unless then It be Certain or deserve the name of a Principle, They
can never be held by Protestants such, nor consequently can merit the name of
Principles (even Subordinate ones) because then pretended First Principle from
which only they can derive Title to that dignity is, in that case, none it
self: To Scripture then lets come. By which word if they agreed to mean any
determinate Sense of it certainly known to be the true one, their Discourse
were well built: But, since their Church can own no determinate Sense of the
Scripture derived down from Christ and his Apostles in antecedency to the
Scripture's Letter, but (having renounced that Way or Tradition) must say she
has it merely from that Letter as yet unsenc't, She must mean that it is the
Scripture Letter She relies on as the foundation and final resort of all her
Persuasions, nay for her Persuasion that this is the Sense of it. Since then
Principles are determinate Senses, not characters or Sounds, neither is
Scripture (as they take the word) a Principle, nor consequently Fathers or
Councils, whose Certainty is resolvable into It. They Will say, that Letter is a
Certain Way to arrive at a determinate Sense, and consequently that they have
determinate Sense by means of it. I ask, is the Letter alone such? Then, in
case it alone be absolutely sufficient to such an Effect, it will perform it in
every one; as, if Fire be alone sufficient to burn all the world, and so
overpower all the resistance of the matter, do but apply it, 'twill do that
effect or burn it. Is there requisite some Schollership in the Subject
Scripture's Letter is to work upon, or desire to see Truth in their Will? Then,
if this be the only requisite, it will work its Certifying or determining
Effect upon all Scholars and wellmeaners; and so no Scholars and well meaners
can disagree in the Sense of it. The contrary to which all sober men
acknowledge, and daily Experience teaches us as much as we can be sure of any
Human Action. The like Discourse holds whatever requisits they desire; for
still it will follow they must say, that in whomsoever they place that requisite
they cannot differ in the since of Scripture, which Common Experience will
confute. Nor will it avail them to run to Fundamentals, unless it be said the
Trinity is no Fundamental, which the Dissuader makes the only one p. 12. for
the Socinians deny this, amongst whom it is a strange Immodesty in the
Protestants to say there is nonc well-meaning, Learned or unapply'd to
Scripture. Adding then to this most Evident Proposition that a Cause proper to
produce such an Effect if we put the Patient disposed and the Application,
always produces its Effect, on the Truth of which all Nature depends, adding
this, I say, to the obvious and common Experience of Differers about Scriptures
sense, in all whom it is Impossible to judge either Disposition of the Patient
or Application is wanting, for all read it and strive with all the wit and
skill they have to find the sense of it; it will follow most Evidently that the
Fault is in the Agent or Cause, that is, that Scriptures Letter is unsit to
Certify or bring us to a determinate sense of it: and therefore, since, till we
know the Sense of that Letter it is to us but mere Words, I am forced by my
reason to judge they have no Principles (Those being Sense) but that their
whole way is wordish; and, not out of disrespect to them (for this touches not
them more than it does all others who have lest off the way of conveying down
determinate Sense by Living voice and Practice, or Tradition) but I am obliged
by Conscience and my duty to my Cause to declare that their whole Ground of
their Faith is thus hollow and empty. Whence I contest out of the nature of the
thing, that their Cause can bear no way of Sense or Principles, but must
forcibly be upheld by Wordishness; as by quoting Texts without any Certain
Interpreter, Citations of Fathers not brought to Grounds not held by themselves
Certain, fine Scripture phras'd flourishes of piety, and such like, In which
the Dissuader is Excellent; Or else (if the Objecter be very witty and have
taken a great deal of pains in the way of Skepticism to be too hard for
himself) by bringing all into Uncertainty, which is the acutest way of
Wordishness, and most proper to oppose any Discourse that tends to Establish
and Settle, because most opposite to it; and so I am to expect Necessity will
force them to take this way when any replies to SURE-FOOTING.

I know some will expect I should have answered the Dissuasive particularly;
but I know no reason why I should be sollicitous to stand cutting of each
single Branch of Error or be careful to hinder their growth, after I have once
plucked the Tree that bore them up by the Roots.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF my Ld. please to reply, (which I fear will be too troublesome a task,
because of the illnaturedness and Inflexibleness of Principles) or, if he
resolve to write hereaster against our Church, his LP. is entreated he would
please to go to work like a Man; that is, orderly, not confounding and jumbling
all together. Let him first define then what makes a Thing obligatory to be
held by Catholics, a Doctrine of our Church or point of Faith; then put down the
very words of the Council in case it be difin'd; next, acquaint us with the
nature of his objections, vouch them Conclusive, and let his Reader know in
what their virtue or force of Concluding is plae't, for this will strengthen
them exceedingly; and then let him fall to work when he will. Above all I beg
of him not to go about to forestall the sincere verdict of Reason by corrupting
first the Will of weak people by pious Talk; but first speak smart and home to
their understandings with solid Reasons, and then at the end of the Book preach
as much as he pleases against the wickedness of a Point when he has once
demonstrated its Falsehood. Otherwise the Sermon so expands and ratifies the
Proof, and his Godly Rhetoric so evaporates his Reasons, that it reflects no
light at all; and so no mortal eye, though straining its optic nerves, is able
to discern it.

A Letter To Dr. Casaubon.
Honored Sir,
AFter I had printed Sure-Footing, I heard accidentally that you had been
pleased to take notice of my Way and some signal Passages in Schisms Dispatched.
I was glad to hear that so ancient a Friend of mine had offered me a fair
occasion to renew our acquaintance, resolving to take an account of his
Exceptions, and requite them with a due Satisfaction as soon as I could find a
season proper. Wherefore, when the last sheet of my Appendix against the
Dissuader was under the press, finding both leisure and Opportunity to second
my Intentions, I took your Book, perused diverse chief passages in it, and
particularly what concerned my self, p. 87.

The first glance of it put me in some Wonderment at the difference I found
between you in your Book and the character of you in my Thoughts long ago
imprinted there: For in these I found you a solid sober man, a good Scholar,
as also ingenuous and candid; but in your Book, particularly in those passages,
I saw plainly (and was troubled to see it) you had either none of those
Qualities I imagined in you, or to a very small degree. But, I began straight
to reflect with my self that as, when I was a child, I fancied rooms very
spacious and streets very long. which, coming to the state of a Man, I found
very strangely diminisht; so my riper and more Judicious Thoughts saw now the
measure of your virtues in their true demensions, which my younger and
unexperienc't years had so strangely magnified and enhanc't. I doubt not but
your outward appearance will make it thought by those that know you, I have
said too much, let us see how I can justify my self.

I complain then that your carriage in this one page discovers you at once an
absolute stranger to Science, and withal very uncivilly Injurious to me all
along without any imaginable need, Ground or the least occasion given.

You begin with a mistake of the reason why the Rational Way explained in
Rushworth's Dialogues was followed by me in Schism Dispatched, or rather why
that way was devised; and conceive it is because we despair of maintaining the
Popes Personal Infallibility, and think all your own if you disprove this; So
that you strongly apprehend this the basis of all our Faith. By which I see
Opinion and Faith is all one with you. Deceive not your self nor your Readers
Sir; our Dr^. came and do dispute against personal Infallibilities far more
strongly than you are even likely; and if you please to look into our Councils
you find no news of building Faith on any such ground, but only on Tradition.
The Way I take is the old-and-ever-Way of the Church; the farther Explication
of it is indeed new, not occasioned by our relinquishing Personal Infallibility
of the Pope, (you shall never show the Church ever built her Faith on a
disputable Ground) but by this occasion.

Had you looked into Things and considered the progress of the Rational part of
the world as well as you pore on Books, you would have discerned that the Wits
of this last half Century have been strangely curious and Inquisitive, and
straining toward a Satisfaction apt to bring all into doubt which they
conceived to hinder their way to it. Had you reflected on those Heroes of such
Attempts, the Noble and Learned Sr. Kenelm Digby, des Caries, Gassendus,
Harvey, and now the Royal Society, those living Libraries of Learning in their
several ways, you would have found that, parallel to them in the matter of
Controversy were the Ld. Faukland and Mr. Chillingworth; whose acute wits
sinding no Establishment nor Satisfaction in the Resolution of our Faith as
made by some particular Divines, nor yet in the Grounds of the Protestant
Belief, endeavored to shake the whole Fabric of our Faith, and allow but a
handsome Probability to their own. Whence, Doubt and Inquisitiveness being the
Parents of Satisfaction and Evidence, Catholic Controvertists began to apply
themselves more closely and regardfully to look into the Ground^ of their
Faith, Tradition or Universal delivery; se^tled from the beginning of the
Church, proceeded upon by Councils and all the Faithful, insisted on and stuck
to by the Fathers, especially those) who were most Controversial as Athanasius,
S. Augustine, Tertullian, S. Hierome, etc. and at large by Vincentius
Lirinensis; and, to consider how Proper Causes laid in Things by the Course of
God's Providence had the virtue to produce the Effect of deriving down with
Infallible Certainty Christ's doctrine to us. Hence sprung our farther
Explication of this way which so much bewonders you. This is your mistake; now
to your Injuries.

I quoted Rushworth's Dialogues and called it The rich Storehouse of motives
fortifying Tradition. Upon this your Reason works thus. This I do not
understand; I never heard of such an Author; and it is possible the better to
cry himself up he might borrow another name. What means This I do not
understand? I Will acquaint the Reader. It means you are so wedded to talk by the
book that you are utterly at a loss if an Author be quoted you have not heard
of: The reason of which is because as I see by your Discourses, which look like
so many dreams, your Genius inclines you not much to trade in Books which
pretend to the way of Reason; and, if Schism Dispatched so amazed you, it is to
be feared that Sure-Footing and its Corollaries may put you out of your wirts.
But with what Civility should you hint I so extolled my self under another
name, it being (as you say) but possible. Should I put upon you all things that
were possible, what a Monster might I make you? But it abundantly manifests
your short reach of reason that it is highly Improbable. For either I must have
discovered my self to the world to be Author of both books and then I had
shamed my self with so high self-praises; or not have manifested it, and then
where is the credit I had got by the other book I had so extolled.

Your next Injury is that I make nothing of, and disclaim the Testimonies of
Popes and Prelates, calling them the words of a few particular men, and cite
for it Schism Dispatched p. 98. where there is not one word of either Pope or
Prelate, nor of disclaiming any Testimony, nor of calling those the bare words
of a few particular men; Now, if this be so, every word you charge against me
is an injurious Calumny and your whole charge a direct Falsisication. My words
are these. By this is shown in what we place the Infallbility of the CHURCH,
not in the bare words of few particular men, but in the manifest and ample
Attestation of such a Multitude, etc. Where, though you cannot or will not, yet
the Reader, if he understands plain English, will see I meddle not with who is
or is not Infallible besides the Church, nor sean the validity of Testimonies
of Popes or Prelates but treat in what the Infallibility of the CHURCH
consists: Now the word CHURCH denothing in its First Signification an
Universality, I place her Infallibility in Universal Attestation from Age to
Age. Notwithstanding which, my Corollaries in SureFooting, if your Wonderment
at my new Way or your own habituation to words will let you understand them,
will let you see I also place Infallibility in lesser Councils; and even in
particular Sees, but most in the Popes or the Roman; not by way of an Afflatus
(of which I for my part an able to give no account) but by a course of Things
Natural and Supernatural, laid by Gods sweetly-and-strongly ordering Providence
in second Causes. But what aggravates your Falsification is, that whereas I
there counterpose bare words and Attestation, rejecting the first and making
use of the later, you make me affirm Testimonies to be bare words; To which how
much I attribute every such passage of mine will tell you; for on them the way
I follow entirely builds. So that this whole Charge is either quite opposite or
else disparate to what I say in the place whence you cite my words.

Your third Injury (and it is a strange one) is that I slight Scriptures,
Fathers and Councils as much, (in this business) and call them in scorn Wordish
Testimonies; for which you cite Schism Dispatched p. 42. But not such a word is
found there, nor I will undertake any where else in my Writings. It Is likely
indeed, that speaking of such things as you use to call Testimonies, (for you
name every slight Citation such whether it have the nature of Witnessing in
it, that is, be built on Sensations or no) I may say they are wordish, in
regard you have no Certain means to arrive at their Sense; and till then I
beseech you what are they else but mere WORDS? or rather mere Characters and
Sounds?

What high deference I give to Scripture see. 18, and 19. beginning p. 146. in
Sure-Footing: To Councils, see Corol. 27. To Fathers, taking them properly, you
may be informed by the whole Body of my Discourse concerning Tradition, of
which they are a part, and the Eminentest Members of it in Proportion to their
number.

Your 4th. Injury is that the only thing I place Infallibility in is Oral
Tradition and the Testimonies of Fathers of Families; whereas I place
Infallibilities also in other things, though I make this the greatest. But your
discourse makes me disesteem and exclude all others, both Popes, Prelates,
Fathers and Councils, by establishing this; Whereas by settling this, I
establish all others, nor find you any such Expressions in my Book; on the
contrary it is evident by those words I include them; unless you think Popes and
Prelates are not Fathers of Families, but take lodgings or hire rooms in other
men's houses by the week. Truth is, being to express the obligatory descent of
Faith from Age to Age, I cast about for a common word fit to express such
Deliverers, and conceived this of Fathers of Families the aptest; because the
Church consisting of Families, this was most General; and every Master of a
Family, by being such, has an Obligation to see all under him taught their
Catechism or Faith. This in common, which was enough for my purpose then. But,
were I to distinguish the strength of those Testimonies, I should show that a
Priest has an Incomparable advantage above a Layman, a Bishop above him, and
the Head of the Church above a Bishop.

Your 5th. Injury is lighter, because it speaks but your own Apprehensions and
I am to expect no better from you. My many chimerical suppositions, and my
Impertinencies in which I so please my self, must needs begets wonder (say you)
in case the man (as probably) be of any account and reputation in the world.
Now my Suppositions in the way I take are chiefly these, that men in all Ages
had Eyes and Ears, the wit and (if they were good Christians) the Grace not to
tell an open and damnable ly to no purpose; and, for these, I should much
wonder my self if you did not wonder at such odd Grounds, and esteem them
Chimerical, because you have read them in no ancient book; for you use not to
look into Things. By this extravagant kind of dealing, you say you cannot but
suspect me to be one of the Fraternity of the new-pretended Lights. I believe
you heartily: For, to begin with Self-evident principles and thence to deduce
Immediate Consequences is such a new Light to you, as I dare undertake scarce
one beam of it ever entered into the Eye of your Understanding. I conceive it is
the difference between your way and ours which breeds all this
mis-intelligence. Ours ayms to bring all Citations to Grounds by way of Cause
and Effect; yours to admit them confusedly, especially if writ by some old
Authors provided they speak not for the Interest of Papists, for then they are
questionable. Ours is to be backwards in assenting to any thing writ long ago,
till our Reason be satisfied no Passion or mistake could invalidate its
Authority; yours to believe them hand over head, if the book be but said to be
Authentic; which is to a degree the same Weakness as that of the rude Country
people who think all true they see in Print, and that their having a ballad of
it is sufficient to authenticate it. Our Principle is that no Authority
deserves any Assent farther than Reason gives it to deserve, and hence we lay
Principles to assure us of Knowledge and Veracity in the Author ere we yield
over our Assent to his sayings. Yours is kinder-hearted than to hold them to
such strict terms, and is well appay'd if some Author you have a conceit of,
praise the other for a good Writer, or his work for a good Book. Ours is to lay
Self-evident Principles and deduce immediate consequences, and by this means to
cultivate our Reason, that noblest Faculty in us which constitutes us Men;
yours to lay up multitudes of Notes gleand from several Authors; and, if you
better any Spiritual Faculty you have, it is your Memory not your Reason. Hence
we carry, for the main of our Doctrine, and as far as it is antecedent to written
Authority, our Library in our Heads; and can as well study in a Garden, as
sitting in a Library stufit with books; whereas your way of Learning ties you
to turn over leaves of Authors, as children do their Dictionaries, for every
step of your discourse: and as an ingenious man said of those Poets who spun
not their Poems out of their own Invention, but made them up of scraps of wit
transcribed from other Authors -- Lord! how they would look
If they should chance to lose their paper Book?
So we may say of you; that, if your Notes you have with much pains collected,
hap to miscarry, you are utterly at a loss; so that little of your Learning is
Spiritual and placed in your Soul, as true Learning should be, but in material
and perishable paper and characters. In a word, your whole performance ends
here, that you are able to declare what other men say; whereas ours aims at
enabling us to manifest what our selves KNOW. No wonder then if our ways being
so different, we cannot hit it; but that, as you think ours Chimerical, so I
assure my self yours; and consequently all you write in that way, is (as far as
you go about to conclude or cause Assent by it) exceedingly ridiculous.

This, I doubt not, will confirm you in what you said before, that I am no
Friend to Ancient Books or Learning. To Note-book Learning indeed not much; to
true Learning or Knowledge, very much; and even to the other as far as it
conduces to This. To Books I am so much a Friend, that I desire not a few
should be selected of each sort by a General Council of Scholars, and the rest
burned, as did an ingenious person; but I would only have the riff-raff burned
('it is no great matter if that tedious Legend of Dr. Dee's Sprights accompany
them) and the Generality preserved; but so, that their Contents should be
gathered in Heads or Commonplace books for Scholars to look in occasionally,
not for rational Creatures to spend their whole lives in poring on them and
noting them with a foolish expectation to find true Knowledge by stuffing their
Heads with such a gallimawfry, and after 40. years thus spent, never the wiser;
for, indeed, this is little better than for one to hope to frame himself a good
suit of Apparel by picking thrums ends out of a multitude of old and overworn
Garments. But to the point, I distinguish Books. And, as for the Scriptures,
ascertaining their Letter and Sense (which is done by Tradition) it is clear
they are of Incomparable value; not only for the Divine Doctrine contained in
them, but also for many particular passages, whose Source or first Attestation
not being universal, nor their nature much Practical, might possibly have been
lost in their conveyance down by Tradition. Next, follows those of Councils and
Fathers, and (supposing Christ a perfect Lawgiver) it is clear all they have to
do with Faith is to witness the Churches belief; and the former of them to
declare or explain Faith or the Churches Sense against obstinate Heretics. As
such then their Books are to be valued, that is exceedingly. Next, follow such
as Euclid's or Archimedes his, which express Science; and those are of very
great worth, in regard they acquaint us with and manifest to our hands the
Knowledge of the former world; which being Speculative, little of it could have
come down by Tradition, except when that Speculation became Practical, and
expressed it self in Matter by many useful or rather needful Arts, Trades or
Manufactures. After these succeed Opinionative Books, of which this last Age
has produced multitudes; and these also are very useful, if the Reader go not
too credulously to work, but have right Principles laid already in his head;
for then the variety of men's Conceits and their Reasons for them will hint to a
Considerer diverse Consequences, which otherwise the slowness and
distractedness of our Reason would not have light of; nay, even the
miscairiages of such Reasoners avail a wise man, as Aristotle out of the
contrary Opinions of Philosophers, whom he saw failing in their Grounds,
gathered very happily the middle Truth. These Books therefore are worth
preserving. Human Histories come next; and These second Tradition in her
object, matter of Fact, after she has authenticated them and the Circumstances
of their Writers. There are others fit for Explications or Rational
Declarations of a point by Similitudes, allusions, Examples and such like, as
Pliny's Natural History, Emblems, Fictions, and others of an Ornamental Nature;
which being useful for Sermons and Discourses suitable to the middle size of the
world, it is plain they are preservable: With this caution that these and
chiefly Opinionative books be either kept from the weak and credulous vulgar,
or else in the Preface to them some learned Authority declare in common how far
they are to be credited; lest by imposing on the reasons of the Generality,
they hinder the world's improvement. Prayer-books and Recreation-books it is
almost as Evident they are to be preserved, as it is that Prayers and
Recreations are to be used. Only caution is to be had the former be examined
well and approov'd by Ecclesiastical Authority, and that the later be chaste and
unabusive. You have here my sentiment concerning Books; against which you shall
find nothing in Schism Dispatched, or any of my Writings. In a word, I would
have every thing distinguished, examined by Grounds, and allowed as far as it is
reasonable: Nor wonder I much at your mistake of me in this point, for you are
not the only man that thinks all Books, and even Authority to be absolutely
denied, when they are sorted, and rank't in their just degree of merit; that
is, indeed, settled and established; for we Metaphysicians think nothing to
stand firm but by being, or being held-to-be, truly what it is.

You denounce Woe to Colleges and Libraries if these men should prevail. Yet,
you see now I leave you Libraries enough, and permit you your only darlings,
Books; and only desire you would love them wisely. Neither will Colleges
forfeit their Libraries to my Discourse. Only, whereas you would have
Scholars educated there, only pore on books, Note and (when they come to
write,) quote, I would have them take Principles along with them by which to
judge and consider of what they read. Without which it is to be feared their
much reading will do them more harm then good; and even pervert honest natural
Reason in them by filling their heads with a multitude of unconnected and
unconnectible Ends of Sayings, impossible to be ever postur'd in the frame of
Reason, and themselves unfurnish't of means to know which rather to adhere to;
which may sit them to talk indeed of many things, like Parrats; yet, all the
while, for want of Principles, know nothing of what they say. If you would have
Colleges consist of such, I conceive I am a far better Friend to Colleges
than your self are, and that no great cause of Woe will come to them by my
means. But, as our way in your conceit brings Woe to Colleges and Libraries,
so you affirm that Atheism and Mahometism will get by it. By which I understand
what a Disputant you are. I believe you would quote Scriptures and Books to
confute an Atheist or Mohammedan; whereas I conceive, since all Discourse
supposes an Agreement between the Discoursers in some Common Principle, and
they deny or undervalue your written proofs, you must begin to confute them by
Maxims of common Reason, antecedent to all Authority. For these, Human Nature
obliges all men to hold to, unless they have quite irrationaliz'd themselves
into perfect Skepticism; whereas they reject or slight the other; which to
render Efficacious you must go to work first with Principles of plain reason.

Your last Injury which I account the worst of all the rest, is delivered thus.
Others, of approved worth and abilities have met with this man, who, I think,
have done him more credit than he deserved. This argues you are so set to abuse
me, that no Testimony, though never so valid, and confessed to be such, can stave
you of. And the Judgment or Veracity of my Friends, who speak by Experience
shall be questioned, rather than you will be brought to entertain any conceit
of me that is handsome. You leap voluntarily into Falsifications and
ill-languag'd misconceits without any motive, but are so restif and backward to
think or speak in the lest civilly of me, that witnesses of approved worth and
abilities, cannot win you to favorable apprehensions nor keep you from
pursuing your resolute Censoriousness. Had you found half that Testimony for
the Authentickness of an old Writer in some mouse-eaten rag of Antiquity it had
gone down currently with your Genius, and bin next to Gospel. I value not your
Judgment of me; but highly and equally dislike your humor as void of all
Ingenuity, whether it had been used to my self or another. When you review
Schism Dispatched, and see your mistakes, I hope you will have a good conceit of
my Friends at least; for whom in this passage I apologize.

But that I may re-acquaint my self with you, I am to tell you that you also
have met me formerly and knew me very well. Nay, that I am exceedingly bound to
you for the best favor in the world; which is that, accidentally, you
contributed to make me a Catholic. But, because it is long ago, I am forced to
remind you of it by two Tokens. One is that in Durham-house where you at that
time lodged when you came to London, and in your chamber there, upon occasion
of reading a book writ by a certain Protestant Bishop against the Real
presence, I observed, and acquainted you with my observation, that, to my
Judgment, the Fathers spoke more favorably for the Papists tenet than the
Protestants: Hereupon, you took me by the hand and told me they were mad who
read the Ancient Fathers and saw not they meant Christ was as really in the
Sacrament as in Heaven. The other was yet more remarkable, and this; that
(either your Grandfather or Father, I know not which, but I think) your
Grandfather was intimate with Mr. Calvin, and, when he had put out his
Explication of Christ's presencein the Sacrament, which dodg'd and shuffled
between really and notreally, that is, between is and is-not, he challenged Mr.
Calvin with it, and laid open to him the Nonsense and indefensibleness of it,
asking him why he put out so strange an Opinion, which he was never able to
make good? at which Mr. Calvin took hold of his own finger, and said, See you
this? I would willingly cut it off on condition I had never put it out so. To
which your Grandfather replied, You should then explain it some other way; Mr.
Calvin answered, My Institutions are so spread all over France that it is now
too late. Thus you, letting me see by a Testimony very immediate, that the late
Author of this Tenet which now so reigns all over England, wished his finger
cut off when he writ it. How you will reconcile this with the late new piece of
the Rubric in the Common Prayer Book, absolutely renouncing all real presence,
in which point the Church of of England formerly expressed her self abstractedly,
do you consider.

Sir, I beseech you let this be a fair warning to you how you deal
disingenuously for the future; and pardon some of my expressions to my high
provocation and exceeding great have: I am sure the worst of them is a Civility
compared to the harsh carriage you have used toward your self in openly
falsifying both my words and sense, and causlesly wresting to an ill
construction every passage you touched; yet not doing me the right to go about
to answer any one in the least, that so I might see by your Reasons you had
Grounds to think as you writ. Had you argued against me I know too well the
right of a Writer, to take it ill if you laid open and named my conceived
Faults, though the names of them had been harsh Words; but not even to attempt
to confute them, yet to fly into such Expressions, is the very definition of
railing. I was extreme sorry to lay open the Fault of a Friend, though my own
Concern made it Fitting, and your demerit Just, and do assure you that only
the Injury to my Cause, which went along in that action obliged me to this
Vindication. Setting aside the duty I owe to That, I am still as ever.

Your true Friend and humble Servant, J. S.

A LETTER from The Author of Sure-footing, to his Answerer.
SIR,
I Am certainly informed there is an Answer to my Book intended, and a Person
chosen out for that Employment; whose Name I am unconcerned to know, it being
only his Quality as a Writer I have to do with. I receive the Alarm with great
cheerfulness; knowing that, if my Adversary behaves himself well, it will
exceedingly conduce to the clearing and settling the main point there
controverted. But, because there is difference between being called an Answer
and being an Answer, and that it is extremely opposite to my Genius, to be task't
in laying open men's Faults even as Writers, (though it has been my unhappiness
formerly to meet with Adversaries, whose way of winning made that carriage my
only duty) wherefore to prevent, as much as I am able, all occasion of such
unsavory oppositions, and to make way to the clearing the point, that so our
Discourse may redound to the profit and satisfaction of our Readers, I make
bold to offer you these few Reflections; which in effect contain no more but a
Request you would speak to the point, and in such a way as is apt to bring the
matter nearer a clearing. This if you please to do, you will very much credit
your self and your endeavors in the opinion of all ingenuous persons. If you
refuse, and rather choose to run into Rhetorical Excursions, and such Discourses
as are apt to breed new Controversies not pertinent to the present one under
hand, you will extremely disparage both your self, your party and your Cause,
and give me an exceeding advantage against them all; I shall also have the
Satisfaction to have manifested beforehand by means of this Letter, that I
have contributed as much as in me lies to make you avoid those Faults, which I
must then be forced to lay open and severely press upon you, little to your
Credit nor your Causes neither; You being (as I am informd and Reason gives it)
signally chosen out as held most able to maintain it.

2. That there may be no more distance between us than what our Cause enforces,
I heartily assure you that though I highly dislike your Tenets negatively
opposite to what we hold Faith, and the Way of Writing I foresee you must take
(unless you resolve to love Candor better than your Cause) as being
Inconclusive and so apt to continue not finish debates, yet I have not the
least pique against yours or any man's Person. Nor have I any particular
aversion against the Protestant party; rather I look upon it with a better eye
than on any other Company whatever which has broke Communion with the Catholic
Church: It preserves still unrenounc't the form of Episcopacy, the
Church Government instituted by Christ; and many grave Solemnities and
Ceremonies, which make our Union less difficult: Many of their soberest Writers
acknowledge diverse of the renounced Tenets to be Truths: some of them also
profess to hold Tradition, especially for Scripture's Letter; and even for
those Points or Faith-Tenets in which they and we agree; that is, where their
Interest is not touched. I wish they would as heartily hold to it in all other
Points which descended by it, and look into the Virtue it has of ascertaining,
and declare in what that Virtue consists; I am confident, a little candor of
confessing truly what they find, joined with an endeavor of looking into
Things rather than Words, would easily make way to a fair Correspondence. I
esteem, and even honor the Protestants from my heart for their firm Allegiance
to his Sacred Majesty and his Royal Father; This uniting them already with all
sober Catholics under that excellent notion of good Subjects, and in the same
point of Faith, the Indispensableness of the duty of Allegiance we owe our
Prince by Divine Law. Lastly I declare, that for this as well as for Charitable
Considerations, I have a very particular zeal for their reconcilement to their
Mother Church; and that it is out of this love of Union I endeavor so earnestly
to beat down the wordish and dissatisfactory way of Writing, and go about to
Evidence the Ground of all our Faith; knowing, that, as wounds are never
connaturally and solidly cured, by uniting the distant sides at the surface,
and leaving them disunited and unheal'd at the bottom, but the cure must begin
there first; so, the only Way to heal the Wounds of the Church, is to begin
first to win some to acknowledge the most radical and bottom-Principle of all
Faith, as controverted between us; without which all agreement in particular
points must needs be unsound and hollowhearted. This is my only aim in
Sure-Footing. That therefore you may not obstruct so good a work, and withal
perform the duty of a solid and candid Writer, I offer to your self and all
ingenuous Readers these few Reflections: not sprung from my Will (for what
Authority have I to prescribe you your method) but from true Reason working
upon the Thing; which makes it just duty in you, and so ought oblige you to
follow it.

3. In the first place, fince the scope of my whole Book is about the First
Principle in Controversy, or the Ground of all Faith, as to our Knowledge; that
is, about a Point antecedent to all particular Points; I conceive it reasonable
you should let your Discourse stand firm to the matter in hand, and not permit
it to slide into Controversies about Particulars. For so, it is evident, we
shall be apt to multiply many words little to our present purpose. On what
conditions you may have right to allege Particulars as pretended Instances of
Traditions failing, shall be seen hereafter.

4. Next, I desire you would please to speak out Categorically, and declare
whether you hold Faith absolutely Certain to us, or else Possible to be false
for any thing we know. To explicate my self better, that so I may void some
common and frivolous Distinctions, my intent is to demand of you in behalf of
the Christian Reader and his due satisfaction, whether you hold Gods Providence
has laid in the whole Creation any Certain means, by way of Proper Causes to
such an Effect, to bring down Faith truly to us, and whether we can arrive at
Certain Knowledge of those means, that is, come to see or know the Connection
between such Causes and their Effect spoken of. I make bold to press you
earnestly to this declaration; and my reason is, because nothing will more
conduce to the Conclusion of our present Debate: For, in case such Causes be
laid and can be seen by us, then they are Evident or Demonstrative Reasons for
the Ground of our Faith's Certainty: But, if no such Causes be laid, or being
laid, cannot be seen by us, then all the Wit of man can never avoid the
consequence, but that we can have only Probability for all our Faith; that is,
for any thing we absolutely know, it is all as false as an old wife's tale;
since there are no degrees in Truths and Falsehoods. If you advance this Civil
piece of Atheistry, you must pardon me if I be smart with you in opposition to
so damnable and Fundamental an Error: I love Christianity and Mankind (...)
well to suffer that Position which destroys effectually the Root of all their
Eternal Happiness, and the Substance of all their Hope, to pass unstigmatiz'd,
as it deserves. Nor think to avail your self by some Discoursers in our
Schools, It will be shown, when pressed, that they are still preserved good
Christians through the virtue of Tradition which they all hold to,
notwithstanding their private speculations: but you not, because of your want
of Certain Grounds, to make you rationally hold Christ's Faith. They only
mistook a Word, whereas you will be found to err in the whole Thing, or the
ordinary Means to true Christianity.

Again, if such Causes be fitting to be laid by God's Providence, it is
impossible to avoid the Doctrine proposed in Sure-Footing, because it is
absolutely Impossible to invent any thing that looks like such Causes, but
those which are delivered there; nor did any other Way ever attempt to show any
such. Whence I foresee your Cause will force you to fly for refuge to the
actual Uncertainty, or possible Falsehood of all our Faith for any thing any man
living knows by ordinary means. A sad consequence of an erroneous tenet! But
it is connatural, and, so to be expected, such Effects should follow the
renouncing the Rule of Faith.

5. Thirdly, I conceive it very reasonable that you would please to declare
whether Controversy onght to have any First Principle or no; If none, then to
speak heartily out, and confess that Controvertists are Certain of nothing they
say, since their discourse has no Ground or First Principle to rely on. If any,
whether Tradition be It; or, if it be not, what else is; and then vouch (as
plain reason tells us you ought) that what you assign has truly in it the
nature of a First Principle, which common Reason gives to be selfevidence. Or,
lastly, to profess (if you judge it your best play) that, what you substitute
in stead of Tradition, though it be a First Principle, yet it need not be at
all self-evident. Any thing shall content me, so you will but please to speak
out, and to the point.

6. Again, since it is evidently your task to argue against Tradition's
Certainty, it is as Evident that while you argue against it, you must bear your
self as holding It uncertain; I conceive then plain Reason obliges you not to
produce any thing against Tradition which depends upon Tradition for its
Certainty; for, in doing so you would invalidate and even nullify all your own
proofs: Since, if Tradition be held by you uncertain, and they have no
certainty but by means of It, they must be confessed Uncertain too; and so they
would be incompetent to be produced as proofs, and your self very dis-ingenuous
to produce them: I add self-contradicting too, and Unskilful; Nature and
Aristotle teaching us, that a Discourser ought not sustain contrary to himself.
Hence plainest Reason excludes you from alleging any kind of Testimony, either
from Scripture, Councils, Fathers, or History, till you answer my Corollaries
12, 15, 16. which pretend to demonstrate the Certainty of all these dependent
on Tradition's; and the only way to show my discourses there to be weak, is to
manifest my mistake by declaring into what other thing your Certainty of those
Testimonies is finally resolvable, which is not coincident with Tradition. When
you produce such a Principle, and prove it such, you have right to allege the
foresaid Testimonies, for then you can make good their Authority: Till then,
you can have no right in true reason to do it. Not only, because till then you
are to be held a Renouncer of that Thing's Certainty upon which there are
pretended demonstrations against you Theirs is built; and those presumed true
ones, because you let such strongest Attempts pass unanswered; but very
particularly for this Consideration that our present matter restrains you from
it: For, our discourse is about the Ground of that Authority which ascertains
to us Faith; which theresore is antecedent to the notions of Faith, Faithful,
Church, Councils, Fathers, nay and creditable History-books too; since those
rely on Tradition (taken at large) for their Certainty, as is evident by plain
reason, Coroll. 16, 24. which devolves into this, that Tradition is FIRST
AUTHORITY, and so not proovable or disproovable by any other secondary
Authorities, but ought to be impugn'd by pure Reason. But, if you think fit to
grant this Certainty to Tradition taken at large, yet deny it to Christian
Tradition, which has, besides its Human force most powerful Divine Motives
also to strengthen it; please to speak it out, and the strange unreasonableness
of the position will quickly be made appear. Or, if you grant Christian
Tradition Certain in bringing down those common Points in which we agree, yet
Fallible, nay actually erring, in bringing down to us those other points which
we were found holding upon Tradition when you left us, and for which, as
grievous Errors, you pretended to leave us; please to declare in what you hold
the virtue of Tradition consists, ascertaining to us both those common points,
and how we come to know Tradition is engaged for them; which done, it will
quickly appear whether its ascertaining virtue has its Effect upon some, and
not others; or on all. Unless you do this, your very admittance of Tradition's
Certainty in some, overthrows you without more ado: for, to acknowledge it
argumentative for the Certainty of some, grants it a virtue of Ascertaining,
which therefore you are obliged to grant in all, unless you give the reason of
your Exception: otherwise to admit it when your Interest is not touched, and
reject it when it opposes you, is plainly to confess that Tradition is able to
certify, yet that you admit it when you list, and reject it when you list.

7. Being informed then by Evident Reason, that no kind of Authority but only
the way of Reason is a competent Weapon to fight against Tradition with; I have
three things to propose to your Thoughts on this occasion, which I hope will
sound reasonable to any intelligent man by the very mentioning. First, that you
would not allege such Arguments as strike as well at the Constancy of every
Species in Nature, especially Rational Nature; that is, such natural Mediums as
tend to destroy all Natural Certainty. Secondly, that your objections be not
foreign, or fetched from afar of; for these are multipliable without End, and
apt to be suggested by Fancy upon every not-seeing the coherence of some other
remote (whether real or conceited) Truth, with the Tenet we aim to impugn; but
that they be immediate and close, that is, taken out of the Intrinsecal Nature
of the Thing; For so, they will be more forcible and by consequence be apt to
do your Cause much service; and unless they be such, they will do it none: For,
in regard my whole process is grounded on the nature of the Thing, as appears
by my Transition, and every Logician knows that remote and common
considerations are liable, for any thing we know, to be connected or
not-connected with the point we would apply them to, because we see no
Connection but what is Immediate; it follows that it is a very incompetent and
dissatisfactory way to impugn an Adversary who endeavors all along to frame
his discourfe out of the Intrinsecal Nature of the Thing, by remote, or
unimmediate, that is, indeed, Unconnected Mediums. The third thing I request
is, that you either grant that no Argument or Reason is Conclusive,
Obliging-to-Assent, or Satisfactory, but what is either Proper (at least
Necessary) Cause or Effect; or else show us out of Logic that other Mediums
have this virtue, and how they come to have it. This way of procedure will give
me a great respect for you as taking honestly the Way which is apt to clear
Truth; and you will have this Satisfaction to your Conscience that you have
endeavored it to your power by following the best method you could imagine to
give your Cause its due advantage, in case it can bear that Test; that is, in
case it be Truth. And, if it cannot bear it, that is, if it be no Truth, it is
your own best Advantage by this strict procedure to have discovered it. Your
Judicious Readers also that look seriously for satisfaction, will rest much
edified and thankful for your pursuing that Method which is likely to save
them a great deal of fruitless pains in reading multitudes of books writ in a
loose way, whence no Conclusion or Satisfaction is likely to result.

8. My fifth request, and I hope it is just and reasonable, is this; that, if
you conceive your Discourse has made good the Certainty of Written Authorities
or quoted Testimonies, without Tradition, (which I see isimpossible,) and hence
you make account you have title to produce them against Tradition's Certainty,
(That being the matter in hand) and therefore you resolve to pursue the way of
Citing Authors; you would then be please'd to vouch your Citations to have
truly in them the nature of Testimonies; that is, to be built on Sensible
Knowledge, and not on Speculative, or Opinion in the Author alleged, and that
they fall under none of Dr. Pierce's faulty or Inconclusive Heads; or else show
they are Conclusive though thus Faulty, which is done by confuting my Grounds
laid in my First Appendix.. 6, 7, 8. Or, lastly, to declare, that though thus
Faulty and Inconclusive they ought still to be alledgd; and to give your reason
for it; which, heartily spoken out, I am sure will be this, that you must
either produce such, or none. I hope all our ingenuous Readers will think me
very reasonable, who am well contented with any thing which is spoke out
expressly and declaratively of what method or way of Satisfying you take; and
only desire you would not quote and speak confusedly and in common, as if you
meant to persuade your Readers that your discourse has in it some strange force
taken in the bulk, though you will vouch no one particular piece of it to be
Certain; or, as if you supposed their reasons were to be amazd and stupify'd
merely at the venerable Names of Authors and the solemnity of a
diverse-letter'd, or diverse-languag'd quotation. without clearing to their
Judgments the virtue by which such Citations can pretend to have force able to
subdue their understandings to Assent, or (which is all one) satisfy them. If
you refuse to do me reason in this point, and still resolve to pursue the
huddling together Testimonies without warranting their Certainty by showing
upon rational grounds they must be such, I shall declare beforehand to my
Readers, that I must be fore't to do right to my self; which is, to rank all
your Testimonies under Dr. Pierce's Faulty Heads, and so let them go as they
are.

9. Particularly, I beg the Justice of you not to think to over-bear me with
the conceived Authority of other Divines resolving Faith in their Speculative
Thoughts after another manner than I do: since this can only tend to stir up
Invidiousness against my person (which yet their charity secures me from) and
not any ways to invalidate mv discourse. For, every one knows it is no news
Divines should differ in their way of explicating their Tenet, which they both
notwithstanding hold never the less firmly; and every learned man understands
that the word Divine, importing a man of Skill or Knowledge in such a matter,
no Divine has any Authority but from the Goodness of the Proofs or Reasons he
brings and on which he builds that Skill. Please then to bring, not the empty
pretense of a Divines Authority or Name to oppose me with, and I shall freely
give you leave to make use of the Virtue of their Authorities, that is their
Reasons against me as much as you will. I easily yield to those great
discoursers, whoever they be, a precedence in other Speculations and
Knowledges, to which they have been more addicted, and for which they have been
better circumstanc't; In this one of the Ground of Faith, both my much
Practice, my particular Application, my Discourses with our nations best Wits
of all sorts, my perusing our late acute Adversaries and the Answers to them,
with other Circumstances; and lastly, my serious and industrious studying the
Point, joined with the clearing Method God's Providence has led me to, have
left me (as far as I know) in no disadvantage. What would avail you against me
and our Church too (for my Interest as defending Tradition is indissolubly
linkt with Hers) is, to show that our Church proceeds not on Tradition, or that
in Her Definitions She professes to resolve Faith another way rather than mine,
or (which is equivalent) to rely on something else more firmly and fundamentally
than on Tradition. But the most express and manifold Profession of the Council
of Trent to rely constantly on Tradition, has so put this beyond all possible
Cavil on my side, that I neither fear your Skill can show my Grounds in the
least subcontrary to hers, nor the Goodness of any Learned and considering
Catholic (however some may conceive the Infallibility of the Church placed ad
abundantiam in something else) will or can ever dislike it. I expect you may go
about to disgrace my Way as new: But I must ask, whether you mean the substance
of it is new, or only that it is now deeper looked into and farther explicated
than formerly: If you say the former, my Consent of Authorities (p. 126, 127,
etc.) has clearly shown the contrary; and common sense tells us no other way
was or could be possibly taken (for the Generality of the Church at least) in
Primitive times till Scripture was published universally and collected: If the
later, please to reflect, that every farther Explication or Declaration, as far
as it is farther, must needs be new; and so, instead of disgracing us, you most
highly commend our reasons for drawing consequences farther than others had
done before us. Again, if it be only a farther Explication, it is for that
very reason not-new; since the Sense of the Explication is the same with the
thing explicated; As it is only an Explication, then it is not-new; as farther,
it is indeed new, but withal innocent, nay commendable. But there are three
things more to be said on occasion of this objecting Catholic Divines; One is,
that, taking Tradition for the living voice of the present Church as I
constantly declare my self to do, not one Catholic does or can deny it; for he
would eo ipso become no-Catholick but an Arch-heretick; and this all
acknowledge. In the thing explicated then, that is, in the notion of Tradition
all agree with me (and consequently in the Substance of my Explication) nor can
any do otherwise, except they be equivocated in the Word Tradition and mistake
my meaning, which I conceive none will do wilfully after they have read here my
declaration of it so unmistakably laid down. The second thing is, that an
Alledger of those Divines will only quote their Words as Speculaters, not
those in which they deliver themselves naturally as Christians or Believers;
which Sayings were they collected, we should find them unanimously sounding to
my advantage, and not one of them oppositely. And, lastly, speaking of our
Explication as to its manner, Divines contradict one another in other kinds of
Explications, but not one Author can be alleged that expressly contradicts this
which I follow.

10. My sixth request is, that you would speak to the main of my Book, and not
catch at some odd words, on the by as it were: Otherwise, understanding Readers
will see this is not to answer, but to cavil.

11. And, because we are (I hope) both of us endeavoring to clear Truth (I am
sure we ought to be so) therefore, to acquit your self to your Readers that you
ingenuously aim at it, I conceive you will do your self a great deal of right,
and me but reason, nay (which is yet weightier) do the common Cause best
service, if you will join with me to retrench our Controversy as much as we
can. Let us then avoid all Rhetorical Digressions and Affectations of Witty and
fine Language; which I have declined in my whole Book, and chosen a plain
downright manner of Expression, as most suitable and connatutural to express
Truth. Likewise all Repetitions of what particulars others have said or
answered before us, such as are the Objections made by that ingenious person,
the L. Faukland, and the Answers given them in the Apology for Tradition;
unless it be conceived those Solutions are insufficient, and Reasons be offered
why they are judged so. For I conceive it an endless folly to transcribe and
reprint any thing others have done before us, except it be Grounds which ought
to be often inculcated and stuck to; and those particulars which we show to be
not yet invalidated, but to preserve still their strength. Much less do I
suspect it can fall under the thought of one who aims to discourse rationally
(such my Answerer ought to be) to rake together all the filth and froth of the
unwarrantable Actions or Opinions of some in the Church, or to run on endlesly
with multitudes of invective and invidious sayings on his own head without
proof; and then apply them to the Church, as does the Disswader. It would also
very much conduce to the bringing our differences to a narrower compass if you
would heartily take my Book endwayes, and declare what in it is evident, and so
to be allowed; what not: What Principles are well laid or Consequences right
drawn; and what are otherwise: To requite which favors, I promise the same
Carriage in my Reply to you. By this means it will be quickly discovered
whether or no you have overthrown my Discourse by showing it ill coherent, and
how far it is faulty; that, if I cannot clear it to be connected, I may confess
my fault and endeavor to amend it. For, however I see my Grounds Evident, yet
I am far from judging my self Infallible in drawing my Consequences; though I
see withal the method I take, will not let me err much; Or, if I do, my Error
will be easily discoverable; because I go not about to cloud my self in words,
but to speak out as plain as I can from the nature of the Thing.

12. In the next place I earnestly request you, as you love Truth, not to
shuffle of the giving me a full Answer, nor to desist from your Enterprise (as
I hear a Certain person of great esteem for his learning and prudence has
already done) though you find some difficulty where to fasten upon the
Substantial part of my discourse. There are perhaps many difficult passages
which my Shortness forced me to leave Obscure; These will naturally occasion
mistake, and Mistake will breed Objections to impugn me with. Please, if others
fail, to make use of those at least. It Is no discredit in you to mistake what is
obscure; rather it argues a fault in me (did not my circumstance of writing
Grounds, and only to Scholars, excuse me) that I left it so; To make amends
for which I promise you to render it clear when I see where it pinches you or
others. And on this score, I owe very particular thanks to Mr Stillingfleet,
that by speaking clearly out his thoughts, he gave me a fair occasion to open
that point he impugn'd, I think, upon mistake of our Tenet.

13. If you think fit sometimes to argue ad hominem, be sure what you build on
be either our Churches Tenet or mine; for I am bound to defend nothing else. If
then you quote Fathers, first, see they speak as Fathers, that is as Believers
and Witnessers; for so it is evident our Church means them by her Expressions in
the Council of Trent; as also did Antiquity. For both of them constantly
allege and stand upon Traditio Patrum, not Opinio Patrum: Next, see you bring
Consensus Patrum, or an agreement at least of very many of them speaking as
Witnesses, otherwise you will not touch me nor our Church; for she never
abetted them further. In case you bring Councils, it would be very efficacious
you would choose such Testimonies (if you can find them) as I brought from the
Council of Trent; that is, such in which they declare themselves (or the
Circumstances give it) they proceed upon their Rule of Faith: For, otherwise,
every one knows that Bishops in a Council have in them, besides the Quality of
Faith-Definers, those also of Governors, and of the most Eminent and solid
Divines in God's Church. If Scripture, you must make Evident the Certainty of
your way of arguing from it, ere I or our Church shall allow it argumenative.
Thus much for Authority. If you oppose me by my own Principles or Discourses of
my Reason, I must defend my self as well as I can. One thing on this occasion,
I must mind you of; it is this, that though you should conquer in this way of
arguing ad hominem, you only conquer me as a Discourser, by showing that I
contradict my self; not my Tenet: for to prove that false, you must fix your
foot and build your discourse on some Certain Ground; which barely my holding
it (on which your discourse ad hominem relies) cannot make it. You must build
then on some Grounded Truth if you will go about to overthrow a pretended one.
Indeed, if you can show Tradition contradicts her self, you will do more than
miracle, and so must conquer. But I fear not the Gates of Hell, much less Man's
wit can prevail against that impregnable Rock. Only, I beseech you bring not
as Parallels against our Tradition in hand, which is a vast and strong stream,
other little petty rivulets sprung originally from the Sensations of two or
three: For, then, as one side was liable, in a thing not known publikly, to
belly their Senses; so the conveyance down of such slight built Attestations
may easily be self-contradictory. In a word, if you will argue, take first into
your Thoughts the nature of the Thing you argue against, and then fall to work
as soon as you will. Now, if you should chance to say you hold the Sayings of
Fathers and Councils (some at least, to be Certain, my Reason tells me from
Principles, that, having renounced Tradition which only could ascertain them,
rational nature in you will not let you have any hearty conceit of their
Convictiveness, whatever you pretend; but that you rawly allege them, and so
let them go with a valiant quantum valere possunt. That therefore we may have
some security more than your bare word (which Experience tells us is now
affirmative now negative in this point, as it best suits your Interest, or,
after a pretty Indifferent manner, half-one-halftother) that your profession of
holding to such Authorities is not hollow-hearted but rooted in your Reason,
it is just your Readers should expect you would declare in what the virtue of
Certifying consists, and that They have this virtue. This if you do, you acquit
your self to go to work solidly, and you offer us fair play in giving us some
hold of your Reason, whereas a common Expression gives none. This Procedure
also will show, when applied, whether you are Justisiable or no for admitting
some Authorities of that nature and rejecting others.

14. My last request is, that, if in the course of your Answer you think fit to
complain of me for bringing History and other Proofs heretofore commonly
without more ado admitted, into Incertainty: please to amend the fault you
find, and settle their Certainty on some better Principles than I have
endeavored. In the mean time it is Evident my whole Book ayms at settling the
Certainty of all Authority, by evidencing the Certainty of First Authority;
upon which the Assuredness of History, Fathers, Councils, Church, Faith, nay
Virtue or Christian Life must all be built. This is my way; if you judge it
incompetent to do the Effect spoken of, be pleased to manifest it Unfit and
show us a Better.

15. Perhaps I may have demanded more of you in some particulars than is due
from the strict duty of merely answering: in the Schools, a bare denial, or
distinction is enough for a Respondent. But I conceive we are not on these
terms: in regard we are not met face to face, where the returns of the one to
the other can be quick on every occasion. This obliges us, for the Readers
satisfaction, to enlarge our selves and bring reason for everything we affirm
or deny, lest we should be thought to do it gratis. And, your case here, is
particularly disadvantageous: For, if you go about to overthrow that on which I
aim to show the Certainty of all Authority built, and yet declare not on what
your self hold them built, and, by your faithful promise to show it shortly,
give them strong hopes you will perform it; you send them away very much
dissatisfied either with you or with all the Authority in the world, though
built on Sensitive Knowledge: Of which it being impossible Rational Nature
should permit them to doubt, they must needs dislike your attempt, and have an
ill conceit of your performance.

SIR, I understand, to my exceeding Satisfaction, that multitudes ofthe most
Eminent, Solid and Ingenuous Wits of our Nation have been diligent perusers of
my Book. Consider, their eyes are upon you while you Answer; I am confident
they will judge I have requested no more of you in this Letter, but what is
reasonably due to their and my satisfaction; and so, will look your Answer
should be correspondent. They are weary of endless Contests about Faith; and,
seeing we are not now controverting the signification of some ambiguous
Testimony, but penetrating deep into the very bowels of a point which is of the
greatest concern in the whole world; and pursuing (in a method likely to
decide) the clearing of it, their expectations are very much erected and
attentively observing what will be the issue of this rational combat. Frustrate
not their desires to see Truth manifested by bringing the Question back from
the plain open field of Evidence-inour-method, to a Logomachy or word-skirmish
in a Wilderness of Talk, out of which the Thread of Grounds or Principles had
disent angled it. To them therefore as well as your self I address this:
requesting those of them who are acquainted with my Answerer, to press him to
do himself, me, the world (his Cause too, if it can bear it) the right due in
Reason, and here demanded. This Sir, if you will perform, I shall lay aside the
remembrance of the Justice I have to it, and look upon it purely as a Favor
and most obliging Civility to him who is, next to Truth's,

Feb. 6th 1665. Your Friend and well-wisher, J. S.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF you complain of this Fore-stalling as Unusual; as long as it is rational
you can have no reason to do so: and it will appear such to him that considers
it was an unusual Circumstance occasioned it. IT is this: I had endeavored to
bring Controversy from an Endless to a Conclusive Way: and both my Reason and
Experience made me apprehend my Protestant Answerer would have such strong
Inclinations to bring it back into the way of quoting and glossing Testimonies
(that is, into a wordish scanning a great part of all the Libraries in the
World) that a slender touch at it in my Book was not forcible and express
enough to oblige him to take notice of it. Having communicated therefore my
thoughts with intelligent and ingenuous persons, both Catholics and
Protestants, and received their approbation, I resolved, and pursued it as you
see; And I hope the manifold Usefulness of it (as shall be seen what way soever
now you take upon you of answering) will sufficiently justify my Action.

FINIS.

