A Short Speech Prepared to be Spoken, By a Worthy MEMBER IN Parliament,
Concerning the PRESENT STATE OF THE NATION.

-- Quare tam perdita Roma?
Ipsa sui Merces erat, and sine Vindice Praeda.
Petron. Printed in the Year 1700.

A SPEECH prepared (it seems) for the ensuing Session, by a Member of
Parliament, which falling from him by Accident, is Published, lest he should
have no other Copy.
THE Business of this Day is the greatest, and of the greatest Consequence that
ever came before the Representatives of this Nation: For as in all past Ages,
the People of this Country have lived in Liberty at Home, and Reputation
Abroad; so upon the Resolutions of this Day, or at least of this Session of
Parliament, to which those of this Day may give a considerable stroke, does
depend the continuation of that Liberty and Reputation which we have always
had, of being bold Asserters of our Rights and Freedom, together with the Fate
and Destiny of our Posterity.

Our Great Historian, has made the Noble Spirit of our Ancestors Illustrious to
this and all future Ages: All Nations read, and all Porterity will know and
praise their Actions: But if we shall now so far degenerate, as not to assert
our Freedom at Home, by breaking a standing Army in time of Peace, which if
kept up is a Treasonable Alteration of our Government, and makes it Tyrannical:
If we do not assert our Rights as a Free People, by such just and true
Representations of them to our Neighbour-Nation, as may convince them, we have
no Designs, but such as we have just Right to prosecute, and are for the Common
Good of both: If we do not discover the black Designs of a few ill Men, who
endeavor for sinister Ends to set the Nation together by the Ears: I say, if
we do not take effectual ways to accomplish these things, and establish a
lasting Peace, both at Home and Abroad, I shall easily comprehend the History
of our Nation in this and all future Ages in two Words: If you ask them, I
answer, Slavery and Oblivion.

But that I may give some Advice in the Affair, and propose Remedies suitable
to our Condition, and the multiplicity of Evils that press and threaten us on
all hands; 'twill be necessary to deduce them from their original Causes, and
to give a just and true Account of the present State of the Nation.

When that Great and Memorable Change happened in this Island, by which the
Kingdom of Scotland and England came to be so far united as to have but one
King, both Nations promised to themselves great Advantages: And though the
Endeavors that were then, and have been since used for a nearer Union, proved
unsuccessful; yet this Advantage still remained, that Peace betwixt the two
Nations was preserved, and a King common to both, as a common Father, kept them
from encroaching upon the Rights of each other; and having no regard to the
Partialities, or Animosities of either, did equal Justice to both.

This state of things has lasted to our time. But now we are told, that his
Majesty is forced to do diverse things prejudicial to the Interest of Scotland,
on account of Representations and Addresses made to him by an English
Parliament, with whom (as representing a more powerful Nation) he is obliged to
comply: as if there were no Rule of Justice by which he should judge of Matters
contraverted between us: As if in a Suit between a Rich and a Poor Man, the
Judge were not to consider the Merits of the Cause, but always give Judgment
in favor of the Rich Man.

And though in former Reigns ever since the first Union, under one Head, no such
thing was ever done, or so much as mentioned; though no King ever suffered the
least Breach to be made upon the Independency of Scotland, as appears more
evidently in K. Charles 2d's Removing the English Garrisons out of this Country
in the Year 1660; yet by our remotness from the Seat of the Government, and
Influence of the Prince, (as a Farm that has none but Servants to look after
it) this Nation became quickly of little or no value; and England by means of
Husbandry and Trade, as well as by being the Seat of the Empire, rising as fast
as Scotland sunk by the want of all these, the Disproportion in Riches sell
from 1 to 5, as it was about the Year 1600, to that of 1 to 30, as it is at
this day.

But the People of this Nation, though they know the removal of their Kings to be
the Original Cause of this Alteration; yet knowing also that by the same means
they had obtained a perpetual Peace with England; and being conscious to
themselves, that whilst their Freedom and Privileges were preserved entire by
the Prince, it was their own fault if the Policy of the Country were not
regarded, if Husbandry and Trade were not advanced: On these Considerations (I
say) they have always continued peaceable in that Union, without the least
thoughts of ever separating or dividing from their Neighbors, or disturbing
the Peace of this Island any more.

And though in the state of Separation they were much more Considerable, Rich,
and Powerful, than ever they have been since: Though France, (our Natural Ally in
case of a Separation with England) has of late Years become not only a Balance
for England, but a Balance for almost all the rest of Europe, in conjunction
with England: Though our Colony in Ireland were become formidable to the English
power there (who besides are always sure to have the Irish for an Enemy) Yet
all these Dis-advantages on the one hand, and Hopes on the other, could never
shake that Allegiance which we owed to our Prince, nor remove us from that
Union with our Neighbors, by which we had suffered so much.

But having within these five or six Years begun to be sensible, that the
extreme Poverty of our People, which still increased, did proceed from nothing
but the want of Foreign Trade, which gives Life to all Manufactures, and
increases the value of Land, by giving Encouragement to Improve it; We applied
our selves to the setting up several Manufactories, and sending our Ships to
Trade in Places where formerly they were not employed: Yet knowing that all
this would prove but a mean and peddling kind of Commerce, unless we traded to
the Indies, it was very natural to us, who abounded more in People than any
thing else, to think (after the Example of all our Neighbors) of having a
Colony there also: And accordingly an Indian-Company was established by Act of
Parliament.

When on a sudden, as if by that Act we had broke the Peace with our
Neighbors, we begin to be complained of, and cried out against in England; It
was said, That the Privileges and Powers of the Company were Immense (though it
is evident that those of the French and Dutch Companies are greater) It was
said, That the Immunity from Customs for 21 Years, would sink all the other
Companies of Europe; not at all considering that there was a Draw-back in
England for all Indian Goods that were not consumed within the Country: And by
the Arts of a few ill Men, the Parliament of England was surpised and led into
Apprehensions, which they have found since to be so groundless, that for two or
three Years last past, there was not the least mention made of them. His
Majesty likewise was, by evil Counselors, persuaded to tell the Parliament of
England, That he had been ill served in Scotland, etc.

I shall not tediously particularize all the bad Counsel that was given, nor
all the foul Dealing, either in the Affair of Hamburgh, which was against the
Law of Nations; In that of the Spanish Memorial, which was against common Faith
in Society; In that of the Proclamations published in the West Indies, by which
his Majesty's Subjects, for prosecuting their just Rights warranted by Act of
Parliament, were treated as Enemies; in refusing them Wood and Water, as if
they had been proscribed and condemned to die, aqua and igne interdicti. (I
say) I shall not tediously insist on the odious and shameful Circumstances of
all those Particulars, because they are sufficiently known to all of you; but
especially because it has been since evident what sort of Men they are who gave
the King such advice; Men altogether depending for Places or Pensions on the
Court, or such as did Journey-Work for them.

The House of Commons in their last Session, having fully shown, how much such
Courses were against the Sentiments of the English Nation, and resented the bad
Usage we received, in a very generous manner; declaring withal, That any
Propositions of an Union between the two Nations that shall come from us, shall
be always welcome to them. I shall only make some Reflections on the sad
Condition of this Nation, with relation to this great Design, by which they
hope to relieve themselves from their great Poverty; and in which they are now
so deeply engaged, that with it they must stand and fall (for though undertaken
by a private Company, it is become of universal Concernment) whoever Wounds or
withholds Nourishment from it, destroys the Vitals of the Nation.

We have for Enemies Spain, powerful in the West Indies; The French, powerful
at Sea, who have often begged of the Spaniard the liberty to destroy us: We have
been abandoned at Home in Word and Deed. It Is declared we have no Right to the
Place where we have settled our Colony, because our Settlement in that Place
contradicts a certain Agreement for the Division of the Spanish Monarchy, and
breaks the Measures of a Catholic League for the Extirpation of the Protestant
Religion, and the Remainders of Liberty through the World. We are exposed to be
treated as Pirates; and though neither the English nor Dutch Nation be our
Enemies, yet the English and Dutch Counselors (who to the Dishonor and Ruin
of this Nation, meddle too much in our Affairs) are our Mortal Foes. What shall
I say of Scots-Men who concur in such Advice? If ever there were reason to
Complain of evil Counselors, sure it must be of those of this Nation at this
time: Yet these Men have the Confidence to look us boldly in the Face, though
their impudent Contrivances to Ruin the Colony of Caledonia, and Murder such
numbers of them in the West Indies, be notourly known. What shall I say of a
Man who, without any other Character to protect him, than such as to the utmost
aggravates his Crime, is at the Root of all the Mischief that has, or is like
to fall upon this Nation. Who is it, that having the right to destroy a Noxious
Beast, has not at the same time the right to destroy such an one? These are the
Enemies, of your Company and Colony, which you have been at great Charges and
unspeakable Pains to erect, establish, and mantain; that you might bring this
Nation from Poverty and Reproach, to Honor and Wealth; our poor People from
under the perpetual Tentations of Stealing, Lying, Cheating, nay and after all
the necessity of Starving, for want of Bread, to that Ease, Plenty, and
Satisfaction, which always accompany Industry.

These are the Men, who this Day oppose the giving a reasonable Tax to support
so good and Glorious a Design, and would divert the Money which the Nation is
willing to give, to another use. Sure one would think, that the Pretext must be
very specious; that the use to which they would put it, must be some Design for
the Good of the Nation, beyond what can occur to any Man upon first Thoughts:
What can it be? Is it that for, this Money once given, our Liberties shall by
excellent Laws be established upon such solid Fundations as can never be
shaken? Can Fertility of Soil, or the Happiness of Climate be purchass'd and
brought to us from any of the Southern Countries? One would think it should be
something of that nature. No! it is to none of all these Uses that their Money
is to be employed. In what then? for at length we must know, should the
suprize, of Joy be never so great or dangerous. It Is to mantain a perpetual
Standing Army. What Reverse of Fortune? From what Expectations are we fallen?
If, as upon many great Occurrences in human Affairs, so upon this occasion, a
Medal were to be struck, a Ship arriving in Harbor, where Peace with an Olive
branch in hand, stands on the Shore, might very well become one side; but a
Fiend with a Torch in one hand and a Dagger in the other, must be the Reverse.
Nothing but a Picture of the highest Felicity, and another of the most abject
Misery can express the Alternative. Liberty, Riches, Peace, Good-order, Virtue,
Ease and Quiet, are on the one hand: Slavery, Poverty, Oppression, Vice,
together with the Calamity, Groans and Blood of the Poor, are on the other. To
which of these will the Nation incline? Are they to be driven like Sheep to the
Slaughter? Is there any Pretext for this Standing Army, that can be named by
Men of the least Ingenuity? Has the bad Usage I mentioned before, or the many
Indignities put upon this Nation of late, afforded any? No! nothing has been
able to provoke us: We have always, and in every thing, complied with his
Majesty beyond our Power; yet we are condemned to lose our Liberties: We are
condemned to die, without any Guilt alleged against us: We are to have no
Trade, because inconsistent with a Standing Army: Our only Commerce is to be in
Soldiers; by whom, that we may be Gainers, we are to have a Superplus over and
above what we can pay. In which sort of Commerce, if any Nation was ever a
Gainer, I appeal to History.

This Nation has of late been in a Starving Condition: And I wish that the
Blood of many Thousands may not be required of diverse, whose duty it was in
their several Stations to have provided for them: Yet during all that time, we
were to Mantain an Army of idle Fellows, without the least necessity, and in
order to keep up 4 or 5000 of them, starve 30 or 40000 innocent People; since
if the Pay of that Army had been prudently employed in buying of Corn, it would
have been sufficient to save the Lives of the one and the other.

You may, perhaps, say, That this is Reflecting upon the Parliament who ordered
the keeping up of the Forces. I answer, The best of Councils, even Parliaments
themselves, are liable to Mistakes, occasioned by false Representations of
Affairs by evil Counselors; but should have a care of failing twice into the
same Fault: And subsequent Sessions of Parliament, should correct the Errors of
the former.

But when all Pretexts of Fears from a Foreign Invasion have failed; when no
Indignities in point of Honor; no extraordinary Losses of vast Numbers of our
People, and Treasure of the Nation; no Endeavors to creat Animosities between
the two Nations, have been able to provoke us to give the least pretense for
the Standing Army; The evil Counselors have had recourse to Force and Bribery:
They have drawn the greater part of the Standing Army near and about the Town
in time of Parliament; by which those Gentlemen who, last Session, voted for a
Standing Army, may already see what use is to be made of them; and will have
their Names branded with Infamy to all Posterity, if they now vote for keeping
them up any longer. They have remitted 20000 l. Sterling. into Scotland; (which
they say Mr. Carstares has done by way of Holland for the more close
conveyance, and that by my Lord Portland's means) They have procured many new
Warrants for Pensions, of which probably the first Term only will be paid, and
perhaps not that same; for when the Villainy is done, the Villains become
useless. They have Bribed diverse others with new Titles of Honor, for the
most Infamous of all Actions; the 12 Years duration of the Parliament having
given occasion to the evil Counselors to know the Pulse of every Man: And that
no Artifice may escape them, they not only endeavored to corrupt the whole
Representatives of Burrows at one dash, by a Tack of the Customs, (though God
knows a very few reap the benefit) but have also at this Juncture erected
little, pitiful, inconsiderable Villages into Royal-Burrows, in order to have
the same represented in Parliament by Persons secured to their Interest
beforehand: And whenever the Representative of any Shire or Burrow dies, it is
too well known what care is taken to have his Place immediately supplied, viis
and modis, by some Court-Myrmidon, a Guard or Dragoon-Officer, or some such. By
all which means, we may in time expect to see the Officers of the Army (if kept
on foot) mustered in the Senate House: and then the Country freed from the
Charge and Trouble of sending any other Representatives to serve in Parliament.
I shall not insist on the spliting of State-Commissions among Members of
Parliament, and granting sham Commissions pro tempore for the same Offices.

After so many Mysteries of Iniquity, you will be very justly surpised, if I
shall mention one Blacker than all the rest; yet it is a thing of which I am
credibly informed, and from many concurring Circumstances, have just ground to
believe.

The French Court who, you know, have often begged leave of the Spaniard to
destroy our Colony, and who hate you upon many accounts, but chiefly that of
your Religion, have in conjunction with some of our evil Counselors, contrived
a more subtle piece of Malice against you, than all these formerly mentioned;
to accomplish which, they make use of their old Tool, the late King James, who
to serve such ends and for his own Ruin, is still kept in France; they have
furnished him with 40000 Pistols to send to his Party here, that they may be
zealous in supporting our Colony in Darien: His Party here, God knows, is just
as significant as he is there, and neither fit for anything but to be made use
of for their own and this Nations Ruin. The French, who are said to advance the
Money (but no doubt know how to be reimbursed) can easily tell our evil
Counselors by what way it is conveyed; and they can as easily Convict those
who receive it:

This, unless Men be undeceived, must Ruin all, and stop the Mouths even of the
best, who not being able to comprehend such refined Villainies, will conclude,
That tho many honest Men are engaged in the Company, yet originally and at
bottom it must needs be a Jacobite Design; and so the Court by this Artefice
obtain that, which hitherto they have (in vain I hope) endeavored; I mean the
utter Destruction of our Colony.

It Is become dangerous to contrive Plots in England, because they begin to find
them out: Such Designs must now be transmitted to Scotland, as a Country remote
from public Intelligence.

'Twill perhaps be said, That to employ so much Money among us, it would be to
little purpose, since the evil Counselors are sure of their ends by other
means; and that it is ridiculous to think, that only 20000 l. Sterling. should be
employed in direct Bribery, and 40000 Pistols on a Shamm-Plot. But they who say
this, do not consider, that by this Means not only the Designs of the Court
will go here without control; since every Man that opposes them, will be said
to have received part of K. James's Money; but also the People of England will
be deluded into a Belief, that the Jacobite Party in Scotland is so formidable,
that a Standing Army is necessary to keep them in awe; which Army would
otherways be very much suspected by the English, as it will in the end be
infallibly made use of to suppress the Liberty of both Nations; tho perhaps
before that time, considering what sort of Men are now coming to the Helm in
England, it may be employed to reward the Presbyterians for their Services to
the Court.

To conclude, tho we are remote from public Intelligence, and the Presbyterian
Party seems struck with incurable Blindness; yet I hope the Parliament will not
wilfully shut their Eyes, but seriously consider the fatal Consequences of a
Standing Army; and how absolutely necessary it is to Disband at least the far
greater part of our Forces, even tho we had no other pressing Occasions for our
Money at this Juncture.

Tell me, if ever there was such a swarm of Popish Priests among you as at this
time: Consider the severe Act lately made in England against Popery, contrary
to the mild Temper of that Nation; and then you will easily believe they were
not induced to that Severity without some great and extraordinary Motive, tho
perhaps not fit to be mentioned: Consider that in the Treaty of Reswick, as
well as in that of Hungary, the Protestant Religion was abandoned by those who
call themselves Protestants: Consider the Perfections of France, Piedmont, the
Palatinate, Hungary, Transylvania; and the Forces that are now hovering about
Saxony, in order to force that People to submit to Popery: Consider that the
Apostate King of Poland is made a Tool to imbroil all the Protestant Powers of
Europe (except only the Protestant Swisse Cantons, against whom the Emperor is
now forming New Pretensions:) Consider that most of the Popish Princes of
Germany, and some Protestants likewise, are arming powerfully, to assist him;
for Popery is thought to be so necessary to keep People in due Obedience, that
few Princes think themselves safe as long as their Subjects are of any other
Religion: And there is but too just ground to suspect the Religion of diverse
great Princes in Europe, who are called Protestants. Consider all these things,
and act as you will Answer to God in the Great Day, for the Trust reposed in
you. And so I conclude with that Admonition and Advice given by the Wisest of
Men:

If thou Faint in the day of Adversity, thy Strength is small. If thou forbear
to deliver them that are drawn unto Death, and those that are ready to be
slain. If thou say, Behold, we knew it not; does not he that pondereth the
Heart consider it? and he that keeps the Soul, does not he know it? and shall
not he render to every Man according to his works? Prove. 24.10, 11, 12. Take
away the Wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in
Righteousness. Prove. 25.5.


FINIS.

