A SERMON ON The Restoring of the COIN, With reference to the State of the
Nation, and of the Church therein.

By a Minister of the Church of England.

Isa. 1.25. I will turn my hand upon Thee, and purely purge away thy Dross, and
take away all thy Tin.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower
End of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, 1697.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Henry Ashurst, Baronet.
Honored Sir,
IT is no small inconvenience of the late deficiency of the Coin, that it has
occasioned so much unprofitable Discourse; that in all Companies, almost
nothing is talked of but Money: There is a Divine Chemistry, and Holy Art of
Extracting out of any Common Subject, some Heavenly and Spiritual Matter: It
were well if we could take occasion from the multitude of words about the late
debased, and now regulated Coin, to affect our own and others Hearts with the
depravity of our natures, and the necessity of their recovery by Grace; with
the Corruption of the Land, and what hope of Reformation; whatever private
Persons may do toward it, at least by earnest Prayer, and by beginning at
home: Church-Reformation is much promoted by Family-Religion, and that must
begin with personal Dedication. It is a true saying, Corruption optimi est
pessima, next to the Corruption of the Ministry, that of the Gentry is most to
be bewailed: How sad is it when they who should help forward the Reformation,
do themselves most need it! But as when the Coin was most corrupted, there was
always some good, so has the Lord yet a Remnant in this Land, and the Lord add
unto them (how many soever they be) an hundred fold: When I have heard of your
Zeal for God and his Interest in public and private Stations, I could not but
say, I have known few amongst the great Ones like minded: It is upon this
account that I have made bold to set your Name before this Sermon, that whereas
I have not the vanity to think that it should come into the hands of many (if
any) of those Noble Patriots to whom I have addressed my self in the Body of it;
the substance of that part of it may be communicated to them of your
acquaintance in your Familiar converse with them, but in your own more
efficacious words, and with greater enlargements than the necessity of my
keeping within the narrow bounds of a Metaphor would admit of in this
Discourse: And yet I have said so much to those whom I so much reverence, that
a modest shame obliges me to withdraw my Name, lest it should be known to come
from so mean a Person; and I shall seek other ways to make it known, how much I
am,

Your most Humble, And most obliged Servant.

JEREMIAH 6.30. Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, because the Lord has
Rejected them.


WHether this Censure of the People of Israel be a continuance of Gods words to
the Prophet, begun, ver. 27. or whether they be the Prophets Words in answer to
the charge there given him, I have set thee for a Tower -- that thou may
know and try their way; Evident it is, that thereby is represented to us the
great Corruption of the Church and State of Israel at that time, under the
similitude of Debased and Corrupted Coin. Ver. 28. They are grievous Revolters
-- they are Brass and Iron, they are all Corrupters. Which is further
amplified, 1. By the Pains that had been taken, and Means used to remedy this
Corruption. Ver. 29. The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the Fire,
the Founder melts in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away. 2. By the
Rejecting and Casting them off, thereupon Reprobate Silver, Refuse Coin shall
Men call them, because the Lord has rejected them.

Doct. The State of a Church, with respect to the degeneracy of the People, is
like that of a Land, with respect to the debasing of the Coin; they are like
Reprobate, Refuse, and Rejected Money.

The same similitude is used by the other Prophets, Isa. 1.22. Thy Silver is
become Dross. Ezekiel. 22.18. The house of Israel is to me become Dross, all they
are Brass, and Tin, and Iron, and Lead in the midst of the Furnace. Which is
not spoken as to those Metals in themselves, but as used to Corrupt the Silver,
and Debase the Coin, which Metaphor is largely persued in the following verses,
to note how they were like Money, that was first Corrupted, then Reprobated and
Refused, which the Government would Reject, and forbid to be Owned, or to pass
Current any more; Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, etc. What the Case of
this Land has been, with respect to the debasing of the Coin, almost every one
is sensible of, and has felt more or less; Had it not been timely restored, it
might have proved ruin to the Nation: Now this similitude does so suit the
Condition of this poor Church and Nation, with respect to our great degeneracy,
that unless something be done for a more effectual remedy, our Case must needs
be sad indeed. The considering of the Parallels in the Doctrinal Part, may help
to prepare us for the Application.

1. Heretofore there was good Coin, of the right Stamp, of the full Weight;
Current Money of the Merchant. The convenience and usefulness of which for
Trade and Commerce no one doubts of: Now this does aptly set forth the happy
condition of a Nation where Religion flourishes; and Holiness and
Righteousness are, as it were, the current Coin of it. That place in Isaiah
1.22. that speaks of the debasing the Silver, has reference to what goes
before, ver. 21. It was a faithful City, it was full of Judgment, Righteousness
lodged in it: It was pure Coin, though now Adulterated. Indeed if we were to
seek for a time when there was no corrupt Money in the Land, we must run it up
to Ages long since past; So if we seek for perfect Purity, we must look as far,
as to the state before the Fall, when God made Man upright, and instamped upon
him his own image, and there was no disagreement from the Standard and Rule of
his Holy Law: Yet there have been days since that, when there has been a
greater comparative Purity, as in the primitive times of Christianity, and next
to them in the year after the Reformation; so that it might be said of the
Churches that they were like pure Silver Coin in the same respect, as it was
said of Jerusalem, in that forecited place, in the days of Asa and Jehosaphat:
And though it cannot be denied that there may be a great fault in saying, The
former times were better than these, Eccles. 7.10. Yet that is to forbid a
murmuring at the Judgments in our days, and not to prevent our Humiliation for
the sins of them; though there has been all along some bad Money, yet we can
all remember the time when it was much better than of late: here were Faults
and Corruptions in the days of our Fathers, but it is yet within the memory of
some alive, when there was not such a flood of Debauchery as has broken in
since; and many that are no ways factiously inclined, have given a true Report,
of that Zeal for God that was amongst the Professors of Religion heretofore,
that seriousness in their Families, circumspection in their lives; of that
encouragement that the power of godliness met with, from Persons of Great Name
and Note, in the Counties and Places where they dwelt

2. There has been of late a great debasing of the Coin. Part of it
Embezelled, and the weight Diminished; part of it Adulterated, the Stamp
Changed; some plain Brass to every eye, the rest more cunningly Counterfeited,
but presently discovered by a more discerning sight. The dangerous condition in
which the Land was a while ago on this account, does represent to us our danger
still with respect to higher Corruptions; where it is to be hoped that there
may be the True Stamp still; Yet is our Spiritual state like that of the Coin,
Impaired; the Ancient Seriousness, Piety and Charity, much clipped off; the
Letters missing by which it was wont to be known; by this shall all men know
that you are my Disciples, if you love one another; Our divisions have been to
us what the Sheers and such like Instruments, have been to the Money. With
others it has been yet far worse; there is nothing of the Royal Coin left;
they have another Stamp upon Brass and Iron washed over, Ezekiel. 22.18. What a
mixture of false Doctrines and Blasphemies (witness the late spreading of
Socinianism and Deism) of Debauchery, and wicked Practices, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness and Profanation of the Lord's Name and Day, has there been with
the poor remainder of a Christian Profession! The Brass is apparent, By their
Works you shall know them: Though others have cunningly disguised their
Wickedness, who yet lie open to the All-discerning Eye of him, who trys the
Hearts and the Reins. It is true, the Corruption of the Coin was not all at
once, but in a few Months space, it grew worse at last than in many years
before. The sinful Corruption of this Nation has been a gradual thing, and
whither will it proceed if it be not yet at the height, and if some stop be not
put to the daily increase? Already is the Land reduced to as miserable a Case,
as ever the Coin was. For, (1.) Sin has obscured the glory of it: There was
always some good pieces where the Coin were at worst, and usually some Silver
in the most debased Piece, but the luster of the Coin was lost It is (2.)
rendered Deceitful and Hypocritical, as Israel was called, Isa. 10.6. The
Counterfeit Coin was perpetually cheating, and deceiving those that had to do
with it. And thereby (3.) It is become worthless and contemptible, nigh unto
cursing, ready to be rejected, like Coin that could not be used, it was so
Adulterated, or as the Prophet uses another similitude, Jer. 24.8. Like figs
that could not be eaten, they were so evil.

3. Many attemps were made to prevent the mischief, but all proved ineffectual,
so long as the corrupted Coin was suffered to pass current. Indeed the more
ignorant sort saw not the cause of the Mischief, nor the need of a remedy: They
thought and said, That if their Money might but pass according to its
denomination, though it was made of Leather, it was all one to them. Others that
understood better did dread the consequences, and did something to prevent
them; private Persons in their places, and the Governors in theirs; many of
the counterfeit Pieces were stopped, and broken, that they might cheat no more;
many of the Debasers and Coiners were taken and suffered the due reward of
their deeds; but all this was insufficient to put a stop to the Corruption, on
the contrary, it grew worse and worse. This is set down in the verse before the
Text, v. 29. The Bellows aeburnt, the Lead is consumed of the fire, the Founder
melts in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away. Which may in the general
Note, that the Land in respect of Moral Corruption, was not only like debased
Coin, but worse; because it was more easy to redress the State of the Coin
than of the Land: But indeed this verse has some difficulty as to the
Application of the Metaphor, for the fire is wont to be the last remedy, and to
prove effectual to the designed end, and so we find it used in the Parallel
places, Isa. 1.25, 26. Ezekiel 22.22. I conceive therefore that the simililtude
must signify something else here, and something less than it does in the other
places, viz. The Preparatory and Precious Methods that were used (before the
Rejection spoken of in the Text) which all miscarried: Here were Bellows
provided, and Lead (used then instead of Quicksilver) to have facilitated the
melting; here was the Founder ready, but all in vain, Why? because the wicked
was not plucked away. The debased Coin was still Current; the Founder melts his
Lead, and consumes it for nothing. Has it not been thus in our Land? It is a
strange stupidity of some, that they are against all attempts of a Reformation;
they would have all things go as they do; Heresies, and Debaucheries let alone:
But yet attempts have been made, some private stop put to the Corruption in
some places; Public Proclamations against Debaucheries, Orders against
Heresies, Commissions and Consultations about Church Reformation. Nay, here
has been something of the Fire kindled, the Bellows and Lead prepared. Noting
either the preaching of the Word, or the preparatory Judgments of Plague, Fire,
Wars, and such like Calamities, all which are ineffectual because the wicked
are not plucked away. It still grew worse while the debased Coin past current.

4. At last the Government resolved to make a thorough work; they wholly
rejected the debased Coin, that it should no more pass by the Name it did (
Reprobate, or Refuse, Silver shall Men call it.) They ordered all the corrupted
Money to be brought to the fire, that nothing should go but according to Weight
and Standard, and that the whole at last should be made New, more excellent for
beauty, safety and usefulness than ever before. The Lord has rejected it,
says the Text; But, alas! who shall live when God will do this? When (1) God
shall pour contempt upon the profane in the eyes of the World, and shall
separate the precious from the vile; So that they shall not pass current as Men
in fashion that blaspheme the Name of God with their horrid Oaths, and ridicule
Religion as a Cheat and Priestcraft; when they shall not call the proud happy,
but, Reprobate Silver shall Men call them. When (2.) all things shall go by
weight and measure, as reduced to the standard of the Word; when things shall
not go by mere name, as we have called that a Shilling which was not half
weight, nor a quarter worth but as weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary.
When (3.) upon bringing the rejected and refuse Silver to the flame, all things
shall become new, and the Church restored to its Beauty and Excellency as the
Coin is. This is admirably represented, in Ezekiel. 22.19, -- 22. and in other
places. Now whatsoever way the Lord will work this, whether by Magistrates whom
he will spirit and stir up for it; or by Afflictions, sometimes called a
Furnace; or by greater Effusions of his Spirit in the preaching of the Word; or
whether by all these together, sure we are, that he will be like a refiners
fire, Mal. 3.2. And there will be these two things in it.

1. Great Wrath upon such as shall be found debased and corrupted, and so
refused and rejected, Psalm 119.119. Thou put away all the wicked of the
Earth like dross; They despised God, his Ways and his People, they counted them
as the Offscouring of the World, and they themselves shall be lightly
esteemed, Ezekiel. 22.20, 21. As they gather Silver, and Brass, and Iron, and
Lead, and Tin, into the midst of the Furnace to blow the fire upon it, so will
I gather you in mine anger and my fury -- and I will blow upon you in the fire
of my wrath, etc. The Judgments of God are very searching and desolating upon
the wicked many times in this World, as we have instances in Church History all
along, even so as to be an Emblem of the great Judgment to come, and to
express, Rev. 3. 3 -- I will come upon thee, and thou shall not know what hour
I will come upon thee.

2. Great Mercy to the Church afterward, for upon the rejecting the wicked,
the Church is restored, Prove. 25.4. Take away the Dross from the Silver, and
there shall come forth a Vessel for the Finer; which is applied in the next
Words to the taking away the wicked -- verse 5. Diverse of the Prophets spoke of
this Mal. 3.3. He shall sit as a Refiner, and Purifier of Silver: and he shall
purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may
offer to the Lord an offering in Righteousness. He may possibly begin with them
in Judgment for their Corruptions, and in Mercy for their Recovery, that they
may be instruments in restoring others. Of whom another Prophet speaks in the
same manner, Zech. 13.9. And it shall come to pass, that in all the Land says
the Lord, two parts therein shall be cut off and die, but the third shall be
left therein; and I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine
them as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tried: they shall call
upon my Name, and I will hear them, etc. Here is a remnant reserved and
restored, made bright and Illustrious, like New and Beautiful Coin. The like we
may see in Isa. 1.25. and 4.3, 4. Of which, further Use may be made in the
Application, to which we shall now proceed.

Use 1. This may be used for a serious Exhortation, that you be not found
amongst the Corrupters, and Corrupted Ones, whom the Lord will reject. The old
debased Coin past a great while; it went current, partly through faultiness,
and partly through ignorance; The wicked have not been plucked away; some have
continued in the Church through neglect of Discipline, and others by reason of
their Washes and cunning Artifices have not been discovered to be what they
are: What will you do when you can pass current to longer? there is a day that
will manifest every man's work, for the fire will declare it. If thou continuest
a profane Enemy of God and Godliness, a malignant Hater of seriousness and
strictness in Religion; if under the wash of an outward Profession, thou will
still cherish Malice, Uncleanness, Worldliness, or such like Lusts in thy
Heart, thou will be rejected, refuse Coin, reprobated, and cast off by the Lord
Hearken therefore in time to the Word of the Lord, that God may hearken unto
you.

1. See that you have the image of God instamp'd and renewed upon your Souls:
When the Coin was debased, they melted down the Money that had the right stamp
they corrupted it with the baser Metals of Brass and Iron, and placed a
counterfeit Stamp upon it; this was our ruin at first: By the Fall the Image
of God was lost, and defaced, and a contrary image stamped on the Soul: There
must be a restoring the King's Image again, the debased Coin must be broken
with the Hammer, melted with the fire, and made susceptible of a new stamp; How
admirably does this set forth the work of Grace upon the Heart! Jer. 23.29. Is
not my word like a Fire, says the Lord? and like a Hammer that breaks the
Rock in pieces? Thou must be broken by the Hammer of the Law, and melted down
by the Gospel, and the Lord's Image must be renewed upon thy Soul, Col. 3.10.
And have put on the new Man which is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of
him that Created him. And in the other Epistle, Ephesians. 4.24. it is said to be
after God, that is, after his Image, which we are told there, does consist in
Righteousness and true Holiness. So that the great Question, which you must put
to your Souls, is, Whose is this Image and Superscription? Is it after Christ,
after his likeness? have you received Grace for Grace? Is there Grace in you,
answering to the great Patterns and Exemplar in him, as in the Coin face
answers to face, and one part and feature to another? It will come to that at
last, that no Coin will go current, but what is new. All old things must pass
away, and all things become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. The Apostles words respect
another similitude, but may be applied to this, 1 Cor. 5.7. That you must be a
new lump, or Mass, on which a new Image must be stamped. There must be a new
Heart and a new Spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26. From whence proceeds newness of Life and
Obedience: And as the old Coin is still wearing away, and the new Money
increasing; so must the old Man be decaying, as crucisi'd with Christ, Rom 6.6.
put to a lingering death, till at last there be no more of it; and the new man
must increase, till Grace comes to be perfected in Glory.

2 See that in your whole life and course you be according to the Standard, and
full Weight. It was the charge upon that Remiss Church of Sardis, in which we
are nearly concerned, that the Lord had not found her works perfect before God,
Rev. 3 2. not filled up; but like Coin impaird and embezelled, that would not
hold weight. The Gospel requires good Works, as well as the Law, though not for
the same ends: and the one is a Standard as well as the other, if he weighs us
in the Balance of his Law, and Covenant of Works there is no Righteousness,
but that of Christ's, which will hold weight: But sincerity is a kind of
Evangelical perfection, and so owned in the Covenant of Grace; and sad is our
case, if God should write upon us, TEKEL, thou art weighed in the Balances,
and art found wanting, Dan. 5.27. There are many frothy vain Persons of empty
light Spirits that have no solidity; Examine your selves, says the Apostle,
prove your own selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. Where he uses a word, that is also made
use of for the Trial of Metals of which Money is made.

Use 2. This may further be improved by way of caution, that you take heed of
murmuring and fretting about the difficulties occasioned by the Coin at this
day, when you have more reason to lie low before God in sorrow, and
humiliation. Murmuring has been one of the prevailing sins of England of late,
as it was of the Children of Israel when they came out of Egypt; there are
many circumstances that are much alike in both Nothing has more exercised the
Tongues, and filled the Hearts of many this last year, than the difficulties
about the Money: No Man smites upon his thigh and cries, what have I done? Each
one murmuring at others, the wisest Counselor and Counsels cannot escape
them; they fret themselves against God and the King, and look up. Sometimes
they murmur at the inconveniences occasioned by the Calling in of the Coin,
the stoppage of their Trade and Commerce, the hinderance of the War, and of the
Peace, and Deliverance hoped for by it; at other times at the difficulties in
amending the Coin, the delay of it, and the frustrating some attempts that have
been made to restore it.

Now not to argue against this murmuring from the General Heads of the Sin and
danger of it; I desire only that they who murmur in this Case, would reflect
upon themselves, and enquire whether they have not more cause to mourn, than to
fret upon this account. Let it be considered:

1. Whether you are not the Persons that have caused this Calamity, this
Debasing of the Coin; I do not mean, whether your sins as well as others, have
caused it meretoriously, as sin brings down all Judgments, but whether you have
not been instrumental in procuring these inconveniences, which have lain heavy
on your selves and others. They that suffered justly for their Treason, and a
kind of Robbery of the whole Nation, in Clipping and Coining, were not the only
guilty Persons; it must needs be that they have other Confederates, Accessaries
to their Treason and Theft, who helped them to all that broad Money which they
clipped and melted down; which Confederacy is doubtless an Iniquity, that ought
to be punished by the Judges; but I hope this guilt lies (comparitively) but
among a few. There is yet a more general Sin to be bewailed, which was always
accounted a heinous piece of injustice, till the temptation grew too strong for
many; the putting off false and counterfeit Money in their dealings one with
another. How many made no conscience of putting off Brass and Iron for Silver,
because, say they, we took it for good our selves; which is but in other words,
to cheat others, because they themselves were imposed upon! It was this common
practice that encouraged the pouring in such vast quantities of debased Money
upon us: I doubt not, now the Temptation is over, the Conviction will be more
easy, that it is the same sin to put off counterfeit Money knowingly, as to
put off counterfeit Goods: A sin so general, ought to be publicly
acknowledged, and bewailed by the Land; and shall the guilty persons murmur at
that which they caused; at an Evil which they have encouraged and procured!

2. Whether you your selves are not like this debased Coin, this reprobate
Silver, this refuse Money, which is now rejected? How little good, and how much
bad would there be found, if now you are brought to the Balance? Let me only
put the Question to your Hearts in reference to the pretenses of your present
Murmuring.

1. You murmur, that the badness and deficiency of the Coin has hindered your
Trade, and stopped the success of the War; upon this some fly out into
extravagant expressions, which I list not to repeat. Now I beseech you consider
whether the greater corruption of your lives has not more hindered the progress
of the Gospel, and the desired deliverance. Is not the Gospel of more concern
than your Trade, and the interest of Christ in the Land than your private
interest? and yet this is that which you have hindered. You are degenerated and
debased, become, as the Prophet says, Brass, Tin, Iron and Lead; Brass for
Impudence in Sin, Tin for Hypocrisy, Iron for inflexibleness, Lead for
stupidity; and has not this more hindered the work of God in the Land, than the
bad Money has hindered your work? You your selves have been the Achans that
have troubled our Israel: It was not the want or the badness of the Coin that
hindered the success against the Enemy, so much as the abounding of sin in the
Land. Oh that my People had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways,
I should soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned my hand against their
Adversaries, Psalm. 81.13, 14.

Or, 2. You murmur that there are delays in amending and restoring the Coin,
that some attempts have failed, and many disappointments are met with that were
not expected: But ought you not to consider, how many more apparent
miscarriages there have been of the attempts to reform you? Here have been
delays as to the Coin, but you see something is done; a great deal of new Money
is come abroad, but what has yet been done amongst you? though some attempts
as to the Money, have miscarried, yet others do succeed; but all the several
methods to reform you have in great part failed. Such exceeding difficulties do
they meet with, who have attempted a greater purity in Church and State, that
they are ready to give it over, as a hopeless undertaking. So refractory have
Sinners proved, and averse to Reformation, that there is need of all fitting
Arguments to persuade those, whose work it is, to overcome the discouragements
they have met with, and to set about it, in good earnest; which brings us to
another Use.

Use 3. By way of Address and humble Application to them who have been the
Restorers of our Coin, that they may become healers of our breaches, and
restorers of paths to dwell in. I doubt not when the heat of Men's passions is a
little over, the whole Nation will thankfully acknowledge your Wisdom and Care
in the late Regulation of the Money; and the more serious part of it will
especially take notice of your delivering us from so great a Snare, as was the
customary putting off bad Money to one another, almost at last without
Reluctance. Now it has been proved that our Land is become by sin, like
corrupted and debased Coin, and that the Reformation of it is Gods Work, who
uses what instruments he pleases; And Oh that it might please him to put it
into your hearts to do as much for the interest of his Church, as you have done
for the interest of the Nation! that you may resolve to sit de die in Diem, as
one grand Committee for Religion, till all things are brought to the Balance,
and reduced to the great Standard of the Word. You have been sensible how much
the honor of the King is concerned, that the Coin should be such as he should
own; and is not the Lord as jealous of his Ministry and Ordinances, on which he
has set his Stamp? I will only set before you, your own example, Do as you
have done for us, and the Lord shall be with you. You have delivered us from
the corrupted Coin, you have refused and rejected it; deliver us also
effectually from Debaucheries and Profaneness; put a greater restraint upon
the boldness of Heretics, that deny the Lord that bought them; what you find
amiss in the Church, redress it; and begin, as God himself does, with the Sons
of Levi. His Majesty's Commission to the late Convocation, 1689. will inform
you of the particular grievances, and you do not want eminent Lights set up in
the highest places of the Church, to assist you in the redressing of them. You
have encouraged the good Money to come abroad freely, which heretofore was
hoarded up; and can it be for the glory of God, that so many Persons should be
hoarded up, and confined to private and separate Assemblies, whose Labors are
much wanted in the Church, had the comprehension gone along with the Toleration
seven years ago, it had doubtless been more for the interest of Religion in
general, as well as for the Church of England in particular. You have taken
care, that the old Money, not yet spoiled, should be Recalled and Recoined: It
has been formerly unquestionably current, the Nation has flourished in the
use thereof, yet when you saw that the Hammered Coin was liable to be abused
still, and like to breed quarrels amongst the People, in Wisdom you thought fit
to remove it, and to exchange it for that which is more bright, and safe, and
useful: Let it please you to consider, whether there be not some Rites and
Vsages, tho not debased by superstition, yet unnecessary and subject to abuses,
which have bred quarrels in the Church for above a hundred years together, and
whether they may not be changed for such as are more unquestionably useful:
especially when this difference is observed, that the old Money which you call
in, has had on it the Royal Stamp, whereas these Usages pretend only to a bare
allowance to pass for a time, and are more like to the small Money, which I
remember many years ago was stamped by private Shop keepers, which by the leave
of the Government, went current for some years, within the narrow Bounds
assigned them: But it has since been found much better, that even Farthings
should have the King's Stamp, and nothing suffered but what may pass current
through the Land.

I doubt not but in the setting about so great a work as is the Reforming a
corrupted Land, you will meet with many difficulties, and you will not want
those who will on purpose lay rubs in your way; but give me leave to say, they
can propose no Objections, but what you have answered your selves, nor are
there any Obstructions but what you have already broke through in the like case.

Should it be objected that we have a good establishment already, that there
are many good Law's against corruptions in the Land, many good Constitutions in
the Church, and actual endeavors already made for a Reformation of what is
amiss; was it not also so as to the Coin? was there not a good establishment of
it formerly, good Laws about the taking and refusing it, and care taken for the
preventing and redressing of the abuses of it? yet you saw cause to do
something more, and more effectually than ever had been done before in our days.

It will be objected, That alterations are dangerous; there will be those that
will cry out, as if the Church were in danger, if you remove but a Ceremony,
but you have got over this stumbling Block too; for there have not wanted those
that would have amused you and the Nation, with fears and jealousies, as if you
were ruining the Land, when you were restoring the Coin. You easily perceived
that these out-crys came from a selfish private interest, and unconcernedness
for the public good.

It may possibly be further said, that should you do all that is desired, there
would be still faults and corruptions, still quarrels and factions, that some
Men will never be satisfied, whatever is done in, and for the Church; and is
not the same thing said as to the Coin, that there will be Counterfeits of the
New Money too; quarrels amongst the people about it, and some dissatisfied as
well as others pleased? Let not Objections, already baffled, and answered, by
your selves have any force to hinder you in so great a work. And yet there is
need of one Use of the Doctrine more.

Use 4. To stir us up to a solemn Supplication unto, and entire dependence upon
the Lord to perform his own Work, in his own way. The Church needs and calls
for the prayers of all the Members of it; and the promises of God are the
ground of our Faith, and encouragement of our prayers, Isa. 1.25, 26. I will
turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all they
Tin; And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at
the beginning; afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the
faithful City. Indeed if we consider Gods rejecting the wicked as Reprobate
Silver, abstractedly and by it self, it seems rather matter of trembling, than
of desire: When the Psalmist had said, Psa. 119.119. Thou put away all the
Wicked of the Earth as dross-he adds v. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of
thee. But when we consider it, in reference to his design, the purifying and
beautifying his Church, the preserving and defending it from all that would
mischief it How could all they who make mention of the Lord not keep silence,
but pray more earnestly, and give him no rest till he has made Jerusalem a
praise in the Earth; till the name and image of our King be again visible on
all his Coin; as he has said, I will write on it the name of my God, and the
name of the City of my God, Rev. 3.13. till that, which is the inscription on
the Coin, shall be written round the Church, Decus and Tutamen, Glory and
Defense: Which is directly according to his promise, for having spoken of
Purging of his Church, Isa. 4.4. With the Spirit of Judgment, and the Spirit of
Burning; according to the allusion of the Refiners Fire: He adds, v. 5. That
upon all the glory there shall be a defense. Which two things are again
prophesied of, Zech. 2.5. I will be unto her a Wall of fire, and the glory in
the midst of her. What Glory, Luster and Beauty will the Church then have, when
the Lord shall turn to the people a pure Language, and they shall call on him,
and serve him with one consent? Zeph. 3.9. And for Defense; He shall fill Zion
with Judgment, and Righteousness, and Knowledge shall be the stability of our
times, Isa. 33.6. Then shall thou no more be termed Desolate, nor thy Land
Forsaken, Isa. 62.4. As now men call it reprobate Silver, rejected and refuse,
but thou shall be called, Hephzibah, and thy Land, Beulah: for the Lord
delights in thee, and thy Land shall be married -- As the Bridegroom
rejoiceth over the Bried, so shall they God rejoice over thee.

FINIS.

