A SERIOUS VINDICATION OF THE Church of England; SHOWING The Nations Happiness
Under the Present Government. BEING A Seasonable Answer To a late PAMPHLET,
Entitled, The Naked Truth.
By a Well-wisher to the Nations Happiness and Prosperity.
IN this sad Dissension and Division of Religion; the Seers, (who are appointed
to be the Watch- men of the Church,) cannot but observe, that the Supplanters
and Underminers of the Church, (as is evidently seen) are daily (by Papism,
Factions, Sedition and Schisms,) digging down the Foundations of our Church and
State, as it is now lawfully Established: And having by such Instruments
already destroyed, so are they running fiercely on again to destroy all Public
Forms of Ecclesiastical Government, Discountenance an Excellent Liturgy, take
off the very Hinges of Unity, Disgrace the Articles of a Pure Religion, Pollute
Public Assemblies, take away all Cognizance of Schism, by mingling all SECTS,
and giving Countenance to That, against which our Power ought to stand upon our
Guard, against such Rebellious, Self-Interested, and Bloody-minded People, as
we have (more is the Pity,) in this our Kingdom. They, who have seen this our
Jerusalem so much involved in our late Unhappy Uncivil Wars, and lived under
the Tirany of Traitors and Usurpers, who Imprisoned and Murdered their Good
KING of ever Blessed Memory; and Imprisoned, Sequestered, Plundered, and
Beheaded our Nobility, Gentry and People, (for which many suffer to this Day;)
And our now Dread Sovereign, and the Royal Family forced to fly for Refuge
into strange Nations; The Ministers of the Church turned out, and Barbarously
Used; And a Company of Perverse and Wicked Wretches, (who Preached nothing but
Sedition and Rebellion against the King and Government,) were put into their
Places, and all this done under the Cloak of Religion, and being thereunto
Inspired by a Holy Zeal, (as they always pretend) And thus, in short, were We
enslaved under those Holy Tirants, till God of his Infinite Mercy and
Providence brought home our Most Gracious King to his Lawful Throne again, and
Restored the True Church to its former Prosperity, which God Preserve from all
its Malicious Opposers, etc. And shall we forget all this? and the Order of the
Morning and Evening Sacrifices, and the Beauty of the Temple? and be Tempted to
Neglect so Excellent a Ministration? and be content with any thing that is
brought to us, though it be but the very Husks and Acorns of Prodigals and
Swine, so They may get Money by it? We must now take care that the Young Men
who were born under that Captivity, may be taught how to Worship the God of
Israel after the manner of their Forefathers; For, never did the Excellency of
Episcopal Government appear so Demonstratively and Conspicuously as now under
their Conduct and Order; For We have a Church, so United, so Orderly, so
Governed; A Religion so Settled; Articles so True, Sufficient, and Confessed by
all sober Men; Canons, so Prudent, and so Obeyed; Devotions, so Regular, and so
Constant; Sacraments, so Adorned, and Ministered; Churches, so Beauteous and
Religious; Circumstances, so Grave and Prudent, so Useful and Apt for
Edification, that the Enemies of our Church, (who serve the POPE (...) all
things, and (...) Christ in some; who dare transgress an Institution and
Ordinance of ^^RIST, but dare not break a Canon of the POPE,) did Despair of
prevailing against Us and Truth; and know no Hopes, but by setting their Faces
against Us, to Destroy the best of Governments; which if they could, then they
would Triumph without having any Enemy: So Balaam the Son of Bozer, was sent
for to Curse the People of the Lord, in hopes that the Son of Zippor might
prevail against them that long prosper'd under the Conduct of Moses and Aaron.

But now instead of this Excellency of Condition, and Constitution of Religion,
the People are Seduced, and fallen under the Harrows and Saws of Faction,
Sedition, Railing, Despising, Drolling, Impertinent and Ignorant,
Self-Interesting Solemn League and Covenanting Preachers, who think all
Religion is a Sermon, and all Sermons ought to be Libels against Truth and
Government; who think they are Saints, and none like them, when they are great
Hypocrites, and Wolves in Sheeps-clothing, for by their Fruits you may know
them; who Expound Chapters, that the meaning may never be understood; and Pray,
that they may be thought able to Talk, but not to hold their peace; Who speak
Evil of Dignities, Resist the Power and Ordinances of God; who take up Religion
for a Cloak, who Delude silly Women to Cheat their Husbands; who care not to
obtain any thing but Wealth and Victory, Power, and Plunder; And all the People
do reap the Fruits thereof that are apt to grow upon such Crab-stocks: They
grow Idle and False, Hypocrites, and careless; They deny Themselves nothing
that is pleasant; They Despise Religion, Forget Government, and some of them
never so much as think of going to Heaven; And if at any time they chance to
do, They think to go thither in such Paths, which all the Ages of the Primitive
Church did give Men warning of, lest they should that way go to the Devil. But
when Men have tried all that they can, it is hoped they will return to the
Excellency and Advantages of the true Christian Religion as it is taught by the
Church of England; For, by Destroying it, no End can be served, but of Sin and
Folly, Faction, and Death Eternal: For besides that, no Church that is an Enemy
to this, does Worship God in that Truth of Propositions, in that Unblamable and
Pious Liturgy, and in Preaching the Necessities of Holy Life, so much as the
Church of England does. Besides this, (I say,) it cannot be persecuted by any
Governor that understands his own Interest, unless He be first abused by False
Preachers, and then prefers his secret Opinion, before his Public Advantage:
For no Church in the World is so great a Friend to Loyalty and Obedience, as
She, and her Sisters of the same Persuasion; She Preaches no Rebellion against
her Prince, and is no Councellor, Contriver, or Projector of PLOTS and
Conspiracies, but a True Lover of Peace and Quietness, etc. They that hate
Bishops, destroy Monarchy; And They that would Erect an Ecclesiastical
Monarchy, must consequently subject the Temporal to it; and both One and the
Other would be Supreme in Consciences: And they that Govern there, with an
Opinion that in all things they ought to be attended to, will let their Prince
G^^ern others, so long as he will be R^^e^^y Them. And certainly, for a Prince
to persecute the Established Protestant Religion, is, as if a Physician should
endeavor to Destroy all Medicaments, and Fathers kill their Sons, and the
Masters of Ceremonies Destroy all Formalities and Courtships; And, as if the
Pope should root out all Ecclesiastic State. Nothing so Combines with
Government (if it be of Gods appointment,) as the Religion of the Church of
England; because nothing does more adhere to the Word of God, and dis-regard
the Crafty Advantages of the World. If any Man shall not decline to try his
Title by the Word of God, It is certain, there is not in the World a better
Guard for it than the True Protestant Religion, as it is taught in our Church;
For it is Via Tuta, the safe way: And certain it is, that in that day we shall
prevail against all Gods Enemies and Ours, not in the Purchaces and Riches of
the World, but in the Rewards and Returns of Holiness and Patience, Faith and
Charity; For by these we Worship God, and against this Interest we cannot serve
any thing else. And there is none can leave our Communion, or have Reason to
reprove our Doctrine, unless they be abused with Prejudice, and suck in Venom
with their Milk: And there is a more solid Comfort, and Material support to a
Christian Spirit in one Article of Faith, in one Period of the Lords Prayer, in
one Holy Lesson, than in all the Disputes of the Impertinent Rabble, who take
more pains to prove there is no Purgatory, than to persuade Men to avoid Hell:
And that a plain Catechism can more Instruct a Soul, than the whole days prate
which some usually spit forth, to bid them get Christ, and persecute his
Servants.

It will not be unnecessary to tell you in part, (as I did at the beginning,
how our Kingdoms were Ruined, as is too well known,) how our Divines were
persecuted, how our Churches were Demolished, and made Stables by Sacrilegious
Rebels and Tirants; And it is evidently seen at this day, That there are
abundance of such Saints among us, (and if not timely prevented,) may play the
Devils Game over again: For have they not began already to Rebel in Scotland?
They killed in a most Barbarous manner the Archbishop of St. Andrews, etc.
What Impious, Devilish and Hellish Declarations, and Covenants lately by them
openly proclaimed? How many Conventicles are there contrary to Law? How are our
Orthodox Divines most scurrilously slandered by them? How bold and Audacious
are they, daily to publish Answers? Joque, Droll, Libel and Asperse our Able
Divines? How many go under the notion of Protestants, (for in Discourse they
say they are so,) when really they are none, For you shall have them all the
week Railing against the present Government, frighten the People into Fears and
Jealousies at Coffee-houses, Booksellers shops, Private Caballs and Factions
Clubs up and down the Town; And on Sunday they will run to a Conventicle, and
there exhort their ignorant Congregation to do the like, etc. Much more might
be said; But I shall conclude, with my hearty Prayers that all our Differences
may be composed, and that we may be United in one True Church, and that God
would save and Defend Us from the Hands of all our Enemies, and Infatuate their
wicked Designs; That we may study Peace, and not Wars, Strife, Confusion and
Discention, which lead to the ways (...) D^struction: That God would Bless,
Preserve, Defend and Keep His Sacred Majesty from the Hands of all his Enemies,
and to give him Victory over them, and send him a Long, Happy and Prosperous
Reign over Us; And that We may live in Gods Fear, and in Duty and Obedience to
Our King: And God bless the Great Council of the Nation the Parliament; And
when they shall be Assembled, to Direct and Prosper all their Consultations to
the Advancement of Gods Glory, the Safety, Honor and Welfare of our Dread
Sovereign, and Kingdoms, That Peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion
and Piety, may be Established amongst Us to all Generations; And let all True
Subjects with me, say, Amen.

LONDON, Printed for A. Banks, Anno Domini, 1680.


