A LETTER OF THANKS From the AUTHOR OF SURE-FOOTING To his Answerer Mr. J. T.

Quis autem magis de his novit, hic ne seductus homo qui etiam nunc superest,
and hucusque in hoc mundo versatur, aut qui ante nos Testes fuerunt, habentes
ante nos Traditionem in Ecclesia; quique etiam a Patribus suis Traditum
acceperunt, quemadmodum etiam hi a Patribus suis didicerunt qui ante ipsos
fuerunt, quomodo Ecclesia acceptam a Patribus suis veram fidem usque huc
continet, itemque Traditiones. Epiphan: contra Aerium. haer. 75. Paris, 1666.

SIR,
1. YOur Friend Mr. Stillingfleet, who, I thank him, professes a great deal of
real kindness for me, tells your self in the beginning of his Appendix, that
your performances in your Book have been so clear and satisfactory, that he
hopes Mr. S. in stead of another Letter of directions to his Answerer, will
write you one of Thanks, for the Reason and Kindness you have showed him
throughout your Book. I hate to be ungrateful, and have that real kindness
for him and your self too as not to suffer your hopes to be defeated. My
Obligations of Gratitude he concieves to spring from a twofold Head; the
Reason and the Kindness you have shown me. The former of which is to be
examined by reducing the respective parts of your Discourse to Grounds or
Principles; which I shall do when it shall please God to give me leisure and
health to answer your Book; and I promise you faithfully to own as much Reason
in it as these will allow me: I fear you may dislike the verdict of Principles
and think them discourteous because of their inflexible genius, and
self-confident too, because they love naturally to express themselves with an
Assuredness, and are often so bold as (unconcerned in the Skeptical humor of
others) to talk of those bug bears to Fancy, Evidence and Demonstration; But be
assured, Sir, though they are not altogether so good-natured nor bashful as
your timorous quivering Probabilities, which you phrase modest, yet they are
very just and honest; and, as they cannot flatter you, so neither will they
injure you in the least. My other Obligation to Gratitude is the Kindness you
have showed me; and, as Mr. Stillingfleet says very truly, throughout your
Book, which it were a Sin to deny. For I know no greater Kindness from one that
opposes me than to write in such a manner as to put himself upon the greatest
Disadvantages imaginable to give me so many Advantages against him and his
Cause. Nor am I to expect your Intention should go along with your Favors;
it is abundant Kindness in an Adversary that by his means I enjoy the reality of
the Benefit; and this I have received from you, never to be forgotten but with
Ingratitude. As often as you omit what is important, mistake either voluntarily or
weakly, triumph causlesly, injure me undeservedly, cavil groundlesly,
prevaricate from the business purposely, revile bitterly, jeer sillily; or
falsify and pervert my meaning or words palpably; so many real Kindnesses you
conferr upon your poor Servant, of which in this Letter of mine both to your
self and the world I here make my hearty Profession and Acknowledgment.

2. And first I am to give you very humble thanks for totally waving to take
notice of my Letter to my Answerer. The whole scope of it was to request you
would hold to a Method which was evidently Conclusive; that you would begin
with some First Principles, and vouch them to be, as First Principles should
be, self-evident; That (as all Art and Common Sense gives it) you would not
produce any Thing against Tradition till you show it depends not on Tradition
for its Certainty; that you would either confess your Testimonies unapt to
Certify, or declare in what their virtue of Certifying consists, which must
needs either show them feeble if they be such; or, if otherwise, enforce and
strengthen them: That you would uphold your Arguments satisfactory, that is,
able to subdue the Understanding to Assent, and show us how they come by that
virtue; with diverse other Requests, not Prescriptions as you call them, only
tending to make a short End of Controversy by bringing Truth quickly to a
clearing by the way of Principles. Now, who sees not that I had obliged my self
to the same severe Laws of Concluding, by proposing them to you; and so, had
you had any Principles worthy to be called such, or the confidence in your
Cause to venture upon any Conclusive method, you had gained a notable advantage
against me in laying hold of that method and obliging me to stand to it,
because I was the Proposer of it. At least you might have pleased to have shown
my Way Inconclusive, and substituted and established a better, in case you had
thought any Evident or Conclusive method your Advantage. But it is a manifest
sign you judged any rigorous way of Concluding unsuitable to your Causes and
your own Interest; and that to continue still on Foot Inconclusive and
endlesly-talking ways of Discourse, (as is yours, which consists in being able
to say a great many pretty plausible any-things to every thing) was more
proportioned and advantageous to your moderate, modest, courteous and probable
Faith; which is (I dare say for it) far from that Boldness and Self-confidence
as to talk of Principles, Evidence, Demonstration, or even Certainty, unless
minc't and allayed with the Epithet Sufficient; though you will never show us
how acknowledged possibility to be otherwise can ever convince us sufficiently
to Assent the thing is so, or why a Capacity to be false for any thing we
know, is not the very notion of Incertainty, and so most abusively pinned to
the notion of Certainty. Now, that you should so perfectly wave speaking to
that Letter, it being particularly directed to your self, whereas the Book you
pretend to answer was not; the end aimed at in it being by all men's Confession
very importantly good, that is to shorten Controversies and bring our Disputes
to a period; also the method of Discoursing being (as Logic tells us) one of
the praecognoscenda to the Discourse it self, and so either Disputant has right
to require it should be first treated of, though I civilly requested it of you:
Lastly, it being so indifferently framed to your or my interest, or rather
totally for his who had Truth or Grounds on his side; that is, for you, were
your cause so qualified; and, as such, equally liked by Judicious Protestants
as well as Catholics: This being so, that you should so totally slight and
disregard it in these circumstances, is a clear argument you think it not safe
to venture your cause and Credit upon Principles or any Evident or Conclusive
method of discoursing; and a plain Confession by way of Fact that all your
discourse against my Book has neither Principles to subsist by, nor Evidence to
conclude by. Which acknowledgment of yours though tacitly and modestly expressed
(for you are a modest man in all your rational performances, and only very
brag and brisk when some jest haunts your fancy or when you are disposed to
flout and rail at the impudence of my assertions) is as high a favor as your
great wit could have invented; and so I am bound to yield you a return of
Infinite Thanks for it; which I beseech you accept in part of requital, till I
come to show hereafter out of the nature of that Letter that all your Probable
talk in this Book had been marred in case you had yielded to do me the reason
which I there requested

3. Next I am to thank you heartily that you begin your Impugnation with the
most disingenuous Cavil that perhaps has ever been heard of Intending to frame
my discourse as plain and unexceptionable as I could concerning the Rule of
Faith, I declared (page 4.) that I intended not rigorous definitions of either
word, but only to reflect on and make use of some Attributes, Predicates or
Properties, which in the sense of such who intelligently use those words, are
apprehended to be involved in or truly appertaining to their signification, I
added that I gave that caution to avoid mistake and Cavil: which might ensue
upon pretense of defining, but could not upon merely predicating, so my
propositions were true: This done, I begun with the plainest sayings I could
use, and thence drew on the process of my discourse by the most immediate steps
I could invent. The tenor of my First discourse was thus: A Rule signifies a
thing which is able to regulate him who uses it, therefore it must have in it
those Qualities by which it is able to do that it is proper Effect; therefore it
must be knowable as to it is existence to the Persons it is to regulate; as
also, it must be knowable to have in it a virtue to regulate or guide them
right. Again, the word Faith being Equivocall, and sometimes taken for
Conscience, sometimes for a strong Trust or Reliance, sometimes for Fidelity or
Honesty etc. I had a mind to restrain it to our present purpose as it is taken
for an Assent of the understanding upon Authority; and, so, expressed my self. 8.
that, Faith is the same with believing; thence I affirmed something of Divine
Belief, as much as would bring me to evince this that Faith in a Christian
Sense imported Knowledge of Supernatural things; which is all I aimed at in
this Branch of my discourse. So that I used all the art and care I could to
avoid Cavil. But Sr, I perceive to my comfort your Disingenuity (which is one
of your chief kindnesses) is beyond all prevention. First, you can by no means
think my explication of those Terms sufficient p. 1. you should have said those
affirmations true, or, those Predicates, truly pronounced of the subject; for
this is all I aimed at, and not to compile Explications. Next, you say, this
proposition A Rule is to regulate or guide him that uses it, is a Description;
which I beseech you believe was never intended. Afterward you complain I
confound Rule and Guide, by making regulating and guiding equivalent; and I
defend my self, that those words being vulgarly confounded may without wronging
Art be used so till we have occasion to distinguish them, which I have no
where in my whole book: Nor had I blamed Mr. Whitby for this but that in the
very discourse where he professed to distinguish Rule from Guide, he
notwithstanding, even there confounded their notions. Were I to distinguish
them, I should (if you would not be angry) put this difference between them,
that Guide has something Personal in its signification, which Rule abstracts
from. But you proceed with your kindnesses; and (page 2.) call those words my
definition; though (so unparallelld is your candor) you quote my words a little
after that I inrended here no definitions: and then show my definition
(forsooth) Faulty, because I fell Englishmen for their clearer understanding
this word, that it is a Thing able to regulate etc. whereas regulate is less
removed from the Latin and so, less plain then Rule the word defined. Whereas
your self know I meant not to define; and I beseech you believe me when I tell
you I as little meant to write to any Englishmen that did not understand the
word Regulate as well as the word Rule. Yet I must define whether I will or no,
though there be no other occasion why it should be so but only that you might
break a jest, which tickled your Fancy, and so your fingers itcht to put it
down; It Is a Definition of your own parallel to my counterfeited one, that a
Lawgiver is one that has the power of Legislation; And in this you have hit
right; for it is just such another definition as mine was.

4. After this you bring in my other Definition (as you call it) that Faith is
the same with believing, and immediately add my words disowning any sayings of
mine in this first discourse to be definitions at all, as had you transcribed a
little farther you might have let the Reader see more visibly. And, so kind you
are, that my very not intending to define which is alone able, one would think,
to excuse all the pretended faults in my mistaken definitions must have a
little touch of a Cavil notwithstanding from that fertile wit of yours, which
minds not desert nor misdesert, but follows it is own Genius, and indifferently
pours out it self merely to vent its exuberancy. Now the reason why those words
Faith is the same with believing must needs be a Definition too, is Evident:
you had another witty conceit came into your Fancy, which was a Country-fellows
Definition, saying that an Invasion was as if he should say an Invasion; which
would not have fitted, unless you had made my words Faith is the same Believing
a definition too; and it had been a thousand pitties such a pretty jest should
have been lost. But, Sr. since I meant to bring my notion from a more Equivocall
to a less Equivocall word, and thence proceeded (as you call it) defining a
great way farther, that is indeed predicating or affirming diverse other things
in that. why you should catch at my very first words, Faith is the same with
believing, and make that alone a Definition, neglecting all the following ones,
is impossible for such dull heads as mine to divine; unless it were that the
Country-definition had a very great Ascendent and Influence over your
Conscience and Sincerity as well as your Fancy.

5. This definition of mine (to see how things will come about) puts you in
mind (p. 3.) of my First Principles (...) is a Rule, Faith is Faith. Upon which
you triumph thus. This ie the right self-evident method he talks so much of;
and his Principles agree admirably well with his definitions. If he had
proceeded in the same method, and added that a Rule of Faith is a Rule of
Faith, Orall Tradition is Orall Tradition, and that to say Orall Tradition is
the Rule of Faith is as much as to say Orall Tradition is the Rule of Faith,
the whole business had been concluded without any more ado, and I think no body
would have gone about to confute him. What a terrible thing it is to deal with
your great Wits! Let Us see how a little honest plain Logic will dissipate this
vapor. To Conclude is to show evidently that two notions we call the Subject
and Predicate are identify'd or connected in that Proposition we call the
Conclusion. To do this we find a Third notion, called a medium or Argument to
be identify'd with those two, whence we infer them to be the same: but how
shall we know that third notion to be identify'd with those two others, that
is, how shall we know the major and minor propositions to be true? By finding
another medium connected with them: And how far must this go on? Endlesly, or
no? If endlesly, since every following Connection is proved by some foregoing
ones, in case we cannot come to see some First Connection or Principle, we
could conclude or deduce nothing. And how must we evidence the Connection of the
Terms (or of the Subject and Predicate) in these First Principles? By another
antecedent connection of those Terms with a Third? No; for these are supposed
the First Connexions. Wherefore, since they cannot be evidenc't by any thing
out of themselves and yet must be Evident, else nothing could be evidenc't by
them, it follows they must be Evident of themselves or self-Evident. And in
what consists this Self Evidence? merely in this that no medium, middle Term or
Argument can come between the notions of their Subject and Predicate; which
devolves finally into this, that the Subject and Predicate are perfectly the
same notion: So that all Science about any thing is finally resolved into the
nature or Essence of that thing, that is into that things being what it is, or
which is all one it is being the same with its self, which your great Learning
laughs at. Hence, what is, is; or Every thing is what it is, as plain and
course as it looks, is the last resort of all Evidence in the world; and, in
particular Sciences, that the Subject of that Science is what it is; as that
man is a Man, Quantity is Quantity, and so, a Rule is a Rule, Faith is Faith,
must principle all that can be solidly concluded either about Man, Quantity,
Rule or Faith.

6. Had you reflected on any maxims of Art, and not stood pursuing your
affected buffonerie when it became you to discourse like a solid Scholar, you
would have seen how little ground you had for your taunting nonsense. To say
that a Rule is a Rule is a First Principle, had not been held a just occasion
of giggling, much less had you been so indiscreet as to parallel my Conclusion
Orall Tradition is the Rule of Faith with my Principle A Rule is a Rule; or to
put it upon me that because I make my Terms in my Principle self-evidently
Identicall, therefore I ought to do so in my Conclusion too; whereas your
Conscience tells you and my whole Book informs the Reader I go about at least
to prove it in so rigorous a method that as you fear to admit, and so wave
speaking to my Letter, so you and your fellow Probable-Christians judge it your
best play to laugh at it. And it is a cheap way if you had a Fool to deal with
who would let such weak evasions serve your turn.

But let me sum up my obligations to you at present. You have manifestly
falsify'd my Intention: pretending I meant to define, whenas I expressly
disowned it, Sure Footing p. 4. You omit to answer whether those Propositions
or Predications of mine be true or false; and, if true, whether my
Consequences be right or no; which was all your task at present: you lay the
gull you have raised for your Ground, and thereupon cavil and flout all the
way without sense, reason, or the least occasion: You laugh at the nature of
First Principles, bewraying either your Ignorance of those things on which all
solid Discourse can only be built, or your Necessity of scorning such
unfriendly Discoverers of your weakness: and, which is the worst of all, you
make this unsavory kind of Talk, the first part of your Onset, and the first
taste you give your Reader of your Sincerity and depth of Reasoning. And now,
Sir, be Judge your self, whether the confessing your self thus amply to be a
disingenuous and weak Caviller, be not strangely obliging to your thankful
Servant. Really, Sir, unless you will be so good as to take the telling you
heartily of your Faults to be sufficient Payment, I am exceedingly afraid I
shall live and die in your debt. I could make good sport with the word measure
in your definition (for you will define to excel me though none requires it
of you) but I dare not imitate you, nor pretend to so great a degree of witty
and pleasant Eloquence. Only I will beg leave to transcribe your words which
introduce your definitions p. 4. Rejecting then his way of definition as inept
and frivolous, and no ways tending to give a clearer notion of things, I shall
endeavor to explain a little better (if I can) the meaning of these Terms. And
certainly, Sir, a man may with a little Astrology prognosticate your victory;
for you combat nothing but a Chimera your own brain had coined. In the mean
time it is another small Kindness to show your self so vain as to build your own
triumphs on a voluntary misprision. But right or wrong you are resolved to
conquer, and I must have patience.

7. I hoped when I came to your second Section your Reason which as your Friend
Mr. Stillingfleet (who hummes your Book as loud as you can do his for your
heart) tells us runs throughout your Book, would have given some respite to
your Kindnesses, and my Thanks for them; but I discern in this and your
following Section that your very Reason it self is compounded of Kindness, and
that your soberest impugnation of my discourse is made up of Groundless Cavills
and (which I am loath to say) voluntary mistakes. I am sorry to see it, because
I intended to throw aside the rubbish of your Book in this Letter, that in my
Answer I might better lay open the admirable Fabric of your Discourse, and
have nothing there to do but to speak to solid points. But in this
disappointment I must behave my self as well as I can, and your Goodness must
help me out by pardoning me if I omit to thank you for innumerable Kindnesses
which are involved in your Rational performances, till God gives me health and
leisure.

8. You are pleased to honor me with a very loud and heavy Calumny all over
your Book, as reviling Scripture, vilifying, disgracing it, and what not. Now,
Sr, I use still to distinguish in Scripture the Sense of it from the Outward
Letter, which distinction if you admit not, I have no more to do but to allege
experience confessed by all, that many Sects who have the outward Letter inform
it with different Senses; which evidently argues a Divisibility or Distinction
between that Letter and it is Sense. Admitting then this Distinction, and that
the Sense of words is the Soul of, them, I cannot allow that Letter with any
propriety to be called Gods word, unless informed and enlivened with Gods
Sense; but only dead Characters; for sincerely, Sr, I never saw a Bible creep
about and move it self that I should call it, that is, the paper and
characters, Living. Now, taking those Letters in complexion with Gods Sense,
and, as informed by it, I challenge your utmost spite which most of your book,
especially the end of this Section, shows to be very bitter against me, whether
you ever read any man give a higher respect to those Oracles then my self. See
my words Sure-Footing p. 40. and 146. which you might have had the Candor to
acknowledge. And as for the Author of Rushworths Dialogues whom you accuse of
the same crimes I know not whether you will take my word or no, but I assure
those who will, that when on occasion I was moving him to write a Comment on
the Books of the New Testament, he shook his head and replied! Ah, Sr, do you
know what you ask? They are so full of profound heavenly sense, that it is
beyond the wit of man to declare it without injuring it; assuring me it was to
sublime a task and required such perfection of Science especially Divinity,
that he durst not undertake it. I challenge you therefore as you hope to be
held an honest man, to show me any one expression in all my writings, where I
speak of the Letter of Scripture in Complexion with it is Sense, (which only is
truly Gods word); otherwise then with highest reverence; nay of that very
Letter as managed by any method of arriving at a Certain and determinate Sense
of it but with respect. For otherwise the mere Letter of Scripture quoted by
the Devil and taken in his sense is the Devils Word, not Gods, and for the
same reason the same Letter cited by you to signify your Sense is your Word,
(though you tell your Auditors boldly that all is Gods Word you talk out of the
Pulpit) unless you first make Evident you adhere to a Certain method of
interpreting it right, which you shall never evince; nay Certainer and Solider
then is the living Voice and Practice of the Church Essential, which you so
laugh at, and would persuade your Readers to renounce and disbeleeve it to
adhere to your Grammatical Quibbling and Criticisms. So that all your anger at
us in reality springs hence that we will, not let Your Word be taken for Gods,
and honored (forsooth) and reverenc't with a sacred and Divine veneration.
Hence all this heat and foam of ill language. And, good reason, for this one
point of not permitting your private Interpretations of Scripture that is your
Word to be held Gods, so deeply concerns your Copyhold, that, if this cheat
be once discovered, your self, all the Books you write, nay all your whole
Profession signifies just nothing. This short and plain Discourse once
understood by our Readers, as I hope it will, your fierce Calumny against me
as a Blasphemous person devolves to this that you venerate your own Talent or
Fancy in sencing the Letter of Scripture as a most Sacred thing, nay place it
in stead of the Holy Ghost who first dictated that Sense to the Divine Writers.
And can you do me a greater Kindness than to discover this, and be so highly
concerned for it?

9. You tell the Reader p. 13. that whatever I attribute to Scripture for
fashion's sake, or (say you) to avoid Calumny with the vulgar, as he says
very ingeniously in this Explication of the 15th. Corollary; nevertheless it is
plain that according to his own Hypothesis, he cannot but look upon it as
perfectly useless and pernicious. By which words you would make me acknowledge
I attribute nothing to Scripture but to avoid Calumny with the vulgar: whereas
in the place you cite there is no such matter; but only that some of our
Controvertists (not I) condescended to the Protestants sleight-way of quibbling
out of Scripture, lest they should calumniate them to desert Scripture it self.
But this is your usual sincerity.

10. You quoted (after you have discours't as if there could be no use of
Scripture besides making it the Rule of Faith) And that it is intolerably
pernicious according to his Hypothesis is plain, because every silly upstart
heresy fathers it self upon it; and then quote for these words Sure-footing. p.
40. But look there and one may read, I speak of Scripture only as ill-manag'd
by you; that is, putting it without any distinction of the Persons in the
peoples hands, and leaving it to their Interpretation to make use of it for a
Rule of Faith. Now, if Scripture as mis-manag'd bear the same notion with
Scripture it self, then you have dealt very honestly, and done me no Kindness
in falsifying my intentions evident from my words in that very place, and
inveighing against me accordingly. As for your next citation, that
Scripture-words, not senc't, nor having any certain Interpreter (under which
notion I express my self to take them) are waxen-natur'd, that is, appliable to
diverse senses, it is so beat out by manifest experience, that it is beyond
Cavil to confute it; and the very Disputes between John Biddle and the
Protestants is sufficient to evince it. But your Candor is pleased to confound
Scripture's Letter taken as unsenc't, with the same Letter as taken with it is
true Sense, that is, taken as God's Word; and that Letter as taken without any
Certain Interpreter, with the same Letter as certainly interpreted, and then
who so abominable miscreants as the poor Papists; who must be forced to say,
not what themselves in reality say, but what their disingenuous (though even
therein kind Adversaries) will needs have them say.

11. Your third Section tells us that you are much puzzled for Instances of
Traditions Followers differing in Faith; and you are so put to it that you
cannot I mean (you will not) distinguish between the Head of our Church acting
as a Definer of Faith or Proceeder upon Tradition, and acting as a prudent
Governor. Please then to take notice how this Affair of Censuring Books is
managed. Diverse Books, perhaps of twenty several Authors are ordered to be
read over by some Divines, and their Judgments concerning them to be given in,
which they do: The Chief Officers of the Church perhaps have twenty other
things to handle that very day; and Themselves have neither leisure to peruse
the Books, nor discuss the Propositions; which coming clad in a Theological
dress would in Prudence require a great deal of deliberation ere any of them
were expressly and particularly to be declared against with it is peculiar
Censure. All that the nature of their Circumstances permits them to do is to
trust those Divines, and to proceed accordingly, to warn the Faithful to
beware of those Books, in which they are informed there is such danger. So that
the motive those Governors proceed upon is their care of preserving the
Faithful untainted, and the Judgment of Divines, not Christian Tradition. And,
what motive proceed those Divines upon in these Censures? Upon their best skill
as Divines; that is their best skill in drawing Consequences; in which neither
themselves nor any else say they are Infallible; Thus much for the Censurers.
Now come we to the Person censured and his Books. Of what nature are they?
Theological Discourses. And what do such Discourses rely on formally? On
Tradition? Nothing less: On this he relied as a Believer or Christian, not as
a Divine, but on his own humane skill in explicating Faith or it is Ground, and
his talent in deducing right Consequences, in which also he and every man
Living is Fallible: You see, Sir, by this time the ripe fruits of your
performance in this point, and that you have brought a worthy Instance of
Difference amongst Reliers on Tradition, in a passage wherein neither side rely
on Tradition Oh, but they contradict one another in the very point of
Tradition: It Is your weak and unproud conjecture; and besides you cannot (I
mean still, will not) distinguish between the Substance of Tradition (that is
the Infallibility of the Living Voice and Practice of the Church Essential in
conveying down uninterruptedly Christ's Doctrine) and the Explication of it;
show the Church of Rome condemns the former and you have my free Confession I
am at a loss for my Faith. But, though you show she condemns and censures all
the later, that is all the Explications whether made by that Author, my self,
or any other, yet, as long as she condemns not the former, she has done
nothing against Tradition; and so your wise Instance is spoiled, as it was no
other likely, being the weakest you could have invented against Tradition, and
the least concerning it; in regard there is not one learned Catholic in the
Church that looks upon the Acts of the Roman Inquisition in Censuring Books, as
on Infallible Definitions of Faith.

12. You Will ask, where lies the Fault in such cases? I answer, no where that I
know; not in the Head of the Church, who acted the most prudently and carefully
that could be in such an affair; neither censuring any particular Proposition,
where there was no more Certainty to ground that Censure, than the Judgment of
some Divines; and yet providing by the Caution his censure imported that the
conceived harmfullness in those Books might work no ill Effects: whence it is
but an invidious presumption of your own, that perhaps the Pope is censured for
it in England. Nor, were those Roman Divines Faulty in case they judged
secundum ultimum potentiae; but were bound in conscience to give in to the
Court what they thought. Again, those Explications of Divinity-points looking
new to them, and it being the natural Genius of the Followers of Tradition to
be jealous of any thing that is new, and this not only in Faith but also in
Explications of Faith, in regard these pretend a coherence and connection with
Faith it self, it seems to me to sound a laudable zeal both in them and others
to be suspicious of and less a Friend at First to what is new, 'till it be
farther looked into and appear innocent. Nor can I say it is a Fault in the
person censured, in case he sincerely meant to write what he judged was truth
and so most advantageous to the Church, and submits to the Orders of his Chief
Eccesiasticall Superior. You see, Sir, the whole case: in which I am larger
because you are kinder here than ordinary; and, your Instance falling
pitifully short, you piece it out with Falsehoods (p. 22.) that we in England
censure perhaps the Pope for this Action; that the person censured disobeyes
the Summons of his Chief Pastor; that p. 24. the Governors of the Church do
professedly cherish Ignorance in the Generality of the Papists for the
increasing their devotion. These are grear favors indeed: you are too
liberal, Sir, and will undo your self unless you restrain your hand from this
profuseness of kindness.

Your 4th. Section is all Reason, and (like the foregoing one in which you laid
your grounds and fell to build) so strong and firm that it needs more than an
ordinary blast to blow it down. Therefore I conceive it is best to stay a while
and gain more breath, which is something short with me at present.

13. But your fifth even kills me with Kindness, and acquaints the Reader with
a dangerous oversight of mine enough to overthrow my whole Book. It Is this,
that I make Traditions Certainty a First and self-evident Principle, and yet go
about to demonstrate it; which you soberly admonish me to take heed how I take
it upon me; that Aristotle never demonstrated First Principles, because they
could not be demonstrated; that most prudent men are of Opinion that a
self-evident principle, of all things in the world, should not be
demonstrated, because it needs not; you ask, to what end should a man write a
Book to prove that, which every man must assent to without proof so soon as
it is propounded to him etc. Now, Sr, in my mind you should only have combated
this, and have given no other Answer to my whole Book but to this only: for
nothing can be so senceless nor so impertinent as to go about to prove that
which that which can need no proof, nor consequently less meriting an Answer. I
would then, had I been in your case, have thought it my best and most
honorable play, to omit all counterfeitings of my Adversaries defining, all
those multitudes of groundless Cavills, voluntary mistaks, Calumnies, laughing
at his First Principles, Evidence, demonstration, etc. together with all my
wordish exceptions at his rumbling Rethorick, perching upon the nature of
things, and other such expressions; and have solely applied my self to this one
Folly evacuating his whole Book and so excusing my Answer; And this you might
have done with far greater hopes of conquering than in any of the rest;
because, that a First and self-evident Principle cannot be evidenc't seems so
clear that it even looks like a First Principle it self, of which no other part
of your confutation has the least Countenance or resemblance: And be assured,
Sr, since you would not use this advantage against me as you might, you shall
never have me upon the like lock again.

Caught in these streights by your entangling Logic I endeavor my escape on
this manner. Self-evidence is twofold, Speculative and Practical. Speculative
self-evidence it that which cannot be made Evident by any Speculation or
Skill, but is known merely by the common light of understanding: such is that
which is found in those Principles I dicourst of before, which were therefore
Self-evident speculatively because, their Subject and Predicate being the very
same notion, no other middle notion could come between them, by connection with
which they might be shown connected with one another: You remember them I
suppose; it was they that made you and your Friends such sport in your Book.
Practical Self-evidence is that which we are not thus imbued with by nature
through the common light of Understanding, nor yet is it acquired by rational
Discourses, (for this is Evidence by-deduction, not Self-evidence) but that
which is stolen into us as it were at unawares by a common converse with things
in this world, which all mankind in a manner even those who are very rude are
acquainted with. Examples of the former are (if you have done laughing) A Rule
is a Rule, Faith is Faith, also A whole (or a part and more) is more than a
part; or, is a part and more. Examples of the later, for your better
satisfaction, I propose three or four. One shall be that in a square space
it is a nearer way to go from one corner to that which is opposite, by the
Diameter, than to go by the two sides. Another shall be that, things look less
afar off and bigger neerer-hand. A third shall be that (abstracting from
madness) it is impossible Mr. T. or any other such (you see how kind I am to
you) should take for his Text The Fool has said in his heart there is no God,
and at the same time, and in the same circumstances things stand now in
England, should preach Atheism and endeavor to persuade them out of that very
Text, there is no God. The last shall be the Existence of Q. Elizabeth or K.
Henry the 8th. Now I affirm that all these are Practically-self-evident: for it
was not by virtue of Speculative discourses the vulgar arrived to the Knowledge
of these and such like things (as is evident by this that they know not how to
prove these, or give an account of their assent by way of evident discourse)
but by virtue of the common knowledges of things in the world they are
acquainted with. Now what is thus self-evident is so far from being impossible
to be evidenc't Speculatively, that it is the proper task of Learned men (by
which I mean not those tedious mighty men of Talk, who think it an excellent
confutation of Sense to cavil at words and Expressions) to look into Nature,
and discover or (if you be not offended) demonstrate what were the proper
Causes which wrought thus, after a natural manner, that Effect called
Certainty in rational Souls as to all the aforesaid particulars; which found,
they will appear to be the mediums fit to demonstrate that Effect. That this
is so in the two first Examples, you are so well skilled in Euclid, and the
mathematics (though one Prophet T. says I have not read him) as to know that
notwithstanding this Practical-self-evidence all mankind has of them,
Mathematicians notwithstanding go about to demonstrate them speculatively
without fearing to do a needless action, out of the nature of Quantity; as I
make account I could demonstrate the 4th. and the 3d. too out of the nature of
Man, or out of this (if you please) that a man is a man or a rational
Creature, that is a Thing that acts not, if he have the use of Reason, without
a motive.

To come nearer home, I concieve that it is to all unprejudic't and
unpreoccupated Understandings, as are all Catholics who have not their Faith
from skill but by the natural way of Education. Self-evident Practically, that
the Doctrine delivered now as taught by Christ and his Apostles, by such as
profess to have it by way of Tradition or uninterrupted Succession from them,
is truly their Doctrine; or, that the Certainty of Traditions conveying down
matters of Fact is practically-self-evident; and thence I proceed to look
speculatively into the Causes of such an Assurance, and so demonstrate it.
Which when I go about, I discover that, besides what ascertained Humane
Tradition in witnessing the Existence of Henry the 8th. or any other matter of
Fact, infinite Advantages were found in Christian Tradition enabling it to
bring down the first-preach't Doctrine above what was found in them. But I
expatiate too far.

I hope by this, Sir, you see at length what my whole Book ayms at; though
(good man) you were so taken up with cavilling at little wordish Exceptions you
spied it nor before; that is, to demonstrate by way of Speculation what I
conceived before to be self-evident practically; you see also at the same time
how infinitely you oblige me by professing your Ignorance of this point; for
in so doing you profess withal that you are utterly Ignorant of what my whole
Book meant. And, are not you rarely qualified to be an Impugner of my Book,
who are so perfectly to seek in knowing what is the main end it drives at? Is it
not evident hence that your endeavors to confute me can never go to the
bottom of the difficulty, but only talk superficially, that is wordishly and
withal mistakingly to some passages in it? Surely, plain reason tells us in
every ordinary affair that if one man understands not the main end the other
ayms at, however he may talk prettily and express himself in good language,
yet he can never speak home and to the purpose. And as this is plain a priori
from it is proper Cause, your Ignorance of my main intent, so you have
abundantly demonstrated the same a posteriori in your whole Book; which no
where (as I hope to show you hereafter) begins at the bottom; but is wholly
made up of a great many aerie gay prettinesses, such as best befits one who
mocks at Evidence and Demonstration. But it is no matter your Friend Mr.
Stillingfleet will extol you for it the more, and the Generality of your
party, who are accustomed and educated by you to loose sermonary Discourses
will like it the better; whereas, had you professed the way of Evidence, you had
been charactered by him as monstrously opinionated of your self, and that kind
of Readers, your only admirers, would not have understood you.

14. Your second Part treats about the Properties of the Rule of Faith, and
whether they agree solely to Orall Tradition. I assigned seven; of which you
are pleased to mistake quite no fewer than all. But I must not here take notice
too much of your Reason, but of your Kindnesses contradistinguisht by your
Friend Mr. Stillingfleet to your Reasons, that is, which are Irrational.

You tell me p. 57. that I might have learned something from the same Author
from whom I borrowed my Chief Properties of the Rule of Faith, if I had but had
the patience to have considered his Explication of them. Surely, learned Sir,
you have great skill in Judiciary Astrology; or else you deal with Lilly, and
Booker; or perhaps have an enchanted Glass which discovers to you all I do in
my study. For you know exactly all I do there; nay which is yet more
wonderful, all I do not. You know better than my self I never use to read the
Fathers; you can pronounce fearlesly that I never read Euclid, and here you can
tell to a hair where I borrowed my Chief Properties of the Rule of Faith, and
that it was Dr. Holden' s Analysis. What Mephostophilus reveals these secrets
to you? But, Sir, I beg your pardon; I will not put this gift of yours upon
such a score: you are a Divine, and so no doubt know these things by the Spirit
of Prophecy; nor am I a little proud to know that so great a Prophet is so near
related to me by his Friendship and Kindnesses. But, Sir, take heed; even holy
men and Prophets themselves have been deceived sometimes. I need not quote
Scripture to you, how a certain person offered to be a lying Spirit in the
mouth even of Prophets; and as for your present Prophecy I do faithfully assure
you that I never read a leaf in Dr. Holden's Analysis in my life; nor knew,
till your Book told me it, he treated at all of the Properties of the Rule of
Faith. The occasion of this neglect was that I was told he went the way of
Rushworth's Dialogues, which I made account I comprehended sufficiently, and so
minded not to peruse it. You see, Sir, what you gain by being persoually
affrontive; which you exceedingly affect in your Book to me and others; and so
studiously endeavor it that to find occasions for it, you stick not to say the
most false and unjustifiable things rather than not humor that Infirmity of
your Will. Now your Kindness in this partinular carriage consists in this, that
you discover plainly a resolution to cavil though you engage your self by that
means to assert things which may easily be false, and which it is impossible
for you to prove or justify were they true; which signifies you are neither too
civil, over honest, nor endowed with any exceeding proportion of Prudence. But
Mr. Stillingfleet likes you never the less for it, and perhaps will proclaim
your praises the louder for your victory, however achieved by Stratagem. Dolus
an virtus. --

15. You are pleased p. 60. to Cavil that the words absolutely ascertainable
to us (are as you who are master of Language, and so may say any thing, deliver
your self) most contradictiously expressed. And why? because they import, with
respect to us, without respect to us: As if it were such an unheard of thing
that the word absolutely should ofttimes signify perfectly, as when we say
absolutely good an absolute Workman, Scholar, etc. And then I beseech you
inform me what Contradiction there is in saying the Rule of Faith is perfectly
ascertainable to us. Besides you should as well have placed the contradictio^
in the words absolutely ascertainable. For if it be once sense that it is
absolutely ascertainable, it cannot be ill to add to us; for the word
ascertainable implies a respect to some or other. On this occasion (that I may
not trouble my Reader often with such nitty Exceptions, with which your Book
abounds) it were not amiss to reflect how industriously your friend Mr.
Stillingfleet and you, who, as it is most sit, echo mutual praises to one
another, affect and pursue such empty cavills; any misplac't word whether it
happen through the Compositors letting it in, in a wrong place, or printing it
whennot sufficiently blotted out in the original; any less propriety in an
expression, occasioned by the have I was in when I writ my Appendix against
him, which was sent to the press in loose Quarters of sheets; any Metaphor
which light unsuitable to your Cavilling Genius, as that of perching, which
makes your self verry jollyly merry; any pretended degree of obscurity in a
word, as that of Regulate in stead of Rule; any expression that sounds not
roundly and tersely Rhetorical, in a book in which I meant no Rhetoric at
all: These and diverse others such wordish Faults or no Faults, ('it is all one
with you) are judged mighty pieces of ignorance according to the genius of such
aerie kind of Schollarship; and great Triumphs made upon them. Whereas I should
rather wish to combat the inward meaning and sense of a discourse than it is
outward dress or manner of expression, provided the manner of expressing wrong
not that sense. Hence I except mainly against the Titles of Mr. Stillingfleets
and Mr. Tillotsons books: It being both highly improper and abusive of the
signification of words to call that a Rule which is Confessedly possible to be
False, that is which possibly has no power in it to rule at all; and equally
absurd to call that a Rational Account of any thing which is built on no
First, that is Self-evident Principle, without which no rational discourse can
subsist nor Conclusion be deduc't, as I showd lately 5. Unless perhaps Mr.
Stillingfleet takes Rational as we use the word reasonable when we say a
thing is reasonable strong, that is we hope it will hold, but yet we see not
but it may break. This is my way of excepting; but were Mr. Tillotson to work
upon the word Rational it is good luck he is Mr. Stillingfleets dedicated and
dedicating friend, for otherwise it is forty to one he would have about with him.
And first he would have called the Title of his Book, his Definition of it; and
then have fallen foul with him for setting forth a Book to Englishmen and using
the word Rational which was nearer the Latin, instead of the word Reasonable
which was plain English, and so more intelligible to his Readers.

But enough of these Fooleries; it is now high time I return to my Friend and
his Kindnesses. Your present one, Sir, (which I acknowledge common to you and
your Friend, and you ought to applaud one another for it) consists in this:
that by your magnifying and frequently insisting upon exceptions against my
words, not upon a Logical score, because they are Equivocall or injure the
Sense we are discussing, but upon a Grammatical, or Rhetorical, that is a
Superficial account in which the point under debate is no way concerned, is a
very hearty acknowledgment to your Reader that you value the aerie gingling of
words more than the solid substance of Sense; which discovers you, how much
soever you have read, noted and scribled, to be very Empty of true Learning or
Science: This is a real Kindness, Sir, and I humbly thank you both for it.

Your second Section and some following ones for the main part of them speak
nothing but pure Reason; I mean in your way, that is sophistically and
knowingly deforming every passage you meet with. Yet to do you right you speak
a great Truth in the beginning of your 4. p. 65. when you say, And thus I might
trace him through all the Properties of the Rule of Faith; for nothing is more
Certain than that. Thus, that is, handling things as you do, one may do any
thing, nay even write a Book against the First Principles themselves. The Rule
of Faith being confessedly the means to arrive at the Points of Faith, and the
Sense or meaning of Scripture being the Points of Faith, it follows unavoidably
that the Protestants must say (if they will speak sense) that the Rule of Faith
must be the means to bring them to the Sense or meaning of Scripture; for
which, according to them, the Letter of Scripture as significative, being
sufficient, it is consequent they can only mean by Rule of Faith the Letter of
Scripture as significative of God's Sense or Points Faith. I beseech you, Sir,
what say you to this Discourse? Do you answer it, or show that, if you take
Scripture in any other Sense for Rule of Faith than as thus considered, you do
not confound the Rule of Faith with the Points of Faith? Not a jot. Nor is it
your fashion to speak to my Reasons, or Consequences. Thus you answered my
First Discourse, the most solid and most Fundamental part of my Book?
Deforming the plain sayings I built on for Definitions, denying my conclusions
in a following Section, and saying something against them; but not a word I can
find any where against the Proofs which inferred them, deduc't at large there
for 14... together; that is from 2. to the end. Your way of answering is
generally when you are gravelled with the Reason, to bring some ridiculous
Parallel, then laugh heartily and mock at that, and so discountenance the
other. But here to do you right, you bring two very good ones, but the comfort
is you understood them not to be such, else we should not have had them;
which you put a little oddly and then triumph, and think your self victorious.
Pray Sir, lend me your Parallells a while to manage. The first of them is found
p. 62. concerning which I thus discourse. Taking the Statute-book for the means
to convey to us the Sense of that Book or the Laws, I must still say you cannot
mean by Statute-book the Sense of that Book or the Laws, that is that Book as
conjoined with it is Sense, for so it would signify that the same Thing is a
means to it self, that is, is before and after it self: you must only mean
then by Statute-book, thus considered, the Letter of that book as yet unsenc't,
or contradistinguisht from the same book as conjoined with its sense; that is,
the Letter of that Book as Significative. Thus I conceive it perfectly
parallel to mine, and withal very rational. But you make it amount to this
p. 62. l. 13. That a Book cannot convey to a man the Knowledge of any matter,
because if it did it would convey to him the Thing to be known. The later part
of which is true though I percieve you know it not; for these words [Knowledge
of a matter] involves in their signification [the thing Known] as if you
reflect on your own words, Matter and Thing, you will quickly discover. But the
Sophistry lies in this, that when you say, a Book cannot convey, etc. you
equivocate in the word Book, which I contend must either be taken for the
Letter of it in conjunction with the Sense which is the thing known, and then
it cannot thus accepted, be a means of arriving at the Knowledge of the Thing
or the Thing as known, for then it would signify as much as if one should say,
the Letter with the thing known is the means of arriving at the thing known; or
else, it must be taken for the Letter as Significative only, or without the
Sense, and so it may be conceived a way of arriving at that Sense it is judged
apt to signify. But, Sir, your contending here against a thing so Evident has a
great deal of reason for it; you would have the outward Letter of Scripture
confounded with the Sense of it, that those who hear you quote the Letter, may
thee fooled to imagine you have still the Sense aoo; whereas, should these be
known to bear distinction, it would be very obvious to question whether you
speak any thing of God's Word, or no, how much soever you have the outward
Letter in your mouth and pen; Which reflection alone if it were considerately
weighed, would spoil all your writing and preaching too: For thus go your First
Principles; The outward Letter lying in a book must first be called God's
Word, and held so plain that it cannot be misunderstood; and then the Sense
you give it must needs be held God's Sense; which politic Principles laid, I
see not what you are inferior to those whom the Holy Ghost inspired; and your
sayings are to have the same force, if the plot take, as the words of a Prophet
or Evangelist. And who would not be angry, fume and take on against a
Discourse which is likely to divest you of so considerable and beneficial a
Prerogative?

Your second Parallel applies my Distinction concerning Scripture to Orall
Tradition; for you have a special Faculty of your own in making men contradict
themselves; thus you used a whole cluster of our Authors p. 119, 120. and as
for poor me, if you take me underhand I can scarce speak a word consonantly.
Now, Sir, we are thus far agreed, and better Friends than you took us to be
that I allow your Parallel to a tittle, and stick not at all to grant what you
would force upon me p. 63. that, When I say Orall Tradition is the Rule of
Faith, I can only mean by Orall Tradition the Living Voice and Practice of the
Church as apt to signify the Sense of Forefathers; and not the Sense, or those
Points of Faith which they are apt to signify. Also that those Words and
Practices taken formally as the means to know Points of Faith are
contradistinguish't from that Sense, or those Points, and opposed to it
relatively as a means is opposed to an End; and therefore taken as considered
in this abstraction and contradistinction as a Means to cause their actual
Sense in us, I say those Words and Practices are without Sense; in the same
manner as a Means, taken formally for such, is without the End, and excludes it
from it is notion. All this I voluntarily grant, and least you should conceit
your strong Reason has brought me to it, I let you know I ever took them so
formerly: See Sure-footing p. 41. 2d. Edition (which I still intend to quote),
By Orall or Practical Tradition we mean a delivery down from hand to hand (by
Words and a constant course of frequent and visible Actions conformable to
those Words) of the Sense and Faith of Forefathers. Where you see I make Sense
or Faith the thing delivered; and Words and Actions the Way of delivering:
which therefore must needs exclude one another formally. Yet you think you have
gotten a notable advantage against me by this Parallel Discourse, telling
your Reader p. 63. When he has answered this Argument he will have answered
his own. A shrewd Opponent! who confutes me by putting me to answer an
Argument, thinking it would puzzle me grievously, which is my own express, and
avowed Doctrine. Is not this a strange mistake?

But, Sir, let me reflect on my Obligations. First you write a Book against
Tradition, and yet discover plainly in this last mistake, you understand not in
what I put Tradition to consist, that is you impugn, I thank you, you know not
what. We are like to find a wise confutation of it when we come to examine
it is rational part, which still misses in what is most substantial and
fundamental. Next, you revile me all over as abusing Scripture for unsenc't,
or without Sense when we speak of it as your Rule of Faith; and yet you see
now we speak the same of our own as to that point; which I am sure you think
me too highly venerate; and your mistake springs hence that (which is a shame
for a Scholar, especialy for one Mr. Stillingfleet so highly praises) you
understand not the nature of Abstraction, and imagine and represent me to say
it is devoid of sense, senceles without sense etc. Which I no where affirm of it
absolutely butas it is abstractedly considered as a means to arrive at Sense,
and as so taken it must not be conceived as having that Sense which it is a way
to arrive at. Once more for all (that I may clear your mistakes to you) know
that we make account there is the same reason for our Rule's being only
significative or a way to Sense, that is, as such not-yet senc't, as for yours:
but we put the difference here that we make account Living voice and Constant
Practice of the circumstant Faithful of the Church Essential is by our
perpetual comnverse with them and other conveniences so perfectly
significative of their sense in delivered points or points belonging to
natural Christianity, that they leave to the Generality no possible ambiguity
or occasion of mistake; the persons being alive to explain themselves in any
such Difficulty, if their carriage and Expressions could possibly leave any;
whereas the Letter of Scripture as left to be interpreted by private heads, is
given both by reason and Experience to be diversely interpretable; and cannot
by way of living voice apply it self pertinently to explain its own meaning
when it is sense is perverted by any; but lies at the mercy of the interpreters
pretending to draw it into different faces, by alluding one place to another,
Criticizing, and other fallible knacks. You make a great noise all over your
Book as if we would make God unable to write intelligibly; but you beg the
question all the while, which is whether God intended the Scripture for a Rule
of Faith or no; for if not, then why is it not as intelligible as it need be?
Again, the question is whether God intended it for every private man to
interpret, or rather that they should hear the Church in that as well as in all
things else belonging to Christianity: If he did, then They (not God) lead
themselves into error though their Spiritual Pride, which makes them usurp
the Churches Prerogative. But Tuetullian long ago has given you the best Answer
(de Praescrip. Haer. c. 39.) Nec periclitor dicere ipfas quoque Scripturas sic
esse ex Dei voluntate compositas ut haereticis, materias subministrarent; cum
legam oportere haereses esse quae sine Scripturis esse non possunt. Nor am I
afraid to say that the Scriptures themselves are so framed by the will of God
that they should afford matter to Heretics; for I read that there must be
Heresies, which without the Scriptures could not be. I hope now you are
satisfied that Tertullian is as great a Reviler of the Letter of Scripture as
is your Friend I. S.

As for the point it self it needs no more to evince it to any except verbal
Cavillers, but this; That Sense is no where formally but in intelligent Things,
that is, in our case only in men's minds; nor can it be otherwise in words
then as in Signs that is Significatively. Since then I deny not but the
protestants are to hold Scriptures Letter Apt to signify Gods Sense, as is seen
Sure-footing p. 13. the very passage you cavil at, I wonder what you would
have, or upon what Grounds you can require more.

You proceed as if you meant to overwhelm me with your Favors and tell the
Reader p. 64. it is pleasant to observe with what cross and untoward Arguments
he goes about to prove dead Characters not to have the Properties of a Rule
of Faith. May not one without danger of infidelity fear, Sir, that as some
vessels give every thing that comes into them a tincture of the ill sent with
which they are imbued; so every thing that passes into your Fancy grows cross
and untoward by a predominancy of those Qualities there? You will give the
Reader a taste or two you say, but the artificial sauce you add to it will be
found to alter quite the natural one of the dish it self.

The first taste is that I say It cannot be evident those Books were writ by
men divinely inspired, till all the seeming Contradictions be solved. Upon
this your fluent wit works thus. How can this be an Argument against those,
who by Scriptures must mean unsenc't characters. I had thought Contradictions
had been in the sense of words not in the Letters and Characters; but I
perceive he has a peculiar Opinion that the four and twenty Letters
contradict one another Sir. I perceive you have been used formerly to be
humm'd at the University for breaking Jests when you should dispute, and have
taken such a liking to the Grande (...) of those Applauses, you cannot for your
heart yet wean your self of that merry pin of Fancy. But though you be
pleasant as you say and follow your sport yet I must be sober and regard the
profit of our Readers. I discourse then thus. Contradictions are formally in
men's minds, and significatively in words. Since then in the very place you
quarrel at I allow your Tenet to be necessarily this, that those Characters
are Significative of God's Sense, my discourse runs evidently thus. Since God
cannot tell a ly, or, (which is all one, signify a Contradiction) if the Letter
of Scripture cannot be cleared from being Significative of Contradictions it
cannot be held of God's enditing. See you any occasion, Sir, in this plain
discourse which can deserve such mirth and triumph. You might have pleased then
after my words that the Protestants must mean by Scripture, unsenc't
Characters, have added what imediatly follows there p. 13 with their Aptnes to
signify to them assuredly Gods mind, which I repeat again in the same place,
and then where is the difficulty? It being very good reason in my mind to say
that Gods Spirit cannot order words to be written which signify a ly. But this
passage, dear Sir, shows plainly you value honesty and fair dealing much less
then your Jest, dismembring a Sentence which ought necessarily go all together,
to gain a sorry occasion for your pastime and merriment.

The next taste you give of me is enough to give any Reader who loves sincerity
a whole belly full of your manner of confuting. It Is found p. 65. where you
make me say that the Scripture cannot be the Rule of Faith, because those who
are to be ruled and guided by the Scriptures Letter to Faith cannot be
Certain of the true Sense of it. Upon this you descant thus. Which is to say
that unsenc't Letters and Characters cannot be the Rule of Faith, because the
Rule of Faith must have a certain Sense, that is, must not be unsenc't Letters
and Characters; which in plain English amounts to thus much, Unsenc't Letters
and Characters cannot be the Rule of Faith, that they cannot. Here is not much
rumbling of Rhetoric (as you call it p. 63.) but here is a strange jumbling of
Sense. Let Us see if I can set right what you have taken such pains to disorder.
I discourse then thus, Points of Faith are determinate Senses, and Faith is
Certain; therefore the Way or Means to Faith, that is the Rule of Faith, must
be a Certain Way of arriving at those determinate Senses: These Senses (say
you Protestants) are arrived at by the Scripture's Letter signifying it to you,
therefore you must be Certain by it that those Determinate Senses were meant
by God. Not that the Rule of Faith was those Senses, but the Way to them, and
They the End of it, of which that Rule must be significative (as I all over
expressed) and so it was properly related to those Senses as the thing Signified.
Whence in proper Speech they are to be called its Sense; in the same manner as
it is called my Handwriting which my Hand writ, though neither my Hand is the
writing, nor involves writing in any part of it is Definition, but is
distinguished from it as Cause from Effect; nor yet does the Letter taken as the
Way to Faith, or God's Sense, imply as any part of it self the Sense it is to
cause in my Knowing Power. If by this time you be awake you will see how you
wilfully abuse me, and how far I am from tautologizing, which for a blind to
avoid a more pertinent Answer you pretend. The pith of the Cavil lies in those
words in your Descant; The Rule of Faith must have a certain Sense, that is (as
you put it upon me) it must not be unsenc't Letters and Characters, or it
must be senc't Letters, etc. Observe the words have and be: the former of
which means no more than when we say a Cause must have an Effect; but we do
not therefore infer that the Cause taken as a Cause has in it self that very
Effect which it produces in another; for Example, the Fire which causes or
heats is not heated, not the Cold that cools cooled; nor for the same reason
the Letters which are the Cause of Sense in us are not, as such, senc't, that
is have not that very Effect in themselves which they produce in another, viz.
in the understanding: For Senc't means made to be understood, and they cannot
be made to be understood, taken as significative or as the way to be
understood. I hope by this you see how the Rule of Faith being the Means, Way
or Cause of arriving at Faith or Sense may have a certain Sense, caused by it,
as it is Effect, and yet it self not be or include the Effect it causes in
another, but for that very reason exclude it, and so be unsenc't; but yet
significative, or apt to be senc't.

After this follows the Triumph. And thus I might trace him through all his
Properties of the Rule of Faith. Which I heartily yield too, and I believe my
Reader that examins these Passages will be verily persuaded not only that you
may do it, but that you will do it, it is so natural to you, and necessary to
boot. Now the greatest Favor you have done me herein is that by a few
unselected Passages you have so acquainted our Readers with your manner of
writing and what may be expected from it, that it will render it needless for
me to spend time in laying you open any farther. Besides I foresee your Reason
(such as it is) begins to come into play. Yet some few Favors scattered here
and there, will, I fear, not cease to solicit my Gratitude.

You drop some of them upon my Friends. Capt. Everard you say (p. 75.) or his
Friend affirm there are plain contradictions in Scripture, impossible to be
reconciled, and therefore Protestants ought to submit to the Infallibility of
the Church; instancing in the third Series of Generations, Mat. 1. said there
to be fourteen; yet, counted, amount but to thirteen. And, has he not good
reason? since neither can Scripture alone recommend it self to an Unbeleever to
be of God's enditing if it be found by him to be significative of
irreconcilable Contradictions, and so needs the Churches Authority to
ascertain it to be such; nor can we have any security such Contradictions
might not be found in the main points of Faith themselves, did not the
Churches Faith writ in her heart keep the Letter of it safe from such enormous
Corruptions. Yet you must have your jest, and to bring it in you constantly
mistake on set purpose; asking (p. 76.) if the Infallibility of the Church can
make Thirteen Fourteen: notwithstanding you say p. 75. this difficulty has been
sufficiently satisfied by Commentators: I suppose therefore you judge those
Commentators have sufficiently satisfied you that Thirteen are Fourteen: Any
body can sufficiently satisfy any difficulty with you, provided the Church and
her Infallibility have no hand in it. On this occasion I beseech you, Sir, give
me leave to ask you what Commentator has reconcild that most Evident
Contradiction in your Translation of the Scripture. Look in your Psalms put in
the Book of Common Prayer, and there Ps. 105, v. 28. we have these words; He
sent darkness and it was dark; and they were not obedient unto his word But in
the same Psalm and verse put in the middle of the Bible, these: He sent
darkness and made it dark; and they rebelled not against his word the former
place says they were not obedient the latter they were obedient. I suppose you
conceit (mistaking the whole thing) your Church without Infallibility can
reconcile those things, which ours even with Infallibility is at a horrible
puzzle with.

Mr. Cressy's turn is next; against whom you have many a fling, but one
especially p. 93. because he says Schism is impossible in our Church. Which
you call absurd and ludicrous; you tell him he cannot deny but it is possible
for men to break from our Communion: but that the Subtility of it lies here
that therefore Schism is impossible in our Church, because so soon as a man is a
Schismatic he is out of it. This done, you ask. And is it not as impossible
in the Church of England? Sir, I must tell you your whole Book in a manner is
compounded of putting tricks upon your Adversaries; that is putting their
sayings upon such accounts they never intended, and then impugning your own
fictions. It Is not on the impossibility of any going out of us, nor merely
because whenany one is out of our Church, he is not in it, we ground the
Necessity of our Churches Unity; but in this that her nature and Constitution
is so framed that she can admit no division in her Bowels, but keeps her self
distinguished from Aliens. If any one recede from Faith it must be by not
hearing the present Churches living voice teaching him points which the
Knowledge Practice and Expressions of the Teachers determins and make Evident
what they are; whence his disbeleef, if expressed, is an Evident matter of Fact
which is most apt to make a plain distinction between the disbeleever and the
Believers, and an Evidence beyond Cavil for the Church Governors to proceed
upon. This done (as likewise in the case of high disobedience against
Church-Laws, or Governors) she Excommunicates, that is solemnly separates the
Schismatic Offender from the Obedient Faithful; Hence those Faithful look
upon him as a Rebel or Outlaw or (as our Savior expresses) as a Heathen or,
Publican; no Church Officer admits him to Sacraments but upon his penance and
Satisfaction, nor any Son of the Church will communicate with him in Sacred
duties. Pray you, Sir, is this the Temper of your Church of England? Your Rule
is the Letter of Scripture as conceived significative of Gods word, and this to
private understandings. Again you say all necessary points of Faith are plain
in it, nay that nothing is fundamentally necessary but what is plain there.
Hence all that hold the Letter to be plainly Expressive of Gods Sense and
intend to hold to what they conceive plain there, whether Socinians,
Anabaptists, Independents or whatever other faction, all hold to your Rule of
Faith, and so are all Protestants. For, if you would ty any of these to any
determinable points, you force them from the Rule of Faith, Scripture as
seeming plain to them, and would instead thereof bring them to a reliance on
your Judgment. And if you would punish them for not doing it, you cannot
evidence their Fault by way of matter of Fact, that so you may proceed upon it;
for, as long as they profess their intention to hold to what seems plain to
them in Scripture, and that your Text seems less plain to them there than their
own, you ought not to proceed against them Ecclesiastically without
disannulling your avowed Rule of Faith. And your carriage executes accordingly
neither using Church Discipline against them for Tenets, nor yet for denying or
disobeying your Government, Episcopacy, though held by you divinely instituted:
When did you put any distinction by any solemn Ecclesiastical declaration
between an Anabaptist, Presbyterian, Socinian etc. and your selves? When did
you excommunicate them and warn the purer Protestants by any Public
Ecclesiastical Act not to join with them in Sacred Offices, but to look upon
them as Aliens? Might not any of them come to receive the Communion, if he
would? or has any discipline past upon him to debar him from being admitted?
None that we see. Your Party then in indeed no Ecclesiastical body, cohering
by Unity of Tenets or Government, but a Medly rather consisting of men of any
tenet almost, and so bears division, disunion and Schism, that is, the Formal
cause of Nonentity of a Church, in it is very Bowels.

These two flams of yours, are, Sir, the Favors you have done my Friends; and
I can only tell you in a country complement, I thank you as much for them, as
if you had done them to my self.

Seeing your Reason begin to play it is part bravely in the following part of
your Book, I thought I had done my duty of Thanking: but I percieve one main
Engine your Reason made use of was to make me perpetually contradict my self.
And this you performed by singling a few words out of my Book from their
fellows, introducing them in other circumstances, and so almost in every
Citation falsifying my Intentions; and this purposely, as will be seen by this
that you practiced design and Artifice in bringing it about. This obliges me,
in stead of making an End, to return back; and to show how sincerly you have
used me in almost all your Citations.

I omit your false pretense that I meant to define, contrary to my express
words.

You tell your Reader p. 11. That if any presume to say this Book, (Scripture)
depends not on Tradition for it is Sense, then the most scurrilous language is
not bad enough; then are those Sacred writings but Ink variously figured in a
Book, quoting for those words App. 4th. p. 319. But if we look there, not a
word is there found of it is depending or not depending on Tradition for it is
Sense nor of making that the Cause why I used those words you object, and cite
for it; but only that whereas my Lord of Downs says his Faith has for its
object the Scriptures, I tell him that since he means not by the word Scripture
any determinate Sense (which is the formal parts of words) he must mean the
Characters or Ink thus figured in a Book, as is evident; there being nothing
imaginable in them besides the matter and the form which, every Scholar knows,
compound the thing. This being then the plain tenor of my discourse there, and
not the least word of Tradition sencing Scripture. Whatever the Truth of the
Thing is, it is evident you have abused my words as found in the place you cite.

My Citation p. 12. which abstracts from what security we can have of those
parts of Scripture which concern not Faith, you will needs restrain to signify
no security at all either of Letter or Sense: which is neither found in my
words nor meaning.

How you have abused my words [to avoid Calumny with the Vulgar] cited by you
p. 13. as also the former of those cited p. 14. I have already shown. 9, and 10.

P. 17. You quote my words, It Is certain the Apostles taught the same Doctrine
they writ, whence you infer they writ the same Doctrine they taught. Which your
introducing Discourse would make to signify an Equality of Extent in Writing
and Tradition, by saying I grant this Doctrine (which signifies there the First
delivered Doctrine) was afterward by the Apostles committed to writing.
Whereas, whoever reads my 29th. Cor. will see I can only mean by the word same
Doctrine, a not-different Doctrine. Whatever the truth of the point is, this
shows you have an habitual imperfection not to let the words you cite signify
as the Author evidently meant them, but you must be scruing them to serve
your own turn.

You quote me p. 36. to say, that Primitive Antiquity learned their Faith by
another method a long time before many of those Books were universally spread
amongst the Vulgar. The sum of your Answer is, that when the Apostles who did
miracles were dead, Writing then became needful: But that in those
Circumstances Orall Tradition was a sufficient way of conveying a Doctrine.
What I note is that you ended your citation at the words [before those Books
were universally spread amongst the Vulgar] but had you added what followed
immediately to complete that period, [much less the Catalogue collected and
acknowledged] you had been put to confess too that Tradition was a sufficient
way for diverse Ages after the Apostles were dead, which had been little
favorable to your Tenet. I complain then that by citing me by halves, as you
do frequently, you slip the answering better half of my Arguments; and, here
particularly, as appears by the words [much less] that part in which I put the
most force.

P. 41. You put me to say expressly that Tradition is the best way imaginable
to convey down such Laws to us. Now if by the word such, you only meant such
as it concerns every man to be skillful in, and had so expressed it, you had
done well, for it is my position; but you had brought an ill-resembling Instance
of Magna Charta, and make me seem to allow your Instance, and to affirm
Tradition is the best way to bring down Magna Charta, as appears by your words.
Mr. S. says expressly it is; but how truly I appeal to the Experience, and the
wisdom of our Lawgivers who seem to think otherwise; making my word such,
mean such as Magna Charta, which is far from my meaning: in regard I judge not
Magna Charta a thing in which it is every man's particular concern to be
skillful in, but Lawyers only whom others trust; few in England, but they
being thoroughly acquainted with the Laws found there. Take your own Liberty,
Sir, in making Parallells ('it is my Advantage you should, you pick out such
awkward ones) but when you have made them, do not disingenuously put them upon
me, and quote me to say them expressly. Thus you use my words, Why may not he
mistrust his own Eyes, which (p. 16, and 17.) were applied by me to the
business of mistaking or not mistaking in transcribing perfectly a whole Book
or correcting the Press, in which, we daily experience miscarriage; but you
apply these words to your own senceless Parallel of seeing the City of Rome p.
83, and then by such an application endeavor to make them seem ridiculous, as
they must needs for you had discourst ridiculously, and by making them part of
your Discourse, and not taking them as any part of mine, had made them so too.
I could instance in many others of this nature, but I am too long already.

P. 61. being to state the point, you allege my words Sure-footing p. 13. That
the Protestants cannot by [Scriptures] mean the Sense of them, but the Book,
that is, such or such Characters not yet senc't or interpreted. And there you
stop; my immediately following words explaining my meaning are these: that is,
such and such Characters in a Book with their Aptness to signify to them
assuredly God's mind, or ascertain them of their Faith. And this Explication
you omit; which had been nothing had you not made an ill use of that omission;
but your Cavills afterward, and the loud outcries in your Book in many
places, of a senceless Book, my Ignorance of your Tenet, and what not, are all
grounded upon your own fly omitting those words in which I expressed your Tenet
to be, that those Characters were significative of your Faith; and I wonder
what else you would have a Rule of Faith to be but a Mean's to signify to you
God's Sense, or the Faith Christ taught those inspired Writers. It was one of
my requests in my Letter that we might agree to acknowledge what was Truth in
one another's Books; but you use all the Arts Insincerity can suggest to
deprave, wrest or diminish my words, rather than I should appear to speak
reason in any thing. All must be monstrous in your Adversary when your
pregnant Fancy and dextrous pencil come to delineate it; which shows indeed
much crafty wit, but I doubt the Reader will think it argues not too much
Honesty.

I affirmed Sure-footing p. 17. that the numerous Comments writ upon the
Scripture and the infinite Disputes about the Sense of it even in most
concerning points, as in that of Christ's Divinity beat it out so plain to us
that this (to wit to find out a Certain Sense of Scripture by their
Interpretation) is not the task of the Vulgar, that it is perfect phrenzy to
deny it, which you quote p. 85. and diverse other places, leaving out still my
words and sense that [this is not the task of the Vulgar;] (upon which that
whole proceeds) and impugning it accordingly: See your own words p. 86. making
me say The Protestants cannot be certain of the true Sense of it, as if
Protestants and Vulgar were the same notion: Also p. 86. He tells us (say you)
the numerous Comments upon Scripture are an Evidence that no man can be
Certain of the true Sense of it. This improves it into a very ample
Falsification, for the word [no man] excludes all Catholics too, and indeed
all the world, however proceeding to interpret it; whereas I only engage in
the place cited against the Vulgar. And, after you have ended you Confute all
built on your own omission of those important words, you single out (after your
old fashion) two or three of my words ['tis perfect phrenzy to deny it] and
call it, a hot phrase; whereas it is very lukewarm taken in the occasion I
spoke it; namely that the Vulgar could not be certain of the right
Interpretation of Scripture, since even Learned Commentators so strangely
differed about it. How you will clear your self of this kind Insincerity
without casting a mist before men's eyes, that they cannot read right, I cannot
in your behalf imagine.

P. 104, You quote me twice as endeavoring to prove that men may safely rely
on a general and uncontrolled Tradition. Which, though you pretend not my
words, yet I count it an injury to impose upon me such a Sense. Uncontrolled
joined to Tradition is such another Epithet as Sufficient joined by you to
Certainty. I, who contend for the absolute Certainty of Faith, would say
Uncontrollable, not Uncontrolled; for a thing may be Uncontrolled merely
because it had the good Fortune that none had occasion to look into it, and so
control it: whereas nothing can be Uncontrollable but by virtue of it is
Grounds it is built on, preserving it from a Possibility of ever being
controlled. Your intent in producing those two Citations from me is as you
declare it p. 105. is to show the Unhappiness of my Demonstrations, that in
order to demonstrate the uncertainty of Books and Writings must suppose all
those Principles to be uncertain which (I) take to be self-evident and
unquestionable when I am to demonstrate the Infallibility of Orall Tradition. A
hard case! yet it will be harder to come of, for you never are more powerful
than when you use your wit to make Authors fall out with one another, and
unnatural me with my self. But to the point: In the first Citation I say,
That the common course of humane Conversation makes it a madness not to believe
great multitudes of Knowers, -- etc. But I add Sure-footing p. 49. what you
omit, that in the way of Tradition all Deliverers or immediate Forefathers are
Knowers. -- all the Knowledge requisite being of what they were taught and
practic't accordingly all their lives. I beseech you, Sir, are those great
multitudes of immediate Forefathers Knowers when they deliver down a Book for a
right one; that is, do they all know the Translation is right made, the Copy
right printed or written, and all the Perquisits which are needful that they
may be truly said to know this Book is rightly qualified. You see then how far
I am from contradicting my self, unless you show that I hold all Recommenders
or Accepters of a Book to be Knowers, as they are of the practical Doctrine
they were bred and brought up to, which I neither do, nor can with any Sense
profess. The Reader also will see that the stratagem by virtue of which you
made me contradict my self, was your omitting those words of mine which made
the contrary clear.

The next place you cite p. 104. from me to the same purpose, is this, that
none but madmen can suspect deceit where such multitudes agree unanimously in a
matter of Fact. Now the words such multitudes, mean all their immediate
Forefathers qualified as Knowers, as I expressed myself a little before, which
will veryill suit your purpose, in regard the matters of Fact employed about
the delivering a right Book, as in translating, transcribing, pointing right
etc. of which their Senses only can make them Knowers, are so inumerable, and
minute, and yet such that very great miscarriages may ensue upon a very little
oversight, that to think all Forefathers, can know no Fault in any of these
intervened, is such an extravagant conceit, that only a most obstinate passion
could make a rational soul entertain it. The point is at present that you
affect to represent me to the half part, and by that art you take me up
perpetually before I be down; For it is not an agreement in any matter of
Fact, but in such a one as may be known by all, in which I place the force of
being able to oblige others to assent to their proposalls.

You treat me far worse p. 105. making me say that the Providence of God is
no security against those Contingencies the Scripture is liable to, because we
cannot be certain of the divine Providence or Assistance to his Church but by
the Letter of Scripture; which is to put upon me a ridiculous Argument, making
me infer there is no such Assistance, from this, that we cannot be Certain
of it but such a way. Whereas Common sense tells every one that our Certainty
being an Effect of the Thing's Existence, must depend indeed on their
Existence, in regard we cannot be Certain of what is not; But the things can
exist whether we be Certain of them or no; I affirm then and charge upon you
that I have no where either such words or sense in my whole book as you with a
strange precipitancy (to say no worse) affirm p. 104. that I tell you
Sure-footing p. 18. where my discourse only pretends to show that, who will
argue orderly must first be Certain of that on which he builds his Conclusion
ere he asserts the Conclusion it self; This was the tenor of my discourse
there which I conceive to be evident beyond Cavil. If I erred any where 'twas
in supposing you only took from Scripture that God assisted his Church in
preserving a right Copy of Scripture and therefore argued preposterously if you
inferred. God has a Providence over his Church in preserving right Scripture,
therefore it is preserved right. But this I spoke only with an If, and besides
had good grounds for it: For I conceived there being but two ways to know
this, by Revelation which you profess to have only by way of Scripture; and by
natural Reason, whence you could not have it: For however mere nature might
teach it is exact Followers there was a God, and that he had Providence over
his Creatures, (as it taught Socrates, Seneca and such like) yet I remember not
that we have any Ground to say mere nature informed any, God had a Church,
much less that there was no way to Provide for her continuance in Faith, or
deriving his Doctrine down in her, but by way of Books. Hence I concluded and
conclude still it must be either by Scripture or no way you can know God has
such a kind of Providence over his Church.

You are pleased to tell your Reader p. 119. that this Principle [That in
matters of Religion a man cannot be reasonably satisfied with any thing less
than that Infallible Assurance which is wrought by Demonstration], is the main
Pillar of Mr. S' s. Book; whereas I assure you, Sir, the last part of the kind
slur you put upon me, [which is wrought by Demonstration] was never either my
words nor sense; neither Pillar nor the least part of Sure-footing: wherefore,
as you put those words in a different Letter for mine, so you had done well to
have put down the place too where those words were found; which you wisely
omitted. If I had affirmed that that Assurance which grounds Faith must be
wrought by Demonstration, how should I pretend the Vulgar can be saved who are
manifestly incapable of Demonstration, as I also frequently acknowledge.
Understand then my Tenet at length, which you ought to have done e're you begun
to write against it; but that to use your own words you thought it an absurd
and ridiculous study to bend your brains to read my Book as you would do Euclid
p. 292. which yet is no more but to consider attentively my Principles and my
Consequences. My Tenet is that all the Faithful have, and those who seek after
Faith may have, and those who seek after Faith may have Assurance of their
Faith wrought in them by Practical Self-evidence, in the same natural manner,
but with far better Reason, than they believe there was a Henry the 8th. and,
that it is only Scholars that go about to Demonstrate what the Faithful know,
but, for want of Study or Reflection on their own thoughts and on the Causes and
Manners with which they were so assured, are ignorant how to make it out. I
beseech you, Sir, repress this overflowing of Kindness in giving me so many
Advantages against you, and take a little pains to understand what I say, nor
(to borrow your elegant expression p. 292.) suffer your self to be so demurely
discharged of a Study so necessary and so honorable.

I had affirmed in my Letter to my Answerer p. 5th. that it was a civil piece
of Atheistry to say Faith is possible to be false for any thing we know, or
that we have only Probability for our Faith; And you kindly tell us p. 135.
that what M. S. calls a civil piece of Atheistry is advanced in most express
terms by his best Friends. Sir, I account Rushworths Dialogues my best Friend,
and I perceive you abuse the Preface of it notoriously, which was wholly
designed to evince the contrary positions; citing the Author of it p. 132. to
say that such a Certainty as makes the cause always work the same Effect
though it take not away the absolute possibility of working otherwise, ought
absolutely to be reckoned in the degree of true Certainty, whereas he only
tells us there p. 7. that by Moral Certainty [some understood] such a
Certainty as made your cause always work the same Effect; whom a little after
he reprehends for undervaluing this for moral Certainty, which is true (or
Physical) Certainty; putting an Instance of the Certainty he has that he
shall not repeat in order the same words he spoke this last year; and yet
(says he) these men will say, I am only morally Certain of it. Your injury
then lies here, that by leaving out the words at the beginning of the Citation
by moral Certainty [some understood] such a Certainty etc. you make him say
what he evidently makes others say, and condemns them for so saying; for he
is far from abetting their tenet tha a real possibility to be otherwise makes
a true Certainty; but asserts that to be truly Certain which they mistook for
possible to be otherwise or morally Certain; which is the plain tenor of his
discourse, as it is the whole scope of that Preface to force the direct
contrary Position to what you would so disingenuously impose upon him. The two
next Citations are only mistaken; for, it is one thing to say what men would
do, did they love Heaven as they ought, or had they no Interest in their
Souls, another to ask what means is most efficacious to beget a hearty love of
Heaven in their Souls; the prudentialness of their obligation, in case of a
higher probability only, joined with their undervalue of Heaven was enough to
make them miscarry; but it is a question whether 'twas enough to elevate them
sufficiently amidst the Temptations of our three Spiritual Enemies, to
heavenly love so as to save them; or if they be very speculative, against the
Temptations of Fancy and the seeming Impossibility of the mysteries. Also it is
another thing to ask what men should do if there were no Infallibility, or
(which is all one to them) if they hold none; and, whether Infallibility or an
absolute Impossibility Faith should be otherwise, be not incomparably the
best for mankind, and so, laid by God who ever does the best for his Creatures.
As I would not therefore have the Protestants renounce all practice of Religion
because they have not an Infallible means of knowing their Faith to be true;
so neither do I doubt, but had they such Assurance, their Faith would work
through Charity with far more liveleness and steadiness than either it now does
or can do.

You abuse what you cite from me p. 140. by impugning half the Sentence only;
the other half would have discoverd I spoke not of man's nature according to his
moral part, but according as it is cognoscitive and this chiefly in natural
Knowledges imprinted directly by his Senses on his Soul. Represent things
truly, and then dispute as much as you will, otherwise you but injure your
self and abuse your Reader, while you go about with a preposterus Courtesy to
oblige me.

P. 145. According to your usual sincerity you quote Rushworth's Nephew to say
that a few good words are to be cast in concerning Scripture for the
satisfaction of indifferent men who have been brought up in this verbal and
apparent respect of the Scripture; to which you add, who it seems are not yet
arrived to that degree of Catholic Piety and Fortitude as to endeavor
patiently the word of God should be reviled and slighted. Whereas in the place
you cite he only expresses it would be a Satisfaction to indifferent men, to
see the positions one would induce them to embrace, maintainable by Scripture.
Which is so different from the invidious meaning your malice puts upon it, and
so innocent and unoffensive in it self, that one who were not well acquainted
with you and knew not your temper and over good nature to be such that you
cared not to undo your self to do your Friend a Kindness, would wonder with what
Conscience you could so wrest and pervert it.

P. 146. You mention my explaining the notion of Tradition, which you carp at
as tedious; and yet (as we have seen by frequent experience) all was too
little to make you understand it, though I endeavored there according to my
utmost to render it unmistakable. But you mistake it here again, objecting that
I instance in set forms, the Creed and ten Commandments, whereas the Apol. for
Tradition says That cannot be a Tradition which is delivered in set words. It
had been better you had put down that Authors own words Apol. p. 81. which are,
A Tradition (as we have explicated it) being a Sense delivered etc. for why
was it not possible he and I should explicate it diversely? But to the point. I
speak of Tradition or delivery, you and the Apology of a Tradition or the thing
delivered, which you confound. Now a Tradition or point delivered being Sense,
and Sense abstracting from my particular manner of expressing it, he had good
reason to say there, that a Tradition is a Sense settled in the Auditor's
hearts by hundreds of different Expressions explicating the same meaning; nor
do you any where find me say but that, though the Creed and Ten Commandments
be the shortest expressions of the main points of Speculative and Practical
Christianity, and so most suitable to the young memories I speak of, yet I no
where say that Forefathers expressed the Senses contained in them no other way;
or, that they did not deliver them in hundreds of different Expressions,
according as the manifold variety of occasions and circumstances, accidentally
lighting, prompted the Fancies of the Teachers after a natural kind of manner
to declare themselves. You see, Sir, how unfortunate you are still when you
would make us contradict our selves or one another; And the civillest Excuse
for your perpetual failings herein is to allege that you are utterlyignorant
of what you would impugn; and I wish that were the worst.

You put upon me p. 152. that unless a person to be converted can demonstrate
one pretended Rule certain and Infallible, the other not, he has not found
out the Rule of Faith. I wish you had told us where I say this, for I must
disavow it as directly opposite to my Doctrine which is that our Rule of Faith's
Certainty is Practically-self-evident, and known by virtue of an obvious
familiar conversation with the nature of things, and, therefore, that persons
to be converted may come to Faith without demonstration at all. I may perhaps
say that in an Assent thus grounded there is found at the bottom what is
demonstrable by a learned man, or apt to yield matter for a demonstration; but
that those who come to Faith must demonstrate or frame demonstrations (which
it is manifest only Scholars, and good ones too, can do) is fa from my Tenet,
however it is your Kindness to put it upon me, right or wrong. You shall take
your choice whether the Reader shall think you understand not the Tenet you are
confuting, or that understanding it you wilfully injure it.

You proceed p. 153. that according to Mr. S. Reason can never demonstrate that
the one is a Certain and Infallible Rule, the other not. That never is a hard
word; and it will seem wonderful to some Readers I should say Reason can never
demonstrate this, and yet in that very Book contend to demonstrate it by Reason
my self; nay make that the main scope of my Book. But, Sir, those Readers, know
not yet the power of your wit and sincerity, which can make me say any thing,
nay say and unsay as it pleases. Yet you quote my express words for it,
Sure-footing p. 53. where you say I [tell you, Tradition has for it is basis
Man's Nature, not according to his Intellectualls, because they do but darkly
grope in the pursuit of Science, etc.] I deny them, Sir, to be my words or
sense; you have altered the whole face and frame of them by putting in the word
Because, which makes me discourse as if man's Intellectualls could never
arrive at Evidence nor consequently Certainty; and you keep the Reader from
knowing the true sense of my words, by curtailing the sentence with an [etc.]
my words are, not according to his Intellectualls, darkly groping in the
pursuit of Science, by reflected thoughts or Speculations, amidst the misty
vapors exhaled by his Passion predominant over his rational will] which
discovers I speak of our Intellectualls placed in such circumstances, or
employed about such a matter, as our Passion or Affection is apt to blind and
mislead us in it, which we experience too too often. But do I therefore affirm
our understanding can never arrive at Science at all, or that our Passion
exhales vapors to hinder us from seeing the Truth of the first Proposition in
Euclid; or was it ever heard that any man was transported so by his Passion as
to deny there was a Henry the 8th? Or can any one out of Passion be ignorant
of or forget what is inculcated into his Senses almost every day, which
natural Knowledge, I there make the Basis of Tradition? Pray, Sir, reflect on
my words once more and on the Tenor of my Discourse, and you shall see it
only says, that Tradition has for it is Basis man's Nature, not according to
his moral part, which is of it self pervertible, nor yet his Intellectualls as
subject to his Moralls, but on natural Knowledges imprinted by direct
Sensations, not subject at all to his Will, but necessary and inevitable: and
when you have done this, you will easily see how you injure me, though I
expect not from you any Acknowledgment of it. You commit those Faults too often
to concern your self in such a trifle as any handsome Satisfaction.

Your next Citation p. 153. lays on load. It Is taken out of my 2d. Appendix p.
183. My whole Discourse there is to show how Reason behaves her self in finding
out the Authority she is to rely on that this is God's Sense or Faith, and how
in the points of Faith themselves. Concerning the former I discourse there. 3.
and have these Expressions, that No Authority deserves assent farther than true
Reason gives it to deserve; that the Church's Authority is found by my Reason
to be Certain; that it is perfectly rational to believe the Church assuring
me the Divine Authority is engaged for such and such points; that Gods and the
Church's Authority as Objects imprinting a conceit of themselves in my mind as
they are in themselves, obliged my Reason to conclude and my Judgment to hold
them such as they were; nor have I the least expression of diffidence of
natural Reason's certifying me perfectly of the Ground of my Faith, which can
no ways be done by Acts of reflected Reason, (which I there speak of) but by
demonstrating it. After this. 4. I come to discourse how differently Reason
bears her self in order to the points of Faith or the mysteries themselves.
Hereupon I have these words. p. 183. Reason acts now much differently than
formerly. Before I came at Faith she acted about her own Objects, Motives or
Maxims by which she scanned the Autho rities we spoke of; but in Acts of Faith
she has nothing to do with the Objects of those Acts, or Points of Faith.
Then follow immediately the words you cite, She is like a dim-sighted man; who
used his Reason to find a trusty Friend to lead him in the twy-light, and then
relied on his guidance rationally without using his own Reason at all about the
Way it self. Which most plainly signifies, that, as a dim-sighted man cannot
use his Reason about the Way, for that required, it should well affect his
Senses, and imprint it is right notion there, (which it did not,) but yet could
use his Reason about choosing a trusty Friend to guide him, for this depended
not on his dim-sight, but the converse and negotiation with his neighbors and
relations which he had been inured to, and so was capable to wield and manage
such a Discourse: So our Reason, dim-sighted in the Mysteries of Faith in which
neither Senses nor Maxims of Human Science had given her light enough, could
not employ her talent of discoursing evidently and scientifically to conclude
the Points of Faith themselves; but yet was by Motives and Maxims within her
own Sphere, enabled to scan the nature of Authorities, and find out on which as
on a trusty Friend she might safely rely. This, Sir, is evidently my
Discourse, from whence you will needs force me to say Reason is dim-sighted
about the Authority we come to Faith by or the Rule of Faith. Now my whole
Discourse in that very place aiming at the direct contrary, and you leaving out
the immediately foregoing words which clearly discovered it, I hope you will
not take it ill, Sir, if I tell you I fear any sincere Examiner of it will
judge, that though you hold Plaindealing a Jewel, yet you would not be
willing to go to too much cost for it. Especially when he reflects that you
build better half your Confutation in your Book on such kind of willing
mistakes, and hope to blind it and make it take by Sophister-like quibbles,
flouts and jeers with which you use to sound your own triumph. I expected,
sweet Sir, some First Principles of your Discourse, and I see now you intend
those Artifices for such; none else have I met with, nor do you build on any
thing so much as these; but, one of these laid for a Ground, you run on with
such a Carreer as if you would overthrow all the Sense and Reason that ever
comes in your way.

You tell me p. 158. by a parallel Discourse to mine against my Lord of Downs
that my demonstrations are none unless I vouch some particularity in my Method
above what is in others, which p. 160. you say you remember not I have done any
where. It seems you read my Transition not with any sober intent to understand
it and speak solidly to it, but only to carp at it, and break jests upon it.
Have you so soon forgot the pleasant mood it put you into p. 3, and 4. I
contest then that the Method I there declare my self to pursue is particular
above what I ever observed in any of your Controvertists; not that they want
better Parts to lay it, but because they want a good Cause to bear it, and give
them leave to follow it. I declare also that I hold that Method sufficient to
demonstrate by, though I pretend it not the exactest than can be made. As for
those great men whom you allege to differ in demonstrations, (Charles Thynn I
leave to bear you company, you are both such merry Blades) I doubt not but,
were the business well examined, their differences spring from not attending
heedfully to the Method of concluding; and that no miscarriage could ensue in
any Discourse, were the way of Discoursing perfectly laid, agreed to, and
exactly followed; nay that those few Differences amongst Geometricians arise
from the same defect; as, were it seasonable, I could show particularly (with
the help of a Friend, you must think) in that famous one about angulus
contingentiae. But to our present purpose; meethinks, Sir, you may remember, a
thing called a Letter to my Answerer, where I endeavored at least at some
means to settle some particularity in our Method above what has been practic't
in other Controversies formerly, begging you would agree to it that so we
might both follow it; but you would have none you thank't me: Since then you
would not accept it when offered, you should not ask for it again when your
Book is writ and the Circumstances of using it past. But perhaps there lies the
policy of it! You end with a Glance or two at my Self-confidence? But are you
Prophetical in this too, Sir, that it is some proud and vain humor in me, and
not rather my Assuredness of the Truth of my Cause, and of the Conclusiveness
of my Method, which makes me deliver my self undauntedly? See my Letter to my
Answerer where I have these words p. 18. By this means it will be quickly
discovered whether or no you have overthrown my Discourse by showing it
ill-coherent, and how far it is faulty: that, if I cannot clear it to be
connected, I may confess my fault and endeavor to amend it. For, however I see
my Grounds evident, yet I am far from judging my self Infallible in drawing my
Consequences: though I see withal the Method I take, will not let me err much;
or, if I do, my Error will be easily discoverable; because I go not about to
cloud my self in Words, but to speak out, as plain as I can, from the nature of
the Thing. Had you a desire to practice the due candor toward me I should
have done to you, you would not have sought occasions to put in upon a
personal priding my self in my performances, which I so frequently disown and
place all my advantage in my Cause and my Method. But you are angry I deliver
my self so boldly in what I take to be Truth; I beseech you, Sir, is it not
natural for any one who judges he speaks what is Evident, to express himself
fear lesly when he disputes against an Adversary of the Truth whose Cause he
has espoused; as, it is on the contrary for one who judges he has only
Probability for what he says, to speak dis-confidently, and condescendingly,
and when he indeed sneaks not daring to speak out, then to praise himself and
his party for modest and moderate men? You know by experience, Sir, it is. Has
there in our late age come out a Book more brisk than this of yours, not in
asserting, but in scorn, and proud petulancy, and (which is to be pitied)
proud of an aerie jest or some gay conceit? Shall I be bold to tell you, Sir,
what is Self confidence? To undertake to write a Discourse about the Ground of
Faith, without so much as one Principle that deserves to be called such to
bless himself with; to lay for Grounds all along Falsifications of his
Adversaries meaning and words, and then quibbling, taunting and vapouring as if
all the world were his own. Lastly, to tell his Auditors soberly and sadly out
the Pulpit all is God's Word he preaches, and press they should believe him;
and yet when he writes against us, confess all he preaches concerning
Salvation and the Way to it, may possibly be false; that is, for any thing he
absolutely knows, he has not told them one true word all the while. This, Sir,
I must needs confess, is such a Heroic strain of self-confidence that, however
it be familiar and natural to others, yet I despair for my part ever to
attain it. To bear ones self as holding a thing a demonstration which he judges
he has Evidence that it is such, is a puling and trifling kind of selfconceit;
but to carry it out with the greatest Formality in the world as if it were most
Certain, and yet hold at the same time and profess it is possible to be false,
that is, may for any thing any man knows, be shown false to morrow, is a noble
and gallant Self confidence, and such a one as fears not the face of any man
living.

P. 161. You come to examine my demonstrations a priori, and in order to it, my
four Grounds, which you affirm you will set down in my own words. Which
intimates you did not do so formerly, though it be your duty to do it always;
However it is a Kindness which I am bound to thank you for, and as far as I
discern you have not faltred in it, of which I here make my hearty
Acknowledgment. But, Sir, may I not fear this particular Resolution of yours
here to be Sincere springs hence, because in this Sect. 2. where you put down
my words, you do not yet go about to apply them to your Discourse, and attempt
to confute; which in your next Section p. 163. you endeavor? I foresee you
will be shrew'dly tempted there, for want of other Answer, to break your
resolution; till we come there then I leave you with my hearty wishes of
strength and constancy against that habitual Infirmity which so often overcoms
all your resolutions of that nature.

And we are now come to your third Sect p. 163. (the place of the trial of
your perseverance) where you begin your confute; and contend first that my
Demonstration would conclude too much viz. as you tell us p. 164 that if it
were true, it would be impossible any Christian should turn Apostate or
Heretic, or that any Christian should live wickedly. I marry, this were a rare
Demonstration indeed! But, how comes my demonstration to be thus guilty of a
plot to make all the world Saints, or rather of drawing after it a Conclusion
so extravagant. By virtue of a direct Falsification both of my words and Sense,
by cogging in a word little in show but very large in Sense, namely the
monosyllable [All] making my Principle run thus that the greatest hopes and
fear are applied to the minds of all Christians; which you put down here in the
Italick letter, the same you quoted my words in. I beseech you, Sir, review my
own words put down lately by your self p. 161. 162. at what time you made that
good resolution, and see if any such word be there; But, what is most material
is this; Let the Reader survey your following discourse which aims to confute
me, and he will see'tis wholly and solely built on this word All, so that
your own Falsification is still the First Principle, which gives the Strength
and Life to your Confutation. What use you make of it may be seen p. 164 l. 8.
That any Christian etc. Ib. l. 12. That any Christian should live wickedly l.
18. That any Christian should turn Apostate l. 26. But all Christians have
those Arguments of Hopes and Fears strongly applied. l. ult. It Is necessary all
Christians. Again p. 165. l. 3. (which I desire the Reader to note that he may
see how bold you are in your imposing things upon me) If these causes be put
in all the Faithful actually causing as (say you) Mr. S. says expressly in his
Grounds; Whereas I assure the Reader Mr. S. says expressly no such thing. But
to proceed p. 165. l. 8. and 9. It Is impossible there should be any defection,
etc. l. 14. It Is impossible any single Christian. P. 167. It concludes there can
be no Heretics or Apostates etc. This, dear Sir, you use me: First you put
upon me other words and meaning, and then overthrow most powerfully not what I
said or meant, but what you had counterfeited me to do; which victorious way
of confuting runs thorough the better half your Book.

You affirm p. 165. that I liberally acknowledge in other places this (to wit,
that it is impossible any single Christian should either totally Apostatize or
fall into Heresy) is a genuine Consequence from my Principles. Surely, Sir,
your great plot is to have me thought a direct mad man or Frantic; For never
did any man moderately in his wits advance a Position and pretend to
demonstrate it, which is contrary to the Eye sight and frequent Experience of
the whole world; nay write a whole Chapter as I did Sure-footing p. 65. how
Heresies come in, and yet maintain in the same Book no man can turn Heretic
that is that no Heresy could ever come in. Well, but what are those other
places which must prove me a liberal Acknowledger of such an unheard of
Paradox? You assign four places p. 165, and 166. The first you introduce me
thus. He tells us (and then you quote my words from Sure-footing p. 54.) That
it exceeds all the power of Nature (abstracting from the Cases of madness and
violent disease) to blot the Knowledges of this Doctrine out of the Soul of one
single Beleevor. I assure you, Sir, I tell you no such thing, and that I have
neither those words nor sense in my whole Book, which makes me doubt you did
not so much as make a resolution here to set down my own words, as you did
formerly; and I wish for your own sake, you did not resolve the contrary. My
Doctrine is that the Knowledges of this (or Christ's) Doctrine, may be blotted,
not only out of the Soul of one single Believer, but all Believers, in case it
be laid there only opinionatively, or imprinted slightly by a fleeting Sermon
or wordish discourse, apt to go in at the one ear and out at the other. My
words in that place cited are these? It exceeds all the power of nature
(abstracting from madness and violent disease) to blot knowledges THUS FIXED out
of the Soul of one single believer. And, what mean the words [thus fixt] it is
told you in the same p. 54. in Sure-footing, that it is by so often repeated
Sensations; which (in the foregoing page, where that discourse begins) is
explained to be, by Impressions upon the Senses, not made once but frequently,
and in most, many times every day; and that to make those more express and apt
to be taken notice of, their lives are to be framed by the Precepts they hear
and conformable Examples they see. All this is impli'd in the words [thus fixt]
as found in that place; which therefore being very prudent in your generation,
you demurely omitted; else it had seemed no great Paradox (which it is your
constant endeavor to make me still speak) that no one man, unless mad or
much diseased, can forget what he daily experiences in others others and
practices himself. But, grant all true you pretend to, and that every man must
needs have or retain the knowledge of Christ's doctrine however imprinted; yet,
do I any where say that no man can act against knowledge, and so relinquish
Tradition, and by that means turn Apostate or Heretic? when you find that
Position in me, cite it, and let us see it, otherwise barely to allege me
saying they cannot but know it, argues not I say they must necessarily follow
it. The last of those four Citations which you bring for this point p. 166.
immediately follows this first (now discust) in Sure footing p. 54. whence it
concerns the same matter, namely the Indelibleness of Knowledges thus fixed out
of the Soul of one single man; as is Evident to him that reads the passage in
it is proper place; though false dealing be so natural to you, you assure the
Reader p. 166. that in the full career of my bumbast Rhetoric I deliver it
(that is, as you express it a little before the Impossibility that Tradition
should fail in any one single person) roundly without fear or wit; whereas
neither there nor in that whole Discourse is there one sylable concerning
Traditions being adhered to or not adhered to, (this Subject beginning the next
Discourse in these words, All this is well, may some say, in case Tradition had
been ever held to) but only of it is Certainty or Regulative virtue, founded on
natural Knowledges imprinted by frequented Sensations in such a manner as is
impossible to be blotted out in one single Testifier or part of Tradition. I
am loath to think or say too hardly of you, Sir, only I say it is strange a
mere Chance should produce so constant an Effect of perverting my Evident Sense
(often times words too) in each passage. It may be the reason of your mistaking
me here and in some other passages was this, I minded not Rhetoric at all,
but only Sense; and you, (as became a solid Confuter) minded not the Sense at
all but only the Rhetoric: which by me was never aimed at either there or in
any other part of my Book: If what I write be Truth, and my Expression
Intelligible, I have my End; and can without Envy permit you to dress up your
own Falsehoods in the gingle of periods and empty flourishes.

The second place brought to make me liberally acknowledge that it follows
from my Principles no man can possibly relinquish Tradition is found in you p.
165, and 166. and thus; Since no man can hold contrary to his knowledge, nor
doubt of what he holds, nor change or innovate without knowing he does so, it
is a manifest Impossibility a whole Age should fall into an absurdity so
inconsistent with the nature of one single man. Is here any liberal
acknowledgment that no man can desert Tradition? Or is there a word here to
that purpose? but only, that no man can doubt of or hold the contrary* to what
he knows, nor go about so visible an action as innovating without knowing he
does so; with which yet may well consist that not only one single man but all
mankind may (for any thing is there said) knowingly and wilfully desert
Tradition and turn Apostates. I wonder, learned Sir, what you are akin to that
Philosopher who maintained Snow was black! you have so admirable a faculty of
identifying the most disparate nay contrary notions; and by a knack of placing
things in false lights, make even Propositions which signify the self-same,
become perfect Contradictions.

The third place of mine, which you say must make me liberally acknowledge it
a genuine consequence from my Principles that it is impossible one single man
should relinquish Tradition, is cited by you p. 166. from Sure-footing p. 87.
That it is perhaps impossible for one single man to attempt to deceive
posterity, to which you add in another Letter [by renouncing Tradition]. It had
been better in such nice points to put down my own words, especially when you
put them in a different Letter. Mine are, It Is perhaps impossible that they
should mislead posterity in what themselves conceit to be true; which is
different from the Words and Sense you represent for mine; for many weak
persons by Sophistry or fine words pretended from Scripture and baptized God's
Word, may be inveigled to conceit that Tradition is false; in which case
should they renounce Tradition, yet they would not therefore mislead posterity
from what they conceit true; which is all I there say or undertake for. But,
the main is, you represent me to say, it is perhaps impossible in one single
man; which reaches any man whether good or bad; whereas my discourse there
proceeds upon good and holy men only. It begins thus p. 89. For, supposing
Sanctity in the Church, that is, that multitudes in it make heaven their first
love -- had those Fathers, (that is those Holy men) misled Posterity, etc. and
then follow some of the words you cite, I mean all of them that are mine. This
being so, be Judge your self, Sir, whether (bating you the perhaps, and
speaking absolutely) it be not impossible for one good and holy man to mislead
posterity in what he conceits to be true; and whether it may not consist well
enough with this branch of my discourse, that great multitudes may turn bad,
that is, choose some false good for their last end; and then, out of affection
to that, disregard what is true, what is false, and mislead their children
contrary to their own knowledge.

You say p. 171. that the only thing I offer in that discourse to prevent this
Objection is this Sure-footing. p. 65. It Is not to be expected but some
contingencies should have place where a whole Species in a manner is to be
wrought upon, etc. And, had there been no more, me thinks it might have made
you wary to challenge me with the direct contrary, had you not resolved to lay
the necessity of my contradicting my self in every passage for one of your
first Principles to confute me with. But I offered far more and more obvious
preventions than that. See the immediate Conclusion from my Grounds put down by
your self p. 162. which one would think should inform you best what is the most
genuine consequence from the same Principles; This put, it follows as certainly
that a GREAT NUMBER OR BODY of the first Believers, and after-faithful in each
Age, would continue to hold themselves, and teach their children as themselves
had been taught, that is, would follow and stick to Tradition, etc. Does a
great number or Body signify all, not one excepted, which you falsely put upon
me? How disingenuous a proceeding is this; to persuade your Reader those are
not my Consequences from my Principles which I make my self, but those which
you make for me? and how do you make them? by perverting constantly my words
and sense. Again, you know I had writ a discourse, declaring how Heresies came
to be introduc't, and therefore one would think any sober Confuter that were
not bent upon Cavil, ere he had challenged me to hold that no one man could
possibly turn Heretic, that is, that no Heresy could possibly come in, should
have looked first in that place to see how and by what means I made Heresies
actually come in. But you were resolved beforehand what to do; that is, to make
me speak contradictions, and so it was not your Interest to see it or take
notice of it. Otherwise, there you had seen me prevent all the imputations
which you by virtue of your forged monosyllable [All] had put upon me. See
Sure-footing, p. 66. We will reflect how an Heresy is first bred. We must
look then on Christ's Church not only as on a Congregation, having in their
hearts those most powerful motives -- able of their own Nature to carry each
single heart possessed by them, -- but as on the perfectest form of a
Commonwealth, having within her self Government and Officers to take care all
those Motives be ACTUALLY APPLIED AS MUCH AS MAY BE to the subject Laity; and
that all the sons of the Church, etc. -- notwithstanding, it happens sometimes
that, because it is impossible the perfection of discipline should extend it
self in so vast a multitude to every particular, some one or few persons by
neglect of applying Christian motives to their souls, fall into extravagancies,
etc. -- and -- if Governors be not vigilant and prudent, draw other curious
or passionate men into the same faction with themselves, which words would have
clearly shown you that, for want of due application, (which was one of the
requisites my demonstrations went upon) the Cause fell short of producing its
effect of adhering to Tradition. And this you might have seen nearer hand,
namely, in the foregoing Discourse, the very same which pretended to
demonstrate; where, speaking of the Application of the Cause to the Patient p.
63. 64. 65. I end thus: In a word, Christianity urged to execution, gives its
followers a new Life, and a new Nature; than which a nearer Application cannot
be imagined. So that you see I make account it is Application depends upon it is
being urged to Execution; and what is it that urges things to Execution, but
Government and Discipline? I wish, Sir, when you are to confute a rational
Discourse, you would not stand running after Butter-flies, and catching by the
way childishly at this little word, and the other little word, to play upon
them jestingly; but have patience to read it thorough, and take the whole
substance of it into your head, and so endeavor to speak to it solidly. This
is the way to benefit your Readers, (to whom you owe this duty) nay a far
better to credit your self with understanding men, than all those petty tricks
of impertinent Wit, and ironical Expressions, which you so passionately dote
upon.

I am heartily weary of so illiberal a task as to spend ink and paper, much
less time, in discovering men's defects; and I assure you, Sir, I am very sorry
your carriage made it necessary; whereupon, though I see much rubbish of this
nature behind, and have overslipt too very much, yet I should have ended, did
not I find my self highly concerned to defend one Assertion of mine, than which
you (who use no hot phrases, but are all Civility and Sweetness) say p. 173.
nothing can be more impudent; I humbly thank you, Sir. This most impudent
position is this, that Sure-footing, p. 65. being to meet with the Objection,
that there have been many Heretics or deserters of Tradition, I say, If we
look into Histories for experience of what has past in the world since the
first Planting of Christianity, we shall find far more particulars fail in
propagating their kind than their faith. Now, Sir, if this be proved not at
all impudent, which you judge most impudent, I hope the rest, which you judge
less impudent, may easily pass for blameless.

Let Us to work then, and because it is your business as well as mine, I beseech
you lend me your thoughts to go along with mine from one end of the 7th.
discourse in Sure-footing to the other, Company may do much in making them
attentive; otherwise, I see plainly they will stand loitering and gazing by the
way at this odd word, or the inelegancy of that phrase, or noting some passages
that may be prettily mistaken and make excellent good sport; by which means
You who as you say p. 292. are apt to unbend your brains without bidding, will
hardly ever be drawn to go forwards with a deliberate pace half the way. In
the said discourse then p. 65. you see I design to clear an objection of my own
which I conceived obvious, namely that there have been actually many Heretics
or deserters of Tradition. I make my way to it p. 66. by asserting that the way
of Tradition is as efficaciously established in the very grain of man's nature as
what seems most natural, the propagation of their kind: Hence I come at last
to that most impudent assertion that more have faild in propagating their kind
than their Faith. Proceeding to prove it, I show p. 66. how Heresy, or a
failing to propagate Faith, happens; and, I allow p. 68. that it must be
performed by deserting Tradition, and choosing (at least for a show) another
Rule, that so they may have occasion to break from the former Church. But I
affirm withal p. 65.. 3. that as soon as the breach is sufficienly made, and
the novellists begin to be shaped into a body, whatever for a show they still
would seem to keep to, yet that they presently desert the new Rule they had
taken up, and the natural way of Tradition again recovers it self; that, the
Reformers themselves make use of it to keep their company together; that,
Children are taught they are to believe their Pastors and Fathers even in
interpreting Scripture; that the first Reformers punish them if they break from
their body, and hold not to the Sense of Scripture they give them. And hence I
conclude p. 74. that the number of the Actual deserters of the natural way of
Tradition have been but few, to wit, the First Revolters that the descendents
of these Revolters followed the way of Tradition, however misplac't; then I
added some considerations for Grounds to balance the number of Failers in
propagation with the number of those who faild in Tradition; and as reasons why
I concluded this number less: but you never use to speak to my reasons; only
you mistake my discourse and my conclusion to mean not only the First
breakers, but their descendents too, which I make account return naturally to
the Traditionary way; then you deny and impugn like a learned logician, the
Conclusion it self, amplify strangely upon your own mistake of it, instancing
in all the Countries almost East, West, North and South; triumph mightily, and
would have me show you a whole nation that refused to marry: As if my
Conclusion could not be true, unless such a rare sight were showed you all at
a clap.

E're I come closer to the proof of my Assertion I foresee I am to make good
first that even the deserters of Tradition, when they think themselves
sufficiently enfranchiz'd from the discipline of the former Church and that
their followers settle into a kind of Body under them, bring in again the way
of Tradition, or rather indeed permit nature to work both in the new brood that
grow up under those Fathers who had lately deserted Tradition, and in those
deserters themselves: nothing being more natural than both for the Fathers,
Elders or Governors, to desire and even expect the children, Posterity and
Subjects should follow their judgments, and not to make themselves wiser than
their betters; nor for the descendents and young ones credulously to believe
those whom they looked upon ever with an awe and respect, and to permit their
lives to be framed by their conduct. I affirm then that even in all those
Sects that have fallen from the Catholic Church, whether Protestants, Lutherans,
Presbyterians, or whatever else they be that pretend to hold to Scripture, the
Generality if not all are continued to the former body or immediately foregoing
Generation by Tradition, and not by virtue of Scripture Evidence uniting their
understandings. For what a wild conceit it is to imagine that the Children
throughout a whole Kingdom of Lutherans for example, should still light to
interpret Scripture just as did their Forefather Lutherans and thence
unanimously hold to the Lutheran Profession? And the same in Protestants,
Presbyterians, Arians, Pelagians. And the like may be said in some sort even
of Turks and Heathens, that it is not the virtue of any motive that they go upon
which keeps up a Succession of men of the same Tenet, but the natural force of
Education at first and Custom afterward; which we experience daily to have
so strange a Power, that the most evident Arguments are scarce able to wean
persons, otherwise very rational, from the most absurd and weakly grounded
Prejudices; and that to root out judgments thus planted from their Souls, seems
as violently to shock and strain nature in them as if one went about to tear a
limb from their Body. If it be acknowledged then, as it must, that Education
has such an incomparable force in preserving an unanimousness between Foregoers
and Posterity, and Education consists in making the descendents think and act
as did their Forefathers, we shall discover that Education has in it the very
nature of Tradition; and consequently, that it is by virtue of Tradition any
Sect continues the same; which devolves into this, that, therefore, as soon as
any Sect is formed it returns or slides back (if it continues) naturally into
the way of Tradition.

I am afraid, Sir, by this time you are ready to object (for it is your way, out
of an over-zealous affection to find Absurdities in your Adversary, to catch at
any thing that seems so at first sight without maturely weighing it) that by
this means I make all Protestants, Quakers, nay Turks and Heathens too of our
Religion, by making them follow our Rule of Faith, Tradition; and you have a
little to that purpose p. 147. and elsewhere much more if I remember right.
But, Sir, I shall undeceive you easily, by distinguishing between Tradition
taken at large, or as I call it Sure-footing p. 74. the natural way of
Tradition, and Christian Tradition. That has the abetment, and Concern of many
Natural ties to make it followed, and in Public and universally-concerning
matters of fact, it lays a kind of force upon man's Nature, as in the
Existence of William the Conqueror, Mahomet, Alexander, etc. This has,
besides, Supernatural Assistances of the Holy Ghost, to strengthen the greatest
force of Nature. But to omit other differences, what concerns us most at
present, is, that This pretends to be an Uninterrupted Derivation from Christ,
whence it is called Christian Tradition; whereas any other, for example yours in
following your Forefathers, can pretend uninterruptedness no farther than your
first Reformer; whose immediate Ancestors being Catholic, your chain is broke,
or at an end; whence, for the same reason, this short-lin'd Tradition ought to
be called his, (for example the Lutheran) and not Christian Tradition. The more
therefore you, or any other adhere to any other Tradition, so much farther you
recede from, and are more obstinate against Christian Tradition; since, doing
so, you hold more firmly to that which was a renouncing the other.

These rubs removed, we advance to our point, which is to examine whether, in
likelihood, more particulars have failed propagating their Kind than their
Faith. To do this the shorter and clearer we will pitch upon one Instance
which your self mention, namely, of the vast multitudes which since Luther, in
Germany, Denmark, Sueden, England, Scotland, Ireland, etc. have renounced the
Roman-Catholik Faith. And, since by our former Discourse and indeed common
Sense, none in any of those Countries were Actual Deserters of Tradition (by
which I mean Catholic or Christian Tradition) but those who once held it, which
their Descendents did not, but either followed Tradition at large, or their
Tradition, that is the Tradition of what these Deserters educated them to,
hence we are to exclude all the innumerable Descendents from those Actual
Deserters, as persons unconcerned at all in my Discourse, my express words ever
excluding them. And, because those Deserters began not all with Luther, but
some fell 20. some 40. years after him, I will put my self upon the
disadvantage to put them all to be fallen sooner, to wit, about 20. years after
Luther: it being all one to our Case, for no more could fall but all those that
actually then did fall (in regard we allow their Descendents to continue their
Fathers steps) though we put them to fall all at once. Imagine then that in the
Year 1537. all were fallen that did fall either then, before, (I mean, before
that Year, since Luther) and after that time; what proportion may we conceive
they might bear to all Catholics then living whether in the Greek or Roman
Church, whether in those parts of the world or America, whose Conversion was
then well begun? I conjecture we should be very liberal to grant they
equaled one third (that is were the fourth) part of those who were found
living, in the Year assigned and adhering to Tradition.

This laid, let us consider next how many we may conceive to have failed in
that Year and ever since that is for 128. Years in propagating their kind. And
first we will take a view of those who die by natural Deaths or Casualties,
before they enter into the ordinary Circumstance of Propagation, Marriage; and
yet conduc't, in their proportion, to the instilling Faith into those they
converst with. For, as soon as any arrive to that pitch of age as to express
themselves Christianly in their Language and Behavior, it is evident they
connaturally insinuate into others of an inferior pitch they converse with, to
their slender Degree, the same things they hold and practice; and so are truly
parts of the Church Essential as delivering, or parts of Tradition; and, though
we might begin much sooner to reckon them such, yet we will to avoid dispute
take them from the age of 14. to 24. before which time if any marry, there are
as many that marry later, and if this be not enough to balance it to an
Equality we will allow all lay people that live unmarry'd, and all that marry
and yet die before they have children or never have any, into the bargain.
Those then between the age of 14. and 24. reckoning the whole time of man's
life 90. Years, are the 9th. part of mankind that were found living in our Age.
Putting then all the present Livers in that Age to die in the Year we pitched
upon (that so we may for clearness reduce our Discourse to the same
determinate compass of time) we may well put the 9th. part of mankind living
in that Year to die between 14. and 24. that is, to die without conducing to
propagate their kind, though they contribute to propagate their Faith; and, if
this number be thought too great, because of the healthfulness of that Age,
we will account it but a tenth part, though in truth it deserves to be held
rather an 8th. or 7th. because of the numerousness of that Decad in comparison
of the persons found Living in those Decads, beginning from the 60th. 70th. and
the 80th. Year, which are very few. Certain then it is according to our best
moral Estimation a tenth part of mankind within that prefixed Year die (I mean
a tenth part of those who do then die) who have had a hand in propagating Faith
and not their Kind. Next, let us multiply that tenths part by the number of the
Years elaps't since, that is, from the Year 1537. that is for 128. Years, and
it is plain that we shall have 128. tenths, that is near 13. times as many as
lived in that whole Year. Wherefore, the Actual Deserters of Tradition
reaching but to one 4th. of the mankind that lived in that Year as was shown
above, it follows that the number of those since Luther, who died without
propagating their kind amounts to 4. times thirteen times, that is, above 50.
times more than those who actually deserted Tradition since that time or those
who failed to propagate their Faith.

Again, let us weigh the multitudes found in any one Year to belong to the
whole Ecclesiastical Body of the Catholic Church, wherever extended, with the
innumerable Companies of all the several Religious Orders of men and women with
their Lay-Attendants, and consider what proportion they may be held to bear to
the whole Body of the Church living in the same Year, and so, to those that die
in that Year: That we may not exceed, we will allot them to take up but a
four hundredth part of the Church; nay (that we may no more be troubled with
Mr. Tillotsons uncharitable railery p. 172. 173.) we will allow them to amount
but to a fivehundreth part of those who lived or died in that Year we pitched
on; that is there died that Year only a fivehundreth part of the Church that
propagated their Faith and not their kind; which low number is a most
advantageous Concession of ours, if we take out as we ought all those that
died from 14. to 24. formerly spoken of. But, be it only a fivehundreth part;
yet this multiplied by 128. the number of the Years since, there being four
times 128. found in 500. rises to be a full fourth part of the Total living
in the Year 537. that is full as many as were the Actual deserters of
Tradition since Luther. Add, that the persons now insisted on (of whom we
might double the number,) are all of them absolutely the most Eminent parts of
Tradition that are, viz. the whole entire Body of the Church Governors or
Ecclesiadocens; a very few of whom experience has taught us to have been able
to propagate our Holy Catholic Faith to many Nations in a few Years; the rest
such whose exemplary devout lives exhibit the practice of Christianity in so
eminent a perfection, and with such influence over the hearts of the
Generality, that next to the Sacred Authority, and Exalted Sanctity of the
others, nothing more fruitfully propagates Christian Life and Doctrine than
those who are thus barren to the world.

Thus much for the number of Propagaters of their Faith, and not their Kind
amongst those who were formerly Catholics; but what a strange counterpoise
does it add, if we go about to compute those vast Nations which since Luther
have of new accru'd to Tradition, and who have been spiritually geniti in
Evangelio; and this, (which enhances our Advantage) not by Lineall Descendents
in the same place, but a few Externs, and in such places, to wit, Heathenism,
where there has been no Deserters of Tradition formerly, nor any since to
diminish their number by their counterballance. Whence I have title to add not
only the first Adherers to Catholic Religion there, but also all their
Posterity since who have stuck to it, they being Cleavers to Tradition, and so
counterdistinguish't to Relinquishers of Tradition. Which if we compute ever
since the time about Luther, who can averr (considering the vastness of the
Territories they possess) they equal not the Total of the Deserters of
Tradition that have been from the beginning of the Church.

One Consideration is yet more than all the rest; but, I must not lay claim to
it at present, lest I break bargain, having confined my self to the
circumstance of time since Luther; yet it is not unlawful to mention it. It Is
this; that for diverse Centuries before Luther there had not been any
considerable number of Actual Deserters of Tradition, (as who is read in
Ecclesiastical Histories cannot but know) but almost all Followers of it, that
is, Propagaters of it practically to the immediately undergrowing Faithful.
During which time if we calculate how many, both in those lay-persons who died
from 14. to 24. and all those Religious and Sacred Persons, the best
Propagaters of Faith, failed in propagating their kind, it will be very
difficult (I had almost said, most impudent) to deny but they unproportionably
almost exceed the number of the Actual Deserters of Tradition that have been
since Christ. For I see no reason to judge by what I have read in
Ecclesiastical History, that the number of the Actual Relinquishers of the
Church have exceeded the number of the Churches Total, taken in any
determinate time, thrice repeated; If you can show there were more, you may
please to acquaint us with the sight. In the mean time I hope you understand by
this time my position is so secure that I can allow you 40. times as many, and
yet fear no danger of being most impudent.

You may allege perhaps this is but an Evasion now, but was not my Sense when
I writ. To which I answer, I have shown it to have been my meaning already out
of my plain words, and whoever reads Sure-footing p. 74. and 75. shall see
there expressly the Grounds laid for each branch of this discourse: which, Sir,
had you been pleased to read over with a mind, to admit them into your
understanding faculty, you might have saved me this labor of dilating on
them, and your self the blemish of ranting against a position as that than
which nothing can be more impudent, which only your carelessness to read it,
or resolution not to heed it, hindered from being most innocent.

It were not unseasonable perhaps, if I should here amuse you with another
Paradox, namely that the deserting Tradition strengthens it; I mean, that,
Tradition, when a Heresy arises, gains more of Intensiveness and vigor, than it
loses in it is Extensiveness; nay that the Intensiveness which accrues to it by
that means is the way to make it branch out afterward into a far greater
Extent. I begin my Explication of this from your words p. 176. If I should see
a whole nation fail because no body would marry or contribute to propagate etc.
By which I perceive you misunderstand the nature of the things in hand. In the
business of marriage there is nothing to contrast with it on the other side,
but being natural and held withal a holy state, they that will (that is, they
who will not voluntarily oblige themselves to another holier) may undertake it;
whence it has no Universal Opposite, and so takes it is free course, when
convenient, and is liable only to common Contingencies. But in things of
Corrupt Nature and Grace, the matter is carried quite otherwise; and, because
either side has a great opposition against the other, and withal a very great,
or rather a kind of Universal sway and force, hence the course of such things
consists in a kind of Undulation: So that, now, Corrupt Nature when she finds
her self a little more free, follows her own tendency or propension, and bears
downwards; and now again Supernatural and Gracious Assistances with which the
Wisdom of the Eternal Father had furnished his Church superabundantly, being
shock't and excited even by this contrary motion of Nature, begin to put
themselves forwards into an opposite motion, and strive more vigorously to raise
themselves upwards. For example; Discipline, which is to apply Christian
motives, by tract of time grows remiss in the Church; hence decay of virtue,
dissoluteness of life, addiction to material goods, and, consequently
Ignorance, creep in by insensible degrees into diverse parts, so that it
happens there are multitudes of corrupt Members in the Church, and regardless
of any duty; who, therefore, want nothing but a fair occasion, and one to lead
them to break all ties of Virtue and Obedience, and run into the utmost
Extravagancies. Nor can we think but in the course of such a vast variety as
is found in a World, now and then there will be found amongst those wicked men
some notable fellow, of a subtle wit, a bold spirit, and a plausible tongue, so
circumstanc't that he can hope for Impunity by the friendship of some great
person, and so dares give way to his proud desire of having followers, or his
private spleen, to renounce the Church's Faith, and shake of the yoke of her
discipline. Hereupon, the rampires of Government and discipline being forced and
violently broken down, presently like a Torrent or Inundation all those whose
hearts were corrupted with spiritual pride, or other vices, like brute beasts,
leap after one another out of the Fold of the Church, and threaten to trample
down all that is Sacred; Reviling the Church, and laying to her charge all the
faults found in particular persons, as if they were Effects of her Doctrine;
though their own knowledge tells them otherwise; and make use of failings in
particular Governors to renounce and extirpate the Government it self.

On the contrary those good Catholics who by this Trial are made manifest,
stir up their zeal both in behalf of their Faith and their Governors,
instituted by Christ; and detest the vicious Lives and Pride of those Rebels,
the Parents of such a horrid Revolt. The Governors, alarmed, begin to look
into the Cause of this distraction, and to provide wholesome Remedies. They
call Councils (General ones if need be) to straiten afresh Ecclesiastical
Discipline; enjoining the Officers of the Church to stand every one to his
Charge. They take order to promote worthy Officers, and to advance
Ecclesiastical Learning; they recommend afresh by their grave Authority the
points of Faith, to the Ecclesia Credens, as the depositum preserved
uninterruptedly in the Church from Christ and his Apostles, and establish them
in a particular belief of them; nay make these more intelligible and rational
by Explicating them more at large; or, if the Heretical party involve and
confound them in ambiguous words, they define and declare them in language most
properly suting to the sense writ in the hearts of the Faithful; and, lastly,
anathematize the Revolters, if they prudently judge their contumacy
irreducible; that, so, the remaining Body may concieve a just horror and
aversion against that Rebellious party, and be preserved uninfected with their
contagious Communion. All which Advantages and much more are visibly found in
the Change made in the Church by that neverenough-renowned Synod the Council of
Trent occasioned by Luthers fall. Nor is this all; for the Faithful not only
grow more virtuous by the reformation of Church-disciplin, but even by the
Calumnies of their Adversaries: Again, the learned party in the Church are
excited to far greater industry, and consequently Knowledge, by the insulting
opposition of the Churches enemies: whose disgracing points of Faith for absurd
and contradictions, stir up divines to show their conformity with acknowledged
natural Truths, as does their calling into question the Ground and Certainty
of Faith, open the understandings of those who defend it, to look into the
Causes on which Gods sweet and strong Providence has founded it is infallible
Perpetuity, and so demonstrate it. A task no Heretic durst ever attempt,
finding Principles failing him to begin with; that is, Causes laid by Gods
Providence to build his Congregation on; whence all they can do is to talk
gaily and plausibly about the Conclusions themselves and laugh at Principles.

From which discourse is Evident that by occasion of a Heresy (which purifies
the Church of all her ill humors, and rectifies and makes sound what remains)
Tradition renews as it were it is Youth and recovers it is vigor; whence also it
must needs Propagate and extend it self still unto more and more Subjects, as
is also daily Experienced. It Is seen also that the abundance of corrupt Humors
begets Heresy at First; for multitudes fall away then, whereas afterward scarce
two or three in any Age desert the Catholic Banner. It appears also that
Secular interest or desire of Liberty and Spiritual Pride, not zeal of Truth
begun and continued the breach; I mean in the Leaders; for afterwads they are
content to remain where they are without troubling themselves to propagate the
Truth to other Nations; nay, they have let the large region of Nubia run to
wrack (for as Mr. T. to make us smile, tells us p. 174. Alvarez says, it was
for want of Ministers) and never sent so much as one single Protestant Parson
to assist them. It shows also, how unconcerned the Catholic Churches Stability
is in all the Heresies that have or shall fall; since they only tend to
confirm and radicate more deeply in the hearts of the Faithful the Points of
Faith they renounced; to occasion reformation of discipline and so to purify
their virtue. Lastly, it shows how Tradition or the Delivery of Faith by the
Living Voice and Practice of the Catholic Church is so immovably planted by the
hand of the Almighty, that it loses nothing by all the Actual Deserters of it
that ever have been, but is by that means only pruned of it is saples branches
to shoot out in due season livelier and farther. But, to return my Friend.

I hope Sir you will pardon me if I have rather taken pains to open your
understanding a little in acquainting it more fully with that part of my
doctrine is totally mistook, than to proceed with your Faults; in lieu of which
I here pardon you all the Injuries you have done my meaning or words in near
the other half your book, that is from p. 176. to p. 300. though I see them
many, and some of them very gross ones. The Testimony part I would not here
neglect, because as you shall see shortly, they concern not my book as any
proofs of the point, and so are improper to be allowed room in my future
Answer: which designs nothing but against your reasons. You are resolved to
be brief in them, and I hope to be briefer; in which, I thank you, you have
helped me much by your manner of handling them. I will pass by diverse of your
little quirks upon my whether real or pretended mistakes in things
unconcerning, and only touch upon what is more pertinent.

And first, I am sorry I must begin with the old complaint that you mistake
quite (whether purposely or no let others judge) what was my intent in
producing those Testimonies. Can you really and in your heart think they were
intended against the Protestants, that you set your selves so formally to
answer them? or can you judge me so weak a Disputant as to quote against you
the 2d. Council of Nice or the Council of Trent so elaborately; whereas I know
you would laugh at their Authority as heartily as you did at my First
Principles? Sure if I meant it I am the First Catholic Controvertist that ever
fell into such an error. My intent, manifest in the Title and the whole course
of my writing there was this, that having deduc't many particulars concerning
the Rule of Faith which manner of Explication might seem new to Catholic
Controvertists, I would endeavor to show to them rather than to you that both
others of old, and the Catholic Church at present favored my Explication. This
was my main scope, however, as diverse Testimonies gave me occasion, I applied
them by the way against Protestants.

Your second mistake is found p. 304. where you accuse me to have committed as
shameful a circle, etc. and why, because according to me Scripture depends
upon Tradition for it is Sense, and yet I bring Scripture for Tradition. Sir, my
Tenet is, that nothing can sense Scripture with the Certainty requisite to build
Faith upon but Tradition; which yet well consists with this, that both you and
I may use our private wits to discourse topically what sense the words seem
most favorably to bear. And you may see I could mean no more by the many
deductions I make thence alluding to my Tenet, which yet I am far from your
humor of thinking all to be pure God's Word or Faith, nor yet Demonstration,
as you put it upon me in other Testimonies p. 308. Though I make account I use
never a Citation thence, but to my judgment I durst venture to defend in the
way of human skill, proceeding on such Maxims as are used in word-skirmishes,
to sound far more favorably for me than for you.

But let us see what work you make with my Authorities. After you have
unworthily abused Rushworth, in alleging him rawly to say Scripture is no more
fit to convince, than a Beetle is to cut withal, whereas his Discourse runs
thus, that as he who maintains a Beetle can cut must cut with it, but cannot
in reason oblige others to do so; so they who hold Scripture is the true Judge
of Controversies, and fit and able to decide all quarrels and dissentions
against the Christian Faith, bind themselves, etc. After this prank (I say) of
the old stamp, you put down p. 303. three of my Testimonies from Scripture, and
immediately give a very full and ample Answer to them all in these words. From
which Texts if Mr. S. can prove Tradition to be the only Rule of Faith, any
more than the Philosopher Stone or the Longitude may be proved from the 1 Cap.
of Genesis, I am content they should pass for valid Testimonies. To which my
parallel Answer is this. From which Reply, and our constant experience of the
like formerly, if it be not evident that Mr. T. will never with his good will
deal sincerely with his Adversary, but in stead of confuting him, impose on him
still a False meaning, and impugn that in stead of him, I will yield all his
frothy Book to be solid Reason. I beseech you, Sir, where do you find me say
or make show of producing those Testimonies to prove Tradition the only Rule
of Faith. For Truth's sake use your Eyes and read. Do not I express my self
Sure-footing p. 126. to produce the first Citation to show how Scripture
seconds or abets my foregoing Discourse merely as to the Self-evidence of the
Rule of Faith. Does not the second contend for the Orality of the Rule of
Faith, it is Uninterruptedness, and perpetual Assistance of God's Spirit, and
the third of imprinting it by the way of living Sense in men's hearts? And,
though I say those places speak not of Books, but deliver themselves in words
not competent to another Rule, yet I contend not they exclude another Rule, or
say there is but one Rule and no more. There was indeed p. 12. another
Testimony from St. Paul, contradistinguishing the Law of Grace from Moses his
Law, which sounded exclusively; but you were pleased to omit it, and so I shall
let it stand where it did.

You advance to my Testimonies from Fathers and Councils, and never was young
gentleman so fond and glad that he had found a hare sitting as you are to have
discovered whence I had those Citations: Presently (...), all is mirth and
triumph and Jubilee. You are a Seer, Sir, and will find out the Truth by
Revelation, and so I had as good ingenuously confess it. 'Twas thus then. When
my book was nere printed, some Friends, who had read my discourses, dealt with
me to add some Authorities; alleging that, in regard I followed a way of
Explication which was unusual, it would give it a greater currency to show it
consonant, though not in the whole Body of it, yet in the most concerning
particulars to the Sentiments both of the former and present Church. I foresaw
the disadvantage my little time would necessarily cause me; yet, willing to
defer to the Judgment of my Betters, I resolved it. Casting about in what
Common-place-book I might best look, for I had not time to rummage Libraries,
nor am I so rich as to have a plentiful one of my own, it came into my mind
there were diverse of that nature in that book where you made so fortunate a
Set, and caught such a covy of Citations in one net together. I ask't first the
Author's leave, who answered, that when a Book was once made public it was
any one's that would use it; nor knew I, till you came to teach me more
manners, I owed any account to any man else; neither do I think your self in
your Sermons stand quoting all the Commonplace-books or private Authors where
you meet a Testimony or Sentence transcribed you make use of. Hereupon I took
the book with me to a Friend's Chamber near the Press, where Proofs already
expected my correcting hand; and there, having no other book by me, fell to
work. This have made me examine nothing, being very secure of the perfect
sincerity of the Author I relied on, but put them down in his words and order.
This, Sir, is heartily the true History of that affair, which will spoil much
of your discourteous vapor, showing a great deal of empty vanity in you, to
magnify so highly such petty trifles, and so totally unconcerning the main of
the business You laugh p. 305. that I who confessed my self a bad Transcriber,
transcribed him; how childish a Cavil is this? As if every one who is to bring
Testimonies, whether he like his task or no, must not transcribe them from
some place or other; yet you tell me ironically, you will do me the right to
assure the Reader (that I) do it very punctually and exactly. I wish, to
requite you, Sir, I could assure the Reader you had as punctually and exactly
transcribed me; you had saved a great deal of precious credit by it, and I a
great deal of precious time and ungrateful pains in laying open your
Insincerity. But, to our Testimonies.

The first is from the Synod of Lateran. The force of which you say p. 306.
lies in the word [deliver'd] which is indifferently used for conveyance by
writings or word of mouth. But, Sir, there are also in that Testimony the words
preaching and teaching, and I do not believe it is so Indifferent to you
whether you preach by word of mouth or no, that you should say the word
Preaching sounds not conveyance of a thing orally.

The next Testimony has the same Exception, and the same Answer. But you say
this Council particularly this part of the Epistle were excepted against by
some. What matter's it, so they did not except against it for this passage or
this Doctrine (which may serve for Answer also to the mistaking Exceptions
against the 7th. General Council which follows next) Thus Origin and
Tertullian are both excepted against, yet are both commonly alleged and
allowed where the Reasons of those Exceptions have no place.

Next follow your Answers to the Fathers I alleged. But first p. 310. you must
mistake Rushworth, next me. For Rushworth speaks not (I mean in the first
Citation) of Delivery, but of a point delivered; nor do I here intend to
convince thence the Certainty of Delivery or Tradition which you proceed upon;
for, making Fathers parts of Tradition, it would make the same thing prove it
self. Understand then rightly, Sir, what I am about, and then I shall accept
your impugning it for a favor. The Truth of the thing is one thing, and the
Judgment of a person concerning it, is another; And it is not to evince the
Truth of the point I produce these Testimonies, for in the order of Discoursing
the Knowledge of Traditions (or First Authority's) Certainty, antecedes and
gives strength to all the other inferior and dependent ones. What I only aim
at then is only to show that thus they judged (not to convince the Truth of the
Thing from their Judgment) and thence to show my self not to be singular in
thus judging. Whence also it is that I entitled this part Consent of Authority,
etc. Retract then, I beseech you, Sir, any such thoughts or expressions as that
I would hence convince Tradition to be the whole Truth of Faith, demonstrate,
prove it: For I intend to prove no more by the rest then by those from the
Council of Trent, which only aim to show that so and so that Council said and
held.

The First Testimony of a Father is Pope Celestines; the force of which you
think quite spoild (p. 310.) by Binnius his other Reading of such a word. And
why I pray? unless he could make it out his reading were true, the other false;
which I see not attempted. But you let it pass, and answer that [retain'd by
Succession from the Apostles till this very time] may mean by Scripture, as
well as by Orall Tradition. I conceive not, and I give you my reason; because,
who make Scripture their Rule, are unconcerned whether their Faith was retaind
to this very time from the Apostles by Succession, or no: For, though all the
world apostatized, and so interrupted that Succession, yet, as long as they
have the Letter of Scripture, it being plain to all, their Faith is retained
still. What you quote this Father afterward to say of Scripture, we heartily
say Amen to, so you mean by Scriptures that Book sen'ct by its proper
Interpreter (as to points of Faith) the Church. And, you are to show he meant
otherwise.

You choke with an etc. better half of Irenaeus his Testimony p. 311. which
spoils your answer to the first; for it speaks of his present days when the
Scripture was not only left by the Apostles, but spread and to be had, and
yet that many nations of those Barbarians who believe in Christ, had (even
then) salvation writ in their hearts without Characters and Ink, diligently
keeping the ancient Tradition.

The Substance of your Answer to Origin 312. is only this, that unless I mean
by Churches Tradition preserved by order of Succession, mystical
interpretations of Scripture so delivered down, you assure me Origin is not
for my turn. And I assure you, Sir, it is so learned an Answer that I dare not
oppose it.

Tertullian is next, to whom by offering to wave him, you show your self 312.
little a Friend; and no kindness is lost for he is as little a Friend to you
driving such as you in his Prescriptions from any Title to dispute out of or
even handle Scripture, yet you say he says no more but believe what is
[Traditum] deliverd; though as alleged by me Sure-footing p. 133. he says
much more in a large entire Testimony which you not so much as mention. You
tell me also he meant delivered by the Scriptures, but you strain hard to
make it come in. And Tertullian is the unlikeliest man in the world to provoke
to the Scriptures, who tells us (de praescrip. c. 16.) Nihil proficit
congressus Scripturarum, nisi plane ut aut Stomachi quis ineat eversionem, aut
cerebri. Scripture-disputes avail nothing but merely either to make ones
Stomach or his head turn.

But, alas, Sir how are you gravelled with the two First Testimonies from
Athanasius and how slightly you pass them over p. 313. The Protestants first
maxim is Believe no men, nor Ancestors nor Church, but search the Scriptures,
that is seek for your Faith there: Against which way his whole discourse is
bent, as may be seen surefoot: p. 133. 134. Is Faiths coming down by
Ancestors the same as coming down by a book? or do not the words, [from
Christ by Fathers] mean [by words expressing the Sense in their hearts,] but
[by a book not to be Senc't by them, but plain of it self?] The third
Testimony expressly says. It Is to be answered to those things [which alone of
it self suffices] that those are not of the Orthodox Church, and that our
Ancestors never held so. You tell me it is a gross error that he thought
this alone (or without Scripture) might be sufficient; I wonder what mean the
words [which alone of it self suffices:] if they be not exclusive of any thing
else as necessary, words have lost their signification, and I my reason. I but,
he quotes Scripture for it afterward! True; and he expresses himself to do
it lest Adversaries from his being wholly silent should take occasion to be
more impudent. That is, the reason of the thing required it not, but the
unresaonableness of the Carping humor of Adversaries. You allege his words
That Faith which was professed by the Fathers in the Nicene Council according to
the Scriptures 315. l. 3. 4. etc. is to me sufficient, etc. Whence your
discourse makes his opinion to be that Scripture is the sufficient Rule of
Faith. Lord? Sir, where are your thoughts wandering? or what is the Nominative
Case in that clause [is to me sufficient] to the word is? Is it not that
Faith: to wit, the Nicene, which you mistake for the Rule of Faith, and join
the Epithet, sufficient, to Rule of Faith, which in the Testimony is joined to
Faith? Your conceit that it seems hence the Scripture was to him the Rule to
judge the Creeds of General Councills is a very weak one: he told you before
his Faith came to him by Tradition of Ancestors; all that is here intimated is
that he judged the Nicene Creed to be according to the Scriptures; and what
Catholic judges not so of that and the Council of Trent too, and yet holds not
Scripture which is to be interpreted by the Church the Rule and Standard to
judge the Church by? To use your own words p. 332. You use a wretched
importunity to persuade Testimonies to be pertinent; yet all will not do, and
your too violent straining them makes them the more confess their natural
reluctance.

But now comes the Testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, charged to be taken (not
by me, but by the Author I borrowed it of) out of the middle of a long
Sentence, and both before it and after it Scripture named so as to make it
quite opposite to our Tenet. I have already given account of my action; and my
Adversary, now become my Judge, charges it not wholly upon me. Alas, I am not
able to read the Testimonies in the books and understand them there, it is such
a piece of mastery; and therefore am fain to take them upon trust from others
that can read them there. But my Seducer, how he will acquit himself of so
foul an Imputation is left to any Ingenuous Papist to judge etc, Sir, let me
tell you, you should consider circumstances ere you come to lay on such heavy
charges. I beseech you was the book in which this Seducer (forsooth) used this
Testimony writ against Protestants who hold Scripture, the Rule of Faith, or
against some Catholic Divines holding the Opinion of Personal Infallibility?
Clearly against the later. This being so what was he concerned to transcribe
the whole large Testimony, no wrong being done to them? either position of
Ecclesiastical Tradition, which he cites, or of Scripture which he cites
not, equally making against that Tenet; or rather that passage of
Ecclesiastical Tradition, being far more efficacious upon them than that which
concerned Scripture which they account not obligatory unless interpreted by the
Church. By this time the Reader will discern there was a great deal of rashness
in the Accuser, but no Insincerity at all in the Alledger. Nor is there the
least danger of the Testimonies following, upbraiding them who patch together
abundance of false words and fictions that they may seem rationally not to
admit the Scriptures; For what is this to us whose endeavors are to lay (...)
beginning from First Principles why we and every man may and ought rationally
admit the Scriptures; and neither make our Faith ridiculous by admitting into
it what is uncertain, nor leaving any excuse to Atheistical Impiety in not
admitting what is Certain? This is the sum of my aim and endeavors, though
nothing will content you, but that we admit the Letter to be plain to all,
and, by consequence, to you; and then your Fancy is to be accepted for God's
Word, and your pride of understanding will be well at ease.

You pass over nine of my Testimonies; two from St. Basil, and three from St.
Austin, alleged by me Sure-footing p. 135, 136, 137. one from Ireneus, and
two from Tertullian, and another from St. Peter Chrysologus, Sure-footing p.
138, 139. sleighting them as but a few; whereas, speaking of Testimonies from
the Fathers, as you do here, you had answered but eight in all; which you seem
by your words to judge such a great multitude in comparison of 9, and those 9,
or those few which remain (as you call them) so inconsiderable for their number
in respect of the other numerous or innumera le 8, that the paucity of their
number made them less deserve speaking to. Yet a careless general kind of
Answer you give such as it is p. 318. telling the Reader that there is nothing
of Argument in those few which remain, but from the ambiguity of this word
Tradition; which we will needs take for unwritten Tradition. You add p. 318.
that you need not show this of every one of them in particular; for, whosoever
shall read them with this Key, will find that they are of no force to conclude
what he drives at. I was going, Sir, to use your own words, and to ask with
what face you could pretend this? Let Us bring the book; I Will undertake it shall
not blush to tell you how careless you are of what you say. I omit that the
word Tradition does by Ecclesiastical use signify in the first place
unwritten Tradition. Moreover, that we may let Mercy triumph over Justice, we
will pardon the first Testimony; found p. 135. though St. Basil by
counterposing Tradition of Faith, to the conceits of the Heretic Eunomius
seems to mean by Tradition Sense received from Fathers attesting; this being
the most opposite to Conceits or new-invented Fancies that can be; for even an
Interpretation of Scripture may be a Conceit or Fancy newly invented, whereas
what is barely delivered cannot be such.

The 2d. is, the same St. Basil's p. 136. Let Tradition bridle thee; Our Lord
taught thus, the Apostles preached it, the Fathers conserved it, our Ancestors
confirmed it, be content to say as thou art taught. Is not here enough to
signify unwritten Tradition? Did Christ teach it by reading it in a written
Book? or the Apostles preach it by book or is the perpetuating it by Fathers
and Ancestors the keeping it by way of writing* The third is St. Austin's p.
136. I will rather believe those things which are Celebrated now by the Consent
of Learned and unlearned, and are confirmed throughout all Nations by most
grave Authority. Is universal consent and most grave Authority of all nations,
the book of Scripture or written Tradition? or rather is it not most Evidently
unwritten universal Tradition or Sense in the hearts of all Believers learned
and unlearned, or the Church Essential?

The 4th is from the same St. Austin. It Is manifest that the Authority of the
Catholic Church is of force to cause Faith and assurance. Do these words
[Authority of the Catholic Church] mean the Book of Scriptures? Or can I
desire more then this Father offers me in express terms? or a greater
Testimony that you are to seek for an Answer to it then the strange Evasion you
substitute instead of a reply? Especially if we take the Testimony immediately
following, which from the best established Seats of the Apostles even to this
very day is strengthened by the Series of Bishops succeeding them; and by the
Assertion of so many nations. Is here the word Tradition pretended Indifferent
and apt to be taken ambiguously? and not rather Assertions of so many nations,
or Consent of nations, and Authority of the Catholic Church, of force to cause
Faith and Assu rance? which to demonstrate is the whole Endeavor of
Sure-fooring.

The 5th is the same Fathers cited p. 137. The Faithful do possess
perseveringly a Rule of Faith common to little and great in the Church. Is the
word Church the same with the word Tradition or in danger of being ambiguous,
or (as you say of the word Tradition p. 318.) commonly used by the Fathers to
signify to us the Scriptures?

The 6th. is of St. Irenaeus. All those who will hear Truth may at present
perfectly discern in the Church the Tradition of the Apostles, manifest in the
whole world. What means the world [at present] but that the Tradition of the
Apostles is yet vigorous and fresh in the Church? which remark had very unfitly
suited with Scriptures.

The 7th and 8th are Tertullians. Both say the same Sense, that what is
established as Sacred or professed at this present day in the Churches of the
Apostles is manifestly delivered by the Apostles or a Tradition of the
Apostles; which is incompetent to Scripture, it not being a Tradition or point
delivered, but the Delivery.

The last is of Chrysologus, which has indeed the word Tradition, but by the
additionall words [of the Fathers] not left ambiguous but determined to
unwritten Tradition: For the Fathers according to you are not to give, or
diliver down the Sense of Scriptures, it being plain of it self.

This Sir, is the upshot of your skill in Notebook-learning; the three first
Testimonies from Scripture you answered not, mistaking quite what they were
brought for; the 4th you omitted. You have given pitiful answers to eight from
the Fathers and shufled off nine more without answer, pleading you had given us
a Key to open them which was never made for those locks. By which I see you
reserve your greatest Kindnesses, like a right friendly man, till the last.

You will not have the Council of Trent make Tradition the only Rule of
Faith; you had obliged me, had you answered my reason for it in my 4th note p.
145. 146. But this is not your way; you still slip over my reasons all along as
if none had been brought, and then say some slight thing or other to the
Conclusion, as if it had never been inferrd by me, but merely gratis and rawly
affirmed. I have explicated our Divines that seem to differ from me herein,
Sure footing p. 187. 188. and the Council it self takes my part in it, by
defining and practicing the taking the Sense of Scripture from that quod tenuit
and tenet Sanct a Matter Ecclesia, which, in this antecedency to Scriptures
Sense, can no where be had but from Tradition. You cavil at me for not
putting down the words in which that Council declares it self to honor the
Holy Scripture and Tradition with equal pious affection and reverence. Why
should I? you see I was very short in all my allegations thence and rather
touched at them for Catholics to read them more at large, than transcribed
them fully. But how groundless your Cavil is may be understood hence that I
took notice of a far more dangerous point to wit it is putting the Holy
Scriptures constantly before Tradition, and showed good reason why? But you
approve not even of any honor done to the Scriptures upon those Terms; and
your interest makes you wish that rather it is Letter and Sense both should
remain uncertain, than it should owe any thing to the Catholic Church. You ask
how an Apostle and Evangelist should be more present by the Scripture
ascertained as to words and Sense then by or all Tradition? I answer, because
that Book is in that case Evident to be peculiarly and adequately his, whereas
Orall Tradition was common to all; and it is doubtable what hand some of those
Apostles or Evangelists might have had in the source of that which was lineally
derived to us.

Sir, I wonder how you hit so right once as not to answer likewise the
Testimony I brought p. 152. of the Catholic Clergy's adhering to Tradition in
the ^ick of the breach, you might as well have spoke to that as to the Council
of Trent and diverse others: But I perceive it had some peculiar difficulty, as
had diverse of the neglected nine, else your Genius leads you naturally to fly
at any thing that has but the semblance or even name of a Testimony: whereas,
unactive I stoop at no such game till I see certainly it is worth my pains; and
I fear yours will scarce prove so

THey come in play p. 320. And because they are huddled together here something
confusedly, it were not amiss to sort them under Dr. Pierce's Heads found
Sure-footing, p. 170.

To the first Head, which comprises those which are only brought to vapor
with, belongs that of St. Hierom. p. 323.

To the second Head, which consists of those which are raw, unapply'd, and
only say something in common which never comes home to the point, belong all
those of Eusebius. That of St. Chrysostom and St. Austin's p. 324. of Justin
and Theodoret p. 325. That of Hilary p. 327. of St. Basil. p. 328. of
Chrysostom. p. 328. and 329. and those of St. Austin in the same place. Of
Theoph. Alexandr. p. 330. Theodoret p. 330. 331. The 2d. and 3d. from Gerson.
p. 331.

To the 4th. that of St. Austin p. 325.

To the 7th. Head, which comprises those which are false, and signify not the
thing they are quoted for, appertain that of Ireneus p. 326. of St. Austin, St.
Hierome, and the 2d. of Theoph. Alexandrinus p. 330.

To the 8th. consisting of those which labor of obscurity by an evidently
ambiguous word, that of Optatus p. 327. The first from Gerson p. 331. and that
from Lyra p. 332.

St. Cyprian's Testimony was writ by him to defend an Error, which both we
and the Protestants hold for such, and therefore no wonder if (as Bellarmin
says) more errantium ratiocinaretur, he discoursed after the rate of those
that err; that is, assumes false Grounds to build his error on. Whence the
inferring an acknowledged false Conclusion from it, is an argument rather his
Principle was not sound.

I know, Sir, you will fume at this usage of your Testimonies: but with what
reason? For first, you putting them down rawly, without particularizing their
force or import, or driving them home to any point, my very sorting them under
these Heads, sounds a greater particularity in my Exceptions and Answer, than
you showed any in alleging them. Next, you had refused to do me the reason I
begged in my Letter to my Answerer. 8. in vouching you Testimonies to be
Conclusive or Satisfactory; which unless you did, I had already told you there
it was my resolution to give them no other Answer. And I shall heartily make
known my Intention why I do so, and shall ever do so, till you come to some
good point in that particular. I had observed what multitudes of voluminous
Books had and might be writ in the way of Citation without any possibility of
satisfying, that is, to the extreme loss of time, and prejudice to rational
souls, while any Citation however qualified was admitted, and no Principles
laid to sort them, and show which were Conclusive; wherefore I judged it the
best way to drive you from that insignificant, and endless way of writing, to
tell in short my exceptions against each Testimony, and to force you to vouch
them Conclusive. And I pray, why should I or any be put to show each of those
Citations, to our excessive pains, inefficacious, whereas your self, who is the
Alledger, will not take pains to show any one of them to be efficacious? But
your way here is the weakest in that kind I ever read or heard of. You huddle
together a clutter of Citations, never apply them particularly as I constantly
did mine: Overleap all considerations of their qualifications, nakedly set them
down, (as you say p. 332) and then tell us they are enough to satisfy any
unpassionate Reader that dare trust himself with the use of his own Eyes and
Reason. Which is plausible indeed to flatter fools that are passionately
self-conceited, otherwise I conceive an unpassionate Reader will require much
more, if he ever knew what Controversy meant. He would know the variety of
Circumstances, Antecedents, Consequents, etc. Besides, speaking Equivocally or
Rhetorically, not distinctly and literally, may alter every Testimony there;
Above all he would consider whether they were expressive only of some persons
Opinions, and not rather of the solid and constant sense of the faithful in
that Age; without which they want the nature of Testimonies. Is it clear to
every man's Eyes and Reason, none of these or other faults render all yours
Inefficacious? Is it clear that when they say Scripture is plain, they mean
plain to all, even Heathens that never heard of Faith, (such must be the
Plainness of the Rule of Faith) or only to those who have learned Christian
Doctrine already by the Church; that is, who bring their Rule with them. I am
sure St. Austin de Doctrina Christiana, your best Testimony, speaks of such
Readers as are timentes Deum ac pietate mansueti, those which fear God, and are
meek with piety; that is those which are not only Faithful or Christians
already, but pious and good Christians; which makes it nothing to your purpose.
Again, some one passage may be so plain as a learned man may in the opinion of
learned men plainly confound an Adversary; but will it be clear and plain in
all necessary points to the vulgar, who hear a great many hard words brought on
both sides, and have no skill to judge who has the better in such contests? yet
the Rule of Faith must be plain even to the vulgar, and able to give them
Satisfaction. Again, when the Fathers provoke to the Scripture, is it not
against those who deny the Church, but accept the Scripture, and so the
necessity of disputing out of some commonly-acknowledg'd Principle, may be the
only reason they take that method? It Is evidently so, in that you quote from
St. Austin against Maximinus p. 329. and against the Donatists, who denied the
Judgment of the Catholic Church quae ubique terrarum diffunditur; and so he
was to prove his point ubi sit Ecclesia, out of Scripture or no way. Again, is
it clear out of the Citations nakedly set down, what went before and after? Is
it clear for example that when they speak highly of Scripture, they mean not
Scripture unsenc't, but only taken as Significative of God's sense, as it
must, to be the Rule of Faith; or, if of Scripture senc't, they mean not
senc't by the Church, but by the human skill of private persons, which is the
true point between us? St. Austin without doubt makes the Church the
Interpreter of Scripture, as is clearly seen by his Discourse at the end of his
17. Chap. Of the Profit of Believing, which spoils your pretense to his
Authority. Nay, do not they often mean by Scripture the very Sense of it, that
is Christ's Doctrine or the Gospel? As often as you hear them speak of the Things
that are written, or call them Principles, or The Rule of Truth and Opinions,
or speak of conforming other Doctrines to them, and such like, so often they
speak of the Doctrine it self contained in Scripture, or the Truths found there.
Such is that of Clemens cited by you p. 316. 317. which speaks merely of the
Sense of it, or the Truths in it, which he makes deservedly the Rule to other
Truths; and hence, now he names Scripture, then, the Tradition of the Church,
then Scripture again, it being indifferent to his purpose, the same Sense
(which he only intends) being included in both. Such is also evidently your
best Testimony, to wit, that of Irenaeus, which speaks of the Gospel it self,
preached and writ; that is, clearly of the Sense indifferent to either way of
Expression. But what is this or indeed all that is said there to the Letter of
Scripture taken as Significative of God's Sense, that is, not for that Sense,
nor as including it, but as the Means and Way to it (as it must be taken when
it is meant for a Rule of Faith) and the plainness and Certainty of that Way, to
all that are yet to come to Faith, taking that Letter as interpretable by
private Skill and Maxims of Language-learning, which is the true point between
you and us? Bring Testimonies for this, and you will do wonders. To use your
own words p. 318. I need not show what I have discours't here of every of his
Testimonies in particular; for, whosoever shall read them with this Key will
find they are of no force to conclude what he drives (or ought to drive) at.

I am loath to suggest any Jealousy of your Insincerity in all these
Citations, though you have seldom failed in that point. Present my service to
your Friend Mr. Stillingfleet, and assure him he shall not be neglected,
though there were no other reason but your high commendations of him.

Your humble Servant J. S.

A Postscript to the Reader,
READER,
THough I write to Mr. T. yet I publish to thee, and so have a Title to salute
thee with a line or two. Tell me then, do not find thy Expectation deluded,
which, Sure-footing had raised, and our Controversy begin to slide back into
petty squabbles? Consider, I beseech thee how little I contributed to it, nay
what care I took to prevent it; hazarding some ill opinion of singularity in
putting forth antecedently a Letter to my Answerer, requesting we might hold
to a Conclusive Method, rather than (which I foresaw) permit the clearing that
most concerning point in hand relapse into wordish Talk. If thou read that
Letter, I hope thou will acquit me, and think it rational; nay more, thou will easily see that Mr. T. not only waves speaking to it, or giving reason
why, but goes point blank opposite to it, using frequent Ironies, quibbles and
little squibs of University-wit; and neither laying Principles, nor admitting,
or denying my Consequences (except very seldom) nor distinguishing Testimonies,
or vouching any Thing or Way he builds on to be Conclusive; but catching
mistakingly at this little word, and the other, putting upon me twenty false
meanings, with all the crafty Arts that may be to make me relinquish pursuing
the method I had begun, so disadvantageous to him, and fall to clear my self
and accuse him, which is little to our Cause and unsavory to our Readers, and
so, not worth heeding or reading; whence he and his Friends might hope the
Discourse would die and come to nothing. And, indeed, who expects better from
him, who characters Controversy (which is the Science or Knowledge of the
Grounds of Faith) to be nothing but a Blessed Art of Eternal Wrangling? By
which means he gains himself indeed much credit for a great Controvertist, who
avoids all Methods of Concluding any thing, that is, labors to keep on foot
and promote all the Ways of Wrangling; and makes his Adversary none, who
pursues Conclusiveness and Ways to avoid Wrangling. But the plot shall not
take; I shall still go on my Way in my Answer; and to this End that I might
there only attend thy Benefit, I have voided out of the Way this riff-raff
with which this Great Controvertist in his Way had so learnedly assaulted me.
In a word, I declare my resolution (God giving life and health) to be this. I
will never leave following on my blow, till either I bring them to lay
Principles that will bear the test; or, it come to be made evident to all the
world they have none. What I attempt is, to settle the Absolute Immoveableness
of Faith against my Adversary, whose avowed Position it is p. 118, that it is
possible to be False; nay the Certainty of Scripture too, which he puts in
the same case as to it is Firmness. Pardon the sleightness in composing this,
and perhaps some possible oversight, though my conscience knows of none. I am
chid by my Doctor for writing it while I was in a course of Physic, my
strength and health both much decayed. Which, if it pleases God of his Goodness
to restore, I promise thee amends.

(...) 7. 66. Thy Soul's hearty Well-wisher J. S.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7. line 16. Description. p. 14. l. 10. Sections. p. 17. l. 17. in his.
16. l. 30. You proceed. p. 30. l. 16. particular. p. 32. l. ult. about. p. 36.
l. 22. beefool'd. l. 23. too; whereas l. 24. a Distinction. d. 39. l. 11. we
too. p. 40. l. 27. Tertullian. p. 48. l. 21. determine. p. 49. l. 19.
determinate. p. 56. l. 23. your Confute. p. 63. l. 3. the cause. p. 66. l. to
from any. p. 69, l. 2, 3. Knowledges. p. 75. l. 16. despair. l. 27.
demonstration. p. 77. l. ult. Thus. p. 95. l. 15. tenth. p. 98. l. 2. more
forcible. p. 105. l. 21. self. p. 106. l. 1. to some. p. 107. l. 16.
Philosopher's. p. 121. l. 23. Tradition's. p. 112. l. 9. Binius. p. 117. l. 1.
falsehoods. p. 120. l. 28. deliver.


