THE CHARACTER OF A Popish Successor, AND WHAT ENGLAND MAY EXPECT From Such a
One.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, Appointed to
meet at OXFORD, On the One and twentieth of March, 1680/1.

LONDON, Printed for T. Davies. MDCLXXXI.

THE CHARACTER OF A Popish Successor, AND What England may expect from such a
One.
IT has been my Fortune to be a Subject and a Native of that part of the World,
where almost three years last past I have scarce heard any thing, but the
continual Noise of Popery and Plots, with all the clamorous Fears of a jealous
Kingdom, about my Ears. And truly, I must plainly confess, I am not so ill a
Commonwealths-man, but that I am glad to see my Countrymen disturbed in a
Cause, where Religion, Liberty, and Property are at stake. If their Jealousies
are just, and their Fears prophetic, in God's Name let them talk. Every good
man ought to be so far from silencing any reasonable Murmurs, that it is rather
his Duty to bear a Part in a Choire so Universal. And if we see the Great and
Wise Men of our Nation, like true English Patriots, struggling and toiling to
prevent our threatening Calamities, let us take delight to behold them restless
and uneasy, rolling about our troubled Sea, like Porpoises against a Tempest,
to forewarn us of an approaching Destruction.

But amidst our evident Danger, we see another sort of People daily slattering
and deluding us into a false and fatal Security. And sure none are so little
our Friends, or indeed so void even of Humanity it self, as those who would
lull us asleep when Ruin is in view. But since Zeal and Hypocrisy, naked
Truth and artificial Falsehood, have oftentimes alike Faces, I cannot but think
it the Duty both of a Christian and an Englishman, to unravel the Treachery of
those false Arguments which they raise to destroy us.

As first, they say, Why should we stand in fear of Popery, when in the present
Temper of England it is impossible for any Successor whatever to introduce it?

And next, amidst our groundless Fears, (say they) Let us consider what that
Prince is that appears so dreadful a Gorgon to England. A Prince that on all
accounts has so signally ventured his Life for his King and Country: A Hero of
that faithful and matchless Courage and Loyalty: A Prince of that unshaken
Honor and Resolution, that his Word has ever been known to be his Oracle, and
his Friendship a Bulwark wherever he vouchsafes to place it; with such an
infinite Mass of all the Bravery and Gallantry that can adorn a Prince. Why,
must the change of his Religion destroy his Humanity, or the advance to a Crown
render his Word or Honor less Sacred, or make him a Tyrant to that very People
whom he has so often and so cheerfully defended? Why, may there not be a Popish
King with all these Accomplishments, that whatever his own private Devotions
shall be, yet shall publicly maintain the Protestant Worship, with all the
present Constitution of Government, unaltered?

Yes, now I say something! If this Rara avis in terris can be found, then
England were in a happy condition. But, alas! what signify all the great past
Actions of a Princes Life, when Popery at last has got the Ascendant? All
Virtues must truckle to Religion; and how little an Impression will all his
recorded Glories leave behind them, when Rome has once stamped him her Proselyte?

But since unlikely things may come to pass, let us seriously examine how far
the Notion of such a Popish Successor consists with Reason, or indeed has the
least shadow of possibility.

If to maintain and defend our Religion be any more than a Name, it is
impossible for any Man to act the true Defensive Part, without the Offensive
too: And he that would effectually uphold the Protestant Worship, Peace, and
Interest, is bound to suppress all those potent and dangerous Enemies that
would destroy'em; for all other Defense is but Disguise and Counterfeit.

If then the Wisdom of several Successive Monarchs, with a whole Nations
unanimous Prudence, and indefatigable Care for the Protestant Preservation, has
determined, That those Popish Priests who have sworn Fealty to the Sea of Rome,
and taken Orders in Foreign Seminaries, are the greatest Seducers of the King's
Liege-People, and the most notorious Incendiaries and Subverters of the
Protestant Christianity and Loyalty; and for that Cause their several Laws
declare them Traitors; by consequence these are the potent and dangerous
Enemies which, in defense of the Protestant Cause, this Popish King is obliged
to suppress and punish, and these the very Laws he is bound to execute.

And though, perhaps, till the Discovery of the late Plot, for several Ages we
have not seen that Severity inflicted on Popish Priests, as the Laws against
them require; and why? because the flourishing Tranquillity of the English
Church under this King and his Father's Reign, rendered them so inconsiderable
an Adversary, that the natural tenderness of the Protestant People of England,
not delighting in Blood, did not think it worth their while either to detect or
prosecute 'em, and therefore has not made 'em the common Mark of Justice.

But under the Reign of an English Papist, when the Fraternity of their
Religion shall encourage the Pope to make his working Emissaries ten times more
numerous; when, if not the hope of Public Patronage, yet at least their
confidence of Private Indulgence, Connivance, and Mercy, emboldens the Missive
Obedience of his Jesuitical Instruments, whilst the very Name of a Popish
Monarch has the Influence of the Sun in Egypt, and daily warms our Mud into
Monsters, till they are become our most threatening and most formidable Enemies.
And if ever the Protestant Religion wanted a Defender, it is then. If the Word,
Honor, or Coronation Oath of a King be more than a Name, it is then or never he
is obliged to uphold the Protestant Interest, and actually suppress its most
apparent and most notorious Enemies.

Well then, for Arguments sake, by the virtue of a strong Faith (a Faith so
strong as may remove Mountains) let us suppose we may have such a Roman
Catholic King, as shall discountenance Pope and Popery, cherish Protestantism,
and effectually deter and punish all those that shall endeavor to undermine
and supplant it: and then let us examine what this King, thus qualified, must
do.

First then, in continuing the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, Honors, and
Preferments in the Hands of the Protestant Clergy, he must confer his Favors
and Smiles on those very Men, whom (by the Fundamentals of his own uncharitable
Persuasion, which dooms all that dye out of the Bosom of the Romish Church to a
certain state of Damnation) he cordially believes do preach and teach, and lead
his Subjects in the direct way to Hell: And next, at the same time he must not
only punish and persecute, but perhaps imprison and hang those very only
Righteous Men, whom from the bottom of his Soul he believes can only open them
the Gates of Paradise: whilst in so doing he cannot but accuse himself of
copying the old Jewish Cruelty. Nay, in one respect he out-goes their Crime;
for he acts that knowingly, which they committed ignorantly. For, by the
Dictates of his Religion he must be convinced, that in effect he does little
less than save a Barabbas, and crucify a Jesus.

A very pretty Chimaera! Which is as much as to make this Popish King the
greatest Barbarian in the Creation; a Barbarian that shall cherish and maintain
the Dissenters from Truth, and punish and condemn the Pillars of Christianity,
and Proselytes of Heaven: Which is no other than to speak him the basest of
Men, and little less than a Monster. Besides, at the same time that we suppose
that King that dares not uphold nor encourage his own Religion, we render him
the most deplorable of Cowards; a Coward so abject, that he dares not be a
Champion even for his God. And how consistent this is with the Glory of a
Crowned Head, and what hope England has of such a Successor, I leave all Men
of Sense to judge.

Besides, What mis-match'd incongruous Ingredients must go to make up this
Composition of a King! His Hand and Heart must be of no Kin to one another: He
must be so inhumane to those very darling Jesuits, that like Mahomet's Pidgeon
infused and whispered all his Heavenly Dreams into his Ears, that he must not
only clip their Wings, but fairly Cage 'em too* even for the charming Oracles
they breathed him: And at the same minute he must leave the wide and open Air
to those very Ravens that daily croak Abhorrence and Confusion to them, and all
their holy Dreams, and their false Oracles. Thus whilst he acts quite contrary
to all his Inclinations, against the whole bent of his Soul, what does he but
publicly put in force those Laws for the Protestant Service, 'till in fine,
for his Nations Peace, he ruins his own, and is a whole Scene of War within
himself? Whilst his Conscience accusing his Sloth on one side, the Pope on the
other, Romes continual Bulls bellowing against him, as an undutiful unactive
Son of Holy Mother Church, a Scandal to her Glory, a Traitor to her Interest,
and a Deserter of her Cause; one day accusing the Lukewarmness of his Religion,
another the Pusilanimity of his Nature; all Roman Catholic Princes deriding
the feebleness of his Spirit, and the tameness of his Arm: till at long run, to
spare a Faggot in Smithfield, he does little less than walk on hot Irons
himself. Thus all the Pleasure he relishes on a Throne, is but a kind of
Good-Fryday Entertainment. In stead of a Royal Festival, his rioting in all the
Luxury of his Heart, to see Romes Dagon worshipped, Romes Altars smoke, Romes
Standard set up, Romes Enemies defeated, and his victorious Mother Church
triumphant; his abject and poor-spirited Submission denies himself the only
thing he thirsts for: And whilst the Principles he sucks from Rome do in effect
in the Prophets words bid him, Rise, slay and eat, his Fear, his unkingly, nay
unmanly Fear, makes him fast and starve.

However, if there be such a King in Nature, as will not defend his own
Religion, because he dares not; but sneaks upon a Throne, and in obedience to
his Fear shrinks from the Dictates of his Conscience, and the Service of his
God: If, like Jupiters Log, such a King can be, and Fate has ordained us for a
Popish Prince, pray Heaven shroud the Imperial Lion in this innocent
Lambs-skin. But I am afraid we shall scarce be so happy; and I shrewdly
suspect, that all those cunning Catholic Trumpetters who in all Companies
found the Innocence of a Popish Successor, and flatter us with such a hopeful,
harmless, peaceful Prince in a Papist, have a little of the Romish Mental
Reservation in the Promises they make us, and no small Jesuitical Equivocation
in the Airy Castles they build us.

But I have heard some say, Why, may there not be a zealous Prince of any
Religion, who still out of the mere Principles of Morality, shall have that
tenderness and sense of his Peoples Peace, as to trouble himself about Religion
no farther than concerns his own Salvation; and therefore continue the
Administration of Laws and Devotion in the same Channel he found them?

And all this his mere Morality shall do! Alas! alas! If he is a Bigot in
Religion, all his Morals are Slaves to his Zeal. Nay, grant him to be the most
absolute Master of all the Cardinal Virtues, there is not one of them that shall
not be a particular Instrument for our Destruction. As for Example, allow him
Fortitude, suppose him a Prince of matchless Courage: So much the 2worse; what
does that but make him the more daring, and more adventurous, in pushing on the
Cause of Rome, and with a more undaunted and manly patience bear all the
Oppositions he meets in the way. If he be a Man of Justice, that still makes
for Rome: for whilst he believes the Pope to be Christ's Lawful Vicar, and that
that Office includes the Ecclesiastical Supremacy, no doubt but he will think it
as much the Duty of his Cstristianity to give the Pope his Right, as to take
his own: And in Christ's own Words, that give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar 's, and unto God those things that are God's, he will certainly judge the
Popes Restoration as great a piece of Justice, as his own Coronation. Then if
he be a Master of Temperance, in the properest sense of this Moral Virtue, viz.
a Man that can govern his Passions, that is still as bad: For he that has the
most bridled Passions, has always the firmest and steadiest Resolutions. Who so
renowned for Constancy, so fixed in his Resolves, and so unalterable in his
determined Purposes, as that Philip of Spain, who was never heard to rage, or
scarce seen to frown? Nay, History gives this Character of him, That after the
discovery of his Queens Adultery with his own Son, at the same minute that he
ordered her a Bowl of Poison, he did not so much as change his Look, or Voice,
either to his treacherous Son, or his incestuous Wife. And what so fit a Pillar
for Popery, as such Constancy in a King?

But if we take Temperance in its larger signification, viz. the self-denial of
a Man's Worldly Appetites; still worse and worse: For a Riotous Luxurious
Monarch bounds his Ambition wholly in the Pleasures of a Crown, resigns his
Reins to his Charioteers, and leaves the Toil of Power to his Subordinate
Magistrates, like the Work of Fate to Second Causes; whilst his Intemperance so
slackens his Zeal, that it unbends those very Nerves, which otherwise might be
more strenuously wound up for our Destruction.

And lastly, If he has Prudence, that is worst of all. That Is his only winning
Card; the only leading Virtue that manages his Policies and Conduct with that
Care and Art, till he effects the Business of Rome, and ripens that mighty Work
to a perfection, which otherwise an overforward foolhardy Zeal, by ill
management, might destroy.

Thus his very Cardinal Virtues are the absolute Hinges that open the Gates to
Rome. Alas! where Superstition rules the day, all Moral Virtues are but those
lesser Lights that take their Illumination from that greater Orb above 'em. And
thus, what boots it in a Popish Heir, to say he is the truest Friend, the
greatest of Heroes, the best of Masters, the justest Judge, or the honestest of
Men? All mere treacherous Quicksands for a People to repose the least glimpse
of Safety in, or build the least Hopes upon.

But I have heard a great many say, It cannot enter into their thoughts, that a
Popish Successor will ever take such an inhumane and so unnatual a Course to
establish Popery, it being so absolutely against the English Constitution, that
it can never be introduced with less than a Deluge of Blood. Surely his very
Glory should withold him from so much Cruelty, considering how much more it
would be for his Immortal Honor, to have the universal Prayers than the Curses
of a Nation. And one would think a King would so much more endeavor to win the
Hearts, than the Hatred of his People, that certainly in all probability this
excentrick Motion, this disjoynting the whole Harmony of a World, should be so
ungrateful to him, that no Religion whatever should put such a thought into his
Head.

And all this his Glory shall do? His Glory! The Glory of a Papist! A pretty
Airy Notion. How shall we ever expect that Glory shall steer the Actions of a
Popish Successor, when there is not that thing so abject that he shall refuse
to do, or that Shape or Hypocrisy so scandalous he shall not assume, when Rome
or Romes Interest shall command; nay, when his own petulant Stubbornness shall
but sway him? As for example; For one fit he shall come to the Protestant
Church, and be a Member of their Communion, notwithstanding at the same time
his Face belies his Heart, and in his Soul he is a Romanist. Nay, he shall vary
his Disguises as often as an Algerine his Colors, and change his Flag to
conceal the Pyrate. As for instance; Another fit, for whole Years together, he
shall come neither to one Church nor the other, and participate of neither
Communion, till ignobly he plays the unprincely, nay the unmanly Hypocrite, so
long, that he shelters himself under the Face of an Atheist, to shroud a
Papist. A Vizor more fit for a Banditto, than a Prince. And this methinks is so
wretched and so despicable a Disguise, that it looks like being ashamed of his
God.

Besides, If Glory could have any Ascendant over a Popish Successor, one would
think the Word of a King, and the Solemn Protestations of Majesty, ought to be
Sacred and Inviolable. But how many Precedents have we in Popish Princes to
convince us, their strongest Engagements and Promises are lighter than the very
Breath that utters 'em. As for Examples sake; How did their Saint Mary of
England promise the Norfolk and Suffolk Inhabitants the unmolested continuation
of the Protestant Worship, calling her God (that God that saw the falseness of
her Heart) to witness, That though her own Persuasion was of the Romish Faith,
yet she would content her self with the private Exercise of her own Devotion,
and preserve the then Protestant Government, with all her Subjects Rights and
Privileges, uninjur'd. Upon which those poor, credulous, honest, deluded
Believers, on the security of such prevalent Conjurations, led by the mistaken
Reverence they paid to a protesting Majesty, laid their Lives at her Feet, and
were the very Men that in that Contest of the Succession placed her on a
Throne: But immediately, when her Sovereign Power was securely established, and
his pious Holiness had bid her safely pull the Vizor off, no sooner did
Smithfield glow with Piles of blazing Heretics, but Chronicles more
particularly observe, that no People in her whole Kingdom felt so signal Marks
of her Vengeance, as those very Men that raised her to a Throne. Her Princely
Gratitude for their Crowning her with a Diadem, Crowned them with their
Martyrdoms.

But since we have mentioned her Princely Gratitude, 'twill not be amiss to
recollect one Instance more of so exemplary a Virtue. In the Dispute betwixt
hers, and the Lady Jane Grays Title to the Crown, it was remarkable, that all
the Judges of England gave their unanimous Opinions for the Lady Janes
Succession, except one of them only, that asserted the right of Mary: But it so
fell out, that this Man proving a Protestant, (notwithstanding of all the whole
Scarlet Robe he had been her only Champion) was so barbarously persecuted by
her, that being first degraded, then imprisoned and tortured for his Religion,
the cruelty of his Tormentors was so savage, that with his own hand he made
himself away to escape 'em. And well might the violence of his Despair
sufficiently testify his Sufferings were intolerable, when he fled to so sad a
Refuge as Self-murder for a Deliverance.

But here says another Objection, Suppose that the Conservation of a Nations
Peace, the Dictates of a Princes Glory, and all the Bonds of Morality, cannot
have any influence over a Popish Successor; yet why may there not be that
Prince, who in veneration of his Coronation Oath, shall defend the Protestant
Religion, notwithstanding all his private regret, and inclinations to the
contrary? When rather than incur the infamous brand of Perjury, he shall tie
himself to the performance of that, which not the force of Religion it self
shall violate? And then, how can there be that Infidel of a Subject, after so
solemn an Oath, that shall not believe him?

Why, truly, I am afraid there are a great many of those Infidels, and some
that will give smart Reasons for their Infidelity: For, if he keeps his Oath,
we must allow, that the only Motive that prompts him to keep it, is some
Obligation that he believes is in an Oath. But considering he is of a Religion
that can absolve Subjects from their Allegiance to an Heretical Excommunicated
Prince, nay depose him, and take his very Crown away; why may it not much more
release a King from his Faith to an Excommunicated Heretical People, by so much
as the Ties of Vassals to Monarchs, are greater than those of Monarchs to
Vassals?

But 'twill not be amiss, for strengthening this Argument, to give the World an
Instance of the power of an Oath with a Roman Catholic King.

There is a famous Gentleman on the other side the Water, whom we all very well
know, (pray Heaven we live not to be better acquainted with him than we desire)
that once took the strongest of Oaths, the Sacrament, That he would never
invade nor make war upon Flanders. But whether or no his Confessor found some
Jesuitical Loop-hole from that Sacrament, or that the Body and Blood of Christ
could not hold him, we see that Flanders of late years has not lived so
merrily, nor so peaceably, as so Royal a Voucher (one would have thought) might
have assured them they should.

And now let us a little balance the difference between the Breach of his Oath,
and that of a Popish Princes in England. All the Motives that could provoke him
to the breach of his Oath, was only his Ambition, a Lust of being Great: And at
the same time that he is an Invader of his Neighboring Princes, his Conscience
must tell him his Conquests are at best but so many glorious Robberies, and all
his Trophies but shining Rapines. Was it not the sense of this that made
Charles the Fifth, who may be also called Great, after all his Victories,
retire from a Throne into a Cloister, out of mere remorse for all the Streams
of Blood he had shed, to make the last part of his Life an Atonement for the
Faults of the first?

And then if a Roman Catholic can break an Oath only for the pleasure of
Conquering, which he knows is doing ill; shall not a Popish Prince in England
have ten times more inclination to break an Oath for the propagation of his own
Faith, which his Conscience tells him is Meritorious? For, besides the specious
flattery, That Kings can do no ill, and That all Crimes are cancelled in a
Crown, he has Religion to drive the Royal Jehu on; Religion, that from the
beginning of the World, through all Ages, has set all Nations in a Flame, yet
never confesses it self in the wrong. Besides, how can a Popish Prince, in
attempting to establish his own Religion, believe he does his Subjects an
Injustice in that very thing in which he does God Justice; or think he injures
them, when he does their Souls right? Alas! no: When Rome by her insinuating
Witchcrafts has lifted the full Bowl of her Enchantments to his Lips, what will
his holy enthusiastic Rage do less than the hot-brained drunken Alexander? All
his best Friends, and every honest Clytus that dares but thwart his Frenzy, is
presently his Frenzies Sacrifice: only with this difference; the frantic
Alexander, after his drunken Fit was over, in his milder and more sensible
Intervals, with all the compunctions of penitence, could mourn and groan for
what his blinder Rage had murdered: But Religious Frenzy leaves that eternal
Intoxication behind it, that where it commits all the Cruelties in the World,
it is never sober after to be sorry for it. Thus whilst a Popish King sets his
whole Kingdom in a combustion, how little does he think he plays a second Nero?
Good conscientious Man, not he: Alas! he does not tune his Joys to the
Tyrannick Nero's Harp, but to David's milder and more sacred Lyre; whilst in
the height of his pious Ecstasie he sings Te Deum at the Conflagration. Thus
with an Arbitrary unbounded Power, what does his licencious holy thirst of
Blood do less, than make his Kingdom a larger Slaughterhouse, and his
Smithfield an Original Shambles? Thus the old Moloch once again revives, to
feast and riot on his dear Humane Sacrifice: And whilst his fiery Iron Hands
crush the poor burning Victime dead, the propagation of Religion, and the Glory
of God, as he calls it, are the very Trumpets that deafen all the feeble Cries
of Blood, and drown the dying Groans of what he murders.

Thus whilst the Bonds of Faith, Vows, Oaths, and Sacraments cannot hold a
Popish Successor, what is that in an Imperial Head, but what in a private Man
we punish with a Gaol and Pillory; whilst the perjured Wretch stands the
universal Mark of Infamy, and then is driven from all Conversation, and like a
Monster hooted from Light and Day. But the Pope and a Royal Hand may do any
thing; there is a Crown in the case to gild the Deeds his Royal Engines act. --
Et quod
Turpe est Cerdoni, Volesos Brutosque, decebit.
They are still that adorable Sovereign Greatness we must kneel to, and obey.
What if a little perjured Villain has sworn a poor Neighbor out of a Cow or a
Cottage! hang him, inconsiderable Rogue, his Ears deserve a Pillory. But to Vow
and Covenant, and forswear three Kingdoms out of their Liberties and Lives,
that is Illustrious and Heroic. There Is Glory in great Achievements, and
Virtue into Success. Alas! a vast Imperial Nimrod hunts for Nobler Spoils,
flies at a whole Nations Property and Inheritance. A Game worthy a Son of Rome,
and Heir of Paradise. And to lay the mighty Scene of Ruin secure, he makes his
Coronation Oath, and all his Royal Protestations, (those splendid Baits of
premeditated Perjury) the Cover and Skreen to the hidden fatal Toil laid to
ensnare a Nation.

But now to their main Objection: Some People will tell us, That it is wholly
impossible for any Popish Successor, by all his Arts or Endeavors whatever,
to introduce Popery into England.

To this I answer, If he is a Papist that says so, he knows he belies his
Conscience; for our late Hellish Plot is a plain Demonstration, that their
whole Party believed it possible. For did not the late Secretary St. Coleman's
Records tell us, That the pestilent Northern Heresy was to be rooted out, and
that now they had as much hopes of accomplishing that Sacred Work of Rome, as
they had in Queen Marys days? Could any thing be plainer, than that the subtle
Jesuits had formed a Design to effect it? For it is contrary to Reason, and
even Nature it self, (as bloody as their Principles are) to think they aimed at
the Life of their King, and would play the Regicides only to commit the
blackest of Murders, for merely Murders sake. No: They had the assurance under
a presumptive Popish Heir, of making a National Conversion; and how little
privy soever he might possibly be to their principal and hellish Blow, yet they
had that perfect in-sight into the very Soul of a Papist, that they were
satisfied that under that Notion it was impossible for him to be otherwise than
a Man of Romes right stamp, and their Hearts own liking. And if under such a
Successor, their hopes of a Nations Conversion were equal to those in Queen
Marys time, no doubt the converting Means must have been as Bloody or Bloodier
than hers. For if after the short Infancy of seven years Reformation, under the
Protestant Edward the Sixth's Reign, there wanted Fire and Faggot to restore
the Pope; how much more will he want them for his Restoration, after an
Exclusion of almost Seven-score years together, with all the necessary
Difficulties of regaining his Empire, where his Throne has been so long
demolished? Nay, in Edward's Days the only detestation of the Fopperies,
Idolatries, and Superstitions of Rome, was all that went to make a Protestant
Reformation. Alas! the Beast was then but young: But his Horns are since grown
stronger, and his Teeth and Tallons sharper? For, since that, we have had the
notorious Paris and Irish Massacres, when at one riotous Festival above 100000
bleeding Protestant Hearts were all gorged by the devouring Monster in a Night.
Add to these, the successive Villainies of Gunpowder-Treasons, Fired Cities,
with Plots against Kings and Kingdoms, which serve to heighten the Protestant
Abhorrency. And if after all this we must still be converted, most certainly
his Holiness must follow Nebuchadnezzar's Example, and heat his Fiery Furnace
seven times hotter than formerly.

Thus far we are convinced that the Jesuits beliv'd it possible; and they are
too cunning and politic a sort of People, to be deceived with Shadows, or make
Mountains of Mole-hills. And that it may not be objected, That their Zeal has
blinded their Reason, let us but rightly consider, how far the first
Foundations of Popery, (viz. Arbitrary Power) may be laid in England. First,
then, if a Papist Reign, we very well understand that the Judges, Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, and all the Judiciary Officers, are of the King's
Creation: And as such, how far may the Influence of Preferment on baser
Constitutions, culled out for his purpose, prevail even to deprave the very
Throne of Justice her self, and make our Judges use even our Protestant Laws
themselves to open the first Gate to Slavery? Alas! the Laws, in corrupted
Judges hands, have been too often used as barbarously as the Guests of
Procrustes, who had a Bed for all Travelers; but then he either cut them
shorter, or stretched them longer, to fit them to it. Well, but if the Public
Ministers of Justice betray the Liberty of the Subject, the Subject may
petition for a Parliament to punish 'em for it. But what if he will neither hear
one, nor call the other? who shall compel him? The entailed Revenues of the
Crown are much larger than his Popish Predecessors e're enjoyed,
notwithstanding all the Branches of it that terminate with the Life of this
present King. Besides, if this will not do, there is no doubt but he will find
sufficient Assistance from the Pope, English Papists, and Foreign Princes: And
then having but a prudent Eye, and a tenacious Hand, to manage his Exchequer,
we shall find he will never call that People he shall never have need of. And
then where are our Parliaments, and a Redress for all the Grievances and
Oppressions in the World? But all this while the Pope is not Absolute, there
wants a Standing Army to crown the Work. And he shall have it; for who shall
hinder him? Nay, all his Commanders shall be qualified, even by our present
Protestant Test, for the Employment. He shall have enough Men of the Blade out
of one half of the Gaming-houses in Town, to Officer twice as many Forces as he
shall want. It Is true, they shall be Men of no Estates nor Principles; but they
shall fight as well as those that have both: For People are ever as valiant
that have their Fortunes to raise, as those that have them to defend: nay, of
the two they shall be more faithful to him; for they have no Property to be
concerned for, and will more zealously serve him, by reason their whole
Interests and Estates lie in him. And that this Army may be more quietly
raised, how many Honorable Pretenses may be found? Perhaps the greatest and
most importunate Preservation of his Kingdom shall call for it; and then, upon
second thoughts, in stead of defeating some Foreign Enemy, they are opportunely
ready to cut our Throats at home, if we do not submit, and give all that this
King shall ask. And then I hope none will deny, but his Revenue may be as great
as he and his Popish Counselors shall think fit to make it.

Thus far we have given the Pourtraicture of a Popish King: And now let us take
a Draught of his Features in his Minority; that is, whilst he is only a Popish
Heir Apparent.

Imagine then a long and prosperous Reign of a Protestant Prince, a Prince so
excellently qualified, that true Original of Clemency, Goodness, Honor, all
the most dazzling Beams of Majesty: That with all his Sacred Princely Endowments
he renders himself so true a Vicegerent of Heaven in his Three Kingdoms, so
near an Image of God in the moderation of his Temper, and the dispensation of
his Laws, that even the nearness of his affinity to Heaven should entitle him
to the dearest Care of it. And to prove him the dearest Care of Heaven, imagine
likewise that Heaven has given him a People of those loyal and grateful
Principles, looking up with that thankful Allegiance, and kneeling with that
humble Veneration to the best of Kings, the Author of their Prosperity, and
the Founder of his Kingdoms Glory, that they have made it the greatest study of
their Obedience to deserve so good a King. Witness in all Exigences their
cordial tendering their Lives to serve him, and so far endeavoring to
strengthen his Scepter and his Sword, till perhaps they have added those Gems
to his Crown, that all his Princely Ancestors could never boast of: Being so
truly strenuous in rendering their Purses and Fortunes his absolute Votaries,
till they have made his Revenue more than trebbly exceed all his Royal
Predecessors: And not stopping here, but upon all occasions continuing their
generous and unwearied Bounty: Nay, that too, not always where his Peoples
Safety, and his Kingdoms Glory, but where his private Satisfaction called for
it; as if they were resolved to yield their Hands and Hearts so entire a
Sacrifice to Majesty, that they would gratify even his softest Wishes,
studying to sweeten his Fatigue of Empire with all the Pleasures of a Throne.

Now let us suppose, after a long Tranquillity of this matchless Monarch's
Reign, That the immediate Heir to his Crown, and a part of his Blood, by the
Sorceries of Rome is cankered into a Papist. And to pursue this Landschape, we
see this once happy flourishing Kingdom so far (as in all Duty and Reason
bound) concerned for themselves, their Heirs, and their whole Countries safety,
till with an honest, cautious, prudent Fear they begin to inspect a Kingdoms
universal Health; till weighing all the Symptoms of its State, they plainly
descry those Pestilential Vapors fermenting, that may one day infect their
Air, and sicken their World; and see that rising Eastern Storm engendring, that
will once bring in those more than Egyptian Locusts, that will not only fill
their Houses, and their Temples, but devour their Labors, their Harvests, and
their Vintages. Thus they so long survey their threatened Countries Danger, till
with a more than Prophetic horror, they manifestly discover all the
inseparable Concomitants of a Popish Successor; and, like true Patriots,
anticipate their Woes, with a present sense of the future Miseries they foresee.

With these just Resentments of their dangerous State, it is easy to conclude
what follows. What is this Popish Heir in the Eye of England, but perhaps the
greatest and only Grievance of the Nation, the universal Object of their Hate
and Fear, and the Subject of their Clamours and Curses? at whose Door lie their
Discontents and Murmurs; But it is Murmurs so violent, that they thrust in
amongst their very Prayers, and become almost a part of their Devotions:
Murmurs so bold, that they dare approach the very Palace, nay Throne and Ear of
Majesty. And whenever the People of England reflect on this Heir as their King
in Reversion, they have reason to look upon him as no better than Jupiter's
Stork amongst the Frogs. Yes, notwithstanding all his former Glories and
Conquests, his whole Stock of Fame is so lost and buried in his Apostasy from
the Religion, and consequently the Interest of these Protestant Kingdoms, that
all his Services are cancelled, and his whole Mass of Glory corrupted.

Suppose likewise this Popish Heir for many happy years so blessed in the
Tenderness and Friendship of the best of Kings, that there is not that Favor
or Honor within the reach or wish of Majesty, that he has not made it the
Study of his whole Reign to confer upon him; whilst his Greatness and Luster
have been so much his dearest darling Care, as if the promoting his Interest
had been the Support of his own; till in short he has had so large a share in
the Bosom of this Royal Pylades, this kindest and most gracious of Princes, as
if one Soul had animated them both.

On this Foundation, as great Affections are not easily removed, and Sympathy
is that Bond which Humane Power can never dissolve, suppose moreover, that this
inseparable Tie continues so long, notwithstanding all the Changes of
Principles and Religion, a Bias so heavy that it almost overturns a Kingdom:
Yet still the force of Nature and Friendship surmounts them all, and stands
that zealous unshaken Bulwark, for the protection and safety of this dearest
part of himself; till at length he does little less than act so over-fond a
Pelican, that he exhausts even his own Vitals to cherish him.

Thus whilst the long and lawful Fears of a drooping Nation have fully and
justly satisfied them, that the kindest and most favorable Aspect of Majesty
that smiles on England, through the defense and Interest of a Popish Heir, shines
but like the Sun through a Burning-glass, whose gentlest morning Vernal Beams,
through that fatal Medium, do but burn and consume what otherwise they would warm
and cherish; what can the Consequence of this unhappy Friendship be, but that
the very Souls and Loyalties of almost a whole Kingdom are staggered at this
fatal Conjunction; till I am afraid there are too many, who in detestation of
that one gangrened Branch of Royalty, can scarce forbear (how undutifully
soever) to murmur and revile even at that Imperial Root that cherishes it?
Insomuch that those very Knees that but now would have bowed into their very
Graves to serve him, grow daily and hourly so far from bending (as they ought)
to a Crowned Head, till they are almost as stubborn as their Petitions and
Prayers have been ineffectual.

Thus whilst a Popish Heir's extravagant Zeal for Rome makes him shake the very
Throne that upholds him, by working and incroaching on the Affections of
Majesty for that Protection and Indulgence that gives Birth and Life to the
Heart-burnings of a Nation; what does he otherwise, than in a manner stab his
King, his Patron, and his Friend, in his tenderest part, his Loyal Subjects
Hearts? Which certainly is little less than to play the more lingering sort of
Parricide; a part so strangely unnatural, that even Savages would blush at; yet
this Religion, incorrigible remorseless Religion, never shrinks at.

Thus whilst the Universal Nerves of a whole struggling Nation bend their united
force against the Invasion of Pope and Popery, in studying to prevent Tyranny,
they grow jealous of Monarchy. And fearing lest their Loyal Aid to the Father
of their Country should unhappily contribute to the strengthening of the
Subverters of their Peace and Liberty, instead of that Tributary gold which
once they so cheerfully shower'd at their dread Sovereign's feet, now on the
contrary the protection of a Popish Successor makes them so far from supplying
the real and most pressing Necessities of Majesty, that they are rather
well-pleased and triumph in his greatest wants, and that perhaps when his
Glory, nay possibly when his nearest Safety calls for their Assistance.

Thus what does this Popish Heir in tying up the hands of a whole Nation from
their just devotion to their King, but only this, In return for the
accumulated Honors heaped upon him, he most inhumanely starves the very hand
that fed him. An Ingratitude that even an Infidel would be ashamed of! But this
Religion, incorrigible remorseless Religion, never blushes at.

Besides, if there can be a Son of that Royal Martyr Charles the First, a
Prince so truly pious, that his very Enemies dare not asperse his Memory or
Life with the least blemish of Irreligion; a Prince that sealed the Protestant
Faith with his blood; who in his deplorable Fate and ignominious Death, bore so
near a resemblance to that of the Savior's of the World, that his Sufferings
can do no less than seat him at the right hand of Heaven. If, I say, there can
be a Son of that Royal Protestant, of that uncharitable Popish Faith, who by
the very Tenets of his Religion dooms all that die without the bosom of their
Church irreparably damned; then consequently he must barbarously tear up his
Fathers sacred Monument, brand his blessed memory with the name of Heretic;
and to complete the horrid Anathema, he most impiously execrates the very
Majesty that gave him being.

Then in fine, provided and granted that we have an Heir to the Imperial Crown
of England perverted to the Romish Faith, and consequently of that depraved
constitution and principles, that he has neither charity for the Stock from
whence he sprang, concern or care for the safety, peace, glory, or prosperity
of the best of Patrons, Friends, and Kings; nor lastly, any remorse for all the
Groans of an afflicted Kingdom: What promises can we give our selves of his
future Reign, when we have all these fatal Prognostics beforehand? Ex pede
Hercules. Or is it likely he will have greater care and tenderness for a
Nations peace, when he shall be seated on a Throne, and have more power to take
it from them?

But says a Critic to all this, Suppose this Popish Heir undoubtedly believes
(as a Papist must do) that there is no way to Heaven but his own; should he so
far comply with the glory or interest of his King, though a Father or a
Brother, on the one side, and the quiet and safety of a Nation on the other, as
to renounce his principles of Christianity, and conform to theirs? What were
that, but to purchase their peace with his own damnation, and to sacrifice his
own Soul for their worldly interests? And certainly neither Duty, nor
Allegiance, nor any Tie whatever, ought to extort that from him. And then, if
all the grievances of a Kingdom lie at his door, alas, the worst can be said of
him is, That if he be any occasion of it, it is his unhappiness, and not his
fault. More especially, provided he is only passive, and that we plainly see,
that during his being this Popish Heir, he acts nothing that may encourage or
favor Popery in the least.

Pray, by the way, How must it follow, that if we do not plainly see him act,
that therefore he must not act? Does no man act, but he that publicly treads
the Stage? Does no man sit at the Helm, but he that visibly holds the Rudder?
Does no wind stir the troubled Sea into a Tempest, but what the poor Mariners
both hear and feel? no Storm, but that which lightens in their Eyes, and
thunders in their Ears, to warn 'em it is a coming? Alas, alas, the greatest
Hurricanes are only made by subterranean Winds. A secret, silent,
underground-working Mine of Ruin, which never bursts out till it destroys, and
which no man hears or sees till he is lost.

But to return to the Objection, The grievance of a Nation may be his
unhappiness, and not his fault, etc. That is, in short, he cannot help it. Very
right. And so when this Popish Heir comes to the Crown, and promotes the Romish
Interest with all the Severity, Injustice, and Tyranny, that Religious Cruelty
can invent; his answer will be, he cannot help it, or at least cannot withstand
those irresistible motives that prompt him to their execution; which is the
same thing. The injunctions of his Conscience make him as active now in the
ruining a Kingdoms peace, as he was passive in it before. For who can be so
void of common sense, as not to know, that the same impulse of Conscience that
makes a man a Roman Catholic, will make him act like one when opportunity
serves? And what greater opportunity to establish Popery, than for a Papist to
wear a Crown? And though perhaps the stubborn English Genius will not easily bend
to the Superstition of Rome, yet since his Almighty Friend the Pope, the
undisputed Keeper of the Keys of Paradise, will no doubt assign him no common
Diadem in Heaven for so glorious a Task as a Nations Conversion, who then will
not make that sacred Work the study of years, which cannot be accomplished in a
day, for such a Reward? Especially when he has these two infallible Arguments
to spur him on in so godly a Cause: First then, he is of a Religion that makes
humane Merit the path to Salvation. Merit, the Roman Catholic Exchequer,
Rome's bottomless Golden Mine. Merit, that makes the frighted dying sinner
starve his own Blood, and pawn his Estate, to redeem his Soul. Merit, that
drains the Wealth of Nations into the priestly Coffers, and makes the Luxury of
a World the pampered riotous Church-mans Inheritance. Merit, that can make a
Loretto-Chappel vie with a Venetian Arsenal; and Rome's Altars, Cloisters, and
Covents, rise so high, so rich, so numerous, and so magnificent, though the
impoverisht Widows groans, and the naked Orphans cries, do little less toward
the building than a second Amphion. Nay, Merit, that can consecrate Daggers,
and kill Kings. Thus whilst he has the Wonder-working Merit for his Tutor, what
greater and more meritorious act to canonize him a Saint of the first
magnitude, than the converting of an Apostatized Heretical Kingdom?

And then next, he is of a Religion that does not go altogether in the
old-fashion Apostolical way of preaching and praying, and teaching all Nations,
etc. but scourging, and wracking, and broiling 'em into the fear of God. A
Religion that for its own propagation will at any time authorize its Champions
to divest themselves of their humanity, and act worse than Devils, to be
Saints. And thus whilst neither the cries of Blood can deter him on the one
side, and so no Tyranny come amiss to him; and next, that he has the undeniable
assurance of the greatest blessings of Eternity to encourage him on the other;
with these advantages, who would not be as active as a second Romulus, and with
all his utmost vigor and pride, build up his Romes new Walls, though he made his
nearest, nay the Nations dearest blood their Cement?

And thus what is a Popish Heir, but the most terrible and the most dangerous
of Englands Enemies, and of all our Foes, has the most inflexible invincible
Enmity. Nay, the very outrages of Thefts, Murders, Adulteries, and Rebellions,
are nothing to the pious Barbarities of a Popish King. The Murderer and
Adulterer may in time be reclaimed by the precepts of Morality, and the
terrors of Conscience. The Thief, by the dread of a Gallows may become honest.
Nay, the greatest Traitor, either by the fear of Death, or the apprehensions of
Hell, may at last repent. But a Papist on a Throne has an unconfutable
vindication for all his proceedings, challenges a Commission even from Heaven
for all his Cruelty dares act. And when the enchantments of Rome have touched
his Tongue with a Coal from her Altars, what do his Enthusiasms make him
believe, but that the most savage and most hellish Dooms his blinded zeal can
pronounce, are the immediate Oracles of God? and all the Apology a poor Nation
can expect from him, is, He cannot help it.

I, but (say the wisest Critics we have met with yet) if these be the dangers
of a Popish King, why have we not such strong, such potent Laws made before
this popish Heir come to the Crown, that it shall be impossible for him ever to
set up Popery, though he should never so much endeavor it?

To this I answer; To endeavor to set up Popery by Law, even with the Laws
that we have already against it, is impossible; and therefore the very
supposition of the Projection that way is nonsense. And on the other side, to
conclude he will endeavor to do it against Law, and so to make new Laws on
purpose for him to break them with their fellows, is worse nonsense than
the other. Besides, Who shall call this King to question for breaking these Laws,
if he has the power and will to do it? I fancy that the only nearest
illustration I can make upon this point, in creating new Laws against Popery in
case of a Popish Successor, is as politic a piece of work in the kind, as
building the Hedge to fence in the Cuckoo. It Is true, I will not deny, but a
Popish King may be totally restrained from all power of introducing Popery, by
the force of such Laws that may be made to tie up his hands; but then they must
be such as must ruin his Prerogative, and put the executive power of the Laws
into the hands of the People. If a King of England were no more than a
Stadt-holder in Holland, or a Duke of Venice, no doubt Popery would have little
hopes of creeping into England; which is in short, he that is no King, can be
no Tyrant. But what Monarch will be so unnatural to his own Blood, so ill a
Defender, and so weak a Champion for the Royal Dignity he wears, as to sign and
ratify such Laws as shall entail that effemenacy and that servility on a
Crown, as shall render the Imperial Majesty of England but a Pageant, a mere
Puppet upon a Wire? If then no King will assent to make Laws to do it this way,
and no Laws can do it the other, all Laws against Popery, in case of a Popish
Successor, are, as I told you before, but building the Hedge, etc. For indeed,
how can the force of Laws made by a Protestant Predecessor, and a Protestant
Parliament, in any sort bind a Popish Successor, when the very first advance
of the Popes Supremacy introduces that higher power, those Canonick
Ecclesiastic Laws, which no Secular, or any Temporal Court can or may
control? Laws that shall declare, not only all the Statutes and Acts of
Parliament made against the dignity of Mother Church, void and null, but the
very Lawmakers themselves as Heretics, wholly incapable of ever having any
right of making such Laws. No doubt then, but that fire that burns those
Heretic Lawmakers, shall give their Laws the same Martyrdom.

With this certain prospect, both of the Ruin of their Estates, Lives, and
Liberties, where lies the sin in the Commons of England to stand upon their
guard against a Popish Successor? Aye, a God's name let 'em stand upon their
guards, and use all expedients to keep out Popery and Tyranny, provided still
that we preserve the sacred Succession in its right Line; for that we are told
both King and people are obliged in Conscience to defend and uphold.

I think I need not insist further in multiplying Arguments to prove how far
it is impossible to do one without the other; but on the other side, let us
examine how the defending and establishing a Popish Successor, is an obligation
on our Duties or Consciences.

First then, let us fancy we see this Popish Heir on his Throne, and by all the
most illegal and arbitrary means, contrary to the whole frame and hinges of the
English Government, introducing Popery with that zeal and vigor, till his
infatuated Conscience has perverted the King into a Tyrant. And not to stop
here, If the Constitution of the English Majesty makes a King supreme Moderator
and Governor both Ecclesiastic and Civil: What does this Popish King by
admitting the Pope's Church-supremacy, but divest himself of half his Royalty,
whilst like the junior King of Brainford in the Play, he resignes and alienates
the right and power of Majesty to an Invader and an Usurper? And whilst we are
thus enslaved by a Medley-Government betwixt Tyranny and Usurpation, by
establishing a Papist on a Throne, we are so far from preserving the Crown,
that is, the Imperial Dignity, in a right Line of Succession, that we do not
preserve it at all, but on the contrary extirpate and destroy it, whilst by
enthroning a Papist we totally subvert and depose the very Monarchy it self.
And can it be the duty of either Englishmen or Christians, to have that zeal
for a corrupted leprous Branch of Royalty, that we must ruin both Religion,
Government, and Majesty it self, to support him? How much more consistent would
it be with the honest, prudent, and lawful means of a Nations preservation, to
take out one link out of the whole Chain of Succession, than by preserving
that, to break the whole to pieces? Next let us see, who it is the Commons of
England would render incapable of inheriting the Imperial Crown; a Prince of
the Royal Blood, nursed and bred up in the Protestant Allegiance and Faith, and
afterward seduced and perverted to the Romish principles and Superstition. And
what is that, but a Prince whom the unanimous Voice both of King and People,
(for such are the Laws of England) have declared guilty of High Treason, as we
find it in the first Statute in the 23 d of Elizabeth.

STATUTE.
Be it declared and enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That
all persons whatever, which have, or shall have, or pretend to have power, or
shall by any way or means put in practice to Absolve, Persuade, or Withdraw any
the Queens Majesty's Subjects, or any within her Highness Realms and Dominions,
from their natural Obedience to her Majesty; or withdraw 'em for that intent
from the Religion now by her Highness Authority established within her Highness
Dominions, to the Romish Religion; or to make them, or any of them, to promise
any Obedience to any pretended Authority of the Sea of Rome, or any other
Prince, State, or Potentate, to be had or used within her Dominions; or shall
do any Overt Act to that intent or purpose; and every of them, shall be to all
intents Adjudged to be Traitors; and being thereof Lawfully Convicted shall
have Judgment to suffer and forfeit as in case of High Treason.

And if any person shall, after the end of this Sessions of Parliament, by any
means be willingly Absolved, or withdrawn as aforesaid, or willingly
Reconciled, or shall promise any such Obedience to any such pretended
Authority, Prince, State, or Potentate, as is aforesaid; then every such
person, their Procurers and Counselors thereunto, being thereof lawfully
Convicted, shall be Tried and Judged, and shall Suffer and Forfeit as in cases
of High Treason.

Nor was this Act any more than a Confirmation and Explanation of an Act made
before, in the 13 th year of her Reign; Where it is likewise declared, That if
any person, or persons, shall willingly receive or take any Absolutions, or
Reconciliations from the Sea of Rome, that they and their Seducers shall be
equally guilty of High Treason. Nay, we have an Act even in Henry the 8th's
Reign, in which is declared, That any man that shall refuse the Oath of Henry
's Supremacy in renunciation of the Pope, shall be guilty of High Treason.

If then we have a Popish Heir presumptive, of the same brand that these Laws
have marked him out, I would ask, what Crime it is in the People of England to
endeavor to disable a Tyrant from wearing a Crown? Besides, they consider they
are under a regulated and bounded Government, a Government where no man stands
or falls but by his own act and decree; whilst the whole dispensation of Meum
and Tuum are made by every man's self, or his Representatives. Since then the
People of England, as the Lawmakers, are an essential part of the Government;
and are fully assured in the Reign of a Papist, that Right will be destroyed,
Why should not they be as active and vigorous for their own Royal Inheritance,
and Sacred Succession of Power, as a King for his? Nay they ought to be the
more vigorous of the two. For the King in defending a Popish Heir, protects but
that Successor, whose Tyranny he shall never live to see (since it commences
but from his Grave); but the People of England, in Asserting their Rights and
Liberties, and defending themselves and their Heirs, do oppose that Tyranny
which they may both live to see and feel. And that they may assure themselves
they shall feel it, if ever a Papist mounts this Throne, then all their
Murmurs, their Petitions, Protestings, and Association-Votes will be remembered
to the purpose. He that has gone a long and tiresome Journey through Brakes and
Briars to a splendid Palace, when once in possession, will send out to Root up
all those Thorns, and Weed those Thistles that gored him in the way. Alas! too
sure he will make good that old Promise of God to the Seed of the Woman, He Will
crush their Heads, that bruised his Heels. And would it not be hard, that the
Folly and Fall of one Man should renew our old Adam's Misfortune, and entail a
Curse on our whole English Generation? If the policy of Rome, like the old
Serpents subtilty, has puffed him up into an ambition and lust of being equal to
Gods; may he have Adam's success too, whilst the Protestant hearts and hands of
England, stand like the Angels Flaming Sword to expel him from that once
Hereditary Paradise, which now his Apostasy has justly forfeited and lost.

Besides, that the Disinheriting of an Heir to the Crown of England may not
appear a thing so illegal, or indeed so monstrous as some people would make it,
I would only refer those vehement assertors of the inviolable right of
Succession, to our own Chronicles for their confutation. For they will find not
only the Succession was scarce ever kept for Three Kings Reigns together, in a
direct line of descent, since the Conquest; but that the Crown and Succession
were frequently disposed and settled by Acts of Parliament. I shall need
instance but in some few particulars. In the 25. of Henry the 8 th, we find the
Parliament ordering the Succession, and enacting, That the Imperial Crown of
this Realm shall be to King Henry the 8th, and to the Heirs of his body
lawfully begotten on Queen Anne, and the heirs of the bodies of such several
sons respectively, according to the course of inheritance; and for default of
such Issue, then to the sons of his body in like manner; and upon failure of
such issue, then to the Lady Elizabeth, etc. By the same Statute is every
subject at full age obliged by an Oath to defend the contents of this, and the
refusal made misprision of Treason. In the 28 th year of his Reign, was that
Act repealed, and the Parliament entailed the Crown on the Heirs of his Body by
Queen Jane, the Lady Mary and the Lady Elizabeth being both declared
illegitimate, the first as the Daughter of Katharine, formerly his Brothers
Wife, and divorced; and the last as the Daughter of Anne Boleign, atainted of
High Treason. And in case he died without issue, then the Parliament empowered
him by the same Act to dispose of the Succession by his own Letters patents, or
his last Will. In the 35th year of his Reign the Parliament granted the
Succession to Edward, and for want of Heirs of his Body, to the Lady Mary, and
the Heirs of her Body; and for want of such Heirs, to the Lady Elizabeth; but
both subject to such conditions as the King should limit by his Letters
patents, or by his last Will signed by his Hand; and if the King left no such
Conditions by his Will, or under his Letters Patents, then either of them
should enjoy the Imperial Crown, with the limitations only made in that Act. By
these Acts we may plainly see, that the Succession of the English Crown was
wholly subjected to the disposal, determinations, and limitations of
Parliament. And that we may be well assured that that right lay in them, Henry
the 8th was a Prince of that Wisdom and Prudence, and so far from submitting to
Parliaments, that we may be very well assured, that he would never have
complimented them with a power that was not their due. If he had thought in the
least that he could have disposed of the Succession himself, no doubt but he
would have challenged the Prerogative, had he had it to challenge. And as in
every one of these three Acts they declared that their zeal for settling the
Succession was for prevention of those mischiefs, and that bloodshed that might
possibly be occasioned by future disputes; Here it is observed, that whilst they
thus bandied the Succession so many various ways, by three several Acts in one
Kings Reign, they did not so much respect the preservation of the Right Heir,
as the Kingdoms safety. For had they been so passionately tender for the next
of blood in that Age, as some would have us be in this, they would never have
excluded the Lady Mary and Elizabeth from the Crown in one Act, or never have
readmitted them again in another. Besides, one thing is rema^kable in these
Acts of Parliament, viz. The last Act of Parliament gives the Succession to
those very Ladies whom the King and Parliament had before declared and recorded
Illegitimate. Nay, they had proceeded so far, as to make it Treason for any man
by Writing or Printing to say or declare that either the Lady Mary or the Lady
Elizabeth were legitimate; and yet afterward these were no impediments to
debar them from a Throne. And England was never more blessed, than under the long
and glorious Reign of that excellent Princess Elizabeth, how Illegitimate
soever she had been rendered. I shall only cite one Act more, and that is the
13 of Elizabeth, where it is made Treason to affirm the Right of Succession of
the Crown to be in any other than the Queen; or to affirm that the Laws and
Statutes made in Parliament, do not bind the Right of the Crown, and the
descent, limitation, inheritance, and governance thereof. If after so plain and
evident proofs of the undeniable power of Parliaments, we meet so many snarlers
against the proceedings of the last, I know no excuse they can make for
themselves, but by owning their Ignorance to be as great as their Impudence.

If then (which no man in his right wits can deny) our Religion, Lives, and
Liberties are only held by a Protestant Tenure, and the Majesty of England not
only by the force of his Coronation Oath, but by all the ties whatever ought to
be the pillar and bulwark of the Protestant Faith, and at the same time
granting that we have a Popish Prince to inherit the Imperial Crown of England,
he ought certainly in all Justice as little to ascend this Throne, as
Nebuchadnezzar ought to have kept his when the immediate blast of Heaven had
made him so incapable of ruling as a King, that he was only a companion fit for
brutes and savages. And if he had no injustice done him when he was thrust out
into his proper Element, to feed and herd with the Beasts of the field; a
Papist Heir of England, with that persuasion and principles so destructive to
the British State, has as little wrong done him in being debarred from the
Succession, as a fitter Guest for a Cloister than a Throne. I remember Story
tells us, That the Mother of Paris, the Son of King Priam, dreaming before his
birth she had brought forth a Firebrand, that should one day set their Troy in
flames; immediately upon this, the afflicted King, as a true Father of his
Country, notwithstanding all the compunctions of Nature, and ties of Blood, was
so far from cherishing even his own Race, and a Branch of himself, that he
ordered the Infant to be brought up amongst Swains, as the Son of a Shepherd;
where divested of all his Princely Fortunes, and ignorant of his own high
Blood, he should end his days in ignoble obscurity. And all this out of the
prophetic horror but of a dream, that seemed to threaten the peace and safety
of his Kingdom. And how much more reason has the present power of England, for
effectually opposing Popery, by disinheriting a Popish Successor, when under a
Popish Monarch, our Troynovant has the undeniable assurance of being put into a
flame; when Priams fear was but a Dream? How fabulous soever this Story may
appear, yet I am certain we have too much reason to esteem the Moral of it
Oraculous. And surely our present greatest Sticklers for an unbroken Succession
of the Crown, must of all Mankind set but a very little price upon their
Country, and conclude our England the most inconsiderable part of Christendom,
when the interest of one man shall outweigh that of Three Kingdoms, with the
whole safety of Religion itself, and the Glory of God to fill up the Balance.
But indeed they are resolved to be positive; and be the next of Blood a Papist
or a Mahumetan, yet if he be born to it, let him Govern us. And truly I cannot
forbear to repeat one of their commonest Arguments, and as they think
strongest; which is, If the Son of a private Gentleman, though a Papist, shall
inherit and quietly possess his hereditary Estate; is it not hard, nay
barbarous Injustice, That the Son of a King, and the Heir of a Crown, should
lose his Patrimony of Three Kingdoms for being a Papist?

Though this Argument, as Argumentum a Fortiori, has mighty sound in it; yet how
feeble will it appear, when the Analogy shall be examined!

The Papist Gentleman that is born to an Estate, may peaceably inherit it; yes,
and with some reason for it: For he is a Subject of a Protestant Kingdom, and as
such, has Protestant Laws to rule him. He can neither force his Neighbor or
his Tenant to Mass, or imprison or burn 'em for Heretics, nor seize their
Estates as forfeited to Rome, whilst he is a Papist. His Religion is only to
himself, and if he takes any violent or unlawful course to propagate his own
Persuasion, he is not so big but he may be brought into Westminster Hall to
answer for it. Nay, possibly the Papist Subject under a Protestant Government,
may sometimes behave himself as a more harmless and quiet Common-wealths-man,
than a Protestant himself, if for no other than his own preservation, as not
daring to awaken that Justice that may inflict the penal Statutes against him
for his Recusancy.

But how directly contrary to all this is the influence of a Romish Heir, when
there is not one of all these destructive qualities (of which a private man can
never be guilty) that he on the other side shall not vigorously and undoubtedly
put in execution, when once the acquisition of a Crown has Enabled him for it,
as we have at large discoursed before? And if the Princely Popish Heir be
disinherited, when a private Gentleman escapes, it is not for his Religion, for
that may be alike in both; but for his uncontrolable power of establishing that
Religion, which a Royal station will inevitably give him.

Alas, the Protestant strength is above the fear of any little Popish Beasts of
prey: It only behooves their safety, to hunt the Imperial Lion down.

If then the English Blood boils so high, and the access of a Papist to a
Throne must necessarily meet a passage so difficult, with all these solid Bars
between; if his Religion were as Honorable as it is invincible, what deathless
Fame, and what eternal Trophies might a Popish Heir atchieve, if the welfare of
a King and Kingdoms could so far influence him, as freely of himself to make
the union of King and people a work of his own creation, by slacking the fatal
strength of a too generous Brothers over-violent Friendship; and so rendering
our universal peace his inclination, and not necessity?

I remember in the old Roman History, when a long Plague had reigned in Rome,
and an Earthquake had opened a prodigious Gulf in the middle of the Forum,
their Consulteo Oracle told 'em, that neither the Plague should be stopped, nor
the breach closed, till the most noble Victim in Rome had appeased their angry
Deity. When Curtius, a Noble Youth of Rome, of the best and highest Roman
quality, most princely adorned, and most gallantly mounted on Horseback, with a
look so gay and so cheerful, more like that of a Bridegroom than a Sacrifice,
amidst a thousand wondering tender eyes around him, rode headlong into the
yawning pit. Thus falling, unterrified at so dreadful a precipice for his
Countries deliverance, he extorted the promise of the Oracle; for the
Pestilence ceased, and the closing Earth sealed up his Grave.

The voluntary resignation of a Popish Heir, would be no less a signal National
service in the present exigence of England, than that of Curtius in Rome; only
it is attended with milder circumstances. Our State, as dangerous as it is, does
not require any Sanguinary Sacrifice: The Cure he might make to all our
plagues, would be only the easier oblation of quitting the doubtful prospect of
a remote and Craggy Throne; and that too, to refix a shaking Crown, to regain
the hearts of a whole Nation, and build himself that Pyramid of Honor, which
would outshine the wearing a Diadem.

Besides, let Plotting but once end, and the Pendant Sword, which like that of
Damocles, hangs but by a Hair over our Sovereigns Head, be safely sheathed, and
give Nature fair play, the little disparity of their years considered, the
resigning of a Crown in all humane probability, would not appear at so much
distance, and such uncertainty, altogether so extravagant an offering,
especially when it is made for a King and Brothers safety and glory, a Kingdoms
peace and prosperity; nay indeed, the whole repose of Christendom, when the
concordance of the King and Parliament is the greatest means for strengthening
those Foreign Alliances, that may give check to the fatal growth of France.

Nay, above all this, what Immortal Glory would it bring even to the Romish
Religion it self, when a Prince so immediately Allied to a Crown, shall
voluntary lay aside the hopes and pretensions to a Temporal Diadem, for an
Immortal one? And how many more, at least more Hearty Converts would so
transcendent an example of piety make, beyond the utmost severer influence of a
Throne? Nay, I may even without flattery say, the deed would make him so
adorable, that for losing a Crown, he would almost raise himself an Altar.

But Rome (Heaven knows) has other work in hand; she will have no proselytes of
that kind of Creation; her rode of Conversion, I assure you, lies quite another
way: Besides, her Champions are not made of so pure and so refined an Oar,
their Minerals are more course, and more allayed. Her Saints, in spite of all
their Heavenly Contemplations, have still so much of Earth about them, that
like the feet of Daniels Image, they are a mixture between Iron and Clay.

But to sum up all; If no reason must or shall prevail, and that right or wrong
a Papist must succeed, when all the inseparable Cruelties of Pope and Popery
shall surround us; suppose the worst that may be, that the dreadful approach of
certain slavery, so opposite to the free born genius of England, has
exasperated them into a spirit of Rebellion; what is it but the pestilential
Air of reigning Popery, that bloats and swells them into that Contagion? And if
the Popish King summons all his Thunder to punish 'em for it, what can the
greatest favourer of Rome make more on it, than that he warps them crooked, and
then breaks 'em to pieces because they are not straight? And what is the whole
sum of a revolting Nation under a Popish Tyrant, but using a violent cure to
expel an universal poison?

But here will some pretended pious Objectors say, How shall we dare to Revolt?
Remember we are Christians, and we must obey, or at least yield a passive
obedience to our King; be his Religion, Principles, or Government never so
Tyrannick, he is still the Lords Anointed, and our native Sovereign.

I would ask what this Lords Anointed is? and who it is is our Native Sovereign,
when instead of being free Subjects, Pope and Tyranny shall rule over us, and
we are made Slaves and Papists? We are bound indeed by our Oaths of Allegiance,
to a constant Loyalty to the King and his lawful Successors. Very right; by
that Oath we are bound to be his lawful Successors Loyal Subjects; but why his
Loyal Slaves? Or how is an Arbitrary absolute Popish Tyrant, any longer a
lawful Successor to a Protestant established and bounded Government, when
lawfully succeeding to this limited Monarchy, he afterward violently,
unlawfully, and tyrannically over-runs the due bounds of power, dissolves the
whole Royal constitution of the Three Free States of England, and the Subjects
Petition of Right? Whilst wholly abandoning those Reins of Government which
were his lawful birthright, and making new ones of his own illegal creation, he
makes us neither those Freeborn Subjects we were when we took that Oath, nor
himself that King we swore to be Loyal to. But alas! that Bugbear passive
obedience is a notion crept into the world, and most zealously, and perhaps as
ignorantly defended. There never wanted the authority even of Holy Writ itself
on all occasions to vindicate every thing; and there is scarce a precedent in
the oldest Historick part of the Bible, that shall not by an extorted
Application, be appropriated even to the duty and necessity of all ages,
places, and constitutions of the world. For example, They Will tell you that the
Prophet Samuel makes this answer to the Jews that desired a King, That he would
make their Sons and Daughters Slaves, and give their Fields, their Vineyards,
and their Olive-yards, etc. to his Servants, and all this and much more they
must expect from a King, etc. And ye shall cry out in that day, because of your
King that you have chosen, and the Lord will not hear you in that day. Which
was as much, as if the Prophet had said, If a King shall, as he may do this,
you have no redress but to your Prayers for his conversion, and they perhaps
too shall not be heard. He does not tell them they might revolt or rebel to
redress themselves; no, Heaven forbid he should. For what was the King they
desired, but like those of the Nations about them? And what were those Kings
but Absolute? In their own breath lay the voice of the Laws, and Sic volo sic
Jubeo was a Decree or Statute; and if they voluntarily submitted, and vowed
Allegiance to a King so absolute, and so Arbitrary, as such they ought to obey
him. And as they freely would run all risks of whatever might follow, it was
their own choice, and Volenti non fit Injuria. Here indeed a passive obedience
was due; but what is this to a King of England? It Is not here, Sic volo sic
Jubeo, here it is first sic vult populus, and then comes sic jubet Rex. Here all
our Laws and Decrees by which we are governed, are of the peoples choice; first
made by the Subject, and then confirmed by the King. Here a King cannot take
our Sons and Daughters, or our Fields and Vineyards away, unless we please to
give him them.

If the Three States of England, which we suppose the whole Body of England
lawfully convened in Parliament, shall submit to such an Arbitrary Majesty, to
have their Magna Charta abolisht, their Religion and Liberties destroyed, and
to have Popery and Arbitrary power set up, and yield to have the Right of Lords
and Commons extirpated, and all devolve into the King, so that like the old
Kings of Israel, he may set up Idols and molten Calves, and make us bow down
and worship 'em; if they will do all this, then indeed we are his lawful
Slaves, and as such, it is our duty to pay him an entire, undisputed obedience.

I would only beg the world seriously to consider how Monarchy itself is
acquired and founded, and then the duty of Subjects will be more easily
discerned.

Monarchy can be acquired but Two ways.
First, by the choice of the People, who frequently in the beginning of the
World, out of the natural desire of Safety, for the securing a peaceful
Community and Conversation, chose a Single Person to be their Head, as a proper
Supreme Moderator in all differences that might arise to disquiet that
Community. Thus were Kings made for the people, and not the people for the King.

The other acquisition of Monarchy, was by Conquest. The glory and pleasure of
Reigning grew so tempting, that (especially in later Ages) they spurred on
Ambitious Minds to obtain that by Force, which in the Infancy of Time, and the
first Original of Nations, appears to be generally the People's Choice, and not
Compulsion.

However, whether Choice or Compulsion, yet after possession, and the Peoples
Submission, the Right of Kings is Sacred.

Now Conquest is Twofold.
The first sort is, where the Conqueror wholly over-runs a Nation, or People,
and like those that take Towns by Storm, destroys and depopulates, kills or
enslaves; and then establishes Religion, Rights and Laws, solely at the will of
the Conqueror.

The other kind is, when the vanquished come to Capitulate before they yield,
and only Surrender upon terms.

Such was our last Norman Conquest, when the Inhabitants of Kent, and the
Bishops of London upon a Parley, prevailed with him (as our Records attest) to
confirm their Customs and Rights, established and granted them by Edward the
Confessor; whilst the Lenity of the Conqueror, contenting himself with no
larger a Prerogative than their last Saxon King had possessed before him,
submitted to make their own Native Common Laws of England the Standard of his
Justice, and the continuation of their Ancient Privileges the Cement of their
new Allegiance.

In this mild Channel ran the English Monarchy, till in the Reign of Henry the
Third, the Magna Charta was Confirmed; which indeed was but a Monumental
Register of the Liberties and Immunities of Englishmen, enjoyed before (though
not so fixed) in their pious Edward's Reign. In this state has the Majesty of
England, the Dignity of Parliaments, and the Liberty of the People (bating
their former Servility to Rome) continued ever since. And if now at last Popery
must and shall come in, (as by Law it cannot) and consequently must be restored
by Arbitrary Power: If a new Monarchy, then a new Conquest; and if a Conquest,
Heaven forbid we should be subdued like less than Englishmen; or debarred the
Common Right of all Nations, which is, to resist and repel an Invader if we can.

But to sum up all this, I must say, the most vehement Disputants against the
Peoples Right of defending themselves, must at least acknowledge thus much,
that whenever a Popish King shall by Tyranny establish the Pope's Jurisdiction
in England, undoubtedly in the Eye of God he is guilty of a greater Sin, than
that people can be, that with open Arms oppose that Tyranny. For by introducing
Popery by Tyranny, by one unjust Power he establishes another as unjust; and by
one ill, defends a worse: Whereas the People of England, in taking Arms against
that Tyranny, defend a just Right, viz. their Religion, Lives and Liberties.

Thus when a Popish Monarch shall subvert all Right, and violate all Laws, till
oppressing a wretched Nation, more like a Lupus Agri than Pater Patriae, he so
wholly perverts the Duty of his great Office, and defaces in himself the
nearest Image of a Deity, by so falsely representing his Vicegerent: Imagine on
the other side, a persecuted deplorable People, even abandoned by God, and so
exasperated by Injustice, till they struggle against the Yoke, and the Horror
of this Gorgon in spite of all their Native Duty, has hardened 'em into
disobedience, and then what can a poor Nation expect but Vengeance and
Destruction? If this be our Rod of Iron, this the King ordained to Rule over
us, What signifies all our long pudder about a Plot? Give the Papists that
point, and allow them all they dare ask, that there neither is nor has been any
Popish Plot: That the Evidence are perjured, and that Coleman's Letters,
Godfrey's Murder, and Bedlow's dying Attestations, etc. are nothing to the
purpose: Grant this and twice as much more, yet allowing at the same time, that
Providence has decreed us a Papist and a Bigot for a King; no matter then for
Plotters, Jesuits, or Russians: The very essence of a Popish Successor is the
greatest Plot upon England since the Creation. A Plot of God himself to scourge
a Nation, and make three Kingdoms miserable. As for the other Plot, what was it
but a secret Confederacy between a handful of feeble Villains, the Limbs of the
Roman Hydra? But, alas! With all their Designs they were but Men, and as such
we have seen them both detected and defeated* But if we are predestined for a
Romish Government, that is a Plot indeed, a Design formed by the irresistible
Decrees of Heaven, either for our Sins, or what cause to it self best known, to
lay a groaning Country in ruin. Nay the Ruin is so universal, we must give it
no bounds. For upon the Supposition of a Popish Heir, we must not conclude that
it is only the poor distressed Protestants that shall feel the smart, and stand
the mark of Slavery and Martyrdom. A Popish King has that pestilential
Influence, that he blasts even the very party he smiles upon, and entails a
Curse upon his dearest darling Favorites. As for Instance, if after this
King's Reign, steps up a Protestant Prince (for surely the whole Royal Blood
must not all follow his Apostasy, and degenerate in secula seculorum) then what
becomes of the Popish Interest in the next Generation, and all that flourishing
party, whom either the Witchcrafts of Rome, or the Contagion of Regis ad
exemplum has nursed up for mine? It Is the greatest toil of the next King's
Reign, to make those severer Statutes for future Ages, to suppress the
Insolences and Follies of the past; whilst those very Idols, that were Saints
but yesterday, are now crushed and dashed to pieces.

Thus a Popish King undoes at once the Heretic party in his own Reign, and the
Roman Catholic in the next: And then who is it, that he either does or can
make happy? Why nothing but an Atheist, he that believes there is no God, and
so makes the name of the most fashionable Religion, the Bawd to his Pleasures
and Preferments; or at best that Latitudinarian Believer, that can kneel to a
Crucifix to day, and burn it to morrow. This and this only Principle, can be
safe under a Papist; and these are the only men that in their right wits ought
to be unconcerned at the danger of a Popish Successor.

FINIS.

