THE WISDOM OF Public Piety DISCOURSED, IN A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right
Honorable THE Lord MAYOR and ALDERMEN Of the CITY of LONDON, At the GUILD HALL
Chapel, September. xxviii. 1679.

By EDMUND SERMON, Master of ARTS, and late of St. Mary HALL in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1679.

(...)giving the assistance of Your favor to the Discourse which is here
offered to You. It is a Discourse which came forth with as great disadvantages
as can well be supposed; the composing of it being incommoded with the weakness
of an obscure Author; and the delivery of it obstruded by such an
indisposition, as for a space deprived him of the use of memory and speech. An
accident which as it was unhappy in giving a disturbance to such an Auditory;
so possibly it might have the good effect upon some minds, to make the
impressions of some things upon them more deep and effectual. However, what it
was Your patience first to stay for, it was Your goodness afterward heartily
to interpret. And I wish that the Discourse which could not be so well heard,
were more worthy of Your sight and perusal. But such as it is, I humbly
Dedicate to Your favorable acceptance, as an imperfect description of that
Moderation and Prudence; which, as it has made Your Government of a Great City
so useful and advantageous to it, in a tumultuous and distracted Time; so may
it ever continue to be as successful to promote the benefit of Public Peace
and Order: which is the Prayer of

RIGHT HONORABLE, Your most humbly devoted in all Observance, EDMUND SERMON.

A SERMON ON JAM. III. XIII. Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge
amongst you? let him show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of
wisdom.
THe reasonable Soul being the excellency of Man's nature, and wisdom and
knowledge the perfection of that; no wonder that all who have any respect for
themselves, and that value the honor of their Creation, should ardently affect
those accomplishments of the mind, or at least the opinion and repute of them.

It was not without good reason, that our Savior declared the highest
punishment to be due to him who should say to another, Thou fool [Mat. 5.22.]
that he particularly said concerning such a reproacher of his neighbor, that
he was in danger of Hellfire. Because the imputing of folly to a man, being in
effect to degrade him from his manhood, and to rank him with a lower sort of
creatures that are void of reason, as it is a reflection upon God's
workmanship, so it has ever been by the universal resentment of mankind, taken
for one of the most unsufferable affronts and provocations that can be given.

So that nothing is more apt to dissolve all the ties, and destroy all the
endearments of common friendship, to stir up the malignity of choler and
indignation, and consequently to produce all the mischiefs ensuing thereupon.
Nothing does sooner exasperate men to variance, and engage them in the most
irreconcilable quarrels and bloody combats.

For the most mean and degenerate spirit is even to impatience sensible of the
infamy of ignorance and indiscretion. And generally to tax men with lack of
wit, is more unpardonable than to brand them with want of honesty. It Is safer
to impeach their morality than their understanding; and to disparage their
judgment is a more intolerable offense, than with the severest reflections to
expose their conscience. And the reason is, because to those who have any
conscience, the depriving them of reason is the same thing as the denying them
religion; nay, it is the same thing as to make them beasts, which are incapable
of the impressions of Divinity. And as for those who have no conscience, those
very men think it their interest to preserve a reputation of policy and
cunning, albeit they seldom use it, but to carry them through such actions as
are unconscionable.

But though the World has so much fondness and concern for the title of
wisdom, and esteems it to be so very glorious and reverend; yet the unhappiness
of it is, that the most of men run away with the empty name of wisdom, not
knowing what particular thing is intended by it. Some general and confused
conceit they have of something that is very excellent and noble; but being
ignorant of the specialty wherein it consists, they commonly run counter to
their own aims, and flee from wisdom whilst they aspire toward it. And seeing
truth is but one, and the opposite mistakes are infinite; it is no wonder that
men should invent as many ways to be wise, as they have of showing themselves
vain and imprudent; no wonder that in this case their errors should be
manifold, when rightly to pursue wisdom argues some possession of it, and
nothing but discretion can truly inform us what it self is.

Now in this variety of humane imaginations, the wisdom of God interposeth its
direction and umpirage; and to relieve the weakness of our minds, and to
prevent the uncertainty and extravagance of our choice, gives us a distinct
notion of the wisdom which is properly so called; that so we might not be lost
in the maze of our own thoughts, but might clearly discern the way and method,
by which we may successfully steer toward that great attainment.

But seeing wisdom directs us to that which is our crown and ornament; and
seeing the glory of the best capacity lies in that exercise of it, into which
life and action reduces it; and seeing withal that every honorable
employment is managed by proper rules and laws; it is easy to be conceived that
such instructions as reach to the truth of wisdom, must extend to the due
conduct and government of our actions.

And farther, in that the most perfect of our actions are those that are
public, and that is most answerable to our capacity which we do in relation to
our common league and society with the rest of mankind, it follows, that no
precepts come up to the height of wisdom, but those that teach us rightly to
compose and order our conversation in the World. And therefore according to
these measures St. James resolves that important question, To whom the
character of wisdom and knowledge truly belongs? as it is plainly expressed in
the words of the Text, Who is a wise man, etc.

Where we need not stand critically to dispute, whether the Apostle meant, that
a good conversation tempered with meekness is a demonstration of wisdom and
knowledge; or that wisdom and knowledge oblige and direct men to such a
conversation; it being in effect the same, which sense of the two we take;
because if a good conversation be a proof of wildom, then wisdom must oblige
and direct us to it: and if wisdom does oblige and direct us to such a
conversation, nothing without that conversation can be a proof of wisdom.

And therefore to proceed; Two things are to be considered in the words. 1.)
That a good conversation is a principal sign of a wise and understanding man.
(2.) That meekness is an essential part of that good conversation which
denominates a man truly wise and knowing.


(1.) A good conversation is a principal sign of a wise and understanding man.
This will appear evident whether we consult the Principles, (1.) Of that wisdom
which is revealed; Or, (2.) Of that which is natural.


(1.) If we consult the principles of that wisdom which is revealed. For this
wisdom teaches us, that as our life was not given us by our own power, so it
is not to be spent to our own purposes.

God has made us sociable Creatures, and fitted us for conversing with those
of our own frame; and therefore, not to have correspondence with those in whose
nature we communicate, that is, not to perform those Offices for them which we
are capable of doing, is to contradict the end of our Creation.

The fairest pretense that can be made for Men's withdrawing themselves from
humane intercourse, and addicting themselves to solitude and retirement is
this, that thereby they have freedom for those contemplations, from which
company and business does divert them.

But what I pray are those Contemplations? If they are such nice and subtle
things as exhaust Men's age and strength, and at last leave their Judgments
unresolved, and their Virtue unimproved; I know no man of whom they are
required, but contrariwise they are forbidden to all. But as for such as are
more necessary and useful to the government of a Man's life, there needs no
such long time to be spent for satisfaction about them. And as they are made
obvious by an ordinary diligence, so when they are sully comprehended by one,
it is his duty to impart them to others.

This, if any lover of privacy, and his own thoughts neglect as a thing not
incumbent upon him; it is plain that he transgresses the rules of that common
justice, which if others should as little regard as himself, the world could
not subsist. For, is not the Man who museth in his Cell, beholden to others for
his temporal support? Do his lofty speculations and curious enquiries provide
the Bread that he eats, or the Clothes he puts on? If then he receive such
benefit from the labors of other Men, common justice requires that according
to his capacity he should make them some recompense. And no way is so
convenient for making them a requital, as the allowing them the advantage of
his Christian conversation with them.

It Is true, Men may be allowed to live recluse for a season, in order to the
preparing of themselves for a public Office, so John the Baptist was in the
Defarts until the time of his showing unto Israel. [Luk. 1.80.] So the Schools
of the Prophets were places sequestered from common familiarity and business,
and dedicated to the study of useful knowledge, such as might put them into the
best capacity to receive the gift of prophecy, and the admonitions of God.

But then that gift in the Jewish Church was ordained for the benefit and
edification of others, as well as it was afterward in the Christian. So that
notwithstanding the instance alleged, he that conceals himself within a
Cloyfter, and devotes himself to a perpetuity of solitariness, does manifestly
oppose the designs of privacy; he makes that his end which was only his way,
confounds his education with his employment, and takes up his rest in that
secrecy and retirement which was intended to fit him for the discharge of some
public trust.

But if it be incumbent upon Men to be of public spirits, and to do their
Generation service; and consequently to be of sociable tempers, and to converse
with their Neighbors; it is as requisite that their conversation should be
good. For it were better that we had no communication at all with Men, than
that it should be such as corrupts good manners. And how much it is our wisdom
by what has been dictated to us in the Gospel, to walk honestly and without
blame, is evident from hence, that the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness, [Rom. 1.18.] and that the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking vengeance of them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel, [2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.] So that
according to the Principles of Christianity, it is our greatest wisdom to be of
an upright conversation; because the contrary is our damnation. And to show how
deplorable a state of misery it is to which an evil conversation leaves us
liable, our Savior has plainly told us, [Mat. 18.6.] that whosoever shall offend,
that is, scandalize, or by wicked practice make to offend one of those little
ones that believe in him; it were better for him that a Millstone were hung
about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. All which he
will find to be true, when he is cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone.

But a good conversation is not an argument of wisdom, as wisdom is only taken
for a zealous care of our own welfare; but also as it implies strength of
reason, and soundness of judgment to take right methods, that this welfare may
be secured. For Religion does not wholly consist in being affectionately
concerned for that which is ultimately to be desired; but it requires soberness
of mind, regularity of thought, and an understanding well informed, such as is
of ability to apprehend, and propose what is really conducive to our great
advantage.

And what necessity there is of a Man's being very judicious, in order to his
being capable of a good conversation, will appear upon more accounts than one.
For if we consider the frailties to which we our selves are subject; if we call
to mind how many vain and enchanting fancies, how many strong and pre-engaged
affections, how many subtle insinuations of our enemy, and how many surprising
temptations of the World, do continually besiege us, to bring us into bondage
to folly and vice, we cannot but acknowledge that there is need of very great
prudence and foresight, of the most serious consideration, and of the most
staid and watchful mind, to escape the dangers wherewith we are encompassed.
And he that by shunning all those snares can approve himself a Christian, does
certainly show himself to be a very great Man.

Again, one great law of Christian conversation, is that we walk charitably,
with respect and compassion toward our weak Brethren. So that no Man's
conversation is unblameable but his, who does nothing whereby he causes his
Neighbor to offend. This is plainly and fully determined by the Apostle, [1
Cor. 8.] where he states that great case of conscience, of eating things
offered in sacrifice to Idols. For [ v. 4.] he grants, that the thing in it
self is not absolutely sinful: because he that knew that an Idol was nothing in
the World, and that there was but one true God, might eat of those meats as the
gift of that God, giving thanks to him, and not paying any worship and honor
to the Idol: But then he tells us [ v. 7.] that the taking of this liberty
might be prejudicial to some weak persons, who having not so much judgment to
distinguish as others, might by their example be encouraged to eat with
conscience of the Idol, as the expression runs, that is, with some portion at
least of that respect which the Heathens gave to their Idols in their Festivals.

And the general rule that presides in this case holds no less in all the parts
of a Christian's life: For in every action it is his duty to consult, not only
the integrity of his own conscience, but also the safety of his Neighbors; and
he is by the strictest law of religion bound upon pain of damnation, to abstain
from any public act, which by a probability of consequence and natural
tendency may induce his Neighbor to commit a sin.

And where a Man is bound to walk so circumspectly, there is need of very good
discretion to make all things regular. He that must consider all the weakness
of others, and use caution that the ignorant may not be ensnared by his
practice, must very well forecast in his mind what may be the circumstances and
events of actions; and this argues no small dexterity of reason.

Nay farther, Christianity does not only oblige us to consult the condition of
the simple, but of the froward too. We may not transact at any rate as we
please, with those who are of crooked tempers. When they are unreasonable, we
must be discreet; and when they are mad and outrageous, we must be calm and
moderate. Just men must not slander, revile and threaten, or exercise revenge
and cruelty, because the Sons of Belial do so. The man of God, of what
condition soever, must be gentle and patient. But when a Man is assaulted with
insolent provocations, not to be discomposed and transported so as to act any
thing unbeseeming the gravity of his judgment, or the dignity of his place, is
certainly an argument of a most admirable prudence, and demonstrates the
government and command of himself to be very singular.

(2.) If we consult the principles of that wisdom which is natural, a good
conversation will appear to be a principal sign of a wise and understanding
Man. And that upon Two accounts.

(1.) Because a good conversation does most conduce to a Man's preservation.

(2.) Because that administers the truest satissaction.

(1.) Because it does most conduce to a Man's preservation.

And because I would not have my arguments to be precarious, or give occasion
to any to say that they take the advantage of a popular prejudice and opinion;
I shall beg your leave to discourse it a little, as if I supposed my self to
have to do with those to whom Scripture and Gospel is no authority.

To proceed then: It Is possible that many are not so well acquainted with the
Fundamental maxims of truth and reason, and the course and government of the
World, or have not so good a faculty to draw conclusions from those Principles,
as by the strength of their own reasoning to find out a God to whom belongs
Power and Judgment. But then it is as certain, that by all the sophistry and
speculation imaginable, no Man is able to prove that there is no such Being, as
governs and gives laws now, and will hereafter reward and punish Men according
as their conversations have been good or evil. And therefore a state of virtue
is in wisdom to be preferred before that of vice, upon the score of safety and
preservation; because however things be, a good Man cannot be miserable
hereafter, whereas a wicked man, though he be an Atheist, may for ought he
knows be so eternally: and it is a dictate of wisdom in case of uncertainty to
avoid danger, and provide against the worst that may be supposed to happen. The
only objection that can be made against this, is, That uncertainty is not to be
preferred before certainty; but to this religion sometimes obliges us, when
Perfecution arises upon the account of it; for at such time the keeping of our
conscience damnifies us in a present convenience, and for the sake of what we
expect we lose that good which we have in sure possession.

But as plausible as this objection may seem, it is easily silenced. For beside
that it reaches not all times, let us but consider the vast disproportion that
there is between the short age of Man, and that Eternity which infinitely
exceeds all time: that in a very short space, it will be all one whether a Man
lived here in plenty, or perished for want of Bread; yea, if we consider him in
respect only to this World, that it will be all one whether ever he had had any
Being in it or no: let us but consider how small the goods are which the
Atheist possesses, in comparison of the evils which he may justly fear; and we
must conclude that it is no wisdom to keep such inconsiderable certainties,
when we run a hazard that is infinitely more considerable than they. Especially
when those present certainties are so uncertain, as that we are liable to the
final loss of them every moment; and the pretended uncertainties are so far
certain, that the best reason of Man does oblige him to expect them.

(2.) A good conversation does administer the truest satisfaction. For this
only can make Men hope for a future blessedness. And what satisfaction is
comparable to the steadfast looking to the recompense of the reward? This is a
joy that the irreligious man wants: and to take him in the most favorable
circumstances, it cannot but somewhat stun and afflict him in his delight to
think, that after a little time he can enjoy it no more.

But suppose he says that he has no need of a holy comfort: that he can
caress himself with the diversions of mirth, and fortify his mind by pleasures
against all melancholy and sorrowful presages; yet it cannot be denied, but
that the hope of real happiness hereafter is a greater satisfaction, than
barely not to be dismayed with the terrors of Death and Judgment.

Besides, seeing the Atheist cannot with all his art disprove the Articles of
our Faith; he has no way to secure himself from the sad jealousies and
suspicions of future misery, but by debauching his mind, and hurrying himself
beyond all consideration. And what wisdom I pray is in that complacency, which
prohibits the best use of our reason, and wretchedly enjoins the understanding
to withdraw.

Nor is this carnal solace of the irreligious Man only unsound and irrational,
but (as all such things are,) it is also unstable: it accompanies a Man when
he has least need of it; but as soon as he is destitute of other helps, that
forsakes him too. For upon consideration of the whole matter, we shall find
that this is a solace only for them, whose estates are plentiful, and
constitutions firm; whose minds are not crossed, nor their spirits decayed. It
may attend Men whilst they are rich and healthful; but when they fall under
poverty or pain, it vanishes like a dream or shadow.

It Is true indeed, if a Man be only poor, Atheism can prescribe this remedy, to
steal and filch his Neighbors goods, that his own substance may be increased
by it: which yet is but a desperate remedy, where there is either pubick law
and justice in a Nation, or but the natural dictate of self-preservation, as
there is in all private men: and in a contention which is here to be supposed,
it is very great odds but the poorest will be overcome.

And when this way of Men's making their condition better proves unsuccessful,
irreligion has nothing better to propose to them, than by a stroke at their
life to put an end to it. And this is all the comfort it can administer to them
in time of sickness, when they are neither able to hurt others nor help
themselves; when their soul abhors all manner of meat; and they say of laughter
it is mad; when the most pleasant recreations are distastful to them. And is
this a satisfaction equal to what the just Man has, who in the critical minute
of affliction and distress triumphs in the prospect of God's great salvation?
How much better were it for a Man in anguish and torture to have hope in the
everlasting God? This hope would turn his very evils into helps, and make Death
it self to appear his greatest advantage. So great supports has righteousness
in the worst estate, and the spirit of a just Man will sustain his infirmities.
And so much may suffice to be spoken to the first thing considerable in the
words, viz. That a good conversation is a principal sign of a wise and
understanding Man; I now proceed to,

(2.) The second thing, which is, that meekness is an essential part of that
good conversation which denominates a Man truly wise and knowing.

The truth of this will appear upon Three Grounds.

(1.) Because meekness preserves the World from trouble and disquietness.

(2.) It is an advantage to Men's conference and discourse.

(3.) It makes them successful in their undertakings.

(1.) Meekness preserves the World from trouble and disquietness. It is upon
these very terms commanded by our Savior [Mat. 11.29.] Take my yoke upon you,
and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto
your souls.

It Is the nature of meekness to calm the mind, and preserve it from vexation.
For it is contrary to wrath and fury; and therefore look how much trouble rage
is to a Man's spirit, so much does meekness help us to avoid.

Nor does it only prevent the trouble and torment of anger, but it is also
inseparably united with other quieting Graces, such as humility and
contentment, by which means all fretting passions are stilled. For he that is
of so serious a temper as not to be incensed with provocations, can certainly
avoid the follies of pride and discontent; he can rest satisfied in a low
place, wherein his gracious God puts him, and cheerfully acquiesce in the
disposals of his wise providence.

And what a happiness is it for a Man to enjoy such peace and tranquillity of
mind, and to be exempt from the disturbances and turmoils of passion and lust!
This is to have a foretaste of Heaven, and in some degree to be in an Angelical
state; whilst in the midst of those occurrences which cut unwise Men to the
heart, we can be quiet and unconcerned, sing praises to God for all his works;
and our Souls can with freedom return to their rest.

Nor does meekness only grant peace to a Man's own breast, but it also keeps
the peace of the World. For the wrath of Man sets on fire the whole course of
Nature. Anger has in it the true property of fire, which is to produce it self
in the subject upon which it works: and so the forcing of it stirs up strife.
And where is then the wisdom of allowing it? It wracks the mind wherein it
abides, and destroys its pleasure; for he that is angry is certainly
displeased; and he that is displeased, must want his complacency. Nor is this
all, but it also gives continual occasion of its own continuance. For it puts
others into a heat like our own; thereby depriving us of the consolation of
their kindness and assistance. It makes us either contemptible or odious to
them; and so the great comfort of Man's life, friendly society, is utterly lost.

(2.) Meekness is an advantage to Men's conference and discourse.

He that would discourse like a wise Man must first judge so; and he that would
judge rightly, and be constant in it, must be of a sedate spirit. For if his
mind be disturbed, he can neither learn, teach, nor use knowledge. He cannot
learn. Now Solomon gives this account of a wise Man, [Prov. 1.5.] That a wise
man will hear, and will increase knowledge; and a man of understanding shall
attain unto wise counsels: It Is a sign of the greatest ignorance, for a Man to
presume that he has wisdom enough; and it argues a taste of knowledge, when a
Man uses diligence to obtain it: insomuch that were not our understandings
naturally furnished with the first principles and common notions of wisdom, we
could not possibly study to advance and improve it.

But is any Man a lover of wisdom? would he learn and find out what he has not
yet known? he must be very considerate, and seriously compare things together.
And if so, it follows that he must be calm and dispassionate. Because the
perturbations of the mind, darken, distract and confound the understanding: and
the thoughts of wrathful men are too hasty and urgent, and thereupon too
immethodical to be discreet. And if it be a matter of divine wisdom, wherein
spiritual illumination is required; the wrathful and unquiet spirit has no
reason to expect that; the promise of it being made particularly to the meek,
[Psal. 25.9.] The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach
his way.

Nor can a wrathful person inform another, For his passion puts him out of his
conceptions: it transports him beyond his right sense, and so diverts him from
his proper method. Besides he that would instruct, must not only comply with
the capacity, but in some measure also with the temper of his Disciples: as
knowing how much a readiness or aversion in the will does dispose the
understanding to give or deny assent. But passion, if it meet with the more
soft and tender dispositions, terrifies and scares them out of their own
thoughts; so that they have not the use of their own faculties. And if it has
to deal with the more stout and undaunted, the discouragement that it gives
them does but make them desperate and harden them by degrees to an inflexible
obstinacy of resolution.

For the heat of passion taking away the steady use of reason from the
instructor, and by a natural efficacy propagating it self in the learner, there
is but little understanding to be found betwixt them; and then the appearance
of wrath makes a Man so detestable and hateful, that when there is but a little
reason left, it may well be thought it will be to no purpose.

And what farther shows the folly of passion; it renders men incapable of using
in any way the knowledge which they have learnt. For it disturbs their reason,
and makes their thoughts to be desultory and incoherent. It puts them beside
the true use of their memory; for when there is not serious deliberation to
guide it, it is recollections must needs be very casual and uncertain. In this
case men are led as brutes, by the disorderly motions of fancy and appetite.
And what licentious and irregular imaginations may intrude, when the guard of
consideration is resigned to those powers, the wandering discourse of Lunaticks
may sufficiently inform us. So that meekness is a necessary qualification to
preserve us from extravagance, and is therefore an essential part of that
conversation which denominates a Man truly wise and knowing.

(3.) Meekness makes men successful in their undertakings. For it is easy to
miscarry in any attempt, wherein true discretion is not our guide: but when
fury is in place, discretion is absent.

It must be granted, that wherever anger is, there is some cause or other in
debate. But the wrathful man does much thwart his own intention, in doing
disservice to that interest for which he contends.

For like a furious Warrior he falls on rashly, whilst his adversary keeps his
ground, and watches an opportunity to attack him in that part which is weakest,
and give him a blow where he can least bear it.

But meekness gives a Man the advantage of a clear reason, and has an art
whereby it vanquisheth both Parties and Neuters. It overcomes those that are
Parties in a quarrel, in that it tires them out. For though anger be
troublesome to a Man's self, and though it be heightened by disagreement and
opposition, yet such is the madness of it, that it desires opposition and
conflict, and nothing wearies out angry spirits more, than to see their
indignation and fury slighted; and so when they have sufficiently spent their
virulency and rancour, wanting new fuel of provocation from others to maintain
their flame, they quietly desist; and when they find that notwithstanding all
impressions their adversary remains unshaken, they do like those assailants,
who quit the siege when they find the Fort to be impregnable.

And hence it may easily be conceived how much meekness may recommend a cause
to bystanders; who being disinteressed have no such strong prejudice to be
subdued. For the effects of rage are abominable in the common sense of
humanity. Raillery, reviling, smiting, and the like, make a Person scandalous;
and when he himself is accounted so bad, his cause and quarrel will not be
esteemed much better.

What say the indifferent Men of such a Hotspur? this is an abusive, a
scurrilous, and injurious fellow; he knows not what religion, and conscience,
nor common civility is. We have reason to fear this Man's principles: For if we
be not what he requires, he will deal with us in as bad a manner. We have
reason to suspect this Man's cause; for if it were good, these outrages might
be spared, as being both unsuitable and unuseful to it: If there be an evil in
the circumstance of his quarrel, why may not there be in the substance of it?
and if he make use of indirect ways, why may he not as well aim at an unjust
end? Thus does fury make the credit of a Man's cause sink in the estimation of
indifferent Men.

Besides, what is more considerable for the making Men's ways unprosperous,
seeing whatever the wrathful contend for, they must unavoidably be enemies to
God and his Grace; it pleases him to curb their fury, and to put his hook into
their nostrils, to defeat their purposes and blast their endeavors. For as the
wrath of Man works not the righteousness of God, so neither will God suffer it
to accomplish the will of Man. No: the rage of man must not govern the world;
and God forbid that it ever should; that ever that rage should prevail, which
makes men not only as unreasonable as brutes; but oftentimes as merciless and
savage too. Excellently to this purpose speaks David, [Psal. 76.7, 8, 9, 10.]
Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when once thou
art angry? Thou did cause judgment to be heard from Heaven; the Earth feared
and was still, when God arose to judgment to save all the meek of the earth.
Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shall thou
restrain.

But will some ask, may we not then be angry? and may we not express our
indignation against dishonest things in some severity? Yea doubtless, not to be
capable of anger is to be stupid. And that upon some accounts we may be severe
with men, appears by the presidents of Magistracy in the Law, and the rules
concerning it in the Gospel; as also by the example of David cursing the
Churches enemies, of Christ sharply rebuking the Scribes and Pharisees, and of
Paul in his conflict with Elymas the Sorcerer. But then we must well weigh the
occasion, that our anger may be adjusted to it, and not exceed the bounds of
moderation.

And now having spoken thus much for the enforcing of a good conversation, and
of meekness, so essential a part of it; I shall conclude my Discourse with a
little Direction.

(1.) In order to a good conversation in general, that besides imploring the
help of the divine grace, you would be watchful and circumspect, that you do
not unadvisedly fall into snares. It Is wisdom to foresee and prevent the
occasions of sinning. And if by chance a temptation overtake you, do not trifle
and dally with it. Be ferious in reasoning with your selves against it; and
remember what you have been taught, and what you believe. Consider the matter
well, and when you have perceived it to be sinful, say with your selves, Do I
not believe that for such things God will bring me into judgment, and that for
such things the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience? Why then
should I to gratify the incitement of a lust, do this wickedness and sin
against God, and so pierce my self through with everlasting sorrows?

(2.) In order to meekness in particular, besides praying for the gift of the
spirit of love and gentleness,

(1.) Use those Considerations that may be Remedies against wrath and
displeasure.

Consider the weakness of laying the blame of your passion upon the occasion of
it. Can that force you to be passionate without your consent and allowance? No,
your selves must be accessory to your own indignation.

Consider besides, what weakness and inexperience of things it argues to be
discomposed at things without us. Is not the course of the World such? and is
there any better to be expected? shall our fury reduce things to a better
state? When we have raged and tormented our selves never so much, our anger may
indeed help to make things worse, but is the most unlikely means to put them
into a better posture.

Consider again, that if there were no thwartings and provocations, there would
be no need of such a virtue as meekness; nor would there be any such virtue at
all. For if nothing crossed us, but all things went according to our mind,
there would be no occasion nor trial of meekness, for it would be impossible
that we should be otherwise than pleased. But because things will fall out
oppositely to our desires and expectations, therefore meekness is enjoined as a
means to relieve us.

We may do well to consider withal, that if things happen so ill as to
disquiet us, whether it is not wisdom to make the best that we can of them; and
so whether it be not our wisdom, instead of struggling with a provocation, to
suppress and stifle our resentments of it.

And seeing anger is most frequently stirred up by the provocations that are
given by Men; and seeing we are not angry with Men, but when we judge that they
deal unduly with us; As it becomes us to see that this judgment be true, and
that we do not unjustly apprehend a wrong, when there is none done to us; so
upon condition that we are injured, it were worthy of our consideration, how
much it degrades a Person who has the honor to be just, to stoop so low to
the brutish, as to be wounded with a resentment of their villainy; and how much
it is beneath the mind of such a man to be disordered by the rudeness of
disorderly men. The very being concerned at their insolence does but make it
too plausible, whilst it shows them to be such as deserve consideration. Ye
suffer fools gladly (says the Apostle) seeing ye your selves are wise, [2 Cor.
11.19.] And says the wise man, [Prov. 26.4.] Answer not a fool according to
his folly, lest thou also be like unto him: that is, take notice of him no
farther than is necessary to prevent the evil that may follow from the
toleration of his pride and vanity. It being a reproach to a wise man to submit
his wisdom to the pleasure and controulment of a fool, who rages and is
confident: whose brutish passions first deprive him of sober sense, and then
give him courage and boldness to expose his want of it. So true is that saying
of Solomon, [Prov. 14.29.] He that is flow to wrath is of great understanding:
but he that it hasty of spirit exalts folly.

(2.) Avoid those worldly affections and desires, which are the primitive and
fundamental incentives to anger, as Covetousness and Ambition. For these make
Men competitors for the same things, and so stir up anger and emulation amongst
them. One is displeased, because another carries away his profit; and another,
because his Neighbor steps in between him and honor. And especially pride
produces the greatest animosities and heart-burnings amongst Men. Thus when a
Man is puffed up with the wisdom of speculation, he is angry that others are
not of his judgment; though they perhaps have more reason to be displeased with
him, because he is not of theirs.

And generally where Men have great thoughts of themselves, they expect great
regard and observance from others; and this earnestness and confidence of
expectation makes them wrathful when they are disappointed. And how far their
rage and discontent may go, and in what inhumanity it may end, as we do not
know, so we need not to enquire; it being sufficient that we know thus much,
that the effects of it are very sad and dismal.

Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant us to be like-minded one toward
another, according to Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, be ascribed Dominion, Blessing and Praise, both now and for ever.

FINIS.
EDWARDS MAYOR.
Cur. Special. tent. die Lunae in Festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli 1679.
Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi Angl. etc. xxxi.
THis COURT does desire Mr. Sermon to Print his Sermon preached Yesterday at
the Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this CITY.

WAGSTAFFE.


