A SERMON PREACHED By a Reverend Father, in the JESUITS Chapel at the
Kings-Inns Dublin, on St. Patrick's Day. 1687/8.
Dear Catolicks,
IT is not necessary wid my shelf to relate you de Shapter and Vershe, becash
you are not allowed to read de Bibles; but de Vords be deese, And Macabeush he
did make a great flau-ter.

Which betokens, dat Macabeush vash a great Varrior, I by my Shoul vas he; and
sho vas Artaxus, and sho vas Darius, de King of Persia; and sho vas Alexander
de Great: Now Catolicks, which of all deese do you tink vas de greatest
Varrior; I am know very well you will shay, Alexander de Great; and for fie?
becash he did conquer de hole Vorld: but I shay unto you, dear Kristians, dat
none of them all vas like our Catolick Varrior Tyrconnel, for he ish a greater
Varrior nor none of them all; yonder he shits. God bless King Jamas, for he has
restore us to our own Country and Religshion; and fie did he do sho? becash he
is true Catolick, and did believe in the Shurch, for de Shurch, dear Catolicks,
she is like de Cammomille, de more you vill shit upon her de more she vill
grow. And now, dear Catolicks, dish being St. Parick's Day, I will make you an
Exhortation relating to dish holy Day: and firsht of all, you vill know dish
holy St. Parick, fen he voud come from Rome to dish place, our holy Fader de
Pope (resht his Shoul) did make him de Primate of Ireland; sho dish holy
Shaint, fen he vid be after coming over, all de Devils voud came before him:
but de holy Shaint vid make de shigne of de Cross, and all de hole of them vas
presently vanish. In de same time dear vas a great King in dish Country, dat
vas told, a Man wid a shaven Crown voud take his Country, and make shanges in
his Laws wid himself: sho fen he did hear Shaint Parick vas comd, and had de
shaven Head, he did sent to kill him: but fen dey did she he vas only a poor
Priesht, dey did make scorn upon him, and shet a great masty Dog to vorry him:
but fat do you tink, but fen de holy Shaint vas after making de shign of de
Cross he vas dead in de plashe. I am know you pay your Devotion to Shaint
Parick very vel, for I observe in de houshes in de Country fere I comd, some of
dear Shildren vil have de Name of Parick upon them very good Devoshion. But den
Catolicks, anoder vay for your Devoshion to dish holy Shaint is to pray to him,
fich I take notice your Parish Prieshts do very vel. And anoder way to pay your
Devoshion to Shaint Parick is by keeping dish Day deicate to our great
Aposhtel. Dear Catolicks, how do you tink vil you keep it now? I shay, do not
be drunk, you are mush to blame for dat: I tell you, I will know shome of you
drunk on Shaint Parick's Day, I by my Shoul, on Good Friday it self: have a
care of dat; I am very well know you will go drink your Bunn Parick; I, and you
vill not be content vid dat, but you vill drink till you be drunken; but I
musht tell you dear Catolicks dat doesh Shins dat you do take most delight in,
oftent^mes voud be your Destruction; for I will tell you de Story, to
illustrate dish matter; it ish a true Story, by my Shoul, for I had (...) from
de Priesht of de Parish fere de ting vash done. Dear vash shom Gentlemen vash
drinking dear Bunn Parick upon Shaint Parick's Day, and dey vent into a housh
for drinkin, and dear vash up stairs in de housh, and dear dey vere drinking
till dey vere dronkin; and de Voman of de housh was brewing dat day, and she
did left a tub of hot Vorts at de stair foots to cool; and one of de Men vas
coming down Stairs, and he had heels upon his Brogues, and de heel of his
Brogue did take hold upon de Stairs, and Joy he did tumble vid his Head forward
into de tub of hot Vorts, and dear he vash scaled to dett. She dear now, dear
Catolicks, fat comes of Dronkening: did not I told you so, dat doos shins dat a
Man takes delight in does often prove his ruin; for dish Man did love cold
Ale, and he was drowned in hot Vorts. Dear is for you now, dear Catolicks: But
now to make you good Kristians, you must take de Exshample of dat good Vomans
dat had Oil did grow in her Pots; dey vere all clean Pots but one Pot, and de
Oil did not grow in dat Pot: fie, dear Catolicks, I am mush fear your Shouls be
like dat dirty Pot fere no Oil voud grow; but I will told you now, if your
Shouls be like dat you are all dam; I shay you are all dam, I by my Shoul, all
de hole of you; derefore, dear Catolicks, have a care of dat. And you, good
Vomans, you must not go (...) nere de holy Altar vid them fine Cloash, and does
Patch upon your Fashes. I will tell you now, fen de Men should be ^^ looking
upon de holy Crushifex, dey will be looking upon your Fashes. O hone, Joy, I
told you now, dear be de Quakers, observe them, dey be de better Kristians den
none of you all: I told you sho, de Devil vill take you all, if you voud not
mend. De Quakers be de best Kristians in de Vorld if dey vere join to de
Catolick Shurch. Now let ush pray for our gracious King Jamas, dat he may have
a long and prosperous Reign, and Issue Male, wise Council, stour valiant
Soldiers, faitful loving Subjects, dat being all united in one Faith, we may
embrace one anoder in de Arms of Love. In de Name, etc. Amen.

After which he kneeled down and paid his Adorations to the Picture of St.
Francis, on his right Hand.

LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old-Bayly.


