A TREATISE OF MUTILATION and DEMEMBRATION Divided in two PARTS.

In the first whereof, the Name and Nature of these Crimes, and of Proper and
Improper Members of the Body, are unfolded: The Doctrine of Canonical
Regularity and Irregularity, from which that Distinction in order to Crimes
descends, explained: Also the Method of pursuing and defending in these Crimes;
the Competency of the Judge; the Order of Probation; together with the
Procedure of the Inquest, is set down.

In the second PART, The Punishments of these Crimes are handled; Retaliation,
which is the first of them, distinguished; and the Practice of that Species
thereof called Pythagorical or Arithmetical, refuted; from the Opinion of
Divines and Lawyers; and even from the Opinion of the Rabbis: The other
Species called Aristotelical, Analogical or Geometrical, reconciled to natural
Equity, and to the Law of GOD. The Punishment of Amputation of a Hand, though
in many Cases practiced, yet, rejected from being the ordinary Punishment of
these Crimes. Arbitrary Punishments asserted in place of both; and a well
regulated Arbitrary Power proved to be useful and necessary to Judges, for
augmenting and diminishing Punishments, in these and in other Crimes, according
to Circumstances attending the committing of them. And in both Parts the Civil
Law, and the Law and Customs of this and other Nations are compared.

By Sir ALEXANDER SETON of PITMEDDEN Knight Baronet, etc.

By way of Appendix to the foregoing Book, written by the Learned Sir GEORGE
MACKENZIE of Rosehaugh.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. For Mr. Andrew Symson; and are to be Sold by
him in the Cowgate, near the Foot of the Horse-wynd, Anno DOM. 1699.

ERRATA.
The Letter N. relates to the Number in the Margin, and the Letter L. to the
Line of the Number.

Number. 1. Line 4. f likely r. like N. 4. l. 23. f. jacturum r. jecturam N. 6. l.
pen. f. Dutilatus 1. Mutilatus N. 7. l. 9. f. ipsis r: ipsius. N. 19. l. 1. f.
irregular r regular N. 20. l. 6. to Dionys. add Halic. N. 24. l. 15. f.
excaecuerit r. excaecaverit. l. 17. f. lib. 12. r. lib. 22. l. 18. after Hist.
add Cent. 1. N. 37. l. 5. f. occasions r. affects N. 67. l. 7. after Assize.
add But this must be upon some Speciality, and probably because many
difficulties occur in the Decision. N. 71: l 12. f of one other. r. one or
another N. 100. l 6. f. Hugo r. Ugo. l. 7. f. talitur r. taliter N. 105. l 18.
f Lucia r. Lycia. N. 125. l: 4: dele it. N. 167: l: 25: f: legem r: legum. N:
170: l. 7: f: honor r: am^re. As for any other literal Errors, or Mistakes in
the punctation; the candid Reader is desired to excuse and amend them.

To the Reader.
WHen I gave the first of the following Sheets to Mr. Andrew Symson, that he
might publish them, 'twas my Desire that my Name should be concealed, to the
end that the Reader (being lest to his Conjectures about the Author) might
ascribe them to a person of greater Learning, whose Reputation in the World
might add more Luster to the Work than my obscure Name could do; But the
Publisher by some mistaken Apprehension having prefixed my Name, has thereby
obliged me to premit the following Account beyond what the Introduction
contains, which was all the Preface I at first designed.

The occasion of my Writing was this; Mr. Symson, Minister of the Gospel,
having in the year 1689. retired to this City of Edinburgh, resolved, according
to the Apostles advice 1 These. 4.11.
to be quiet and to do his own business, and to work with his own hand, that so
2 These. 3.8.
he might not be chargeable to any; but 2 These. 3.12.
eat his own bread; and Ephesians. 4.28.
have to give to him that needs. And in prosecution of this virtuous
Resolution having taken himself to the Trade, he well understood, of publishing
and selling of Books, desired from me and his other good Friends, to give him
such Encouragement as might fall in our way.

Some of the Honorable Society of Advocats, Mr. Symsons Patrons and Be
nefactors, having advised him to publish a second Edition of the Laws and
Customs of Scotland in Matters Criminal, written by the Learned Sir George
Mackenzie of Rosehaugh; and he being desirous that this second Edition might go
out with some Addition; I was prevailed with, though unfit for the Undertaking,
to write the following Appendix; and the Subject being lest to my own choice, I
pitched upon the Crimes of Mutilation and Demembration, as these on which least
had been written, and yet afforded variety of Matter both profitable and
pleasant, whereof I hope the Reader will be convinced, after he has perused
these following Papers.

For Methods sake, I have divided this little Work in two Parts; In the first
whereof (containing Matter Medico-legal) I have spoken of the Names and Nature
of these Crimes, and shown they can only be committed on proper Members of the
Body; and from thence I have taken occasion to describe both proper and
improper Members, and to show how far the distinction betwixt them, arose from
the Doctrine of Canonical Regularity and Irregularity; I have likewise set down
some general Directions for forming a Lybel, with the most remarkable Defenses;
and some Observations anent the Competency of the Judge; the Method of
Probation; the Inquests their Procedure; intermixing now and then, with
Citations of Law, some pertinent Passages of History, to divert the Reader.

In the second Part I have considered the Punishments of those Crimes; and have
handled Retaliation (which is the first of them) as a matter
Historico-theologico-juridical; and refuted the Species thereof, called
Pythagorical or Arithmetical; and reconciled the other Species, called
Aristotelical, Analogical, or Geometrical, to Natural Equity, and to the Law of
GOD. And that for clearing a Debate in the Books of Adjournal about strict
Retaliation. I have also discoursed of the Punishment of Amputation of a Hand,
and rejected it from being the ordinary punishment of those Crimes, and have
asserted Arbitrary punishment to be the Ordinary; and described Arbitrary
punishment in the General, and showen how far a well regulated Arbitrary Power
is useful and necessary in Judges; for satisfaction of some who are scandalized
at the very Name of every thing called Arbitrary; and last of all, I have
endeavored to clear the Sense of the ancient Statute of King Robert the
Second, which declares the Li^e of the Mutilator to be in the Kings Will. All
which is more particularly held forth in the Summaries pre^ixt to each Part,
which, according to the Method of Farinacius, contain au Abridgment of the
Heads they relate to.

In the performance of this Task, I have adduced the Testimonies of Physicians,
Divines and other Authors, as the Subject of each of these Parts required, and
have compared them with the Citations of Civil Law, and D D. and Decisions, in
the Books of Adjournal, and have disposed them in such a Method as makes the
Work altogether new, and yet no part of the Criminal Law needed more to be
known, because the Crimes I treat of, have frequently occurred, and must occur
so long as the Wickedness of Man prompts him to Revenge.

These things being premitted concerning the Occasion and the Matter of the
Appendix, I crave leave by way of Apology to represent; first, That when I
entered upon this Task, I designed to comprehend all I had to say, in six or
seven Sheets; but one Thought following upon another, swelled them to the
Number they now appear in. Next, during all the time I was employed about these
Sheets, I met with frequent Interruptions from a long and tedious Suit of Law,
sufficiently known to be just on my part, where through I was obliged to give
in every Sheet, as it was finished, to the Press, before I had time to digest
another, to satisfy the Importunity of the Printers who frequently called for
them: and this did so hasten and drive me, that I was forced to take Hours from
my Sleep to Revise and Correct the Sheets. This Precipitation occasioned some
Literal Mistakes, and if even Errors in Matter should appear, (as I hope they
will not) I may be allowed to excuse my self in these words of the Judicious
Noodt. Probabil. lib. 1. c. 1. N. 1.
quod nimia acceleratio saepe efficit ut Animus, dum pluribus intenditur,
variet atque ad alia aberret quam sibi dicenda faciendave proposuerat;
providing I do frankly acknowledge the Errors how soon they shall be
discovered; and this I not only promise to do, but also will think it my
Honor; after the Example of the famous Papinian; who (though he was dignified
in Law with the splended Titles of Disertissimus l. fin. C. de instit. and
substit.
prudentissimus l. 14. C. de praed. min.
acutissimus and merito ante alios excellens l. 30. C. de fidei comm.
hemo excelsi ingenii sed quia 7. inst. defidei comm. Haered.
; and last of all with the Title of Maximus Papinianus Novel. 4. c. 6. verse.
sed and hoc.
yet thought it no Derogation to yield to the Arguments of Sabinus, and to
become his Convert sed in contrarium (says he, after stating his own Opinion)
me vocat Sabini sententia l. 6.. 1. ff. de serve. export.
; and by so saying, to proclaim the Victory on Sabinus his side: and in another
case Justinian cites him, changing his Thoughts, and approves the 2d, before
the first l. 22.. 3. C. de furt. et serve. cor.
; and justly, for Reason should not be ruled by the Will, but have the command
over it; this being that noble Victory, of a man over himself, commended by
Plato calling it pulcherrimum victoriae genus.

A TREATISE OF MUTILATION and DEMEMBRATION PART I.

WHEREIN the Name and Nature of these Crimes, and of Proper and Improper
Members of the Body, are unfolded: The Doctrine of Canonical Regularity and
Irregularity, from which that Distinction in order to Crimes descends,
explained: Also the Method of pursuing and defending in these Crimes; the
Competency of the Judge; the Order of Probation; together with the Procedure of
the Inquest, is set down. As also the Civil Law, and the Law and Customs of
this and other Nations are compared.

By Sir ALEXANDER SETON of PITMEDDEN Knight Baronet, etc.

By way of Appendix to the foregoing Book, written by the Learned Sir GEORGE
MACKENZIE of Rosehaugh.

1699

printer's or publisher's device

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent MAJESTY. For Mr. Andrew Symson; and are to be Sold by
him, in the Cowgate, near the Foot of the Horse-wynd, Anno DOM. 1699.

A TREATISE OF MUTILATION and DEMEMBRATION, (by way of APPENDIX to Sir George
Mackenzies Criminals:) Divided into Two Parts.
PART I. Wherein the Nature of the Crimes or Delicts of Mutilation and
Demembration is Considered, Together with the Method of Pursuing and Defending
therein.
Summaries.
1 Introduction, Showing the Design of this APPENDIX. 2 Mutilation and
Demembration, by some are treated of among Injuries, and not improperly; by
others in the Title of Murder: with the Reasons why. 3 This Tractat is divided
into two Parts: The first Part treats of the nature of these Crimes or Delicts,
together with the method of Pursuing and Defending therein. The second Part
treats of their Punishments. 4 The several Acceptations of the Words Mutilation
and Demembration, and of their Synonymous Words, Mutilum, Mutilatum, Curtum,
Decurtum, Descissum, Detruncatum. 5 How the Word Mutilation is to be understood
in Cap. 11. Stat. Rob. 2. and in our later Custom of Speaking. 6 Mutilation and
Demembration are Names of Crimes: and one who wants a Hand, or other Members on
other occasions, is not properly called Mutitilatus or Demembratus, sed Mancus.
7 Mutilation and Demembration described and diftinguished from Debilitation,
which is the weakening of a Member, without taking away it is total use. 8
Mutilation (like Homicide) distinguished into Voluntary, Necessary, Casual, and
Culpable. 9 Mutilation and Demembration are called Acts of Private Violence, to
distinguish them from Acts of Punitive Justice. 10 Mutilation, why described by
the Word Hurting, and not Wounding. 11 Mutilation and Demembration being
committed on Members, are thereby distinguished from Homicide. 12 The last
Words of the Description of Mutilation [to that Degree that the Member cease
to be useful] hold forth, 1. That the hurt Member must be useful. 2. That it
lose its us^. 3. That it be irrecoverably lost. 13 This leads us to enquire
what is a Member, because it is in some cases alleged that the hurt part of the
Body is no Member. 14 Members divided in principal and subservient, and both
described. 15 And in proper and improper, and both described. 16 The action and
use of a proper Member described. 17 Though Mutilation be described, by it is
rendering a Member useless, yet it is not th^r^ly con^^^^ded with Demembration.
18 The Canonists in their Discourses of Canonical Regularity and Irregularity,
give light to the understanding of the nature of proper and improper Members.
19 Canonical Regularity and Irregularity described. 20 Some Defects in the Body
are Causes of Canonical Irregularity in the Rom^n Church, as had been formerly
under the Levitical Law; from whence that Custom seems to have descended to the
Heathen Nations; and last of all, come in to the Church of Rome. 21 D^^^c^ of
the Body more either natural or accidental; and among other Acc^d^n^^, more
occasioned by the Crimes of Mutilation and Demembration, which (...) rend^^d
the Agent, and sometimes the Patient, and sometimes both* (...). 22 A Rule
taken from the Doctrine of the Canonists anent irregularity, whereby to know
when Mutilation and Demembration is committed, in order to ^^fer Punishment. 23
Of Members in particular; where, First, It Is proved that the Eye is a preper
Member. 24 A man may be demembred of his Eyes two ways: First, Formaliter, by
^^^ing them design'^ly pulled out; which atrocious Crime has been punished by
Retaliation. 25 Also a man may be demembred of his Eye, by it 's being wounded
to that degr^^, that it withers or consumes, and such a man is said to be
mutilated Su^st^nti^liter. 26 The Eye man be mutilated, either by a total
abolition of the Sight; or by such a d^mir^^ie^ a^ renders the Sight almost
useless: which is described and ill stra^^d by Examples. 27 D^p^a^ation of the
Sight as described, infers not Mutilation. 28 The Tongue p^ov'd to be a Member
in the proper Sense. 29 The Tongue is said to be demembred, when cut out by the
Root. 30 The Tongue is said to be mutilated, when such a part of it is cut off,
as hinders it (...) s^^^k to Understanding, although the Law will hold him
sanus as to R^d^^b^tion. 31 Whether the Lips be Members in a proper Sense. 32
Whether the Teeth be Members in a proper Sense? Arguments for the Negative. 33
Arguments for the Affitmative. 34 Arguments for the Negative Answered. 35 The
Nose is a member in the proper Sense, proved by Authorities. 36 It Is proved by
Experience, which teaches that it is the only Instrument of Smelling. 37 An
Objection Answered. 38 Those who deny the Nose to be the Instrument of
Smelling, do acknowledge it to be the Instrument of other distinct Operations;
and co^s^^u^^^ly, a Member in the proper Sense. 39 The Far described: And
distinguished in Internal, called Auris; and External, called Auricula. The
first yielded to be a Member in the proper Sense, and the s^co^d controverted.
40 Physicians and Lawyers for the Negative. 41 Physicians and Lawyers for the
Affirmative. 42 Suares and Zacchias agree to the Affirmative, hic and N. seq.
43 If Amputation of a part of the Auricula, infers Demembration; Afforted by
Su^res, Deny d^^y Zacchias, and so d^^^d^d. 44 The Chin no proper Member
according to Farinacius; and therefore the cutting off of the Chin insers not
Demembration, but yet is punishable as a Delict or Riot. 45 The Beard is no
Member, yet the cutting off thereof (...) just (...) will, is severely
Punishable, even paena incidentis membrum, acc^rding to Baldus. 46 The Paps or
Duggs of a Woman are Members in a proper Sense. 47 Whether or not the Spondyls
or Vertebrae be Members in a ^^op^r S^^s^. 48 Castratio virilium is a most
atrocious Demembration, and s^v^rely punishable, hic and N. in^ra. 49 The Hand,
how taken in a large Sense, and how in a narrower Sense. 50 The Hand because it
performs most useful and distinct Operations, is without all Debate, a most
useful and proper Member. 51 The Leg i^ also an useful and proper Member. 52
Whether the Fingers and Toes are Members per se, or only parts of the Hands and
^eet i^ (...) agreed among the DD. 53 For the Negative, viz. that Digitus non
est Membrum, are Bartolus, Baldus, and many others, both Lawyers and
Physicians. 54 Fr. Suarez seems to agree with the Negative. 55 Cajetan and Soto
are for the Affi^m^^i^^. 56 Suarez acts the part of a R^c^^^^er betwixt Cajetan
and the other DD. 57 Digitus found to be Membrum, by many Decisions in the
Books of Adjournal. 58 Arguments to justify the Decisions. 59 Whether it be
more proper to say, the Fingers are demembred, or the Hand is demembred of the
Fingers, according to Fortunat. Fidel. 60 Answers to some Laws ^dd^c^d by the
DD. to prove that the Fingers are no Members. 61 The Toes or digiti pedis are
properly Members, as the Fingers of the Hand, because of their useful^^s^. 62
Wonderful Performances done with the Toes of such as have been Born without
Hands 63 Detruncation of a Withered Hand, infers the Crime and Pain of
Demembration. 64 The cutting off of a proper Member from a dead Body, does not
infer the Crime or pam of Demembration. 65 The use of this Dis^^u^s^ of proper
and improper Members, is for the understanding of general Statutes concerning
Members. 66 All Judges cowpetent in Homicide, are likewise competent in the
Crimes of Mutilation and Demembration. 67 Barons of Barony are not competent
Judges, neither is the Privy Council. 68 Though the Privy Council cannot
decide, yet they can precognosce, and discharge the Justices to proceed. 69
Five Cautions for forming the Libel. 70 The Defenses are dilatory, or
peremptory; and both described. 71 The first dilatory Defense against
Mutilation is, that Year and Day is not elapsed since the committing of the
Crime; with the Reply thereto. 72 This Defense takes no place against a Libel
of Demembration. 73 If the Pursuit be both for Mutilation and Demembration, the
Pursuer may pass from the Mutilation, and Insist within Year and Day for the
Demembration. 74 The second dilatory Defense is, that the Case is submitted. 75
The first peremptory Defense is, that the mutilated Member is recovered. 76 The
Defense of Recovery, is only relevant against a Libel for Mutilation. 77 The
second peremptory Defense is, that the Case being submitted, the Arbiters have
decerned. 78 The Justices oft-times recommend to the Parties to submit. 79
Mutilation and Demembration, are but privata dilicta. 80 The third peremptory
Defense is, that the King has remitted the Crime. 81 The fourth peremptory
Defense is, Dissimulation: but this must be very apparent and evident,
otherways it is not relevant. 82 The fifth peremptory Defense is, Res judicata.
83 The sixth is a good Defense, that the Council have precognosc'd and
discharged the Justices to proceed. 84 Sometimes the Council remit to the
Justices to precognosce. 85 The seventh Alledgance of Self-Defence is relevant
here, as in Homicide. 86 Self-Defence is not relevant against one clothed with
lawful Authority. 87 The eighth is a good Defense that the Wound was Curable,
and the Mutilation or Demembration was ex malo regimine. 88 All who are Actors
Art and Part, are liable. 89 Whether it be a good Defense that the Party
mutilated or demembred was at the Horn. 90 A Panel at the Horn, must relax
before he can be allowed to propone his Defenses. 91 If strict Retaliation be
craved in the Libel, the Panel must debate how far the Jewish Retaliation is
obligatory. 92 It is a good Defense that the Pursuer did Mutilat or Demember
himself. 93 Whatever Defense is competent against Homicide, is also competent
against Mutilation and Demembration, mutatis mutandis. 94 Two things to be
noticed in the Probation of these Crimes or Delicts. 95 1. What Is evident to
the Judge and Inquest by Ocular Inspection, needs no further Probation. 96 2.
If Mutilation be only pretended, then the Trial must be either by the Oath of
Calumny of the Party pretending to be Mutilated; or by Witnesses; or by Skilful
Surgeons, who must declare their Opinion upon Oath. 97 The Testimony of
Physicians and Surgeons, is not probative, unless upon Oath, which is
agreeable to the Opinion of the DD. and the Practice of Foreign Courts. Three
Cases wherein they not obliged to Swear. 98 Assisers should be persons more
than ordinary intelligent. It Is also necessary that Advocats study the
Questiones Medico-Legales.
THe design of this Appendix is, Mutilation and Demembration omitted by the
learned Author of the foregoing Book. And if the worthy Gentleman had lived to
favor his Country with a second Edition; it is likely he would have enlarged
upon the whole Titles of his Book; and saved me the pains of this Addition, by
writing on it to better purpose.

This Subject is handled in the Title of Injuries, P. Aerodius. rer. judicat.
lib. 6. tit. 5. cap. 20. Matthaeus decrim. tit. 4. cap. 2. Carpz. prax. crim.
p. 2. qu. 99. N. 25. Wesenbecius and Zoes. ad tit. ff. de injur. and by many
others; and even by the Text it self. 7. inst de injur. And it cannot be
denied, but to cut off, mutilat, or disable a necessary Member of the Body, is
one of the greatest Injuries that can be done to it; for not only does it
deform the Body, but renders it unfit for Action; and in many places makes the
injured person incapable of the Office of the Priesthood, as we shall show, N.
20. infra: So that these Crimes or Delicts are very properly handled in the
Title of Injuries. Yet others, as Covarruv. relict. de Homicid. Farin. prax.
crim. 4: 119. tit. 4. insp. 4. and Zoes ad tit. ext. de homicid. treat of them,
in the Title of Homicide or Murder, as our Author very properly calls it; and
these Reasons may serve to justify them. First, Because the sixth Command,
Thou shall not kill, Exodus 20.13. prohibites these Injuries as Degrees of
Homicide, and for this cause the political Sanctions added cap. 21. to explain
and defend that Command, first of all declare the several cases of Homicide
from verse. 12. to verse. 24. and then the cases of Mutilation and Demembration,
v. 24. and 25. making this proportion betwixt the Punishments, that as Life
must go for Life, so Eye for Eye; Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand, Foot for
Foot. Secondly, These Crimes, because of their Similitude and Relation to one
another, have many common Rules for judging them, which seems to be the Reason
why they are coujoyned in our ancient Laws and Acts of Parliament; as cap. 11.
stat. Rob. 2. And Act 28. Par. 3. Ja. 4. and Act 118. Par. 7. Ja. 5. But, this
Controversy being of no moment, the Reader may append this small Treatise
either to the Title of Murder or of Injuries, as he pleases.

I have divided this little Tractat in two Parts; In the first,
medico-juridical; and, for this cause the Physicians and Lawyers have been
mutually assisting to each other. And the cases resolved by them, are called,
Quaestiones medico-legales. This Subject is useful to be known; and the
wickedness and vindictive Nature of Mankind, has made the knowledge thereof
necessary. As its useful so its difficult, and is acknowledged to be so, by For
tunatus Fidelis, a learned Physician, who having written a Book in Octavo, de
Relationibus Medicorum, in which (for clearing the eases wherein Judges are in
use to call for the Advice of Physicians) he lib. 2. tit. 5. de Mutilatione,
introduces his Discourse with these words: Hand parva difficultas quibusiam
medicis interdum offertur, si quando a judice de mutilis est referendum; si io
enim mulios esse que cum scientiarum titulo se venditent, quid tamen ipsa sit
mutilatio plune ignorant. And the Dissiculty appears in the different
Sentiments about it. The second Part is Theologico juridical, and has many
thorny Questions in it, especially about the pain of Retaliation, which has
perplexed both Divines and Lawyers, and yet few have written on these two
Delicts, as Delicts deserving punishment. It Is true the Canouists have
considered them as they are the Causes of Canonical irregularity; and many of
the Civilians also have considered them as to that end; but they say little of
them as they are punishable Crimes, which has induced me to make this small
Essay, hoping it may encourage others to do better; and if they discover any
Mistakes, as perhaps they may, they will do me a favor to correct them.

For understanding the different Expressions of the DD. Mutilation and
Demembration, are variously taken by Divines and Lawyers, as also by Physicians
(whom Lawyers use to consult in such Matters.) By Mutilation we commonly
understand the Cessation and Privation of the Office, and distinct Operation of
a Member, albeit no Particle of it be cut off: And by Demembration, we
understand the cutting off of a Member, and in this sense we find these words
used in the Journal Books. But Fortunat. Fidel. dict. lib. 2. sect. 5. cap. 1.
makes use of the word Debile, to signify that which we call a mutilated
Member, and of the words mutilum, mutilatum, curtum, decurtatum, descissum vel
detruncatum; and of the Greek word Colobon, as Synonymous words, to signify a
Member wanting an extreme part; and cites the words of Aristotle 5. Metaph.
cap. 27. Mutila sunt, non cujusve particulae privatione, nam si carnem aut
splenem tollas, non propterea mutilus remanebit, sed si extremitatem, atque
hanc non omnem, sed quae, tota ablata, generationem non habet. By which it
appears that the Nature of Mutilation, according to Aristotle, consists in a
Want or Defect of the extreme parts of the Body which cannot be repaired. And
so Galen de diff. Morborum, cited by him, defines Mutilum to be, cui pars
aliqua corporis est pracisa; and affirms, that Mutilation may be of Eye, Ear,
Nostrils, and of any fleshly part; as of the Tongue when the half of it is cut
off. And again, dict. sect. cap. 2. he cites Galen. 1. de diff. pulls. 11.
describing mutilatos ac decurtatos pulsus, to be, quibus de priore magnitudine
aliquid deest. And in that same place Fortunat. Fidel. says, non quamcunque
substantiae jacturum mutilum constituere, nam si quis a proximo ortu, aut sine
manu prodicrit, aut aure, aut part aliqua similiter fuerit destitutus, non
mutilum illum sed mancum proprie nuncupabo. And so he confounds Mutilation and
Demembration, and also makes them to be Acts of Violence. In like manner,
Barbosa, de off. and potestat. Episc. aleg. 42. N. 10. by mutilated Members
understands these, quae aliquo modo praecisa and obtruncata sunt. And the Gloss
and Panormitan in C. de accus. in verb. Debilitatus affirm mutilum dici, cui
membrum aliquod abscissum; and mancum dici illum, cui membrum debile factum.
And this sense of the Words is approved by Covarruv. dict. relict. 3. de
Homicid. Number. 8. in fin. Calvin in Lexic. following Spigelius, by the word
Mutilatus, seems likewise to understand one who is demembred, because he
explains the word Mutilatus by the words corpore diminutus, Mutilati, says he,
i. e. corpore diminuti. And so the word is taken in Gloss. ad. 3. tit. 53. lib.
2. Feudor. This is what Mutilation signifies according to the DD. above cited,
and in the same sense is always taken by Farin. fragm. crim. part 2. Argument.
de irregularitate quam quis contrahit propter membri mutilationem. Number. 581.
and seqq.

I find the word Mutilation in King Roberts said Statute; Demembration; for
it is there said, If any man mutilats another, or wounds or hurts him be
forethought felony, and the Party grieved pursue him before a Judge, such Form
and Order of Process shall be led against him, as is ordained against a
Manslayer. Now either the word Mutilation must signify Demembration, or it
will follow, that Demembration is not in the Statute; and that Mutilation which
is less than Demembration, is punishable as Homicide: For the following words
of the Statute, ordain the Mutilator to be tried by an Assyze, and if he be
convicted, his Life to be redeemable; which shows that his Life, for committing
that Crime, is in the Kings Will. And therefore for correcting this Mistake,
the Act 28. Parl. 3. Ja. 4. conjoyns Slaughter and Demembration, without
mention of Mutilation. In our later Custom of Speaking, and in all the Journal
Books extant, Mutilation signifies only the taking away the use of a Member,
the Member still remaining with the Body: and so is a less Crime than
Demembration, which (according to the notation of the word) signifies
Obtruncation, or a separating a Member from the Body; and some DD. do so
understand and distinguish them.

It Is further to be remarked, that Mutilation and Demembration, Act 6. Par. 16.
Ja. 6. the Crime of Mutilation is expressed by that word in the Narrative of
the Act; whereas the word Amputation is made use of in the Statutory Part, to
express the Punishment of cutting off a Hand; and in like manner the words
abscindere and amputare, are made use of to that end, in l. 3. and Auth. seq.
c. de serve. fugit. and novel 134. cap. 18. And hence the DD. calls this
punishment poena amputationis. Carpz. prax. Criminal. p. 1. qu. 4. N. 43, 45,
48. This is the most ordinary way of expressing it; Yet I find mention of poena
mutilationis membri, in Cabal resolut. crim. cent. 3. cas. 36. N. 25. I observe
also, that Paulus in l. 10. ff. quitest. fac. pos. making mention of one who
lost his Hand by accident, makes use of the words qui manus amisit, and says
not qui Dutilatus vel Demembratus. And such a one is rather called Mancus than
Mutilatus.

Mutilation then, as it is the name of a Delict, may be described to be, A
voluntary Act of private Violence, by which one hurts a Member of another Body,
to that degree, that the Member cease to be useful. And this is commonly done
by cutting the Nerves and Sinews by which the Member is moved. Demembration, is
a further degree of this Violence, by which a Member is cut off and separated
from the Body. And Debilitation is betwixt the two, and signifies with us, the
weakening of a Member without taking away it is total use. I say with us, for
Cabal. Cent. 3. resol. cas. 236. N. 23. defines Debilitation to be Impeditio
principalis, and proprii officii ipsis membri, which upon the Matter, is all
one with Mutilation; and all others do the like, who confound the words
Mutilation and Demembration, to signify the same thing.

I call Mutilation and Demembration [Voluntary Acts,] Carpz. p: 1. qu. 1. N.
13. to whom I refer: Or with Zoes. ad tit. ext. de Homicid. N. 2. we may reduce
all to these four Heads, viz. Voluntary; and that is either unlawful: As when
one intentionally designs to mutilat or dismember another without just cause;
or Lawful, and that again is either Necessary and Defensive, when a Man does
these Deeds in his own Defense. Or Punitive; such as is inflicted by Authority
of the Magistrate. Or Casual, which falls out merely by Chance: As if a Man
defending himself, should accidentally hurt a By-stander. Or Culpable, which
although it be not designed, yet it is not merely by Chance.

We say [An Act of private Violence] to distinguish it from Acts of punitive
Justice. Feb. 1618, in the case of James Douglass. and 25. March 1667. in the
case of Patrick Roy Mackgregor (and his Accomplices) whose Sentence was to have
their right Hands first cut off, and then to be hanged.

We say [Hurts a Member] and not [wounds it] First, Mutilation and Demembration
may be committed without a Sword or such like Weapon. And therefore the
Justices sustained Mutilation of a Leg, committed by breaking thereof in
Wrestling. 6. June 1627. Leslie against Harvie. and 11. March 1631. Crawfurd
against Scot; in both which Decisions, this Alledgiance ( viz. that the Leg was
not broken aliquo telo, but in wrestling, in which the Pursuer might have been
the Breaker of his own Leg) was propon'd and repelled, in respect of the Libel,
bearing that the Panel broke the Pursuers Leg in the wrestling, by violently
throwing him on the Ground. And very justly, for even Homicide is sustained by
the Law of God, Exodus 21.18, 19, 20. though it was committed by a Stone or a
Stroke, with the Fist, or beating with a Rod. Of this manner of killing see at
length Carpz. p. 1. q. 3. N. 19 and seqq. where he sets down the several cases,
and it were easy to adduce many Decisions to this purpose. Secondly, By the
word (Hurting) we distinguish Mutilation from Demembration, which is committed
by Amputation of the Member.

By the word (Member) we destinguish both Mutilation and Demembration from
Homicide, Harprecht:. Item. 7. inst. de pub. is violenta vitae hominis
ademptio; or as Farin. dict. q. 119. inspect. 1. N. 3. in fin. it is, animati
corporis p^remptio. And if it happen (as often it does) that the Wounding or
Amputation of the Member, be the Cause of Death, then he who gave the the Hurt
or Wound, is punishable as a Manslayer; and not as a Mutilator or Demembrator.
l. 15. ff. de Sicar. (there says Vlpian) nihil interest, occidat quis, an
causam mortis praebeat.

The last Words of the Description of Mutilation [ to that Degree, that the
Member cease to be useful i. e. cannot perform its wonted Operations Cartz.
dict. prax. crim. p. 2. q. 99. N. 25.) hold forth. 1. That Mutilation and
Demembration are commonly committed on useful Members. 2. That every Wounding
or Disabling of a Member, infers not the Crime and Pain of Mutilation, though
there be much effusion of Blood. Abbas in c. 1. qui clerici vel voventes. N. 8.
Navar: ibid. N. 223. Suarez. de censuris did. 44. sect. 2. N. 6. But the
Member must cease to be useful; and yet wounding, per se makes a Delict,
punishable by the Judge Ordinary, that is to say the Sheriff, to whom the
Justices are in use frequently to remit it. 3. That though the Member may, by the
Strok it receives, lose its use for a time, yet if it recover its use, the
Action of Mutilation cease; and by the practice of the Justice Court, Year
and Day is allowed to expect Recovery; within which time, Action for Mutilation
cannot be sustained: as we shall show when we come to the Defenses.

And this brings us to a main point, Mutilation and Demembration. This I say is
a main point, because the first Defense that uses to be proponed against a
Libel of Mutilation or Demembration; as for Example of a Finger, is, that
digitus non est membrum, whereof see a large Debate Number. 52. and seqq. infra.
And to prove this, the Panel or Defender appeals to the Testimonies of Lawyers
and Physicians; wherefore it is fit we should inquireinto their Opinions
concerning the Definition of a Member.

Membrum, Member, (which comes from the word metior metiris, to Divide, Cabal.
resolut. cent. 3. cas. 236. N. 2.) is variously distinguished. First, Some are
called Principal Members, which operat by themselves; such as the Tongue, in
speaking; and others, subservient, as the Teeth and Lips, which assist the
Tongue in forming of Words.

Again, proper and strict Sense; others, in a large and abusive Sense. The last
of these includes all the organical and similar Parts; That is to say, the
Flesh, Nerves and Veins; which are of the same Contexture throughout the whole
Body, and in this improper Sense, a Member is defined to be, A solid continued
part of the Body, begotten of Commixtion of Humors, thickened and formed by the
Strength of Nature, Arist: lib. 1. de hist. Animal. cap. 1. Galen. lib. 1. de
usu partium. cap. 1. Fortunat. Fidel. de relat. mediic. lib. 2. sect. 6. cap.
1. and 2. Zacchias quaest. medico-legal. lib. 5. tit. 3. qu. 1. N. 5.6. and 7.
where he cites Avicenna the Author of the Definition. But in the strict and
proper Sense, a Member is defined to be a Particle, or part of the Body, not
circumscribed on all sides, nor joined every way to the Body, nor to another
Member of the Body. And this agrees to all the extreme parts of the Body, and
makes them to be proper Members. And so Fortunat. Fidel. defines it, dict. cap.
1. And he takes it from Aristotle and Galen. and Covarruv. follows it, Init.
relect. 1. de homicid. N. 8. But they both and Zacch. dict. loc. give this as
the more common and received Definition, viz That it is a part of the Body,
performing a proper and perfect Action and Operation, which no other Member can
perform, and which cease to be performed, if that Member cease to be. And
this Definition is embraced by Suarez. de censuris. disp. 44: sect. 2: N: 6.
who in equivalent words defines it to be, that part of the Body Quae est quasi
integrum instrumentum proximum alicujus actionis; and says, that this the
Summists hold for a Rule, herein following Panormitan, Bartolus, Baldus and
others, who, says he, put this Sense upon it in their Disputations anent the
sense of this Statute punishing Mutilation. And the same is embraced by Cabal:
Number: 4. and seq: where he compares the Body of Man to the Structure of a House:
and the proper Members, of the Body to the Hall, Chambers and Kitchen, which
have distinct uses in the House; and the improper Members to the Stones of the
House, which are of the same Contexture throughout all the House, but have no
distinct use in it. And for this he cites Bartolus and Baldus, and many others
upon diverse Texts; but chiefly in l: 2. ff: de publ. judic. and l. si fugitivi.
c. de servis fugit. Caballus dict. cas: N: 115. makes another Division of
Members, viz: in instrumentalia and formalia, and ex his alia majora alia
minora. de quibus late tradunt DD: in l. 2.: ff. de publ: jvd. Baldus in l: 3:
l: de accusat: and in l. data opera C. iis qui accus. pos. and others cited by
him.

And again the said Fortunat. Fidel: dict. cap. 2. inprin. describes the Action
of the Member; for Example of the Hand, Use to be the apprehending of the
Object. So that now it is easy to resolve what it is to mutilate a proper
Member. viz. nothing else but to make it incapable of moving to, and
apprehending of the Object.

But then some object and say, that if it be necessary to the Essence of
Mutilation, Mutilation and Demembration, which we define as distinct Crimes,
are confounded. This Objection is moved by Suarez. dict. disp. 44: 2. N: 5.
where he distinguishes and defines these two Crimes, as we do, from the
Authority of Panormitan in Clement. Vnic. de homicid. and yet answers to the
Objection; that suppose the Fault were equal, yet the Effect is not simply the
same, which is sufficient for not extending the punishment. Next, he says, the
Damnage in both is not equal, because the Deformity is not equal. Moreover a
withered Hand has still the name of a Hand, and of a Member so long as it is
affixed to the Body; as we shall show when we come to speak of the Hand in
particular.

The next thing, that falls in my way, proper Member, and which not: And
because we have much Light from the Canonists in this Point (who describe the
Nature of Members; and of Mutilation and Demembration committed upon them, in
order to clear the Nature of Canonical Regularity and Irregularity) I crave
leave to digress a little upon this Subject, and to show how it is concerned
with the Crimes of Mutilation and Demembration.

To be irregular then, Roman Church, and to be subject to the Rules of the
Order, whence is the Denomination of Regular; and Irregularity is to be under a
Canonical Impediment, that hinders to enter into the Order, or to remain in it,
if entered. Covarru. init. relect. de Homicid. N: 1. And the Denomination of
Canonical comes from the Word Canon, (which also signifies regular) because the
first Institution of this regularity in the Christian Church, is from the
Canons of the Church. Covarruv. N. 2. ibid.

Among the Causes of Irregularity, Jews, Levit. 21. It came from them to the
Heathen Nations, among whom we find it. Plin: lib: 7: not: hist. cap: 28.
Seneca lib. 4. declam. 2. particularly, it was among the Romans, Dionys: lib:
2: Romanarum antiquitatum. And among the Persians, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 6.
dierum genial. cap: 14. and came last into the Roman Church by the Canons of
Gelasius and Honorius Bishops of Rome. Did: 53. c. 1. and 2. The words of the
last are, Poenitentes vel inscii literarum, aut aliqua membrorum damna
perpessi, ad sacros ordines aspirare non audeant. which has it is Declarations
and Restrictions in the other C C. of that Distinction; and in the Titles of
the Decretals; de regularibus and transeunt. ad Relig. and de Corp: vitiat.
ordinand: vel non. All explained by Parnormitan. Covarruv. dict. relect: de
homicid. Zoes. de homicid: Farin. fragm. part 2. N. 401. and seqq. Suarez:
dict: disp: 44: sect. 2.

This Defect of the Body as it was sometimes by Nature, Mutilation and
Demembration: And the Committer became irregular, by doing the fact; Clem.
unic. de homicid. except in the Cases there excepted; As also the Patient, if
either it did render him incapable to discharge his duty; or left a Cicatrice
in his Face, or other visible Deformity. Covarruv. dict relect: part: 3. N. 8.
whereby many persons, sufficiently qualified to bear Office in the Church, were
made incapable of bearing it: which occasioned some of the Canonists, and
Civilians followingthem, to contract the Number of proper Members of the Body,
into a lesser compass than probably they would have done, if it had not been to
restrict the Number of the Cases of Irregularitie.

From this Digression, Rule to our purpose. That in all the cases wherein the
Canonists conclude the Committer of Mutilation and Demembration to become
thereby Irregular, we may conclude him by the same facts, to be liable to the
punishments enjoined by our Laws for the same Crimes: though we cannot on the
other part agreewith them in all the cases wherein they think Mutilation is not
committed; because where there is any doubt concerning the Nature of a Member,
if it be properly a Member or not, in order to punishment, much is left to the
Arbitriment of the Criminal Judge. as Paulus Zacch: does frequently
acknowledge, dict: tit: 3. qu. 3: N: 7: in fin. and qu: 4: N: 27: and 31. and
qu. 5: N. 28. in fin. So that the Judge may go further in finding Mutilation
and Demembration, than the Canonists do.

And now I come to inquire into the Nature of each Member in particular; proper
and strict sense: Because it performs the Action of Seeing, which no other
Member of the Body can perform, and which Action ceases to be performed, when
the Eye ceases to be.

Demembration may be committed on the Eye two Ways. First, Formaliter, by
pulling out the Eyes; and this is so atrocious a Crime, that it deserves the
severest punishment, both for the Design, and because this Member is most
useful in foreseing the Dangers of the Body, and directing it in all it is other
Actions and Operations; as also because, by it is being put out, the Body is
deprived of all it is lawful pleasures, and especially of the Benefit of
Reading, which instructs the Soul. The punishment of this Crime, demonstrats
the greatness of it Leo Novel. sua 92 commands the Eye of him who pulls out one
Eye to be likewise pulled out; and if he have pulled out both Eyes, to lose but
one, not that he thereby intended to favor the Delinquent, but the Party
injured; for, as he there says, the Man who was made blind, had no advantage
by the Delinquents being made blind, therefore he restricted the punishment to
one Eye, and instead of the other, he commanded that the Delinquent should
aliment the Man whom he had made blind. To this Quintilian does agree, declamat
297. qui excaecuerit aliquem aut talionem praebeat, aut excaecati dux sit. This
was in case the Delinquent was Rich, but if he were Poor, he was to lose both
his Eyes. But Joannes Dubravius, Bishop of Vlm. lib. 12. hist. Bohem. cited by
Camerarius. meditat. hist. cap. 99. Reports, that the Emperor Charles the
fourth, sitting in Judgment, caused a Sentence to be pronounced against
Zachora a Nobleman of the Empire, to lose both his Eyes, for pulling out both
the Eyes of a Priest without any Provocation, save only that he did reprove him
for Errors, not considering that he was his Patron. The Crime indeed was
atrocious, and therefore the Defenses proponed by Zachora, viz. That he did it
in-passion, was penitent, and had ingenuously confessed the Crime, and was
willing to pay any Ransom the Judges should decern; were all repelled and no
regaird had therero.

Secondly, Demembration may be committed by so wounding the Eye, Farin. fragm.
p. 2. N. 596. This he calls mutilari substantialiter, vel demembrari, and
corpus oculo privari. And this seems to have been the case of the Pursuit
before the Justices, 18. June 1642. at the instance of Andrew Alexander and his
Father against David Young, eldest Son to Young of Kirkton, for putting out his
left Eye with a hard Clay Bullet from a Pluff, and thereby demembring him of
that Eye which was his only Eye, the other being lost by the small Pox. No
Decision followed on it, because the Parents transacted for their Children, in
respect they were but young Boys at the School, and the Crime was considered as
done, exlascivia and non ex dolo.

The Eye is mutilated either by a total Abolition of the Action of Seeing, vid.
Fortunat. Fidel. lib. 2. derelat. medic. cap. 4. And also it may be occasioned
by a Stroke on the Head, which makes a Defluction to fall on the Eye, producing
(as it often times comes to pass) a Cataract on the Eye, or a thin Skin, which
we commonly call a Slough or Striffen, or Film: And therefore the Justices 8.
July. 1643. found a Libel at Logies instance against Howison Portioner of
Cramond, bearing, that the Panel had mutilated his Eyes to that Degree, by
such a Stroke on the Head, relevant to infer the Crime and punishment of
Mutilation.

But a Depravation of the Action of Seeing, (which is when the Object appears
double, or otherwise than it should) does not infer Mutilation: it be a Delict,
or Crme punishable in suo genere. Caballus dicto casu^ 236. N. 123. calls it
Detuirpation, and says that debilitatio membri [meaning Mutilatio] being
nothing else but impeditio principalis and proprii officii ipsius membri it
follows, that oculus non dicitur debilitatus, si quis videt ut prius, licet
propter ictum, oculus sit deturpatus aliqualiter.

Secondly, proper Sense, because it performs the distinct operation of
Speaking, and besides it contributes to Deglutition and Mastication. Bartolus,
and alii D D. in l. ff. de pub. j^d. col. ult. N. 13. and l. Si cui lingua ff.
de Aedil. edict. Cabal. dict. cas. 236. N. 9. where he mocks Capola, for
denying it to be a Member, on no better reason, but that it performed all these
Actions.

Demembration is committed, Justinian in l. 1. in prin. c. de off. prefect.
praetor. Afric. testifies of the venerable Confessors whom he saw in Africa.
Qui abscissis radicitus linguis, poenassuas miserabiliter loquebantur, related
their case after their Tongues were cut out by the Roots at the command of
Honoricus King of the Vandals.

Mutilation is committed on the Tongue, sanus as to exclude an Action of
Redhibition. per l. 10.. ult. ff. de Aedil. edict. where Vlpian says that
Balbus, Blaesus, Atypus isque qui tardius loquitur, varus and varius, sani
sunt; But if it be true that the Tongue being a fleshly part, will grow again,
and speak as well as formerly (which Zacch. in dict. tit. 3. qu. 5. N. 28.
testifies to be from Art and Experience) then Mutilation is not committed by
cutting off the tip of the Tongue, at least some time must be allowed to expect
Recovery.

Thirdly the D D. deny the Lips to be Members of the Body in a proper sense,
Arist 2. de part. animal. 16. Zacch. dict. tit. 3. qu. 4. N. 30. Fortunat.
Fidel.. 6. cap. 2. and among the Lawyers Covarruv. dict. init. relect. de
Homicid. part. 1. N. 8. Farin. Fragm. part. 2. N. 587. And therefore according
to them Mutilation or Demembration cannot be inferred from hurting or
prescinding the Lips; but they grant they are Injuries in suo genere, because
they take away an useful part of the Body for helping of Speech, and that the
want thereof creates a seen Deformity, by exposing the inward part of the Mouth
to public view, and so by the Canon Law makes the Patient, canonically
irregular, though not the Agent; because he did not prescind a Member Covaeruv.
Relect. de Homicid. quaest. 3 init. N. 8. This is one of the Cases remitted to
thee Arbitriment of the Judge Zacch. dict. tit. 3. qu. 4. N. 31.

Fourthly the D D. conclude the Teeth to be no Members of the Body in a proper
sense, Farin. fragm. part 2. N. 585. because, says he, they make not up the
Integral or Consistence of the entire Body, but do only belong to the Beauty
and Ornament of it; As also that they perform no proper Action, but only
assist the Tongue, as the Lips do, in forming of Words, So Cabal. Cas. 236. N.
12. and seqq. and the D D. cited by him Covarruv. init. Relect. part 3. de
Homicid. N. 8. Further they adduce the words of Paulus in l. 7. ff. de Aedil^
edict. Cui Dens abest non est morbosus, magna enim pars hominum aliquo dente
caret, neque ideo morbosi sunt, praesertim cum sine dentibus nascimur, nec ideo
minus sani sumus donec dentes habeamus, alioquin nullus senex sanus esset. And
to these Lawyers, the Physicians agree, viz. Fortunat. fidel. dict. lib. 2. de
relat,. 6. cap. 2. Zacch, dict. tit. 3. qu. 5: N: 19. Who says, that the want
of Teeth may be made up by Art, if they be not all excussed; meaning that the
Artificial Teeth may be tied to those that remain, and they conclude that seeing
Mutilation and Demembration can only be committed upon proper Members, they
cannot be committed by excussing of the Teeth.

But not withstanding, there is much to be said for the affirmative. For,
Zacchias seems to grant, that if no natural Teeth remain but all be excussed,
then there is a clear Demembration. 2. As the Teeth concur with the Tongue in
forming of Words, so they perform a special Action in grinding or chewing the
Meat for the Stomach, whence they are called Grinders: And the decay of them
reckoned among the Forerunners of Death, Ecclesiast. 12.3.3. They are ranked by
Moses with the Eye, Hand and Foot in the Law of Retaliation, Exodus 21 24. and
its yielded by all that Eye, Hand and Foot, are Members in the proper sense. 4.
They concur in Mastication.

And to the Arguments for the Negative, I answer; first, Gloss on the said
Words of Paulus l. 11. ff. de Aedil. edict. acknowledges the Reason of the Law
to be bad; and if it were good, it would likewise prove, that a hand is no
proper Member; because some are born without a hand, and may live and be served
without it. 2. It is of no import that the want of a few Teeth may be supplied
by Art, for so may the want of a Hand or Foot; and a man can go upon stumps,
where both Legs are wanting.

Fifthly, the Nose is a Member in the proper sense; for this we have; Arist.
lib. 1: de part. animal. Hippocrat: lib. 1. de diaeta. Vales. controv. lib. 2.
contr: 26: And among the Lawyers, Farin. in append. deimmunit: Eccles, Cap: 6:
N: 249: and in Fragm: p: 2: N. 587. where he defines a proper Member by its
quality of exerciseing a distinct Operation: and for examples condescends on
Hands for grasping; Feet for walking; Eyes for seeing; Ears for hearing; and
Nose for smelling: So that according to him, the Note is as properly a Member
as any of the others named; and hence he concludes, that he who Mutilats or
Demembers the Nose, or any of these other Members, becomes thereby irregular,
(which could not be by prescinding or Mutilating an improper Member, for this
he denies, N. 585. ibid.) and consequently by so doing he incurs the Crime and
Pains of Mutilation or Demembration: For to be guilty of the Crime in order to
punishment and to become irregular, are equipollent in the Canon Law as we said
before Number. 22. And for the same cause, Zacch: dict: qu: 4. N. 3. and 5.
concludes in the general; Naso mutilato, ea omnia locum habent, quae in
caeteris mutilatis membris habere diximus. And again, in eum qui nares
abscidit, non modo pari ratione, ut in eum, qui aliud quodcunque membrum
abscidit, sed majori severitate animadvertitur non ob id tantum, quod haec pars
unica in nostro corpore sit, and nequaquaem duplicata, ut Oculus, Manus, Pes,
Auris, Labium, sed quia realiter majus multo dedecus affert abseissio Nasi,
quam alterius cujuseunque partis, etiam ipsius manus. And cites Paris a put:
dear milit: lib: 8: cap: Quando unus eff: ocul. alter and alter abscid: nas.
Videtur ergo quaecunque leges de membris, de corumque mutilatione sanciverunt,
recte ad nasum etiam sunt transferenda. These are the words of Zacchias, which
are only applicable to corporal and not to canonical Punishments.

That the Nose is a Member in the proper sense, is also evident, smelling: For
this, we have common Experience; every one offering an Odoriferous thing to the
Nose.

Its objected, that the Argument drawn from smelling does not conclude; ex: gr:
when a Defluction of Salt and thickened Humors falls upon the Lungs, Mouth and
Nosestrils from the Ventricles of the Brain, by the Nerves of Smelling; This
distemper (which the Physicians call Coryza) will obstruct the sense of
Smelling, (even when the Nosestrils remain patent) as sometimes a worse Disease
does, where it occasions os cribrosum. To which it is answered, that accidental
Distempers do not change the nature of Members, for a Hand or Foot, may lose
their proper use by a palsy or other accident and yet we cannot from hence
infer that they are not proper Members.

But suppose that it were granted that the Nose is not the proper Instrument of
smelling, smelling, ( viz. Fortunat. sidel: lib. 2. de relat. medic.. 2: cap:
1. And Paris a puteo; ubi supra, N. 2. And Galen. in lib: de instrum. odor.)
Yet do grant that it has diverse other distinct Operations; As that it is the
Tubulus or conduit, by which the Mucus descends from the Brain; And is the
chief Instrument of Respiration; As also of Sounds: So that where the Nose is
wanting, the sound of Words is not distinct: By which Concession, the Nose must
yet be a proper Member, according to those who deny it to be the proper
Instrument of Smelling; because it exerces the other three Functions. As
Taliacotius proves chirurg. nov. lib. 1. cap. 6.

Sixthly, proper member or not; to clear the Question, know that the Ear is
defined by Arist. l. 1. de hist. animal. to be that part of the Head which is
fabricated for hearing. We must distinguish here betwixt the internal Ear
called Auris, and the External called Auricula, which is the Cartilaginous
Substance guarding and defending the Auris from Danger, and with us is commonly
called the LUGG, yet though the Words Auris and Auricula be so distinguished,
they are promiscuously used in speaking, and nothing is more frequent among the
D D. than abscindere Aurem; and quod, Auris sit ornamentum corporis. Zacch:
quaest medico-leg. lib. 10. Consil: 35: N. 2. That the Auris is a proper
member, is acknowledged by all, because it is the sole Instrument of Hearing,
and therefore if any deed be done to prejudge the Auris, so as to deprive it of
the Faculty of Hearing, it infers the Crime of Mutilation; nevertheless it is
contraverted whether the Auriculae or external Ear be a proper Member.

These among the Physicians who deny the Auricula to be a proper Member,
Fortunat: fidel:: 6. cap. 2. Zacch: quaest: medico-legal qu: 4. N. 26. and
seqq. and consilio 35. where he says that being consulted in the case of a
Clergy man who had lost the upper part of his Auricula or external Ear, by a
Wound in Rixa; whether he thereby became irregular and incapable of Promotion,
as one who wanted a Part of a proper Member? He resolved ( N. 13.) that the
Auricula was no proper Member, nor reckoned among proper Members by any man,
and that therefore the Canonists with much justice had declared, that the
Abscission of the Ear inferred not irregularitie. With those, several Lawyers do
agree, as Covar. init: part: 3. Relect. de homicid. N. 8. verse. incip. primum.
where he expressly affirms, that when the Auricula is cut off, a Member is not
cut off; because, the Auris is properly the Member, and the Auricula or
Cartilaginous Substance, is rather for Ornament and Safeguard to the Auris,
than for use to the Body; and for this he cites Baldus in l. serve. fugit. ad
sin. Farinacius is of the same Opinion, in dict. fragm. part. 2. N. 590. where
he cites Covar. Navar. and diverse others; distinguishing betwixt Auris and
Auricula, and these Doctors urge for themselves the words of Vlpian in l. idem
offilius 10. ff. de Aedil. edict.

But for the affirmative there are others of no less Authority; Galen in lib.
de instrum. odoris, and among the Lawyers the Gloss in c. singula. verb. Oculus
89. distinct. And Majol. cited by Farin. in fragm. part. 2. N. 591. affirming
that if the Law of irregularity had been in S. Peter's time (as it is a humane
Constitution of a latter date) he had been declared irregular (and consequently
a Demembrator) for cutting off of Malchus his Ear, unless he had been excused
for defending his Master. In the same opinion is Speculator in tit. de
dispensat. juxta. Number. 8. Likewise Suarez. de Censuris disput. 44. sect. 2. N.
9. asserts that the Auricula or outward Ear is a Member in the proper Sense,
and rejects the Opinion of Covarruv. upon this Reason, that the Auricula
Co-operats with, and contributes much to the Organ of Hearing, and from thence
concludes, that the Amputation thereof infers Irregularity, and that not upon
the account of Deformity, occasioned by the want of the Auricula, (that being
obscured by the Hair) but because of Demembration, in respect that Deformity
without Demembration (which he expresses by the Word Mutilation) makes not
irregularity.

As Suarez. believes the Crime of Demembration to be committed by Amputation of
the Auricula, Zacch. in dict. qu. 4. N. 24.27.28. though he denies the Ear to
be a proper Member, yet he confesses it contributes much to the Organ of
Hearing, and that a sound, without it, is like the Noise of the running of
Water, and therefore allows the Lawyers to count the Auricula among the proper
members in order to infer the Crimes and Pains of Amputation. in quo casu
(inquit) been dicitur aurem esse membrum, quia abscindens aurem eisdem paenis
subjicitur, quibus subjicitur abscindens membrum. Vnde etiam in Auris
abscissione habet locum id, quod in abscissione membri quodd immunitatem
ecclesiasticam, qua abscindentes membra in ecclesia non gaudent, and concludes
his Discourse N. 31. by remitting all to be determined by the Lawyers. Now, all
this must be understood of the outward Ear or Auricula, because the Auris or
inward Ear cannot be abscinded.

But then a Question remains to be answered, Auricula be sufficient to infer
the Crime of Demembration? and the same may be urged as to the Amputation of a
part of any other Member. Suarez: dict. disput. 44. Sect. 2. N. 8. in med.
says, that its sufficient for Mutilation [meaning Demembration] that there be
either integra abscissio, vel gravis diminutio alicujus principalis membri, and
he there speaks of the Auricula (for there could be no Abscission of the Auris,
either in whole or in part). Zacch. dict. consil. 35. N. 8. and 9. maintains
the contrary, and especially as to the Ear, where he says that the abscission
of a part, and chiefly of the Superior part, which the Physicians call Dinna or
Helix, infers not Demembration because it wrongs not the sense of Hearing. We
have a Decision 22. June 1610. Guthrie against Rynd where the Justices refused
to sustain Demembration inferred from cutting off a part of the LUGG or Ear,
and remitted the Cause to be tried, as a common Riot before the Sheriff of the
Shire as the Judge Ordinary.

Seventhly, Chin is by all acknowledged to be no Member in the proper sense,
because it performs no distinct Operation, and is only useful for decoring and
adorning the Body. Farin. dict. fragm. crim. part. 2. N. 565. where he cites
Majol; and (following the Canon Law) concludes that the Amputation of the Chin
infers not irregularity against the Committer, and consequently no Crime of
Demembration according to them: But every one grants, that to cut of the Chin
is a Riot, or Delict, severely punishable; because it creats a Deformity in the
Face, and makes the Patient (though not the Agent) irregular.

Eighthly, Beard is no Member; Nevertheless to cut off, or to pluck out the
Hairs of ones Beard without his Consent, even albeit no Blood follow is an
Injury, according to Oinot. cited by Zacchias Quaest. medico-leg. lib. 5. tit.
3. q. 5. N. 14. And there is good Reason why it should be punished; because the
Ancients expressed their sadness by permitting the Beard to grow. l. item quod
labionem 15.. generaliter 27. ver. Haec autem fere ff. de injuriis. Diverse
Authors are cited by Cujacius, lib. 6. observe. 5. to prove this Custom and
therefore l. 39. dict. tit. it was not permitted to any man vestem sordidam Rei
nomine, in publico habere, capillumve summittere, nisi ita conjunctus erat
affinitate, ut invitus, in Reum testimonium dicere cogi non possit. Further, to
cut ones Beard was a mark of indignity; and therefore David resented it, when
it was done to his Ambassadors by Hanun, King of the Ammonites ^ Sam. 10.4.5.
where its said that David's Messengers were ashamed. But albeit the Beard be no
Member, yet, this cutting it off, is punishable poena incidentis membrum,
according to Baldus, in l. Reos. C. de accusat. N. 6. and from this Baldus
concludes the Beard to be a Member in the proper Sense, but others in the
general Sense only as the extremities of the Nails of the Fingers are Members
which we daily cut off. Guazzin. de defensione Reorum. def. 33. Cap. 6. N. 5.

Ninethly, Papes, or Duggs of a Woman, are Members in the proper sense; for
their producing Milk and giving Suck is a distinct Operation; And therefore he
who prescinds them becomes by the Canon Law, irregular, and consequently a
Demembrator, according to our former Rule. N. 22. of arguing from irregularity
to Demembration against the Committer of the Crime. of this Opinion are Farin.
dict. fragm. crim. part. 2. N. 593. Baldus, in l. data opera. N. 75. C. qui
accus: non poss. Suarez. disp. 44. sect. 2. number. 9. fin. verse. solet dubitari,
with diverse others cited by Farinacius.

Tenthly, proper Members, or not. They are called in Greek (...) in Latin
Vertebrae; because by their help, the Body turns. They are in Number 29.
whereof 7. in the Neck; 12 in the Back; 5. in the Loins; and 5. in osse sacro;
as the Anatomists reckon. Vid. Castelli ^exic. ad Verbum, Spondylus. The Reason
of the Doubt is, that none of the abovementioned Authors have counted them
among the proper Members: And yet on the other part they perform a distinct
Operation, because by them, several places of the Body are turned. By our
practique they have been found to be proper Members; for the Justices 7 Nov.
1621. found a Lybel of Mutilation, alleged to be committed by Marion Paton
upon Williamson her Apprentise, by dislocating the Spondyls of his Back,
relevant to infer the Crime and pain of Mutilation, and remitted the Lybel to
the knowledge of an Inquest; but no Decision followed, because she proved that
the Pursuer recovered. Now if from hence you will not allow the Spondyls to
answer to the precise and exact Definition of Members in a proper sense, then
you must grant, that the Justices sometimes make use of the Power which they
have, according to the Concessions of Zacchias dict. quaest: medico-legal.
dict. lib. 5. qu. 4. N. 27. and 31. where he says, that Lawyers are not tied to
the precise Definition which Physicians give of a Member.

Eleventhly, Castratio virilium is one of the most atrocious Demembrations; and
when a man does it to himself, he is sui homicida. C. 4: did: 55. And so
punishable with Death and Confiscation of Goods, l. 4.: 2 ad leg: Cornel: de
sicar: And its equivalent if one suffered himself willingly to be castrated by
another; dict: Farin. fragm. crim. part. 2. N. 584. and the D D. cited by him.
Haec castratio sit, vel praecisione virilium, vel faciendo Spadones, thlibias,
thlasios; dict.. 2, As to all the Species and Punishments of this Crime, vid.
novel. 142. de his qui Eunuchos faciunt. and novel. leonis 60. See also Covar:
init. prim. par. relect. de homicid. N. 6. where he adduces many Texts and
Reasons to prove that it was unlawful for any man seipsum eastrare praetextu
Religionis, vel volenter id pati ab aliis sibi sieri. And therefore Eusebius is
justly reprovable for defending Origin upon that account. The common Reason is;
that nemo membrorum suorum est Dominus. l. 13. ad legem Aquiliam. whether this
Crime may be punished poena talionis will occur to be spoke of afterward, upon
the Question, how far the Law of Retaliation is yet in Force.

Twelvthly, I come now to speak of the Hand, which in a large Sense is taken
for the whole Arm, but more particularly for that qui cubito annectitur;
Carpus or Wrest, or first part of the Palm of the Hand; or that part of the
Arm, which is betwixt the lowermost part of the Cubit and the Hand, and
consists of eight small Bones, with which the Cubit is joined to the Hand: 2.
It includes the Metacarpus or Metacarpium, or back of the Hand, made of four
oblong little Bones, which expand the Palm of the Hand, called postbrachialia.
3. it includes the Digiti or Fingers joined to the Metacarpus; the outmost
Bounds whereof are called Metachondyli. It is called a Member. Novel. 134. cap.
13.

We need not insist to prove that the Hand thus composed is a Member in the
proper sense, and that it has a distinct Operation, viz. By the Hand one
defendes himself from the Cruelty of Man and Beast; by it he rules and commands
Beasts to be subject to him, even such as are of the wildest Nature; it serves
to many uses for his Body; and is useful to the very Beasts that serve him; and
being stretched foreward it supplies the want of the Eyes, by preventing of
several Dangers; and by signs, it many times supplies the want of the Tongue.
These are collected out of Coel. Rodig. lib. 4. lect. antiq. Cap. 3. Galen.
lib. 1. de usu partium cap. 3. and lib. 11. Arist. 4. de part. anim. Cap. 10.
Cicer. lib. 2. de not. Deor. Fortunat. Fidel. lib. 2. relat. med.. 4. Cap. 1.
Therefore the Justices have always found Demembration to be incurred by the
cutting off of the Hand, and Mutilation by the hurting thereof to that Degree
that it became useless. 5. May 1605. Skirven against Forrester, for mutilating
him of the Hand. 26. Nov. 1613. John Hunter Tailor against Menzies of
Castlehill, who came in the Kings Will, and was fyn'd in 100. lib. Scots. and
30. July 1614. Donaldson against Lorimer. And 10. July 1635. Thomson and her
Spouse against Gillespie, Thomson and others. The like 24. July 1635. Fletcher
of Benshaw against Ramsay, Lindsay and Lord Spyney, for Mutilating him of the
Left Hand. I should not need to cite Decisions in so clear a Matter, were it
not the Custom.

Thirteenthly, There is as little Doubt, that the Leg is a proper Member, and
that it has its distinct use profitable to the Body, viz. 6. June 1627. Lesly
against Harvie for Mutilating his left Leg. 20. July 16^7. Paterson against
Wordie for Mutelating his right Leg. And in the foresaid case, 3. Novem. 1621.
Williamson against Paton for shortning one of his Legs by wounding thereof. and
the like was pursued 28. July 1647. Forbes of Lesly against the Lord of
Pitfoddels for mutilating one of his Legs by the Shot of a Pistol; in which
poena talionis was lybelled, but it came to no Decision: As also 11. March
1631. above cited, Crawfurd against Scot; where the Justices sustained
Mutilation for Scots breaking of Crawfurds Leg in Wrestling, and remitted it to
the knowledge of an Assise, whereby he was convicted and fined in 250. Merks.
The like 19. March 1690. Relict and Children of Fenton against Montgomery for
breaking of Fentons Leg; where the Lords Commissioners of Justiciary found the
Lybel, as founded upon Presumptions, relevant to infer an Arbitraty punishment,
and fined him in 2500. Merks. This case is as plain as that of the Hand, and
therefore Decisions are only cited for Custom.

Fourteenthly, perse, or only parts of the Hands and Feet. The D D. are divided
in their Opinions; most of them are for the Negative, but some are for the
Affirmative. Others distinguish betwixt the cutting off or Mutilating the
whole, and a part only.

For the Negative simply, viz. That the Fingers are no Members, we have these
Lawyers Bartolus ad l. 14. ff. de statu. and in l. 2. de pub. jud. N. 13. Where
he says expressly digitus non est membrum, sed pars Membri, and if there were a
Statute ordaining Amputation of a Member to be punished lege talionis, it would
not be extended to the Amputation of a Finger. And Baldus in dict. leg: says,
digitus non est membrum sed pars officialis membri, and that, aliud est
dividere rem in membra, and aliud in frusta, and sic amputans digitum non
dicitur amputare membrum; and again, Digitus est tantum membrum in diminutivo,
non membrum proprie and principaliter, quia non est al quota pars corporis sed
aliquanta particula respectuqualitatis, and compares it to a Tree of the Roof
and a stone in the Wall of a House, which are but parts of the Roof and Wall,
and not Members of the House. And with these agree Decius in l. si fugitivi C.
de servis fugit N. 26. Julius Clarus. Farin. frag. crim. part. 2. N. 587.
Pannormitan. in Cap. Cum illorum. 32. de sent. excommunic. As also Covarr.
part. 3. relect. in clement. Sifuriosus de Homicid. N. 8. verse. incip. tertio.
Where he cites not only Bartol. and Bald. but Felin. Anton. R. Chassanaeus and
others. With them likewise agree Cabal. dict. cent. 3. resol. 236. N. 11.110.
and 118. Where besides these above cited, he cites Coepol. Angel. Castr.
August. etc. But although Caballus dict: cas. 236. has affirmed that digitus
non est membrum, yet in eod. cas. N. 109.110.111. and seqq. he is forced to
grant that if the hand be debilitated [meaning Mutilated] by Percussion of a
Finger, one, two or three, that then percussor tenetur de membro debilitato;
and says, he has often seen it so decided, and that he himself has frequently
decided so. Among the Physicians we find the above cited Zacch. dict. lib. 5.
tit. 3. qu. 7. N. 12. and the foresaid Fortunat. fidel. derelat. med. lib 2..
5. Cap. 2. also for the Negative.

Suarez. dict disp. 44. de cens. Sect. 2. N. 6. to establish a Rule for judging
irregularity, D D. for there he says Cui altera manus deest dicitur simpliciter
mutilatus. Whereas, in cap. 2. de clerico agrot. presbyter, cui media palma
manus cum duobus digitis abscissa fuerat, non dicitur truncatus membro, sed
accepisse membri debilitatem and deformitatem; ergo proprie membrum Jolum est
tota manus.

But one the other side, Cajetan. 2.2. qu. 65. art. 1. and Sot. lib. 5. de
justitia q. 2 a. 1. and to prove it say, that it is not necessary to the
Essence of a Member, in order to Mutilation [meaning Demembration], and
irregularity, that it exerce a distinct Office and Action; but it is sufficient
that it co-operat with a principal Member, and be assistant to it in its proper
Actions; and subsume, that a Finger, although it cannot operat by it self
without concourse of the Hand, yet often it has something proper to it in the
Action of the Hand, as in playing on a musical Instrument, in Writing, and the
like; And if it were otherwise, then one Man should not be irregular, by
cutting off another Finger, which is false, because by so doing, he much
diminishes the integrity of the Body; And Cajetan. further says, that every
organical Part which makes up the integral Body, is a Member in Order to
Mutilation; and Fingers are such organical parts. Moreover, he says, all that
is said of Members agree very well with parts of principal Members; and that
there is no repugnancy between being a Member and the part of a Member,
[meaning in order to Demembration.] And that the Gloss. in C. cum illorum; 32.
de sent. excom. verb. Mutilationem membri; insinuats the same, saying in the
like case, we must not distinguish between a Member and a Member.

Suarez. dict. disp N. 8. having related the Opinions of Cajetan. and Soto,
viz. what is a Member? and the Juridical, what is to be understood by a Member
in poenal Laws? do not at all concern the Case of Irregularity, which contents
it self with a simple Mutilation, though it be not the Mutilation of a Member
in the proper sense according to the forecited Clementine, and then affirms
Mutilation [meaning Demembration] simply taken, is committed, when a principal
Member is remarkably diminished, albeit not totally prescinded according to the
Notion and Propriety of the Latin Word: and if at any time the Canons make
mention of a Member; they always intimate that any Diminution is sufficient:
and for this cites, Cap. de cleric. pugnant. in duel. Ibi vel Membrorum
diminutio. And Felin. in cap. cum illo^um de sentent. excom. N. 3. Further the
same Suarez. N. 9. Ibid. in med. distinguishes, and says that Abscission ofone
Finger is not commonly sustained sufficient, which, says he, is true if it be
one of the two least Fingers; but if any other Finger be cut off, it is a
sufficient Diminution, at least doubtful

The Reason why I have insisted so long on this Question, An digitus sit
Membrum? viz. a Lybel of Demembration was sustained for cutting off the Thumb
of the left hand and three Fingers; 3. Nov. 1620. Alanson against Steuart.
Mutilation was also sustained when committed on the two foremost or
firstand-second Fingers; 15. July 1642. Laurence Cheyne Brother to Wallie
against Mouat and Neivings. And for mutilating of three Fingers; 5. Novem.
1618. Dal. glish against Walter Scot. And again a Lybel of Demembration was
sustained for Amputation of three Fingers of the left hand; 14. September 1610.
Montgomery against Henderson. And for the Amputation of two Fingers; 17. Dec.
1623. Boyne against Hately. And for the Amputation of two Fingers of the left
Hand, 19. Novem. 1647. Inglis of Craigmakerran against Martine. And for the
Amputation of the Thumb of the left hand ^8. and 27. of June 1605 Broun against
Johnstoun. and 12 of January 1642. Tailor against Norie. and 15. July 1642.
foresaid, Mr. Patrick Cheyne of Wallie against Mowat and Nevings. For
Amputation of the Finger next the little Finger commonly called the Ring-Finger
or Annularis; 8. March 1605. Fowler against Lermont. For Amputation of the
Little-Finger of the Right Hand, 27. Feb. 1618. by biteing it off with his
Teeth; Thomson against Miln; which is a greater length than Suarez. allows,
who expressly excepts the Little Finger, and says that the Crime of Demembration
is not committed by the Amputation thereof; vid. number 56. supra. In five of
these Decisions, viz. Allanson against Steuart, Montgomery against Henderson;
Dalgleish against Scot; Inglis against Martin; and Boyne against Hately; The
Defense that Digitus non est Membrum was propon'd and repelled, notwithstanding
of the Authority of Bartolus, Baldus, Julius Clarus and others, was urged; and
the Reason of the repelling was in respect of daily Practice: So that there
remains no more doubt, with us, on that Question, whether the Finger be a
Member in the proper sense, or not.

And certainly, Fingers; Further, if the Fingers be separated from it, it is of
little or no use: And if the Fingers be distinctly considered, it will be found
that each of them has it is own use. For, in the Thumb lies the Strength of the
whole Hand, and therefore is called Pollex, quia aeque pollet omnibus digitis;
also (...), because it is placed against the other Fingers, as if it were a
second Hand; and is sometimes called, parva manus; by it we Write, Paint, etc.
and it has the chief use almost in all Actions: And if the Pollex or Thumb,
with the Index or Forefinger, be both cut off, the whole hand is almost lost;
for the three Remaining, viz. Medius, annularis and minimus, do rather
co-operat with the Pollex and Index, than work by themselves, for of themselves
they can do little to purpose, except in playing on Musical Instruments; their
several uses, are best known by a man's Employment; and according to that, the
Judge should consider the Punishment: as we shall prove afterward.

The Consideration of the Use of the Fingers to the Hand, D D. (who deny them
to be distinct Members, yet) to acknowledge that Mutilation and Demembration
may be committed upon them, but then when the Fingers are prescinded or
mutilated, they think it should be said the Hand is demembred or mutilated: and
not the Fingers, which, say they, are but Instruments of the Hand cooperating
with it; and this seems to be the Meaning of Suarez. dict. disp. sect. 2. N. 9.
And are the express words of Fortunat. Fid: lib. 2: relat: med: sect. 5: c: 2.
Mutilam particulam (inquit) nuncupare solet Galenus, non quae jam est abscissa,
sed quae jam superest imperfecta. de morb: cause. 8. where he cites Galens own
words, nemo ambigit quod ejus quod superest partis est aegritudo. and so the
whole Difficulty is resolved in a Question about a Form of Speaking, whether,
when the Fingers are cut off, it be more proper to say the Fingers are
demembred, or the Hand is demembred of the Fingers.

It Is a wonder why the DD. should make so much work about this Question, l: 14:
ff: de Statu. The Scope of it, according to Corasius, is not to determine what
is a Member, and what not, but to regulat Succession ab intestato, and to
exclude from that Succession all Monsters and prodigious Births, qui contra
formam humani generis converso more procreantur; as when a Woman brought forth
a Calf or Monster with two Heads, whereof many were brought forth at that time,
among the Romans. As to these Paulus the Author of the Law determines, they
should not be numbered among Children: But if the Birth was not monstrous, sed
tantum membrorum humanorum officia ampliavit; ex. gr. had six Fingers; such a
Birth might be numbered among Children, and have the benefit of Succession: And
therefore the said Text, as it is explaned, affoords no ground for proving that
Digitus non est membrum. And l. 2. ff. de pub. jud. and l. si servi. Cod. de
servis fugit. speak not one word of Members. And the truth is, the matter of
Canonical irregularity occasioned the most part of the Debate.

Having said so much upon the digiti manus, Fingers, because we find it often
debated in the Criminal Registers; it remains now that we speak something of
the digiti pedis or Toes; As to which we have no Decisions in these Registers,
but yet there is the same Reason to conclude, that the Crimes of Mutilation and
Demembration may be inferred, when the like Violence is committed on them, that
serves to constitute these Crimes as to the Fingers, because they are also of
great use; for if they be cut off, a man can neither stand nor walk, as before,
though he may in some measure do both; nor to put his Body in such a Posture,
as to be able to defend himself against the Assaults of his Enemies; nor to
make his escape, when like to be overpowered. If only one Toe be cut off the
inconveniency is not so great as arises to the Hand, by the loss of a Finger;
yet the Foot has a great loss by the want of the Great-Toe, and the Damnage
more than in the loss of any other; and next to that, is the Damnage of the Toe
next to it; and so in order, both as to Fingers and Toes; but still the loss of
Fingers is esteemed greater, because they perform more Actions, and the hand is
so noble a Member that when a Member is simply spoke of; the Hand is
understood. Zacch. Quest. medico-legal. lib: 5: tit. 3. q. 6. N. 5. and the
Authors there cited by him.

And yet if we may give credit to the Authors cited by Zacch. dict. q. 6. N. 9.
Hands, have performed the like Actions with the Toes, as the Hand is in use to
do. He cites Alex. Benedict. Paree, the famous French Surgeon, and diverse
others; making mention of persons, who Ate, Drank, played at Cards and other
Games with their Toes; and of one that Stole, Robbed, murdered with them, and
suffered Death for so doing; and of a Woman that cut Cloth, Span, Sewed, etc.
Zacch. says, anno 1624. he saw Petrus Lucernensis who wanting his Arms played
on all musical Instruments with his Toes; and a Woman who anno 1627. performed
the like Actions. If any desire to please himself with Examples of this Nature,
he may peruse Cardan. de subtle. and lib. 12. de variet. cap. 62. as also
Schenckii. Hist. memorab. Monstrorum; and Wanely in his wonders of the little
world. lib. 1. cap: 10. N. 3. and 6. We only mention these to this end, to show
that if such persons should exist among us and be mutilated or Demembred of
Feet or Toes, the Crimes would deserve equal punishment as in the case of Hands
or Fingers, because the prejudice is equal, except as to Deformity, which is
more visible in the hands.

Its questioned among the D D. if Precision of a withred Member infers the
Crime and Punishment of Demembration? Suarez: de censur. disp. 44. Sect. 2. N.
11. verse. Respondeo aliud esse. and versu. ideoque si alter postea. And Farin.
Fragm. crim. part. 2. N. 597. handle the same point (as to Irregularity) and
conclude that he that detruncats a withred Member from his Neighbors Body,
becomes no more Irregular by so doing, than if he had cut off the Member of a
dead man; because the Member wanted Life in the one case as well as the other;
but if the Member cut off had been a living (though a weak and wounded) Member,
the Detruncator (say they) had become Irregular; but notwithstanding of what
they conclude as to Irregularity (the causes whereof they labor to retrench,
as I have said) yet such a Detruncation infers the Crime and punishment of
Demembration, when the Question is concerning Punishment, and not Irregularity,
and this is the express Opinion of Caballus, resol. crim. cent. 3. Cas. 232. N:
77. and 78. where he affirms, that albeit a Member want life, yet so long as
it adheres to the Body, it is still a Member; as a withred Tree is always a
Tree, so long as it stands on the Root; but after separation it is not called a
Tree, but Wood: And for this he cites Angel. Salicet. Fulgos. and Coepol. To
this add, that if a Malefactor be sentenced to have a Hand cut off
indefinitely, it is always understood of his whithred hand, if he have one: per
Authent. sed novo jure. C. de serve. fugit. and ibi gloss. 2. in adit. which
could not be, if it were no Hand. This is also concluded by the said Cabal.
dict. cas. N. 52. Jul. Clarus in pract.. sin. q: 69. N. 4. Caepol. in dict.
Authent. N. 24. Carpz. pract. Crim. p. 1. qu. 40. N. 43: and diverse others.

The next Question is, if a man may be punished as a Demembrator, who cuts off
a Member of a dead man's Body out of a design to disgrace it? Farin: loc. supra
cit. N. 559. says it infers no Iraegularity; so says Covarruv. in Clem. si
furiosus. p. 2. in prin. N. 1. de homicid. because the Member being dead, is no
Member, or, rather, I say, because the separated Member was not cut off a
living Body, as in the case immediately preceding. Majol. (cited by Farin. N.
600. ibid.) and some others affirm the contrary, because if the person had
been alive, the Delinquents malice would have led him to do the same; and
voluntas non actus, spectanda est. l. 1.. 8. ff. de sicar. Yet for all that I
think the Crime of Demembration cannot be hence inferred seeing Homicide could
not be inferred by a wound in the Heart, which would have killed him had he
been alive. vid: Suarez. de cens. disp. 44. Sect. 2. N 3. ad sin. verse. atqne
ita and N. 4. Farin. loco citat. N. 601.

The use of all this Discourse, proper and improper Members, is for
understanding general Statutes concerning Members, without mentioning whether
they are proper or Improper; For Example, if a Law or Statute Ordain, that one
who euts off, Mutilats or Debilitats a Member, shall be punished: that will not
reach him, who cuts off, Mutilats, or Debilitats an improper Member. Cabal.
dict. Cent. 3. cas. 236. N. 16.17; unless says he, the contrary appear from the
mind of the Statute, as if it run against him, who cuts off or debilitats ANY
Member; in that case, says he, it would comprehend improper Members; because
the Relative ANY, or ALIQVOD is general: and for this he cites Bald. Fulgos.
Castr. Caepol. Angel. August. And the like is asserted by Bartolus, ad l. non
sunt liberi. 14. ff: de Statu. viz. That if there were a Law ordaining him that
cutts off a Member; to be punished paena talionis; it would not reach him who
cuts off an improper Member; and Pannormitan. C. cum illorum. 32. de sent:
excommun. follows Bartolus: and it does not alter the case, whether the
punishment appointed by the Statute, be Corporal, or arbitrary: the thing
remarkable being only the generality of the Word Member.

All Judges competent in Homicide, Mutilation and Demembration, and therefore
not only are the Justices competent, but likewise Baillies of Regalities,
Stewarts of Stewartries, and the Commissioners of the Borders. But sometimes
where the Pursuit was first commenced before the Justices, they have refused to
allow Repledgiation, as in the forecited case, 15. July 1642. Chynie of Wallie
against Mouat and Nevings, where the Justices did not allow Sir William Dick
Stuart of Orkney (the place where they dwelt) to repledge, but recommended to
him to agree the parties, and because he did not agree them, the Justices
judged the Cause ut supra. The Justices allow the Commissioners of the Borders
to repledge; and so 11 June 1612. Lord Cranston repledged Rutherford pursued by
Weir, for mutilating him of the foremost Finger of his left Hand; and yet the
Justices did not admit of that Repledgiation till they had advised with the
Privy Council.

Barons of Baronry are not competent Judges of Mutilation and Demembration;
Justices, 10. July 1635. Thomson against Gillespie and others, for mutilating
her of her right Hand, when she came to rid them; and they craving to be
absolved, because the Lord of Killhead, as Baron Baillie to the Lord
Drumlanrig, had judged the Cause; The Justices repelled the same, and remitted
the Pannals to the knowledge of an Assize. Neither is the Privy Council Judge
to these Crimes, more than to Murder; And hence it follows, that if he who is
guilty should be conveened before the Privy Council, to be punished for that
Crime as a Riot; their Sentence would not hinder the Justices to judge it over
again under the head of Mutilation and Demembration. 27. June 1605. Johnston
against Brown, and 9. and 11. January 1628. Mcmurran against Hamilton; where
the case of Johnston against Maxwel of Grubtoun Anno 1605. for assaulting the
House of Newbie, was cited; but the Justices only continued the Diet, because
Hamilton the Panel, was sick.

But though the Privy Council cannot decide cases of Mutilation and
Demembration; Justices to proceed; for this they can do in Homicide which is
the greater Crime, and there needs no Proof of this, because it is daily
practiced.

There are some Cautions to be observed in forming a Libel of Mutilation;
Homicide, to libel that the Desunct was killed, ex: gr. on the first day of
January School. or on one or other of the days of the said Month, or Months of
the said year, yet in a Libel of Mutilation, the Day must be precisely
condescended on, or declared at the Bar, which is equivalent. 10 January 1640.
Ker against Halyburton; and the alternative [upon one or other of the Days of
the said Month, or Months of the said Year] will not be sufficient; because the
Pursuer cannot insist within Year and Day after the committing of the Crime; in
respect the Law allows that time, to expect recovery of the Wound; as we shall
prove in the first Defense.

Secondly, It will be convenient that in a Libel of Mutilation, ex: gr. of the
Eye, the true matter of Fact by which the Sight was taken away be condescended
on, and so in the foresaid Action 28. July 1643. Logie against Howison, the
Libel bears, that the Eye was mutilated by a Stroke with a Tree on the Head;
which brought a Defluction on the Eye, and occasioned a Blindness. If the Libel
be so formed, it will the better quadrat with the Probation. and prevent all
Cavillation, which may occur by reason of Difference that may happen between
the Tenor of the Libel and Probation. I say it will prevent Cavillation; but I
say not, that a Libel without this Condescendence will be rejected as
irrelevant; for the contrary was found. 19 Nov. 1647, Inglis of Craigmakerren
against Martin; where the Justices sound a Libel of Mutilation relevant without
such a condescendence, notwithstanding it was urged that Mutilation falls no
otherwise under the external sense, but by virtue of the Incisions or other
Hurts from which it is inferred. But there will be greater difficulty in a Libel
of Demembration, ex. gr. of a Leg; which was not cut off by the stroke or
wound, but was crushed to that Degree, that the Surgeon was necessitated to
cut it off; for if the true matter of Fact be not libelled; but, in place
thereof, it be said, that the Panel cut off the Leg; then the Panel will
simply deny the Lybel, and consent it be found relevant, as conceived; and then
when the Witnesses come to be examined, a Debate will arise upon the
Interrogatories, for either they must be agreeable to the Lybel, or to the
Matter of Fact: If to the Lybel, viz. whither they knew, that the Panel cut
off the Leg? they will depone negative; and if to the Matter of Fact, viz. if
the Surgeon cut it off, then it will be objected, that the Interrogatories
are disconforme to the Lybel; and ought to be rejected; because the Lybel is
found relevant as conceived; bearing that the Panel cut off the Leg; whereas
if the true Matter of Fact had been lybelled, viz. that the Surgeon cut it
off; the Panel would have alleged and proved, that the Surgeon did it ex
malo regimine: Of which Defense he had no use as the Lybel was conceived: and
so the Panel being by the Conception of the Lybel deprived of that Defense,
the Witnesses can only be examined upon the precise terms of the Lybel. And
suppose the Justices do sustain the Interrogatories as they agree to the matter
of Fact, viz. that the Panel crushed the Leg and the Surgeon cut it off,
yet it may be after much Altercation, which may be preveen'd by lybelling the
true matter of Fact.

Thirdly; It will not be improper in a Lybel of Mutilation, to say, that the
Member was not only rendered useless at the time by the Hurt it received, but
that it remains still useless, never having recovered: just as in a Lybel of
Reduction of a Bond or other deed granted on death bed, its usual to say, that
the Defunct dyed of the Sickness and never went to Kirk or Market after he
granted the Bond; for by this negative (which proves it self) the burden of
proving the Contrary, ( viz. that the Member did recover its strength) is
devolved on the Panel.

Fourthly, If either Mutilation or Demembration be so secretly committed that
no Witness saw it, and the Probation be only by Presumptions, it will be very
convenient to condescend upon the Presumptions, in the Lybel, that the Justices
may give Interloquitor upon the Relevancie of them, and leave nothing to the
Assize but to cognosce upon the Fact of those Presumptions, because it is hard
in many cases to judge upon the relevancy of Presumptions. This Caution was
practiced in the Lybel of Demembration at the instance of the Relict and
Children of William Fenton against Montgomery, upon which the Lords
Commissioners of Justiciary gave their Interloquitor, dated 19. March 1690.
finding the Presumptions relevant to infer an arbitrary Punishment, and
remitted the same [ id est, the matter of Fact of the Presumptions] to the
Knowledge of an Assize, whereas if the Presumptions had not been lybelled, but
had been first adduced before the Assize, it is a thousand to one if they had
not given a Verdict, finding the Lybel not proved, because it concluded pain of
death, on the account that the breaking of Fentons Leg was the cause of his
death; which the Surgeons would not depone. I find a Libel of Homicid, 12.
April. 1637. had been formed after the same manner; at the instance of the
Kings Advocat against Memath, for murdering a poor Chapman upon the Hill of
Corstorphine where no witnesses were present and no other probation but
presumptive.

Fifthly, there are some, both Divines and Lawyers who think it convenient in a
Lybel of atrocious Demembration to conclude that the punishment of Retaliation
may be corporaly inflicted on the Panel, (as was done in the foresaid Pursuit,
Forbes of Leslie against Pitfoddels) to this end, that if either the Panel be
solvent, yet unwilling to pay what the Judge shall think fit to modifie by way
of Assythment: Or if he be vilis persona, or indigent: corporal punishment may
be inflicted; In which last case the Lawyers say that Paupertas facit poenam
pecuniariam commutari in personalem. Caball. dict. cas. 236. N 43. and 45. and
this Cautela does likeways answer to the design of cap. 11. stat. Rob. 2.

I come now to the Defenses; Dilatory and serve only to continue or delay the
Diet; others are peremptory which elide the Lybel. Of the first kind are these.

1. Mutilation that year and day is not elapsed, since the Time lybelled of
committing the Crime, this the Justices will sustain and continue the Diet till
Year and Day elapse, because by our Custom, as aforesaid, so much time is
allowed to expect recovery. So they found 17. December. 1624. Boyne against Hately
and 10. January 1640. Ker against Halyburton and Crawmond. It was also propon'd
9. and 11. January 1628. Mcmurran against Hamilton, and in the above cited 3.
August 1647. Forbes of Lesly against Pitfoddels; but none of these two came to
a Decision. The reply to this (if the Day of Committing be condescended on) is;
that though the Lybel be raised within year and day, yet it is not insisted on,
till year and day be elapsed; or in case a certain day be lybelled with an
Alternative [of one other of the days of that Month or Months of the year]
then the Reply is, that suppose count be made from the last day of that year,
it will be found to be expired.

This Defense, that year and day is not elapsed, Demembration; because where a
Member is cut off, recovery is not to be expected, as was found, 27. Feb. 1618.
Thomson against Miln, for biteing off her Finger.

If the Pursuit be both for Mutilation and Demembration, ex. gra. for
mutilating two Fingers, and demembring the Hand of other two: the Pursuer may
pass from the Mutilation, and insist within year and day for the Demembration;
as was found in the foresaid case 17. December. 1622. Boyne against Hately, for
demembering him of two Fingers and mutilating him of other two.

The second Dilatory Defense is, that the Case is submitted: Interloquitor in
such a Debate is, to continue the Diet, till the day of the Expiration of the
Submission; which may be either condescended on, and insert in the Act of
Continuation; or the Justices may put the Panel under Caution to answer on
fifteen days warning, in case the Submission take no effect; 14. June 1626. Ord
against Forbes; 15. June 1629. Paterson against Wordie; and 20. July 1627.
inter eosdem: From these two dilatory, two peremptory Defenses follow.

The first peremptory Defense is, that the mutilated Member is perfectly
recoverad; Recovery. Ex. gra. against a Lybel of mutilating of the Hand of the
Fingers, it was found relevant that the Pursuer had ridden up and down the
Country, and held the Bridle with that Hand and Fingers; and that he cut up
Poultrie and Geese at the Table, as he had been in use to do; 15. Dec. 1630.
Barclay against Kennedy in Mayboll, where the Defense being proved, the Assize
cleans'd the Panel; and the Justices only fined him in an hundred Merks of
Expenses for the Cure The like Defense was sustained in the foresaid Pursuit of
Mutilation. 3. Novem. 1621. Williamson against Marion Paton residenter in
Leith, for dislocating the Spondyls of his Back, and mutilating him of his Leg;
in which Pursuit the Justices found this Defense relevant to elide the Lybel,
that the Pursuer, being a young Boy, had in his usual Recreations with his
Comrauds, run Races on the Links of Leith; as he was in use to do before he was
hurt. As also 6. June 1627. Lesly against Harvie, for breaking, at least
lameing and mutilating him of his left Leg; this Alledgiance was found
relevant, that the Pursuer had walked from his House many Miles.

This Defense of Recovery, is only relevant against a Lybel for Mutilation;
Gaspar Taliacotius, in his Chirurgia nova de Narium, Aurium, Labiorumque
defectu, pretends to have discovered a new Art of repairing Noses per
incisionem cutis ex humero. And Lanfrancus cited by P. Zacchias quaest.
medico-leg. lib. 5. tit. 3. q. 3. N. 3. reports, that some had asserted that a
Nose, which once lay prescinded in the owners hand, was thereafter restored to
it is place; but he calls it an impudent Falsehood. Yet Zacchias dict: q. N. 1.
and 4. follows Taliacotius; and cites Paree, and other famous Surgeons
asserting the same, and thinks this may be useful to Lawyers, for discussing
cases of Demembration. But seeing these learned Physicians do not agree about
it, I remit the case to be class'd inter ea, quae raro and ex inopinato
accidunt; Like the partus quinquagenariae, in l. si major 12. C. de legitim.
Haered. and like Serapia's Birth of five Children; in l. utrum. 7. ff. de reb.
dub. which last, Aristotle judged to be as impossible, ut in l. 36. ff: de
solut. as Lanfrancus did the restoring of the Nose; and seeing, if it exist, we
cannot expect express Law to decide anent it, (because Laws are only made for
things quae ut plurimum, and non quae raro eveniunt, l. 3.4.5. ff: de legib.)
it must be then regulated (when it happens) by paritie of Reason, with cases
commonly existing, according to l: 10: 11: 12.13- ff: eod. And by the same
Rule, the Judge may decide in the Amputation of the Toes of persons, formerly
mentioned, N. 62. who use them instead of Fingers.

The second peremptory Defense is, Decree, or has already done it and obtained
a Discharge; or that the Parties have transacted and agreed; this I say is
relevant; for all Injuries become extinct by Paction or Transaction l. sitibi:
17:: 1: l: si unus 27:. pacta 4. D: de pact. l: non solum 11:: 1: D: de injur:
and was so found by the Justices 14: June 1637 Allardice against Forbes for
mutilateing him of his left Leg. In all these cases the Justices desert the
Diet, which is the proper term of the Sentence proceeding upon Transactions.

The Justices do oftentimes recommend to the Parties to submit, July 1642.
Cheyne of Wallie and his Brother against Monat and Neivings, where Sir William
Dick Stewart of Orkney compearing to repledge, the Justices recommended to him
to agree the parties. Sometimes a judicial Submission is made to the Lords
themselves, as was done 1. Feb. 1650. by Mclure and Baxters.

Whence observe that the Crime of Mutilation and Demembration are but privata
delicta; dict.. 4. ff. de pact: whereas public Crimes cannot be transacted, l.
juris gentium 7: and. paciscar: 14: init. verse. Et in caeteris: ff. eod: and
may be inquired in.

A third peremptory Defense is, that the King has remitted the Crime, and
ordered an Assythment; Homicide, so, is expressly sustained to fist the Pursuit
of Demembration 17. May 1610. Rob. Keith against Lindsay.

Fourthly, Dissimulation (which is a tacit Discharge inferred from a friendly
converse and Acts of Kindness) is a good peremptory Defense.. ult. Inst. de
injur. l: si tibi. de liber. cause. But it must evidently appear that there is a
design to pass from the Pursuit; and therefore in the foresaid case, 12.
January 1642. Tailor against Norrie for mutilating of his Thumb; the Justices
found that the Pursuers consenting to let the Panel out of Prison and drinking
with him, were no such Acts of Dissimulation; but perhaps there were some
Specialities in the case: as that they conversed and drank together for respect
to the Company; and the letting out of Prison might be in order to meet for
communing about an Agreement. But abstracting from these or the like
Circumstances, friendly conversing and drinking together, is astrong
Presumption of passing from the Crime, according to Mathaeus; Apud Germanos
(says he dict. tit. N. 14.) propinatio poculi validissimum dissimulatae
injuriae argumentum est.

Fifthly, res judicata is an uncontroverted Defen ce; the Trial being before
the Justices who are the Judges competent: But (as I said before, N. 67.)
neither is the Privy Council nor any Barron-Court Judge competent. Act. 6.
Parl. 16. Ja. 6. And therefore their Decreets will not serve for an Absolvitor;
but if the Pursuer passes from the Mutilation, and insists for Blooding or
Wounding only; res judicata before the Privy Council or an inferior Court, is
sufficient; and if it be the Sheriffs Decree, and a Reduction of it raised,
and a Reply upon the Reduction; the Justices will continue the Process for a
time, till the event of the Reduction be known. So they did, 19. Nov. 1649.
Inglis of Craigmakerran against Martin.

Sixthly, Defense that the Privy Council has precognosced, found the Panel
innocent, and discharged the Justiees to proceed. This is daily practice and
needs no Confirmation; as was said, N. 68. supra.

Sometimes the Council remit to the Justiees to precognosce, July 1614. in a
Precognition craved by Donaldson against Ronald Lorimer and other three
persons, for demembring him of the Left Hand; and the Justices not being able
to discover any thing, because the Fact was done in the Night, they remitted it
to the Assize, who neither would fyle nor cleanse the Pannels, whereupon the
Justices committed Lorimer to Prison, till they should advise with the Council,
and then 16. November. that same year, after advi^^ng with the Council, they
pronounced Doom, that Lorimer should find Caution to satisfy Donaldson as the
Council had ordained.

Seventhly, The alledgeance of Self-Defence is relevant here, as in Homicide;
kill, in defense of his Person, his Wife, or her Honor. l. 1.. 4. ff. ad l.
Cornel. de Sicar. so much more may he mutilat or demember such an Invader: As
was sustained 27. June 1605. Brown against Johnston, in which case Brown was
mutilated in assaulting Johnstons House in the Nightime, with an Intention to
abuse his Wife; and yet had the confidence to pursue for the Mutilation;
whereas if Johnston had pursued Brown, then certainly Brown had been hanged;
for 20. Feb. 1650. William Macrie Soldier, was convicted and hanged, for
invading Colemans House on the like wicked Design. Also a Man may kill or
mutilat in defense of his Goods, Covaruv. de homicid. relect. 3. sect. Vnic. N.
6. where he adduces many Texts of Law. As also a Man may Kill or Mutilat a
Robber in the recovery of Stolen Goods, when he is flying with them. Act 100.
Parl. 11. Jac. 6.

If a Man defend himself against one who is authorized by lawful Authority to
apprehend him, that will not be esteemed Self-Defence, December. 1641. Jarden
against Edmonston. And just so will it be in the case of Messengers, in their
lawful executing of Captions. See our Author Tit. 11. of Murder. N. 13.

Eighthly, It Is a good Defense that the Wound was curable, Mutilation or
Demembration was ex malo regimine. This holds in Homicide, [see our Author,
Tit. 11. N. 10. and Farin. de homicid. qu. 127. p. 3.] and much more in lesser
Crimes. But if the Surgeon was necessitated to cut off the wounded Member,
that will not excuse the Crime of Demembration; it being all one to cut off the
Member by a Stroke or to necessitat the Surgeon to do it; per l. nihil
interest 15. ff. de sicar. And so it was found in the foresaid Action 27. Feb.
1618. Thomson against Miln, for biting off her little Finger. But there may be
some diffierence in the form of lybelling the one or the other; as, N: 69:
sect: 2: supra.

Ninthly. If more than one be conveen'd for Mutilation or Demembration, Airt
and Part, all of them may be insisted against, and it will be no good Defense
for any of the Pannels, that there is but one Wound which could only be given
by one as principal percussor, who ought to be condescened on, and first
discussed. This was expressly propon'd for three Defenders, and repelled, in
respect Airt and Part was libelled, 10. July 1635. Bessie Thomson and her
Spouse against Gilespie, Thomson and Hill, for mutilating her of her right Hand
when she came to rid them, they being all fighting together: all three of them
were remitted to the knowledge of an Assize. The like 24. July 1635. Fletcher
of Benshaw against Ramsay, Lindsay and the Lord Spinie, in which Action the
Lord Spinie compear'd and took the Fact on him and alleged that he was fined
by the Baillie of the Regality of St. Andrews, and yet it was repelled in
respect of Airt and Part. And in the foresaid Action 15. July 1642. and 5.
August 1642. Cheinie and his Brother against Mowat and the two Neivings for
mutilating them: all the three Defenders were convicted and fined in 1000. lib.
to the parties, and two hundred pounds to the King: and 3. Novem. 1620 in the
foresaid Action Allanson contra Steuart and others for demembring him of a
Thumb and three Fingers, and giving him seven bloody wounds; it was alleged
for Steuart that one of the Defenders was fugitive and at the Horn, and had
thereby taken the Crime on him; and l. si in rixa percussus 17. ff: de Sicar.
was cited, which was also repelled, and he was remitted to the knowledge of an
Inquest. The like 6. January 1662. Advocatus contra Bates and others for
Slaughter. And yet 10. June 1618. Robertson against Ross for mutilati^g him in
his right hand, it being alleged for Ross the Panel, that one was at the Horn
for that Crime, and fugitive, the Assize cleans'd the Panel; but the truth is
there was no Probation in the case against the Panel, and a testificat was
produced under the hands of famous Gentelmen laying the Guilt on the Fugitive:
See our Author, tit. 11. number: 12. speaking of homicidium in rixa, where many
are conjunct Actors.

Tenthly, Defense as well in Homicide, as in Mutilation and Demembration, that
the Party killed or wounded was denounced Rebel, or, as we call it, at the Horn
at the time for a criminal cause. This was found in the Action Anno 1610. Ker
of Ferneherst against Turnbulls and others, and the extract of the Horning was
found probative, and Relaxation was sustained by way of reply, to elide the
Horning. The same was at length debated from the Civil Law, and D D. 20. Nov.
1618. Meldrum against Meldrum of Eden, but not decided. And is like the
Question among the D D. If it be lawful to kill Bannitus or an outlaw? whereof
he who desires to be satisfied may consult Farinacius prax. crim. q: 103: It
seems that before the year 1612. a Defense founded on a Denunciation for a
civil Cause was a ground of Defense, because by the third Act of the Parliament
that year, it is statuted and declared, that for time coming it should not be
lawful for any man to kill or mutilate any of the Subjects on the account of
their being at the Horn for civil causes, under the pain of being punished as
Murdere rs and Mutilators, with this Declaration, that the Act should take
effect heirafter allanerlie which implies that a Defense on an Horning for a
civil cause, was good before. Our Author has fully discussed this Question
dict. tit: of murder, N: 19.

But before a Panel at the Horn (for not finding Caution to compear) taken
with Caption and presented to the Bar will be allowed to propone this Defenses,
May 1605. Skirven against Forrester, for mutilating him of the Right Hand;
where this Alledgance that Defense was juris naturalis was proponed and
repelled: But if there be any Nullities in the Horning, the Panel may propone
them; as was done in the said case.

Eleventhly, Retaliation be expressly craved in the Libel (as was in the
foresaid case. 28. July 1647. Forbes of Lesly, against Pitfoddels;) the Panel
will be forced to debate how far the Law of Retaliation, given to the Jews, is
obligatory upon other Nations; so it was there debated, but not decided. This
Point I shall labor to clear hereafter.

Lastly, Defense, that the Pursuer did mutilat or demember himself; this
(though contrary to the Libel) was found relevant 12. January 1642. Tailor
against Norie; for mutilating him of his Thumb: against which the Panel
offered to prove that the Pursuer did mutilat his own Thumb when he was rashly
drawing his Sword.

These are the particular Defenses, General: That whatever Defense is competent
against Homicide, is also competent against Mutilation and Demembration;
mutatis mutandis.

Now I come in order to speak to the Probation of the Libel and Defenses,

First, That as in an Action of Homicide, Annaeus Robertus rer: jur. lib: 1: c.
4: (and which was once done in a Pursuit at the instance of a Genleman against
his Neighbor, for alleged killing of his Shepherd, recorded in the Journal
Books, but their Names escape me) then it would be very superfluous to prove by
Witnesses, that the person said to be killed, is alive, because the Judge and
Inquest see him: Even so in a Libel of Demembration, ex. gr. of an Hand, if it
appear by ocular inspection that the Pursuer have both his Hands; as in the
case of Arsenius said to be murdered, and demembred of a Hand, by Athanasius,
and thereafter for vindication of Athanasius, brought in alive having both his
Hands. Socrat: eccl: hisi: lib. 1. cap: 21: and Ruffin: l: 1: cap: 17. I say in
all or any of these cases, the Judge and Inquest can cognosce the matter by its
notoriety; just so if an Hand said to be mutilated, appear by ocularinspection,
never to have been mutilated, or to be perfectly recovered, the Judge and
inquest need no further Evidences. So they did in the cases 28. July. 1627.
Paterson against Wordie, and 19. November. 1657. Inglis against Martin.

But 2. If there be any doubt in the case; Hand or Fingers are wounded; and no
mutilation committed, but only pretended to be committed; the Truth in that
case must be discovered: Either by the Oath of Calumny of the Party pretending
to be mutilated; or, by Witnesses who saw him express Signs of recovery: as was
done, N: 76: supra: Or, by the trial of skilful Chyrurgions, who must declare
their Opinion upon Oath, before the Judge and Inquest; and as this is our daily
Practice, so is it the custom of foreign Courts, as Caballus testifies in
di^^. cent. Resol. 3. cas. 236. N. 113. and seqq. where he cites Angelus
iustructing Judges to advise with skilful Physicians and Chirurgions in
ambiguous cases, how far the Member ex. gr. the Hand is mutilated or
debilitated (for these two are but one and the same with him) by incision of
the Thumb or other Fingers, and to record their Opinion or Report, among the
Acts of the Process: And as Caballus relates this as the Advice of Angelus, so
he says that he has seen this frequently practiced by Judges, and that he
himself has often practiced the same; and particularly that he has seen many
Reports of skilful Surgeons concerning Debilitation or Mutilation of the
Hand by Incision of the Thumb, or by Wounds given in the Fingers of the Hand,
and sometimes by Amputation of two Fingers, so that the Hand ceased to exerce
it is proper Office, and became almost unprofitable; and in all these cases, the
Delinquents were condemned to undergo the punishments imposed by the Laws and
Statutes of the Place where the Crime was committed.

The Justices, with us, do never accept of the single Testimonies of Physicians
and Surgeons; but oblige them to depone, or declare upon Oath; de fideli
administratione, they gave at their Admission was sufficient for all: So it was
decided; 20. July 1627. Paterson against Wordie; and for the same cause the
Justices do reject Testificats subscribed by them, unless bearing upon Soul and
Conscience. So they did 7 Novem. 1621. Williamson against Paton; and 15.
December. 1630. Barclay against Kennedy in Mayboll, in which last case, the
Testificat was subscribed by the Deacon of the Surgeons of Edinburgh and
other two of the Trade. And the like Objection was made 12. January 1642.
against a Testificat produced by Tailor against Norie to prove the Lybel,
notwithstanding it was written by the Clerk of the College of Surgeons, and
subscribed by four of them. And that this is agreeable to the Opinion of the
DD. of Law and practice of Foreign Courts (what ever be pretended to the
contrary) will appear by the following Citations of Law and DD, as Crusius de
indiciis delictorum. p. 2. C. 20 N. 13. and seqq. Mascard. de prob. vol. 3.
conclus. 1175. N. 40. juncto N. 50. Baldus and Salicetus, l. hac edictali. 65.
his illud 1. de sec. nup. and others cited by Mascardus, dict. N. 50. Farin.
vol. decision: crim. decis. 346. N. 5. and N. 6. and Decis. 365. N. 1. and 5.
Vid. etiam Carpz. Criminal. p, 1. qu. 21. N. 8. and qu. 20. N. 38. and seqq.
and the DD. cited by him: As also Matthaeus de sic: cap: 3: N: 17: likeways
Gail: 1: obs: 111. N. 3. all of them asserting and proving that their Oaths
should be taken. This was expressly enacted by a Constitution of Charles the
fifth Artic. 149. cited by Carpz. dict. N. 38. and decided in Camera imperiali.
Mynsyng. cent. 6 observe. 34. Vid. dict. Crusium, loc. citat. N. 19. and Bald.
in l. 20. C. de fid. instrument. And there should be at the least two of them,
if they can be had. Matthaeus Ibid.

There are some cases wherein Physicians and Surgeons are not obliged to
swear. as 1. If they be assumed by the Judge; or 2. if they be chosen by mutual
consent of Parties; to declare anent the nature of the Thing; no more than a
tutor Testamentar is obliged to find Caution, and the same Reason is for both;
viz. because they trust their Faith by chosing them. Mascard. dict. conclus. N.
51. Mynsyng. cent. 5. dict. observe. 34. N. 13. and 14. Or, 3. If the Physician
or Surgeon be appointed by public Authority, for such business, and sworn
at the beginning. Mynsing. did. N. 14. Carpz. qu. 26. N. 40. And so I
understand Matthaeus, saying, it is sufficient they were sworn at their entry
to their Office. dict. N. 17. but withal they should be put in mind of their
Oath formerly given.

From hence it follows, Probation wherein so many Difficulties occur, upon the
Qualities of Wounds and Chirurgical Terms, should be more than ordinary
intelligent: otherwise they who in dubious Cases incline to absolve, may
probably free the guilty upon some mistaken point. This fell out in the
foresaid case 8. July 1643. Logie against Howison for Mutilation of an Eye: the
Panel was by them cleans'd upon a point that arose from the Probation; viz,
that the Pursuer gave ill words, and thereby provoked the Panel to give the
stroke which occasioned the Blindness, and yet this was neither pleaded nor
relevant; for the Law does not allow Compensation betwixt verbal and real
Injuries. And Advocats who plead these cases, may likeways see how necessar it
is for them to study the Quaestiones medico-legales, without which it is not
possible for them to understand some Texts in Law; l. 12. ff. de Statu. And
many other Laws in the Titles ad leg. Aquil. and de Aedil. edict. But we need
not give instances, seeing the large Volume of Paulus Zacchias frequently above
cited, contains hundreds of Instances. And Matthaeus, dict: loc. thinks it may
be useful also for Judges to understand these things, that they be not easily
deceived by the Reports of corrupted Chyrurgions; and in order to this, he lays
before them the 18 Aphoris: of Hippoc: de vulneribus lethalibus, sect: 6: and
the words of Celsus, lib: 5: cap: 26: as a particular case to be understood.

A TREATISE OF MUTILATION and DEMEMBRATION PART. II.

WHEREIN the Punishments of these Crimes are handled; Retaliation, which is the
first of them, distinguished; and the Practice of that Species thereof called
Pythagorical or Arithmerical, refuted; from the Opinion of Divines and Lawyers;
and even from the Opinion of the Rabbis: The other Species called
Aristotelical, Analogical or Geometrical, reconciled to natural Equity, and to
the Law of GOD. The Punishment of Amputation of a Hand, though in many Cases
practiced, yet, rejected from being the ordinary Punishment of these Crimes.
Arbitrary Punishments asserted in place of both; and a well regulated Arbitrary
Power proved to be useful and necessary to Judges, for augmenting and
diminishing Punishments, in these and in other Crimes, according to
Circumstances attending the committing of them. And the Civil Law, and the Law
and Customs of this and other Nations are compared.

By Sir ALEXANDER SETON of PITMEDDEN Knight Baronet, etc.

By way of Appendix to the fore going Book, written by the Learned Sir GEORGE
MACKENZIE of Rosehaugh.

ARRIUS MENANDER, L. 5. ff. de re Militari. Non omnes Desertores similiter
puniendi sunt, sed habetur and ordinis stipendiorum ratio, gradus militiae, vel
loci, muneris deserti, and ante actae vitae: sed and numerus, si solus, vel cum
altero, vel cum pluribus deseruit, ali^dve quid crimen desertioni adjunxerit.
Item temporis, quo in desertione fuerit, and eorum, quae post gesta fuerint:
Sed and si fuerit ultro reversus, non cum necessitudine, non erit ejusdem
sortis. EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson,
Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty. For Mr. Andrew Symson; and are to
be Sold by him in the Cowgate, near the Foot of the Horse-wynd, Anno DOM. 1699.

PART II. Of the Punishments of MUTILATION and DEMEMBRATION,
Summaries.
99 The DD. insist chiefly on three Punishments: Retaliation, Amputation of a
Hand; and Arbitrary Punishment: And the Law of this Kingdom Cap. 11. Stat. Rob.
2. declares the Life to be in the Kings Will and redeemable; which may be
reckoned as a fourth. 100 Retaliation described; and its various Names. 101 The
Subject is, Juridico-theological, equally handled by Divines and Lawyers. 102
The Nature of Retaliation held forth in some Conclusions. 103 Concl. 1.
Retaliation instituted by God in his Law, and delivered by Moses to the Jews.
104 Concl. 2. The execution of the Law of Retaliation committed to the
Magistrates, and not left to private Revenge. 105 Concl. 3. The Law of
Retaliation was transmitted from the Jews to the Grecions, but how or in what
time is uncertain; some ascribing the Law to Rhadamanthus who was Moses in
Mythologie according to Huetius; others to Charondas King of the Locrians; The
words of their Laws set down. 106 Concl. 4. That Retaliation is founded on
natural Equity, which consists in observing Equality between the Crime and
Punishment; proved by five Arguments. 107 Arg. 1. Taken from the consent of
Nations and Laws. 108 Arg. 2. Taken from the Testimony of Fathers, Modern
Divines and Lawyers, asserting its natural Equity. 109 Arg. 3. Taken from
various instances of providence inflicting Retaliation. 110 Arg. 4. Taken from
Gods threatening Retaliation, against the Enemies of his Church in general, and
the Chaldeans in particular: and also against his own people. 111 Arg. 5. Taken
from the threatenings of Retaliation under the Gospel, which shows that the Law
was not peculiar to the Jewish oeconomie. 112. The Objections of Socinians and
Anabaptists devised to overturn the power of Christian Magistrates answered: and
the Authority of the Christian Magistrate asserted. 113. A farther proof by
Instances of Providence under the Gospel, that the Law of Retaliation, was not
abrogated under the Gospel; with a Reflection against the Deists denying the
Validity of humane Testimony. 114 Concl. 5. Although Retaliation be founded on
natural Equity, and so is immutable, yet it does not follow that it must be
always executed according to pythagorical or Arithmetical proportion; but that
Analogical or Geometrical proportion, as Circumstances require, is sufficient.
And this proved by several Arguments. 115 Arg. 1. Taken from the Practice of
the Jews in several particulars. 116 1. In many cases it was either naturally
or morally impossible to execut strict Retaliation. 117. 2. It was lawful for
the Jews to transact anent the punishment of Retaliation. Josephus his Opinion
disproved. And the Practice of the Justice-Court anent Transactions justified.
118 3. And for the same Reason, the Jewish Magistrate was not obliged to enquire
into these Crimes, when the Parties did not desire it. 119 4. If the Party
injured did apply to the Magistrate, and insisted to have the pain of strict
Retaliation inflicted, yet then in that case, the Judge was not obliged to
inflict punishment according to the words of the Law, but he enquired into
Circumstances and varied the punishment accordingly. All this is proved by many
instances; particularly where the Quality of Parties was unequal. 120 5. When
Quality and Circumstances were equal (which seems to be the only difficult
Case) even then the Jewish Magistrate did admit of a Ransom and pecuniary Mulct
for punishment, which was done on five accounts condescended on by the Rabbis.
The Law of Retaliation, concluded to be minatory, with a Rebuke to the
Sadducees and their Successors. 121 6. A false Witness occasioning Death to
another was punished with strict Retaliation; but if by his Testimoney he
occasioned only Demembration; the difficulty is greater. 122 Arg. 2. Taken from
the Agreement of the Laws of the XII. Tabb. as paraphrased by Jacobus
Gothofredus, with the practice of the Jews and Doctrine of the Rabbis in
several Instances. 123 Inst. 1. The Law of the XII. Tabb. allowed Transactions,
as well as the Jewish Practice. 124 Inst. 2. Depalmation by the Law of the XII.
Tabb. was punished by a pecuniary Mulct, and not by strict Retaliation. And
this was the Jewish Practice. 125 Inst. 3. The Law of the XII. Tabb. de osse
fuso, vel dentibus excussis, appoints pecuniary Punishment: and the same was
augmented or diminished according to the Quality of the Delinquent; which was
also the Jewish practice. 126 Inst. 4. In the Agreement betwixt the Laws and
Practice of the Jews, and the Law of the XII. Tables, in the case of a false
Witness. 127 Secondly, the Greek and Latin Authors; and particularly Aristotle
and Phavorinus understood the Law, si membrum rupsit, etc. not strictly but
analogically. 128 Phavorinus did not believe strict Retaliation practicable,
but argues against it. 129 S. Caecilius in his answer to Phavorinus
acknowledges there cannot be an exact Retaliation in Breaking and Bruising, and
therefore concludes for an Estimat. 130 An Epicrisis on the Reasonings of
Phavorinus and S. Caecilius. 131 Strict Retaliation condemned by the Reasonings
of Aristotle against the Pythagoreans. 132 The Judgment of Aristotle to be
preferred to that of Pythagoras; and why? 133 Aristotle and Phavorinus censured
by Bodinus, and he by Matthaeus: and and yet Bodinus no friend to strict
Retaliation. 134 The case of equal Circumstances considered by Bodinus. 135 The
Law of Charondas, of Eye for Eye, recorded by Diod. Siculus, proves not the
general practice of strict Retaliation; it being not made for the sake of
strict Retaliation, but with respect to the excellency of the Eye beyond other
Members; and the like has been since practiced by Christian Emperors. 136
Arg. 3. to prove that strict Retaliation though founded on natural Equity,
admits of analogical Retaliation; taken from the authority of Divines and
Lawyers; I begin with Grotius, eminent for his Knowledge in the Jewish and
Christian Theology; and in the political Laws of both. 137 The Testimony of
Goodwyn and Ainsworth: Munster, and some Rabbis, cited by them. 138 The
Testimony of the Jews has the more Weight, in that they were tenacious of
their political Laws and Customs; as is proved by Instances; with the Opinion
of St. Augustine and Isiod. Pelusiot. 139 A further Testimony of Goodwyn. for
analogical Retaliation, following A. Gellius; with an Observation thereon. 140
The Testimony of Paulus Fagius for the same. 141 The Testimony of many other
Divines condemning Pythagorical Retaliation. 142 The Sadducees and wicked
Manichees, Patrons of identical Retaliation. 143 Strict Retaliation condemned
by many famous Lawyers. 144 Reasons why the Conference between Phavorinus and
S. Caecilius, recorded by A. Gellius, is to be regarded. 145 The Law of
Retaliation never executed among Jews, Grecians, or Romans in the strict sense;
except the Crime were atrocious: Moderat Damnages more agreeable to Christian
meekness. 146 First Objection bearing, that if strict Retaliation had not been
among the Jews, there would have been no need of Exhortation to Meekness under
the Gospel; answered. 147 A second Objection taken from these words of l. 1.
ff. ad leg. Aquil. Lex Aquilia, omnibus legibus quae ante se de damno injuria
loquutae sunt, derogavit, sive XII. Tab. sive alia quae fuit; enforced and
answered: by showing that the words omnibus derogavit, admit of Exceptions. 148
The Answer illustrated by an Enquiry into the Date of the Lex Aquilia. 149 The
use of the Enquiry for knowing the Author of the Lex Aquilia. 150 Amputation of
the Hand is the second Punishment of Mutilation and Demembration to be spoken
to; and why? 151 Amputation of the Hand proved by many Instances of the Civil
Law, to be the punishment of many Crimes committed by the Hand; and how that
punishment is to be regulated? 152 The punishment of Amputation of the Hand, is
always in Saxony conjoined with Relegation; and why? 153 An Argument taken from
the Gloss and some Texts of the Feudal Law, to prove that Mutilation and
Demembration, were punished poena amputationis manus, because single wounding
was so punished. 154 The Argument taken from the words of the Gloss put in
form, and enforced from a Rule in Suarez; and answered, by showing that single
wounding was never punished, in that manner, unless joined cum fractione pacis
publicae, to which the Law required several Conditions there set down, which
made the Crime atrocious. 155 Some Acts of Parliament, anent the Amputation of
the Hand for carrying forbidden Weapons, explained. 156 An Objection answered.
157 Arbitrary Punishment, by the Civil Law, succeeded in place of Retaliation,
and in place of the fixed Mulcts of the XII. Tabb. If these Mulcts were enacted
in maxima veterum paupertate? (as Trebonian says) and abrogated on that
account? For what Cause were the Words of the Law Si membrum rupsit etc.
abrogated? 158 How long had Analogical Retaliation been in practice before
Justinian introduced Arbitrary Punishment in place of all Retaliation? 159
Mutilation and Demembration punished arbitrarie, as other Injuries. 160 The
nature of Arbitrary Punishment not understood by every one. 161 Arbitrary
Punishment answers to Arbitrary Crimes. Ordinary and Arbitrary Crimes
described. 162 Anciently all Crimes and Punishments were determined by Law; but
multitude of Facts which could not be forseen gave occasion for Arbitrary Power
to determine in Emergencies by the Rules of Equity. 163 This ancient and modern
Custom, and the nature of Arbitrary Punishment held forth by Ulpian. Why a
Judge called Legis auxilium? 164 Punishment in general as including ordinary
and extraordinary or Arbitrary, described. 165 Arbitrium plenum or absolute;
and regulatum or limited, described. A Judge, exercising unlimited power,
called bellua and non judex. 166 Absolute, and Arbitrary power, are different
things and have different Effects. 167 An Arbitrary Judge, is the same with a
prudent and wise Judge described by Cicero; and is the same with Ulpian's vir
bonus described by Alex. Neapolit. 168 An Arbitrary Judge has not power to do
any thing that is unjust. 169 He cannot, without a just Cause, augment or
diminish punishments which the Law has determined, nor recede from any thing
determined by Law, unless the Law allows him to do it. What cases are said to
be determined by Law? 170 He cannot totally remit a Punishment to gratify the
people, especially after Sentence. And its not always safe for them to remit,
who have power to do it; proved by the authority of St. Bernard and Cicero. 171
An Arbitrary Judge cannot punish beyond merit. 172 He cannot punish one man for
the Fault of another, though he were willing to undergo it: except in some
particular cases. 173 He should not delay execution of Sentence beyond the
ordinary time. 174 If Arbitrary Punishment can reach ad poenam Capitis? 175 If
ad amputationem manus? 176 An Arbitrary Judge may determine Punishment for
extraordinary Crimes; and highten or lessen punishment in ordinary Crimes, if
the Circumstances of Fact require it: and why? 177 There is a like necessity
for Arbitrary Power in some civil Cases. 178 And yet for all this the Judge
cannot be said to be more favorable than the Law; or that he contraveens it,
or departs from it; but is rather Legis auxilium, and a Preserver of the Law,
because the Law in some cases gives him that power. 179 Only supreme Judges
have this power; and inferior Magistrates must consult the Prince, especially
after Sentence pronounced. Whether the Judge be obliged to express the Causes
of his receding from ordinary Punishment? how far the Law presumes for the
Justice of the Judge in ambiguo. 180 The Circumstances for hightning or
lessening Punishments, are chiefly seven. Causa, persona, locus, tempus,
Qualitas, Quantitas, Eventus. 181 1. Diverse Considerations anent the Cause,
viz. 1. If the Delinquent acted ex proposito, or not. 2. If the Crime be
consummated or attempted only. 3. If the Delinquent acted of his own accord, or
by command of another. What the Judge ought to do in each Case. 182 2. As to
the Person whether Agent or Patient, it makes a great alteration in Punishment.
Each should be considered as to Sex, Age, State, and Quality or Dignity. 183 3.
Place; of Committing, augments or diminishes the nature of the Punishment;
proved by Instances. 184 4. Time; varies the Punishment: which is also proved.
185 5. The Quality of the Fact makes the Crime more or less atrocious, and
varies the Punishment. 186 6. Quantity; distinguishes furtum ab abigeo. 187 7.
Event increases punishment and Damnages; as when the hand of a skilful
Artificer is struck off. 188 Damnages are due by the Rules of natural Equity;
proved by the Authority of Farin. and Marsil. 189 How far Delinquents are
liable for Damnages, intrinsic or extrinsick; and both these Damnages
described. 190 Obligation to pay Damnages founded on Exodus 28.19. 191 Damnages
to be modified at the arbitriment of the Judge; and by what means he should
inform himself. Other five Circumstances for mitigating Punishments. 192 Of the
Practice of Scotland anent punishing Mutilation and Demembration; and decerning
of Damnages: The words of Cap. 11. Stat. Rob. 2. which are the foundation of
all, set down. 193 If there be any Warrant, from the words of the Statute, to
punish Mutilation and Demembration capitally; debated pro and contra, and
resolved Negative.
I Have now done with the first Part of this Appendix; Mutilat and Detruncat a
proper Member of a Man's Body; and how to pursue and defend Actions thereanent.
I come next in this second Part to speak of Punishments and Damnages; which are
not always the same, but vary, in these as in other Crimes, according to
Circumstances; tot. tit. ff. de poenis. Farin. 11.87. and seqq. de poenis
temperand. The DD. insist chiefly on Retaliation, Amputation of a Hand; and
arbitrary punishment; and there is a Fourth, mentioned in an ancient Statute of
our Law, viz. cap. 11. stat. Rob. 2. where it is said, that for wilful and
premeditated Mutilation (which is there understood for Demembration) the
Delinquents Life shall be in the Kings Will and redeemable.

Retaliation; which is the first of these, is a Punishment of equal
Retribution, or the doing to one as he has done to his Neighbor; Jewish
Magistrate for Execution; and thereafter received by the Gentile Nations, upon
the account of it is natural equity, and executed by the Rule of Geometrical
Proportion. All which I shall make appear in several Conclusions. Cardinal Hugo
on Exodus 21.23. thus expresses it; Talitur laedendus est just, qualiter ipse
injuste fecerit alii. Poena talionis is not expressly mentioned among the Laws
of Justinian; except in. poena 7. inst. de injur. but we find it in Novel.
Leon. 60. and 92. The Reason why it is but once in Justinians Law, is, that when
Trebonian composed the Law, Retaliation of one Member for another was worn out,
and in place thereof actio injuriarum had succeeded, as in dict.. Poena. It Is
oftener in the Canon Law, as in C. Poen. 14. q. 1 and in C. sex differentia, 23.
q. 3. and in C. calumniator. 2. q: 3. but it is frequent among the DD. as Jul.
Clarus, Farinacius, Cujac. Bart: Bald: and others. And among the Rhetoricians;
as Quintil. declam. 297. and 352. Senec: Controvers. 2. lib. 3. and controv.
33. lib. 5. and it is to be found in Symmach. Epist. 59. lib. 1. and Epist. 27.
lib. 3. and Sidon. Epist. 3. lib. 5. and the Essence of it consists in the
cutting off one Member for another, as appears by the punishment of him who
makes an Eunuch: Novel. Justin. 142. Cap. 1. It has it is name from the Latin
word Talis. Voss. in Etymol. which denotes an Equality betwixt the Crime and
the Punishment; and for this Cause it is likeways called paena similis
supplicii; in l. ult. c. de accusat. and l. ult. ff. de calumniat. Poena
reciproci. in l. 3. lib. 9. c. Theodos. de exhib. vel transmit: reis. And paena
paris vindictae; quasi (...), or the suffering of the same thing. It is several
times called by Aristotle (...) lib. 5. Ethic. cap. 5. i: e: contrapassum: All
these are Names denoting Equality.

The Subject is Juridico-theological; Physicians to assist the Lawyers; so in
this second Part I must call Divines to my Assistance.

And because the Subject is full of Difficulty, Retaliation under Christianity,
I shall labor to clear the Difficulties in a few Conclusions, whereby the
divine Authority and natural Equity thereof shall be proved in the first place,
and yet it shall be shown in the second, that it was not intended to be always
executed in the strictest and literal Sense, but according to the Rules of
Geometrical Proportion and distributive Justice.

1. Deists who deny the Authority of the Books of Moses and reproach this Law,
(as you may see in Nichol's Dialogue with the Deist) acknowledge that the Law
of Retaliation, was one of the Laws which Moses received from God, and
delivered to his People the Jews. For first God gave this Law to secure the
Life of man Genesis 9: 6. in these Words, He that shedeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed; and having declared it to take place in all cases of wilful
Homicide, Exodus 21.22.23.14.18.19.20.21.22.23. with Certification in the last
of these Words, that Life should go for Life. He thought fit, by a further
step of his wise providence, to forbid Demembration under the like pain. verse.
23. Eye for Eye; Tooth for Tooth; Hand for Hand; Foot for Foot. As also
Mutilation and lesser Hurts, v. 25. Burning for Burning; Wound for Wound;
Stripe for Stripe: These are the Words of the first Institution of the Pain of
Retaliation; which is renewed Levit. 24.19.20: If a man cause a Blemish in his
Neighbor as he has done, so shall it be done to him; Breach for Breach; Eye
for Eye; Tooth for Tooth: As he has caused a Blemish in a man so shall it be
done unto him again. Further, least this should be thought to reach the
Percussor only; It Is declared Deuteronomy, 19.6. and subsequent Verses, to extend also
to a false Witness, by whose false Testimony the Life or Member of an innocent
man should be taken away. All these places of Scripture serve to illustrat the
above mentioned Description of Retaliation; because the very words in the Texts
Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, etc. are as so many Examples of the Equality to
be observed in Execution of the Law either Literally; or Analogically, by
geometrical Proportion.

This Law was not a business of private revenge, Math. 5. verse. 38: 39: etc:
charge upon the Sadduces) nullo enim modo servaret ille modum, says Estius in
Exodus 21.23. but the Execution was committed to the Magistrate; for Deuteronomy. 19:
17. it is expressly said, that both the men between whom the controversy is,
shall stand before the Lord, before the Priests, and the Judges which shall be
in those Days. And all private Revenge, yea even private hatred, was expressly
forbidden the Jews. Levit. 19.17.18. thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy
heart: thou shall not avenge nor bear any grudge against the children of thy
people, And the Roman Law, tot. tit. C. Ne quis in sua causa; permits no man to
judge in his own cause, except supreme Judges.

3. Dan. Huetius, in his Book entitled, Demonstratio Evangelica prop. 4. cap.
8. n. 2. cites Authors, who say, they might have received them from Cadmus and
Danaus, who being contemporaries with Moses, were forced to fly from their own
Country of Egypt, and sheltered themselves among the Grecians, and taught them
those Laws. And he dict. prop. cap. 11. insists at large upon the transmission
of these Laws to the Grecians by the Syrophenicians; but Authors (whom he
cites) do not agree about the time. Some think it was when the Syrophenicians
fled from the Sword of Joshua, invading their Country; others think, that the
Syrophenicians themselves had never learned these Laws, before Solomon sent
many thousands of his People to provide Materials for the building of his
Temple, 1 King. 6. But the Grecians had the Law of Retaliation long before this
time, if credit may be given to the Pythagoreans, who (as Aristotle says, lib.
5. Ethic. cap. 5.) ascribed this Law to Rhadamanthus King of Lucia as its
Author, in these words, Quod quisque fecit patitur; autorem scelus repetit;
suoqu^ premitur exemplo nocens: I say, it must be older than Solomon if
Rhadamanthus enacted it, for Turselinus in his Epit. Hist. makes him
contemporary with Joshua: and according to Huetius, dict. c. 8. N. 12. he was
the same with Moses. Calvisius, Helvicus and Nauclerus calculat him to be about
the same time. But Diod. Sicul. lib. 12. ascribes the Law for the Eye, Si quis
oculum eruerit, oculum reo pariter eruito, to Charondas King of the Locrians,
surnamed Thurius, (because he gave Laws to the Thurians or Tyrians. Tiraquel.
in his Notes on Alex. ab Alex. lib. 6. dier. genial. c. 10.) and then, as to
that particular Member, the Law was of a later date. But leaving these
Chronological Inquiries, because the Heathen Histories of these times, from
which they are taken, are very uncertain; according to the learned
Stillingfleet. Orig. Sacr. cap. 1. in fin. It Is enough for our design that we
find the Law of Retaliation, among the Grecians; and no man will deny this who
reads Aristotle dict. l. 5. Eth. cap. 5. Demosth. in Timocr. Diog. Laert. lib.
10. And Huetius dict. prop. 4. C. 11. p. 161. is positive, that the Law of
Retaliation, was one of the Laws which descended from the Jews to the Grecians,
and transmitted by them to the Romans in the XII. Tables, l. 2.. 44. ff. de
orig. jur. anno V.C. 300. whereby it is agreed, that it was a Law anciently
among the Grecians, and that they honored it for its equity, by ascribing the
general Law, Quod quisque fecit patitur, to Rhadamanthus, and the particular
Law, Si quis oculum eruerit, to Charondas; both famed for their Equity and
Justice, as Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 6. and the Mythologists testify of the first;
and Val. Maximus testifies of the last, lib. 2. cap. 5. but by instancing a
Heathenish piece of Courage.

Conclus. 4. This Law of Retaliation is founded upon natural Equity;

Argum. 1. Common censent of all Nations in the receiving a Law, natural
Equity; and all Nations have agreed to receive this Law. This we have already
showen, as to the Grecians and Romans, N. 105. supra. As for other Nations,
their receiving this Law of Retaliation, see Dempst. lib. 9. Rosin. in
paraleip. p. 940. Cujac. lib. 7. observe. cap. 13. P. Aerodius, rerum judicat.
lib. 6. tit. 5. de injur. c. 20. Forner. lib. 3. select. cap. 28. Faber. lib.
3. Semest. cap. 19. and Covaruv. var. Resolut. lib 2. cap. 9. Moreover, the
Authors of particular Texts in the Roman Law are positive in this point of
natural Equity; as, Vlpian. in l. 1. ff. quod quisque juris, who there says,
Quis aspernabitur idem jus sibi dici, quod ipse aliis dixit. And the foresaid
Joannes Suarez. dict. cap. N. 7. says, that he believes the Praetor introduced
the Law of Retaliation against the Magistrate, who contrary to his duty,
decerned unjustly; and therefore an anonymus German in his Book entitled, Jus
ff. illustratum, inscribes his Notes upon that Title, in these words: De jure
talionis sive retorsionis. See Maranus ( Cujacius his Scholar) on the same
Title. And S. Cacilius apud A. Gell. lib. 20. c. 1. disputing for the Equity of
the Law of Retaliation in the XII. Tables, against Phavorinus, has these words,
Quae, obsecro, ista est acerbitas, si idem fiat in te, quod tute in alios
feceris?

Arg. 2. It Is natural Equity is asserted by many great Authors, August. lib.
21. de Civit: Dei. Cap. 11. Expostulating with the Gentiles who labored from
the natural Equity of this Law to confute the belief of Eternal punishment: as
if it had been disproportional to a temporal Sin; not knowing, that the Sin was
measured from its being against an Eternal Majesty, Infinite in Justice. Of
this Opinion also are, Gratian: in C. paenas 14. qu. 1. and in C. sex
differentiae 23. q. 3. Tertul. lib: de patientia cap. 6. Origines, homil. 10.
in Exodus: D: Ambros. lib. 1: officior. cap. 48. D. Valerianus in sermon. de bono
disciplina. S. Isiodorus pelusiota lib. 2. Epist. 133. Abulensis in cap. 24.
Levit. all cited by Johannes Suarez de mendosa ad l. Aquil. C. 2. in apparatu
N. 6: where he says plane haec de talione lex non solum bono sed aequo
convenit; quia in poenae aequalitate versatur, sed nulla esse reperitur, quae
magis secundum naturam sit: nitebatur enim naturali hac ratione quae aequiss.
ma omnibus visa est; nimirum quod inse patiatur quisque quod fecerit alteri.
And again N. 8. Igitur cum haec lex naturali ratione suffulta sit. Inde est
quod omnes Gentes eadem lege regebantur, and ab omnibus peraeque custodiebatur.
And this Answers exactly to the Definition of natural Equity given by Aristotle
lib. 5. c. 7. where dividing jus in (...), natural and legitimum, he calls
natural, quod ubique eandem habet vim, and non quia sic videtur aut non
videtur. And legitimum, quod initio quidem liberum est, postquam vero
constitutum sit, observari necesse est. This natural Equity is also asserted by
learned Divines, Andreas Rivetus ad Exodus 21.24. N. 3.4. And Antonius Walaeus
oper: tom. 2. p. 290. col. 2. as also by Soto, tractat de inst. and jur. lib.
5. art. 4. in the case of punishing Accusers; and by Episcopius, inst. l. 3.
Sect. 2. c. 12. The same is also maintained by Farin. prax. crim. qu. 16. de
accusat. N. 2. and by Vander Muelen: p: 2: qu: 15.

Arg. 3. special providence and vindicative Justice executed, by the Rule of
Retaliation, against heinous Offenders, and notorious Malefactors; as upon
Pharaoh, by drowning him and his Host in the Red Sea, in Retaliation of the
Command to drown the Male-Children of Israel. Exodus: 1: 22: In like manner
Adonibezeck King of Bezeck who had cut off the Thumbs and great Toes of 70
Canaanitish Kings, had his own Thumbs and great Toes cut off by the Tribe of
Judah, Jud: 1: 6, 7. where he acknowledges the justice of GOD in this
Retaliation, saying, AS I have done, SO GOD has requited me. And when Samuel
hewed Agag the King of the Amalakites in pieces before the LORD, 1 Samuel 15: 33:
he said unto him, AS thy Sword has made Women childless, SO shall thy Mother be
made childless among women. These three were Gentile Kings, who could not
suffer by the Law of Retaliation as it was a Law of the Jewish oeconomie, but
as it was a Law of natural Equity. We have another Example of the executing of
this Law by virtue of it is natural equity, even before its Promulgation by
Moses, viz: upon Joseph's Brethren; they had cast him in a Pit, and had no
regard to the Intercessions made by him, or for him: Gen: 37: 21, 22, 23, 24:
and he again on another occasion (but with a better design) had no regard to
their Intercessions, but cast them in Prison, Genesis 42.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17. and verse 21. they acknowledge the Justice of this Retaliation,
saying to one another; We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we
saw the anguish of his Soul when he besought us; and we would not hear,
therefore is this distress come upon us.

Arg. 4. natural Equity of this Law is proved by GOD's threatening to retaliat
upon the Enemies of his Church in general, Isa. 33.1. When thou shall cease to
spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. And against the
Chaldeans in particular, Habak. 2.8. Because thou have spoiled many Nations,
all the Nations of the People shall spoil thee. And not only did GOD threaten
the Heathen Nations, but even his own People the Jews, Deuteronomy. 32.21. yea, even
David himself, 2 Samuel 12.9, 10, 11. Sword for sword, defilement for defilement.
And Solomon tells us, Prove. 21.13. Whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the
Poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. A Threatening worthy to
be observed in this time of Scarcity.

Arg. 5. If the Law of Retaliation had not been founded on natural Equity,
Jews, then it could not be obligatory under the Gospel, but it is obligatory;
as appears from Matthew. 7.2. With what judgment you judge, ye shall be judged;
and with what measure you met, it shall be measured to you again. And Revel.
13.10. He that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity; and he that
kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword. And many Nations observe
it in particular Cases.

And whereas it is Objected by the Socinians and Anabaptists following them,
Matthew. 5.38, 39, 40, 41. do abolish this Law. It Is Answered by Rivetus, dict.
loc. Exodus and by the judicious Calvin; by Marlorat, Maldonat and others on our
Savior's words, Matthew. 5.38, etc. and by Lorinus in Levit. 24, 19, 20. that
all that Christ intended, was to recommend Christian Meekness and Patience, but
not to wrong the Power of the Magistrate, which is frequently asserted under the
Gospel; as Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. and Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. where we are
commanded to be subject to superior Powers, who are a terror, not to good
Works, but to the evil: and verse. 4. He bears not the sword in vain, for he is
the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, and
therefore we are to be subject, not for servile fear only, but for conscience
sake. Farther, Calvin and Rivetus say, that Chrst intended to correct an error
of the Pharis es, who believed that the execution of the Law of Retaliation was
committed to every private person; but Maldonat on the Text dissents from this
thinking the Pharisees could not be ignorant of the Prohibition, Levit. 19 17,
18. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart; and thou shall not avenge, or
bear any grudge against the children of thy people.

Further, to show that this Law was not abrogated under the Gospel, Retaliation
under the Gospel; as in Herod, who Matthew. 2.16 sent forth and slew all the
children in Bethl hem, among whom (he that should have succeeded him) was also
slain. Vid. M^cr b. lib. 2. Saturn. cap. 4. and Spanhem. his disquisition upon
it, d b. evang. Vol. 2. dub. 76. As also, the Daughter of Herodias who
contrived the beheading of John the Baptist, Matthew. 14. was (as she passed a
River) beheaded by the Ice, holding her fast by the Neck, whilst her Body
danced under the Waters. Niceph. lib 1. histor. cap. 20. And the Jews, who
concurred in the wicked crucifying of our blessed Lord, were crucified in great
numbers daily at the Siege of Jerusalem, by Titus the Son of Vespasian. Joseph.
de Bello Judaico l. 6 cap. 12. And Valens the persecuting Arian Emperor, may
be adduced as another Example, who having burnt fourscore Orthodox Christians
coming from Constantinople to Nicom di^ unto him, humbly to plead their Cause,
was himself at last burnt in a little Couage, where he had hid himself, when
flying from the Goths; Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 3. And some later Examples
are recorded by Camerarius in his Historical Meditations cap. 98.

After all which Proofs, the natural Equity of this Law is not to be doubted;
so that the Deists, who object this Law as a foolish and unjust Law, to refell
the authority of the Books of Moses, may see that the Gentile Nations have
honored this Law, if credit may be given to the best humane Authority; which
if the Deists reject, (as often they do, for supporting their Cause) they will
not be able to prove who are their Fathers, and so may, after their death, lose
the Right of Succession.

Conclus. 5. Retaliation is founded on natural equity, and so is immutable, yet
nevertheless it will not follow that it must always be executed according to an
Arithmetical, Identical or Pythagorical Proportion; that is to say by taking
Eye for Eye in a literal sense, which Aristotle says the Pythagoreans
maintained; but its sufficient for satisfying the Law of natural equity that
the punishment be executed according to a proportion Geometrical, Analogical,
or Aristotelical; that is to say, by paying of an equivalent, according to
time, place, person, and other Circumstances attending the commiting of the
Crime: This I shall prove by several Arguments, viz.

Argum. 1. Jews, who may be admitted to clear the sense of a Political Law of
their State, because they were the first Receivers of it; and they neither did,
nor in all cases of Bodily Injuries could, observe any other but Geometrical
Proportion; For, as it appears by the Particulars following,

1. Retaliation; as in the Example, Exodus 21.22. of a Woman who by a Hurt given
to her by men's striving together, makes an Abortion, or parts with an inanimat
Child; the man could not be punished by a Pythagorical Retaliation, but a Sum
of Money succeeded in place of Punishment, by the words of the Text. In like
manner, there could not be a Pythagorical Retaliation in Injuries done to the
Body by Rapes and Adulteries; and therefore when Sampsons Father in Law, with
concourse of the Philistines, took his Wife from him and gave her to his
Companion: Sampson did not take their Wives and bestow them upon others,
according to the literal sense of the Law of Retaliation; but he, as a Judge
and Ruler in Israel, having power to take Revenge for Injuries done to the
Person and Honor of his Wife, compensed them by burning of their Corn, with
their Vineyards and Olives, etc. Judge. 15.5. Yet nevertheless, he excuses his
taking revenge, in words declaring it to be Retaliation, saying, verse. 11. AS
they did into me, SO have I done unto them.

2. Retaliation did not hinder the Jews to transact for the Injuries done to
their Persons except Death was the Consequence of the Injury, and this is
inferred from Gods prohibiting Transactions simply in the case of Homicide,
Numb. 33.31. ye shall take no ransom for the life of a Murderer: So Ainsworth
on Exodus 21.25. infers. [ Josephus Antiqu. lib. 4. cap. 46. gives the Flection
to the Pursuer whither he will have the Fine or the reciprocal Punishment: but
Ainsworth, a man well versed in Rabbinical learning, observes no such thing out
of Maimonides, whom he adduces to prove their custom of transacting.] And this
serves to vindicat the practice of the Justice Court, where such transactions
are judicially allowed, as we show among the Defenses, N. 74.77.78, 79. supra.
which prove that these kind of Injuries are but privata delicta, wherein the
Public is not concerned.

3. viz. That Paction or Transaction was allowed to the Jews, tanquam in
delictis privatis) their Judges never did, nor were they obliged to enquire in
these Crimes. And this is inferred from Deuteronomy. 19.17, 18. where it is said, That
both the men between whom the controversy is shall stand before the Lord,
before the Priests and the Judges which shall be in these days; and then, but
not till then, its said, the Judges shall make diligent inquisition. This is
another of Ainsworths Observations; and it agrees with the Civil Law, and our
practice mentioned, dict. N. 79. supra.

4. Retaliation inflicted, yet even in that Case the Judge was not always
obliged to inflict it according to the words of the Law, but was to enquire
into the circumstances of time, persons, place, age of the Delinquent, as also
his strength to undergo the Punishment, without the loss of his Life; for a
sickly man, by the loss of his Hand, might lose his Life; likewise, the taking
away the Eye of a Monoculus, or the Hand of a Delinquent, who had but one,
would be harder to him, than what he had done to one having two Eyes or two
Hands; the Judge was also to consider, whether he was pursuing or defending
when the Crime was committed; and according to these and other Circumstances he
was to punish or not punish, and to highten or lessen the Punishment as he
should think fit, ex. gr. though the Rule of Retaliation foresaid in Hurts, be
only simple Retaliation; Stripe for Stripe, yet the single smiting of Father or
Mother was punished with Death, Exodus 21.15. And on the other Hand; if a Master
smite out the Eye or Tooth of his Manservant or Maidservant, the Master was
not punished with pulling out of his Eye or Tooth, but the Servant obtained his
Liberty, as a thing more profitable for him, Exodus 21.26, 27. Also, if a
Magistrate do smite a Beggar, it is not to be punished as a Beggar's smiting a
Magistrate with Amputation of a Hand, or some greater Punishment; [As to which
Cases, read Cajetan and Willet their Commentaries on Exodus 21.24, 25, 26.] All
which being considered, it could not be easy to fix upon a Case wherein simple
Retaliation could be exactly inflicted by the Jewish Magistrates in a literal
sense. All this agrees to the Practice of other Nations, and if we were not
here restricted to speak of Personal Injuries done to the Body, we could give
many instances in the Jewish Law, wherein Pythagorical Retaliation was not
observed, particularly in Theft, Exodus 21.1, 5. where the Thief was to restore,
somerimes the double, sometimes fourfold, and sometimes five-fold.

5. When the Pursuer and Defender among the Jews were persons of equal Quality,
and otherwise equally Circumstantiated, Josephus speaks of, as is mentioned N.
117. supra.) Even then, if the Pursuer insisted for Corporal Punishment,
according to the letter of the Law; the Judge had Power to determine a Pecunial
Recompense, which the Party injured was obliged to accept of; and the
Delinquent who paid it was thereby freed from the Corporal Punishment. This
Pecuniary Mulct was modified on five accounts, according to Rabbi Cana cited by
Paulus Voet.. 7. inst. de injur. of whose Doctrine he sets down a short
abstract. As also according to Rabbi Moses Maimonides in his Treatife of Hurts,
whereof Ainsworth in his Commentary on Levit. 24.19, 20, 21. sets down a larger
abstract. The Damnage (says he) was modified: 1. For the lost Member. 2. For
the lost Labor. 3. For the Pain and Trouble which the injured Party suffered
by the Wound. 4. For the Expenses of the Cure. 5. For the mark of Ignominy and
Deformation; where also he shows to what Sum the quantity of each Mulct
extended; but neither Voet. nor Ainsworth speak of Corporal Punishment in their
Abstracts. These things are written by the Rabbis, who best understood the
custom of their own Nation, and had no interest to pervert the truth in matters
of that concern. And this may serve for a sufficient proof to justify the
common Opinion, viz. that GOD did not intend the Law of Retaliation should be
literally executed; and that the Rabbis thought this manner of execution,
inconsistent with the Rules of distributive Justice, and that the observing the
Rules of distributive Justice, satisfied the natural Equity of the Law. Ne
(says Vander Muelen dict. qu. 15. verse. sin.) scutici dignum horribili flagello
sectetur; aut securis meritum scutica solvere cedamus: And therefore Pool, and
other Divines on Exodus 21.24. conclude, that this Law of Retaliation was only
Minatory. But of this we shall have occasion to say more hereafter, when we
come to our last Argument, taken from the Opinion of Divines in this Case. Mean
time, we may take notice, that Rabbi Moses Maimonides in his Treatise of Hurts,
cap. 1. sect. 3, 4. (as he is cited by Ainsworth on Exodus 21.25.) ascribes the
Opinion of literal and strict Retaliation, to the Sadducees, who affecting a
strictness in execution of Laws, did therefore superciliously assume the
magnisick Title of TZADDIKIM, or JUST MEN. Hospin. de Orig. Monachat. lib. 1.
cap. 4. as if they (forsooth) were the only just and righteous men of their
Nation: And they have not wanted Successors in Ambition, in almost every Age,
who being guilty of gross Opinions (as the Sadducees were,) by Denying the
Immortality of the Soul, and the Existence of Spirits, etc. have endeavored to
support their Reputation by their assuming some proud Title or another.

6. Deuteronomy. 19. then the Punishment was certainly inflicted according to the
precise letter of the Law, because he was guilty of Homicide; but then the
doubt yet remains, as to the loss of a Member, whether or not the false Witness
was to suffer Retaliation in a literal sense, and the ground of the doubt is
from the words of the Text, verses 19, and 20. which command, that it should be
done unto him as he thought to have done unto his brother: and that upon a
Moral Reason, that evil might be removed from the people, and these which
remained might hear and fear, and commit no more such evil: which refers to a
custom the Jews had of publishing their Criminal Sentences in every City;
Further, it is there said to the Judge, verse 21. Thine eye shall not pi^y, but
life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot; and yet even in this Case, Paulus Fagius on the same Text of Deuteronomy. 19.
says, Haec lex talionis, autore Rabbi Kana ut a Becah citatur, nunquam
observatur, nam praeter scripturam ex traditione ait constari quod non oculus
pro oculo sed aestimatio pecuniaria reddatur. And Ainsworth on Exodus 21.25.
cites Maimonides his Treatise of Hurts, Chap. 1. Sect. 3, 4. to prove that the
words thine eye shall not pity, relate only to the Case where Satisfaction was
not made at the sight of the Judge; but yet if the life was taken away by the
Testimony of the false Witness, then his life behoved to go, and he could expect
no mercy, because he was like the man who lay in wait to kill his neighbor,
and came presumptuously upon him to slay him with guile: and concerning such a
man, GOD's express command is, Thou shall take him from mine Altar, that he may
die, Exodus 21.14. And this may serve for proving the first Argument, taken from
the Practice of the Jews.

Arg. 2. Retaliation in a literal sense, arises from comparing that Law with
the Laws and Writings of the Grecians and Romans on that Subject.

1. I begin with their Law of Retaliation, as it is in the seventh of the XII.
Tables, tit. de injur. cap. 4. l. 2, 4, 5. and the last words of the sixth Law,
with the Paraphrase of Jacobus Gothofredus thereon, who collected these Laws
from Aul. Gellius, and other Roman Authors, and this should bear the greater
weight, in that the Grecians who are said to receive them from the Jews, and
the Romans who received them from the Grecians, had no interest to corrupt or
alter this Law, or to distort it to a wrong sense, nor were tempted with the
blind Zeal that misled them in Religious Worship. And so we have just reason to
believe, that this Law, as it is in the XII Tables, is worded according to the
true meaning of the Law of GOD, from which it was taken, as we said N. 105.
supra, and may serve to illustrate the same.

Follow the words of the Text, with the foresaid Paraphrase, and the Scriptures
in the Margin which correspond therewith.

Text. Paraphrase. l. 2. de injuriis levioribus. The Examples after adduced,
show this was smiting on the Mouth. SI QUINJURIAM ALTERI FAXIT XXV. AERIS
POENAE SUNTO. Si quis injuriam leviorem, sive re, sive verbis, alteri fecerit,
25. assibus mulctator. l. 4. de paena talionis. Exodus 21.24. Hand for Hand,
Foot for Foot. SI MEMBRUM RUPSIT NI CUM EO PAICIT TALIO ESTO. Si quis alteri
membrum aliquod ruperit, ni cum eo pacisci velit, membrum ei pariter rumpere
injuria affecto jus esto. l. 5. de osse fuso, i. e. dentibus excussis. Ibid.
Tooth for Tooth. QUI OS EX GENETALI FUDIT LIBERO CCC. SERVO CL. AERIS POENAE
SUNTO. Qui dentem exgingiva excusserit libero homini trecentis Assibus
mulctator, qui servo 150. l. 6. de falso. Deuteronomy. 19.19, 21. Ye shall do unto him
as he thought to have done unto his brother, and thine eye shall not pity, but
life shall go for life. SI FALSUM TESTIMONIUM DICASIT. SAXO DEICITUR. Si quis
falsum testimonium dixerit saxo Tarpeio preceps dejicitor.

Now let us compare these Laws as Paraphrased, one by one, with what we have
said N. 115. and seqq. concerning the Doctrine of the Jewish Rabbis, and we
shall find an exact agreement betwixt the Rabbis and these Laws. For, 1. As the
Rabbis acknowledge N. 117. supra, that the Jews might Transact; l. 4. de poena
talionis, and these words thereof, NI CUM EO PAICIT, or as the Gloss has it,
pacisci velit, that either a Transaction actually made by the Delinquent, or
his being willing to Transact, as the Paraphrase has it, was sufficient to
liberat him from the Corporal Punishment of the Law. 2. It appears from l. 2.
de injur. leviorib. such as depalmation or smiting on the Mouth; that this was
not recompensed by depalmation, viz. xxv. asses. And this is that Law which
Phavorinus apud A. Gell. loc. citat. objects to S. Caecilius, telling him how
the insolent and wicked Lucius Veracius (or as other read Neracius) baffled the
Law, taking advantage from the smalness of the Penalty, to smite every man he
met with on the Mouth, and thereafter to cause his Salve that followed him with
a Bagg of Money, to pay down the Ransom. 3. It appears by l. 5. de osse fuso
vel dentibus excussis that the Law of GOD. Tooth for Tooth, was not followed in
the Literal and Pythagorical Sense, nor could the Judge decern it in that
Sense, because the Law limits him ad paenam CCC. assium; if the Party injured
was a free man, and to the half it, if he were a Slave, and this difference
shows, that the difference of persons was observed. 4. false Witness was
punished by the Law Deuteronomy. 19. with Death, if by his false Testimony he had
taken away the life of a man; so by the last of the Laws of these Tables, he
was thrown over a Rock without Mercy. And even the later Law of the Romans,
(although it has in many things derogated from the Law of the XII. Tables,
according to Vlpian. l. 1. ff. ad C. Aquil.) yet it contains the Law of
Retaliation against a false Witness, Qui falsum testimonium dolo malo dixerit
quo quis publico judicio rei capitalis damnaretur, l. 1.. 2. ff. de Sicar.
which upon the same Reason was against false Accusers, both by the Civil Law,
in l. fin. C. de accusat. authen. sed novo jure. C. de adult. and by the Canon
Law, in Cause. 2. q. 3. c. 2, and 3. the words are, Caluminator si in
accusatione defecerit, talionem recipiat, qui non probaverit quod objecit
poenam quam intulerit ipse patiatur; though Clarus lib. 5.. fin. q. 81. proves,
that this (as to Accusers) is abolished, Ferd. Vasq. l. 2. controvers. cap. 18.
N. 6. wishes that the Pain of Retaliation might be punctually exacted from both
Witnesses and Accusers, that Pleas might have an end. So that in this point of
punishing a false Witness, the Jewish Law was not more strict than the Roman Law
is.


2. [SI MEMBRVM RVPSIT NI CVM EO PAICIT TALIO ESTO] according to Gothofreds
Paraphrase, did admit of a Ransom, in place of strict Retaliation, when the
Delinquent was willing to pay the same; so the Greek and Latin Authors, who
lived at the time when this Law was in vigor, understood it in the same sense,
as appears by the Reasonings of Aristotle, (a famous Professor of Philosophy in
Athens, the chief Seat of the Grecian Learning,) against the Pythagoreans,
Arist. lib. 5. Ethic. cap. 5. renewed by Phavorinus a Roman Philosopher,
against S. Caecilius a Lawyer, vid. Aul. Gell. lib. 20. cap. 1. and summed up
by Matthaeus, dict. tit. de injur. N. 2. from which we argue thus,

First, strict Retaliation was impracticable in the matter of Bruises and
Wounds, then the Law could not in their Opinion require a strict Retaliation in
these Delicts, but this they believed; as is clear from the first Argument of
Phavorinus, in these words, If (says he, imitating Aristotle) a man, through
chance or inadvertency, mutilat or maim a member of another man's Body, it will
be impossible for the party lesed to take a casual or inadvertent Retaliation;
yea, though the Injury be done designedly; it will be difficult (if not
impossible) to make a Wound so equal to another, as it shall neither be deeper
nor broader, and the Judge will not be able to observe such precise measures as
shall equally balance and not exceed the Injury given. Moreover, if both
parties should happily be in the wrong, and multiply Injuries to one another, and
those of a different nature; it would be an unaccountable cruelty to raise a
Suit for obtaining all these things to be done by way of Satisfaction and
Retaliation, for so, infinite Reciprocations and Retaliations would follow to
both parties.

To these Arguments S. Caecilius makes answer (my dear Phavorinus says he)
although one Member cannot be broken or bruised to the exact dimensions of the
wound and bruise of another, yet Retaliation should not therefore seem unjust;
for why? we should not require the same measure or nice ballancing, of the
stroke upon the same Member, with respect to all circumstances and accidents,
for that cannot be done; but we should rather consider the intention of the
Percussors mind, and if he acted of design, or by sudden passion; and seeing the
Law permits Transaction to be made, and a Ransom to be paid, if in that case
the Percussor will not redeem the Punishment, by payment of the Ransom, the
Decemviri, Authors of the Law, allowed Retaliation to be exacted, whether the
Delinquency was done by design, or by inadvertency; for what Cruelty, I pray
you, can there be, if the same be done to you which you did to another,
especially when you were allowed to transact and pay a Ransom, and no necessity
lay upon you to undergo Retaliation, unless you your self had choos'd the same?
And now, can any of the Edicts emitted by the Praetors, concerning the
estimating of Injuries, be more just or approvable? Also, I would not have you
ignorant, that the Judge necessarly behoved to reduce this Retaliation to an
Estimat. For if the Delinquent, refused to undergo the Retaliation ordered by
the Judge, then the Judge condemned him to pay a Sum of Money, as the Estimat
of the Plea. Whereby if the Delinquent conceived that the terms of Agreement,
and the Punishment of Retaliation were both too hard; the Severity of the Law
was taken off by the payment of a Pecuniary Mulct.

And now seeing Phavorinus, S. Caecilius honors with the Title of one versed in
the Learning of the Academicks, thinks it was impossible to execute this Law by
Identical or Pythagorical proportion: and that S. Caecilius himself yields to
an Analogical proportion, as agreeable to the Law and Custom of the Romans; how
can we think that this Law had any footing in the strict Sense, among the
Romans, whose mind these Disputants their Countrymen, are presumed to have
understood? But

2. As the Dispute betwixt these two Romans, Aristotle urged long before
against Pythagorical Retaliation, show that the learned Athenians (from whom
the Romans received that Law) had always understood, and maintained it,
according to the Rules of Distributive Justice, or Analogical Proportion.
Distributive Justice, says he, requires of Judges that they seriously consider
the Circumstances of Fact, the Persons by whom and against whom the Crimes are
committed. For if a Peasant should beat a Magistrate, or a Child his Father, or
a Slave his Patron, certainly the Crime would deserve greater Punishment than
if committed by the Magistrate against the Peasant, the Parent against the
Child, or by the Patron against his Slave: and yet according to the Law of
Pythagorical Retaliation, he must be equally punished who offers a Blow to a
Prince, and to a Beggar: And a Slave offering Violence to his Patron, and a
Patron injuring his Slave, must suffer the same degree of Punishment; which to
every man seems absurd: And on the same ground, if ye smite out the Eye of a
Monoculus, you shall lose but one Eye by way of Punishment, whereas if the
Monoculus smite out your Eye, he must be made Blind, though he made not you
Blind: and if you having two hands, smite off the single Hand of your
Neighbor, and thereby make him incapable to serve himself in the necessities
of Nature, yet you shall lose but one Hand, and be still capable to serve your
self with the other. Again, Distributive Justice, as it considers the person,
so it diligently ponders Time and Place, and one and the same Crime, is not
equally atrocious at all Times, and in all Places, as the Stoics fancied, but
increases and diminishes according to the Time and Place of committing.
Whereas if Pythagorical Retaliation hold good, then he who Wounds his Neighbor
in presence of the Judge, and he who Wounds him in an obscure Vault, and he who
Wounds him in a Church, or Palace of the Prince, and he who Wounds him in a
Tavern or a Brothel house; must suffer alike Punishment. Moreover, if strict
Retaliation take place, then if Claudius Pompeius commit Adultery with Caesar's
Queen, Caesar may retaliat by committing Adultery with the Wife of Claudius,
which is contrary to the rules of Morality; and if Caesar steal 1000 weight of
Gold from the Thesaury of the People, they may retaliat by robbing the Coffers
of Caesar; and if Albinus reproach Modius, Modius may in Retaliation revile
Albinus, which were to be guilty of a sinful sort of Retaliation, and may take
place according to Pythagorean Doctrine, not only in Adultery, Theft, and
Reviling; but in Witchcraft, Sacrilege, Incest, violation of Sepulchers,
Calumniation, Prevarication, supposititious Births, and all manner of
Villainies; whereas all these Inconveniences may be shunned, by observing the
rules of Distributive Justice.

And now having given an account of these Debates, Grecians and Romans did
believe and practice the Law of Retaliation, in an analogical sense, at the
times when these Debates were managed; I shall now subjoyn some Considerations
for preferring the Authority of Aristotle, before that of Pythagoras and his
followers: As, First, The Question was about the sense of a political Law;
which Aristotle is to be presumed to have understood better than Pythagoras,
because he learned the knowledge of Law from Plato his Master, who wrote de
legibus; and Menochius prooem. de Arbitrar. N. 3. calls him the learned of
Plato's Disciples. 2. Aristotle being a Professor of Philosphy, and a constant
Residenter at Athens, and having written well on the Politics, its presumed he
understood the Laws and Customs of Athens, better than Pythagoras did who
resided long among the Egyptians with Amasis their King. 3. Its probable that
Pythagoras learned the first Principles of strict Retaliation from the
Egyptians, where he also learned the foolish Opinions of the Metempsychosis or
Transmigration of the Souls of Men into Beasts and Plants, and the idolatrous
Doctrine of worshipping the Sun and Moon. 4. Pythagoras seems to have had
little Authority among the Grecians, because he was mocked by diverse of them.
Timon in his Silli reproaches him for his Magical Arts, and hunting after the
Praise of Men, without merit. Xenophanes Gratinus derides him in his
Pythagorazusa, and Alexis in his Tarentines, for his ridiculous Conclusions and
scholastic Toys; and could there be a more ridiculous Fancy, than his adoring
of Beans to that Degree of Superstition, that he choos'd rather to be killed
than make his escape, by trampling on them when pursued: more of his Follies
may be found in his Life written by Diog. Laertius. 5. His absurd Doctrine of
Communication of Goods, needed strict Retaliation to defend it against the
Janglings which such a Doctrine would produce; and his affecting the Name of a
strict Justiciar, might be another cause to defend strict Retaliation. Lastly,
the learned Rivetus, Wallaeus, Matthaeus, and many other Divines and Lawyers,
prefer the Arguments of Aristotle and S. Caecilius, before these of Pythagoras
and Phavorinus.

It Is true indeed, Bodinus lib. 6. de repub. cap. ult. takes a way of his own,
and censures both Aristotle and Phavorinus, as if they had mistaken the meaning
of Pythagoras; and for this Bodinus himself is as severely censured by
Matthaeus dict. c. 4. N. 3. in fin. But, for all this, he acknowledges that
strict Retaliation was never practiced in the Cities of the Jews, and cites
Maimonides, and the words of Rabbi Kana to prove it.

The only thing which seems to gravel Bodinus, Matthaeus observes, is neither
cleared by Aristotle nor Phavorinus) is whether strict Retaliation was in use
where the Offender and Offended were in equal Circumstances; as for example, a
Peasant demembring a Peasant in a private place, etc. but this is no difficulty,
and Aristotle's Arguments drawn from Circumstances, are still pungent against
identical Retaliation, upon this ground, that if the Law had required it in
cases of equal Circumstances, it would have distinguished betwixt a simple and
circumstantiated Case, and would not have determined the same Punishment in the
general, which could be neither just nor possible in all cases.

We cannot deny but some of the Oriental Nations, Locrians did exact strict
Retaliation for the Eye, and we have a remarkable Case in Diod. Siculus lib.
12, which happened to be pleaded upon the Law of Charondas. Si quis cui oculum
eruerit, oculum reo pariter cruito. A Moncculus had his Eye smitten out, the
Delinquent had one of his Eyes taken out by way of Recompense, but the
Monoculus thinking that Punishment not sufficient, brought the Case before the
Assembly of the People, and demanded the other Eye also; the Delinquent
alleged, that he had satisfied the Law by the loss of one of his Eyes; the
Plaintiff replied that the Delinquent ought to be made blind since he had made
him blind, and because the Law did not ordain it, he craved the Law might be
rescinded, and another made more strict: and, according to the Custom of the
Place, came with a Rope about his Neck ready to undergo the punishment of being
hanged therewith, in case his Desire should be rejected, and so far prevailed
that the former Law was corrected. This account is also given by Plato. But
though all this be true, yet it proves not a general practice of strict
Retaliation in all cases; for, if that had been, then the Law would not have
run singly as to the Eye, but in general Terms. Moreover, the Prohibition
(which Aerodius mentions) holds forth, that the Law was made with a singular
respect to the Eye, for its excellency and usefulness to the Body beyond other
Members; and for this cause 'twas that Justinian reckons the percussion of the
Eye among atrocious Injuries. 9. Inst. de injur. and Charondas did no more than
Christians, who condemn strict Retaliation, have done: we have a proof in the
words of St. Augustine Epist. 159. ad Marcellin. (cited by Gratian Cause. 23. q.
5. C. circumcelliones. 2.) where he relates that he himself interceded with
Marcellinus, that the Donalists, who were arraigned before him to be punished
for whipping a Catholic Priest, and putting out one of his Eyes, and cutting
off one of his Fingers, might not be punished by strict Retaliation: and thence
it seems that strict Retaliation, for such atrocious Facts, was in use in his
time. The same is proved by Novel: 92. of Leo the Emperor: and by the Decision
of Charles the fourth against Zachora; cited N. 24. supra, and by Novel 142: of
Justinian ordaining Castration to be punished with Castration.

And this may suffice for our second Argument taken from comparing the Law of
GOD, with the Laws and Writings of the Grecians and Remans, on the Subject of
strict Retaliation; to prove the Conclusion formerly laid down, that although
Retaliation in the general be founded on natural Equity, yet its still to be
understood as admitting of satisfaction by analogical and geometrical
proportion.

Argument 3. To prove the same Conclusion, Grotins, because eminent in the
knowledge of the Jewish and Christian Theology, and the political Laws of both:
this learned Author lib. 2. de jure B. and P. Cap. 20. N. 1. having
acknowledged the natural Equity of the Law of Retaliation in these words; Among
these things which natural Instinct tells us are lawful and not unjust, this is
one; ut malum qui facit, malum ferat, that he that does evil should suffer
evil: which Philosophers do reckon as the most ancient and most perfect rule of
Justice, or as one of the Laws of Rhadamanthus, yea so ancient and indubitable,
that Plato was so bold as to say, that neither the Gods nor Good-men durst
never say otherwise, but that he that does wrong deserves to suffer for it. He
after all this, N. 10. speaking of the same Law of Retaliation, and how far
Christ's words Matthew. 5.44. you have heard it said an Eye for an Eye, etc. make
an alteration of it; and having also insisted upon some passages concerning it,
taken from St. Augustine on Psalm. 108. and Tertullian, he thus concludes: By
this of Tertullian we may see that its not only unlawful for a Christian to
exact this Law of Retaliation, but that it was not tolerated among the Hebrews,
as a thing simply and in it self commendable; but only for the prevention of a
greater Evil. Thus also does S. Chrysostom on Ephesians. 4.13. expound that Law of
Retaliation, Therefore does Christ urge that Law of Moses an Eye for an Eye,
and a Tooth for a Tooth, ut illius manus cohibeat, non ut tuas excitet contra,
to restrain him that offers the wrong, not to provoke thee to revenge who
suffer it; not only to preserve thine Eye, but to keep his also safe. And
again, The most learned among the Hebrews did not apprehend it in that
latitude; for they respected not so much the words of the Law, as the Reason of
it, and the intent of the Lawgiver. And at some distance says, For even the
Jews themselves ( as Josephus tells us) besides the Costs and Charges of the
hurt done, whereof we have a distinct Law Exodus 21.19. did usually buy off
their Talio with a Sum of Money. The like they did at Rome, as Favorinus in
Gellius testifies. In these last words he makes the Parallel betwixt the
practice of the Jews and Romans; and we have shown that the Romans did never
exact strict Retaliation, unless in atrocious Cases. St. Aug. l. 19. c. 25.
contra Faust. Manich. calls the Law of Retaliation, non fomes sed limes
furoris, to show that it was not designed for exacting strict Retaliation, but
to restrain the Jews from private Revenge, by which they were in use to redress
themselves before the Law was made. And Grot. dic. c. 20.. 8. in sin. relating
to the after Custom, says, The Hebrew Law permitted the Kinsman of him that was
murdered, to kill the Murderer with his own Hand, in case he overtook him
without the Cities of Refuge. And it is well observed by the Hebrew Doctors,
that a Kinsman might exact the Law of Retaliation with his own hand for the
person killed; but for himself, if any violence was offered him either by
Wounds, Mutilation, or otherwise, he was to make his Appeal to the Judges;
because it is a very difficult thing to moderat our Passions, when they are
excited by our own personal Grief.

Goodwyn, famous also for his Knowledge in the Jewish and Roman Antiquities: in
his Moses and Aaron lib. 5. cap. 8. Hebews understood not talionem identitatis,
vel Pythagoricam, but similitudinis, vel analogicam, which was when the price
of an Eye or some proportionable Mulct was paid; and that it is impossible to
punish one Maime with another: And for this he cites Targum Jonath. on Deuteronomy.
19.21. And R. Sol. ibid. Further he cites Munster on Exodus 21. affirming that
the Hebrew Doctors say, that the Party offending was bound to a five-fold
Satisfaction. 1. For the Hurt in the loss of the Members. 2. For the Damnage in
loss of his Labor. 3. For his Pain or Grief arising from the Wound. 4. For the
Charge in curing of it. 5. For the Blemish or Deformity thereby occasioned,
[and this agrees with what was formerly cited out of Maimonides by Ainsworth,
N. 120. s^p^a.] And says, that Munster rendereth these Five thus; Damnum,
Sessio, Dolor, Medicina, Confusio.

And the Testimony of the Jews has the more weight in that they were most
tenacious of their political Laws, Deuteronomy. 21.2. concerning one found slain in
the field, as Ainsworth out of Maimonides in his Treatise of Murder, cap. 9.
sect. 4.9, 10. and Seldom de Syned. lib. 3. c. 7. relate; And surely they would
have been as strict in the execution of the Law of Retaliation, had they not
certainly known that an analogical executing thereof was sufficient and that it
was made magis ad terrorem quam damnationem, and to hinder the Party injured
from taking Revenge. Isiod. Pelusiot. lib: 4. Epist: 96. cited by Rivetus on
Exodus: 21: 24: speaking of Eye for Eye, says, quod lege hac cautum est, nec est
crudele neque immane; sed siquidem is sensus qui prima front accipiatur
justitia plenum est; si vero interior sensus expendatur etiam humanitate
refertum est, nam ut eum qui alteri quid inique facere meditatur, compescat
metu similis perpessionis, and ita improbitatem reprimat, ideoque hoc sure
meritoque ita sancivit. The end and design of their Law being, non ut libidini
populi indulgeretur, sed ut qui ad injuriam inferendam proni erant, talionis
metu, coercerentur. As Rivet expresses it on Exodus 21.24, 25.

Further Godwyn says from A. Gellius. lib. 20. c. 1. that the Romans likewise
had a Talio in their Law, but they also gave liberty to the Offender, to make
choice whether he would, by way of Commutation pay a proportionable Mulct, or
in identity suffer the like Maime in his Body. And here we may observe that he
takes the Testimony of S. Caecilius, as a proof of the custom of the Romans, as
the other DD. who cite that Dispute, do.

Paulus Fagius on Deuteronomy. 19. says, Haec lex talionis autore Rabbi Kanan, ut a
Bachi citatur, nunquam est observata. Nam praeter scripturam, ex traditione ait
constare, quod non oculus pro oculo, sed aestimatio pecuniaria r^ddatur
alioquin enim legi non satisfieret, quae ait, qvem admodum dedit maculam in
hominem, sic detur in authorem, Levit. 14. jam patet, Exodus 21. quod de
interesse and sumptu in medicos facto, satisfacere laeso, qui damnum dedit,
tenetur. Quod si authori oculus pro oculo effoderetur, quis illi satisfaceret?
Est and alius tenerioris Constitutionis quam qui laesus est, qui ex equali
vulnere similiter mortem ^bierit. Propterea fieri non potest, ut per omnia
vulnus and laesio aqualis autori infligatur.

The Reader may also peruse these Divines following, viz. Episiop. inst. l. 3.
sect. 2. and Pool in his Critiques following him: as also Pools annotat. on
Exodus 21.24. See also Simlerus, Willet, Cajetan, a Lapide, Chytraeus and
Rivetus, on Exodus 21.24. Lorinus (most amply) in Levit. 25.19.20. Maldonat in
Math. 5.38, 39. Ant. Wallaeus, oper^tom. 2. p 290. Col. 2. all absolutely
condemning Pythagorical Retaliation. And if we turn over all the Divines,
whether Ancient or Modern, Reformed or Romanist, in their Commentaries and
other Writings, we will find all, few or none excepted, agreeing to an analogical
Retaliation, and affirming that the exacting of strict and literal Retaliation,
was never intended by the Law of Moses. And the most that some Divines grant,
is that identical Retaliation may be craved in a Libel, thereby to force the
Delinquent to a Transaction.

To conclude this Argument taken from the Authority of Divines: Sadduces, did
patronise identical Retaliation, among the Jews, and were none of the soundest
of their Sects; even so the Manichees were it is Patrons under Christianity, (as
may be seen by S. Augustine in his Disputes contra Faustum. l. 9. c. 25. and
Adimanthum Manichaos; and by Isiod Pelusiot. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 133.) of whom
it has no Reason to glory, for these Manichees were the most wicked of all
Heretics in the Church, and are classed by Theodosius the Emperor, l. 5. c. de
Haeret. in the Rere of a black Tribe of the worst of them, with this Stigma;
Manichaei qui ad imam usque scelerum nequitiam pervenerunt, and for that cause
he commanded them to be banished out of all Cities, and some to be punished
with death.

As strict Retaliation is condemned by the Divines, Viz. Hottoman, Vulteius,
Harprecht, Bachovius, Vinnius, P. Voet; and several others: in their Commentars
on these Words of. 7. inst. de injur. poena autem injuriarum ex l. XII. Tab.
propter membrum quidem ruptum talio erat; all of them agreeing to the Sense put
upon the Law by S. Caecilius, and to Aristotle's Arguments against Pythagoras.
To these add Mynsinger on that Text, who says expressly, that that learned
Disput betwixt Phavorinus and S. Caecilius, has brought much light to this
matter, because it shows that the Delinquent was lying under no necessity to
undergo strict Retaliation, in that he had the power to redeem; And Gudelinus
de jure Noviss. lib. 5. l. Cap. 15. n. 14. asserts that the Law was
impracticable, if taken in a strict Sense; being convinced by the Arguments of
S. Caecilius and Aristotle. The like is to be observed from Jacobus
Gothofredus, in font. jur. civil. lib. 2. cap. 7. quo commendatio legis XII.
Tabb. continetur; Where having cited Cicero, Tacitus, Livius, Crassus, Diod.
Siculus; Dionys. Halicarnassaeus, to prove the Equity of the Laws of the XII.
tabb. he sets down the whole Dispute betwixt Phavorinus and S. Caecilius, to
show that he embraces the Law of Retaliation no otherwise than as S. Cacilius
expounds it, and for that Cause his Paraphrase on these words, Ni cum eo
pa^^it, is vel pacisci velit, as we have formerly noted.

And whereas some of these Lawyers, in the places above cited, say that in the
case of Demembration, the Punishment was Membrum pro Membro, they are still to
be understood as the like words in the Law of GOD, and the XII. Tab. that is to
say Redeemable, upon a ransom to be modified by the Judge, where the Profer of
the Delinquent was too low, or the Demands of the injured Party too high; like
the case Exodus 21.22.

And all these D D. Divines and Lawyers who have cited that famous Conference
betwixt Phavorinus and S. Caecilius, Romans, than they founded on the Testimony
of Aristotle to prove the Custom of the Grecians. For 1. The Controversy
betwixt these Colloquutors was concerning the sense of the Law of the XII
Tables, which Phavorinus (though eminent for Learning) had mistaken and charged
with Obscurity; and S. Caecilius was well versed in the Knowledge of them, as
you may see by his Answer to Phavorinus, in these words Obscuritates legum non
assignari deb^re culpae scribentium, sed inscitiae assequentium. 2. S.
Caecilius was generally versed in the Knowledge of Law; as you may see by the
Characters he receives from diverse persons; A Gellius relating that Conference,
has these words; in disciplina juris atque legibus Pop. Romani noscendis,
interpretandisque scientia, usu, auctoritateque ^ll^stris fuit. Justinian calls
him juris antiqui conditor. l. 1. prin. c. de communiservum manumit. Papinian
and Vlpian approve his Writings; in l. Titio centum 71. ff. d^condit. et
demonst. l. prospexit. 12.. 6. qui et a quibus manum. l. si postulaverit 28..
si liber 5. ff. ad leg. in l. adulter. See Bertrandus in his Life. Lastly, A.
Gellius himself who records the Conference, was a learned man and contemporary
with these Colloquutors, and conversed with them about the year of Christ 143,
which was the year in which A. Gellius wrote, as you may see in the Account of
his Life written by the Author of the Notes on him in usum Delphini; And in his
third Note on that Conference, where he rectifies an Error of Chronology that
had crept in to the Text, making that Conserence to be many years thereafter.

So that by all that is abovesaid, Retaliation was never executed in a
Pythago^ical or Arithmetical Proportion among either Jews, Grecians or Romans,
but according to the geometrical and analogical Proportion; with respect to
Circumstances that accompanied the Crime and that the payment of a Ransom for
Damnages was always admitted: Except the Obstinacy of the Delinquent had given
occasion to the contrary; or that there had been a special Law upon a special
occasion; or with respect to some particular Member, as the Eye, etc. Which I
doubt not, may happen in many Kingdoms, and give occasion to the Variation of
Laws. See Caroli du Fresne, glossarium, on the word Talio. And therefore the
Libel of Mutilation 28. July 1647. Forbes of Leslie against Menzies of
Pitfoddels, craving strict Retaliation for the breaking of a Leg, was ill
founded; and no doubt if it had come to a Determination, as it did not, the
Judges would have refused the desire of it, in respect of the Answer made
thereto, setting forth that strict Retaliation was not in practice: And indeed,
it is more agreeable to Christian Meekness, pressed by our Savior, Matthew. 5.39:
To be content with moderat Damages. Concerning which I recommend the Reader to
Grotius de jure B. and P. lib. 2. c. 20. N. 10. where he particularly treats of
what the Gospel requires in this matter: and N. 36. he proves, that unless
there be urgent Causes to exact the Severity of Laws we should incline to
mitigate Punishments; For herein, says he, consists one part of Clemency, the
other consisting in their total Remission.

I come now to answer some Objections which occur to me.

Obj. 1. If strict Retaliation was not enjoined among the Jews, Eye for Eye,
Mat. 5.38. I answer, there was still place for the Exhortation, because the
Party injured might always insist for the strict Punishment, but the Judge was
not obliged to grant it, except when the Delinquent brought it on himself by
refusing to pay the Ransom; and even the Ransom it self might be heavy on some,
and so require a total Remission or Mitigation by the Rules of Christian
meekness, as we have just now said.

Object, 2. Vlpian in l. 1. ff. ad leg. Aquil. says, Lex Aquilia OMNIBVS
LEGIBVS, quae ante se de damno injuria loquutae sunt, derogavit; sive XII Tabb.
sive alia quae fuit. By which word Derogavit, he means the taking away a part
from every one of these Laws, while another part remained: for so the word
Derogare signifies, in opposition to Abrogare, or total Rescinding l. derogatur
120. ff. de verb: signif. Now you will ask what part could be taken from the Law,
si membrum rupsit, ni cum eo paicit, talio esto (which was one of the chief
Laws of the XII Tabb. de injuriis) except strict Retaliation? for analogical
Retaliation by paying a Ransom, remained long thereafter; as we see in the
Answers of S. Caecilius to Phavorinus, who flourished about the year of Christ
143, as we noted before.

I answer, That although Vlpian speaks in general, Dionysius Gothofredus, to
prove that some of these Laws were not derogated from, but rather strengthened
by addition of new Actions; e. g. in Tit. 10. dict fragm. Actio noxalis
adversus Dominum ex noxia, sive delicto servi, was proposed in these words, Si
servus furtum faxit noxiamve nocuit; and Vlpian repeats it in l. 2. 1. ff. de
noxalib Now the Lex Aquilia introduced a new Action ex eadem causa, and yet it
was still in the Option of the Party injured, to make use of either the old or
new Action at his pleasure, because they were not contrary the one to the
other; and therefore the one did not derogat from the other, but it was lawful
to pursue the Damnage upon either of them; dict: l. 2.. 1. ff. de noxal. l
Quaecunque 56. ff. de oblig. and actionib. l. familia 5. ff Si familia furt.
feciss. sunt autem 4. Inst. de noxalib. A second Instance is, in Tit. 24.. 8.
of the said Fragments, where there is a Law set down taken from Plin. 17. l. 1.
Fuit and Arborum cura legibus, cautumque est XII Tabb. ut qui injuria alienas
arbores caecidisset, luenat in singulas aeris 25. And there is not a word in
the Lex Aquilia any ways derogating from it, or from the Action founded on it;
but, on the contrary, there is a Text in l. in duobus. 28.. Colonus 6. ff. de
jure jurand. allowing this Colonus to be pursued, for transgressing that Law;
either upon the Law of the XII Tabb. or upon the Lex Aquilia, or upon the
Interdict quod vi aut clam; and being pursued to defend himself per exceptionem
juris jurand. But still it appears that nothing by these new Actions was
derogated from the old; and even so the Lex Aquilia makes no Derogation from
the Law, Si membrum rupsit; only it grants a new Action to a Freeman, as well
as to the Master of a Slave, for Damnages done to him by wounding; not Actio
directa, (for that is not competent in this or in any other case ubi desunt
verba legis, nor does the Law allow it to a free or ingenuous man, but expressly
denies it to him, Quia non est dominus membrorum suorum, neque ulla liberi
corporis aestimatio est, l. liber homo. 13 ff. ad leg. Aquil.) but Actio utilis
to recover the Expense of the Cure, Damnages for the loss of Time, etc. by the
same Reason, that it is allowed to a Father to pursue for the Damnages incurred,
when his Sons Eye is struck out by a Tradesman, to whom he is Apprentice; or by
a Schoolmaster to whom he is a Scholar, l. 5. ult. Verse. Proponitur, et l. 6
and 7. ff. dict. Tit. And it was in the Option of the Pursuer, in this Case, as
well as in the two former Instances of the XII Tabb. to make use of the Actio
utilis, ex lege Aquilia; or of the Action that was formerly competent upon the
Law of the Table si membrum rupsit: And we see by the Conference that the first
Action was then made use of; or otherways the Objection of Phavorinus, and the
Answer given by S. Caecilius concerning the Praetor's modifying the Ransom in
place of strict Retaliation, had been to no purpose.

Further, ex Leg XII. Tabb, and ex leg. Aquil. endured for hundreds of years
together; after the date of the Lex Aquilia: And because the date is uncertain,
we must make our best Conjectures about it from the Age of those that cite it,
and by comparing it with the Conference betwixt Phavorinus and S. Caecilius:
Now the Conference having been Anno Chr. 143. or thereby, as we showed N. 144.
supra; and the Lex Aquilia having had a Being in the time of Brutus (who cites
and decides a Case by it in l. si Servus 27.. Si mulier ff. ad leg. Aquil.)
which Brutus was coaeval with P. Mutius Scaevola, Father to Q. Mutius Scaevola,
as may be seen by the words of Pomponius commending them, as Founders of the
Civil Law about the same time; in l. 2.. 39. ff. de orig. jur. And P. Mutius
having been Consul with L. Calphurnius Piso; anno V. C. 620. as Dion.
Gothofredus in fastis consularibus asserts, (which in all probability was about
the time he cited the Lex Aquilia, he having not written till he was of Age;)
it follows that the Lex Aquilia had endured (from the time of this Consulship
to the time of the foresaid Conference) 274 years; supposing the Conference was
A. Chapter 143. when A. Gellius wrote it. 'Twill then follow, that during all these
274 years, the Action which arose ex leg. XII Tabb. Si membrum rupsit, endured
with the Actio utilis introduced by the Lex Aquilia. Another Account may be
made from the time of Q. Mutius Scaevola; (but it will not go so far backward)
this Q. Mutius likewise cites the Lex Aquilia, and decides a case by it l. 39.
ff. ad leg. Aquil. Now to find out the time wherein Q. Mutius lived, we must
consider that G. Aquilius was his ordinary Hearer; for so says Pomponius, dict.
l. 2... 41.42. and the time of G. Aquilius must be found out by his conjunction
with Cicero, who in topicis calls him his Familiar and Intimat: now Cicero
(according to Dion. Gothofredus, in dict. fast.) was Consul with C. Antonius,
anno V. C. 690: And if we should grant with Vulteius and P. Voet. that G.
Aquilius was the Author of Lex Aquilia; yea, further, which they do not say,
that he made it in the year of Cicero's Consulship (which is evidently false,
being cited by Brutus 70 years before) even then, the Interval betwixt this
Consulship, and the year of the foresaid Conference, will be 204 years; In all
which time both the foresaid Actions continued. And hereby it is evident, that
the Law of the XII. Tabb. Si membrum rupsit; was none of these Laws which was
derogated from by the Lex Aquilia; but rather is to be excepted from the
general words of Vlpian; Lex Aquilia omnibus legibus, quae ante se de damno
injuria loquutae sunt, derogavit; sive XII. Tabb. sive alia quae fuit. And so
the Objection, founded on these general words of Vlpian is fully answered.

This Calculation which I have insisted on, is not obvious to every person, M.
Aquilius, Grandfather to G. Aquilius was the Author of the Lex Aquilia; because
he was before Brutus who cites it, and decides by it. Now M. Aquilius
(according to Suarez ad leg Aquil. apparat. cap. 1. N. 11) having been Consul
anno. V. C. 625. and before that having been Tribunus Plebis; might then have
been Author of that Law, which was Plebiscitum; ut in dict. l. 1. ad leg.
aquil. though with other plebiscita it has obtained the Name of a Law ex lege
Hortensia. But Dion. Gothofredus in fast. Consul. makes M. Aquilius to be
Consul with C. Marius, A. V. C. 651. which does not alter the case of his being
Author of the Law; because he might have been Tribunus Plebis, before the time
that Jo. Suarez makes him Consul; I say this only furnishes a Conjecture, for I
do not presume to be positive, where the learned Noodt. ad dict. l. Aquil. cap.
1. And Jo. Suarez (to whom I am beholden for this Calculation) dict. loc. plead
no further certainty, than that one of the Tribe of the Aquilii was the Author.
Further, Sua. ez thinks it was made circiter annum V. C. 621.

Before I enter upon Arbitrary Punishment, Mutilation and Demembration) I shall
according to the Method I proposed, speak a little to the Question, how far
these Crimes may be punished with Amputation of the Hand which gives the
stroke? And this falls naturally in here; because if the Demembration committed
be of an Hand, then the Punishment will be Retaliation upon the Matter, though
not of Design.

I suppose it will be granted, that, Retaliation, yet, its in the power of the
Lawgiver to make a Law for punishing certain Crimes, by cutting off the Hand
of the Delinquent; There are many instances in the civil Law, as in l. 3. and
Auth. seq. c. de serve. fugit. A Slave deserting and running over to the
Barbarians, is punished in that manner. [where you may observe that the
Amputation of the Foot (which was the delinquent Member) contained in dict. l.
3. is changed by the Authentic into the cutting off of the Hand] as also in
Novel. 17. cap. 8. the punishment of Amputation of the Hand, is appointed for
the Exacters of Tribute, who express not in their Books, the Quantities
received; the same was the punishment of Writers of Heretical Books, Novel. 42.
c. 1.. 2. in fin. and of the Writers of false Instruments, Gloss in dict.
Authent. and Arg. dict. cap. 8. These two last were the proper Crimes of the
Hand, which made the punishment the more agreeable: But withal it deserves our
Observation, that this punishment was to be inflicted with much tenderness and
previous Consideration; and never to have place against both hands, dict. Auth.
nor against the useful hand, if the Delinquent had a withered Hand. Novel. 134.
cap. 13. Cabal. Cent. 3. resol. cas. 136. N, 52. and seqq. The Reason which
moved Justinian to this tenderness, may be taken from the Novel. 134. cap. quia
vero to be this: That a Man mutilated of both hands could not serve himself to
the necessities of Life, and therefore Amputation of both hands was never to be
inflicted, but when Death was conjoined as the Merit of the Crime.

The like Punishment is among the later Laws of Saxony and other Nations.
Carpz. prax, crim. p. 1. qu. 40. N. 40. and seqq. and p. 3. qu. 229. N. 24. but
it is always conjoined (says he) with Relegation; to prevent Quarrels and other
Inconveniences which might follow upon Peoples shunning the Converse of the
Delinquent, as bearing a public Mark of Infamy on his Body. dict. qu. 40.45.
and dict. qu. 129. N. 34. It Is frequently used in Aggravation and Augmentation
of the punishment of Death, as he relates, dict. qu. 128. N. 55. and. seq.

But to leave this uncontroverted Point, viz. If Amputation of the hand be a
punishment appointed for Mutilation and Demembration? we have an Argument for
the Affirmative in Gloss ad lib. 2. feud. tit. 53. de pace tenenda. homicidium.
There its said (by the Emperor Frederick, the first of that Name, according to
Eguin. Baro,) Homicidium quoque and Membrorum deminutio, vel aliud quodlibet
delictum, legaliter vindicetur. Upon which words [Membrorum deminutio] the
Gloss in marg. states a Question, Membri amputatio qua poena puniatur? And
answers, forte manus delinquentis amputabitur, cum pro solo vulnere manus ei
amputaretur, si pacem violaverit, and cites for this, 3. of another
Constitution of the same Emperor de pace tenenda. tit 47. dict. lib. feud. The
words whereof are Si quis alium, intra pacis edictum, vulneraverit, nisi, quod
in duello and vitam suam defendendo hoc fecerit, probaverit; manus ei
amputaretur.

The Argument of the Gloss may be formed in this manner: Amputation of the hand
be inflicted for single Vulneration, then much more, for Demembration, but the
first holds good and therefore the second. The Consequence of the Proposition
may be enforced from the Opinion of Suarez. de censuris disp. 44. sect. 2. N.
4. where he lays down for a Rule, That a Law though containing rigor may be
extended from Mutilation to Homicide, not by reason of Similitude in the cases,
or by an Argument drawn from the lesser Crime to the greater, but by an
Argument drawn from a part to the whole including that part; and subsumes that
Homicide includes Mutilation as a part of it formaliter vel eminenter; and just
so Demembration or Mutilation includes wounding; and therefore the punishment
of single wounding may by consequence be extended to be the punishment of
Mutilation or Demembration; But the Argument, as its formed, will only conclude
in the case where simple wounding, is punishable, poena amputationis manus, by
Fredericks Constitution; and that is only when the wounding is accompanied cum
violatione pacis publicae; to which Gail, (treating of this and other
Constitutions of that nature, lib. 1. de pace publica, cap. 7.) and Carpz.
dict. qu. 40. N. 1.2. 3, 4. following him, require three Conditions, viz. 1.
That there be public Force, and greater than one can resist 2. That the
wounding be with Arms; by which Gail. dict. cap. N. 3. understands every
hurtful Weapon or Instrument; as Sword, Spear, Batton or Stones. 3. That there
be dolus verus, and a formed and deliberated Design to hurt. And it will be
easily granted, that simple wounding in these Circumstances may be punished
with amputation of the Hand, which holds in other Circumstantiated Cases, ex
gr. ratione loci, with respect to the place where it is committed. And this is
clear from Carpz. dict. qu. 40. N. 30, 31, 34, 35, 36, and 37. where he shows
that by the Laws and Practice of Saxony, all manner of Hurting, Wounding, or
Invading; being committed in the Camp, Castle, or Palace of a Prince; or upon a
public way, by one lying in wait, is punishable poena amputationis manus. And
Baker in his Chronicle of England ad annum 1541. shows the same to be the
practice of that Kingdom where the Crime is committed within the Verge of the
Kings Court. In like manner by the Laws of many Places of Italy, a Wound given
in the Face, leaving a Cicatrice, is punishable by loss of the Hand Cabal.
dict. cas. 134. N. 1. And N. 31. he relates a Decision, to this purpose, of the
Magna Curia Vicaria, against Dominicus Feretta who had wounded a young Boy in
the Face; But I remember no Law or Decision ordaining simple wounding to be
punished with amputation of the Hand, out of these circumstantiated Cases:
neither is there any thing like it to be found in the Law and Practice of this
Kingdom; nor in any other case in our Law, except what I mentioned, N. 9.
supra, where persons adjudged to Death for atrocious Crimes, were sentenced to
have a Hand cut off, in aggravation of the Punishment, (as in several other
Cases mentioned by Carpz. dict. p. 3. q. 128. N. 55. 56. 57. et seqq.) which
was inflicted sometimes immediately before Death, or immediately thereafter, as
the Crime deserved.

I find indeed several Acts of Parliament, ( viz. Act 18. Parl. 1. Act 88.
Parl. 6. Act 248. Parl. 15. Act 6. Parl. 16. Ja. 6.) forbidding the using of
certain offensive Weapons therein mentioned, under the pain of cutting off the
Right hand; and the first of them proceeds upon a Narrative, that many of the
Subjects had been murdered and slain; who, if they had not been assaulted with
such Weapons, might have been able to have defended them selves; but the last
of these Acts, contains a provision, That if the Action be pursued before the
Secret Council, the Delinquent shall not incur the Corporal Punishment, but
shall be punished by Imprisonment, Escheat of Goods, or by Fyning, without
prejudice of the Execution of the former Acts against such as shall be pursued
before the Kings Justices, Which was inserted as a Cautela for preventing the
inflicting of the corporal Punishment, because it leaves it in the option of
the King and his Council to pursue before themselves and accordingly all such
Pursuits have been brought before them, and not before the Justices, that so a
pecunial Mulct might be inflicted instead of corporal punishment; because the
Council does not inflict Poenam sanguinis; that being proper to the King's
Justices: By which it is evident that Amputation of the hand has been inserted
in these Acts, ad terrorem only. We have indeed an Ancient Statute in cap. 2.
Statut. Wilhelm. which ordains him who draws Blood in the Kings Court to have
his Hand cut off; But by the later Law, to wit, Act. 173. Parl. 13. Ja. 6. He
who strikes or hurts any person within the Inner Gate of the Kings Palace where
His Majesty has his Residence for the time, Incurrs the Pain of Treason.

If any man shall here object and say, Suarez his Form of Reasoning, argue,
that seeing carrying of unlawful Weapons is punishable by our Law with the loss
of the Right hand, though no Mutilation or Demembration follow on it; should
not then Demembration be punished with the loss of the Hand, because its a
greater Crime than single carrying of Arms? I answer, that Suarez his Argument
as its framed, excludes the Consequence, because it is argumentum a part ad
totum, and not from lesser Crimes to greater, or by reason of any Similitude
betwixt them. And this may serve for Poena amputationis manus.

I come now in the third place to speak of Arbitrary Punishment, Retaliation,
as appears by the following Words of Justinian. 7. Inst. de Injur. Poena autem
injuriarum ex lege XII Tabularum propter Membrum quidem ruptum talio erat:
propter os vero fractum nummariae poenae erant constitutae, quasi in magna
veterum paupertate. Sed postea Praetores permittebant ipsis, qui injuriam passi
sunt, eam aestimare: ut judex vel tanti [reum] condemnet, quanti injuriam
passus aestimaverit, vel minoris, prout ei visum fuerit. Sed Poena quidem
injuriae quae ex lege XII Tabularum introducta est, in desuetudinem abiit: quam
autem Praetores introduxerunt (quae etiam honorariae appellaetur) in judiciis
frequentatur: nam secundum gradum dignitatis, vitaeque honestatem, crescit aut
minuitur aestimatio injuriae, qui gradus condemnationis and in servili persona
non immerito servatur: ut aliud in scrvo actore, aliud in medii actus homine,
aliud in vilissimo vel compedito jus aestimationis constituatur. Which Text
holds forth, that not only poena talionis propter membrum ruptum; but also the
poenae nummariae 25 assium for common Injuries and those other Mulcts pro osse
fracto and dentibus excussis, were gone in desuetude: and there remained no
other Branch of the Law of Retaliation contained in the XII Tables, except what
related to the Punishment of false Witnesses. The Text gives this Reason for
abolishing the poenae nummariae, that they were enacted in maxima veterum
paupertate; and though there be some Commentators who deny that the Romans were
scarce of Money at the time; yet Hottoman proves it from Plin. lib. 19. c. 3.
and A. Gel. lib. 11. c. 1. in which last we may read that the Romans paid all
their Mulcts in Sheep and Oxen; and the Commentator in usum Delphini on that
place N. 5. and on the poenae 25 assium in A. Gel. lib. 20. c. 1. n. 7.
computes the 25 asses, respondere Gallicis assibus circiter novem; and
therefore there was reason to abrogat those fixed Penalties which the insolent
L. Neracius had contemned; as is mentioned before; and in their stead to
introduce Arbitrary Punishments. But the Text does not condescend on the cause
why Talio, propter membrum ruptum, was abolished, and Arbitrary Punishment
introduced in place of it, which had been Arbitrary before; for the very Ransom
(whereof S. Caecilius makes mention in his Defense of that Law, in the
Analogical sense of it) was modified by the Praetor, arbitrarie; to make the
Analogical proportion betwixt the Ransom and the Delict; but that which I take
to have been the Reason why the talio propter membrum ruptum is said to have
gone in desuetude, as well as the poenae nummariae; and Arbitrary punishment to
have come equally in the room of both, is that the words in the Law Talio Esto
were often detorted, by the Party injured, to a Pythagorical sense when he was
malicious, or when the Quantity of the Ransom did not please him. Wherefore it
might be thought convenient in progress of time, to suffer that Law to go
altogether in desuetude, and to give Redress to the Parties injured, by another
Remedy; and probably it was by the actio utilis arising ex leg. Aquilia, which,
having at first been introduced as an additional Remedy; and having for many
years so continued without Derogation from these Laws of the Tables, might
thereafter become the sole Remedy, and so continue till the actio injuriarum
succeeded.

We see now by the words of Tribonian, Lex Talionis of the XII Tabb. was in
desuetude, when the Institutions were published, which was A. Chapter 533. that
being the precise Date of their Preface: and the words Lex Talionis are not to
be found again in all the Text; but he does not condescend at what time it went
in desuetude and Arbitrary punishment succeeded; but Tribonian being the first
that makes mention of its being in desuetude, its presumed that the Change had
been but a small time before, which being supposed, it follows that Analogical
Retaliation had endured among the Romans 982 years or thereabout, these being
the just years of the Interval betwixt the coming of the XII Tables to them A.
V. C. 302. before Christ 449. and the foresaid year of Christ 533. in the which
the Institutions were Published. And as the Conference betwixt Phavorinus and
S. Caecilius ( A. V. C. 894. A. Chapter 143) wherein S. Caecilius maintains
Analogical Retaliation, proves the Existence of it, from the introducing of the
Law till that year, quia probatis extremis probatur medium: Even so the
Existence of it downwards, to a little before the Publishing of the
Institutions, is to be presumed, because no Alteration is proved, till
Tribonian makes mention of it in this Text, saying, that it was gone in
desuetude; and Arbitrary punishment had succeeded; meaning that some new Law,
or Practice, had worn out these old Laws in whole, and had introduced Arbitrary
Punishment for all the Degrees of the Crime; whereas by the old Law, only the
quota of the Ransom propter membrum ruptum was left to the Arbitriment of the
Judge; the Pecuniary punishments foresaid being stated and determined.

It being thus made appear that Arbitrary Punishment came in place of poena
talionis; it follows that Mutilation and Demembration, poena injuriarum
arbitraria as other Injuries committed by private Violence; for which the Law
had stated no particular Punishment. Clar.. final. Q. 83. N. 4. Damhaud. prax.
Crim. C. 102. N. 9. [where he gives many Instances of private Violence, and
describes them in general to be such as are committed sine armi.] to which our
Law and Practice agrees. Mackenzie Inst. lib. 4. tit. 4. where he particularly
makes mention of Mutilation, among Arbitrary Crimes. And in his Crim. tract.
^art. 2. tit. 31. he acknowledges the Crime of Demembration to be punishable by
inflicting a Mulct, in as far as in the form of a Doom or Sentence he inserts
the Quota: and in all the Criminal Registers we have no other but Arbitrary
punishment, for Mutilation and Demembration.

And in regaird the Nature of this Arbitrary Punishment is not commonly
understood, Arbitrary Judge may do what he pleases; and that neither of our
learned Country men, Skeen or Mackenzie, have insisted on it; I shall
therefore crave Liberty to describe the Power of an Arbitrary Judge; and the
nature of Arbitrary punishment; for the Benefit of those who do not well
understand it.

Arbitrary Punishment answers to Arbitrary Crimes. All Crimes are divided in
Ordinary, (called Legitima, Crime and Punishment) such as I aesemajesty,
Homicide, and other capital Crimes; and Extraordinary, or Arbitrary; in which
the Law has determined neither, but has left both, to the Arbitriment of the
Judge; as in the ^^^e of Forstallers or Dardanarii, whom Vlpian l. 6. ff. de
extraord. Crim. describes in these words, Qui fructus suos aequis pr^tiis
vendere nollent, dum minores uberes proventus expectant. This I name with
respect to this present year of dearth and ^c^rcity, and because it is the
greatest of that kind, Solomon having told us Prove. 11.26. He that witholdeth
Corn, the People shall curse him: but Blessings shall be upon the head of him
that sells it. A further Description of this may be seen in our Author, p. 1.
tit. 23. Other Crimes of this nature are set down d. tit. ff. de extr. crim.
And by Struvius and others on that Title.

Anciently all Crimes and Punishments were determined by the Law; Crime be was
found guilty of, but not of the Punishment: The Law supposed the Punishment
would be known, as soon as the Nature of the Crime was declared; l. si praeses
32. ff. de Poenis. l. Accusatorum 1.. 4. ff. ad S. C. Turpil: But as Matters of
Fact are more numerous than could be foreseen or comprehended in Laws. l. 10.
and 12. ff dell. being almost infinite, as every one knows: Even so Punishments
proper to these Matters of Fact, must be as numerous; and therefore the
Lawgiver behooved to give Arbitrary Power to to the Judge for determining in
those Emergencies, by the Rules of Equity and to heighten or diminish the
Punishment, as the Circumstances of the Fact require: And this is called
Arbitrary punishment.

All these, to wit, the ancient and modern Custom, Vlpian in l 13. ff. de
poenis, Hodie (says he, implying a former Custom and a Change) licere ei, qui
extra ordinem de Crimine cognoscit, quam vult sententiam far, vel graviorem
vel leviorem, ita tamen ut in utroque moderationem non excedat. And because the
Judge, in so doing, supplies Defects in the Law, and yet does it by the Rules
of Law and Equity: he is therefore called Legis Auxilium. Eguin. Baro de divid.
et individ. cap. 4. N. 4.

From what we have said its evident, Punishment in general (as it includes
Ordinary, and Extraordinary or Arbitrary) is defined by an anonymous German in
his Book, entitled Jus Pandectarum Illustratum, tit. de poenis, to be; a just
Coercition or Restraining of certain Delicts or Crimes, according to their
Measure and Merit, imposed by Authority of Law, or its competent Judges, upon
guilty persons condemned by a previous Sentence, to be inflicted, after the
time allowed, by the Sentence, is elapsed, and that for the utility of
Government, and common Tranquillity of the People. Now ordinary punishment, is
nothing but that Species which the Law, or Custom having force of Law imposes,
and hence is called Legal. Arbitrary is that which being imposed by no Law,
Statute or Custom, is to be ordained by the Judge according to his Arbitriment;
and is sometimes more, sometimes less according to Circumstances, Beckman
medul. Justin. ff. de paenis these 6. 7. 8. and this is what Justinian says,
dict.. 7. inst. de injur. in these words, secundum gradum dignitatis, vitaeque
honestatem, crescit aut minuitur aestimatio injuriae; And conform to this Skeen
in his treatise of Crimes and Judges in Criminal Causes, tit. 1. cap. 2. says,
Crimes are punished by a lawful Pain specially set down and prescribed by the
Law, or the pain thereof is Arbitrary. Lawful Pains are Capital or Pecunial, or
neither Capital nor Pecunial, but of another kind and sort. Arbitrary Crimes
are, which have no certain prescribed pain; but are punished by the Kings will
and Mercy. Where observe, Skeen sets down the word Mercy for the words pleasure
or Arbitriment, to hold forth that the King and his Judges should in Arbitrary
Crimes incline rather to Mercy than Rigor, if the Cause will allow it.

For further clearing of the Nature of this Arbitrary Power; Gloss. in l. fidei
commissa 11. quamquam 7. ad verb. Arbitrium, de legate. 3. and Menochius
following it, lib. 1. de Arbitrar. qu. 6 n. 1. distinguish Arbitrium, in
Plenum, and Regulatum; that is to say, absolute and limited. Plenum arbitrium
(full or absolute power) is that, whereby one acts according to his Appetite,
and as he pleases. A Judge exerciseing such a Power, is called Bellua, and non
Judex; a furious Beast and not a Judge; Menoch. Proaem. dict. lib. N. 5.
Regulatum, is that whereby one acts according to the dictats of Reason and
Equity, and with due Moderation. And this is the Power, wherey a Judge
cognosces Arbitrarie; and Vlpian both expresses the Power and its Limitation;
in dict. l. 13. to wit the Power, in these words Qui extra ordinem de crimine
cognoscit, quam vult sententiam far, graviorem vel leviorem; and its
Limitation, in these words, ita tamen ut in utroque moderationem non excedat.

Any man may use absolute Power in the Disposal of his Goods, Dominion which
carries with it jus utendi, vel abutendi, except there be a restraint put on
him for public Good. Also, if a Legacy be left to be disposed of at the
pleasure of the Heir, or with Condition, Si volueris, he may deliver or
withhold it; but its not so when the Legacy is conferred in Arbitrium Haeredis,
or in words importing Arbitrium; this is evident by the words of Vlpian in
dict.. 7. Quanquam autem (inquit) fidei commissum non debetur, Si volueris:
tamen si ita scriptum fuerit, si fueris arbitratus, si putaveris, si utile tibi
fuerit visum, vel videbitur: debebitur: non enim plenum arbitrium voluntatis
Haeredi dedit, sed quasi bono viro commissum relictum. This Law shows a clear
difference betwixt the conferring a thing in voluntatem and arbitrium.

An Arbitrary Judge is the same with the prudent and wise Judge that Cicero, in
orat. pro Ant. Cluentio speaks of, Sapientis Judicis est meminisse se hominem:
cogitare sibi tantum, a populo esse permissum; quantum commissum, sit and
creditum, [and its never to be thought that power is given to a Judge to do
unjustly] and non solum sibi potestatem datam; verum etiam fidem habitam
meminisse: posse, quem oderit absolvere: quem non oderit condemnare, and semper
non quod ipse velit, sed quid Lex and Religio cogat, cogitare; anima dvertere,
qua legereus citetur, de quo reo cognoscat, quae res in quaestione versetur.
cum haec sunt videnda, tum vero illud est hominis magni atque Sapientis cum
illam, judicandi causa, tabellam sumpserit: non se putare esse solum: neque
sibi quodcunque concupierit, licere: sed habere in consilio legem, Religionem,
Equitatem, Fidem: Libidinem, Odium, Invidiam, Metum, Cupiditatesque omnes
amovere, maximeque existimare conscientiam mentis suae quam a Deo accepimus:
quae a nobis divelli non potest, quae si optimorum consiliorum and factorum
testis in omni vita nobis erit: sine ullo metu, and summa cum honestate
vivemus. And the same with Vlpian's vir bonus, whom Alexander Neapolitanus (or
Alex. ab Alex. as he is commonly called) Dier. genial. lib 6. cap. 1. in fin.
defines. Quaestioni autem (inquit) diu res fuit quid virum bonum, quid civilem
and politicum deceat. Viro enim bono hoc datur ut ubique sanctus, ubique
castus, pius and integer sit: cujus ne erratum quidem minimum fuerit, ne dicam
vitium. Qui nullo malo perterritus, nulla calamitate victus fortunae cedat,
nihil expetat, nihil dicat, nihil faciat in vita, nisi summa cum laud and
dignitate, in nulla re delinquat, nullius reipoeniteat, servetque foedera
humani generis ita inviolata in magnis minimisque rebus, ut ne minima quidem
labe conscientia detineatur. Civilem vero dixere hominem, qui legem
judiciorumque metuens, quantum moribus legibusque tributum est, id tanto
temperamento agit. ut quoad fieri possit, nihil perperam, aut inconsulto
admissurus sit: qui sua providentia, Religione, fide quantumque ratione
provideri potuit, Reipublicae and Civium saluti consulat, legibus pareat,
patriam tueatur, etc. Here we have the Qualities of an Arbitrary Judge, and if
he be endued with such Qualities, his Arbitrary Power will not be terrifying;
but the Author adds Quem (scil. virum bonum and civilem) nos magis fingimus
quam invenimus. Yet every one should endeavor to be such, and to deserve such
Characters.

By what is said in these Characters, it appears in the general, Arbitrary Judge
can do nothing that is unjust to gratify or please any person whatsoever of
whatever Degree or Quality. Now let us more particularly consider from Texts of
Law. 1. What he cannot do. 2. What he can and should do.

1. He cannot, l. si quis reum 4. ff. de custod. reor. Farin. qu. 17. de delict
and paenis. n. 5.6, and seqq. and a general statute to Punish will not derogat
from a special. l. sancio 14. ff. de paenis. Nor in general can he alter any
thing determined by Law; except upon circumstances where the Law allows an
alteration; A case is looked upon as determined, where either there is an
express Law, or consequences drawn from Law by parity of Reason. l. 11.12. e.
13. ff. de ligib. or by custom; for that has the force of a Law, l. 32. ff.
de ll. to regulat Punishments. Farin. dict. q. 17. n. 18. and if he cannot
alter a Punishment, but by permission of Law, he can far less condemn the
innocent, or absolve the guilty. l. decurionum. 12.. 1. in sin. cod. de poenis,
for both are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15.

2. He cannot totaly remit a Punishment to gratify the People. l. adbestias 13,
ff. de paen. especially after sentence is pronunced. l. penam 15. c. eod. and
in many cases it is not safe, for them to remit, who have power to do it:
because its the Interest of the Public that Crimes be Punished; that so wicked
men may be Reclaimed. l. si poena 20. ff. de poenis and ibi Gothofrid, lit. E.
l. si operis 14. C. eod. and tranquillity be preserved. Wesenb. n. 9. ff. d.
tit. oderunt peccare boni virtutis honor, mali vero formidine poenae. It Is a
saying of St. Bernard. lib. 2. de considerat: Impunitas incuriae soboles,
insolentiae matter, Rad x impudentiae, transgressionum nutrix. And questionless
Cicero was in the right disputing against Calenus: His words ( Philippic 8.)
are Ego nolo quemquam civem committere, ut morte multandus sit: tu, etiamsi
commiserit, conservandum putas. In corpore si quid reliquo corpori noceat, nri
ac secari patimur: ut membrorum aliquod potius quam totum corpus intereat. Sic
in Reipubl corpore, ut totum salvum sit, quicquid est pestiferum amputetur:
dura vox, multa illa duri r, salvi sint improbi, scelerati, impii: deleantur
innocents honesti, boni, tota Respubl. ca. I would have no Citizen (says
Cicero) desire to die, but thou (Calenus) would have none to die though he
deserved it. It is but Reason that as in the body natural we cut off an arm to
save the whole, so in the Body politic we do the same that nothing remain
alive that will make the other die. It Is a hard sentence, it is true, but this is
an harder; let the wicked be safe, and let the innocent, the good, the just
men, the whole Commonwealth be destroyed. This is only applied when punishment
is absolutely necessary.

3. pecadillo or small trifle; or even for a delinquency, which does not really
deserve such a Punishment. And by the same Rule it would infer partiality to
punish a great fault in a rich Man, by the only exacting of a Crown; But
equality must be observed betwixt the Fault and the Punishment. l. 16. ff. de
paenis, farin. de delict and paenis. qu. 17. n. 9. yea, he cannot Punish any
man more severely than the Law will allow; though he should receive a command
from the Prince. He must in this case, delay sentence till he acquaint his
Prince, and in the mean time cause the delinquent to be sufficiently guarded
and secured. l. si vindicand. 20. cod. de paenis.

4. l. si 20. l. Crimen 26. ff. de paenis. l. sancimus 22. cod. eod, yea though
the innocent person should offer his life for the guilty. Quia nemo est Dominus
membrorum suorum. l. liber homo. 23. ff. ad leg. Aquil. This agrees with the
Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 24.26. and to natural Reason; for punishment being an Act
of Revenge, it must be inflicted upon the delinquent himself, seeing no man can
be alieni criminis successor; ut in d. l. 26. For as Seneca says lib. 2. de ira
cap. 24. nihil iniquius quam aliquem, haeredem paterni odii fieri. But yet we
must here except the Crime of Treason concerning which see our Author. Crim.
part 1. Tit. n. 22. supra. we must also except the Laws which impose pecuniary
mulcts to be paid by Parents for their Children, and Masters for their
Servants. Act 69. Parl. 6. Ja. 4 with other Acts and Laws of the same nature,
vid. Farin. qu. 24. N. 154. and 189. Clar.. fin. qu. 86. n. 5. where he says
it is the common opinion; but there must be a statute for it, and the delict
must be proved, and the Punishment cannot exceed the Child's legitime. n. 7.8.
and 9. ibid. See Matheus lib. ff. 48. tit. 18. cap. 4. N. 2.

5. Carpz. pract. crim. p. 3. q. 137. N. 2. and seqq. except in weighty Causes
mentioned by him. N. 11. and seqq. lest he thereby give occasion to
contrivances for the Delinquents liberation l. cum reus 18. cod. de poenis.

It Is questioned among the DD. whether Arbitrary Punishment can reach ad poenam
sanguinis, Maranta disp. 3 Gomez. de injur. C. 6. N. 8. and many others cited
by Farin. tit. de delict. and poenis qn. 17. N. 34. and seqq. where he sets
down many cases in which it may be or not be: but all agree in this that death
can never be inflicted, unless the atrocitie of the Crime deserve it; farin. d.
qu. 17. N. 35. And so Fachin. contravers. lib. 9. C. 45. understands l.
saccularii 7. l. sunt quaedam 9 ff. de extraord. Crim. l. 1. and 2. C. de his
qui latron. occult. l. julia 17. hodie 3. ff. ad leg. jul. Repetun. and thereby
thinks he reconciles the contrary opinions: because Arbitrium is restricted in
l. 1. ff. de fur. balne. l. 1. expilatores. ff. de eff^act. on this Reason,
that the Quality of the Crime required it should be Restricted: But we need not
much insist to debate the Question, because our Author Crim. tract. P. 2. tit.
N. 4. Expressly concludes by Arguments drawn from Acts of Parliament, that no
man's life can be ever taken, without express Law; there he also cites
Chasenaeus, Socinus and a Decision of Pappon. I remit to the place where you
may read his Arguments.

If it be here asked whether Arbitrary Punishment can be extended to the
Amputation of an Hand or any other Member? I answer, Mattheus Crim. ad lib. 48.
N. 12. think it may; however I have not observed any such thing in our practice.

These are things which an Arbitrary Judge may not do; Punishment for
extraordinary Crimes; Secondly, he may highten or lessen the Punishment of
Ordinary Crimes, where the Circumstances of Fact approved by Law require it;
factien^m quaestio in Arbitrio judicantis ect: poenae vero persequntio non ejus
voluntati mandatur, sed legis auctoritati reservatur, says Papinian in l. acc
sationem 1.. fin. ff. ad SC. Turpil. l. Ordine 15. ff. ad munic. And there is a
most pertinent Text, in l. and si severior 3. and ibi gloss. and Salycet C. ex
quib. cau. infam. irrog where Salycet answers the contrary Objections. See many
other Texts and Authors to this purpose cited by Farin. d. q. 17. N. 7. who
gives the Reason N. 8. (which we mentioned before,) to wit, that seeing Crimes
are committed with different Circumstances and Qualities, whereby they are
sometimes to be excused, and at other times to be esteemed more odious and
atrocious; C. Sicut dignum. 6. in pr. de Homicid. l. si adulterium 38..
imperator 8. ff: de adult. l. Gracchus 4. C. ad l. jul. de eod. and that all
these Circumstances and Qualities could not be expressed in the Law, though
some be, l. aut facta. 16.. 1. cum 2. seqq. ff. de poenis; therefore this power
and faculty of Augmenting or diminishing Punishments according to Contingencies
of Fact, behooved to be left to the Arbitriment of the Judge d. l. aut facta. l.
quid ergo 13.. poena gravior 7. ff. de his qui not. infam. where his power of
augmenting of Pecuniary Mulcts, and chainging those Mulcts into Relegation, is
expressed.

There is the like necessity for Arbitrary Power in some civil Cases;
Veneleius, l. continuus 137.. cum ita 2. de verb. oblig. viz. a person at Rome
promises to pay a Sum of Money at Ephesus, in Asia, and makes no mention of the
day of payment: now the Rule in such indefinit Obligations is in quibus dies
non ponitur, praesenti die debetur. l. in omnibus 14. de Reg. Jur. but
Veneleius resolves better, that the time of payment be rather remitted to the
Arbitriment of the Judge who is to allow such a competent time as a diligent
man might travel in to Ephesus, neither obliging him to travel Night and Day
without regaird to tempestuous Weather, neither yet allowing him to Loyter in
such a manner as he might be thought worthy of Reproof, but so orders the
matter with respect to his Age, Sex, Health, as he may have time to go to the
place appointed; that is to say, such a time as others in his Condition are
wont to perform the Journey in, and with this Provision, that if he by double
diligence or by the happy occasion of a Ship shall arive at Ephesus sooner than
others by an ordinary Journey use to do, he shall instantly be obliged to pay
quia in eo quod tempore atque facto finitum est, nullus est conjecturae locus.
These are the words of the Text, and none can be more clear to prove the
necessity of such a regulated Arbitrary power we have described.

And yet for all this, Legis auxilium as we said before, and a Preserver of the
Law, because so the Law wills and disposes, not only by many particular Texts,
but also by that general Rule, Quod poena est commensuranda delicto, de qua in
l. sancimus 22. C. de poenis. And Farin. from all this lays it down for a
general Rule, N. 10. d. qu. that the Law has given the Judge a power, to
augment, diminish, or change Punishments, according to the Qualities or
Circumstances of the Delinquency. All this is fully proved, and the contrary
Arguments solved by Carpz. d. pract. crim. p. 3. qu. 142. N. 22. who is so far
from denying this Power to Judges, that he thinks all Punishments of whatsoever
Crimes, to be now in the Arbitriment of the Judge according to Circumstances;
and proves it. N. seqq. And this is agreeable to the words of Aristotle lib. 5.
ethic. C. 5. Judex debet esse clementior lege scripta, quando ejusdem legis and
justitiae ratio ita fert and patitur. And holds, even albeit the Judge who is
obliged to swear to the Observation of the Laws. l. rem non novam 14. C. de
judiciis. has actually sworn to observe them, Romans in rubr. ff. de Arbitr. col.
5. ver. Item quia quamvis juraverit and Consil. 429. cited by Farin. d. q. N.
17. And the Reasons are, that the Law it self gives this Arbitrary Power to a
Judge, to exercise it as the Circumstances require; And in every Oath the
Authority of Law and Equity is presumed to be excepted. Arg. l. fin. ff. qui
satisd. cog. and an Oath takes not away common Law and Equity, l. si ex falsis
42. C. de transact. and l. fin. C. de non number. pec. And a Judge never incurrs
Perjury for receding from the words of the Laws upon just grounds, because he
has power to recede in that case. Arg. l. si hominem 30. ff. mandati. Farin. d.
qu. 17. N. 17.

But as the Law has given this power to a Judge to augment and diminish
punishment in ordinary, d.. poena gravior. Vivius in lib. Commun. opin. in
verb. Judex ubicunq. Covarruv. Variar. Resolut. lib. 2. cap. 9. N. 8. Tyraquel.
tract. de poenis, in praefat. N. 22. Jul. Clarus in pract. cr. ^.. fin. quaest.
58. versic. ulterius quaero. N. 10. 2 The Judge or Magistrate must in his
Sentence express the Causes why he recedes from the ordinary punishment of Law;
but some think it is sufficient that the Sentence bear in general, that he did
it for Causes moving him thereto. Clarus loc. cit. Vasquez. ontrav. illust. C.
14. N. 5. and this is according to the present practice of the Imperial
Chamber, Gail. de pac. pub. C. 9. N. 2^. 3. Then, he cannot proceed in contempt
of the Law, but in all his proceedings, must have regaird thereto. Gail and
Vasq. locis cit. Mynsing. cent. 2. observe. 50. and 54. and to the circumstances
of the case; but if in dubio he mistake the case and alter the Punishment
without just cause, the Law presumes for him that he acted ex justa causa; this
is also according to the practice of the Imperial Chamber, Gail. d. Obs. N. 26.
where he cites Felin. Romans and Bart. asserting it to be the practice else where.

The DD. condescend on many Circumstances for imposing or altering of
punishments; Causa, Persona, Locus, Tempus, Qualitas, Quantitas, Eventus,
mentioned by Claudius Saturninus in d. l. aut facta. 16. ff. de poenis.

1. Cause. The D D. have written largely on it: but to be brief, the Judge is
to consider with Marcianus in l. perspiciendum. 11.. delinquitur 2: ff: de
poen. If the Delinquent acted ex proposito, vel impetu, vel casu, he gives this
Example of the first, when one comes with a Company to perpetrat the Fact; of
the second, when he falls a fighting in Drunkenness; of the third, when at
Hunting he kills a Man by a Dart thrown at a wild Beast; to these add a fourth,
to wit, culpa, or Negligence. I only name them; for all of them are described
by our Author tit: Murder; and certainly they make a great Alteration as to
Punishment, even in the cases of Killing, Mutilation and Demembration, Farin:
de Homicid: qu: 119: N: 7.2. The Judge should consider if the Crime be
consummated or attempted only; the last is not to be so severely punished as
the first, as is clear by the case of an Arbitrary Crime stated l: 1: in p^in::
ult: de extraord. Crim. l: qui autem 3: ff: de his qui not: infam. l: volgaris
21:: qui furti ff: de furtis. Except in Treason l: quisquis 5: c: ad leg: Jul:
Majest. Paricide l: 1: in fin; ad leg: Pomp: de Paricid. et Arg: l: 6. eod.
Attempting to kill an Infant l: si quis: 8: C: ad leg: Corn: de sicar: for in
this there is more Cruelty, than in attempting to kill a man. Farin: de
Homicid: qu: 119: N: 22. And a Wifes attempting or declaring her Intention to
kill her Husband; et e contra, l: si forte mulier: 9: C: ad leg: Cornel: de
sicar. and this may be the Reason, that they live in a conjunct Society, and
under mutual Trust. There be some other atrocious Crimes wherein conatus is to
be punished, as if the Crime were consummated, vid: Farin: de Homicid: qu: 124.
N: 1: and seqq. But in cases not so atrocious, Conatus is never equaled to
Consummation. 3. The Judge should consider if the Delinquent acted of his own
accord, or by command of another; in the first case he is to be punished, and
all the Laws above cited prove it. In the second case if the Crime was
committed by a Servant at the Command of his Lord; or by a Pupil at the Command
of his Tutor or Curator, and be not Atrocious the Punishment may be remitted,
l. ad ca. 157. in prin. ff: de diver: Reg: jur. the like when one acts by
command of a Judge, l: non videntur. 167. eod. The like in a Soldier obeying
his Officer whom he was obliged to obey; as in the case 2. Dec. 1641: part 1:
N: 86: supra, Jaredin against Edmonston; in which Mutilation committed on a
Deserter by one who was obliged to apprehend him was exculed. The like
generally holds in all cases, where one is obliged to obey, l: is damnum: 169:
ff: de Reg: jur. And though the Crime be Atrocious, the Command of a Superior
where there was no Obligation to obey, mitigats the Punishment. l: Servus: 20:
ff: de oblig: et act: l: Servus 8: Cap: ad leg: Jul: de vi publ: l: si Servus:
2: C: de sepulch: viol: l: qui cum uno. 4.. qui silium. 11. ff: de re milit.
but does not liberat, and this agrees with Carpe: pract: Crim: p: 1: qu: 4: N:
7: 8. where he cites not only Texts of Law, but a Decision of the Supreme Court
of Saxony: and with our Practique, for March 1671. it was found after a most
contentious Debate, that two Boys, the youngest whereof was not twelve years of
Age, should pass to the Knowledge of an Inquest for assisting in the Company of
15 Armed men sent by their Father to demolish an House in the time of a Storm,
whereof the Pursuer was in Possession. These things I have the more insisted
on, because they frequently occur as Excuses and Extenuations in Processes of
Mutilation and Demembration.

2. The person (whether considered as Agent or Patient) makes a great
Alteration in Punishment, d: l: aut facta 16. Persona. 3: ff: de poen. Sex,
Age, State, Quality. 1. As to the Sex; the Law deals more mildly with Women
than with Men, on the account of their Infirmity both of Body and Mind, l: si
adulterium 38:: 7. and 8: ff: ad leg: Jul: de adult: l: quisquis 5.: ad filias
3: C: ad leg: Jul: Majest. l: Sacrilegii 6. ff: ad leg: Jul: peculat. And when
they are the persons injured, the Law punishes the Delinquent with the greater
severity, because they are the less able to defend themselves; And therefore
albeit Deformity in a man occasioned by Wounding or Mutilation does not augment
the Punishment. Farin. de Homicid: insp: 4: q: 119: N: 118. yet the contrary is
true when a Virgin is thereby deformed, because in that case she needs greater
Tocher or Portion. Farin: loc: cit: de delict: Cap: 6: Rubric: de injur: N: 12.
verse. addi tamen. Farin: d: quaest. N: 119. 2. As to the Age; Albeit Minority
does not procure Impunity, if the Delinquent be such as for Age may be doli
Capax, l. impunitas 7: C: de poenis. Mackenzie p. 1: tit: 1: N: 5. yet Minority
extenuats Mackenzie loc: cit: because of the imbecility of Judgment, l: si ex
causa 9:. nunc videndum. 2: l: auxilium 37:: 1: ff: de minorib. vid: Carpz:
pract: crim: p. 3. q: 143. upon the Question how far Minority excuses or
mitigats the Crime. And generally in omnibus poenalibus judiciis and aetati and
imprudentiae succurritur. l: 108: ff: de Rec: jur: Tyraquel: de poen: temper:
Cas: 7: Menoch: de Arbitr: Cas. 329. and therefore if a Minor should mntilat or
wound his Neighbor, his Nonage would mitigat but not excuse the Mutilation,
seeing it does not excuse him in Homicide; but if one mutilats, wounds, or
demembers a Minor, the Punishment may be augmented according as he is capable
or less capable to defend himself. In like manner, regard is to be had to old
and decrepit Persons when they commit the Injury, l: 3: ff: de termin: mot. or
receive it, l. si quis in gravi 3:: ignoscatur. 7: ff: de S. C. Sil^n.
Tyraquel: d. tract. de poen. Cas. 8: Menoch. cas. cit. The Reason is they
become weak in Judgment, like Children. Carpz. pract. crim: p. 3. quaest.
144.3. The state and condition of the person makes an Alteration in
Punishments; especially if they be corporal and ignominious. Slaves were more
severely punished, than free Men, for the same Crime, l: 1:10: and l: 16::
persona ff: de poenis: l. capitalium. 28:: non omnes. 2. eod. and Infamous more
than Famous. d: l: 28:: ult. 4. As to the Quality; It Is certain that if any man
demember, mutilat or any ways Invade a Magistrate, Parent, or Person of Honor,
he commits a greater Injury, and is more severely to be punished than if he had
Invaded his Equal or an abject person, d. l: 16:: 3: ff: de poen: l. ult: ff:
eod: d:: 7: and 9: inst. de injur. But if a Magistrate or Person of Honor
should commit these or the like Crimes against a person of lower Degree, he
should not incurr the same corporal Punishment. This we see in the Instance of
the Decuriones who could not be condemned to the Mines, nor to be hanged or
burnt alive, l. moris. 9.. istae f^re sunt poenae. 11. ff. de poen. And the
Emperor Hadrian would not allow them to be punished capitally unless for
Paricide. l: Divus 15: ff eod. and their Children had the same privilege d::
11. Neither could any person of Repute be punished with Fustigation, d. l. 28..
2. nor be sent to the Mines,. 5. neither were Nobles to be punished by hanging,
Tyraquel: de nobilib: Cap. 20. N: 104. and 106. Covarr. Resol. lib. 20. cap: 9:
de poenis crim: eorumque modo. N. 34. and seqq. nor to undergo ignominious
Punishments, Fulgos. Consil. 167. But to compense this, the pecuniary
Punishment of a Nobleman went much higher, because of his Riches, Covarr. dict.
loc.

3. Place where the Crime is committed, makes the same Act to be Theft or
Sacrilege, and to be punished with Death, or a less punishment, d. l. 26.. 4.
ff. de poen. He that Mutilats or Wounds another in the Church, Theater,
Mercat-place, or in the presence of a Magistrate, is more Criminal than if he
had done it in a private place, d.. 9. inst. de injur. And for the same cause,
its Treason to Strike, Hurt or Slay any person in the Parliament House during
the holding of the Parliament, or within the King's Inner-Chamber, or Chamber
of Presence, the King for the time being within his Palace; or where the Lords
of Session sit for Administration of Justice, at the time they are sitting, or
within the Kings Privy Council House, the time of the Council sitting there; or
in presence of his Majesty, where ever His Highness shall happen to be for the
time. Act 175. Parl. 13. Ja. 6. Which Act also in other particulars makes the
circumstances of Place, to augment or diminish punishment. See also what we
said concerning Amputation of the Hand, with respect to the Circumstance of
Place. N. 154. supra.

4. Time makes a difference betwixt a Diurnal and a nocturnal Thief. d. l. 16..
4. ff. de poen. The first is punishable paena ordinaria, the last paena
extraordinaria, l. 1. and 2. ff. de furib. balnear. and betwixt breakers of
Prison in the night and in the daytime. l. 2. ff. de effractor. In like
manner, a Delinquent who reiterats a Crime, is more severely punished than if
he had been but once guilty. l. 3. C. de Episc. audient. l. Capitalium 28..
solent quidam. 3.8. Grassatores 10. and. famosis. 15. ff. de paenis. In this
last Paragraph, Famous, or common Robbers are ordained to be hanged in the
places where they most frequently transgressed, that others by beholding their
punishments, might be deterred from committing the like Crimes, and the Friends
and near Relations of these whom they had murdered or robbed, might be thereby
comforted; In the above cited case, 15. July 1642. Chynes against Mowat and
Nevings, their Fynes, or pecuniary Mulcts were made greater than ordinary,
because the Pannels had been guilty of the like Crimes before, as the Decision
bears. Under this circumstance of Time, the DD. bring in long Imprisonment,
taking off the Punishment of Banishment, in regaird that Squalor Carceris,
which deprives a Man of the use of Light and free Air, is of it self a
punishment, l. omnes. 23. C. de poenis. and likewise Banishment taking off the
Infamv which accompanies a Crime deserving a pecuniary Mulct, in regaird that
Relegation is more severe than the other. l. quid ergo, 13.. poena gravior, ff.
de his. qui not. infam. But Carpz. makes diutina in carceribus detentio, to be
a Circumstance by it self, p. 3. qu. 149.

5. Quality of the Fact, d.. atrox. 9. inst. de injur. manifest Theft from not
manifest; Expilators from Theives; Tumults from contrived and designed
Invasions; Petulancy from Violence, d. l. 16.. 5. ff. de poen. common Theft
from peculat, which is a stealing or concealing of public Money. l. 4. and 10.
ff. ad leg. jul. peculat. and sacr. and from Sacrilege. l. 6. eod. which is a
stealing of things dedicated to pious uses, and punishable with Death. l. 9.
eod. And Demembration of an Eye from Demembration of a Finger, because the Eye
is a more necessary Member than the other, and the Injury done to it should
augment the punishment.

6. Quantity distinguishes Furtum ab Abigeo. d. l: 16:: 7. Abi^eum; than to
take away one of them, which is Furtum: And it is a greater Crime to give many
Wounds, than to give but one; and to Demember, than to Multilat; and therefore
the Punishment should be the greater.

7. Event increases Crime and Punishment, d: l: 16:: 8. Africa, which served
the Miners, than in some other Countries, because the want of Food obstructed
the Work, and the great Profit that arose from it. And it is a less Crime to
strike off the Hand of a single man wanting a Trade, and Family, than of an
excellent Artificer, who by his Handiwork maintains and enriches himself, his
Wife and Children: and the Delinquent ought to be the more severely punished,
and to pay greater Damnages in the last case, than in the other.

Damnages are due by the Rules of natural Equity and Reason; Farin: insp: 4: q:
114: N: 93: cites Marsil. to prove it, and also expostulating with Criminal
Judges who content themselves to condemn the Manslayer to die for the Crime;
but decern no Damnages to be paid to the persons injured. Further Farin. says,
that where ever a Criminal Action arises ex Delicto, there also arises Actio in
factum adinteresse. l: qui nomine 25: and l. Hodie 32.: 1: ff: ad leg: Cornel.
de falls. and that the Fisk should not carry away all the Goods of the condemned
Person, by virtue of the Confiscation, to the prejudice of the damnified
Persons and their Heirs; and cites Decis: Lucen: 62: N: 30.

But then the main Question will be, Intrinsic and Extrinsick. Intrinsic,
respect the Reward of Physicians and the Expense of the Cure: Extrinsick,
respect the value of the lost Work, which the killed mutilated or demembered
Person might have gained, if the Crime had not been committed. Both these
Damnages ought to be paid, l: qua action 7: in prin: in those words quod
minus ex operis, ff: ad leg: Aquil: which Law speaks expressly de vulnerante.
There is another excellent Text in l: ex hac lege 3: ff: si quadrup: pauper: in
these words, et operarum amissarum quasque amissurus quis esset: and another
Text in l: fin: ff: de his qui effud: vel dejec: in these words, praeterea
operarum quibus caruit vel cariturus est. Many other Texts are cited by Farin:
d: insp: q: 114. N: 95: and 96. where he expressly states the case of Tradesmen,
and concludes, that if a Nobleman who lived upon his Revenues, and not
accustomed to work, be killed, nothing is due upon the account of Workmanship,
or other extrinsick Damnages, and that the same holds, when a man is killed or
wounded that had no Trade. And further N. N. 115, 116, 117. he persists to
prove the Obligation of Damnages for lest Work and cessant Gain, even in the
cases of Debilitation, Mutilation, and prescinding of Members.

This Obligation to pay Damnages is founded upon a Divine Law, Exodus 20.18, If
men strive together, and one smite another with a stone or with his fist, and
he die not but keeps his bed: if he rise again, then shall he that smote him
be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time; and shall cause him to be
thoroughly healed. Here is a Warrant both for Extrinsick and Intrinsic
Damnages; and we show before how far the Jews decerned Damnages by virtue of
this Text.

The Modification of Damnages is to be made at the Arbitriment of the Judge,
Menoch: de Arbitr: l b: 2: cas: 122: N: 3 (and in N. 1. he cites the foresaid
Text in Exodus as its Foundation): In modifying, the Quality of the persons is
to be considered, and an Oath in litem may be taken after Taxing, Farin: d:
insp: 4: N: 113. if the Crime was committed ex dolo, and not otherwise. N: 114:
ibid. Also the Judge may make use of skillful men to enquire into these
Damnages, ibid: where he cites Salycet and others; and the number of the
injured persons Family is to be considered, not only as it consisted of
Parents, Wife, Children and Servants, whom he was obliged to maintain: But also
of Strangers who had their Entertainment by him, and could not otherwise
maintain themselves, Farin: d: insp: 4. qu: 119. N: 105: 106. Further, he
thinks the Delinquent ought to pay all Damnages which these in Society with him
sustained by the Breach of that Society, N: 106: ibid: where he cites several
Texts, and D D. ament the matter of Arbitrary Punishment and Damnages. If any
one desires to be further satisfied, he may consult the Authors above cited,
and particularly Farin: and Tyraquel: locis cit. Ant. Matthaeus ad lib: 48: ff:
tit: 18: cap: 4. And Carpz: d. p: 3. q: 149. where he adds other five
Circumstances for mitigating Punishment. 1. A promise of Mitigation, to draw
forth a Confession. 2. A spontaneous Confession. 3. Long Imprisonment. 4. The
Intercession of a young Maid to obtain the Delinquent in Marriage. 5. The
skillfulness of the Delinquent in some useful and eminent Art.

Having drawn out this Discourse to a greater length than I intended,
Mutilation and Demembration are by the daily Practice punished Arbitrarie by
the Lords Commissioners of the Justiciary; who are in use to decern a Sum of
Money to be paid by the Panel or Delinquent to the Party injured, for all he
can ask or crave, either for Damnages or Punishment, except the Delinquency be
very atrocious, and then they also Imprison or banish the Delinquent: likewise,
they modify a Fine to be paid to the King, (especially if the Crime be
Demembration) and the Delinquent finds Caution to satisfy the Damnages and
Fynes decern'd, or to go to Prison till he pay: He is also Burdened to procure
a Remission, and for that effect the Pursuer is decern'd to give him a Letter
of Slains. These things being daily practiced need no Confirmation, but if any
one desires to see Proofs he may read the following Decisions, 8: March 1685.
where ^ermont is fined in 300 Merks to be paid to Fowlis, for demembrating him
of the Ring-Finger of his left Hand, and his Goods Escheated to the King. 19.
Feb. 1608. where Duncan found guilty of mutilating Davidson Meal-maker, of two
Fingers of his left Hand, is decerned to pay the Expense of the Cure, and
remitted to Prison till he satisfy, and to obtain a Letter of Slayns. 11.
March 1631. Scot found guilty of breaking Crawfords Leg, is decerned to pay 250
Merks to him, he granting a Letter of Slayns. And 15. December. 1630. Kennedy in
Maybole is decerned to pay 100 Merks to Barclay for the Cure of his Arm which
he had mutilat. And 15. July 1672. Mowat and Neivings pursued by Cheyne of
Valley and his Brother, for Mutilation and Demembration, were decerned to pay a
thousand Pounds to the Pursuers, and a Fine to the King; and to procure a
Remission, as the Privy Council had recommended; as may be seen in the Criminal
Registers, 29. July 1642. and 25. August following. But Damnages are never
decerned, unless the Party injured pursue for them; and all this is founded on
an old Statute, Cap: 11: Stat: 2: Rob: 2. which likewise prescribes a corporal
Punishment, and the method of Pursuing; the words are If any man mutilats
another, or Wounds or Beats him by forethought Felony, and the Party grieved
pursues him before a Judge by Suit or Complaint, such Form and Order of Process
shall be deduced and led against the Trespasser, as is ordained against a
Manslayer, until he compear at a peemptory day, and then he shall pass to the
knowledge of an Assize; and if he be convict by the Assize, he shall Redeem his
Life from the Judge or Major, and by the Consideration of the Judge he shall
satisfy the Party les'd; And if he be not pursued by the Party les'd, he shall
be Indicted for that Deed, and thole an Assize, at the Justice Air, without
delay or excuse, and being convict, shall Redeem his Lise and Assyth the Party.
The Foundation of the Action for Damnages lies in these words, which appoint
the Party les'd to be satisfied by the Consideration of the Judge, when the
Party les'd is Pursuer, and to be Assythed if the Delinquent be Indicted.

But the great Difficulty lies in these words of the Statute, who mutilats or
wounds another by forethought Felony, to be pursued by the same manner of
Process as a Manslayer is pursued, and if he be convict to redeem his Life:
which leads me to the last Punishment of Mutilation and Demembration I promised
to speak to, viz. If it be Capital? For the Words HE SHALL REDEEM HIS LIFE,
imply, that the Judge if he find cause, may inflict Capital Punishment, if the
Crime be committed by forethought Felony, which is the case of the Statute.
The Grounds of this Difficulty, beside the words of the Statute, are 1. That
Skeen, who in the Latin Copy of the old Statutes has written learned Notes on
them, passes this Statute without any Observation, which holds further that it
appeared difficult to him, or otherwise, that it plainly decreed that capital
Punishment might be inflicted in the case of the Statute. 2. There are diverse
later Laws, viz. Act 28. Parl. 3. Ja. 4. Act 118. Parl. 7. Ja. 5. Act 76. Parl.
6. and Act 3. Parl. 21. Ja. 6. which rank the Crimes of Mutilation and
Demembration with Homicide and other Capital Crimes, and ordain them to be
pursued by the same form and manner of Process; which are the very words of
King Roberts Statute. And none of these Statutes are rescinded by any posterior
Law. 3. If Trespassers were not liable to the pain of Death, but only to
pecuniary Mulcts, they would not need Remissions, and yet by the above cited
Decisions it appears, that the Judges after they had decerned Damages to the
Party injured, and Fines to the King, they decerned them to procure Remissions,
and the Plaintiff to consent thereto, by granting a Letter of Slaines.
Moreover, upon the 17. of May 1610. Keith, pursued by Lindsay for Demembration,
produced a Remission which he had obtained before the Pursuit, burdening him to
assyth the Party, which shows that an Assythment is not sufficient to free the
Party of further punishment. Lastly, There Is a Letter from the King to the
Privy Council recorded in the Journal Books, 14. Sept. 1608. recommending that
Henderson for demembrating Montgomery of three Fingers of his left Hand might
be banished, because it was not usual in this Nation to inflict the pain of
Death for the Crime of Demembration. These words do imply that there was a Law
for that Punishment, but it was gone in Desuetude: And these grounds of Doubt
are considerable. But to me it seems that the Statute of King Robert was made
only ad terrorem and to force a Ransom from the Delinquent, because it runs
not in the Style of a peremptory and positive Statute, but in words importing
that the Life was in the Kings Will, and was to be redeemed by a Ransom at the
Discretion of the Judge, and so it comes to the Sense which S. Caecilius in his
Conference with Phavorinus puts on the Law of Retaliation in the XII Tables;
And it would have been very hard, after all Nations have rejected strict
Retaliation to have punished Demembration with Death, unless the Crime were
accompanied with such atrocious Circumstances, as might justly augment the
punishment. We read in Strabo lib. 15. that some Indians did both inflict
Retaliation and Death; but Grotius dejure B. and. P. lib. 2. cap 20. proves by
many Testimonies that Christians, though they may justly demand Punishment, yet
should incline to the meekest part. And the Law gives it for a Rule in
paenalibus. l. factum. 155.. 2. ff. de Reg. jur. unless the Crime be very
atrocious, and then Severity is necessary. l. perspiciendum 11. in prin. ff. de
paenis.

FINIS.

