A SERMON PREACHED In a Congregation in the City of EXON, ON THE
Thanksgiving-day, Thursday, April 16. 1696.

By a Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Osborne Bookseller, near the Bear in Exon: 1696.

1 Samuel 12.24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your
heart; for consider how great things he has done for you.
IF we look back to the eighth Chapter of this first Book of Samuel, we shall
find, that the Israelites were extremely desirous of a King. The Government
which God had set up amongst them, did not satisfy them: They were fond of
being like to other Nations round about them: They would have a King to Rule
over them: They were weary of that easy, that gentle Government, which God had
Erected; they would have one that should Rule with a more absolute sway, and
exercise a Power more Despotical amongst them. But this was a most apparent
affront to their God; it was an ungrateful contempt of his Government.
Therefore says God to Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.7. They have not rejected thee, but they
have rejected me, that I should not Reign over them; i. e. This their eager
desire of a King, was not so much a quarrel they had against Samuel, as it was
a daring affront to God himself, who had placed them under that sort of
Government by Judges.

In this chap. 12th. verse 1. we have an account of Samuel's discourse to this
People; in which he tells them, that he had granted their request, had complied
with their unreasonable demand, and had appointed them a King. Then he goes
about to convince them of their Ingratitude to their God, in their having been
so impatiently importunate for a King. He recounts to them, how eminently God
had appeared on their behalf: How signally he had delivered them; with what
wonders of Providence he had favored them; how he had many times secured them
from the hands of their cruel Enemies, who sought their destruction. Then in
the close he very tartly upbraids them with their disingenuous carriage to
their God in their peremptory request of a King, verse 12. Ye said unto me,
nay, but a King shall Reign over us, when the Lord your God was your King,

Farther to convince them of their sin against their God, and of the Divine
displeasure against themselves for so insolent a piece of Ingratitude: He calls
for a Storm of Thunder, and of Rain, verse 17. Is it not Wheat-Harvest to day?
I will call to the Lord, and he shall send Thunder, and Rain, that you may
perceive, and see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the
sight of the Lord, in asking you a King. And immediately such a storm of
Thunder, and Rain, was sent from Heaven, which was somewhat unusual in those
Countries in time of Harvest, as some assure us. This Judgment somewhat
awakened them; hereupon they address Samuel to intercede with God for them,
verse 19. And all the people said unto Samuel, pray for thy Servants unto the
Lord thy God, that we die not, for we have added to all our sins this Evil, to
ask us a King. Samuel tells them, that he would become a Supplicant on their
behalf. For, says he, verse 23. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord,
in ceasing to pray for you. As if he had said, I am sensible that it is my
unquestionable duty to pray for you; as I am a man, an Israelite, a Minister, I
am obliged to do this for you. Nay, so far was he from putting them off with a
Denial, that he would not only pray for them, which was part of his Office, but
as a faithful Minister, he would likewise instruct, and advise them for their
advantage, and happiness; he would discover to them what course they should
take, what methods they should pursue, to become a peaceful, a prosperous, and
a flourishing People. Therefore he says, I will teach you the good, and the
right way: A way far beyond any thing of the best Humane Politics whatever; a
Method, for safety, and settlement, far surmounting any thing they could
possibly contrive And this way he lays before them in the words of my Text, viz.

Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your heart; for consider
how great things he has done for you.

In which words you have these things considerable; as

1. An Exhortation to a duty. Fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all
your heart.

In which Exhortation you may again consider,

(1.) The Matter exhorted to; which is, to fear the Lord, and serve him in
truth, i. e. They were to worship him with a Worship of his own prescription,
and of Divine Institution.

(2.) You have the Manner prescribed, how this duty is to be performed; with
all the heart.

2. You have the Encouraging Motive laid down to induce them to the more
careful discharge of this prescribed duty; and that in those words; For
consider how great things he has done for you.

From the words I would present you with this Truth to be the subject of a
short Discourse; viz Doct. That the consideration of those great things which
God has done for a People, should be a powerful Argument to induce them to
fear, and serve him in truth, and with all their hearts. What I have to say
upon this subject, I shall confine to these following Generals. As,

(1.) I shall briefly show you what we are here to understand by fearing, and
serving of God.

(2.) What it may import to serve God in truth, and with all the heart.

(3.) Prove that the Consideration of the great things God has done for a
people should be a powerful Argument to persuade them to serve God in Truth,
and with all the Heart.

(4.) Shall make some practical improvement of it.

(1.) I shall briefly show you what we are here to understand by fearing, and
serving of God.

I shall not at present detain you with a discourse about the various
significations of the word [fear] it will be sufficient for my present purpose
to prove to you that this word many times in the Sacred Scriptures, is of so
ample a signification, as to denote the whole worship of God. Thus, Deuteronomy.
10.12. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear
the Lord thy God? i. e. to adore, and worship him in opposition to all
Heathenish Idolatries, and false-worship. And thus, Psalm. 34.9. Oh! fear the
Lord, ye his Saints, i. e. Pay him all the respect, the reverence, and
adoration which is his due; Thus Deuteronomy 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
and serve him, and shall swear by his Name. What we are here to understand by
the fearing of God, may be learnt from those words of our Savior; which are a
comment upon this Text, Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve. Here our Lord explains the word [fear] by worship;
So that frequently in the sacred writings we meet with the word [fear]
importing the whole worship of God. In this sense are we to take the word
[fear] in the Text: And the following word [serve] is Exegetical of the former,
and likewise shows, that by the word [fear] we are to understand a worshipping,
and an adoring of the True God.

Then as to the word [serve] it also imports the worshipping of God, look back
but to verse 10. of this Chapter, and hence you may learn the meaning of this
word. For there is it said; And they cried to the Lord, and said, we have
sinned, because we have forsaken the Lord, and have served Baalim and
Ashtaroth; But now deliver us out of the hands of our Enemies, and we will
serve thee. Where the serving of God is put in opposition to the serving of
Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and so plainly denotes the worshipping of God. So that
the thing which Samuel here presses the Israelites to, is the paying that
homage, that honor, and adoration to the great Jehovah, to the only immortal
God, which are his due. He would have them to give over the worshipping their
Baalim, and their Ashtaroth; to renounce all Heathen Deities, and to betake
themselves entirely to the service of the only True God.

(2.) I am to explain what it does import to serve, and fear God in truth, and
with all the Heart. And here,

(1.) What it is to serve, and worship God in truth. Now to serve God in truth
is to worship him in a way, and a manner of his own appointment. It is to
present him him with such services as he himself has Authorized. So that it is
put in opposition to all false worship. For Samuel does here caution the
Israelites against all Idolatrous, and Superstitious usages; against all kind
of worship that has not the stamp of Divine Authority put upon it, for no
worship can be pleasing to God, but what can plead a Divine warrant. Whatever
pompous Devotions, and gaudy Ceremonies men may adopt into their worship, if
they cannot show a Commission from Heaven for them, God will abhor them, although
their esteem may be never so much buoyed up by Men's approbation, and applause.
God's will, and command is the Rule of worship, not Men's teeming fancies;
Therefore it is a sin against God, an affront to his Sovereignty for any man,
or any society of Men, to use any othet sort of worship, than that God has
legitimated by his own Command. Wherefore God rebuking the sinful compliance of
the Jews with the Idolatrous worship of the Heathen nations condemns their
practices, as sinful, because they were not bottomed upon any command of his,
Jerem. 19.5. They have built also the high places of Baal, to burn their Sons
with fire, for burnt-offerings unto Baal; which I commanded not, nor spoke it,
neither came it into my mind. They had no injunction from God for the
warranting such a kind of worship, that was enough to render it unlawful. They
acted without a Commission, therefore was it false worship, and sore
displeasing to God. Now worship may be false. Either, (1.) With respect to the
Object. Or, (2.) With respect to the Medium of Worship.


(1.) Worship may be false with respect to the Object of it. As when persons
terminate that worship, which is only due to the great God, on any Created, and
finite being, when they pay that homage and adoration to the Creature, which
ought entirely to be confined to the glorious Creator: either when they limit
their Devotions to the Creature, with a total neglect of the Almighty God; and
substitute some other person, or thing in his Room to be the Object of their
Religious adorations. Thus some besotted wretches worship the Devil; pay their
homage to the Prince of Darkness, as if He were the God who made them Apiece of
Idolatry practiced amongst many of the Inhabitants of Florida: and the Natives
of Virginia, were formerly no strangers to it, and generally in the Southern
America they have set up the destroyer of Souls for their Deity.

Lactant. de origin. error. Cap. 14.
Some have worshipped the Hosts of Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars.
Nay, the Jews themselves, though instructed in the true worship of God, became so
sottish as to take up this piece of Idolatry in imitation of their Heathen
Neighbors: for it is said, Jer. 19.13. And the houses of Jerusalem, and the
houses of the Kings of Judah shall be defiled as the place of Tophet, because
of all the houses upon whose roofs they have burnt Incense unto all the Host of
Heaven. Strange! that a people favored with so many stupendous Miracles, to
render the belief of the Messages of God to them the more easy, should be so
soon drawn away to the worshipping of the Celestial Luminaries! one would have
thought that the many excellent priveledges they were blessed with beyond
others; and the excellent informations they had from the inspired Prophets,
should have sufficiently fortified them against so gross a piece of Idolatry.
But we are told, 2 Kings 17.16. That they left all the Commandments of the Lord
their God, and made them Molten Images, even two Calves, and made a grove, and
worshipped all the Host of Heaven, and served Baal.

Others, as the ancient Persians have set up Fire for their God, and with a
blind Zeal have paid it their Devotions. Matthew. Theat. Histor. p. 13. says,
Chaldaei ignem sacrum pro Deo coluerunt; that the Chaldeans also worshipped
sacred Fire; and he assigns the reason of it. Cum enim audierant Sacrificia a
Sanctis Patriarchis oblata, Igne coelitus delapso Incensa, and consumpta esse;
non Deum, cujus potentia illud fiebat, sed ipsum Ignem colere stolidi ceperunt.
They paid this Reverence to the Element of Fire, because they had heard that it
consumed the Sacrifices which were offered up by the ancient Patriarchs.

But the Egyptians, on the contrary, chose out the Element of Water for their
Deity; and so made their devout Addresses to the Banks of their famous Nilus.
Hereupon, says Julius Firmicus, de Errore, Prof. Relig. p. 2. Aegypti incolae
Aquarum beneficia percipientes, Aquam colunt, Aquis supplicant, Aquas
superstiriosa votorum continuatione venerantur. The Egyptians perceiving the
great advantages of the Element of Water, worship the Waters, Vid. Caelsi
Rhodigini lectiones Antiquas. p. 1489.
pray to them, and address them with their repeated superstitious Vows.

Others again, although they worship God, yet they admit either Angels, or Men,
or some other creature, to share with God in their devotional Addresses. Thus
many amongst the Heathens have adored sinful Men, whose Vices gave them their
Divinity, and whose Crimes were their Consecrations. Bacchus, and Venus, were
numbered amongst their Deities, and had their respective Homages paid them. Vid.
Caecil. Cyprian. de Idolorum vanitat. p. 2. and Minut. Faelix. de Idolorum
vanitat. p. 27. says sane, and Acca Larentia, and Flora, Meretrices
propudiosae, inter Romanorum Deos computandae.

Others have adored Men famous for their Virtue, or eminent for some notable
Exploits, or some remarkable Achievements. Thus the Heathens advanced their
Hero's into the number of their Gods, and the Papists pay Divine Honors to
their Cannonized Saints: For nothing more common with these latter, than to
address their supplications to St. Francis, and St. Dominick, the Virgin Mary,
etc.

But such a Worship as this is false-worship, because terminated upon a wrong
Object; and is a most apparent affront to the great God, who will not have this
honor given to another, Isa. 42.8. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my
glory will I not give to another. To pay a Religious respect to any other than
God, is an express violation of the first command; which peremptorily says,
Thou shall have no other Gods before me. The Worship of the Samaritans of old,
which was of this sort, was therefore censured by our Savior with an, Ye
worship ye know not what, John 4.22.

Samuel well knowing the temper of the Israelites, how prone they were to
relapse into Idolatries; how ready to present their Devotions to the Heathen
Deities, does here advise them to serve God in truth, with an utter rejection
of all the Heathen Ido^s whatever. He would have them to confine their Worship
only to the true God, to the glorious Jehovah, in opposition to all false Gods,
and Gentile Deities. For God is the only proper Object of Religious Worship;
therefore, says our Savior, Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. Persons ought to worship him exclusively,
without admitting any into Partnership with him. For he will not suffer a Rival
in his Honor, Psalm 50.15. Call upon me (not upon a Saint, or an Angel) in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. None have power to save as God,
therefore none should have such honor as he.

(2) Worship may be false as to the Medium of it. God has declared in his
sacred Word, in what way, and by what means he will be honored, and adored. He
knows what ways of Worship are most suitable to his own Nature, and so what
will be most acceptable to himself: Therefore it is no way reasonable that in
these matters every man should be left to his own wild fancy. For we find from
experience, that when persons have taken upon them a liberty, or license
rather, to prescribe Modes of Worship, they have fixed upon such trifling, such
ludicrous, and sometimes barbarous Rites, as nothing comport with so holy, so
merciful, so awful a Being as God is; so that God himself has all the reason to
determine of those Modes by which he will be honored, and adored. And he has
positively prescribed the way in which he will have men to pay him Homage. As
our Worship must be confined to God, as the solitary Object of it; so the way
of it must be limited by his sacred Will. Men must not make their own
Imaginations the Rule of Worship. That is not current Coin which has not
Caesar's Image and Superscription upon it; and that is not true and warrantable
Worship, which has not the stamp of a Divine Authority. God has set us bounds
in the Matter of his Worship, to which we dare not make any additions, and from
which we are not allowed to make any defalcations, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add
to the Word, which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that
ye may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you. A like
passage you find, Deuteronomy. 12.32. What thing soever I command you, observe to do
it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish therefrom. God will not allow any
Men to make either additions to, or substractions from his own Worship. If Men
substract from the Worship of God, and wilfully neglect what he has prescribed,
they daringly affront his Sovereignty, and quarrel at his Commands. If they add
to his Institutions, and appoint more parts of Worship than he has done, they
arraign his Wisdom; as if he had not contrived wisely enough for his own
Honor; as if he wanted wisdom for the Instituting of his own Worship. It
savours of an intolerable piece of Arrogance for any Man to presume, that he
can prescribe to God, or make any advantageous additions to his own
Appointments. Such an one forgets the narrowness of his own Intellectuals, as
well as the All-comprehensiveness of the Divine Wisdom. He does but display
his own folly, who goes about to teach the Omniscient Deity what ought to be
adopted into his Worship. But to conclude this; God must not be worshipped
according to the little Model of our fancies, but according to his own
Appointments. Not according to our Inventions, but his own Institutions; not
according to our Imaginations, but according to the Line of his own
Revelations; not according to Men's extravagant suggestions, but his own wise
prescriptions. Whoever offers to God a Worship which he has not authorized,
does not serve him, but rather affront him. Hence it was that Samuel, studying,
and designing the good and welfare of the Israelitish People, advises them to
offer to God a true Worship, a Worship which he would approve, and accept;
that so he might still continue to be their propitious Governor, and their
bountiful Benefactor.

(2.) As persons must worship God with a worship that is true, as to the matter
of it, so it must be right as to the manner; it must be offered to the glorious
Object of it with all the heart. As fearing, and serving of God in truth, is
here in my text, put in opposition to all false worship, so I humbly conceive,
the serving of God with all the heart, is put in opposition to all
dissimulation, and Hypocrisy. Too many worship God with their bodies, when
their hearts are estranged from him. They offer him the outward Man, and deny
him the Soul; Present him with the Carcass of devotion, whenas there is no
spirit to animate it. They give him the bended knee, and the hand lifted up,
whilst their minds are wandering after Vanity. Of such kind of worshippers as
these is the complaint, Matthew. 15.8, 9. This people draws nigh to me with
their mouths, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
Were there no more bodies, sometimes in the most thronged Assemblies, then
there are Souls, how small would the number be? How often do men dissemble in
their Duties, and offer to their God a skin instead of a Sacrifice; so that
although their worship may be pompous, yet it is not sincere, and will not meet
with acceptance from him, who looks beyond the surface, and penetrates the very
secrets of the Soul. God does not only expect that worship men present him
should be true, as to the matter, but sincere, as to the manner. Some in the
Duties of Religion are just like a person who takes his Scabbard, and offers it
to his prince but imploys his sword in another's service. They will bring their
bodies into the places of worship, and put them in a posture of reverence,
whilst their affections perhaps shall be committing folly with some darling
Idol, erected in the fancy. But in vain do such worshippers presume upon
accepta nce. An all-seeing eye easily discerns the fallacy, and a God of truth
abominates it. When the Soul, the choicest part of man, as Engaged in his
worship, is actively employed in his service, then does he smell a sweet savor
in it, Pro. 23.26. My Son give, me thy heart. In all the Solemn and Sacred
duties, which men do perform, in all the Devotions they present to their God,
he demands their hearts and affections; without which, all the most glittering
shows, and gaudy pretenses imaginable will amount to no more than a specious
vanity. Lactantius. de. justit. Lib. 5. Cap. 20. speaking of the excellency of
the Christian Religion as unconceivably surmounting that of the Heathen, says,
Illic nihil exigitur aliud, quam sanguis pecudum, and fumus, and inepta
libatio, hic bona men's, purum pectus, innocens vita, Go amongst the Heathens
and there is nothing but the blood of beasts, a little vanishing smoke, and
ridiculous Sacrificing: but with us there is a good mind, a pure heart, and an
innocent life. The Christians presented God not with slain beasts, but with
pure hearts: And says the same Author, just, before, Nostra Religio tota in
animo colentis est, quia mentem ipsam pro Sacrificio habet; Our Religion lies
in the mind of the worshipper, and we offer up our Souls to God for a
Sacrifice. But too too many Christians of latter ages have strangely
degenerated from the primitive practice, and have sat down satisfied with a few
external, and lazy devotions. Amongst the Papists it must be confessed, they
have a very pompous, theatrical worship; but there is little of Soul or Spirit
in it.

Many amongst those of the Reformed Churches are too prone to please themselves
with some externals of worship, and splendid formalties. But alas! the most
accurate external observances will never attract the favorable eye of God;
when there is an absence of the heart. All acceptable worship must arise from
the Center of the Soul, for God is a Spirit, John 4.24. and nothing will please
him but a spiritual worship.

Well then the affections must animate all our devotions, and the whole heart
must be found an ingredient in all our services: All the powers, all the
faculties of the Soul must be seriously employed in every part of worship we at
any time engage in, not only the understanding to apprehend the nature of the
duties they are to perform, but the will, and affections must be active too.
Every faculty ought to be vigorous, and wakeful, when persons are making their
Religious addresses to the glorious King, no power should be dull, or sleepy.
As for instance, in the duty of Prayer, the whole Soul ought to be engaged in
it. The understanding should be employed in the consideration of God's glorious
perfections, of our unworthiness to appear before him, of the many wants we
labor under, and of Gods (both) ability and readiness to supply all our
necessities. The will ought to be engaged in purposing the renuntiation of the
sins which we own in confession, and in resolving a discharge of the duties,
which we beg the grace to perform. Our affections should all be shining, and
active, when we view over the glorious perfections of the Deity, such as
Almightiness, Immensity, Infinite knowledge, Justice, and holiness; we should
call up the passion of fear, see to have our minds possessed with a Reverential
awe at the thoughts of so termendous a Majesty. When we recount his Grace, and
his Mercy, his Goodness and his Bounty, our Souls should be enflamed with love.
Our hatred should rise against sin when we acknowledge it, with its heightning
circumstances; and our desires should be carried out with a great deal of
warmth after grace, and glory. Thus, when the powers of the Soul have each
their respective activities in duty, then is God served with all the heart.

(3.) The third particular I proposed to speak to, is the Motive employed to
enforce the duty prescribed. The consideration of the great things which God
has done for a people, should be a powerful argument with them to induce them
to serve the Lord in truth, and with all the heart. The Command of God does
oblige, and should engage persons to serve, and adore him with sincerity, zeal,
and affection. But God's mercy, his goodness, and his bounty should be an
additional persuasive: When God with gracious, and merciful providence attends
a people, it is but equitable they should return him A tribute of thanks, and
adoration. Signal favors, and seasonable deliverances strongly plead with them
to present him with their best, and their choicest services: Such returns as
these should persons make.

(1.) Upon the account of Graditude: Men ought to make thankful returns to
their glorious preserver, and their bountiful benefactor, for all the miracles
of mercy he has showed them. When the arm of the Lord has brought them
Salvation, they should express their thankful sense of it by devout adorations,
and a loyal observance of all his injunctions. The Israelites had an ample
experience of the indulgent care of Heaven toward them; God in his wise and
powerful providence often appeared so signally for them, as that it was to the
astonishment of their enemies, and their own admiration. What an amazing, what
a surprising deliverance did he gloriously accomplish for them at the Red Sea?
In what a miraculous way did he support, and sustain them, during their long
peregrination in the Wilderness! In how wonderful a manner did he introduce
them into the promised Land, and settle them there! what astonishing victories
did he often give them over their enemies; when as the number of the Israelites
was but small, and the armies of the Aliens like to the sand of the Sea
innumerable? God made them formidable to all the nations about them, Crowned
them with admirable successes; and made them glorious by an unusual train of
providence. He stopped the course of the Sun in the Heavens to make the longer
day, that they might have time enough to complete the conquest of their
Enemies. Many times when the confidence of their foes was advanced, when they
threatened high, and the Israelites were involved in apparent danger, had no
prospect of an escape, then, in their extremity, has God brought them
Salvation. Now certainly ingenuity, and gratitude should promote such a people,
so blessed, so wonderfully preserved, so signally owned by God, to fear, and
serve him in truth, and with all the heart. Gratitude obliged them to a most
punctual observance of all his Commands, to a most cordial, and sincere
performance of all the duties he had prescribed them. If God in an illustrious
manner saves a people from ruin, if he favors them with peculiar priveledges,
and advances them above their Neighbors by his choice, and extraordinary
blessings, it will be the blackest ingratitude in such, to neglect his worship,
or to put him off with a few Hypocritical devotions. Is it commendable for a
people to trifle in their worshipping of that God, who has made his perfections
Conspicuous in their safety? Where is the Justice of it? when persons are made
eminent by their mercies, it is but reasonable they should give God the glory
of it, by the most Cordial, and lively devotions. When Moses had recounted the
great things which God had done for Israel at the Red Sea, and in the
Wilderness, he said to them, Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now Israel, what does the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways,
and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy Soul.

(2) Persons should make a return of their hearty devotions to their God, for
the great things he has done for them, likewise in point of Wisdom; That God
might again appear for them in the times of their danger, and distress. It is
no part of wisdom for a people to affront their God, to provoke their glorious
preserver, or to Engage an Almighty power against them. Therefore it is a
madness in any, after God has signally appeared for, and delivered them, to
flight his worship, to dissemble in their devotions, and to mock with an
infinite Majesty; For this is the way to have the divine Providence as
Conspicuous in their destruction, as it was before eminent in their Salvation.
This will engage him against them as an Enemy; who before appeared for them in
the Relation of a Friend. Therefore it is a piece of commendable Policy in a
People to be sincere Adorers of their God, especially after unusual, and
surprising Deliverances, that so he may continue to succor, and save them in
their Straits and Dangers, he may still secure them from the Rage and Violence
of their Designing Enemies; that he may defend and protect them, when subtle
Heads, and powerful Hands are attempting their Ruin; that when Plots, and
base, and barbarous Designs are framing against them, he may suddenly blast,
and totally disappoint them. Knowing this, that as God has done great things
for a People, so he will continue to be friend, and to bless them, if they will
be but Loyal, and dutiful, and sincere in their Adorations of him. For, says
God, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor; i. e. Those who adore,
and worship me with a Religious Fear, and with Devout Hearts, according to my
own Institutions, I will honor them, I will advance them to Dignity, I will
make them glorious, and prosperous. That therefore was good Advice of David to
his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of
thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing a mind; for
the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the
thoughts: If thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him,
he will cast thee off for ever.

USE.

(1.) I shall apply this Truth by way of Reprehension; and this condemns,

(1.) Those who neglect to fear and serve God with all their hearts, although
God has done great things for them. Many amongst us are justly chargeable with
gross Ingratitude on this score. God has been pleased to Plant the Gospel in
its Purity among us, and has now preserved it with us for many years, in spite
of all the Rage of Hell, and Malice of R^me. God has hitherto by a series of
gracious Providence, secured to us our Civil and Religious Liberties, whenas
our Enemies at home and abroad have been employing all their Skill and their
Cunning, all their Power and Interest to wrest them from us. They have been
unwearied in their contriving Methods to Enslave, and Ruin us: But the success
has not been answerable to their restless Endeavors, and their matchless
Diligence: No, the watchful Shepherd of our Israel has observed all their
bloody and mischievous Designs, and has been as careful to prevent and defeat
them, as they have been studious to hatch, and contrive their Villainies. How
often has the Divine Providence interposed for us, sheltred us from Threatening
Storms; when we were in danger, and knew it not? How many Eminent Deliverances
has he wrought out for us, when we saw no Design against us, till it was
rendered visible by the defeat? Yet after all these Admirable displays of the
Divine Mercy and Goodness, how little is God served, or sincerely worshipped
amongst us? How do Men trifle in their Duties? and complement with their God by
their External Devotions? Men of all Persuasions pretend a great deal of Zeal
for the Worship of God; nothing more dear to them, if you will believe what
their Tongues avow; yet when they come to engage in this Worship, of which they
seem so fond, how much coldness and carelessness do they betray and discover?
Their hearts and affections do not keep them company in their Duties. But,
where is the Equity of such a Carriage? What! Has God signally owned us? Has he
been our glorious Protector? Psalm. 126.2. Has he filled our Tongues with
laughter, and the Faces of our Enemies with shame and confusion? And shall we
slight his Worship? Shall we offer him a dead Devotion without the heart? This
will be unreasonable, not administering the least shadow for a defense. Those
words of Moses are applicable enough to such ungrateful Wretches, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, oh foolish people, and unwise! Is not he thy
Father which has bought thee? has he not made thee, and established thee? Was
it not he, who delivered us from the Romish Yoke? who rescued us from Popish
Tyranny? Has he not made us a prosperous, and a flourishing Nation? made us
great, and glorious in the Eyes of our Neighbors? and Established the Reformed
Religion amongst us? And shall we dare to provoke such a God with our
Formalities, and Hypocrisies, our fruitless and heartless Devotions? Oh! be
ashamed of an Ingratitude so black and inexcusable!

(2.) This condemns also those, who are so far from being encouraged to serve
God from the consideration of the great things he has done for us, that they
murmur at, and are discontented with their own mercies. They are dissatisfied
with God's gracious Providence. They fret, and storm, and repine, because God
has delivered us. Own they will not that God has done any great thing for us in
the late happy Revolution. The mercies which God has been pleased to hand to us
by our King they account their misfortune, and are ready to vote them
oppression. They are uneasy because they cannot be in Slavery. Our safety is
their sorrow, and our liberty is their bondage. They can see nothing of a
gracious Providence in the King's Settlement upon the Throne. All those
wonderful, and signal Successes, which God has granted him, have not been able
to open their Eyes, or to make them to see the kindness of Heaven to us. A
Crown upon a Protestant head is the matter of their grief, and nothing will
content them but a Popish Governor. They would have a King, who is an Enemy to
their Religion, their Liberties, and their Peace. A strange Infatuation! that
any persons professing the Protestant Religion, loving their own Country,
valuing their own Laws and Government, studious of their own Tranquillity,
should be governed by such a Temper! whilst the late King James was upon the
Throne encouraging the Popish Party, visibly driving to Rome with a full
Career; then they were uneasy, till they had dismissed him from the
Government; they concluded, (as justly they might) that they could not long be
safe, if such Throngs of Priests and Jesuits were admitted to crowd about the
Throne. But now the Tide is turned, and he that was before so much their Dread,
is now their Darling; his Return is now eagerly desired, whose Absence before
they could have wished for. Now, it must be supposed, he has been taught more
Mildness, and Mercy, more Faithfulness, and Veracity in the French Court; and
is now formed into a loving Temper to Protestants. We must now imagine that his
long Converse with some of the Most Violent, and Cruel of the Catholics, has
much abated his Rigor, calmed his Spirit, and sweetened him into Lenity. The
discontented Party would have us believe, that the late King, having been
provoked by the Loss of Three Kingdoms, having been more fully instructed in
the Politics of France* having been exasperated by the suggestions of the
Papists about him; is now the better qualified for the Government of a
Protestant People. They promise themselves, that he will be all Clemency and
Kindness to them; that he will be studious of their Interest, and they have
expectations of I know not what immense Advantages which will accrue to them,
in case he should be restored. But alas! these unthinking persons do strangely
forget what they actually suffered, and what they were farther in danger of
suffering under the late Reign. They are of the Temper of the discontented
Israelites, whose cry it was, Numb, 14.4. Let us make a Captain, and let us
return to Egypt. They forgot the Miracles at the Red Sea, and in the
Wilderness. Although God was bringing about of their complete Deliverance, and
their comfortable Settlement, yet were they discontented. They would return to
their former Bondage. They had rather go back, and lie down under Pharaoh's
cruel Oppression, than that God by Moses should deliver them. Thus many amongst
us, are so lamentably besotted that they had rather have their necks galled
with a Romish Yoke, than accept of deliverance from the hand of a Protestant,
of a reformed Prince. This is horrible ingratitude both to God, and their King.

(2.) By way of advice; I would persuade all persons amongst us, to fear, and
serve God in truth, and with all the heart. Do not dissemble with an
All-knowing God in your Devotions. Let your affections animate all your duties.
Keep close to the ways of worship of God's own prescription. Take not up with
any superstitious dotages of Men. Worship God according to his own
Institutions, and not according to Men's fancyful inventions See that all your
Religious services be such as God does require, both as to the matter and the
manner of them too. To encourage you to this, I would lay before you no other
Motive, than what is offered you in my Text. For consider how great things the
Lord has done for you.

Consider the many favors, and blessings which the bounty of Heaven has
indulged us. God has planted the reformed Religion in these Lands, and made it
a national stablishment. He has favored us with excellent civil Privileges,
and Immunities. He has continued these blessings now with us for many years,
notwithstanding the many daring impieties, and Rebellions with which we
provoked him: Although we have despised the riches of his goodness. slighted his
mercy, and taken no care to make suitable returns to his bounty; yet has he not
made us desolate, nor p rmitted our restless Enemies to ravish from us our
privelidges either Civil, or Sacred, He has brought us most excellent, and
wonderful Salvations, when our case has been deplorable, and we just upon the
brink of ruin.

It was not long since we had a Popish Governor seated upon the English
Throne, swaying the Scepter according to the directions of Popish Council. Then
they attempted to Subject us to the Romish Yoke, and to introduce amongst us
the Idolatries, and Superstitions of the Romish Church. Had we but continued a
few years longer under that Government, in all probability we might have seen
all our Religious, and Civil Liberties torn from us. For where ever Popery
comes, it brings Idolatry into the Church, and usually slavery into the state.

The design which was then on foot, was to have reduced us to the Posture of
France, to have made us Slaves, and Idolators. And had not our Gracious God
happily prevented them, by the late seasonable revolution; instead of a
well-limitted Monarchy in the state, we should have smarted under a barbarous
Tyranny. Instead of Religion, and true worship in the Church, we should have
been overrun with multitudes of Superstitious Foperies, and unwarrantable
devotions. In liew of Solid Gospel truths to have been preached to public
Auditorys, we should have been entertained with nothing but Legendary Stories
from the Priests, and Monks, of equal truth with the most fablous Romance.
Instead of Devout prayers, in our own Tongue, we should have been put off with
a little Latin Service, with some Ave Maria's and pater nosters. Beads would
have been more frequently handled than our Bibles. Instead of the Complete
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, we should have had only a Part of it; the Cup
being denied the Layity by the Church of Rome.

To conclude, Instead of an Indulgence to tender Consciences, we should have
been Treated with fire, and faggot, with all the Severities, and Cruelties that
Popish Malice could have suggested.

But blessed be the Lord, who gave us not a prey to their Teeth, Ps. 124.6. He
by a gracious, and an unexpected providence prevented these miseries which
threatened us. He sent, our, Moses amongst us, to secure, and deliver us from
our, more, than Egyptian Foes. He opporturely conducted our King to the
British shore, led him on, without blood, or opposition to the ^hrone, there
he seated him to the general joy of the Nation, and to the Confusion of our
avowed Enemies; where still he sits, to the satisfaction of the most, and the
best of his Subjects.

But yet it must be confessed that a Malignant party amongst us, envy him, his
Honor and Advancement, and are troubled to see so much virtue mounted to a
Throne. They grieve, that one so fitted for Government, one so tender of our
safety, one so concerned for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, one
so much an Enemy to an Arbitary sway, should be graced with a Crown.

Hereupon they have been incessantly contriving how they might divest him of
his Regal dignity, and give him a remove from so high a Station. They have for
many years successively been prosecuting Methods for the depriving him of his
Life, and Throne. But that powerful providence, which raised him so high, has
hitherto been his guard, and defense. It has been glorious in his protection,
and his enemies defeat.

But of late all their consults, and designs were just brought to an issue, for
they resolved with a desperate party of Men well armed, and equipped to have
assaulted the King in his Coach; there to have killed, and murdered him. Some
of them were to have set upon the Guards, whilst others were to have been
employed in the barbarous Assassinating of his Royal Person. And as soon as they
should have accomplished their bloody design, and have Executed their Hellish
purpose, they would have embroyled the Nation, by the universal insurrection of
the dissatisfied party. Then all this was to have been followed with an
invasion from France. Inhumane vilany! What! to seek to take off the Life of so
exexcellent, so courageous, so merciful, so just a Prince by a Clandestine
Murder. What! to raise an unnatural War in our own bowels! And to invite over
the barbarous French to execute their horrid cruelties amongst us! Oh! how
base! how black a design was this!

But what great things has the Lord done for us! He timely detected this
Inhumane vilany, he has brought into a clear Light their bloody design; He has
turned their subtle contrivance into foolishness. He has made some of the
Conspirators themselves to be the discovers of this Matchless Treason. And
maugre all their Hellish Projects, our King is in safety, our Nation is in
peace; and the mischief these Miscreants designed for the best of Princes, is
fallen upon their own heads, so that we can Joyfully sing with the Psalmist,
Psalms 9.16. The wicked is snared in the Work of his own Hands. Higgaion Selah.

But that we may the more fully apprehend the great things God has done for us
in defeating of this barbarous design. Let us consider.

(1.) The person, whose life these Base, and Bloody Assassines would have taken
off. The life of a Protestant Prince, of a great General, Eminent for Courage
and Conduct, of one, who, under God, is the safety of the Nation; the Cement of
the Confederacy against the power of France: Of one, who Rules us with all
mildness, and clemency according to our own Laws, and Constitutions, and
exposes his dear Life in the high places of the Field every year, for the
preservation of the Protestant Religion, and our Nation's security. How readily
does he endure all the Fatigues of War? And to what great dangers does he
expose His Royal Person continually? How forward is he to face the Eenemy in
the Field, and to stand the shock of all their warlike assaults?

He is a King, who seeks not to advance his own Prerogative, by trampling upon
the Liberties of the Subject, nor studies to make himself great by the
oppression of his People. But he is one, who makes our safety, our interest,
and our happiness his own. What a Vilany then must it needs be! to endeavor
secretly to Assassinate so brave, so excellent, so virtuous, and so renouned a
Prince? This enhances the crime, and makes it look with the blackest hue.

(2.) Consider, what in all probability, would have been the fatal consequences
of the Execution of this bloody design; We should have been infested with all
the miseries, and doleful Calamites, which are the usual products of Intestine
Wars. Savage cruelties would have been exercised toward innocent, and
peaceable men. The Swords of our Male contents would have been drawn, and have
been sharpened into a very great keenness, by the assistance they were to have
had from France: Animated by French Dragoons what barbarties would they not
have been guilty of. And if a Gallick Army had invaded us, what Cruelties, what
inhumanities, what grievous oppressions must we have expected from them! could
we have hoped for any thing of mildness or mercy from those, who have for many
years, been trained up in blood, and violence; been all along accustomed to
spoil, and rapine! They, being our professed Enemies, on the account of Religion,
they would have thence been animated to have treated us with all the Rage, and
Rigor, and Cruelty imaginable. They would have fired our Touns, defaced, and
demolished our places of worship, seized upon our Treasures, slain our young
Men, with the Sword, deflowered our Virgins, made havoc of our delectable
things; and have fallen upon us with all the rage, and insolence of Papists,
and Soldiers. For how can we conceive that they would have done less, than
have acted so dismal a tragedy, in an Enemie's Country? Oh! what man of sense,
of honor, or Religion would have engaged in so base, so villainous a design, to
have enslaved, to have ruined, to have destroyed, and laid wast the Land of his
Nativity? Heathens have often Sacrificed their lives for the safety of their
Country; but here we had Christians, pretended Members of the National
Established Church, Embarked in a design to deluge their Country with the worst
of miseries. Oh! Unparalelled Villainy! Some of the Conspirators pretended it to
be the Cause of God, in which they were engaged, and that they designed the
good of the Church; so that it seems, like those of Old, Mic. 3.10. They were
for building up of Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. So that they
would have built their Church with the ruins of the Nation, and have cemented
it with the blood of the Slain. Let us learn to rate the greatness of the
Deliverance, from the dismal Consequences of the Design, if it should have
succeeded.

(3.) Consider, that this Bloody and Villainous Conspiracy was just ripe for
Execution. The Assassines were ready to have dispatched the King: They were
prepared to have given the Assault, waiting only for the Critical Moment which
might favor their Design. They impatiently expected the King's motion abroad,
that they might have had an opportunity to practice their intended Villainy.
Multitudes of the Discontented Party were prepared for an Insurrection. The
French were in a readiness to have made a Descent upon us with their formidable
Troops. The generality of the Nation began to be uneasy at home, because of
the badness of our Money: Our Enemies were confident of their Success. And were
little, or nothing sensible of our Danger. Thus were we just upon the brink of
Ruin: But Divine Providence interposed, suddenly crushed this subtle
Contrivance, prevented the Fatal Blow which was intended; detected the Plot,
laid open the Design, and turned, the Intended Mischief upon the Heads of the
Barbarous Conspirators. How illustriously has the Divine Goodness appeared in
revealing this Secret Wickedness, when it was just arrived at the
Accomplishment! Certainly he must be wretchedly blind, who cannot yet see the
great things God has done for us.

(4.) Now let us consider the signal Mercies we do yet enjoy, notwithstanding
all the Malice and Designs of our Inveterate Enemies. Our King is yet in
Safety, and our Nation in Peace. We yet enjoy the Worship of God without
Idolatry; we have Liberty without Slavery. The Sword does not ravage in the
midst of our Bowels. Every one sits down joyfully under his own Vine, and his
own Fig Tree; and there is none to make us afraid, Micah 4.4. We live under the
Conduct of Gentle Governors, who do not make us to bend under a Gallick Yoke,
nor Reign over us with an Egyptian Rigor. They do not Rule us with Rods of
Iron, nor Scepters of Steel: But they treat us with all the Lenity and
Mildness, with all the Justice and Righteousness that the most discontented
amongst us can possibly expect. Can persons have the vanity to suppose that we
should be full as easy under the Government of a Popish Power! Can they
believe that the late King (now more fully taught the Methods of Persecution
and Severity in the French Court) would upon his return, (which God prevent) be
more tender of our Lives, our Liberties, or more intent upon the promoting of
our common Tranquillity? What Man of thought, or penetration can ever give
admittance to so groundless a supposition?

Well, notwithstanding the restless Malice of our Enemies, Heaven showers down
a plenty of Mercies incessantly upon us. Let us thankfully own God as our
Bountitul Benefactor in the bestowment of them, as our Glorious Protector, in
continuing to us the quiet and peaceable possession of them. We have many
Eminent Blessings both Civil, and Sacred, which our Enraged Adversaries have
not as yet been able by Cunning or Power to ravish from us. Let our God have
the glory of all. Let the consideration of our present Tranquillity engage us to
fear God, and to serve him in Truth, and with all our heart. Let us no more put
him off with heartless, and hypocritical Devotions. Let all our Services be
accompanied with Sincerity. God was real in our Deliverance, let us be real in
our Duties. Let our warmest Affections animate all our Devotions. What greater
Motive can be propounded to you, to engage you in the cordial Service of your
God, than this great, this signal, this eminent Deliverance, which he has so
seasonably wrought out for us, Deuteronomy. 11.7, 8. Your Eyes have seen all the great
acts of the Lord, which he did, therefore shall ye keep all the Commands which
I command you this day. Own the kindness of Heaven, seen in the safety of the
King, and our own Security, by Thankful Lips, and Loyal Obedient Lives. Let us
offer him the Sacrifice of Praise; let us magnify his Name, and grace our
Profession by a Religious, an Honest, and a Sober Conversation, that God may
not frown upon us; but may continue with us the Blessings of Time, and at last
ravish our Souls with the Joys of Eternity.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Robert Osborne near the Bear in Exon.
THE Pastor's Care and Dignity, and the People's Duty A Sermon Preached at the
Assembly of Ministers at Taunton, Sept. 7. 1692. By G. Tross. Christ's
Ascension into Heaven asserted and practically improved in several Sermons. By
the Reverend Mr. Joseph Hallet, late Minister of the Gospel in Exon. The
Pastor's Charge, and the People's Duty. A Sermon for the most part Preached at
the Assembly of Ministers at Exon, June 7. 1693. By Samuel Stoddon.

