A VINDICATION OF The Doctrine contained in Pope Benedict xii. his Bull, and in
the General Council of Florence, under Eugenius the iiii. concerning the state
of departed SOULS. In answer to a certain Letter, Printed and published against
it, by an unknown Author, under this Title A Letter in Answer to the late
Dispensers of Pope Benedict xii. his Bull, etc, Wherein, the Progress of Master
Whites lately minted Purgatory is laid open, and its Grounds examined; And (in
order to a further discovery) a Prospect given to the Reader, of this new
School, it is Method, it is Design, to evacuate Christian Faith, and to establish
a new Philosophical, or a pretended demonstrative Religion.

Psalm. 118. 85. The unjust have told me fables, etc. Coloss. 2. 8. Beware lest
any man seduce you by vain Philosophy, etc. By S. W. A Roman Catholic.

Printed at Paris. 1659.

TO THE UNKNOWN AUTHOR OF THIS LETTER, In Answer to the late Dispensers of Pope
BENEDICT his Bull, etc.
SIR,
Sect. 1. I Gratefully Acknowledge my Obligations, for the good will, you show
to Instruct me. The perusal of this Bull and Council had long since settled a
full belief in my soul: That the Purgation of separated Souls might be
Completed before Reunion with their Bodies and the General day of Judgment.
So that, in truth, I was not a little surprised by your book. It was my
misfortune it fell into my hands, just then, when our expectations were at the
height of those troubles, which afterward succeeded in our Nation, and which
have ever since much diverted me from things of this nature, whilst in such
nicities, as you now have brought the question too, our understandings ought to
be perfectly calm. And this I hope will plead for the delay that I have not
presented you sooner with these Reflections on your book (which I designed long
ago) if my other occasions had not interposed themselves. I found not that
satisfaction I earnestly wished for in your Letter; your Objections seemed not
manly, your Answers not home; you will pardon me then if I mind you of my
Exceptions against both: which I shall endeavor to do with that just
moderation that befits Brethren. I cannot altogether approove of harshness in
writing, even against the professed adversaries of our holy Faith. It was not
unhappily said by one of them, as I remember, That writing of Controversies
ought to carry as much sweetness as Love Letters, and that the other rudeness
served but to chase away the game. And since you have administered to me a just
occasion to reprehend this in your Letter, I shall be wary not to be justly
taxable my self, both to yours and your Masters person, Master White (whom you
have now introduced into the scene) I bear as much respect, as any one
whosoever, upon so slight an acquaintance: It is not the Doctor, but the
Doctrine, combat. I cannot digest their boldness, who usurp the Authority of
the supreme tribunal, to brand any opinion with the title of Heresy, whilst
the Church has not done it to their hands: much less can I endure, that the
Author himself should be stigmatized with the infamous character of an
Heretic. And though in this present controversy, I am fully convinced, that
this modern systeme of Purgatory stands condemned, both by this Bull of
Benedict the 12^. and the Florentin Council, and that of Trent, and by
consequence is Heretical: yet I am very willing to believe, those who sustain
it, do not see its condemnation. And yet I think it will appear that the Author
of it, and those Scholars who are now able pro^icients in his school are
armed, even against the Authority it self. This misfortune I regret, that I
know not how to address my self to you, but in print: and since things which
pass the press, are not confined to one or few men's view, but exposed to many
eyes and censures, I am necessitated to satisfy even vulgar readers; who
certainly, though perhaps now acquainted with the controversy it self, never
yet discovered the source and fountain of this new molded Purgatory. And to the
end I may do so, I shall in the very introduction to my discourse lay open to
my readers eye, the first grounds and rise, and the afterward continued
progress, of this your new doctrine: Nor could I otherwise acquit my self of it,
with just satisfaction to other readers, whilst if I had spoken only in
manuscript to you, (who are now raised (as you say) above your pitch and
enabled to give any one satisfaction that is not before hand resolved to
receive none, by conferring with those solid men, who are acquainted with every
resort of Master Whites doctrine) my business had received a much quicker
dispatch.

For my Method, I hope, you will pardon me, if leaving whatsoever you have
urged either against the Publishers (whom you are pleased to style Dispensers)
of this Bull and Council, or any thing else, not directly pertinent to our
question, to the latter end of my Discourse. After your Doctrine laid open, and
its grounds, and the Question stated between us, I betake my self at first to
our business in hand about the Bull and Council. And for my Style, since we are
now in a Controversy much more proper for a Divinity Lecture then a Rhetorical
Declamation, the strength of the Sense, rather then the quaintness of the
Expression, will best befit the subject. This Preface will claim your pardon,
if you consider it gives some light to what I hereafter say. But I will neither
detain you, nor my Reader any longer, but fall to our work in hand.

Sect. 2. I have (...) from a very Learned and Worthy Friend of mine,
Introduction.
that he himself being present at a Conference between Master White and another
eminent Scholar of our Nation, diverse years before Master White appeared in
Print: among other things then discoursed of, Master White advanced a
Phylosophical Position which the other denied, as inconsistent with our holy
faith of the Blessed Sacrament: to which Master White replied, Let us find out
the Truths in Philosophy, and the Mysteries of our Faith will square well
enough with them: to which the other, Nay, Sir, by your favor, let us in the
first place presuppose the established verities of faith, and then square our
Philosophy to them.

I have many times reflected, often conferred with others, of the different
consequences, of those different methods, which these two great persons held in
leading our understandings to truth. I have often entertained my self with
these thoughts, what a dangerous method Master White prescribed, and as now
appears followed? what a natural and new divinity it would prove, which should
be squared to those Phlyosophical truths, which our weak understandings should
be able to establish, independent of divine revelation? And at last Master
White has brought forth this his issue, and made it public to the world.

Sect. 3. It is not my design, in this our present discourse, to run through
those many little books, which this Author has given us on several occasions:
And the rather because the authority of our supreme Pastor, has already taken
notice of, and interposed his sharp, but justly deserved censures, against
diverse of them; and doubtless will proceed against the rest, according to their
demerits I shall then as to the present, concern my self only with this one
controversy, of the state of those souls which leave this life in the state of
Grace; but so that they are not as yet fully purged: and with those positions
and grounds, on which this new molded Fabric of Purgatory stands, unless some
one Doctrine or other, of the Author of it, having a near alliance with the
business in hand, so offer it self, that our discourse, and the Subject would
be illustrated by it.

Sect. 4. And first as to the opinion it self, he thus delivers it of the
middle State, (acc. 1.) I acknowledge (says he) in humane failings, a
difference betwixt mortal, and venial; nor do I deny an imperfect remission of
mortal impurities, but I place not this imperfection, in that the sin is
totally cancelled, the pain only remaining; but in the change of an absolute,
into a conditional affection, as it were instead of, I will, substituting, I
will not; but Oh, that I lawfully might, etc. the affection or inclination he
had to temporal good, is restrained, not extinguished, of mortal become venial,
changed, not destroyed. Being therefore by the operation of death (as it were)
new molded, and minted into a purely spiritual substance; he carries
inseparably with him the matter of his torment; in like manner as he also does,
who takes leave of his body, with his affections only venially disordered; This
is not well (...) by T. W.
we do not then any where imagine a place filled with hellish dishes, by which
the soul, as from an external tormentor, suffers a butchery; but we are in
horror of the strife and fury of innate affections, which is therefore
proportioned to the s^ns, because springing from them, nor ever otherwise
possible to be defaced, unless the soul by a new conjunction to the body,
become passive or susceptible of contrary affections, etc.

These are his new apprehensions of the State of Souls in their separation,
perfectly squared to those Phylosophical grounds, he had long before laid, in
his Peripatetick Institutions.

Sect. 5. Now as to the order in which this new fabric of Purgatory, and
indeed a whole new system of Philosophy and Divinity was made public; it was
(as I take it) this; after the Book of the immortality of of the soul, fathered
on Sir Kenelm Digby: Master White appeared himself on the Stage, under the name
of Thomas the Englishman of the Albi^ of the East Saxons, where, in a moderate
volume entitled Peripatetick Institutions; to the mind of that most eminent
man, and most excellent Philosopher, Sir Kenelm Digby, etc. He discovers the
great mine of this Philosophy; here the suttleties of Logic, the secrets of
nature, the hidden properties of bodies, both heaven and earth, are laid open;
and not only that, See Consilium Authoris.
but we are further led on by an undisolvable chain of unavoidable consequences
(as is pretended) to the abstract notions of metaphysics, to the clear
understanding of separated souls, intelligences, even the existence and
attributes of God himself. And All this (if the Reader has faith enough to
believe, for otherwise, I am confident, he will find but slender satisfaction,)
by most clear and evident demonstrations, by a long chain of consequences, or a
series of Patets, Fits, sequiturs, clarum ests, consequens ests, confectum
ests, and the like.

The Foundations thus laid, conformable to this incomparable (and I think
incomprehensible) Piece, for never Daughter was liker her Mother, issued out
some time after his Divinity, under this Title, Institutiones Sacrae, built (as
he professes) in, or on (Inaedificatae) his former Peripatetick Institutions.
This now containing a perfect Sum or Model of his Divinity, as that had
formerly done of his Philosophy. And certainly, happy it was, the Author
divided them to our hands, and gave us them in several Volumes, and under
several titles; for else it hd been impossible to know, where the first ended,
or the second began: this being so perfectly squared to that, that in the very
entry to his Divinity, he banisheth the Sea ratio operis. Scito D^um naturae
esse author^m. etc. Know God is the Author of Nature, and that he perfects and
el^vates it by supernatural things; not that he showrs into our souls a series
of things of a different or unlike order or nature: Reason is Nature to us, and
the perf^ction of Reason is demonstration. Do not then despair of demonstration
from God.
Notion of Supernaturality (though not the word) out of his School; the whole
design of his new Theology being (now in the third age of the Church) to
evacuate Christian Faith, and out of his Phylosophical grounds, to mould us up
a new demonstrative Religion, for nothing is upon any other grounds admitted
into this new Theological School, of which I give my Reader a full Account,
Sect. 23, 24. etc.

Sect. 6. In his Peripatetick Institutions then or Philosophy, 5 book, lesson
1. he lays the foundations of his future Purgatory, or the state of Souls in
separation, and having in the first place labored to evince, That Rational
Souls, such as those of men are, may exist or be without their Bodies. He
delivers that notion (which he desires to imprint in us) of a separated Soul,
in these words, nu. 9, 10, 11. Now he who desires to frame to himself, in some
sort, a notion of a separated Soul, let him ponder with himself that Object
which corresponds to the word, Man or Animal, as such: which when he shall see
Abstracts from Place and Time, and is a substance by the only necessity of the
terms: let him conceive the like of a separated soul. Then let him attentively
consider some self evident and most Natural Proposition, in which, when he
shall have Contemplated, That the Object is in the Soul, with its proper
existence, and, as it were, by it: let him think a separated Soul is a
Substance, that is, all other things by the very Connection of Existencies.
Lastly, When in bodies he shall observe, that motion proceeds from the quality
of the mover, and a certain impulse, and that this impulse is derived again
from another impulse, and so even up to that which is first moved and beyond.
Let him imagine the soul is a kind of Principle, of such impulse, whatsoever
thing that must be. And so he holds on, nu. 12. What is said of the substance
of the soul, undoubtedly must be understood too, of its proper accidents: for
since they depend only on the soul, (being something of it, nay even the very
soul it self,) and it would be more imperfect without them; they must run the
same fortune with it, unless some special reason interpose. Out of which he
deduces immediately number. 13. Whatsoever things then were in the man according
to his soul, at the instant of his death, remain inseparably in the state of
separation. Wherefore all his resolutions or judgments, whether speculative or
practical, shall remain in it. Out of which he deduces in the same Book, less.
4. number. 1. And because the affections in the soul, are nothing else but
judgments, upon which operation does, or is apt to follow, etc. it comes to
pass, that our affections to acquaintance and friends, and the rest we
cultivated in this life, shall remain in the future. And more fully in the same
place, number. 2. The affections shall remain, and that in the same proportion
they were during life. Out of which he concludes there, number. 3. Those who have
given themselves up wholly to corporal pleasures, will be affected with a vast
grief, through the impossibility of those pleasures there; that is, because
corporal pleasures cannot now be enjoyed by the soul, in her state of
separation. This is the essence, the substance of his Purgatory; this is his
whole chain, or deduction of it, this is the grief he admits in separated
souls, for accusing them of ignorance, who conceive fire, or any other material
or external agent has power to afflict them in that state; he conceives them
sufferers from these remaining affections to corporal pleasures, which
therefore torment the souls, because they now are in a state, where these
pleasures are impossible to be enjoyed.

Sect. 7. Now as to the measure or duraration of separated souls, and the
continuation of that state, till the day of judgment; the foundations are laid
in the same Book: less. 3. number. 5. Again (says he) it is plain, that a
separated soul in an other manner excels place and time, then in the body;
since in that it only abstracts from them, but out of that, it comprehends
them. For this universal and actual knowledge, places all place, and all time
within the soul, so that it can act in every place at once, and together (as
far as concerns this respect,) and provide for all time, wherefore it is in a
manner a maker and governor of time and place; out of which he deduces fully
of the middle state, acc. 12. in spiritual acts whether they bring happiness or
misery; there is no proportion to time, so as to make pain, which lasts longer,
to be greater; or that which ends sooner, to be less: for those are the
properties of corporal things, etc. Every act of a pure spirit reflected on it
self, being of its own nature, out of the reach of time, is not subject
thereto, but greater then the whole extension of time, etc. And in the next
Sect. more fully. If to a thing (that is a separated soul) which coexists to a
longer part of time, nothing be thereby added; or to a thing which coexists to
a shorter part of time, nothing be thereby diminished, there can be no reason
why duration should represent, either more or less grievous in these respective
cases, etc. So that whatsoever grief of a separated soul is by the quality and
force of its essence greater, the same, let its Co-existence to time, be what
it will, must be more vehement, and that which is less, less intense, nothing
being gained o^ lost by the perpetuating, or shortning of the motions of the
Sun, or other caelestial bodies, etc. And from this ground in the same book,
account. 22. he concludes, Whatsoever time intervenes betwixt it (that is the
prayer now powered out for a departed soul, or death) and the restoration of
the world, (that is the day of general judgment) is to departed souls, but as
one moment.

Sect. 8. And further, as to the Immutability of that state of separation, and
the unchangeableness of the acts of Souls now severed from their Bodies, his
grounds are laid down in the afore-cited Perepatetick Institutions, book 5.
less. 4. number. 6, 7, 8. Moreover (says he) out of what has been said it is
deduced, That in the state of separation, no variety can happen to Souls from
any body, or the change of Bodies: for since (...) change passes not from any
body into the soul, but through the Identification of the soul with its own
body; and this Identification cease by the state of separation: it follows,
that no action nor mutation can be derived from any Body to the Soul. Nor has
the Soul, of it self, a principle of change in it self: not from hence only,
because an indivisible cannot act on it self, but also, because since a
mutation of the Soul cannot be any other, then either according to the
Understanding, or according to the Will. But the Understanding is supposed to
know all things together and for ever; whence by the course of Nature, there is
no room left either for Ignorance, or new Science: And the Will is either not
distinct from the Understanding, or at least is adequately governed in the
state of separation; it follows, that naturally no mutation can happen to a
separated soul from within, or caused by it self. Nor yet from any other Spirit
without the Interposition of the Body: for since all Spirits are indivisible,
their operations too will be such; but an indivisible effect, supposing all the
causes of necessity exists in the same instant: wherefore if any thing be to be
done between Spirits; it is all in one instant so done and perfected, that
afterward an other action cannot be begun: for if it begin, either the causes
were before adequately, put; or not; if they were, the effect was put, if they
were not, some of the causes is changed, that it may now begin to act, and not
this, b^^ the former is the first mutation; whereof it is to be urged, Whether
the causes were put before?

These are the eternal truths (as they would persuade us) the unshakable
foundations of Philosophy, on which this whole new Fabric of Purgatory stands:
and I have been the more careful to deliver them fully to my reader, (even in
this beginning of my discourse) that he may with one cast of his eye see, on
what firm foundations, this new school has abandoned the hitherto received
faith of our holy mother the Church; and now dares pronounce, That what she
has hitherto taught us, proceeded but out of ignorance of the nature of
separated substances. Of the Mid. State. (Acc. 17.)

Sect. 9. But because Master White, the Author of this new Purgatory and our
faithless demonstrative Religion, was sufficiently conscious to himself, that
these novelties would call upon the vigilance and care of the Shepherds of
Christ's flock, he stood ready prepared to receive their encounter: And no
sooner had the late Bishop of Calcedon, his then superior, admonished him of
this, and other his new Doctrines, in this new pretended Demonstrative
Theology; but in defense of his new molded Purgatory, issued out his
premeditated (as it seems) book, Of the Middle State of Souls, directed to the
same Bishop; which book, if it had remained in the Authors obscure and
mysterious Dialect (which he, above all modern Writers, seems to affect; and
reason enough he has to come Mascaradoed into the world, and to involve
himself) had laid deservedly neglected: But it having been, by the indiscreet
care of some one of his Proselytes, put into an English dress, and exposed to
the weak capacities even of Vulgar Readers, lest this new erroneous Doctrine
contained in it, might spread among those, whose infirmity betrayed them to be
the easiliest misled; for them was pub^ished this our Bull of Pope Benedict the
xii. and as much of the Florentin Council as seemed necessary and sufficient,
to arm their souls against the attempts of this novelty; by some Pious and
Vigilant Shepherds, to whom the care of their souls was committed. Which Bull
and part of the Council, because it may not have fallen into my Readers hands,
I give it him again at the ^atter end of my Discourse, [Letter A.] This, Sir,
was the true ground of putting forth that little Volume, nor had the Publishers
any regard a^ all (as you tell us page 7. and 8.) to The Letter of Vindication;
or as you now style it, Challenge, of which certainly not Master White himself,
but some Scholar of his (and he but a slender Proficient in his Masters
Doctrine) was Author. And truly the likeness of its style, with that of this
your Letter, and the Authors still fancying himself inspired with the genius of
Montalt, the fained Writer of the late Provincial Letters (as children by
reading Romances, fancy themselves to be Knight Errants, Don Hercioes) would
persuade me they both came out of the same Shop. And besides that, the
Protestation contained in the beginning of that Challenge (as I heard well
observed) would be subscribed by all the Protestant Divines of the Church of
England: It is not consequent (if Master White remain still himself) that now
he should proclaim, That if any thing expressly repugnant to any Doctrine of
his, be found in any Decree of Councils or Popes, he is contented to be
esteemed to have lost the Cause: who had so lowdly, before the publication of
this book, in his other writings, disclaimed and disowned the authority of both
Popes and Councils, as we shall presently see, Sect. 17.

The Publishers supposed, the sole evidencing, that this new minted Purgatory
stood condemned by that authority, to which he who resists, cannot remain a
Catholic, would prove a sufficient defense to well meaning souls, against the
assaults of this new Doctrine; nor had they any design to enter the lists of
Disputation, against any persons whomsoever, as appears evidently in this, that
they make no application of the Doctrine, of this Bull or Council to any
particular Doctrine, of any particular Writer; but fairly and candioly deliver
the words of both the Pope and sacred Council, in their Original, and our
vulgar Language. And this indeed was abundantly sufficient for their design:
There needed no Application of the Churches affirmative, to their negative, now
sustained both in private discourses, and in Print; they needed not tell the
Reader, that where one part of the contradiction stands defined, the other
undoubtedly stands condemned by the same sentence; Children know that already.

Sect. 10. Who could justly suspect, that this innocent, this piously zealous
proceeding, should beget an adversary in print? who could imagine that the care
of the flock of Christ should now be accused of unreasonableness, of injustice,
the Publishers accused of weakness, of ignorance, even of Schoolboyes Latin,
of animosity, of an empty vanity to appear in print, in a little volume without
any name, without any designed adversary, where there was nothing their own,
but the pains to translate, and the charges to print? But so it was, those,
whose consciences were their self-accusers, who saw with what satisfaction,
that little Volume was received by pious persons, and how their new Doctrine of
Purgatory stood pointed out to every man's eye, as condemned by that sacred
authority, took fire, An O or an A shall be a sufficient subject to him, who
watches an occasion to write. A Puny Scholar then of that School (for such an
one he was, as will be rendered evident hereafter, and none of the ablest
proficients) appears in the Field, armed with a strong zeal to his Masters
Doctrine, and with contempt enough against the innocent Publishers; whom in the
entry to his discourse, he proceeds to vilify and undervalue; Persons surely
who never wronged him, probably never saw him, till now never heard of him, and
at this howr do not know him. But it is not to vindicate their persons, however
injured and undervalued, or to make use of that right which nature furnishes
all men with, to repel an offered violence, by an equally violent resistance.
For we have learnt a far other lesson in the School of Grace, then my Adversary
has in his new Masters, Master Whites: To render good for evil, to pardon and
pray for those that injure us. But in the defense of our holy and deer Mother,
the Catholic Church, and her never erring Faith, in the defense of these
decrees of the Pope, and sacred Council, that I undertake this quarrel; and I
desire my Reader but to be unbyassed in this our present dispute, whether this
Position, That no Souls are delivered out of Purgatory, before the
re-assumption of their bodies, and the general day of judgment, stands not
condemned by this present Bull of Pope Benedict 12. and the Florentine Council?

Sect. 11, And first, that the contradictory of this Position is the
universally received Doctrine of the Catholic Church, appears most evidently
in this, That all Orthodox Writers who have treated this subject, of the state
of separated souls, since the Promulgation of the Bull aforesaid and Council,
suppose it as a certain truth; and therefore no one of them any where sustain
the contrary: Nor can the force of this evidence be weakened, by saying, That it
is indeed the universally received opinion of Divines only; but not their
Faith; for besides what I shall hereafter say, in refutation of this answer;
those who are acquainted with the prying curiosity of the Schools, and with the
strange variety of their apprehensions, know very well, that where any thing
may lawfully be denied, their restless curiosity ceases not to call it to the
Test, nor is it universally embraced as Truth; and therefore it is authority
only, and that irrefragable, which puts limits and bounds to their curious
scrutiny, and the variety of their opinions.

But because my Adversary, having now (as he tells us) conferred with those
solid Persons, Page 3.
acquainted with every Ressort of Master Whites Doctrine; and as clear sighted
in those ages which afford us these Authorities, as in that they live in: With
a strong youthful Confidence proclaims: That it is incomparably false, Page 11
That the Question of Purgatory was in the days of Benedict, agitated and
settled by this Bull of his. Or that the Council of Florence, ever intended or
defined any such matter. Page 31.
And with a clutter of four or five pages settles us a quite: Page 12, 13, 14,
15, 16.
other Question and Controversy, as then disputed and determined, to wit:
Whether perfect Charity be a sufficient disposition to beatifie a soul? And
appeals to Cherubinus his Compendium of this Bull; and tells us, That all
Learned Writers agree. It will justly fall under our consideration: First,
Whether this our present Question of Purgatory were not then intended and
defined? And secondly, Whether this his new Question of Charity, was there
disputed and settled by this our Bull and Council?

Sect. 12. And as to the first, If such an oversight could have happened to a
Person whose business it was to answer this very Bull, and of all those solid
and cleer-sighted Persons, by conferring with whom he was now raised above his
own pitch: I should justly suspect, that neither he nor any one of them, had
ever read this very Bull, about which we now dispute. For was it possible that
a few great Letters, should so possess their eyes, and their great good
affection to their new Masters Doctrine, so fill their hearts, that there was
no room for any thing else of the whole Context? For the Pope himself in this
Bull having in most plain and express words stated our very Question to their
hands: how was it possible they should All overlook it? There arose (says he)
a matter of question, not long since, in the time of John the xxii. our
Predecessor of happy memory, between some Doctors of Divinity, concerning the
vision of the souls of Just men after their death, in which nothing was to be
purged, when they departed out of this world; or if there were, it was now
totally purged: whether they see the Divine Essence, before the re-assumption
of their bodies, and the general Judgment? and also concerning other matters,
etc. And yet in truth. to do him right, he did see this, and cites it, page 24.
and yet has the confidence to impose his quite different Question upon us.
Now, Sir, if it were possible this should escape your consideration, yet since
you appeal to Cherubinus his Compendium of this Bull, you ought at least to
have read and considered him: and yet in truth I cannot believe it. For was it
possible, that after Cherubinus too, agreeing perfectly with the Pope had
stated our Question, you should have the boldness to deny it, and obtrude your
new fancied controversy of Charity upon us, and appeal to this very Author,
whose words do most clearly and evidently condemn you? But having heard* the
Pope, I will satisfy my Reader, and let him hear Flavius Cherubinus in his own
words.

Because (says he) there arose a question among the Divines and others,
Whether the souls of Just men departed, in which there was nothing to be
purged, or if there were, it was now purged, did see the Divine Essence before
the resumption of their bodies, and the general Judgment.. 1. For the deciding
of which question, John xxii. enjoined the Cardinals, Pr^lates and Divines, in
a Public Consistory, That they should deliberately speak what they thought of
it, when he should demand it; but being prevented by death could not perfect
it: Now Benedict the xii. after a diligent examination and deliberation with
the Cardinals of the Sacred Roman Church, and by their counsel clearly defines
this question.. 2. and seq. And another, concerning souls deparned in mortal
sin.. 4. And commands, that it be proceeded against such as pertinaciously
hold, or assert the contrary, as against Heretics.. 5. And hereunto he adds a
penal Sanction.

This is the whole Compendium of Cherubinus, who directly with the Pope states
our present Question, and delivers us, that it stands defined. And yet against
this evidence to which you your self appeal, you have the confidence to tell
us, The sole and only Question was: Whether perfect Charity brings an immediate
heaven?

Sect. 13. Now, Sir, it is not possible for you to persuade an intelligen
Reader, as you endeavor page 24) that there was one only Question disputed and
defined in that time. The Pope himself, and Cherubinus to whom you appeal, have
in terms made two. First, Concerning the souls of Just men, in which nothing
remains to be purged, when they pass out of this life? And secondly, Of those
souls in which something is to be purged. And that there were more Questions
then one determined by this self-same Bull, that very Title which you say, page
10. belongs to it, and stands printed at Rome, 1617. A definition of certain
Articles concerning the blessed vision of God, and the Beatitude and damnation
of souls; will clearly evince. Let my Reader consider the word Articles, the
several states of souls, of which our holy Faith is here delivered; and I think
he will rest satisfied, it was not one only question, much less your only
question of Charity, which stands here defined to us. Nor will that Criticism,
that the Pope styles it Quaestio, a Question, and after him Cherubinus, at all
avail you; for every one knows that where a question is stated of any Subject,
which suffers divisions, and subdivisions, it comprehends in it all those
several questions, which of every one of those divisions, and subdivisions may
justly be made; and so it is in our very business, where the present question
concerning the state of departed souls, extends to all the several conditions
of souls, which departed this life. And that it was the Popes design, and full
purpose, to deliver us what of all these we stand bound to believe, will appear
evidently by his exact division and enumeration of the several conditions, in
which souls depart from this their earthly habitation: Both of Infants, who
after Baptism received, dye before the use of freewill: Of those who coming to
the use of Reason, after Baptism incur no blemish of sin: Of those who in the
same supposition, have incurred the blemish of sin, and yet depart this life,
having fully satisfied, by worthy fruits of penance: Of those who in the same
supposition have incurred the blemish of sin, and have not made full
satisfaction, but pass out of this life with a guilt of temporal punishment due
in the next: And lastly, of those who depart this life in mortal sin, and
enmity to God, of all which he here delivers our holy Faith; so unquestionable
a truth it is, it was not one only, or your only single question of Charity,
which stands here defined: And truly Sir, if your patience had held out, to
read but to the end of the second* Scholion of this said Cherubinus, to whom
you appeal, you would have found not only this one question of the souls of
just men, who depart this life without any need of being purged in the next, or
this other, of those souls which so leave their bodies with a guilt of
punishment in the next life; but eight more questions answered and decided,
even according to this Cherubinus his judgment, by this self same Bull of Pope
Benedict the xii. For thus he concludes. I give you to understand. that by this
determination of Benedict the xii. t^n Heresies are condemned, which Eymericus
in his Directory examines and relates. In which Cherubinus was not at all
mistaken; for so indeed it is: and since this Eymericus is an Author of that
high esteem and deservedly, and his Book has received so signal an approbation
by Gregory the xiii. and is in deed, as well as in title, the Directory of the
Inquisitors; let us hear what Pegna writes of him.

Eymericus (says he) [A famous learned and holy man, who was appointed the
general Inquisitor of the Kingdom of Aragon, Peg. com. 21.
in the year 1358. (which is only 22. years after the Promulgation of this
Bull) from whence he was called to Avignon by Pope Gregory 11. and there being
his Chaplain composed his excellent Directory] gathers ten Heresies condemned
by this Extravagant; and most truly admonishes, that so many Catholic
verities, contrary to those Heresies, are thereby prooved and established: The
place at length, out of this so Authentic a Writer; I give my Reader at the
end of my discourse. [Letter B.] not to interrupt the continued thread of it;
for by it my Reader will easily observe, with what strong confidence the
youthful Scholars of this modern School appear in print.

And if you had been pleased to peruse the continuation of Baronius his
Ecclesiastical Annals by Spondanus, you would have rested satisfied in this our
point; for at the year 1333. he thus delivers the opinion of Pope John the 22.
then disputed, which occasioned this Bull of Benedict his successor: For
(says he) in that year 1333. (as Villanius, Rebdorfius, the continuator of
Nangius, and others witness;) John the 22. then Pope, began publicly to treat
of what before he had conceived, concerning the beatifical vision of Souls:
what not a few of the ancient, both Greek and Latin Fathers, Justinius,
Ireneus, etc. did seem to hold; That souls now severed from their bodies, and
duly purged from all stain of sin, either in this present mortal life, or in
the next (in Purgatory) do not enjoy perfectly the beatifical vision of the
divine essence, before the last day of Judgment: but do expect the Resurrection
of their bodies, that together with them they may attain perfect beatitude: and
to this opinion not as yet altogether reproved (or condemned) by the holy
Church, this Pope John himself seemed to incline, etc. For which reason he
gained himself very many Adversaries, both among the Cardinals, and Prelates,
and also of other Doctors of Divinity every where, and Religious men of all
orders. And at the year 1334 the same Sp^ndanus delivers, that this Pope John
the day before he died published a constitution, in which he condemned that
opinion of which he stood suspected.

Now Sir, when you have perused and weighed these things, which I am confident
you never dreamt of before, for in truth you rested satisfied, with what your
Solid and cleersighted friends had told you, of their new devised question of
Charity as then disputed* you will perhaps observe your error, you will see it
is not a little heat of youth which presses men of your years to appear in
print, or a little tickling vein which eggs young men forward to catch their
Adversary with an O or an A, and pass a witty jest upon him, till age and
experience has ripened their discretion, which can warrant a Book in the
public view of discreet persons. You will be convinced that you were mistaken
by your great good affection and esteem of your solid cleer-sighted friends,
and that in truth you have engaged your credit a little too far upon their
authority.

Sect. 14. But this is not all I have to say to you: The first fault of
negligence and boldness, even in this kind, is perhaps pardonable in young men.
But I beseech you Sir, how could those solid, cleer-sighted persons, give you
the confidence to impose so grossly upon us? to state us here a question, of
which the Bull delivers not one word: of which Cherubinus, to whom you appeal,
makes not the least mention, and yet you confidently add, All Learned Writers
agree. page 14. Where if you had not named Writers, I should have judged, you
appealed to your solid clear-sighted Friends: for in truth I cannot find any
one Learned Writer who states, this your new question as then disputed or
defined. And I cannot pardon this your so confident imposing on your Reader;
You tell us, our present controversy, concerning the delivery of souls out of
Purgatory, stands not here defined, because the Word Purgatory, is not in the
Bull, (however, it is sufficiently in the Council,) and the Pope decrees of
soul^ now purged: And you require, page 26. the Popes or Councils positive is,
or, is not: and unless I can show this Position in terms* Souls are purged
before the day of judgment: I run a hazard to contradict both the Pope and
Council. Which how to excuse from nonsense, if compared with what you are
pleased ou^ of your kindness to allow, p. 27. that the Pope was of the opinion
that Purgatory might be finished before the last day (which could not be
contradictory to his faith) is past my skill. You know what it is to bring rods
to whip himself. And can you have the confidence Sir, to tell us, page 29. and
elsewhere: the only and sole controversy was: Whether perfect Charity brings
an immediate heaven, and all that the Pope intended to secure^ by this present
Bull. Whilst the Word Charity is not in the Bull, whilst there is not the least
mention of it, in the question even now related in Spondanus, which occasioned
this definition: whilst neither in the Preface to the Decree, nor in the Decree
it self, nor any thing that follows it, the Pope pronounces of Charity I, or
no; much less does he declare either the affirmative or negative of this your
new Question, to secure it; nor is there the least hint in Cherurbinus of it, I
gave my Reader his whole Compendium, that he might see, how far you were
transported with the high esteem of your solid clear-sighted Friends, when you
appeal to him, who thus agreeing with the Pope pronounces against you All.

Nor do your Arguments drawn from holy desires, page 15. 16. or the future
rewards and punishments which the Pope so earnestly inculcates in his Preface
to this definition at all avail you. Alas Sir, the whole systeme of Christian
Religion, every part and parcel of it, is directed, to plant, to kindle holy
desires in our Souls; and yet I think you will not easily avow, there is
nothing else defined, or recommended to us, in this whole fabric, but purely
and precisely, that perfect Charity brings an immediate heaven; nor will it be
any plea for you, that this was then the question, because the Pope ushers his
Definition with this Exhortation to holy desires, (which might very well and
properly introduce any Position of Christian Religion whatsoever, and
peculiarly this, because by progress in virtue and holy desires, our endeavors
are rendered more effectual for souls in that distressed condition) as very near
allied to his Decrees, concerning the state of departed souls: For how near a
tie soever, the one has to the other, though it were by an immediate,
necessary, evident consequence, yet it is highly unlawful to change the state
of the present question, and impose upon us, that not it, but some other, thus
allied to it, stands defined by the Decree. When the Church combated the
Eutychian Heresy, which denied two natures in Christ, no Christian dare
affirm, it only then defined the plurality of Wills against the Monothelites:
because these two questions, have so necessary and immediate a connection. And
can you hope to persuade an ignorant Reader, that when the Pope defines: That
after purgation, even before the re-assumption of their bodies, departed souls
are received into heaven: he defines nothing at all about Purgatory, but only
this, that perfect Charity brings an immediate heaven; though he has not any
thing like this Position in his Bull: and that this should be fixed on the
Pope, and Cherubinus, and all Learned Authors to boot. I hope then Sir, you
will pardon my boldness, if I challenge you fairly with this: If you do not
make it appear, by those unknown Learned Authors in terms, that yours was the
question, and not that of Purgatory, we shall judge you have wronged them as
much, as now to our eyes, you have imposed on the Pope, and Cherubinus: And I
justly challenge it of you, that you bring us it, in terms, and not by a
consequence of a second or third remove, or else your sincerity in citing
Authors, will be highly questionable by your Reader, or indeed now past
Question.

And truly I wondered at the first perusal of this part of your Book, why you
should use this slight to prepossess the unwary Reader; but afterward by the
rest of your discourse, I easily observed it was but made use of, to render, by
this art of changing the question, a plawsible answer to this Bull and Council,
otherwise unavoidable: and yet I discovered at last a further design, which no
man but a Prophet could have foreseen, to wit; that you might fix upon your
Adversary, that he, not you, stands guilty of disowning these sacred
authorities, and that forsooth, because he opposes the efficacy of holy
charity, the Queen of virtues, which you, and your Master endeavor to sustain,
of which your slye accusation I shall have occasion to speak hereafter, but I
hope to render this your craft wholly unsuccessful.

Sect. 15. But how unfortunate a Writer you are, will be rendered evident, and
how unfit you are to catechize and instruct others, this Grave and Learned
Eymericus shall tell you, because you do not explicitly believe this Doctrine
of Purgatory now in question. For having distinguished all the Credibilia, or
matters of faith, into three Classes (according to St. Thomas) and showed what
the vulgar and simple sort of Christians, as also what Superiors, Prelates and
Doctors, are bound to believe both explicitly and implicit^ly he there
concludes, concerning the middle sort of Christians, under which name he
comprehends, Priests, Cu^rates, and all Religious Persons, who have undertaken
to instruct the ignorant in faith, and good manners. The middle sorts (says
he) who are to teach the simple people, are obliged to believe some of these
points (that is such as are determined, by the holy Church in her Councils and
Consistories) Explicitly: though not all these Points singly, nor all these
Persons equally, but according to their several state and learning, whereby
they are to instruct the ignorant: As for example, they are all bound to
believe explicitly that the souls of just men departed without sin, as of
little Infants; or if they have sinned, have here or in Purgatory fully
satisfied, are passed into Heaven before the day of Judgment: according to the
Church's determination, making it a matter of faith, in the extravagant of Pope
Benedict xii. beginning. Blessed be God.

Sect. 16. And having said this as to the intention of the Pope in our present
Bull, before I proceed further in your Answer, let us take a short survey of
the Florentin Council, of which I can not but blame you of neglect, in that you
give your Reader so slender an account: And if I must not flatter your sloth, I
know not how otherwise to excuse it, then that you were not conversant at all
in it; and so you rested satisfied, with what your cleer-sighted friends told
you, or Cherubinus his, Vbi hoc idem firmatum fuit: since (if it were possible)
the Council seems more full and home to our Question.

And first, In the Third Article which the Publishers gave you it defines; If
truly penitent Souls shall depart this life, before they have satisfied for
their Commissions and Omissions, by worthy fruits of Penance: that their Souls
are purged by the punishments of Purgatory after their bodies death, etc. Which
Doctrine can find no admittance in your new model; for all the sufferings of
souls, which you fancy by their irregular, and now unchangeable affections,
avail nothing as to the Purging or cleansing of Souls in their state of
Separation: since that is wholly reserved, by you, to the change of those
affections at the reunion. And secondly, when Art. 4. upon this Doctrine of
the Council so said down, it pursues to declare unto us: That Souls which are
purged either in their bodies, ar being uncloathed of their bodies (as is above
said) are presently received into heaven. I would have you to observe, how this
further Doctrine of the delivery of them, and the completing of this purging
being uncloathed of their bodies, is by this Parenthesis, as is above said,
wholly built on the former Doctrine, of the purging itself: And it will be
unavoidable, since there is a Purgation of souls by the punishments of
Purgatory against you; that there also is as effectually concluded, a complete
Purgation of them whilst uncloathed of their bodies, and an immediate delivery,
perfectly condemning, and destructive of your Doctrine in the very point in
Question.

But that my Reader may have a cleerer view of this unavoidable Truth, let us
set together, and compare this Doctrine of the Council with yours. The Council
defines, That truly penitent souls which depart this life before they have
satisfied for their sins, are purged by the punishments of Purgatory after
death; and being thus purged uncloathed of their bodies, are presently received
into Heaven. Or as the Pope more expressly pronounces: before the reassumption
of their bodies, and the general Judgment. Now how happily do you, and your new
Master agree with this Doctrine, when you tell us, Souls which depart this life
with affections to corporal pleasures, suffer a vast grief, by reason those
pleasures are now impossible to be enjoyed, but they are now in an unchangeable
condition both as to the affections their torment, and the state it self. So
that there is no hope they should ever be released before reunion with their
bodies; for though they suffer by their inordinate unchangeable affections, yet
not possibly as to any purging or change of their state or sufferings, whilst
uncloathed of their bodies; and therefore can not Presently, be received into
Heaven, or before the Re-assumption of their said bodies, and the general Day
of Judgment. And I would have you further to observe and weigh the words; Sunt
purgatae, are now purged, in the preterpersect Tense, either in their bodies,
(which you do not deny completely perfected in some souls, in this life,) or
uncloathed of their bodies, which still irrationally, gratis, and wilfully you
deny, though the Council defines of both in the same form and style of words,
Sunt purgatae, they are now purged. Which clearly imports a Purgation now past,
and perfectly completed.

But we Will take our rise a little Higher, from the very process of both the
Greek and Latin Fathers in this business of Purgatory, now assembled at
Ferrara, where this Council (though afterward translated to Florence and so is
called the Florentin Council,) began. For there in the very beginning of the
Council in order to this Decree, this Question of Purgatory was handled. See
tom. 4. Council. Genesis oct. Synod. Quaestio de Purgatorio. And both the Latin and
Greek Fathers lay down their several Positions of Purgatory. And First the
Latins thus begin. We do believe in this world, a Purgatory fire: by which the
souls guilty of lighter faults (that is) venial sins, are purged. For those who
have confessed their sins, and have received the most sacred Body of Christ,
and presently die before previous satisfaction: without doubt in the abovenamed
fire, which is commonly called Purgatory, are purged; and together with the
help of the Church, the prayers of Priests, Masses, and Alms, are expiated.
After this the Greeks lay down their persuasion of Purgatory in this manner. We
judge (say they) Purgatory not to be a fire, but a darksome placee full of
afflictions, in which souls now being, are deprived of Divine Light; but that
they are expiated and freed, from this darksome place and torments, by the help
of the Church, the Prayers of Priests, Masses, Alms, etc. Now Sir, it were
beyond all the degrees of modesty to assert that the question of Purgatory was
not here disputed or defined: Or that they talked only of Charity, as being an
immediate disposition to bliss. And it is most clear, that out of these several
professions, in which both sides agreed against you, directly and home to our
Point in question, of an expiation and delivery from this Purgatory (either a
fire, or a darksome place,) issued out this definition (Being purged,
uncloathed of this body, presently) opposite to your Error. And I would have
my Reader to observe how positively, it was intended by the Council, to deliver
us the Faith of the Church conformable to the unanimous Doctrine of both
parties, both of the expiation or perfect Purging of Souls, when uncloathed of
their bodies, and of their present delivery, whilst uncloated, for in all
this, both the Greek and Latin Fathers clearly agreed, against this new School:
which when he shall have considered, I doubt not but he will rest satisfied, it
can not be an act of the Understanding, but of the Will, which forces the word
Presently to signify (if it signify any thing at all by these moderns) at the
day of Judgment, which was not the time, either the Latin or Greek Fathers
ever thought of, but of the intermediate time of separation, whirh is our
business now in hand. But because this Point is excellently well handled, by an
eminently Learned Person of out Nation, who with unavoidable strength pursues
it more at large, in a Paper which came lately to my hands, I will presume to
give it my Reader in his own words at the end of my discourse [Letter C.] And
further Sir, for your more complete and full satisfaction, since with
confidence enough you strongly assert, That it is Incomparably false, that
either the Pope or Council ever intended to settle this Point of the delivery
of Souls out of Purgatory before reunion. I will add to the Paper of this great
Divine, the answer of a School-fellow of yours, (yet if I mistake not, a much
better proficient, in your Masters Doctrine, certainly much more ingenuous) who
vanquished with the evidence of this Truth, acknowledges, what indeed he could
not with any modesty deny, That this your new Doctrine of Purgatory stands
condemned by both the Bull and Council: and yet he was so captivated, that he
endeavors to sustain it by other grounds, he had now learnt in your School. My
Reader shall find his Letter at large, [Letter D.]

Sect. 17. But before I pass any further, since I have already told you, that
both Master White, the Author of this Purgatory, and his abler Scholars are
armed against the Authority both of Popes and Councils, it will not be out of
my Readers way, but very much conducing to my design of giving him a prospect
of this School, if now by some short reflections on the Doctrine delivered both
by this ingenious Gentleman, and Master White himself, I make good that charge.
For by them it will appear to what unavoidable exigencies, the defense of new
Fabrics in Religion, drive those, who wedded to their preconceived
Phylosophical fancies, are resolved to square their belief to them.

This ingenuous Scholar confesses, That truly according to the opinion that the
Holy Ghosts assistance in Councils and Consistories it without restriction or
limitation: the Paper delivered [Letter C.] seems to him to evidence a
deliverance of Souls out of Purgatory, before the Day of Judgment. But
according to the opinion, that the assistance of the Holy Ghost, in Councils
and Consistories, is no longer then there is a diligent search to find out what
Christ taught, and the Apostles delivered as so taught* there appears only,
that the Council of Florence and Pope Benedict, did think it to be so, which
may raise opposition to a disobedience, but not to an Heresy. etc. So that
unless We show that the Council of Florence and Pope Benedict determined
conformably to Tradition; Mr. Blacklowes (that is Master Whites) calling the
doctrine and practice new, will not savor the least of Heresy, etc. But
foreseeing the strange consequences of this Doctrine, he therefore Adds, This
puts all to a loss; for how shall it be known, that Councils and Consistories
apply themselves aright? Easily (says he) by examining Tradition of what you
have seen and heard. This is the common light, and plain way promised, to keep
even fools from straying from Christ's Doctrine. Thus he.

Now Sir this Exterminating Doctrine was learnt in Master Whites School, where
it is but too too frequent. And first, as to the infallibility of the Pope,
without which no submission, as to Faith, can take place. Master White Sonus
Buccinae, the Title of one of Mr. Whites Books.
(now being constituted by God a speculatour) proclaims against it with sound
of trumpet, and tells us, That to maintain the Pope to be infallible, is
Heretical. Son. Bu^. and Tabulae Suffragiales, tab. 19. nay Archiheretical,
tab. 20. nay the most Horrid of all sins, the sin of sins; and for fear we
should want Examples, worse then violating sacred virgins on Altars; then
treading the ever B. Sacrament of Christ's body, under foot; Or bringing the
Turk or Antichrist, into the Christian Dominions. Son. Buc. tract. 2.. 22. Tab.
Suff. tab. 21. And having thus rid his hands of the Pope, he proceeds against
the infallibility of the Councils, in his Tab. Suff. tab. 22. This being his
signal Doctrine. Non est impossible, etc. It is not impossible that the Pope
or Council should attempt to establish that, (as now of Faith, which was some
time before not of Faith) and by that very attempt fall into an error, and even
promulgate that error, etc. And further he tells us, As to a certain prophetic
inspiration immediately and miraculously, enlightening the Council or Pope, if
constantly and by the ordinary Law of God it be asserted to be required; it is
altogether fabulous, and asserted without any solid ground. Thus he. Upon these
grounds (I say) did this good proficient in this his Masters School, endeavor
to sustain your otherways ruinous Fabric of Purgatory; for in truth there is
no other means left to support it, but by the destruction of all the Authority
of both Popes and Councils to deliver us our holy Faith.

And now I desire my Reader to consider, (for his just and full satisfaction of
the design of this School) that if these grounds be once admitted, Christian
Faith, (which they now combat,) is a mere mockery. For if after all the Canons
of Councils, all the Anathmaes pronounced against any Opinion, (the very
Anathema it self carrying with it, and being an exercise of that power,
invested in the Church to oblige us to submission and belief,) it still remains
to be showen, that the Pope or Council determined conformably to Tradition, or
else Master Whites styling the doctrine and profession new, will not savor the
least of Heresy; or that it is not impossible, a Council may err, and
promulgate an error, we are at an irrecoverable loss: For no Catholic claims
any other assurance of his Faith, then upon this firm foundation, that our holy
Mother the Church, is his infallible Directress. That the Councils her mouth
are the unerring Deliveres of Truth. Which if it stand no firm absolutely, but
upon a supposition of a due application (it being impossible we should have any
higher or more authentic proof, of this supposition, then the Council it
self) there is no security, no assurance left of any thing delivered by them.

Not so (says he) We may easily know, when Councils and Consistories apply
themselves aright, by examining tradition, of what we have seen and heard. And
shall I a private an illiterate Christian (not yet acquainted with these solid
and cleer-sighted Persons) recall all the decrees of Councils to a new examine?
is there still a higher Court, to which I may and ought to appeal, from their
sentence, as to a superior Judge and Umpire over them? shall I take this
liberty upon me, to censure their Proceeds, to admit, to reject their
definitions, as my weakness shall find them consonant to, or dissonant from,
what I have seen and heard? and if they were to receive their approbation from
this Court: How can I (unless a senseless pride blind me) hope, that my
industry in the search, my ability to find, shall not only equallize, but even
exceed that of five hundred, perhaps a thousand Bishops and Prelates, and the
scrutiny of numberless Divines, assisting them in this Inquest? And even to
ease us of this solicitude, you see what exact care is taken, in these
proceeds. Pope Benedict here tells you of the holy Church, that she teaches
nothing rashly, brings in nothing unwarily, introduces nothing in faith
unadvisedly. And hence it is that all such sacred decisions are still ushered
in, with some such expressions as these. After an humble invocation of the holy
Ghost. After a careful examination of the matter. After a dilige^^ deliberation
with our brethren, etc.

But if all this solicitude in truth, signify nothing, if we must not
acquiesce here, but re-examine all in a higher tribunal; i^ not this the utter
Extermination of all that authority we hitherto have believed the Church is
furnished with, to deliver us our holy Faith? Is not this to resolve finally
(en dernier resort,) our Creed into our own breasts, to make every idle head
competent Judge of Popes, Councils, Consistories, All; And them Judges of just
nothing? wherein do those loose bands of disagreeing Protestants, all disagree
from us, and all agree against us, but in this that we acquiesce and submit to
the holy Church, as the faithful keeper and dispenser of our Faith, and
Tradition; and so submit, that from her sentence we admit no Appeal, against
her decrees, we admit no Contradiction, whilst they by a supereminent pride,
assume to themselves a power to judge this Pillar of Truth, and resolve All into
their own capriccioes, private reason, spirit, fancies, pride, and nothing. And
yet I pray you consider whether by this appealing from the Church to Tradition;
what we have seen and heard: we are not sunk into a deeper sink of Error, of
Independancy, then they? for they appeal to Scripture, which (though
irrationally) they accept as Canonical; they admit their Translations as
authentic, and contest the sense only with the Church, whilst this Doctrine
affoords us a far more full and ample reserve to evacuate all Faith at our
pleasures: since it is still in our power, and we competent Judges, what is
Tradition; what not: where the Council proceeded with due Application upon the
depositum of Faith, where upon the uncertain wavering opinions of Schoolmen, or
pretended assistance of the Holy Ghost: which extends to Creeds, Catechismes,
Definitions, yea, the very Canon of Scriptures, and indeed All that any way
belongs to Christian Religion.

Nor will it avail, if this Gentleman, should tell me, that I do him wrong to
rank his Doctrine with that of the Protestants, or indeed hold it worse then
theirs, for the Protestants down right tell us the Church has erred de fact^
in these and these Points in particular. He and Master White more modestly and
shily mince the matter, and teach us that possibly only, or not impossibly,
the Council may err, and promulgate an error. And perhaps he will say that
these inconveniences are saved, by this his succeeding Doctrine in the same
place. Tab. 22. For there having delivered this his Doctrine against the
infallibility of Councils, he presently adds: But it is impossible that such an
error (thus promulg'd by the Council) should pass into an established Doctrine
of the Church, and be accepted as a Doctrine delivered by the Fathers, and
preached by Christ.

For as to the first, it will presently appear even in this our question, that
if their new model of Purgatory be subsistent, not only possibly, or not
impossibly, but de facto, the Florentin Council and Church has erred in this
particular. And since to say, even not impossibly the Council may err, the
foundation of all assurance is now pulled up; I know not but this Doctrine is
as high, and higher Independancy then theirs: And as to those words of Master
Whites. I answer, that they notwithstanding, it is still in his power by his
former Doctrine (that it is not impossible the Council may err, and promulgate
an error) to evacuate all the Canons of all the Councils at his pleasures; for
however the Authority of the Council now stands engaged in the definition of
any Doctrine: however the Decree is now published to the whole world, however
the Church accept of the Decree, however all Catholics submit to the Decree,
yet it remains still in his power to say, It never passed into an established
Doctrine of the Church, whilst he, or his cleer-sighted Scholars intend to
shake it. And how far this his reserve of an established Doctrine, delivered by
Fathers, and preached by Christ, extends, will sufficiently appear in his very
attempt of the Faith of the Church in our Question of Purgatory. (For I have
reason to believe, he had a special regard to his beloved Purgatory, when he
renounced thus the Authority of Councils.) The consciences of all the
illiterate Catholics bear witness, that the delivery of Souls from Purgatory,
is now their received Faith, from their present Pastors and Teachers; no Divine
but knows, that for Three hundred years and upwards, ever since the
promulgation of Pope Benedict his Bull, no Orthodox Writer but submits to his
Decree as unquestionable: Master White himself tells us, That St. Gregory the
great was the first Founder of that Faith (we now fight for) a thousand years
ago, pursued and sustained by the numberless number of incomparably eminent
Doctors and Saints. In sum, if there be any Article of our Faith witnessed, any
established, it is this: not any one carrying after it a more ample continued
practice, not any one testified by so many Foundations, Prayers, Masses, Alms,
etc. as this. And yet this is no established Doctrine of the Church: It is not a
Truth delivered by Fathers, as preached by Christ. And therefore he being
overwhelmed with the consent of the whole Church for a thousand years, appeals
with the Protestants to the Primitive Ages immediate to Christ; their plea and
his being just the same, differing only in this, that they say, the substance
of Purgatory is not the established Doctrine of the Church as delivered by
Fathers, preached by Christ: He, that the delivery of Souls from thence, is not
even yet established.

Sect. 18. This Doctrine then is not the way (as our ingenious Scholar says) to
keep fools from straying, but the way to make fools stray, and supposes a high
folly in him who accepts it; who leaves the received Doctrine of the holy
Church, to gadd after new models of a modern Divine. But the way to keep both
fools and wise men from straying, is that which all the wise men in the world
have hitherto followed, to acquiesce, to submit, to the Church, the Pillar of
Truth, without further dispute or reserve, without further examination of her
Decrees, by what we have seen and heard. We know assuredly, that he shall never
have God his Father in Heaven, who has not the Church his Mother on Earth.

And how injurious would he show himself (says the pious Emperor Marcianus)
to the most Reverend Synod, In Edic. consir. Conc. C^lc. act. 3.
who should attempt to question anew, and publicly dispute and controvert such
points as are once judged and rightly determined. For who will grant (says
Pegna) more authority to the Opinions of single persons disputing of Faith,
according to their own Fancy, then to the definitions of Councils lawfully
called and congregated, where the Fathers hearts are governed by the Holy
Ghosts dictamen. It Is already excellently well decreed, for many Reasons, That
things once defined should be no more called in question. For if such Doctrines
as are thus constituted and decreed, should be again brought under doubt and
disputation; surely no Judgment or Sanction would remain firm and strong
against any Errors what soever: every established Truth and Definition of the
Church being troubled afresh with the same Furies. G^l. Pap. 1. ad Ep. Dar.
miratisumus. Great. cau. 24. q. 1. C. majores.
Thus Gelasius the First related by Gratian. By which my Reader will observe,
how far a different road, that ancient piety of Christians, walked in, to
Heaven, then what is now chalked out to us, by this School armed against the
Authority of Popes and Councils.

Sect. 19. But before I leave this Point, I will mind my Reader, That if it
were (as he supposes it) lawful, for every man to call the Decrees of Popes
and Councils to a new trial by this Touchstone of Tradition, by asking his very
Question, What we have seen and heard? my Adversary has lost his cause. For to
this Question, being proposed in our present controversy of Purgatory, what
can we with truth answer; but that we have seen innumerable Masses, Dirges,
Alms, etc? and that we have constantly heard, that souls are delivered out of
Purgatory by these powerful helps, before the Day of Judgment? And what can we
with truth answer; but that we have hitherto believed this; and if we are still
our selves, and are not so inconstant as to be carried away wi^h the wind of a
new Doctrine, we do believe it, and shall continue to believe it. And for the
proof of this Assertion, I appeal safely even to the Consciences of those few
Proselytes this new Master, Master White, has gained: Whether till of late
this new Systeme of Purgatory came to light, they ever entertained the least
doubt of it? Whether it were not their full persuasion? A Doctrine which they
believed to have been delivered with as firm and constant an Authority, as any
other whatsoever? Whether ever they divided this, from the rest of their Faith,
and allowed it a less degree of assurance only, as of Opinion? Nor will it
avail my Adversary to say, That it was indeed his full persuasion, bu^ not his
belief; he never understood it, (though delivered to him from his present
Pastors) as the Faith of the Church, but only as the generally received
Opinion of Divines: and that in truth he never ranked it among the Articles of
his Creed, but in a lower form, of I know not what consent of Schoolmen. For
the Experience of all Mankind will refute this falsehood. And confident I am, if
a long persuasion of his now received Doctrine has not effaced the memory of
his past disposition of soul, his own conscience bears witness against him. For
as to the whole Universality of Catholics, they still assert and sustain this
Faith; they hear not of this novelty without horror. And for that handful of
persons who are (thanks be to God) not one in a million, who have of late
embraced the contrary: let them (for it highly concerns them) duly examine
their consciences, Whether the private esteem of their Master, Master White,
the Author of this Doctrine; the comfortable new apprehensions he introduces,
in lieu of that great terror and fear they before were in, of the sufferings
of that state: the easing their Consciences from the incumbent care of
assisting their departed friend^, (for all this is immediately wrought by an
acceptance of this Position) has not wrought upon their inconstancy to abandon
the Tents of the Church, and to list themselves in this new Squadron, to impugn
their pious Mother: to forsake a formerly received Belief, now to adhere to a
new Doctrine, which certainly at the first proposal checked their former
persuasion, the holy Faith planted in their Souls. Nor* has the contrary
Assertion any thing but a bold confidence to warrant it; for we know, we feel,
we experience in our selves this Belief. We do believe the Councils can not
misguide us. We do believe the delivery of Souls, before the Day of Judgment.
This is our Faith as firm as a Rock, not to be shaken by all the Sophistry of
the world. If it were possible (as certainly it is not possible) that it could
be evidenced that our faith of both these is erroneous: yet certainly it could
never carry any f^ce of probability, that we have not hitherto, or even yet do
not believe them; every man being furnished within his own breast, with an
irrefragable witness, stronger then all the wit and Logic of the world. The
Protestants face us down that we make Idols of ^^ictures, against our own souls
and knowledge: What impudence is this? And shall this new School have the
confidence, against all men's experience, thus to give the Lie to the
Consciences of the whole Christian world? So that I hope my Reader rests
satisfied, that even this Cour^ (to which he appeals) has given sentence
against him, even by this Question, what we have seen and heard.

And how happily has this our great Master, Master White Arraigned himself (as
the first Author of our new Purgatory, or any other the first Bro^cher of a new
Doctrine) under the person of Luther. Sonus Buccinae Tract. 1.. viii. before
the Tribunal of his Bishop, or a Nuntius of the Apostolic See. That his own
condemnation might be the more solemn, and the sentence pronounced against
himself conceived in his own words: Thus then he makes Luthers, and his own
Process; And let him be asked (says he) of the Doctrine of which he stands
suspected (and much more if now he has sustained in Print) whether he believes
(this his new Doctrine of Purgatory) to be that Doctrine which this present Age
he now lives in, received from their Fathers, of the immediate foregoing Age?
Whether he received it in his childhood, when he was first instructed in
Christian belief, and which, till he now became a Doctor, he followed? And let
him answer for himself (for what other answer can he make) then that (this his
new broached Purgatory) is not that Doctrine he thus was taught, whilst he was
yet a Child: But that it is better Doctrine then the former, which he himself
has now evinced out of sacred Monuments: Heathen Poets, out of the Bowels and
Principles of Nature, by Demonstration, And that the contrary Doctrine to which
he had been bred, took its rise only from ignorance of the nature of separated
substances. And let the faithful people (says he) encompass the Tribunal, now
educated in this faith, that the Authority of things which (...) stand bound to
believe, descends, handel down from Christ our B. Savior, and is otherwise,
even till this Age: Will they n^ cry out upon him as an Innovatour, a Profane
Person, an Heretic: will they not proclaim and invoque to Prisons, Fire, with
him; to rid such a plague out of the world? And he pursues.

But let the people be silent, and let the Judge ^erge him. And do you not
know, Sir, this new Doctrine fights against the known Laws of your Country?
that such an Author as you are first thrust out of the sacred Communion of the
saithful, should expiate or pay for this his presumption with death? Do you not
know that you now fight against the Fathers and Monuments of Antiquity? that
you combat an immemorable custom? that you now impugn that reverence due to
our most dear Parents; by whom above all things else, the contrary Doctrine (of
Purgatory) is recommended to us as most profitable both for soul and body? And
since it can not with any face be denied, but that he knows he contends against
all these: Let the Judge further urge him. From whence Sir can you hope to draw
any Argument of that evidence, which may enforce us and other prudent men to
follow this noveltie with an obdurate soul? And let him answer that out of the
Scriptures. And the Judge reply; and do not you know, that wilfully you inhere
to holy Scriptures? Do you not know that words, do not signify naturally, but
by institution? And therefore the construction of words is subject to such
variety, that it is impossible to pick out any sense demonstratively, at least
any one expressly repugnant to the Doctrine of so many wise men, who all of them
endeavor the understanding of those sacred Texts as well as you. Or can you
pretend Christian Faith is directed by the ^ables of Heathen Poets, or that you
now can demonstratively show out of the Principles of reason, that to be false,
which we all have with unavoidable Authority, hitherto believed to be true; or
that you now have attained to such a clear understanding of the nature of
separated souls, that all the learning of mankind before you, could not reach
that, which now you pretend to have demonstratively and scientifically proved?
Is it not evident (says he) that this large-wide mouthed gaping promiser will
produce nothing worthy the hearing, but must needs b^ esteemed as a mere
frantic and mad person? as he who Vaunts, he will do that, which all learned
men know is impossible, and the very unlearned see is improbable. And further
he pursues; let the same, or another Writer, (says he) being now unmindful of
his own weakness, imagine to himself, that either by his own reason, or
explication of Scriptures, he has now found out that which all former ages
were ignorant of (to wit; that now in the third age or man's estate of the
Church, we shall be directed by faith no longer (...) for the future by his
demonstrations, which is the Position of this our Master, as we shall presently
see.) And that this truth was left by God to him, to be revealed and manifested
to the Church: Of which Position the vulgar Christians, as a sluggish Cattle
not at all given to speculation know nothing, and so he contemns them; he
laughs at the Doctors, he styles the Saints liars, because men: but that he
himself is the first to whom God has made known so great a mystery. But though
he be a most arrogant person, let him weigh with him, and consider: Though I
have hitherto contemplated this sublime and happy truth: But when I come to
propose this Doctrine to others, they will presently object, and ask whether
Christian Faith has any other ground of its security then a continued
succession through all ages to our present time? Do you Sir promise this new
light, of science, of Demonstration? If I deny it, will they not presently hiss
me out? Will they not cry out to the faggot with me? And shall we believe that
in such a disposition of the faithful people, that (such an Innovatour) will
dare to print or publish his novelty* or that he shall hope to find either
buyers of his Book, or followers of his Doctrine, Thus he. And thus Sir, your
great Master pleads the cause, and arraigns himself, and all the Proselytes of
his new Purgatory, thus he thunders and lightens, and I think home to our
purpose, for the consciences of all the faithful bear witness against it, the
unlearned know it is improbable, and the learned see it is impossible.

Having said this to the ingenuous Gentleman, the Author of that Letter, who is
a very able proficient in this new School. I hope he will pardon me, if I make
his Letter public without his name: I hope these short reflections on his and
his Masters grounds, without which he acknowledges this Purgatory can not be
sustained, will prove an effectual admonition to him, both to see and repent,
that he has entered himself a Scholar into this dangerous School, and therefore
out of hand to withdraw his name.

Sect. 20. And now Sir I hope this better proficients judgment will be of some
weight, since he is your School-fellow. I think an unprejudiced understanding
will be convinced, by that evidence I have already brought: the undoubted
intention of the Pope was, to deliver us our holy Faith, in all the several
conditions of souls, which depart this mortal life, either in the state of
grace, or out of it; either which need, or need not any Purgation in the next
life, and for the Council, besides the strength of words of the Decree, the
very Process of it, the several Doctrines of the Latin and Greek Churches in
order to this Decree, will evince that their intentions reach as home, to our
purpose, as their words. But because the Reverend Esteem of ^^ur new Master,
and of those solid, and cleer-sighted persons stop your ears against the voice
of the Church: Let us try that Music which certainly would cure you of this
Tarantula. What if we could obtain your new Master to plead on the behalf of
that Faith we now maintain? this certainly would prevail: Let us attempt it
then; if you are not as yet so good a proficient in your new School, that you
are ready to believe, the Council erred in this particular question of
Purgatory: I doubt not to conclude you out of your Masters own grounds. Master
White then lays you down this fundamental Doctrine. The Church (says he) in
her definitions of Faith proceeds only on tradition: and declares to us, that
Depositum of Faith, which was handed down from Christ, and his Apostles, by an
innumerable number of Fathers and Pastors, to their numberless children and
flock, through age to age, even to any one determinate moment. When then any
controversy is to be decided, and a Council is summoned to declare our Faith;
what course is then taken? surely no other then this. The Fathers there
gathered, lay down that Faith thus handed down to them, which they received
from their precedent teachers, and was commended to them to deliver to
posteri^y, as a sacred treasure not to be violated, since it is their light,
their guide in their way to Heaven. This Doctrine presupposed; let it not be
denied, but the Florentin Council proceeded in that very way he has chalked
out for them, in onr present question, and my work is done. Let us take a view
of the Council. Both the Greek and Latin Fathers meet first at Ferrara,
afterward at Florence; their business there is to declare the Faith of the
Church, concerning the state of souls which depart this life; and in
particular, concerning the Souls which are detained in Purgatory: both sides
lay down their hitherto received Faith, in order to a decision. Let us see how
happily they agree with this new molded Purgatory. And first as to the Latins.

They ^elieve a Purgatory Fire directly against Master White, who pretends to
demonstate, that no material agent can work upon the soul in its state of
separation; they believe that souls guilty of venial impurities, are purged by
this fire, directly against Master White who holds; there is no purging of the
soul in the state of separation, neither by fire, nor not by fire; for this is
reserved to the reunion, when her now torment, her irregular affections shall
be changed. They believe that souls there detained, by this fire together with
the help of the Church, the Prayers of the Priests, Masses, Alms, etc. are
Expiated. directly against Master White, in the point in Question, both as to
the indivisible duration of the state, he pretends to demonstrate, and the
unchangeableness of it, and the continuation of it till the day of Judgment.
Being thus unfortunate with the Latins, who must needs have thrust this new
School out of their Communion; let us see what favor it would find with the
Greeks. These then profess this belief: That souls there, are detained in a
darksome place. Directly against Master White, who holds that souls in the
state of separation do not only abstract from place, but comprehend, and are
in some manner governors, of all place: they believe souls are expiated and
freed, directly against Master White, who holds there is no expiating and
freeing of souls, but at reunion with their bodies; they believe souls are
freed by the Prayers and Sacrifices of Priests, Alms, etc. directly against
Master White, in all the ways before mentioned, both as to his indivisible
measure, or duration of souls, the unchangeableness of their state, and the
continuation of it, till the day of Judgment. And most especially both sides
unanimously agree against him, in asserting the efficacy of Prayers, and
Sacrifices of the Priests, for the dead; for in his new systeme (as shall be
evidenced hereafter) these endeavors advantage not the souls any thing at all.

What wonder then, if out of both the Greek and Latin Professions, thus
directly opposite to him, should issue out a Decree directly destructive of
this his Machin: or whilst neither part would admit him into their Communion;
they should conspire to destory his error. The sacred Council approving: We
define (say they) that the souls of them, who after Baptism received, have
contracted no blemish of sin, as also those souls, who after they have
contracted the blemish of sin, are purged either in their bodies, or being
uncloathed of their said bodies, are presently received into heaven. What
wonders is it, we should have a purging of souls uncloathed of their bodies,
and a p^esent Translation into Heaven, in which both sides agreed against him,
destructive of all this new Doctrine? And truly what to answer to this evidence
but by those other grounds, that the Council did not proceed with due
Application, and so erred; I cannot imagine. And now I think I have fulfilled
my promise to my Reader, that either this new model of Purgatory cannot
subsist, or else the Council, in our very point in question, has not only
possibly, or not impossibly, but de facto proceeded to an erroneous definition;
de facto by this attempt has fallen into an error, and de facto published it
to the World. And the Church which has constantly embraced this Faith, has de
facto erred as well as it.

And now I hope your peremptory When, has received its answer, your so many
times reiterated question. When is this purgation perfected, comp^eated, ended?
Take the Popes answer (since I hope you are not so good a proficient as to
detest and abhominate his authority, to teach you faith,) before the resumption
of their bodies, and the general day of Judgment: Let the Council satisfy you,
(if you are not poisoned with that detestable Doctrine that it may err too, as
well as the Pope) being purged, even uncloathed of their bodies, presently.
Agree and reunite your self to the Catholic Church, and be refractory no
longer upon the itch of novelties, of seeming wiser then all the Christian
World ever was before you.

Sect. 21. But still you bite the Bridle; these words so directly opposite to
your error, are in these sacred decisions: there they are, and there they must
remain, maugre the Gates of Hell which shall never prevail against this Faith;
and when you have turned your self into all your postures, you appear with this
pitiful evasion; these words are ^here indeed, but (say you, page 19 20. etc.)
they reach not home to our point: The Popes ante reassumptionem, etc. before
the reunion, depends on the precedent words; when after death they shall be
purged, and after the aforesaid purgation, which words also should have stalked
in great Letters; This purgation is indeed supposed, but no way defined: and
for the Councils, Presently, it also depends on the foregoing words; being
purged, uncloathed, etc. which presupposes a purgation held by some divines, in
the state of separation, but no way Decrees it; and since the question was not
then of the truth of this supposition, (as now it is,) but that then it was
admittted without more ado; you grant us, that in that supposition those words
passed into the Pope and Councils Decrees: The Pope indeed was of the opinion,
that the purgation ^f souls might be completed in the state of separation; but
what does that concern you: You lawfully dissent from his Opinion if you find
reason, but not from his Faith: where he opin^s, you follow him as far as his
reason leads; but where he defines you submit.

Now Sir as to this, I wondered at your last word submit, for I understand not
you, if you understand your Master. We are here in a business of Faith, and
certainly you pass a very handsome complement upon the Pope, when you tell him
you submit to his definitions: If this be real, (since your submission in faith
can not be grounded but upon the supposition that he is infallible;) your
Master will instantly discard you out of the School: For an Heretic an
Arch-Heretick; for an introducer of Antichrist into Christendom: This censure
he has fixed on this Doctrine, as I have told you before.

But as to your plea, though (to use your own Phrase) it is incomparably false,
as is before evinced; nor can it according to your Masters own grounds take
place in the Council, where they proceed upon the depositum of Faith: Yet to
give you that satisfaction, we will join issue in this your subtility, as if
your plea were allowable. And in truth, when you say that they proceeded on
this as a supposition only, Yonr moderate Reader will much blame the boldness
of this attempt, because it will leave very ill consequences behind it; and
besides he will tell you, that you had a very great disesteem both for the
Pope^ and Council: and that you fancied them to be admirably ridiculous
Persons* who should proceed to definitions of Faith, to declar^ us Articles of
our belief, which regulate so much practis^, on suppositions, not only false
but impossible. The whole Christian World was in labor about the state of
souls in Purgatory, the East and Western Churches meet, the diligent scru^iny
of Divines make a search into all Libraries, Papers, Scrowls: and after all
these Throws, the issue is, n^nsensical definitions upon not only ridiculous
and false, but impossible suppositions. If they had troubled their heads, to
tell us that when the Sky falls, we shall catch Larks: it had been tolerable;
the supposition had been foolish, not impossible: But to tell us, and make ^uch
a putther to tell us, when you remaining yet what you are, shall become an
Angel? what then shall happen: when indeed nothing shall happen, or any thing
may happen, is to render the supreme Pastor of the Church, the sacred
Assemblies of ^h^ shepherds of our souls a laughing stock to children. And yet
this is our very case according to you; for upon this bare and impossible
supposition; that the purgation of separated souls might be completed before
reu^ion, issued this impossible Doctrine, that they were presently, and before
the day of Judgment received into heaven. And if you had but weighed those very
Examples you use (page 20. 21.) you would have observed this. What sense will
this bear? A Prisoner when acquitted by Proclamation, becomes a freeman: or
Fire applied to combustible matter presently burns; if it be absolutely
impossible the Prisoner should ever be acquitted by Proclamation, or that fire
should ever be applied to combustible matter? what practice can we regulate by
such Positions? and yet your self had a ^winkling light of it p. 21. for having
asked your friend, when you should see him in the Coantry? You complain of his
canting answer, when he tells you, as soon as he comes down, he will visit you,
since (as you say) it was the confidence of this, which made you inquire the
other We must be confident then of the supposition, or else what is drawn out
of it, is nothing. If it were impossible, your time should ever be out, under
this your new Master, your setting up a new School for your self, would
signify nothing, If it be impossible That you should ever have performed your
previous exercises, your presently proceeding Doctor would be out of doors. So
that without being an Oedipus, if the supposition (as you will needs have it)
that Souls may be purged uncloathed of their Bodies, be impossible, the
definitions both of the ^ope and Council are more silily ridiculous, then any
Fable in Aesop or Ovid, for in these there is still some Moral or Physical
Mystery coucht for our Instruction, in them nothing at all.

But how do you parrallel page 22, 23. your Adversaries proceed, in obscuring
some words in an obscure Letter, or render it worse, then if he should set in
Cpaital Letters, Christ is not risen from the dead, and our preaching is vain,
in lieu of these words of St. Paul: If Christ is not risen from the dead: Then
our preaching is vain, the cases being so far different: for here St. Paul out
of one absurdity which his adversary admitted, deduces an other absurdity, and
presses it against him. And I pray you, when you write again, tell us, Whether
the Council and Pope Dispute here only, and Define nothing, or whether they
argue only as St. Paul did: If Souls be purged, uncloathed of their Bodies,
they presently are received into Heaven before Judgment: both which according
to you, are impossible. And yet, Sir, I applaud your conceit as pretty, to
possess your Reader, that the Pope and Council does not only not Define
against you, but indeed Define nothing at all, and only dispute against your
Adversary, pressing out of one impossibility, which he admits, an other which
follows it.

But you tell us, p. 28. and that very truly, that among the Divines in the
Schools, many times such impossible suppositions are sta^ed, to clear a point
in question. And yet you are somewhat unfortunate in your examples; for in this
example you bring, If Judas had repented heartily, God had been merciful to
him: This is so far from being a Question, that no Christian can hold the
negative. And for your other, If there had been no Trinity, there had been no
Incarnation. The supposition indeed is impossible: but I would willingly know,
what Divine Disputes it: Since it is impossible, we can have any light; that in
case there should be but one Person in God, he would not have taken Humane
Nature npon him. But though your questions be indisputable, others upon
impossible suppo^itions are: where the question cleers a formality which
depends not on the impossibility of the supposition, (for so it would be
nothing) but might be proposed in possible terms, though not so justly home to
our understandings. As for example, the Divines dispute, Whether if the holy
Ghost did not proceed from the Son, he would be distinguished from the Son?
which question is no way impertinent: it bearing this sense in other words,
Whether the procession of the holy Ghost from the Son, be the precise reasen of
the distinction between those two Persons? And so for our better comprehension
of this nicity, is stated in that impossible supposition. But though this and
the like nice subtilities may be^it Metaphysicall Schoolmen, yet with reasou
you were shye, and therefore tell us, p. 28. However it may suit with the
gravity of the Supreme Pastors Decrees, to proceed on such Metaphysicall
nicityes: whilst in truth, without these mealy mouthed excuses you should have
plainly told us, That both the Pope and Council proceeded on such quiddities,
however it beseemed, or misbeseemed their Gravities, or else you tell us
nothing as to your purpose of building these Definitions upon impossible
suppositions: much less will it be to our purpose to tell us, That perfect
Charity brings an immediate Heaven; which is not ours; nor the Popes Question,
^in which he was, as you would persuade us, to ennmerate all possible and
imaginary Cases: And yet you would possess your Reader, as if those sacred
Assemblies, who are to deliver the World that Faith which is to regulate the
practice of all and every Christian, should proceed only on these niceties and
formalities of Schoolmen: For you insinuate, p. 29. that the Pope spoke only
to them: as if we were bound to believe in our Metaphysical Disputes in the
Schools, whatsoever our practice be out of them. And yet all our practice of
Devotions for the Dead, stands on the firmness of this Doctrine: which if built
on an impossible supposition, these formalities can regulate just nothing. So
that the Objection you made to your self, still remains in full force: That
this is but an evasion, which gratis, and without any ground you make use of,
to evade an otherwise unavoidable Authority. I can not then but lament the
misfortune of that Age, that this School was not then opened, or hearkened
unto; that you your self were not called to counsel in this business: it would
have saved both the Pope, and Councils credit; you had quickly taught them what
Suppositions to make; what decisions to build on them, and much more
effectually; one Thomas the Englishman, appearing from the East of the
Trinobants, had put a stop to this Torrent.

My Reader himself will easily observe, what a wide gate is laid open by this
Sphistry, to evacuate the rest of that Bull, nay, the most of our holy Faith,
and Doctrine of manners. Wha^ if another Trinobant should rise and assert, That
it is not possible any souls of just men can pass out of this life, without
need to be purged in the next: What could this Bull avail against him, though
he should accept it? What can this definition, That such souls pass
immediately to Heaven, be of force against him, whom my Adversary has furnished
with this ready Answer: It depends on a false supposition^ the Opinion, not the
Faith, of the Pope. What if an other should sustain, That it is not possible
any soul should leave this life in mortal sin: what could he be concerned in
this Decree: That such descend immediately to Hell: whilst to him this
Doctrine is built, on a false supposition, the Opiniou, not the Faith of the
Pope. And in our other Belief, what if a new Imp of Hell should arise, and
admit only a metaphorical, and not a real Son in divinis: How could this
Blasphemy be repressed by Consubstantialem Patri, in the sacred Nicene Creed,
whilst he is ready furnished with his Answer; This depends on this false
supposition, That ^here is a real Son, which I deny. And in our Doctrine of
Manners, what if the same miscreant should say, That a moderate affection to a
Concubine, is a less crime then ^n immoderate love to a Wife, as less
intangling our souls and hindering their pursuit of the Divine Love: what could
the contrary Faith of all the Christian world, or the Doctrine of Christ,
saying, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, avail against him,
who has his Answer ready, That this Faith and Doctrine depends on this
supposition, That God has forbidden the one, and not the other; whilst in
truth, God has neither commanded, nor forbidden any thing at all.

Sect. 22. And now having answered this, I know not any thing else, thar
carries any appearance of strength in your Book: So that I might fairly take
leave of this Subject: But I will not be a Niggard to my Reader, I design to
give him a cleerer view of your School, this will serve as an Introduction to
those further discoveries I design for the future. And as to our present
business of Purgatory; My Reader may perhaps have met this new Model, sustained
in English: he has perhaps heard, that the Faith we here fight for, is but a
late device brought into the Church by St. Gregory the Great, the glorious
Apostle of our now unhappy Nation, pursued by Venerable Bede, Odilo, and a long
Catalogue of eminent. Saints and Doctors, since that time, and so took its rise
and continued support, by pi^us, but sillily credulous Monks: for all those
Lights of the Church are most severely whipped for their foolish credulity of
Dreams, Fancies, Melancholy apprehensions, and nothings. And besides, because
it is provoked (after the mode of our late castaways in Faith) to the primitive
Ages immediate to Christ: I will (for my Readers just satisfaction) give him
two or three of the most eminently learned Fathers of those Ages, to which they
appeal, and the rather because it will appear how far different their
sentiments were, both as to the Substance of those sufferings, as well as to
the Co^tinuation of them, from those of this modern School. Let Great St.
Augustine stand in the Front. We may not doubt (says he) but that the dead are
helped by the Prayers of the holy Church, Aug. Ser. 32. de verb. Apostoli.
and by the wholesome Sacrifice, and by the Alms, which are distributed for
their souls, etc. For this is a Doctrine delivered by the Fathers, and observed
by the whole Church. And afterward; Now when works of Mercy are performed for
their assistance; who doubts but that they help them, for whom prayers are not
in vain offered up, to the Divine Majesty? etc. This place I choose to stand in
the Front, because it strongly asserts the Essence of Purgatory derived by
Tradition from the Forefathers, and observed by the whole Church, and because
it is so home to the relief, those souls receive by our Prayers and Alms. And
now this great Father having told us, what he has thus received as to the
Substance, let him also tell us what he has received as to their Sufferings
there, and Continuation of them. Let no man say, Aug. Ser. 41. de S. S.
I care not how long I must tarry in the way, if at last I come to aeternal
life; let no one say so, (dear Brethren;) For surely, that Purgatory fire will
be more severe then any punishment which can be felt or imagined in this world.
And again: Hom. 16. de 50.
According to the greatness of the sin, shall be the length of the stay. And
again: Sermon. 41. de S. S.
We must so long remain in that Purgatory fire, until the aforesaid small sins
(as it were Chips, Hay, Straw) are consumed.

Let us add to him, Learned Origin, more ancient then St. Augustine; who though
he afterward erred, yet in all points stood clear, when he writ those Learned
Commentaries I here cite. Hom. 14. in Levit.
The nature of the sin (says he) is like the matter which is consumed by the
fire, which as the Apostle affirms, is built by sinners: who upon the
Foundation of Christ, build Wood, Hay, Stubble: Whereby is plainly declared,
That some sins are so light, as they may be compared to Stubble, to which if
fire be applied, it can not stay long in it: Other sins are like Hay, which the
fire also consumes without much difficulty; though it stays somewhat longer
then in the Stubble: And other sins are compared to Wood, in which, according
to the quality of the crimes, the fire finds a lasting and great substance to
feed upon. Thus therefore each sin, according to its quality or quantity, is
punished; but for how long time, lib. 8. in Ep. ad Romans 11.
or how many Ages this purgation (which is by the punishm^nt of fire) shall
endure; he alone knows, to whom the Father has committed all Judgment.

Let Us hear pious and learned S. Greg. Nyss. in that excellent disputation he
had with h^s Sister Macrina. As they who purge Gold, (saves he) from its
drossie mixture by the fire, do not only melt that which is adulterate, but
must of necessity melt that also, which is pure, together with the counterfeit,
bad, and corrupted matter; which corruption being consumed, the Gold remains
purified: In like sort, it is also necessary, that whilst the naughtiness and
corruption is consuming in the fire of Purgatory; the soul, which is united to
this naughtiness and corruption, must continue in the fire until that
adulterate, gross, impure, and corrupt matter, be wholly abolisht and consumed,
etc. Wherefore the torment and sorrow there suffered, is measured by the
quantity of the Vitiosity (as he terms it) and naughtiness, which is found in
each one of the sufferers. For it is not meet, that both of them, to wit, he
who for a long time has wallowed in forbidden evils, and he who has fallen into
certain mean offenses, should be equally tormented and afflicted, by the
purgation of his vi^ious custom, and habitude: but proportionably to the
measure and quantity of the matter, shall that pain-bringing flame be
inkindled, to continue for a longer or shorter space of time, according as it
shall find fuel to nourish it. The Soul therefore that is clogged with a great
inherent burden of matter, must necessarily suffer a great and longer enduring
flame, which may waste that matter: But the soul to which that consuming fire
is applied for a less space of time, the punishment does remit, so much of its
vehement and severe operation, by how much the subject has a less measure of
corruption, vitiosity, and naughtiness to be consumed.

I hope, Sir, when you have perused and duly weighed the how long which
rendered St. Augustine so sollicitous, his length of the stay, in propottion to
the greatness of the sin: the whose Analogy of Wood, Hay, Stubble, (in which
St. Paul had before delivered this Doctrine of Purgatory) exactly answered by
the time of their sufferings, in Origin: his how long time, how many Ages: The
whole design of St. Greg. Nyssen in his discourse, his kindling the flame for a
longer, or shorter time: his so many times repeated a great and longer enduring
flame: his applied for a less space of time, etc; you will see those Ages to
which you appeal, had far other apprehensions of Purgatory then are consistent
with your new Systeme; and perhaps a modest Christian Divine would have blushed
to pronounce, That all these Apprehensions proceed but out of ignorance of the
nature of separated Souls. De Med. Stat. dimens. 17. And if He had had the
least respect for Christian Religion, he would have sunk with shame, to appeal
from all the Light of Christianity, to the ancient Fables and Fictions of
Heathen Poets. How could those shameless words pass from his Pen; Much better
then and more solidly then they, did the Poet Philosophyse in the sixth the
Aeneads, where he fansied to have found his Purgatory, never admitted or
thought of in Christ's School? Pardon me, Sir, if a zeal has transported me; I
can not endure the confidence of a Christian Writer, who should prefer a Fable
of Virgil, before the consent of all Christianity, and that now in point of
Faith, of Purgatory. It is to give an approbation to an infamous slander I have
read in a modern Enemy of the Catholic Church: That she has picked her Tenets
out of the Poets, and now their Fables stand canonized in her Creed.

But to the consent of these great Lights of the Church, let us add the
public Lyturgy, the great conveyer of Tradition to us; let it give testimony
to this Faith. We find the Priest at the Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Dead,
pouring forth his Devotions in this manner.

Dread Judge! whose Justice is severe,
Their long black score of sin make clear,
Ere the Accounting Day appear.
What new construction shall we have of this Ante diem rationis, ere the
accounting day: and every where Grant them rest Eternal. Receive, O Lord, the
Sacrifices and Prayers for those Souls we make a memory of this day make them
pass from death to life. And more expressly in the Prayers and Post-communions.
Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, that the Soul of thy Servant being purged and
discharged from his sins, by these now offered Sacrifices, may obtain mercy and
Rest. What senseless Devotions are these whilst Separated Souls cannot be
purged or discharged by any Sacrifice whatsoever, since that is reserved to the
state of Reunion?

Sect. 23. But to this Clowd of witnesses, to all the Authority we can Imagine
in the Catholic Church, to the consent of all the Christian world, Fathers,
Councils, Popes, to the Constant and Universal practice of all the faithful,
not any Church, Chapel, Altar, Oratory, but speaking it alowd, in their
continual Prayers, Dirges, Masses, Alms, Doales, etc. Master Whites Name in
his Instit. Sac.
What is opposed? but, THOMAS ANGLVS E GENEROSA ALBIORVM IN ORIENT TRINOBANTVM
PROSAPIA ORIVNDVS. THOMAS THE ENGLISHMAN DESCENDED OF THE GENEROUS PROGENY OF
THE ALBII(I think he Construes it Whites) IN THE EAST OF THE TRINOBANTS: A^
which in good modest English is, Thomas White of Essex. Together with the
authority of the Heathen Poets. Not so (you willx say) we have not this Thomas
The Englishman, with this frightful title: but with his Reason, with his
Demonstration: with that indisolvable Chain of necessary conclusions, pursued
with Irrefragable evidence; through the most abstruse properties of Bodies, to
the clear discovery of separated Substances, not only of Souls, now severed
from that Clay, which before enclosed them: but of Angels, those clean, pure
Spirits, which never had any allay of drossy matter. Dives Promissis: To be
rich in Promises may accompany very poor men: would your performance were
answerable, though much short of the full proportion. This, truly Sir, is a
very handsome invitation to your School. But is this the only entertainment
there? O no, we have an incomparably higher and nobler feast prepared for us.
All this is but his Peripateticks: the atchievment of Thomas the Englishman of
the Albii of the East Saxons. What shall we hope for in his Theology, now he
has gotten this much nobler Title? What is it for the now great Trinobant to
understand Men and Angels? This towering soul flies much a higher pitch; by his
Adamantine Chain of Demonstrations, he soars up to the Sea Institutiones
Sacrae, in the beginning Ratio operis, where after a description of the
Theology he delivers, Vide, etc. (says he to the Reader) See what an execrable
thing it is in such matters as these, after a proposition and a hope of Verity
in them, to feed our hungry Souls with vain and lying trifles. Remember then
thou art a man, born capable of truth, and that all these things are proposed
to thee in a familiar language, that thou might understand and enjoy them. He
who hopes this without Demonstration, goes about to delude himself and thee.
They object the obscurity of Faith, and the inaccessible darkness of the
Divinity to our Reason. But this hinders nothing; for such Demonstrations may
be given of the Mysteries, as is given of God himself, etc. Courage then, and
dare thou to expect in Theology the full satiety of thy understanding: Seek in
it certainty, and the evidence of Science and Demonstration. And in the same
Institut. Sac. 2 Volume. lib. 3. Lect. 2. And since Grace is so implanted in
Nature, that they draw each other with connected Members, and interlaced links:
it is not to be doubted, but most of the Mysteries of Faith, may be
Demonstratively known; so that the Church now proceeding to the midday, they
are to be Demonstrated.
inaccessible light of the Divinity, he leads us into the bosom of that
incomprehensible essence, and there evidences by clear light, the Sea ibid:
Ratio operis. Theology is planted in nature, Faith is delivered to us, in
humane language. What more sublime things are disputed in Theology, then
Father, Son, Generation, Spiration, Nature, Person? etc. And yet we were taught
all these things by Nature and Reason, even before Christ. But if these things
now be rendered evident, there will nothing at all remain obscure. See more
fully in the same Book, lib. 2. where all these things are pretended to be
demonstrated, by the Principles of natural Reason.
Eternal Generation of the Word, the Procession of the Holy Ghost: There he
inlightens us clearly to see, an Eternal Father, a Coeternal Son, a
substantial love, Generation, Processions, Nature, Persons, All: In sum
whatever our astonished humble Faith, has hitherto only accepted by Revelation.
See ibid. Ratio operis. A libertatis cavo sibil^t alter anguis: The other Snake
hisses out of the Denn of Liberty. Where of these contingent Theological
Truths, he largely promises demonstrations, and attempts is every where in his
new Theology, where these mysteries are treated.
And yet which is more admirable then All this, and which never yet fell into
any man's hopes or thoughts that it could be possible, even of those contingent
verities, to which the Divine Will is free; and where neither part of the
contradiction determinately, can have any necessary tie to the Cause (as
certainly, all created truths are, for God to any thing besides God, can have
no necessary connection) he with his incomparable Chain, fixes even in such
contingencies, this determinat part of the contradiction. And all this after
our great Knight, his standard bearer, Sir Kenelm Digby See ibid Ratio operis,
Eadem Labyrintho, etc. In the same Labyrinth with Divinity, Philosophy too,
grew old. But Digby has held forth his Torch: If now they despair of it, is
vanished: Dare, now greater things; his footsteps will lead thee to the
fortress of Theology, etc. What then do thou fear? and trembling shunnest the
Digbaean attempts? If the things thou learnest are false, reason it self will
teach thee so, if they are true, the happy success will now provoke thee glad;
if they are uncertain, do thou loose any thing by seeking; set then the right
foot forward, and gratefully hold on that path, trodden by other men's labors.
had now held forth his new Torch, to the hitherto darkened World.

May Sir, this your great Master be happy in his glorious undertakings; may
success attend and wait on his endeavors. Phaetont youthful attempt to drive
the Sun, was nothing to this enterprise; and yet -- magnis excidit ausis. Happy
we who are reserved to this third age of the Church which is no more to walk by
Faith, but by Science! Happy we that now live, when this new Sun appears from
the East of the Trinobants, Exeg. on the Apocalypse. Sec. x^.
who gives the second Wing of Knowledge, to the Woman, to the Church! but
especially happy we to whom the acquaintance of this Miracle (for a Man I dare
not style him, nor an Angel, since even to them, but by Revelation, these
Mysteries are hidd,) has not been denied I May all other Doctrines be
silenced, all other Schools shut up; they have hitherto led us in a Clowd, in a
submission of our understandings to obscure unseen verities, upon the Authority
of God the Revealer: whilst he (tearing this veil of ignorance, which
encumbered our understandings,) has displayed with light and evidence, and
placed All in the mid-dayes Sun, whatsoever we have groped for hitherto, in the
dark obscurity of Faith.

Let us no more envy the happiness of those who conversed with our B. Savior
in Flesh, who heard that heavenly voice, who beheld that ravishing countenance,
beautiful above the Sons of Men, who were eyewitnesses of those stupendous
miracles he wrought, in confirmation of that Doctrine which he brought from the
bosom of his Father. Let not an other bragg, he received his Faith from the
mouth of S. Peter, the Rock: of S. Paul, the Vessel of Election: of S. John the
beloved of Jesus: but let all these worthily envy us, who now have a Docto^r,
as far excelling all them, as Light excells Darkness: as Day, the Night: as
Evidence, Obscurity it self. For alas! what did Peter, Paul, or John, or our B.
Savior himself? They laid down obscure Positions, abstruse hidden mysteries,
and in confirmation of the truth of what they delivered wrought Miracles: which
certainly enforce no Assent, but leave us to our former liberty: leave the
Object it self, in the same obscurity it was before: For since they are neither
its cause, nor effect, but purely extrinsecal to it, they enlighten not at all
the object in it self. What then was begotten in the souls of those holy
Apostles and Disciples, who followed our B. Savior by his Preaching? but a
free, voluntary submission of their understandings, to those obscure truths he
delivered upon the Authority only, of their heavenly Teacher. But our great
Master promises a far other proceed: Not by an Attestation extrinsecal to the
Object, will he confirm those truths which he delivers to us, but out of the
clear principles, and intime notions of the Objects, out of the very bowels of
the Mysteries themselves, he will render all clear, evident and perspicuous;
and ravish our souls (even whether our selves will or no) into an Assent, not
any more of an obscure, dark Faith: but of a clear, apparent Science, even to
the Sea Instit. Sac. Ratio operis. Expect that full Satiety or surfeit of thy
Vaderstanding in Theology.
full content and satiety of our truth-thirsty understandings. Let him then
possess the Chair; Let him be Inthroned; Let Peter, Paul and John: nay, let our
Master who came from heaven to teach us, give way; Let all other Doctors
whatsoever, attend upon his Triumph. Let the astonished captivated world,
shutting henceforth their ears to all others, hear him Alone. Why should we
trouble our heads any more with the Gospels, with Paul? We find no Satiety of
our understanding, in their bare, naked Assertions. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word: What if ten thousand
miracles were wrought, in confirmation of this Doctrine? my Soul ha^h not its
full content: I still thirst after light, after evidence, which here is not to
be found. Let us then, shutting our ears to these drily proposed Doctrines,
hear great Trinobant, and Satiate and glut our understandings with this his
evident, clear Demonstration. For thus what St. John obscurely had told us, he
makes apparent: That there is Unity and Plurality in God* Inst. Sac. lib. 2
Lect. 1.
without Repugnance. Since that God knows himself, and the thing defined being
put, the definition is also to be put in him, (but to know is to be another
thing, as another thing; and to be known is to be an other thing, as an other
thing) the business is plainly ended: that God is in God as an other, in an
other: and by consequence Aliety is truly and really, and as a predicat of God,
found in God, and not only as a manner of predicating, or as it is in our
Understanding. Here is light, here is evidence able to ravish a soul; nay,
Satiate and Surfeit her, in the height of all her Thirst and longing after Truth.

Sect. 24. In truth, Sir, a sober Reader, though he were in a melancholy mood,
would be tempted to smile, at this Demonstration, (as you did page 11. at the
word verbatim.) And yet that Passion would justly give way to his indignation
against this Presumption. No Christian, but has heard, That the Faith our B.
Savior taught Mankind, was to continue in his holy Spouse the Church on earth,
till the consummation of the world, and his second coming to Judge. And can we
cease to wonder, or indeed to conceive a just indignation, now to find a Thomas
the Englishman, who after Forty or Fifty years study, should tell us, That in
truth we have all been mistaken: there is no such matter: But that in the
Infancy and Childhood of the Church, She was to walk indeed by Faith, but now,
in the third Age, or Man's estate, she is no more to be governed by Faith, Inst
S. li. 3. lec. 2. and alibi.
but by Science, by Demonstration. In this very Third Age or Man's estate of the
Church, in which now we live, to begin undoubtedly from himself, (since he
admits of no one Demonstration in any one former Schoolman; In the Letter of
Vindication.
and himself promises thousands:) And all this made out of the most prodigious
explication of the Apocalypse that ever saw light, as if it were a mere Poem,
and a Stage Play: And peculiarly of that passage, That there were two wings of
a great Eagle, given to the Woman, that she might fly into the desert: He
understanding this Woman to be the Church, Exeg. on the Apocalypse, sect. xi.
these two Wings to be Faith and Science; Faith, which our B. Savior gave her
in his Economy on Earth, by which she was to steer her course in her Nonage;
But now She being come to Man's estate, He himself gives her the other Wing of
Knowledge; for henceforth she is only to be directed by his Demonstrations. And
with this new Wing, he now gives her, fairly she may walk, if she please,
unless she be able to fly, as she has hitherto done for Sixteen hundred years,
with one Wing alone, since this Wing quite destroys the other, Evidence and
Science being perfectly destructive of Obscurity and Faith.

But it is worth my Readers pains to see this admirable conception of his
fancied demonstrative Third Age of the Church, described at large in the same
Book, Sect. 9. and elsewhere. In the tenth Chapter (says he) begins and is
perfected, the Enarration of the Third Age of the Church, which because it is
to be prosperous and blessed, and subject to few evils, therefore it is
described only in general, etc. The Reason of this is, for since Grace
prefects Nature, and since in rational nature there are three degrees, or
species of knowledge, by which successively the soul receives increase, to wit
Faith, which governs Children: Opinion, which steers young men as yet
unexperienced and unskilful: And lastly, Science which directs men now perfect:
It is necessary that in the Church, Nature ascend by the self same degrees.
Till Constantins time (the first Christian Emperor) Faith alone took place:
From Constantin till our age, Heretics, were combated by Rhetorical and
Logical dissertations, which because by little and little, is fitted to conduct
men to Evidence, the immediate succeeding Age of the Church is to be expected,
in which Evidence succeeding, there will be no place for Heresies, but the
Church shall flourish in most perfect Peace and Prosperity.

And having thus adorned the scene, he brings himself down from Heaven, with
these happy demonstrations in this manner. As in this Chapter (says he) S.
John teaches, describing unto us, A strong Angel; as fitting for man's estate:
Descending from Heaven, from whence all good things are derived to us. Clothed
with a Clowd: That is with a celestial garment, as who brings heavenly things
to us: not keeping himself aloof from us, but even approaching and coming near
unto us: and the Rainbow, which is the symbol of Divine Peace, hung over his
Head And his Face was like the Sun: To wit, as he who came to communicate
perfect light, to humane kind: And his Legs in strength and firmness, as
Pillars: And in activity, as Fire: And he had in his Hand, an open Book, that
is to be read and understood by All, And in which there was no obscurity or
involution: And He put his right Foot on the sea; that is, he subjected
turbulent spirits by force and Power: And His left Foot on the Land; that is,
confirming and strengthening the humble and meeek: And he cried out with a loud
voice, even like the roaring of a Lion: Which apertains to the latitude of the
Church, which is signified to be extended as far as his voice might be heard,
etc. And the effect of his voice was, that the seven Thunders might speak their
Uoices; that is, have their effects: which the Apostle is forbidden, to write
for the reasons above delivered; nevertheless, he is commanded, to seal them in
his memory, perhaps to be told to pious men in private, not publicly to be
promulgated to the Church.

But least this could not be so happily adapted to himself, and his long
lasting third age of the Church, steered by his Demonstrative Religion: since
presently the Text introduces this same Angel swearing. That time should be no
more, and S. John is presently described to have devoured this open Book, which
the Angel brought from heaven. Which might seem to regard the end of the World,
when time shall be no more, but these circulations of the heavens shall receive
their last end and Period: he tells us, that this Oath of the Angel, and this
devouring of the Book, by S. John, belong to the preparation of the ensuing
ruin of the World, and consummation of all things. And the Book though sweet
to the taste, and hearing, yet was bitter in his stomach: And could not be
contained, but forced him to preach the Doctrine of it, to others. Thus he:

But it is a good divertisement to see how after this sublime conception had
fallen into his head, how he huggs it, and pleases himself with the fancied
happiness, of that state of the Church, which thus shall be steered by
evidence, by his demonstrations: and how far he prefers it, before All
whatsoever we have hitherto been acquainted with in Christianity, and even
Prophesies of our future happiness by it. See Instit. Sac. Ratio operis. Sulcus
quem duco, etc. The trench I now draw, hoped will serve to derive both truth,
and certainty, in Theological matters.
All Philosophy shall be new molded, All Theology shall be refined, by his and
his Knights Demonstrations. See ibid. neque tamen sustinet haec aetas, etc. Nor
does the present age sustain, that mention be made of demonstrations, or
infallible decisions,; that theology may be esteemed a science knit together,
and woven with the connection of consequences, or that it be believed to stand
on other foundations, then a mere habnab medley of waxen words, or a certain
juggling temerity of babbling Crackers, without any sense or meaning; (under the
surname of Philosophy) on either side of the contradiction. What further
mischief can we expect? or how long do we hinder Fire and Sword? and adore this
Idol of desolation in the Temple, etc.
Never were School-boyes so handled by an Imperious Master, as He (besides the
correction bestowed on all the Fathers for a thousand years) whips all the
School-Doctours, none excepted, and with most exquisite contempt, persecutes
all their Learning. And of the Church he foretells, in this third age there
shall be, no persecution, no Heresies: Exeg. on the Apacalyps. Sec. 14.
but she shall flourish by his demonstrative Religion in perfect tranquillity.
She shall now be furnished with persons of most sublime and eminent sanctity;
and though there shall be no occasion of Martyrdom: yet the supreme Saints, the
first fruits to God and the Lamb, shall adorn this man's estate or midday of the
Church; Master Whites Prophecy of the happy state of the Church, and civil
Governments guided by his demonstr^tive Religion.
Persons of most sublime contemplation. And further as to the Civil Governments
of Magistrates, and happiness under them; he Prophesies. Instit. Sac. lib. 3.
lec. 2. Since this (says he) is the supreme state of humane nature; it will
also bring with it the bettering of the manners of men, the Governments, and
commands of Sovereigns, and supreme Magistrates, shall be more mild and
moderate; few wars among Christians, the commodities of life far greater: All
excellent arts cultivated, and brought to the highest perfection. And since the
supreme Governors shall find Foreign Wars necessary for domestic security,
they shall disburden the turbulent and ambitious spirits among Christians, in
Wars upon Barbarous Nations, and Infidels, the enemies of this demonstrative
Religion: Whom since now they excel in Arts, they will easily conquer by Arms;
and contain them in their duty, by an even handed, equal Government, And shall
convert them to Christianity, and so Christ shall reign in the whole Globe of
the Earth. Nor is it to be doubted, but that this state, being the very Flower
and vigor of humane Nature, shall be of a most long continuance. Thus he rapt
in an ecstasy Prophesies; such golden ages, melancholy men in love with their
own long settled apprehensions, fancy, and dream of. And his Scholars will
easily believe, (that He now having established an eternal Peace in our Nations,
by that admirable Doctrine, in his Book of Government and Obedience: ground. 16.
That a dispossessed Magistrate is worse then an Infidel, if he do not renounce
all his title and claim: And that All his subjects are obliged to resist his
attempts:) their Masters demonstrations marched of late to the confines, with
the two great Ministers of State, and have now concluded a Peace between France
and Spain.

But this were tolerable, if this were All: Why should not every man enjoy his
own thoughts? Why should not this great Master be as happy as his own
Imaginations, and the Applause of his Scholars can make him? But thus to betray
Christian Religion to Atheists, to Disbeleevers: To display his Banner of
Evidence; to open his School of Demonstration, to reduce all those stupendous
Mysteries of Religion, to the natural force of our too too weak understandings,
(and as I now exemplified in the Aeternal Generation of the Son of God, a
Mystery naturally unknown to Men and Angels; for even those Celestial Spirits
in their now state of Fruition, veil their faces with reverence, when they cry,
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, to the adorable and ineffable Trinity) to tell us,
even in these sublime Mysteries we shall be furnished with evident
Demonstrations. And after this, the Production is a discourse so frivolous, so
unconcluding: Assuming not only what is false, but what is erroneous; and
inferring quite another thing in the Conclusion, then was in the Premises; so
that no Philosopher of two years course, but sees the emptiness of it, no
Divine of one years standing, but has learnt the Error of it; is to render our
holy Faith ridiculous, vain, and contemptible to Naturalists, to Disbeleevers.

Sect. 25. Why should we then wonder, if we have a new Purgatory? Alas, Sir, we
have a new Systeme of a whole, entire, new Religion: We have a Doctor who with
long melancholy thoughts, having fansied a world in the Moon, persuades
himself, that all the Faith Christ taught us, shall be evacuated: all other
Schools shall cease: and he, forsooth, for the future be the sole Pole Star of
the World. It is not unworthy of our observation, by what wary sters this new
Divinity (which fitted to the Genius of our times, I never read, but think I am
in a Romance) walked into the world. The first attempt was upon Scripture, where
by a long Catalogue of its uncertainties, by the Transcribers, Translators, In
R^sh^orths Dialogues, Dialog. 2.
Printers mistakes, or the wilful corruptions of Jews, Heretics, half-witted
and bold Readers: it would puzzle any man's Arithmetic, to count how many to
one it is, there is not one true word of Scripture in Scripture. Upon the sole
score of the Transcribers mistakes, (in that supposition, that there were Two
thousand Copies writ of the Bible in a hundred years) he concludes it sixteen
to one, against any determinate word, that it is not the true word of
Scripture, this only saved, that the same error might be in several Copies.
After this succeeded the infallibility of the Pope, of which I have given my
Reader his sense already. Then followed, that he should attaque the Authority
of the Councils, Which, in truth, with a better grace, and a complement of a
Non est impossible, he sent packing out of his School: And yet all this while
he bore us in hand, that he would save All, by manly sustaining Tradition, the
uninterrupted Doctrine handed down and delivered, by the succession of Fathers
to Children, from Christ and his Apostles to any determinate Age: But because
this Tradition could not, with any appearance be sustained, but that it carried
or supposed, the Infallibility of Councils: Since there is nothing more
universally and constantly believed: nor can we imagine any more Authentic
proof of any Doctrine, that it is delivered by Tradition, then the Decree of a
Council: And yet he being resolved, by the ruin of that Authority, to make way
for his Demonstrative Religion: Tradition faded and dwindled, into this
mysterious expression: That the Error of a Council, though promulgated, should
not pass into an established Doctrine of the Church, as delivered by Fathers,
and preached by Christ: by which he brought all into his own power again. And
when he had thus (as he thought) cut all the sinews of Christian-Beleef; the
mystery of all the design is discovered: We must be governed by Faith no
longer: Christ with his Doctrine has possessed the Chair long enough: Master
White with his Demonstrations, must now take place. And least my Adversary
should tell me; I do him wrong, in asserting, That after the rest, he has now
laid Tradition aside: I desire him and his solid cleer-sighted Friends, to give
me a Catalogue of all those Doctrines he admits into his new Theology, or
prooves in his Institutiones sacrae (which are to be our Scriptures, Fathers,
Councils, Schoolmen, for the future) by Tradition, or on the score of
Authority. Nor let him complain; I impose a heavy task upon him: Those who are
acquainted with every Ressort of his Doctrine, will quickly answer it: The
Catalogue will prove so slender, so short, it will cost him no considerable
Pains: I could comprehend them All in this one Word, Nothing: For in truth,
there is none at all: So safe a truth it is, that in lieu of Faith and
Christian Religion, we have nothing in this School, but under the title of
Peripatetick and Sacred Institutions, an Epicurean, Lucretian Philosophy; or
rather a medley of both theirs, and Aristotle's Philosophy, and Pretended
Demonstrations: not of our Faith, as Catholics have hitherto understood it,
but as now changing quite the Notions of the Mysteries, he is pleased to
understand it. Of which we shall see more hereafter.

Sect. 26. Why then should we wonder at the Issues of this Brain? What should
we wonder at these Productions, which out of an absolutely erroneous Method,
were hatched, and brought to light? It is no marvel, if a most Exotic
Philosophy being presupposed, an equally or more Exotic Divinity is built upon
it. A little Error in the beginning, prooves a great one in the last end. The
attempt to square Theology, to (I know nor what) pretended Demonstrations, has
wrought this destruction. Nor need we the help of Divinity: Our own Experience
and Reason sufficiently evince, and discover this method to be ruinous. There
is no man who has made even a moderate progress in Sciences, but is
sufficiently convinced how weak, how feeble our Understandings are: They are
but Novices in Sciences, who are puffed into a vanity, as if they were even now
become Masters. The better Proficients they grow, the more daily and howrly do
they clearly discover their own Ignorance. Let Us consider it in particular;
there is no knowledge so certain, so connatural to our undexrstandings, as that
of Quantity, the Object of Mathematiques: and yet all the wit of men, that ever
yet have been in the world, come so far short of the discovery, that millions
of Problemes might yet be proposed, which no man can solve. And now as to our
knowledge of Natural Bodies, it is far inferior to the former; for of these we
scarce understand any thing at all. Who ever comprehended the Composition, the
Properties, or even the Essential notion of a Fly? What Physician ever
understood fully the Nature, the operations, the effects, of any one Herb, any
one Simple? Who ever knew how Rubarb works on the innumerable parts of our
bodies: how it purges, how it refines, how it abates, how it heightens the
several humors of it? St. Basil understood our weakness much better, who in
his 168 Epist. to Eunom, prosecuting this subject, proposes above twenty
questions (to which twenty and twenty more may be added) of a contemptible
Emmet: In none of which, the wit of man can satisfy his curiosity. And if we
are thus short in those things we daily converse with, which we touch, and
taste, what will our knowledge amount to in Separated Substances, in Souls, in
Angels, in God himself? The true ground of this our ignorance being this: That
our understandings in our present state of mortality, being only naturally
moveable from our Phansies, which depend wholly on the weak reports drawn from
our Senses: we have not, in this state, without Revelation, any other notions
but such as are abstracted from sensible Objects; so that the peculiar
properties of abstract Substances (since we are not now possessed of the peculiar
essential notions of them) can not now by us, naturally, be known. And hence it
is, that finding our selves so feeble, in things the most obvious even to our
senses, all the Wise men of the World, have ever been struck dumb, and ravished
in the consideration of that Omnipotent hand, which built both us, to honor
and love him, and them for our use to that end; so that where his Authority is
engaged, as certainly it is, in all things that apperrain to Faith: we abase
our prying proud curiosity, and square our weak apprehensions to them, and not
these stupendous supernatural Mysteries, to our creeping grovelling
apprehensions of Nature.

It was then upon this mistake, that this new Purgatory came to light; it is
one, and but one of a thousand of those unheard of productions, this new
Phylosophical Theology is stuffed with. I could give my Reader many instances of
Doctrines he never yet, not indeed the world was acquainted with: but I will
conclude with that very Doctrine (because it offers it self as near allied to
this our present Subject) with which he concluds his Demonstrative Divinity. It
is concerning the Damned Souls; for we have not only a Poetical Purgatory, he
has also furnished us with a most Romancical Hell: and who can but smile to
think of those ridiculous mimick postures, he fancyes of Horse-coursers,
Dancers, Fencers, Bowlers, and all other Brutals attempting now in Hell in all
their several postures; those very pleasures in which they constituted their
final end in this life. Instit. Sac. 1. 3. Lcct. xi.
Thus then of those Souls he concludes: Their misery (says he) depends on
their present perverseness, so that if they themselves would, they might even
yet be happy. Out of the force and series of Nature, of which they are parts,
nothing better (to wit, then to be damned) could happpen to them; neither to
All of them in general, nor to Any one of them in particular. And least Nature
or God should escape this Fatal Doctrine, he adds: And even Nature and God
himself should have been worse, if they had been otherwise dealt with. Pagan
Fatality! Out of the force and Series of Nature, nothing better, could happen
to Judas then to be damned; and if he had not been so, God had ceased to be
God: as so, forsooth, Wisdom is justified against her children. Thus he
concludes his Prodigious Theology.

Sect. 27. And now I hope my Reader has some light of the Method and Genius of
this our great Master and his new School. It will give him an introduction into
the further discovery of their learning. But because his pretended
Demonstrations are now so cried up by that little handful of his Scholars,
whose itch after novelties has rendered Proselites of his Doctrine; and since in
the Entry to my Discourse, I have laid down those (as they would have us
believe) unshakable grounds, of this new minted Purgatory: my Reader may justly
challenge that we should take a Survey of them. And though this might seem
weakly to anticipate, what I hear far abler Pens have undertaken at large, yet
why should we not take a short view of them, and that even in the very order
they lie.

And first then, leaving his Gibberish Notion of a Separated Soul, how
Ridiculous is this Position: That the proper accidents (that is, those things
that are in the Soul according to the Soul, its practical judgments, Its
affections to friends and acquaintance, even to Corporal pleasures) are the
Soul it self. Since that they are so, is not only Indemonstrable, but
Incomparably false: for the Soul is both Created without them, remains in the
Body without them (in such as by grace have subdued these Inordinations) and
much more in Heaven, both with, and without the Body, before and after the
Resurrection: And even in his Systeme of Purgatory, the Soul shall be divested
of them at the reunion: and yet all the Peripateticks or Lucretian Philosophy
in the world, can never evince, that the Soul can be separated from it self:
Therefore nor from these Affections if they be the Soul it self. And how came
these immediately ensuing words, to escape his wary Pen, That the Soul without
them were more imperfect? Are those very Affections which constitute Purgatory
and Hell too, Inst. Sac. lib. 3 Lect. 9.
perfections of the Soul? Or when she comes to divest her self of them at the
Reunion, does she remain more imperfect in Heaven, then when she was in the
state of suffering by Them? or is she then not her self because she is without
them? or had she been less Perfect if she had passed out of this life, by
perfect mortification without them? But because this Doctrine, That the Soul
were more imperfect without these Affectinos, is very near allied to an other
excellent Doctrine of our great Master (and which will much promote solid
devotion) of the Corporal Pleasures themselves; let us compare them together,
they agree very happily, and will illustrate one an other: Since Corporal life
(says he) is made in order to the attaining of Beatitude, Inst. Sac. lib. 3.
Lect. 1.
and Corporal pleasures are conformable to corporal life, and therefore of
necessity that Corporal life in its kind, is the best, which has the most,
and greatest Corporal pleasures: (as elsewhere is shown more at large) And
further, since the best Corporal life, does best serve to the attaining of
Beatitude, it is also necessary that the Christian discipline (which is the
Mistress of Beatitude) should even fill our lives with the pleasures of the
Body, and those who live piously, should enjoy a hundred fold (of those
Corporal pleasures) more then those who live ill. Might not this excellent
Sermon very well become a St. Austen or a St. Paul? No truly, Sir, they never
were acquainted with this Demonstration: They lived in the Nonage of the
Church; they were steered by Faith not by this Evidence and Science. And so
they walked in Austerities; Tenances, Mortifications. They never fancyed, That
that Corporal life was best in its kind, which abounded with most and greatest
Corporal pleasures: much less, That such an one was best adapted to attain that
Beatitude they thirsted after. They looked on Corporal Pleasures as the Bane of
the Soul: But our Great Master being still himself, might well teach us, That
the Soul without these Affections were more imperfect, since he placed the
Perfection of a Corporal life, best adapted to attain Beatitude, in the
enjoyment of the Pleasures themselves. In earnest, Sir, I have a scruple to
Translate such Doctrines as these are, which only befit Epicurus his School,
and the life of Hogs: (though you would persuade us they are truths which
promote solid Devotion) if I were not confident of my Readers virtue, and that
they will beget a just horror in his Soul, both against the Doctrines
themselves, and those Principles that lead to them.

Sect. 28. Secondly, How frivolously he concludes, That the affections to
corporal pleasures accompany the soul in her state of separation? Their rise,
their origin is the Body. The Soul were untouchable by them, if it were not by
reason of that union it has, to that clay which now incloses her. How could
the Soul be concerned to see, to hear, to touch, if she had neither eyes, ears,
hands, or any other corporeal organs, by which these pleasures could be
conveyed to her? especially if she enjoyed her fill of those far more noble and
excellent satisfactions (such as he puts of eminent complete knowledge)
proportionable to that state of separation And what Purgatory could a Scholar
endure, who should pass out of this life with all his Affections regulated,
save only that to learning, since in that state, his soul should even be
ravished with the enjoyment of all that knowledge which he inordinately longed
for in this mortal life? How then is not the soul divested of those base
affections, when she passes out of the body, which have their source from this
earthly habitation? But let us compare this Doctrine, with an other admirable
Nonsense of our Master. He tells us in his Peripateticks, lib. 5. lec. 1, n. 6.
That the separation of the soul from the body, is of that efficacy, that the
soul even in substance is changed: and that a separated soul is in truth an
other thing (in substance) then it was in the body. As if forsooth it were this
thing, this soul, which now informs my body, that offends God in this life; and
an other thing, an other soul shall be punished for it in the next. And does
not this Doctrine evacuate all the fear of Purgatory, Judgment and Hell too?
And let not my Adversary tell me he says it is an other thing, but says not,
that it is an other soul: For I desire him to tell me, what other thing it is,
if it be not an other soul; for still it is a soul, and nothing but a soul. A
thing is a notion more universal then a soul: and what are distinguished in a
notion that is more universal, can not be the same in a notion that is less
universal. No Logician ever fancied, that those things which are distinguished
in the notion of Animal, can be the same in the notion of Homo. If then the
separation render the soul, an other thing, an other soul; how should it not
have other accidents and affections, which (according to him) are the soul it
self? or must it not of necessity have so? But let this too be supposed.

Sect. 29. Thirdly, Whoever fancied, That a separated soul shall be tormented
with a vast grief, by reason corporal pleasures are now impossible to be
enjoyed? Who ever was concerned or tormented, because he could not do that,
which he knew to be impossible? Who ever was intollerably afflicted, because he
could not Fly? or render his body as incorruptible as a Diamond? or become an
Angel? Stay, (you will say) I suppose an ardent ^^ffection to pleasures, not
impossible absolutely, but only by reason of the present state. And what then?
The Soul is now Mistress of perfect Reason, even of all knowledge, according to
you: They are ^hreneticks only, who torment themselves, because they can not
do that, which they see is impossible in their present state, whilst they
cannot transfer themselves into an other state, in which the pleasure they so
much covet may be possible. How ardent a thirst soever you have to the
knowledge of all truth; yet since you see such knowledge is in this life
impossible to be attained, (and you hope for it in the next) yet do I not
believe you endure any vast grief, or even are much tempted to rid your self
out of this world, that you may enjoy it in the next. Besides, your Master
tells us; The Will is either not distinct from the Understanding, or at least,
is adequately governed in the state of separation: How then can the Will be
tormented with a vast grief, because of the impossibility of those pleasures,
whilst the Understanding, shall clearly represent to it, the Baseness,
Vileness, Unworthiness of such Pleasures, and which at one blow, cuts off all
the Wills pursuit, shall represent them, as Impossible? But the truth is, this
Doctrine is grounded upon a pure mistake: For the absence, much less the
impossibility of corporal pleasures, does not torment with any vast or
considerable grief, those souls, (even in this life) which are most of all
immerst in the affections to them, (and by consequence, not separated souls;
for (he tell us,) they remain in the state of separation, even in that same
proportion they were in this life:) but just then, when the body prompts or
calls for an enjoyment. Let us consider the most luxurious, the most gluttonous
person in the world, when the present capacity of his body is satiated with
those pleasures, he indures no considerable torment, till the body again call
for a reiterated enjoyment. It is not then rational to say, That a Soul which
passes out of this life by a long continued Fever, and therefore carries with
it into the next world, a great affection to drink, shall be tormented in the
next life with a vast grief, because she now can not enjoy the pleasure of
drinking, whilst in truth, she can never suffer any thirst.

And how sordid and low a fancy he had of Spiritual Substances in their state
of separation: to conceive them thus tortured, because Corporal pleasures can
not now be in^ayed? Which pleasures, pious Christians abominate, even in this
their Pilgrimage; which the Pride and Ambition of Worldlings easily overcome;
which the wise^ sort of Pagans scorn; which Heathen Philosophers would not
stoop to; which Avicen, though a Turk, contemned, and his Master Mahomets
Heaven, built up and fancied for Swine. It had been pious, and worthy a
Philosopher, to conceive them (as good Christians do) tormented with a vast
grief, because they had so ungratefully offended Almighty God, and delayed
their beatitude, for such low, contemptible, transitory Pleasures. But this
satisfied not his design; it reached not home, to build us up a Purgatory, out
of which no delivery could be hoped for till the Day of Judgment; This grief
was rather a disposition for Heaven; and therefore he must find us out some
unworthy and unchangeable Affection, which must detain Souls there, till he
please to release them. Besides, it is frequent, that vicious men detest at
their deaths those brutalities, the excess of which, has ruined their Bodies,
Fame, and Fortunes; and yet pass out of this life without true Repentance, to
be punished for them in the next, for all Eternity.

But let us also compare this, with an other signal Doctrine of this our
Ma^^er, De Med. Stat. dim. 12. He there disputing against those afflictions
which he supposes his Adversary asserts, that the Souls suffers by some
external Agent; delivers us this unexpected Doctrine: thus arguing against him.
From whence (says he) an unexpected Truth breaks forth; That all those pains
(inflicted by an external Agent on the Soul) are Purely Pleasures. For since on
the one side, the souls thus to be purged, are supposed to be perfect in
Charity, and extremely thirsting of the eternal good, which they are certain to
attain; and on the other side, clearly understand, that corporeal punishments
are the only means by which they may attain beatitude; it is evident they to
these pains are, as a man of an invincible courage, in whom no weakness of mind
can take place; who being highly inflamed to attain some good, ventu^es on
things of great difficulty, either in acting or suffering: In which, both
Experience and Reason teach us, he would feel unspeakable pleasure. As if,
forsooth, Pains and torments, cease to be such, and become purely pleasures,
whilst the soul now perfect in charity, faints not in suffering them. As if
with perfect conformity to the Divine Will, and an absolute desire to satisfy
the Divine Justice, an earnest longing after the ending of these griefs, and
the enjoyment of beatitude, were inconsistent: which necessarily includes and
carries with it a high affliction. But how by this sudden, and unexpected
Doctrine, all our apprehensions are changed in the sufferings of our B. Savior?
Who by a most perfect charity, inflamed with the thirst of redeeming mankind,
under went all, with an invincible courage: for in him no weakness of mind
could take place. We must now change all our pious meditations, no more must we
consider the Scourges, Whips, Contempts, the Nails, and Cross to have been any
other thing, but pure pleasures to him. An excellent Doctrine to increase our
Love to our deer Savior, who to redeem mankind was patient, and resigned to
suffer pure pleasures, and to encourage penance according to S. Paul, si
compatimur and conglorificabimur. This is an other truth to promote solid
devotion. Now then as to the Souls in Purgatory (which certainly being perfect
Masters of Reason, and now in charity, and see their own affections to be
unchangeable, can not be conceived to faint in their sufferings) let us now
learn this unexpected sudden truth which now breaks out, that we have been
hitherto quite mistaken: their sufferings are so far from being pains, that in
truth they are nothing but purely pleasures. O happy model of Purgatory! But
let this be supposed too.

Sec. 30. Fourthly, to come to the other fundamental stone of this fabric. It
is incomparably false, that separated Souls or Angels, both as to their
substance, and operations are measured, by this indivisible duration or moment:
or that to co-exist to a greater or less part of time, adds or diminishes
nothing to them. What if the Omnipotent Hand of God should create in this
moment a new Soul separated from any body: had the rest of souls departed their
bodies many ages ago, no greater duration, then this their even now created
companion? What if the same Hand of God should now destroy one of those
separated souls, shall the rest of them which shall co-exist to all future
time, have therefore no longer duration then she? What if there were no body,
no motion, no time at all, could not God create a Soul, and destroy it at his
pleasure? and yet not this in the same indivisible moment: For then it would
follow, the Soul is and is not in the same instant; Therefore in some other
posteriour moment. What if God should again repair this thus annihilated soul?
We could not imagine, that this new second existence would be measured with the
same duration that the first, for this would exclude the very supposition of an
interruption. Besides, Sir, Christian Theology teaches us that Angels (whose
duration is as indivisible as that of Souls) were not created in Termino, but
in Via: The holy Angels were not Created in the State of Fruition; nor the
Devils in the State of Damnation, but both in the way to these several States.
And that first they were in the State of Grace, in which the good by adhering
to God were afterward translated to Glory, whilst the Devils, by their pride
and disobedience, were deservedly afterward thrust out headlong into Hell. Who
has rendered it evident that all this could be effected in one indivisible
moment?

And further, Sir, as to this point, that my Reader may be cleared more
fundamentally in it: We must observe, That since Eternity, which is devoid of
all Succession, is the measure of a Perfectly Permanent being, that is, of God
himself: as far forth as any thing recedes from a Permanent being, so far it
recedes from Eternity, and comes to Succession. Now though the being of Angels
does not consist in motion, and therefore is not measured by our Time: Yet
since the Essence of an Angel is neither its Understanding, nor its Will, much
less is it the Acts of these Powers: The substance of an Angel is not measured
by Eternity, since it has Transmutation adjoined to it: and so has a proper
duration, or measure between it and time. And further, since the Operations of
Angels, have a real and true succession, they are measured by a true succession
and time, not that of bodies, or the motions of them, but by a time proper to
the succession of those Operations; and if holy Writ deliver us any other then
Metaphorical truths, of separated Substances, it delivers this succession in
them. Your Master himself takes notice in his Med. Stat. acc. 22. Of the Souls
of the slain (described in the Apocalypse) resting under the Altar, and crying
out to have the day of Judgment hastened; which reaches home to our purpose,
that they are concerned in the length of the stay, and that it is absolutely
false, that there is no succession of Acts, even in Beatified Souls; or that,
to coexist to a greater, or less part of time, adds, or diminishes nothing to
them: Though it falls much short of rendering our Prayers only available for the
hastening of that day (as we shall presently see) for which end he there
introduces it. And if you please to consider in the 10th Chap. of Daniel, where
the Angel appearing tells him, That the Prince (or Angel) of the Kingdom of the
Persians resisted him one and twenty days: And behold Michael one of the first
Princes (he who stands for the Children of the Jewish Nation) came to his help:
You will easily observe, there is not this comprehension of all time, your
Master fansied, in the workings, or beings, of Separated Substances.

Sect. 31. Fifthly, As to his grounds of the Immutability of that state, it is
groundlesly assumed, That a Soul can suffer no alteration from a Body, but by
identification (or by being the same thing) with that body. And indeed who ever
fanfied that the soul could thus be identified, or become the very self-same
thing, with the body? Who ever believed that now in this life, our Souls are
really and truly our Bodies, and our Bodies are our Souls? Or if they were thus
Identified, or the same thing; how were it possible they should ever be
severed: since nothing can be imagined to be served from it self? Christian
Philosophy never admitted this position, it is evidently destructive of the
Immortality of our Souls, and of all Religion: For if the Soul be Identified,
(or the same thing) wi^h the body, it must of necessity be resolved into dust
with the body: For no man can conceive, how any thing should supervive it self;
so that this will put an end to Purgatory, Heaven, Hell and All Religion. We
that walk by Christian Faith, and not by new Lights, this Ignis Fatuus of
Demonstrations, always believed, That the Soul and Body as two distinct parts,
concurred to the building up of one Man: who is one, not by simplicity, not by
Identification of the parts, or I know not what strange fancyed
Transubstantiation of the Soul into the Body, but by substantial Union or
Composition.

Further, Sir, It can never be evidenced, That not only such an Inimaginable
Identification should be necessary, to the end that a Soul may be passive from
the Body: but that even a Substantial union is requisite. We see that the Soul,
in the state of Union, even Naturally, suffers by the Bodies Indisposition, as
in Frensies, caused by Feavours, or other distempers: And who shall render it
evident, that in the state of separation, not naturally, but by the Omnipotent
Hand of God, she may not be passive by Fire, or some other External Agent: by
some way our Understandings now reach not to?

Sect. 32. Sixthly, It is a purely voluntary and false Assertion, That a
separated soul knows all things together and perpetually. The very holy Angels
do not thus know all things: Our Blessed Guardians, of new know daily, and
howrly, our actions; and represent our sighs and devotions in the sight of God,
and since in these we are free, and not tied necessarily to any thing but our
selves, it is impossible they should know them, till we our selves have
determined our selves to them: Nor even then immediately, (for God alone is the
searcher of hearts,) till they have sallied out into some effect. And our B.
Savior himself tells us, The holy Angels themselves know not of that day and
howr, (to wit, of Judgment) but only the Father. Matthew. 24. and they rejoice
at the new conversion of a sinner.

Sect. 33. Seventhly, Who ever rendered it Evident, that No Alteration can
befall a separated Soul from any other Spirit, without the interposition of the
Body? For Spirits can act on Spirits immediately, without such interposition;
and the contrary Doctrine is destructive of all the conversation of the holy
Angels for all Aeternity; is destructive of the Doctrine holy Writ delivers us
of the fall of the Devils, where the Dragon is described, to have drawn after
him the third part of the Stars, or Angels, into his Rebellion. And if Angels
can thus Act on Angels, without this interposition of a body, why not on
separated souls? Nor is that Foundation of this his Doctrine at all subsistent:
For since (says he) All Spirits are indivisible, their Operations must be
indivisible: And consequently, perfected All of them in one moment. For this
consequence is perfectly null. Nor will it ever be rendered evident, that an Act
of a Spirit may not coexist to a great or less part of time; much less will it
ever be evinced (as is already proved) that there is not a true and real
succession in their operations. So that his Doctrine is absolutely false, when
he tells us; If any thing be to be done among Spirits, it is so done and
perfected in one moment, that afterward an other action can not be begun And
besides, when he assumes; An indivisible effect, the causes being put, of
necessity exists in the same moment: Though he may say true for that one Act;
but when he infers the same for all succeeding Acts unto Aeternity, he errs
most grossly: Imagining this, (which is one of the most fundamental Bases of all
his Philosophy and Divinity,) that all Causes are fixed and set, as to All
Effects whatsoever, from the very beginning, unto all future succession: By
which Doctrine, both God himself is necessitated so to do, that he can not do
otherwise, then he does do; and each intelligence so to know (by the connection
of existences) that it can not know, otherwise then it does know; which is most
pure Pagan Fatality, destructive of the Liberty of God, and all contingency in
all created things whatsoever.

Sect. 34. Lastly, That we may vindicate Christianity and the Church, from that
ignorance of separated Substances, he boldly and injuriously fixes upon Her,
and the Angelical St. Thomas, from a most gross abuse: let us take a survey of
his 17 Account in his Middle State of Souls. He there tells us, The delivery of
Souls before Reunion, proceeded out of the ignorance, or not adhering to this
Doctrine, of the incomparable St. Thomas and his School: That in Abstracted
Spirits, there is neither discourse, nor any manner of composition; but purely
a simple apprehension: so that error and falsity can have no place in them.
For these (says he) depend on the body, so that it is impossible, Indivisibles
(or Spirits) should be capable of Succession. Now that my Reader may fully
understand, both the Truth here contained, and his most erroneous Consequences
drawn from It; We must observe, that there is a double Composition in
Vnderstandong: both of the Praedicat to the Subject, and of the Conclusion to
the Premises: Both which take place in Us, by reason of the weakness of our
Understandings, in this state of mortality. For neither do We at one single
glance understand the Praedicat, though we cenceive the Subject; nor do we
attain to the Conclusions included in the Principles, but by a long endeavor
and succession of reasoning or discourse: So that our U^derdandings arrive not
to Truth, but by compounding or dividing the terms one with the other, and the
Conclusion with the Premises. But it happens otherwise in Angels; For they, by
a clear strength of Understanding, apprehend both the composition and division
of Propositions with one simple sight, and the Conclusions in the Principles,
without this succession of discourse. This is St. Thomas his Doctrine, 1 Par.
quaest. 58. art. 3. and 4. Now it imports not our present business, to
consider, Whether this knowledge of Spirits is a true discourse, since a
succession of time is not perhaps requisite to that, but only of causality,
which is here found. But it imports us to consider, That out of this Doctrine
of St. Thomas it no ways follows, That Error or falsity can have no place in
separated Substances. For the same St. Thomas disputes this, in the very next
Article; and teaches us: That though in such things, as are thus naturally
known, by the apprehensions of the terms or Principles, Spirits can not err;
yet in such things as depend on the supernatural Ordination of God, as far
forth as they are supernatural; Error may take place in them. And this (says
he) happens not to the good Angels; because they judge not of those things
which supernaturally belong to the Object, without due submission to the Divine
Ordination; but it does in the Devils, who by their perverse will, withdrawing
themselves from the Divine Wisdom, judge erroneously of supernatural things.

But that we may further see how injuriously he would improove the Doctrine of
this great Saint and Doctor, both against him and the Church: we must further
observe, that his Consequence, That Indivisibles (or Spirits) are not capable
of succession: is both null, and against this holy Doctor every where. For in
the first Article of this very Question, he teaches, That Angels are not
always in actual consideration of those very things, they know naturally. He
tells us, That of those thing which God reveals to them, of which they receive
new revelations, by the occasions of affairs, they are in potentiality, or
preceding ignorance. He tells us in the next Article, Those things whose
knowledge depend on one only Species, Angels know all together; but not those
which depend on diverse. He tells us in fine everywhere, That there is a real
and true Succession in their Acts, which is measured by a real and true
Succession of Time. And I can not admonish my Reader too of ten: of His fatal
Necessity and Connection of Causes, which runs through all his Doctrine, and
grounds these his Positions, when he tells us, That a separated Soul is all
other things by the connection of existencies, and since she knows all things
together, and for ever; by the course of Nature, there is no room left either
for Ignorance, or new Science: Which Doctrine is the Cornerstone of all his
Fabric of Purgatory, and is perfectly destructive of all Religion, because
destructive of all Liberty in God and Creatures: And peculiarly destructive of
all the mysteries of Grace and Supernaturality; for all these depend on the
pure freedom and Will of God who is not, nor can not be tied to creatures: and
therefore the same Angelical Doctor, in the precedent 57. Quest. Art. 3, 4, and
5. concludes, That Angels neither know all future contingencies, Nor the
secrets of our hearts, Nor the mysteries of Grace, but as far forth as it
pleases God to reveal these to them: which in their first Creation he did in
some measure: but more amply and fully afterward, according as it did agree
with their Offices and employments in this Universe. This, Sir, is true
Christian Theology (which reaches much more to souls in Purgatory) learnt by
revelation from him, who neither can be deceived, nor deceive us: not out of
Epicurean, Lucretian, Pagan, Principles of Fatality in things, and of Necessity
in God, in order to his Creatures.

But if we should suppose all these Unchristian principles and consequences to
be true; that there is no Error, no Ignorance, no Succession in Separated
Substances, now in their present state of Separation: How inconsequent is it
(as he there tells us) That they are now just that, (as to their affections,)
which this state of union with their bodies and mortality made them? What a
frivilous discourse he introduces, arguing in the same 17 Acc. As an Embri^
(says he) or seminal Mushrom delineates a future man, so the thoughts and
affections of this life, design by their impressions, the future condition of
the Soul: So that death produces such an Entity, as from the man so disposed is
naturally producible, thus to remain till Resurrection. For this has no
Connection with the precedent Doctrine of the Immutability of Souls in the state
of Separation. If we should suppose, that there is no variety in them, no
succession in that single state of Separation, how will it follow, there is no
change of affections in these two, and those so different States of Separation
and Union? Besides, Sir, if the Antecedent of this his Argument reach home to
his purpose, it is a Position destructive of all Christianity; if this Embrio,
or seminal Mushrom delineate the future man, if the Soul be such as the quality
of the matter exacts and determines it to be (as he tells us) it is, at the
first infusion into the body, and remains so, or else he tells us nothing to his
purpose: Our liberty is destroyed. There remains no hopes, that these his
Determinations by the matter or body; should be changed by education, by
virtue; should be corrected by Grace: Since then this his Doctrine is absolutely
false, and since souls, in truth, by the assistance of Divine Grace, do
perfectly overcome (even whilst in their Bodies) what they contract, or are
determ^nod by their Bodies, (as our holy Faith teaches) how excellently is it
concluded, That Souls now in Separation do not Correct, what was in them by the
commerce of that unworthy Clay, which before enclosed them? And how will it not
be as well or more effectually concluded, that Souls at their Reunion too,
passing now from Separation to Union, (as well as before from Union to
Separation,) carry with them their unchangable Affections? and so never get out
of his Purgatory neither before nor at the day of Judgment.

By these short reflections, my Reader will easily observe, how far these
Adamantin, unshakeable grounds fall short of that so much boasted Evidence,
even of Truth: some of them being most perfect falsehoods, the rest groundless,
uncertain, dreaming Assertions: and yet they are such as shall serve the levity
of some men, to abandon the authority of the whole Catholic Church, and upon
these shall be Errected a new modled Purgatory, as upon other the like they
have built us a whole, new, faithless Religion, of which they are so fondly
inamoured, and peremptory, that now they boldly pronounce, The hither to
received Faith of the Church, proceeded out of Ignorance of the Nature of
Separated Substances.

Sect. 35. But to conclude my Adversary and our business; if this his Position
be true, That no Souls are delivered out of Purgatory, before the day of
Judgment: What serve for all our Devotions, Prayers, Alms, Offerings? Does the
holy Sacrifice of the Altar, which the Church has defined to be Propitiatory
even for the Dead, avail those distressed Souls nothing at all? No, my
Adversary dares not, as yet, venture upon this. The Councils are so clear, so
home to this Point, his credit were ruined, if he should attempt to deny it.
His new Purgatory then, must be furnished with some new way, by which our
endeavors may be beneficial to those poor Souls, or else no Catholics Ears
could be open to his new Divinity. Is it perhaps, the intermitting at some
times, or abating of the fury of their torments? O no, this Doctrine finds no
admission in his School. His indivisible duration admits of no intermission:
and where the Soul, by her now unchangable affections, is her own executioner,
no Allay, or Abatement of torment can be hoped for till Reunior, What then
perhaps shall our Prayers be of force to obtain their Release? O no, this the
least of all, It were against all their Demonstrations, and therefore is
reserved to his new changeable state at the Resurrection. What then is the
effect of all our tears and prayers? What benefit do Separated Souls receive
by them? This, and only this, That the day of Judgment is hastened by them. And
is this all? Yes, truly, this is all our new Systeme of Purgatory can admit of,
as to the Assisting of the Souls detained in it. But what if this accelerating
the day of Judgment prove no advantage, no help at all to those distressed
souls? Would not all Christians be justly charged with an intolerable folly?
Would not the Church be unavoidably guilty of a ^upereminent Error, in a
Doctrine which draws so much practice after it? Whilst both the Florentin
Council here, and that of Trent pronounce, and all Christians agree, That the
Souls detained in Purgatory are assisted, delivered, by the Prayers and
Suffrages of the Faithful yet living. And yet certain it is, that the hastening
of the day of Judgment is no advantage to them, in these their Positions and
grounds.

Let this great Master himself plead the Cause. Let him fairly deliver us his
sublime sense, in his own words: Whether our devotions assist those souls or
no? Whether the hastening of the day of Judgment be any way beneficial to them?
and that by his very ^bylosophical grounds, the basis and foundation of the
duration of souls now detained in his new minted Purgatory. In spiritual acts
(says he) whether they bring happiness or misery, there is no proportion to
time: so as to make pain which lasts longer, to be greater or that which ends
sooner, to be less, for these are the properties of corporal things. Every act
of a pure Spirit reflected on it self, being of its own nature out of the reach
of time; not subject thereto, but greater then the whole extension of time,
etc, If then to a thing (or separated soul) which co-exists to a longer part of
time, nothing be thereby added, or to a thing (that is, a separated soul) which
coexists with a less part of time, nothing be diminished: there can be no
reason, why duration should represent either more, or less grievous, in these
respective cases: So that whatsoever grief of a separattd soul is by the
quality and force of its essence greater, the same grief (let its co-existence
to time be what it will) must be more vehement, and that which is less, (by the
force of its essence) less: Nothing being gained or lost by the perpetuating or
contracting of the motions of the Sun, or other Celestial bodies: So that
whatsoever time intervenes between death and the Restoration of the world (at
the day of Judgment) is to separated souls as one moment. This doctrine
presupposed, What can separated souls be concerned when the day of Judgment
shall come? And has not your admired Master made a fair hand of it? has he
not now compleately ended his work? This, and only this remained in his new
Systeme: That the day of Judgment is hastened by our prayers, that so the souls
may be assisted by them, and he himself escape that brand of Heresy (whilst
the Councils pronounce, They are assisted by us) which even vulgar eyes would
presently have fixed upon his Opinion. And now he has fairly delivered us of
that empty pretense. It is not, It can not be (according to him) That the
pepetuating of the motions of the heavens, or their even now ending their
Circulations, can give any addition or diminution, to the torments and
sufferings of souls in the state of separation. For in them to co-exist to one
hour, to one minute and a million of Ages, is one and the same thing. Let the
Angels Trumpet summon them this moment, let it be deferred ten thousand,
thousand years; He tells us, and for fear we should not understand him, again
and again, tells us, Their duration is still the same, Their moment one and the
same, Their pains, their sufferings one and the same.

But how happily will he be surprised, if out of these grounds it be evinced,
That those Souls (as to their present state of separation) can not be
concerned, whether ever the Day of Judgment come or no? Let us suppose, that
the Providence of God had so ordered this machin of the world; that these
circulations of the Heavens should never receive their last end and period:
Separated Souls, most evidently, (according to his Positions,) would not at all
be concerned in this our Supposition; for where to coexist to one minute, howr,
or a million of ages, is the same thing; the Soul, in that state, cannot be
concerned whether Time ever or never receive an end. He himself tells us,
Nothing is gained or lost by the perpetuating (that is, never ending) or even
now contracting of these motions. And this will be rendered more evident, by the
consideration of this our Supposition. For since to suppose the world shall
last for ever, is but to suppose it shall last longer, then any determinable
number of Ages; and since his indivisible duration of Souls, does not only
comprehend this or that determinate number of years, but all time whatsoever:
(He himself teaches us, That every Act of a pure Spirit reflected on it self,
is greater then the whole extension of time:) It follows, that this duration of
Souls, it self remaining the very same, would comprehend all Time in that
Supposition, that time should never have an End; and by consequence, a
separated Soul, (as to its state of separation) is w^olly unconcerned, whether
ever the world should have, or not have an end. And what influence this his
Doctrine will have, to evacuate our apprehensions of Eternity, I leave to my
Readers consideration.

Away then with these idle Winter-tales; away with this Ignorance of the nature
of separated souls: A Purgatory fire: A purging in the state of separation: A
delivery from thence before reunion: An assistance given by our Prayers to
their sufferings. Fables, Dreams, and Nothings. Farewell to Prayers, Offerings,
Masses, Alms, Legacies, Foundations: Mere cheats and devices, Utensils of a
thriving Devotion; imposed by the Church on the pious credulity of ignorant
people. Here is a period put by our Thomas the Englishman to that senseless
Devotion, which has so long troubled the ignorant, silly world. And which then
certainly shall have its period, when Scriptures, Fathers, Popes, Councils, and
All other Schools shall cease: when the Faith Christ our Savior taught us,
shall be evacuated, and have an end; and great Trinobant be inthroned, to
inlighten the hitherto darkened world, by His and his Knights Demonstrations.

Sect. 36. But let us make an end. I have run through my Adversaries defense of
his Purgatory against our present Bull and Council. I have given my Reader some
small light into this School, Its Method, Its Design: I have given some touches
upon Its Doctrines, Its Demonstrations: and we have concluded with this
Devotion for the Dead. There remains only, that I make some short reflections
on what is added in this Letter; either as to the Publishers Persons, or other
things, which did not directly pertain to our present Question of Purgatory.

And First, as to his Quarrel, page 1, etc. That the Publishers printed this
Book without any application. A Medium, by which Mr. White might seem an
Heretic, to the good women (as he tells us) of which there are not a few; and
ignorant men, of which there are too many: Nay, their own Proselytes become
such, by making private Interpretations; since this is to give themselves over
to the private Spirit. I answer: The Faith of their Flock being attempted,
their Pastoral Care obliged them to this proceed: They published the
Condemnation of this Doctrine, and pointed it out, which prooved effectual to
their Design. When Creeds and Catechisms are proposed to the vulgar, without
further application to this or that Opinion of a private Doctor, or Heresy:
there is no fear Children should become Heretics, but are instructed in
Faith. It is those, who with Pride and Pertinacy wrest these Sacred Texts to
their own preconceived fancies, that run the hazard. To Master Whites person,
neither they, nor I, have any Quarrel: It Is an error of Judgment, to conceive
him an Heretic; For those only are such, who voluntarisy and pertinaciously
adhere to some one or more Doctrines, contrary to the received Faith of the
Church: Those who deny all Faith, who pretend no Knowledge is necessary, but
such as is established by natural Science and Demonstrations, are not Heretics,
but Naturalists, and Pagan Philosophers. In your Third Age of the Church, which
shall be directed by this new Light, there will be no possibility of Heresies.
When St. Paul's words, Without faith it is impossible to please God, shall be
evacuated; his other Doctrine, Oportet Haereses esse, will find no place.

Secondly, ^ow was this your Quarrel, ushered in page 4. with Tantoene animis
coelestibus irae? The Publisher had not bewrayed the least impatience; there
was nothing in the Book you pretend to answer, of his own: It was not he, but
you, that pronounce your self guilty of Anger. And yet this was as pertinent,
as your -- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis? is adapted to him, whom all good
men (better acquainted with him,) have been more prone to censure, of the
contrary disposition, to that, which you now slily would fix upon him. But yet
not altogether unhappily was your Defense of a Poetical Purgatory, ushered in
with these Poetical Exclamations.

Thirdly, You tell us, page 7, and 9. That Master White had long before
appealed to these very Authorities, and urged them so home, that he had rendered
it evident, They speak his Opinion, and against that Faith I sustain. My Reader
may, if he please, for his satisfaction, peruse that mysterious place in his 16
dimens. De med. Stat. And I answer, That it is not altogether unhappy, in an
ill Cause, to be able to say any thing without blushing. I have seen Criminals
deride the Court, scorn the Judge; but I never yet heard any of that eminent
Confidence, that he durst Vaunt, the Court had pronounced in his favor, when
he stood condemned by the Sentence. But because you have learnt to say so too,
after your Master, an ordinary Reader will judge, That you verily believe you
have no Credit to lose, when you will venture your rest at this disadvantage.
The Pope defines Souls being purged even before the re-assumption of their
bodies, and before the general Judgment, were, are, and shall be in Heaven. The
Council defines, Souls being now purged uncloathed of their Bodies, are
Presently received into Heaven. I sustain this Faith; That Souls may be purged
uncloathed of their bodies, and that such are received presently into Heaven,
before the re-assumption of their bodies and general Judgment. You maintain the
contradictory of this Position; and yet you have the confidence to tell your
Reader, and even hope he believes you; That the Sentence is pronounced in your
favor, and that I stand condemned by it.

Fourthly, You quarrel, page 10. at the Title of their Book, which is:
Concerning the state of departed Souls. You fancy a Mystery which they never
meant, and tell us, this is a false Title; the true one is, A definition of
certain Articles concerning the blessed vision of God, and the beatitude and
damnation of Souls. Which yet is the very selfsame with the other; in this
only differing, that what they comprehended in the word, state; is here
declared by this division, Of beatitude and damnution.

Sect. 37. Fifthly, You tell us, page 11. the word Verbatim made you smile.
Surely, Sir, you do not smile without some special grace; since you mind us so
often of it. And presently you triumph about the gender of Synodus, which you
insinuate, the Publisher was ignorant of, he having added to it an Adjective in
the Masculine gender: and you pursue your sport amain, and tell us, The Printer
must take the fault upon him, or else the publisher will be suspected, to be
better skilled in transcribin^ Three hundred lines of Latin, then making three:
and yet you safely pass this censure upon him, since the Printer was exact
enough in all the Popes and Councils Latin. And further, you read us a Grammar
Lesson, that some words in [us] are of the Feminine, some in [a] of the
Masculine gender. Now, Sir, we will suppose that you were very careful to
examine the Print; and yet (for all your care) Sacr^sanctum Ecclesiam escaped
your eye: For since you came so lately from Grammar, I do not suspect you have
forgot that Ecclesia^ and Musa are of the Feminine gender, though Poeta indeed
is (as you tell us) of the Masculine. But these are mere
seven-years-old-School-boys employments, unworthy your reflections, now you
write Man, and would be tampering in Divinity.

But it unbeseems your Youth, thus to attaque a person of Merit and Learning;
who long before your new minted Purgatory appeared in the world, both read and
sustained Orthodox Divinity, in a famous University, (and I hope I may say it
without vanity) with Dignity and Honor to that Chair: which was not every ones
good fortune, even after their Conclusions had passed the Press, as I am
informed out of Portugal.

Sixthly, You laugh, page 18. at your Adversaries, as if they were afraid to
produce their Reasons against Master White; and therefore you must guess at
their whispering Objections, by their stalking in great Letters. And elsewhere
you tell us, We can not weild Reason, and therefore our weapons are Authority.
What Goliath is this that exprobrates the Host of the Living God? The Church,
Sir, is both armed with Authority against Novelties, and is not unfurnished
with Reason to sustain her Faith against all the Pagan Philosophy of the world.
If my endeavors receive your approbation, I shall proceed to further
discoveries, in this your faithless pretended Theology. And as to your
complaint, That some words in their little Book stalkt in great Letters, it is
grounded on your little conversation with Books; where Capital Letters are
frequent, especially in citing Authorities: For there where the force of the
proof lies in two or three words, they are pointed out thus to the Readers eye
and observation. You may, if you please, print in Capital Letters, Monachi
subditi Episcopis, and Notent Monachi, and then, you will only publish a
little yet undigested Choler, in a Controversy again and again decided by that
Tribunal, from which there is no appeal.

Seventhly, You tell us, page 14. Master Whites opposers acknowledge, that this
Question of Purgatory was not handled in Pope Benedict his days: since they
accuse Master White for the first starter of this doubt. Your Adversary the
Publisher of the Bull, has nothing at all of this: If his other Opposers
accuse him of it, I know not how they can justify the Accusation. New Opinions
are raked out of hell every day by the Heterodox party, of which we yet find
obscure footsteps in Antiquity. Many opinions were choked by the authority of
the Church even in their birth, and broached again. Your self acknowledge Pope
Benedict, and many Doctors of the Latin Church, were of opinion, That Purgation
might be perfected before Reunion, page 19. and it will not be improbable, if
it was only their Opinion (as you pretend) that others with Master White held
the contrary. But how can you parallel page 17. Master White (according to your
Adversary) with him, who brake a Law before it was made; if Master White now
breaks one, three hundred years after it was made; unless you will suppose,
that no one Article of our Faith was established, till some one or other
impugned it, for otherwise, his now Crime (or erroneous Doctrine) might stand
condemned long ago.

Sect. 38. Eighthly, You would persuade your Reader, page 34, 35. that not You,
but We stand condemned by this Bull and Council: because the sole design of the
Pope was, to secure this sacred verity, That perfect Charity brings an
immediate heaven. And since your Adversary holds, That every soul immediately
upon her separation, converts her self perfectly to God, and yet he detains her
still in Purgatory, to suffer a dry and arbitrary punishment, which does not
redress the already rectified affections of the soul: It follows, He
contradicts the Popes design, and stands condemned by this his Sentence. I
answer, first, That I have already charged you with imposing on the Pope, and
if it were true, that the Pope does here define, That perfect Charity brings an
immediate Heaven (which when you show we shall be thankful for the miracle) yet
does not your argument against us, at all conclude: for where does your
Adversary tell you, That immediately upon separation, all the affections of the
soul are rectified and she in perfect Charity? much less that she has
satisfied the divine Justice for her irregularites in this mortal life. The
Publisher has not one word of this in his book you pretend to answer. (You are
like a Romancical Knight, you make Giants and kill them) but if he truly did
hold this Doctrine which you impose upon him: yet will your Argument be of no
force against him. For this question being proposed, Whether souls immediately
upon separation, rectify all their affections? Your Adversary may take which
side of the contradiction he pleases, and still sustain with the Pope and
Council this their Doctrine of Purgatory against you. And first, let us suppose
he should asser^ with you, That inordinate affections do accompany the soul
into the next life, yet he may sustain those Affections are purged and
rectified before reunion: and what crime should he be guilty of, but of
opposing your pretended Demonstrations? and so your mock Victory, and Pageant
Triumph (whilst you would persuade him, p. 35. to acknowledge with regret, that
the Pope and Council pronounce against him) is at an end: the strength of your
proof depending on An Imposition on the Pope, An Imposition on your Adversary,
and a non-concluding Argument drawn out of them both. I had almost forgot, that
in this case, he should withstand the authority of Virgil, whose Philosophy
your Master magnifies above that of the Church: though the Poet describes both
corporal punishments inflicted on the Souls, (which your master will needs
understand after his too frequent Metaphorical manner) and admits their passing
into Elysium (his feigned heaven) before Resurrection, of which the Poet never
dreamt. Nor even as to the proof that Affections to corporal pleasures do
remain in Separated Souls (for which end it is introduced) does this place of
this Poet reach home:

-- nec funditus omnes
Corporea excedunt pestes, penitusque necesse est,
Multa diu concreta modis inolescere miris.
For these words do not clearly carry this sense;

Do all evils cease, all plagues all strifes
Contracted in the body, many a stain
Long time inured, needs must even then remain.
But however (to do him right) if this place do not reach home, this Doctrine is
frequent with the Heathen Poets in their Fables, as in that of Narcissus 3.
Metamor. where he stands condemned to gaze upon himself in the next life,
because he passed out of this, in a doting self-love.

But if we should suppose the Publisher to approve: That such souls immediately
upon separation, rectify all disordered affections: how will you justify,
that this or perfect Charity is an immediate disposition to Beatifical Vision?
What do you think of Lumen Gloriae, the Light of Glory, which is farther
required? And if you fancy with your Master, lib. 5. Perip. Lect. 15. That God
is a Sun, darting out existencies according to the several dispositions of
Creatures. What doctrine shall we have from you of the Saints in this life? will
you pronounce, That never any Saint had perfectly regulated his affections but
just in that very moment he passed out of this life? What do you conceive of
the holy Apostles? of the Baptist? what in particular of St. Paul, when he tells
us, I live now not I, but Christ lives in me? What of the holy Fathers ofx the
old Law? What of the ever Blessed Virgin, even when she bore the Savior of the
world in her sacred womb? did all these enjoy Beatitude, or were they imperfect
in Charity? or did this Sun not dart forth his existencies as perfect Charity
the immediate disposition to heaven required?

But let us consider your Argument, you tell us, that your Adversary conceiving
the Souls now perfect in Charity, delays their Beatitude and condems them to a
dry and arbitrary punishment, page 35. This dry and arbitrary punishment you
have out of your Masters Doctrine, for he prosecutes it at length in his Middle
State^ Acc. 10, 11, etc. And first, he tells us, God does not punish sinners
upon the score of Revenge, nor for the satisfaction of Justice; since he
suffers no injury by our offenses. Nor can the punishments of Souls be
involuntary, or springing from an external, much less, from a material Agent;
but from within. That such pains neither avail Them, nor Us. Lastly, That these
sufferings have no connection with the sins: and yet God being a perfect
Architect, has so artificially framed his work; that of it self it performs
all operations without supplement, or future minute alterations, in any of its
Members or Organs. And so he excepts against punishments which are supposed to
remain due after the fault forgiven. Acc. 13. All which is but to retrive what
the Heterodox party alleged long since, in their impugnations of Purgatory and
Penance; and which stands condemned by this the 30 Canon of the Council of
Trent, Sess. 6. de Iustif. occasioned by this Doctrine. If any one shall say,
That to every penitent sinner, after the grace of Justification received, that
so the fault is forgiven, and the guilt of eternal punishment, that there
remains no guilt of temporal punishment to be paid, either in this life, or in
the future in Purgatory, before the passage to Heaven may be opened; let him be
Anathema. Thus the Council. Where by the way you may observe a temporary
punishment in Purgatory, against your Systeme: and after the remission of the
fault, a punishment due.

But because this Truth is so fundamental in the Sacred Council, all its
Doctrine of Satisfaction, the third part of Penance, depending on it: Let us
compare its Sacred Oracles, with the Doctrine of our new Master. And first,
Sess. 14. cap. 8. Of the necessity and fruit of Satisfaction. The Council
declares this Doctrine (of Satisfaction) to have been the constantly received
Faith of the Church by Divine Tradition, and is impugned now by those who have
an outside of Piety, but have denied the virtue of it. Directly opposite to our
new School, which teaches, That Pains remain not due, after the fault forgiven:
under pretense of promoting solid Devotion. And the Council pronounces, That it
is altogether false, and against the Word of God, that the fault is never
remitted, but that All the punishment is also forgiven. For besides Divine
Tradition, there are illustrious examples in holy Writ, which most manifestly
convince this Error. Thus the Council, directly against our new Master, as
will presently appear by his answer to this Doctrine. Further the Council
pursues. Nay, the order of the Divine Justice does seem to require, that in an
other manner sins should be pardoned in them who before Baptism offended by
ignorance; then in those who after Baptism violate the Temple of God. And it
becomes the Divine Clemency, that sins should not be pardoned (in Penance)
without any satisfaction. Directly against our Master, who tells us; No
Punishments are inflicted upon the score of satisfying the Divine Justice,
since God suffers no injury by our offenses. The Council holds on. Let the
Priests of God have before their eyes, that the Satisfaction which they impose
(on Penitents) be not only as to the guard of a new life, or as a medicine of
infirmity; but also as in revenge and chastisement of their past sins. And on
this Doctrine, the Practice of the Church is grounded in the Sacrament of
Penance, where Satisfaction is enjoined after Absolution and forgiveness of the
sin, and that in Revenge and Chastisement. Directly against our Master, who
excepts against this Doctrine, That after the sin forgiven, Pains remain due.
And the Council concludes: which whilst our Innovatours will not understand,
they so teach the best Repentance to be a new life, that they take away all the
force and use of Satisfaction. And again, the same Council, Sess. 6. cap. 14.
declares; That in the Penance of those who fall into sin (after Baptism) is not
only contained, Ceasing from sins, and a detestation of them, or a contrite
and humbled heart; but a confession and absolution; and also Satisfaction by
Fastings, Alms, Prayers, etc. Not for the Eternal punishment, which together
with the fault is remitted by the Sacrament; but for the temporal punishment,
which (as holy Writ teaches) is not All of it, always remitted as in Baptism.
Directly against Him: For the Fault is here remitted, together with the Guilt
of Eternal punishment, by the Sacrament, and yet Temporal pains remain due in
Penance, but not in Baptism. You see, Sir, Punishments due, after the sin
remitted; which Doctrine you would disgrace with your Epitheres of dry and
arbitrary. Where by the way I would have you observe, That sins are in an other
manner remitted in Baptism, then in penance; for in this, a Temporary
punishment remains due, not in That. And I pray you tell us, when you write
again, Whether in Baptism receiceived with your Conditional affection to mortal
sins, or an Absolute one to venial sins, if the Party should at that very
moment depart this life; your Master would not condemn him to Purgatorry, even
till the Day of Judgment? though this Countil here declare, that the Fault,
together with the Punishment, is All of it remitted in Baptism; and the Council
of Florence defines, That the Souls of them who after Baptism received,
contract no blemish at all of sin, are Presently received into Heaven. I do
very much suspect, this Presently will signify at the Day of Judgment, in your
Doctrine.

But because the Council here mentions Illustrious Examples in Scripture, where
the sin was forgiven, and yet a punishment inflicted, which had no natural
connection to the sin it self, as all Divines understand in the case of David;
Concilium Provinciale Senonense Decreta fidei, cap. 12.
where for his Crime, now forgiven, God took away his Son. It is not unworthy
our observation, how our great Master was pinched with this Example, when he
sustains, De Med. Stat. dimens. 13. That punishments are not inflicted by God,
which have no connection with the crime. For there having (most injuriously)
tied God to Nature; and told us, That God being the Author of Nature, which
flows from him as from its proper Cause, mu contradict himself, if he act any
thing against it: And therefore cannot assign punishments bearing no connection
with the fault. Yet presently (in the same leaf) to answer this Case of David,
he was forced to have recourse to a Miracle, or work beyond the usual and
connatural course of causes, and the usual connection between the fault and
penalty, that God might signalize a revenge: (which according to his Doctrine,
is to make God contradicts himself.) In which he contradicts all his former
Positions and Grounds, both of Gods proceeding on the score of Revenge and
Justice; and this his now delivered Doctrine, That he punishes not, but by a
Penalty naturally connected, or flowing from the Crime. But presently he tells
us, That such Examples are not to be drawn to the condition of ordinary
punishments, which are usual in the common order of things. But why it may not
be extended, that Gods Justice may and does require of separated Souls, a
punishment not now flowing from their inordinate Affections, he does not tell
us: Nor indeed could he give other Reason then, that this Doctrine would not
square with his Peripatetick Theology. For if either the inordinate ^ffections
of Souls, in that state, might be redressed, or the Divine Justice be satisfied
by their sufferings, or our prayers before reunion; the design he had in
molding his new Purgatory, (which he himself sufficiently declares, De Med.
Stat. dimens. 22.) had been ruined and overthrown. Much better then, and more
solidly did Calvin Phylosophyse, Instit. li^. 3. cap. 5.. 6. What is Purgatory
(says he to Catholics) but that satisfaction for sins which the souls of those
who depart this life suffer? So that if this Opinion of satisfaction be
destroyed, out of hand Purgatory it self is quite pulled up by the very roots.
And when you write again, Sir, I expect your modesty should tell us; That this
Council too, as well as that of Florence, does not decree any thing against
your Master, but against me. The Bells will happily chyme your unchangeable
brutish Affections in separated Souls: No punishments due after the sin
forgiven: No temporary Punishment in Purgatory: No punishment in Revenge and
chastisement: No punishment inflicted by God, but such as naturally flow from
the Crimes.

Sect. 39. But what is all This, if Master White (as you tell us, page 33.) say
it is demonstrable, that Souls being purged are immediately in Heaven? Or if
you can not beat it, with all this endeavor, into our heads, that charity is
the immediate disposition to bliss: since this is the ground of his envied
Book, forsooth, of the Middle State of Souls? (as you say, page 34.) For what
can all the Councils prevail against a Demonstration? And were it not worth my
Readers pains to see, and satiate his soul, with the excellent Demonstration of
this sacred Verity? the Pope in our present Bull declares, Souls now purged see
the divine Essence. And we having, touched something of his new Hell, why
should we not see how his A ^amantine Chain reaches to Heaven too? Thus then,
Instit. Sac. Tom. 2. lib. 3. Lect. 6. he with incomparable evidence, sufficient
to destroy the hitherto only Faith of the world demonstrates, That Souls
perfect in Charity, enjoy the Beatifical Vision. And first presupposing, That
souls in the next life attain a plenary knowledge of all things. He thus
pursues, Nevertheless (says he) since God is one only formality, which is so
elevated above the reasons of all possible, and existent things, that it is
superior to gender (genus) it self, and has no common reason: it is evident
that an intellect by force of the intellection of all possible things, much
less of existents, can not be erected by consequence, and as it were virtual
discourse, to the knowledge of such a formality, which is (as we may say) as it
were, the diffinition of God: and therefore can not intuitively see God. Again,
it is evident, That those who have lived holily, that is, exercised themselves
to have God for the last end, and s^le good, having now received this
plentitude of knowledge, out of that, that they more strongly and evidently know
this truth, do infinitely increase in the affection to see God: and since the
Will is a reflection of existence upon essence, by which the virtue of the
entity is exercised and applied to the desired effect: such a Saint, not to be
any other thing, then a man exercised according to the whole virtue and Entity,
in respect of the Vision of God. Since that then as to know himself, is to be
himself to be, so to know God, is to be God: that is, (...) to be (of) to be
((...) esse esse) but since the virtue of a thing to be, is nothing but a
potentiality, especially in respect of to be subsistent, which is both essence
and to be: it is concluded such a Saint, by all which is in him, not to be any
thing else, but an actual and exercised potentiality of being God. Since
therefore on the part of God, out of that that he is to be it self, (or
speaking more especially, it is to be understood in act it self, or to be in
act understood, which is to be his own to understand passively: so that to be
understood, is not in him a denomination, but a real quality (that very quality
which constitutes the Father) and this quality or property is subsistent, and
by consequence proper to no power but to any one accommodated) nothing can be
wanting which appertains to the reason of act and actuality: it is concluded,
That the Saints and God are one by power and act, that is, that the Saints
clearly see God. And now, truly Sir, if my Readers patience has held out, as
mine has to Translate this long Demonstration, just as it lies, for fear of
spoiling the Nonsense, I think he desires me to make it his humble request to
that Ingenious Gentleman, who Translated your Masters Middle State of Souls,
who has so well delivered us Virgils sense, to put this admirable
Demonstration in Rhyme, it will go rarely to a Jews Trump. And I desire you to
tell me when you Write again, in what Mood and Figure this Syllogism
concludes. But now having Demnostratively understood, That the Saints perfect
in Charity immediately see God. Let us see how you pursue the way that
Separated Souls attain to this perfection by Reunion, And so;

Sect. 40. Ninethly, You tell us, page 37. Master White endeavors to find a
state in which the soul may be changeable to more holy desires, and a
connatural cause to give her those desires, to wit, the corporal and mental
sight of her dearest Savior, etc. For what state more fit for changeableness,
then a corporeal one? and what more powerful to ravish the whole affections of
a soul, then the divine face of her Spouse? My Reader will not wonder at the
inventions your Master finds out, now he is a little acquainted with the head
that finds them. Yet this invention is worth our observation, which I suspect,
you will hardly show in any former writer, and so justly he may be proud of it.
The Souls then have been all the time of their separation, in a state of
suffering only, by their irregular affections: which being wholly unchangeable
in that state, they are as yet not purged, or cleansed at all, but perfectly
the same they were at the moment of death: but now by reunion with the body
they are put into a new state of changeableness. Now, Sir, Christians that have
hitherto walked by Faith, do all conceive that the way or Pilgrimage of men to
the future life, is ended at death. They never heard that Souls at the
Resurrection are returned to Act again in order to Eternity. If that state do
render Souls changeable and free, and their actions then, have such an
influence on their future state, it will justly be feared, that many of them
may drop out of Purgatory into Hell. Nor will the sight of the Divine face of
their Spouse, quite evacuate this apprehension: For if the Soul be not
necessarily, but freely and voluntarily ravished, the doubt will remain, Whether
she will still continue her inordinate affections, or avert her self wholly
from God, and so either remain in his Purgatory still, or nowpass into Hell?
And how happily, Sir, does this change of affections (which is your sole and
only purging or cleansing of the Soul, wrought by the sight of the Divine face
of Christ, which sight is doubtless an incomparable pleasure, and such an one
as ravishes the whole affections of the Soul) agree with the Decrees of these
Councils: That of Florence, when it defines; The Souls are purged by the pains
of Purgatory. That of Trent, when it teaches; After the sin remitted, temporary
pains are due in Purgatory. When now we are taught, that souls are purged by
pure pleasures, the sight of their dear Spouse. And in earnest, Sir, I know not
why the world is not more inamoured of your Doctrine: You have now filled our
lives with the pleasures of the body; you have quite turned the pains and
afflictions of Souls in the state of separation, into Pure pleasures: And now
at the Reunion, you fancy the Souls affections changed; (that is her self
purged) by an incomparable pleasure, which even ravishes all her affections.
And to complete a most pleasant Divinity, I could pursue it, even to your
Masters pleasant Hell: who, Instit. Sac. lib. 3. lec. 9. describes the damned
so pleased with their torments, that they are in love with them, and would not
be without them. But I reserve that to an other discovery. Only I will for the
present mind you, that since the inordinate Affections of the damned are their
torment, (according to your Master in that same place,) and those affections
remain in them, in the same proportion they were in this life; and since
doubtless where pleasures are possible, and easy to be attained, and we
continually pressed by our bodies to the enjoyment; the refraining from them is
a far greater torment, then where the temptations are not so impetuous, or none
at all; and the enjoyment represented as impossible, which at one blow outs off
all the Wills pursuit: It will follow, That those who restrain themselves from
these pleasures, are in a greater Hell in this life, then those who are damned
in the next. And therefore it would not seem very rational, that any man should
precipitate himself voluntarily now into a greater Hell, where is duration and
succession, to avoid a less in the future life, the duration of which, is but
as one moment. And let me further beg of you, to render us a clear account, How
it should happen, that the Souls of the damned at the reunion should not all
of them rectify their now disordered affections, and fly to Heaven: For since
your Master has already taught us, That the damned Souls are now furnished
with all knowledge, Inst. Peri^. lib. 5. lec. 4.
all erroneous judgments corrected in them: their grief depending on this, that
their affections to corporal pleasures are greater then in proportion to other
desires, which ought to be preferred: it would not be inconsequent to t^is
Doctrine, That those damned souls now seeing most evidently, that other desires
ought to be preferred before these affections to corporal pleasures, (since
this error is now rectified) and they in a condition, by reunion with the
body, of changeableness, they should also rectify their affections, which are
but these judgments, and by consequence become now Denizons of Heaven, which
also might seem to become the Mercies of God, and render the state of the
Blessed more happy there, by their company.

Sect. 41. Tenthly, You entertain your Reader, page 36, etc. with scoffing at
hallowed Grains, sanctified Beads, the extending of Indulgencies to the next
World, which you style External devices, Vtensils of a thriving Devotion,
deluding Privileges, etc. which perfectly befits a Scholar trained up in
Luthers School; thus he began. And you are not content with this, you retrive
again, (in the same place,) and fix upon your Adversary, that signal calumny
long since fixed upon the Church, (for the use of such things,) That she goes to
Heaven by such things, not by holy desires: Nor even pretends, that such things
promote souls in holy desires, or increase sanctity in them. In which you speak
against your own Soul and Conscience: For you very well know, the Church is not
guilty of this; nor your Adversary, who will tell you, that he believes with
St. Paul, that if he had faith able to remove mountains, yet it would not avail
him without charity; and further tells you, That such things as you here
enumerate, do increase sanctity and holy desires in us, and render our prayers
more effectual for the Souls in Purgatory.

Eleventhly, You tell us, (in your Postscript,) That private calumnies are
whispered against Master White, as holding strange Opinions, which his own
Books contradict. I have also heard something of this, and I think our
informations jump; you may peradventure find it hinted at in this discourse:
Nor need that Gentleman fear your title of a Calumniatour, or that his
Authority will not carry it, nor indeed will it be engaged in the Quarrel; he
is provided of a Defense; I have showed him that very Doctrine in terms, in
your Masters Book, which he had told him in Private; it is ready for you, you
shall have it when you please to call for it: And I wonder those solid persons,
acquainted with every ressort of his Learning, did not see it.

Lastly, You add, Your Master has this comfort, That his carriage needs
neither fear the exemplarity of his Adversaries lives, nor his unparalled
Learning the force of their Arguments. In which, your Reader will be persuaded,
that you were not a perfect Scholar in Galateus his School. The Publisher
against whom you write, is a Person of eminent exemplarity; and for my part,
where your Masters Pen is not engaged, I have been edified by him, even in his
Writings I find some things most excellent; but why comparisons should be made,
I do not understand. You and I being private persons, hope still the best, and
pray for all those whom we desire to better by our example: But because it is
both laudable and lawful to magnify the good and pious lives of men, I join
heartily with you in this Encomium of your Master: And if you now design to
advance in order to his Canonization, and can make good his Faith, (which is
the first Quaere of that Court,) I shall very willingly give testimony to the
exemplarity of his Life. I wish from my Soul, his Doctrine would appear
entirely and fully Catholic; and for the rest, you have my Vote; he may be
believed, as holy, as St. John Baptist.

Sect. 42. And now, Sir, I hope to have given you some satisfaction in our
point in controversy. We as yet have proceeded upon this unshakeable ground,
That the Councils are unerrable in their Decrees; and upon this I have received
a very ample and full* one my self. I do believe, That Souls are purged
uncloathed of their Bodies, and presently received into Heaven before reunion
with them. And that the Council and Pope deliver this Position, I must see, if
I have eyes; and I hope you will, by what is said. And this hope is heightened
in me, because my Conscience tell me, I have proceeded with as even a hand as I
could, in balancing what you have said against it, with that which I have said
for it. If I am biased naturally on either side, it is on yours: Nature
prompts me still to wish, the Church and her Faith were not engaged against
you: Your opinion would, at one blow, ease me of that incumbent care to assist
my dead Friends: But I have learnt this work of mercy from a Child, to pray for
the Dead, which in your Systeme (as I have evinced) is fruitless. But alas,
Sir, this business of Purgatory is not that which so much troubles my head,
though it be one: I have a deeper fear: I am pressed with the consideration of
this new molded Theology, I see this demonstrative Doctrine, this pretense of
reducing the mysteries of Faith to our narrow brains, this hope of introducing
Science in lieu of Faith into the World, strikes much deeper then yet You
imagine. Nor am I at all confident of your solid cleer-sighted Friends, who are
acquainted with every resort of Master Whites Doctrine. I fear, and I think not
without Reason, the Church and He have nothing common, but words; for the
notions and significations are quite different: But our Faith lies not in the
sound of words, but in the sense and meaning of them. When I am told, Souls are
not purged in the state of separation, but only at reunion; though the word
Purgatory yet remain, my Faith remains not of this Article. And so it will fare
with the rest. I do believe Faith, Hope, and Charity are infused by the Holy
Ghost, into our souls in Baptism. I do believe holy Iustif^ing Grace (by which
we are the Sons of God) is something inhaerent in our souls; and my notion of
these things which are supernatural, is, that they are of a different order and
series then Nature. But when I am now taught, God is the Author of Nature, but
showrs not down into us an other series of things of an other or differing
order; Reason is Nature to us, and the perfection of Reason is Demonstration:
Though at the same time we are taught, That God perfects Nature by supernatural
things; yet I suspect the word supernatural, being still the same, that now it
is become aequivocal, and signifies an other thing with him then it does with
me. I do believe the ever Blessed Trinity to be Three real Persons, Father, Son
and Holy Ghost: Yet where I find this most sublime mystery pretended to be
Demonstrated by what is Essential in God (to know and love himself,) when I
find it so brought down to our capacities, that it is pretended, The examples
of Logic and Natural Philosophy equalize this Mystery; when I am taught, That
the Father and Son (in Divinis) are Metaphors: I have a great apprehension that
this Doctrine and my hitherto received Faith agree but in words, not in the
things signified by them. I do believe, That God most freely, and of his own
goodness built this Universe: I believe, He is not necessarily tied to the
order or course of Nature: And when I am now taught, That God must contradict
himself if he Act any thing against Nature. That, Out of the force and series
of Nature, nothing could happen better to Judas, then to be damned. In fine,
God should cease to be God, if this Fly should not now be in nature. I fear
though we agree in this word God, our apprehensions jump not at all. Christians
apprehend and adore the liberal free hand of their Maker; but a God tied to any
thing besides himself, is not a Christian God, but a Pagan Jupiter. I do
believe upon Christ's words, That if I keep the Commandments I shall enter into
life: and this is the foundation of my Doctrine of manners. And when I am now
taught, That God neither commands nor forbids any thing. However we agree in
these words, Thou shall not Steal: Thou shall not commit Adultery: my whole
Doctrine of Morality is banished by this assertion. It will hereafter appear
your Master has furnished us with a fa^ other Morality then ever Escobar
thought of. What do you think of this Position of your Master in his book of
Government and Obedience, ground 6. speaking of himself, An other man (says he)
is no otherwise to me, then a piece of Cloth or Wood, which I cut and shape
after my own will, fittingly for my use: Even though I do him harm, or seek
his ruin; It follows not I wrong him. How well does this agree with that
Principle of Nature, That we ought so to do to others, as we would have them do
to us? In sum, where I see a pretender to Demonstrate all the Mysteries of our
holy Faith, and that Faith shall cease and Evidence take place, I justly fear
though the words are still retained, this is but to supplant Christ and his
Doctrine; our notions and significations of words must be changed, or else these
stupendous Mysteries can not be levelled to our weak capacities. But though
these be my apprehensions, yet I wish I were mistaken: I wish these new
Doctrines may receive such Explications, that they may appear no less Catholic
then those I profess, and shall be as happy to receive satisfaction, as you to
give it me; but, withal, I must frankly promise you, that I shall require your
satisfaction both in these and many other Doctrines. I do acknowledge with
thankfulness, that one may be instructed by Master White, whose excellent Wit
and Pen, if duly applied, is admirable; but if I mistake not, he has flown
beyond the bounds fixed by an unerring hand: and therefore desire you to accept
of this serious Protestation, That I have an entire respect for his Person, and
if any harsh word has escaped my Pen, it is the Doctrine not He that is
concerned in the Epithete: the same I speak and intend to your self. Though if
you consider the case aright (where not only whatsoever is sacred to
Catholics, but what the Heterodox-Party agree with them in, is thus attaqued;
Where the foundations of Christianity and of all Religion, the Liberty of God,
and Contingency of Creatures, is thus attempted by a Lucretian Galamawfry
Philosophy, to make way for a new Demonstrative Religion) such an exotic
design deserves not a more mild censure then what I have fixed upon it: and yet
I hope you will nor find your too too frequent Calumniating Adversaries, or any
thing like it in my whole book. If you think there is any animosity in my
Discourse, I heartily beg your pardon: we daily say, Sicut and nos dimittimus,
where these heats are easily allayed; and for our present Controversy of
Purgatory, let us patiently expect the determination of our undoubted Superior,
the Present sovereign Pastor, who (as the Florentin Council here tell us) holds
the Primacy over the whole World: Who is the Successor of St. Peter, the Prince
of the Apostles: and the true Vicar of Christ, and the Head of the whole
Church, and the Father and Teacher of all Christians: And who finally had full
power delivered unto him by our Lord Jesus Christ in St. Peter to Feed, to
Rule, and to Govern the Universal Church. To whom we will Heartily, Fairly and
Religiously, (and not by any false suggestions or surprising friends, as you
most strangely suspect, page 40. and thereby at once condemn both that Supreme
Court of Weakness, if not of Corruption, and your adversaries of Dishonesty)
remit the whole Controversy, and humbly submit to his Judgment, both in this
Particular, and in all other Disputable Points whatsoever.

FINIS.
THe Publisher desires my Adversary to take notice, That if there be any thing
in this Discourse which depends on matter of Fact, in which he desires to be
satisfied, he is ready to give him entire satisfaction before any Person of
Honor, by undoubted Witnesses.

A
THE BULL OF Pope BENEDICT the Eleventh, (Otherwise called the Twelfth)
Promulgated in the Year, 1336. Concerning the State of Departed SOULS.
Faithfully Translated, as it is in the Roman Bullary, Printed at Rome, Anno
Dom. 1638.
Benedict, Bishop, the Servant of Gods Servants, To the perpetual memory of
Posterity.

BLessed be God in his Gifts, and Holy in all his works, who through his mercy
forsakes not the Sacred Roman, Catholic, and Apostolical Church, which his
right hand has planted as his Vineyard, and which he has raised up, as chief
and Conqueress, to be the head of all Churches; our Lord saying to Peter, Thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church: but by his blessed
Apostles, especially Peter and Paul, the singular Defenders of the same Church,
keeps her through his compassionate Benignity and continual Piety: that she
being governed by these Rulers, may remain stable in her self, as founded upon
the firm Rock, and that all the believers of the Christian Faith may obey her,
may yield to her, may intend to her, may live under her authority, may be under
her discipline and correction. That in her nothing may be taught rashly,
nothing brought in unwarily, nothing in Faith unadvisedly introduced: and that
so men may decline from evil, and do good; that they may walk in the right
paths, and make progress to better things, by their holy desires; that they may
hopefully expect the near approaching rewards of the eternal life of just men,
and fearfully dread the not far off calamities of Hell, appointed for the
wicked. For it is written, Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to
render unto every one according to his works. But if it shall be otherwise
attempted by any one; that she forthwith by her authority (adding also
punishments thereunto, as she shall judge it expedient) totally root it out.
For which Church (to the end that she subsisting in her self might inform
others) our Savior Christ Jesus prayed to his Father in the time of his
Passion, saying, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may fifth
you as Wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith may not fail, and when
thou art converted strengthen thy Brethren.

. 1. There arose indeed a matter of question not long since, in the time of
John the 22 our Predecessor of happy memory, between some Doctors of Divinity,
concerning the Vision of the Souls of just men after their death, in which
there was nothing to be purged, when they departed out of this world, or if
there were, it was now totally purged; Whether they see the Divine Essence
before the assumption of their Bodies, and the general Judgment, and also
concerning other matters: some of them holding the negative, some the
affirmative; others according to their own imaginations, endeavoring to show
diverse things, and in diverse manners, concerning the Vision of the Divine
Essence by the Souls aforesaid, as it is known apparently by their words and
writings, and by their rejected Disputations, which we here omit for brevities
sake: because they so differed amongst themselves from our determinations. And
whereas our aforesaid Predecessor, to whom the determination of the
abovementioned Questions did belong, had prepared himself in his public
Consistory, as well before his Brethren, the Cardinals of the holy Roman
Church, (of whose members we our selves then were) as before the Prelates and
Doctors in Divinity (many of them being present) strictly charging and
commanding them, that each one should deliberately deliver his opinion,
concerning the matter of the aforesaid Vision, when he should require it from
them: But being prevented by Death (as it pleased God) he could not effect it.

. 2. We therefore, (after the death of our aforesaid Predecessor, being assumed
to sit in the Apostolical Seat; more seriously considering, how great dangers
of Souls might be incurred, and how many scandals might arise, if the aforesaid
contentions were left unresolved: to the end that the diversity of opinions may
perish, and the solidity of truth may plainly appear, having first made use of
a careful examination of the matters aforesaid, and having diligently
deliberated with our Brethren, the Cardinals of the said Roman Church: Do, with
the advice of those our Brethren, by the Apostolical authority, Define by
this constitution to be valid for ever.

. 3. That according to the common ordination of God, The Souls of all the
Saints, which departed out of this world before the Passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ; as also the Souls of the holy Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins,
and of the other faithful, departed after they had received Christ's sacred
Baptism; in whom there was nothing to be purged when they departed, nor also
shxall be when he^eafter they shall depart this life; or if there then be, or
shall be any thing to be purged in them, when after Death they shall be purged.

And, That the Souls of Infants, regenerated with the said Christian Baptism,
and to be baptized; when being baptized they shall depart this life, before
they have the use of their free will.

PRESENTLY after their departure, and after the aforesaid Purgation, in such as
stood in need thereof; EVEN BEFORE THE RESUMPTION OF THEIR BODIES, AND BEFORE
THE GENERAL JUDGMENT; (since the Ascension of our Lord and Savior Jesus into
Heaven:) WERE, ARE, AND SHALL BE IN HEAVEN, in the heavenly Kingdom, in the
celestial Paradise with Christ, aggregated to the fellowship of the holy
Angels; and (since the Passion and Death of our Lord Jesus Christ,) they have
seen, and do see the Divine Essence by an intuitive vision, and even face to
face, without the mediation of any creature interposing it self by way of a
visible object; but the Divine Essence showing it self immediately unto them,
nakedly, clearly, and openly: And, That they thus seeing the Divine Essence, do
enjoy the same.

Moreover, That by such a vision and fruition, the Souls of them who are
already departed out of this life, are truly blessed, and have eternal life and
rest; and so shall their Souls be, which shall hereafter depart this life, when
they shall see the same Divine Essence, and enjoy it before the general
Judgment.

And, That this Vision and Fruition of the Divine Essence, does evacuate in
them, and cause to cease the Acts of Faith and Hope; as Faith and Hope are
properly Theological Virtues.

And, That after such an intuitive and facial Vision and Fruition shall be
begun in them; the same Vision and Fruition, without any interruption,
evacuation or cessation, has remained, continued, and shall be continued, even
to the final Judgment, and afterward, even to all Eternity.

. 4. Moreover We Define, That according to Gods common ordination, the souls of
such as die in actual deadly sin, descend PRESENTLY into Hell after their
death, where they are tormented with infernal punishments; and, That
nevertheless, in the Day of Judgment all men shall appear before the Tribunal
of Christ with their bodies, to render an account of their own actions, that
every one may bear the proper things of his body, according to what he has
done, whether good or evil,

. 5. Decreeing, That our Definitions or Determinations aforesaid, and every of
them, be held by all faithful people: And that whosoever shall hereafter
presume, wittingly and pertinaciously to hold, affirm, preach, teach, and
defend, by Word or by Writing, contrary to these our aforesaid Definitions, or
Determinations, and every of them; It be proceeded against him in due manner,
as AGAINST AN HERETIC.

. 6. Let it not therefore be lawful for any man to violate this Page of our
Constitution, or by a rash boldness to do against the same. But if any one
shall presume to attempt it; let him know, that he shall incur the wrath of the
Almighty God, and of the blessed Peter and Paul his Apopostles.

Given at Avinion, on the Fourth of the Calends of February, in the Second Year
of Our Popedom.
In like manner it was decreed in the Eighth General Synod, held at Florence,
under Eugenius the Fourth; as appears in the Letters of the holy Union between
the Latin and Greek Church. In these terms.

Out of the Eighth Geneneral Synod held at Florence, under Eugenius the Fourth.
In the Letters of the holy Union between the Latin and Greek Churches.
The Sacred Council aprooving, We Define.

Artic. 3. IF truly penitent Souls shall depart this Life before they have
satisfied for their Commissions and Omissions, by the worthy Fruits of Penance:
That their Souls are purged by the punishment of Purgatory, after their Bodies
Death: And that to relieve them from such their punishments, the Suffrages of
the faithful yet living do profit them, to wit, Sacrifices of the Mass,
Prayers, Almsdeeds, and other offices of piety, which are used to be performed
by the faithful for other faithful, according to the institute of the Church.

Art. 4. And that the Souls of them, who after Baptism received, have
contracted no blemish at all of any Sin; as also those Souls, which after they
have contracted the blemish of sin, are purged either in their Bodies, or being
UNCLOATHED OF THEIR BODIES, (as is abovesaid,) are PRESENTLY received into
Heaven, and clearly behold God himself in Trinity and Unity, as he is; yet
according to the diversity of Merits, one more perfect then another.

Art. 5. But that the Souls of them who depart this life in actual deadly sin,
or only in Original sin, do PRESENTLY descend into Hell, to be there punished,
though with unequal punishments.

We also define, That the holy Apostolical Sea, and the Roman Bishop, holds the
Primacy over the whole World; and that he, (the Roman Bishop,) is the Successor
of St. Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and the true Vicar of Christ, and the
Head of the whole Church; and the Father and Teacher of all Christians; and
that full power was delivered unto him by our Lord Jesus Christ in St. Peter,
to feed, to rule, and to govern the universal Church: As it is also contained
in the Acts of General Councils, and in the sacred Canons.

Given at Florence, in the public Synodical Session. In the year 1439. And
subscribed by the Emperor of Constantinople, and the Greek and Latin Fathers,
there and then present: as it appears in the Books of the Councils.

B
The Ten Heresies condemned by this Bull of Pope Benedict; gathered by
Eymericus in his Directory of the Inquisitors, approved by Gregory xiii. cited,
Page 29.
IN the Extravagant of Pope Benedict xii. (says Eymericus) which begins,
Blessed be God. These following Heresies are condemned, and their contraries
are proved to be Catholic verities, and to be held as matters of Faith.

The first Heresy is, That according to the common ordination of God, the
Souls of Just men departed before the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
which nothing was to be purged; presently after the said Passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ, before the resumption of their Bodies, and the general Judgment,
did not see, nor do see, nor shall see clearly and openly the Divine Essence,
nor do enjoy it. No^ after the Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, were, are,
nor shall be in Heaven, in the Heavenly Kingdom, and celestial Paradise with
Christ, aggregated to the fellowship of the holy Angels.

The Second Heresy is, That according to the common ordination of God, the
Souls of Just men departed before the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
which something remained to be purged, the purgation being totally completed,
presently after the said Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, before the
resumption of their bodies, and the general Judgment; did not see, nor do see,
nor shall see, the Divine Essence, clearly and openly, not do enjoy it: Nor
after the Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, were, are, nor shall be in
Heaven, etc.

The Third Heresy is, That according to the common ordination of God, the
Souls of Just men departed, after they had received the sacred Baptism, in
which nothing is to be purged, when they depart, before the resumption of their
bodies, and the general Judgment, do not see, nor shall see, the Divine
Essence, clearly and openly, nor do enjoy it, nor are, nor shall be in Heaven,
in the Heavenly Kingdom, etc.

The Fourth Heresy is, That according to the common ordination of God, the
Souls of Just men, departing after they have received the sacred Baptism, in
which there is something to be purged, when they depart, their purgation being
also totally completed, before the resumption of their bodies, and the general
Judgment, do not see, nor shall see clearly and openly, the Divine Essence, nor
do, nor shall enjoy it, nor are, nor shall be in Heaven, etc.

The Fifth Heresy is, That according to the common ordination of God, the
Souls of Infants regenerated by sacred Baptism, departing before the use of
their Free Will, before the resumption of their bodies, and the general
Judgment, do neither see, nor shall see, clearly and openly, the Divine
Essence, nor do enjoy it, nor shall enjoy it, nor are, nor shall be in Heaven,
etc.

The Sixth Heresy is, That according to the common ordination of God, the
Souls of all the aforesaid Just men departed, before the resumption of their
bodies, and the general Judgment, shall not be blessed with the Divine Vision
and Fruition, nor shall have eternal life and rest.

The Seventh Heresy is, That the Vision which the blessed Souls have of the
Divine Essence, is not an intuitive and facial Vision.

The Eighth Heresy is, That according to the common ordination of God, the
intuitive and facial Vision and Fruition of the Divine Essence shall be
evacuated in the Blessed, nor shall be continued until the final Judgment, nor
from thence unto all Eternity.

The Ninth Heresy is, That according to the common ordination of God, the
Souls departed in mortal Sin, presently after death do not descend into Hell,
nor are tormented with infernal punishments.

The Tenth Heresy is, That in the day of Judgmen^, all men shall not appear
with their bodies before the Tribunal of Christ, to render an account of their
actions, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
that every one may receive the things done in his body according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad.

C.
The Discourse of an Eminently Learned Divine of our Nation, to prove the
delivery of Souls before the Resurrection. Cited page 42.
The Condemnation of Blacklow (or White) by a Pope and General Council.
THe sense of the Florentin Council of the admission of some Souls, even those
that now are in Purgatory, to Eternal Beatitude, before the day of General
judgment.

The Definition of the Council.
In the Name of the most holy Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost: This Sacred
and Universal Florentin Council approving, we define, That the Souls of those
who after Baptism received have contracted no Blemish at all of sin; as also
the souls of those which after the blemish of sin contracted, are now purged
either in their bodies, or uncloated of their said bodies (as is above said)
presently are received into Heaven, and do behold God himself in Trinity and
Unity as he is. Thus the Council.

Though the very Text it self of the Florentin Council, seems abundantly
sufficient to evince what we here aim at and intend: yet that the Stubborness
of some persons (who are not the most knowing in the Ecclesiastical doctrine)
may more powerfully be repressed. It is to be noted, That when any doubt arises
concerning the meaning of a Council, we are diligently to seek out what
occasioned such a Decree, and find what was then chiefly agitated and debated.

The matter here in dispute between the Latins and the Greeks, was this, What
Souls were admitted (...) to eternal Beatitude before the day of general
Judgment?

Let us hear the Latins in this question concerning the fire of Purgatory;
presently in the beginning of the Council.

The Latins acknowledge both in this world a fire, and a Purgatory by fire; and
also in the future world they acknowledge a fire, yet not purging, but eternal.
They confess also, That souls are cleansed and freed by that (first named)
Purgatory Fire, and that he who has committed many offenses, is freed after a
long time of purgation; but he who has committed a few, is sooner delivered.

Let us now hear the Greeks.

The Greeks are of opinion, That the Fire is in the future only, and that in
this world, The temporary punishment of sinful Souls consists in their being
imprisoned in a darksome place, where they remain for a time; but that they are
purged, that is, freed and delivered from that obscure and afflicting place, by
the Prayers and Sacrifices of the Priests, but not by Fire.

Hitherto the Council of the Souls in Purgatory. It proceeds to declare the
opinions of both Churches, concerning the souls of Just men, which have no debt
at all to be paid.

The Latins say, That the souls of holy and just men are in Heaven; and that
(without any medium) they see and enjoy the Sacred Trinity.

The Greeks imagine that the souls of just men have indeed obtained Beatitude,
but not perfectly; and that they shall perfectly enjoy it, when they shall be
reunited to their Bodies in the Resurrection. And, that in the mean while, they
remain in a separated place, where they interiorly rejoice, entertaining their
thoughts with the foreseen and fore-known perfect Beatiude and Adoption which
is prepared for them.

You see the Question clearly and plainly propounded: You see wherein the
Eastern and Western Churches agree, wherein they disagree: What (after their
frequent disputations) was at last concluded? Surely no other thing, then --
The sacred Council approving, We define, That the souls of them, who after
Baptism received, have contracted no blemish at all of sin; as also those
souls, which after they have contracted the blemish of sin, are purged either
in their Bodies, or being unclothed of their said Bodies, are presently
received into Heaven, and clearly behold God himself in Trinity and Unity, as
he is.

Behold a Categorical Definition, directly determining the proposed difficulty.
The Question was, How many sorts of souls were admitted to the intuitive Vision
of God before the general day of Judgment? The Council answers, Three Sorts:

The first sort, such as after Baptism, contracted no sin.

The second such as although they contracted sin, yet fully satisfied for them
before their death by worthy fruits of Penance.

The third, such as contracted sin, and did not fully satisfy in this life,
but were purged afterward in Purgatory.

Our Aversary dares not deny an admittance of the First and Second sort of
Souls to the fruition of God presently, before the day of general Judgment. But
he most inconsequently rejects the Third sort now in Question. For what an
absurd Exposition of the Council would this be? The souls of Just men having no
sin at all, are received presently before the day of general Judgment to the
clear Vision of God. In like manner the souls which have fully satisfied for
their sins before their departure, are admitted presently before the day of
Judgment to eternal Beatitude: the souls cleansed in Purgatory are admitted
presently, that is, in the day of Judgment? When as this Third Sort of Souls is
contained in the same period, under the self same form of words. And (which is
to be taken special no^ice off) the Particle Mox presently, wherein is the
greatest force, is joined only to this Third sort of Souls, though it is also
necessarily understood in the two former.

Surely none of the Latins, none of the Greeks, did either question or
controvert, Whether the Souls of Just men, or the Souls in Purgatory were
admitted to eternal Beatitude in the Day of general Judgment: But the sole
difficulty was of the time preceding; as manifestly appears by the Declaration
of both Churches: and as concerning Purgatory, the difference between them was
only this; That the Latins admitted the operation of a material Fire; the
Greeks a darksome place, but not Fire.

Now for that the Adversary is pretended to be a Catholic, and acknowledges
that he ought to submit himself, not only to General Councils, but also to the
Judgment of the Chief Pastor: Let him attentively read and consider the solemn
Decree of Pope Benedict the xii. (above related) where he shall find his
Assertion in most plain terms condemned: For by that Constitution he may easily
perceive in what sense this particle Mox presently, inserted in the Florentin
Council, is to be explicated, where the same matter, almost in the self-same
words, is handled; and where it most manifestly signifies immediately, and
before the day of general Judgment.

This Decree is extant in Sanderus (de visibili Monarchia,) and it is also
mentioned in the 7th Tome of the Councils, in the life of the said Benedict, in
these terms. -- He defined, That the Souls of holy men, sufficiently expiated
from their sins, were blessed, and enjoyed the clear sight of God before the
day of Judgment. And he is there highly praised, as a virtuous man, and one
perseverantly constant till his death in pious actions.

What (think you) may we now judge of him, who calls the Definition of such a
Pope, and of so great a Council, a new Doctrine, supported by no foundation,
and opposite to the Churches practice?

D
The Answer to the Precedent discourse, by one of Master Whites Scholars, now a
very able Proficient in his School.
SIr, I have perused your Papers, which truly, according to the Opinion* That
the Holy Ghosts assistance in Councils and Consistories, is without restriction
or limitation, seems to me to evidence a deliverance of Souls out of Purgatory
before the Day of Judgment: But according to the Opinion, That the assistance
of the Holy Ghost in Councils and Consistories, is no longer then there is a
diligent search to find out what Christ taught, and his Apostles delivered as
so taught, there appears only, that the Council of Florence and Pope Benedict,
did think or judge it to be so, which may raise opposition to a Disobedience,
but not to an Heresy: For according to this later Opinion, that opposition,
and no other is to be termed Heretical, that gain-says apparent Tradition. So
that unless you show that the Council of Florence and Pope Benedict determined
conformably to Tradition, Mr. That is, Master Whites.
Blacklowes calling the Doctrine and Practice new, will not savor the least of
Heresy; For certainly that Doctrine and Practice must be new, that took
beginning after Christ and the Apostles.

O! but where is this restriction? In Christ's own words, Docebit vos omnia
quaecunque dixero vob^s, Not all truths, but such as I shall reveal to you.
This restriction Vincentius Lirinensis understood, when he imputed the Erring
of the Arim* to their preferring their private reasonings before the proper
rule and light, Tradition, appointed by Christ to steer by: and the concurrence
of Divines seems general, holding that there is no new Revelation, that the
Church only declares matters of Faith, which supposes them delivered, not
newly found out; else she might make matters of Faith, and bring all Truths
within the compass of Christianity; whereas indeed Christianity can only be a
belief of those Truths Christ taught, whilst he was conversant amongst men.

This puts all to a loss: For how shall it be known when Councils and
Consistories apply themselves aright? Easily, by examining Tradition of what
you have seen and heard.

This is the common light and plain way promised, to keep even fools from
straying from Christ's Doctrine.

Neither is Mr. White.
Blacklow taxable in point of Disobedience, he having submitted himself both to
the Pope and Council.

FINIS.
The principal Errors.
Page 70. line 4. leave very ill consequences behind it* read, draw very ill
consequences after it. p. 98. l. 11. I now draw, hopes, r. I now draw, is
hoped. p. 150. l. 3. corporea, r. corporeae.


