REX THEOLOGVS.

THE PREACHERS Guard and Guide In his double Duty of PRAYER and PREACHING.
Deduced from Scripture, Reason, and the best Examples.

In III. Parts.
1. A Vindication of the Kings Letter to the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury
concerning the Regulation of Preachers. 2. A Demonstration that Forms of Prayer
do best suit with Public Worship. 3. An Antidote to the virulent Clamours of
the Non-conformists.
LONDON: Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1664.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir RALPH HARE, Knight and Baronet; and Sir EDWARD
WALPOOLE, Knight of the Bath; Two worthy Members of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Honored Gentlemen,
AS you were in your Capacities highly instrumental to the Restoration of His
Sacred Majesty to His Crown: so I know there is nothing you desire more than
the happy settlement of His Majesty with the Church and State under His
Dominion upon the foundations of Peace and Piety. Amongst other things that
hinders such a desired Establishment, one is the Exorbitancy of the Pulpit:
though you have done great things already in the Parliament (which we
acknowledge to your everlasting Honor) in order to the correcting of those
Irregularities; yet something you left undone, as a work proper for an
Intelligence of an higher Orb; wherefore His Sacred Majesty has made a further
progress in His late DIRECTIONS recommended to the Reverend Fathers of the
Church; wherein at once He has approved Himself Episcopum extra Ecclesiam, a
Bishop without the Church; and Theologum intra Ecclesiam, a Divine within the
Church. But forasmuch as His Majesty's DIRECTIONS meet not with that general
Reception and Approbation they deserve, but are traduced by some as contrary to
the Doctrine of the Church; my design is in this ensuing Treatise to defend
Theologiam Regis, the Kings Divinity shining in them. I am conscious of my own
Defects, and therefore implore your Patronage. I fear I have presumed too far
in sheltering my self under your Names, and therefore beg your Pardon, and
withal your Acceptance of this Testimony of my Observance, promising what I
fall short of in this Expression of my Gratitude, I shall make up with my daily
Prayers for you both, and the Branches of your Honorable Families, to whom I am

A most devoted Servant in all Observance, Robert Seppens.

two lions holding up a crown surmounted shield of the coat of arms of the
United Kingdom above plaque DIEV ET MON DROIT


To the Most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
CHARLES R.

MOst Reverend Father in God, We greet you well. Whereas the hold abuses and
extravagancies of Preachers in the Pulpit, have not only by the experience of
former Ages been found to tend to the dishonor of God, the scandal of
Religion, and disturbance of the peace both of Church and State, but have also
(through the licentiousness of the late times) much increased, to the
inflaming, fomenting, and heightning of the sad distempers and confusions that
were among us. And whereas even at this present (notwithstanding the merciful
providence of God, so signally manifested in restoring Us to Our Crown, and Our
pious care and endeavors to govern Our Realms in peace and tranquillity) the
said Abuses do yet continue in a very high measure in sundry parts of this
Realm, through the busy diligence of some unquiet and factious Spirits, who
instead of preaching the pure Word of God, and building up the People in Faith
and Holiness, have made it a great part of their business to beget in the minds
of their Heaters an evil opinion of their Governors, by insinuating fears and
jealousies to dispose them to discontent, and to season them with such unsound
and dangerous Principles, as may lead them into Disobedience, Schism and
Rebellion. And whereas also sundry young Divines and Ministers, either out of a
spirit of contention and contradiction, or in a vain ostentation of their
Learning, take upon them in their popular Sermons to handle the deep points of
Gods Eternal Counsels and Decrees, or to meddle with the affairs of State and
Government, or to wrangle about Forms and Gestures, and other fruitless
Disputes and Controversies, serving rather to amuse than profit the Hearers;
which is done for the most part, and with the greatest confidence, by such
persons as least understand them: We, out of Our Princely Care and Zele for the
honor of God, the advancement of Piety, Peace, and true Religion, and for the
preventing for the future, as much as lies in Us, the many and great
Inconveniences and Mischiefs that will unavoidably ensue, if a timely stop be
not given to these and the like growing Abuses, Do, according to the Examples
of several of Our Predecessors of blessed memory, by these Our special Letters
straightly charge and command you, to use your utmost care and diligence that
these Directions, which upon long and serious consideration We have thought
good to give concerning Preachers, and which We have caused to be Printed,
herewith sent unto you, be from henceforth duly and strictly observed by all
the Bishops within your Province. And to this end Our Will and Pleasure is,
That you forthwith send them Copies of these Our Directions, to be by them
speedily communicated to every Parson, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer and Minister, in
every Cathedral, Collegiate, and Parish Church within their several Dioceses:
And that you ea^nestly require them to employ their utmost endeavor for the
due observation of the ^ame, whereof We shall expect a strict account both of
you and every one of them: And these Our Letters shall be your sufficient
Warrant and Discharge in that behalf.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 14. day of October, in the 14. year of
Our Reign, 1662. By His Majesty's Command. ED. NICHOLAS.

Directions concerning Preachers.
I. THat no Preachers in their Sermons presume to meddle with matters of State,
to model new Governments, or take upon them to declare, limit or bound out the
Power and Authority of Sovereign Princes, or to state and determine the
differences between Princes and the People; but that upon all good occasions
they faithfully instruct the People in their bounden duty of Subjection and
Obedience to their Governors Superior and Subordinate of all sorts, and to
the established Laws, according to the Word of God, and the Doctrine of the
Church of England, as it is contained in the Homilies of Obedience, and the
Articles of Religion set forth by public Authority.

II. That they be admonished not to spend their time and study in the search of
abstruse and speculative Notions, especially in and about the deep points of
Election and Reprobation, together with the incomprehensible manner of the
concurrence of Gods Free Grace and Man's Free Will, and such other controversies
as depend thereupon: but howsoever, that they presume not positively and
doctrinally to determine any thing concerning the same.

III. That they forbear in their Sermons ordinarily and causlesly to enter upon
the handling of any other controversies of less moment and difficulty: but
whenever they are occasioned by invitation from the Text they preach upon, or
that in regard of the Auditory they preach unto, it may seem requisi^e or
expedient so to do; That in such cases they do it with all modesty, gravity and
candor, asserting the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England from the
cavils and objections of such as are Adversari^s to either, without bitterness,
railing, feering, or other unnecessary or unseemly provocation.

IV. That for the more edisying of the People in Faith and Godliness (the
aforesaid Abuses laid aside) all Ministers and Preachers in their several
respect be Cures shall not only diligently apply them elves to Catechize the
younger sort, according as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed; but also
shall in their ordinary Sermons insist chiefly upon Catechetical Doctrines,
(wherein are contained all the necessary and undoubted Verities of Christian
Religion) declaring withal unto their Congregations what influences such
Doctrines ought to have into their lives and conversations, and stirring them
up effectually, as well by their Examples as their Doctrines, to the practice
of such Religious and Moral Duties as are the proper results of the said
Doctrines, as Self-denial, Contempt of the World, Humility, Patience, Meekness,
Temperance, Justice, Mercy, Obedience, and the like; and to a detestation and
shunning of sin, especially such sins as are so rise among us, and common to
the Age we live in; such are those usually styled the Seven Deadly ones; in
short, all kind of Debauchery, Sensuality, Rebellion, Profaneness, Atheism, and
the like. And because these licentious times have corrupted Religion even in
the very roots and foundations, That where there is an Afternoons Exercise, it
be especially spent either in explaining some part of the Church-catechism, or
in preaching upon some such Text of Scripture as will properly and naturally
lead to the handling of something contained in it, or may conduce to the
exposition of the Liturgy and Prayers of the Church, (as occasion shall be
offered) the only cause they grew into contempt amongst the People being this,
That they were not understood. That also the Minister, as often as conveniently
he can, read the Prayers himself; and when he cannot do so, he procure or
probide some fit person in Holy Orders, who may do it with that gravity,
distinctness, devotion and reverence, as becomes so holy an action: And
whenever by reason of his infirmity, or the concurrence of other Offices, the
time may seem too short, or he unable to perform the office of both Prayers and
Sermon at length, he rather shorten his Discourse or Sermon, than omit any
thing of the Prayers, lest he incur the penalty of the Act for Uniformity,
requiring them to be read according as the Book directs.

V. And further Our Will and Pleasure is, That all Ministers within their
several Cures be enjoined publicly to read over unto the People such Canons as
are or shall be in force, at least once, and the Thirty nine Acticles twice
every year, to the end they may the better understand, and be more thoroughly
acquainted with the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, and not
so easily drawn away from it as formerly they have been.

VI. Since Preaching was not anciently the work of every Priest; but was
restrained to the choicest persons for gravity, prudence and learning; she
Archbishops and Bishops of this Kingdom are to take great care whom they
License to Preach, and that all Grants and Licenses of this kind heretofore
made by any Chancellor, Official, Commissary, or other Secular person, (who
are presumed not to be so competent Judges in matters of this nature) be
accounted void and null, unless the same shall like wise be allowed by the
Archbishop, or the Bishop of the Diocese, and that all Licenses of Preachers
hereafter to be made or granted by any Archbishop or Bishop, shall be only
during pleasure, otherwise to be void to all intents and purposes, as if the
same had never been made nor granted.

VII. Lastly, That for the better observing of the Lord's Day, too much
neglected of late, they shall, as by often and serious admonitions, and sharp
reproofs, endeavor to draw off people from such idle, debauched, and profane
courses, as dishonor God, bring a scandal on Religion, and contempt on the
Laws and Authority Ecclestastical and Civil, to shall they very earnestly
persuade them to frequent Divine Service on the Lord's Day, and other Festivals
appointed by the Church to be kept solemn. And in case any person shall resort
unto (...) ^^^cern, Alehouses, or use any unlawful Sports and Exercites on
such days, the Minister shall exhort those which are in Authority in their
several Parishes and Congregations, carefully to look after all such Offenders
in any kind whatsoever, together with all those that abet, receive or entertain
them, that they may he proceeded against according to the Laws, and quality of
their Offenses, that all such Disorders may for the time to come be prevented.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, October the 14. in the 14. year of Our Reign,
1662. By His Majesty's Command. ED. NICHOLAS.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 16. read great. p. 10. l. penult. r. (...). p. 10. l. 26, 27. r.
(...) for (...). p. 12. l. 7. r. The Verb. p. 15. l. 16. r. jussi sunt. p. 16.
l. 11. r. fallible. p. 21. l. 12. r. Sozomen, and (...). l. 14. r. (...). p.
24. l. 4. r. Pammachium. p. 30. l. 35. r. post illa. p. 39. l. ult. for
question r. Answers. p. 40. l. 7. r. maintaining it. p. 43. l. 20. r. cannot.
p. 56. l. 6. r. honor Presbyteri.

THE INTRODUCTION.
AMongst the infinite methods and arts of Satan wherewith in all Ages he has
infested and troubled God's Church, none has proved more mischievous and
destructive then the perversion and depravation of things good and holy;
whereby the old Serpent playing an Aftergame has been so lucky and prosperous,
that even those things, that in their original were designed as means for the
planting and building up of Gods Church, has by this new artifice of the
Devil, proved powerful weapons to supplant and pull it down. That what Saint
Paul says of sin; it took occasion by the commandment, and slew him; so the
Devil has taken occasion by things in their first appointment good, to
deceive, and ruin men as desperately, as he did by heathenisme it self. It is
an observation of St. Cyprian in his book de unitate ecelesiae, That when the
Devil saw his trade of Idolatry fail at the coming of Christ, and the Seats,
and Temples of I dols were overthrown, Excogitavit novam fraudem, ut sub ipso
Christiani nominis titulo fallat incautos, haereses invenit, and schismata; He
devised a new trade of heresy and schism, that under the color of
Christianity, he might deceive unwary souls, and thereby subvert the truth, and
corrupt the faith. This new imposture of the Devils has been so operative and
effectual, daily experience teaches, That Christianity it self the only
true, and excellent religion, is against her nature made a mother of a spurious
offspring, contention, war, rebellion, The Scripture, that admirable Systeme
of divine revelations, is polluted by the profane usage of every bold
Dogmatizer. Every institution of Christ is adulterated, and turned to his
dishonor. The Public service of God, which if rightly performed would come
before him as incense, and as the Morning Sacrifice; by vain repetitions,
extemporary boldness, and tumultuary effusions of late became the Sacrifice of
Fools; the sacred Eucharist, that is ordained as a bond, or ligament to knit us
together in unity, is by Satan's malice the golden apple of contention: an
occasion of woeful distraction amongst Christians, and the fuel of endless
and irreconcilable controversy. The Love Feasts used in the Apostles times
for the procreation, and conservation of charity, did soon degenerate into
nurseries of riot and dissension. The Public Vigills upon the Evens of
Festivals, Tertul. lib. 2 ad ux. Aug. ep. 64.
at first so advantageous to Christian piety, and observed with so much zeal
and devotion, in time were changed into public disorders. It were endless to
reckon up all the sacred rites of Christianity, the Devil has made use of, to
promote his own Kingdom, and weaken Christ's. But amongst all those, there is
none more visibly, and dangerously abused, then the Ordinance (as they call it)
of Preaching, which at first was the organ in the hand of Christ and his
Apostles for the conversion of the world: but now by Satan's malice and subtilty
is become a great instrument for the disturbance of Christian Churches and
Nations. That it may be a question, whether the excess of Preaching in later
times has not done more hurt, then the want of it heretofore. It Is certain in
Morality, that the vice in Excess, is sometimes as opposite to the middle
virtue, as the vice in Defect. We have lived to see by sad experience, that
vicious, and excessive Preaching, has been both opposite, and fatal to the
most excellent Church in Christendom, and that diverse and sundry ways.

First, by abetting of Heresy, Schism, Sacrilege, Rebellion, Rapine, and all
manner of villainy. Howsoever this bullion was dug out of a lower region; yet
it was minted, stamped, made authentical in the Pulpit. Though those impes of
the Devil, had their conception elsewhere, yet here they had their Birth,
Legitimation, and Christendom. From this quarter blew the wind, that raised
the rageing of the Sea, and the madness of the people. It was a saying of old,
that Athenas oratorum eloquentia perdidit. I will not say, that the eloquence
of our Preachers destroyed us; but their bawling, their clamorous
obstreperousnesse did. For while these Demagogues had the peoples ears tied to
their tongues, they conveyed all manner of poison into their hearts. They who
remember the glory of the first Temple, know how first it came to be Eclipsed,
and afterward invelop'd in universal darkness; And they who live to see the
building of the second Temple, know what mighty opposition it finds from the
fierce and warlike nation of the Pulpiteers.

Secondly by deletion, and extinction of all the parts of Gods worship, whereas
Gods worship is the end of preaching, and preaching is but medium cultus; And
the means is no further such, then it serves unto the end. The matter was so
handled, that preaching had engrossed, and monopolized all the parts of Gods
worship, and was become the sole worship of God. Cartwright, and his
disciplinarians, were modest in respect of these Empiricks. They allowed of no
Sacraments without Sermons. These made Sermons alone all-sufficient without
Sacraments. They held that the administration of the Sacraments without Sermons
was damnable Sacrilege. These by a more damnable Sacrilege destroyed the
Sacraments themselves, so that all the worship of God, was turned to Preaching
much, the most part whereof has been little better then vain babbling.

Thirdly, by eclypsing and disparaging of Gods word contained in the holy
Scripture; for not only Gods Worship was laid aside, but the Bible it self was
turned out of doors. The reading of the Scripture which obtained in the Jewish
and Christian Churches in all ages, and was generally found to be of singular
use, and benefit, was abandoned and esteemed of no efficacy without some of
their new descants upon it. That as the Superstitious Rabbis proverbially
said, Plus est in verbis scribarum, quam in verbis legis, so they thought there
was more efficacy in the words of men, then in the words of God: And thereupon
imparted the peculiar glory of his word unto that which is not his word. For
Sermons are not the word of God but equivocally, because the word of God is the
subject, and should be the rule whereby they are framed. But forasmuch as in
Sermons, there is a mixture of Man's wit and invention, sometimes a tincture of
Error and Malice; For men to lay aside the immemorial and profitable custom of
reading the holy Scripture, and obtrude upon the people in the place of it,
their Sermons, as the pure word of God, is a sacrilegious diminution of its
Authority. If the Romanist be obnoxious to so much censure, for ranking the
Traditions of the Church in equipage with the word of God written, what
insolence is it in men to prefer their fancies and inventions, not only before
the Traditions of the Church, but also the undoubted word of God it self?

Fourthly, by the bringing in a new kind of Idolatry; we are told of diverse
kinds of Idolatry in the Roman Church; worshipping of Images, worshipping of
Saints and Angels, worshipping of the Host. But now there is a new kind of
Idolatry brought into the Reformed Church, worshipping of Sermons. No ignorant
Papists idolize any Image or Saint departed more then some people do these
Sermons. They adore them, they attribute an omnipotency to them in saving
Souls, ex opere operato, they place their affiance in them. They go on
pilgrimage with as much devotion to worship this imagination, as the Papists do
to the Image of the Lady of Loretto. They spare no cost nor charges in their
oblations to these Idol shepherds, though like the Idols of the Heathen they
have eyes and see not. As the people of Israel made a Calf in Horeb, and then
fell down and worshipped it; so these misguided zelots set up Calves for their
Teachers, and then fall down and worship them.

Fifthly, by the destruction of the Priesthood it self; when once by this new
and monstrous Divinity they had made us believe that Preaching was the sole and
only office of a Minister, and observed that insolent Laics pretending to
inspiration, could perform that well enough to peoples satisfaction; They saw
there was no need of Priests, nor any provision for their maintenance, and
therefore laid about them to rid themselves of that chargeable order of
Ecclesiastics: for which purpose, first they attempted to cut off their
persons by various injuries, oppressions and persecutions; and then to destroy
the Priesthood by seizing upon the Church-revenue. Thus they served the Clergy
at last for their preaching. As the Fox did the Crow in the Fable, commended
their voices, till they got away their morsels.

Lastly, by overthrowing the study of Divinity; for since preaching came to be
of such high esteem with the people, that they measure all men's worth by their
sides and lungs; many of the Clergy give over the difficulties of Theology, and
content themselves with such superficial knowledge therein, as will qualify
them for popular Preachers, and no more. The Critical, Polemical, Scholastical,
Casuistical parts of Divinity, crowned with the admirable Learning of Fathers,
Councils, Ecclesiastical History; in all which, or at least in some, Ministers
should excel or be competently versed, are now laid aside as superfluous, and
no way requisite to the accomplishment of a Preacher. Whence it comes to pass,
that in a Church abounding with Preachers, there is a great scarcity of
Divines. Abundance of Preachers, but few Divines.

These considerations with others have moved me to search into the bottom of
this art of Preaching, to see upon what foundation it stands, how it was used
in the ancient Church, what boundaries should be set to it, assuring my self it
would be impossible ever to deliver the Church from these Confusions, till
Preaching, the design of all former Reformations, were reformed it self, and
reduced to the just rule, purged from the dross, and restored to their hands to
whom of right it belongs. For as in all natural and ordinate mutations, there
must be removens prohibens; so that there should be in moral mutations,
Prudence dictates. If there be any thing hinders the Peace and Welfare of Gods
Church, even that should be removed. But how this can be done without the
interposing of Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority, without some Canons and Laws
first deliberately made, and then faithfully executed, is not to be imagined.
For though prudent and considerate men cannot but see the horrible
inconvenience that comes upon the Church by this liberty of prophesying, yet
the Silver-smiths that get their living by this Craft, and have made of this
preaching artem (...), the Philosophers Stone, will cry up this Diana. And then
the (...), the many on the other side, who were carried merely by opinion, and
what they have once imbibed, hold, as Pilate, quod scripsi scripsi, they having
received an opinion that this preaching is the Alpha and Omega of all Religion;
It will be more then an Herculean labor to dispossess them of their darling
fancy. It was an ingenious device of him, that to express the love of
preconceived opinions, elegantly painted in the gate of humane infelicity, a
greater number of men in prison laden above measure, and oppressed with heavy
chains and fetters, who yet were so far from grieving at their misery, that
they strove amongst themselves every one for the Prerogative of his shackles,
while some licked them, some gently touched them, some measured them, some
covered them with rags from the injury of the air; all gloried of their
imprisonment; and if any had less irons then another, he envyed the others
happiness. The World is governed all by opinion, and as every Crow thinks his
own bird fairest, so every man his own opinion, though thereby he is miserably
imprisoned; and the fetters whereby he is holden be iron, impolish'd,
burdensome, grievous to be born, yet he hugs them as Ornaments, not
Impediments; as Golden Chains and Bracelets, not Iron gyves; and by them lies
fast bound in the Dungeon of ignorance: From which if a man goes about to
deliver them, they complain of signal injury done them, as the Devil did of
Christ: Why art thou come to torment us before the time? With these kind of men
I can promise little success to this paper, when I behold the huge mountains
of prejudice that oppose themselves to truth, and reason. But when I look again
upon the grand Impostures and cheats, practiced upon poor weak souls, by these
new Quacks in Divinity; I consider, though it be not in my power to remove, or
cure so great an evil; yet it will be some discharge of Conscience to testify
against it, some step, and furtherance to the cure, to lay open the sore, and
to show the necessity of the generous Medicaments his Sacred Majesty has used
for the healing of our breaches in the Church. As certainly it is a thing of
huge concernment for the public peace to look unto the regulation of the
Pulpit; from whence such innumerable evils have broke in upon us, and so many
inconveniences may arise for the future, if there be no stop to the insolence
of some: so there can be no more sovereign remedies to prevent them then the
directions of our Dread Sovereign recommended to the Reverend Fathers of the
Church. I know Regium est bona facere, mala audire. The best actions of Princes
are obnoxious to censure and calumny. Ignorant persons may derogate from them,
malicious persons may traduce them; but none can propound a better Catholicon
for the cure of this Epidemical Disease in this juncture of affairs, then His
Majesty has done. And I hope in this ensuing Treatise to make it appear to
every unprejudiced Reader, that His Majesty's directions are highly prudential,
and agreeable to the Principles of sound Theology, and the practice of the
golden age of the Church. If it be demanded, why I have not confined my self to
them alone in the treatise? I Answer, First, because they being not prime
verities evident of themselves, it was requisite I should search out some
antecedent truth, from which these do follow by good consequence. Secondly,
because in this disquisition many Homogeneal things offer themselves, which may
be of some moment to the right understanding of the matter. If I answer not the
expectation of any in this my undertaking, I shall satisfy my self with the
intention of doing good; and that I have according to my poor talent
contributed the best I can to the justification of his Sacred Majesty, and the
Peace of my poor laboring Mother the Church of England, to whose judgment I
submit my self, and this poor conception.

And all that I have to say, I shall for orders sake reduce to these four Heads.

1. Of Preaching in general. 2. To whom this Office of Preaching primarily
belongs. 3. How it was managed in the ancient Church. 4. What Innovations have
been introduced in these latter times.
CHAP. I. Of Preaching in general.
THe first thing I am to treat on, is Preaching in general; And to do that I
am in Justice bound to give some account of the importance of the word:
Forasmuch as words are the garments of things, and notionall words make us
understand the natures of things. As Epictetus, (...), The beginning of
knowledge is the consideration of words. Now the word to Preach is (...), there
is another word (...), that is often rendered Preaching too, of which something
afterward. But the most frequent, and ordinary word is (...). The native
signification whereof being examined, may happily afford some light to the thing;
And to find out that, I shall not search into profane authors; but seeing the
style and language of the New Testament is Hellenisticall, content my self to
observe the use of it amongst the Seventy, with whose language best agrees the
sacred dialect of the new Testament. And in the Seventy we find that (...),
does signify a solemn proclaiming of a thing, as when an Herald or Crier does
pro officio proclaim a Law, or Edict, or any thing of the like nature. Thus
Genesis 41. ver. 43. And the Crier cried (...). But in the Prophecy of Jonah it is
very remarkable, that the word (...) in one and the same place is used both to
signify the office of Jonah in Preaching to the Ninevites and the office of an
Herald in making a Proclamation. Go unto that great City, (...) Preach the
Preaching, Chap. 2.3. And the People of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a
fast, (...), ver. 5. The vulgar Latin renders it, praedicaverunt jejunium; And
so does Arias. Montanus. They preached a Fast. And this use of the word amongst
the 70. is altogether consonant to the sense of the word in the Hebrew; For
though (...) is (...) of many significations; yet it is used expressly to signify
the office of an Herald, or a Crier, Dan. 3.4. (...) and praeco proclamavit.
Then the Crier cried aloud. As (...) here signifies to proclaim; so the Herald
is styled (...) from whence I conjecture the Greek word (...) descends.
According to this sense of the word in the Hebrew, and the use of it amongst
the Hellenists, we find it once in our Translation rendered Proclaiming, Luke
12.3. Whatsoever is done in secret (...), shall be proclaimed upon the
House-tops. From this importance of the word we gain two things.

First, that as a Proclamation is the act of an Authorized person, an Herald
or Crier, so Preaching is the act of a public Authorized person.

Secondly, that as a Proclamation is a promulgation of a Senatusconsult, Edict,
Decree, or Law, to whom it was not known before; so preaching is a publishing,
or promulgation of the Gospel to whom it was not known before, as Jews, Pagans,
Infidels. Howsoever through inadvertency or pre-possession men have not
generally observed it, yet upon serious consideration it will be manifest that
preaching in the Gospel-notion, especially referring to the Gospel, signifies a
publishing, or making it known to Jews, Gentiles, and unbelievers only. And
therefore we are carefully to distinguish betwixt (...) and (...) preaching in
the Gospel imports the prime promulgation of the Gospel to them that never knew
of it; (...), the Confirmation of them who already had received it. Preaching
imports the publishing of the Gospel de novo, where it was never heard on
before: Teaching imports the instructing of them in Christianity, which already
they have professed and believed. This observation I find first made by
Gulielmus Lunicensis in his Book de statu Ecclesiae. Praedicare (says he) est
Gentiles, Judaeos and Infideles, vel catechumenos ad gratiam Baptismi vocare;
docere est baptizatos, qualiter contra superbium humilitate, etc. muniantur
instruere. To preach is to call the Gentiles, Jews, and Infidels to the grace
of Baptism: To teach is to instruct them that are Baptized, how by humility
they should be armed against Pride, etc. And this distinction may be grounded
upon the Commission of our Lord and Savior to his Apostles before his
Ascension; Go preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark 16.15. Go make
Disciples in all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, (...), teaching them to do whatsoever I command
you, Mat. 28.20. upon which words Lucas Brugensis observes well, That alia vox
est graeca versu superiori (...) discrimen hoc esse videtur, quod (...) sit
docere eos, qui a doctrina Evangelii alieni sunt, ita ut reddas eos Discipulos;
(...) vero docere jam Discipulos redditos: This Verb in the former Verse
signifies a teaching of them who are strangers to the Gospel, in order to the
making of them Disciples; but the Participle in the latter Verse imports a
teaching of them who are already made Disciples. If this be not foundation
enough to bear up this Superstructure, we are furnished with two Texts more by
a very Learned Critic, Mr. Thorndike, wherein this difference is visible, Acts
5.42. They ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ, to teach him to the
Church, to preach him to the Jews in the Temple; and Acts 15.35. Paul also and
Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord,
teaching it to the Church, preaching it to Unbelievers; if any yet be
unsatisfied, it will be more evident by comparing two places more in St. Paul's
Epistles, the one is Romans 15.20, 21. where St. Paul speaking of his design of
planting the Gospel (says) he strived to preach the Gospel, (...), not where
Christ was named. But here we must take notice that the word for preaching is
(...), which differs not much from (...) importing a publishing of Christ de
nova, (...) a publishing of Christ tanquam bona nova, as good news is
published; and if it be as news, then it must be to them to whom it is news.
And therefore the Apostle says, he strived to Evangelize where Christ was not
named. Upon which words S. Chrysostom observes, Non dicit ubi non crediderant,
sed ubi nondum nominatus est Christus: He says not where they believed not,
but where Christ was not so much as named. The other is 1 Cor. 4.17. where the
Apostle speaking of his labor in instructing of the Churches already planted,
he uses another style, As I teach in every Church. From this further
examination of the word, and the discovery of the importance of it in the
Gospel-notion, another Consectary follows.

That the Preaching, which is sub praecepto, under the express command of
Christ in the Gospel, and is so frequently mentioned there, is the prime
promulgation of the Gospel to unbelievers, and of peculiar concernment to the
Apostles; who besides other extraordinary Prerogatives had an unlimited
Commission to go into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every creature:
And so those Texts that lay a strict obligation upon the Apostles of preaching
under the pain of incurring Gods heavy displeasure, as Act. 4.19, 20. 1 Cor.
9.16. are of Personal concernment to the Apostles, and to be understood of the
prime promulgation of the Gospel to unbelievers; and concern not us Presbyters,
unless we think our selves obliged by the Commission Christ gave his Apostles
to go preach to the Americans and Indians. The words Bishop and Presbyter are
words of relation, relating to the several Provinces and Flocks under their
charge: Though they have a duty incumbent on them of instructing them in
Christianity; yet not of preaching the Gospel to every creature, as the
Apostles had; they have not those extraordinary enablements of Tongues, and
Miracles, and immediate Inspiration simply necessary unto that work; and
whereby their Doctrine became Authentic and Divine, as that the Faith of the
Hearers was without further inquiry to be resolved into it, as into a divine
Revelation. In which sense alone St. Paul's words are verifiable, Romans 10.14,
17. Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word. How shall they hear
without a Preacher, etc. I desire to know what man dares (the Pope excepted, to
whom some of his vain Flatterers presume to attribute Infallibility) assume to
preach in such a notion, as to make his Doctrine that, whereinto Auditorum
sides ultimo resolvitur, which if not, then there is not par ratio, nor par
obligatio, nor par potestas, between us and the Apostles, as to the strict
notion and office of a Preacher in Scripture language.

But whatsoever the importance of the word is in the Gospel notion, yet now the
word Preaching is become a word of Art, and is used to signify that act of the
Ministerial Function, which consists of instructing Christians in their duty;
and in that sense from henceforward I shall take it, and for the more distinct
understanding of the thing, make some little enquiry into the kinds of
Preaching mentioned in the Gospel.

And first there we find a Preaching by Inspiration, and a Preaching by Pains
and Industry.

A preaching by Inspiration, such as I now intimated. Of this sort was the
preaching of Christ and his Apostles, and those who were endued with
extraordinary gifts of Prophesying in the Apostles times. They all spoke with
Tongues as the spirit gave them utterance, they were (...), taught of God. It
is not you that speak, but the Spirit of my Father that speaks in you. And
the Spirit speaking in them after their inauguration to their Apostleship, and
Ministry on the day of Pentecost, gave St. Paul reason to call that their
Ministry, the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.

Then there is a Scripture-preaching by Pains and Industry, at least not
without it altogether. After this manner it seems Timothy preached, and
therefore is exhorted to give attendance to reading, and to study, to show
himself a workman, etc.

Again, there is a Preaching by Writing, and a Preaching by Sermons: one that
is (...), another (...), one that is (...), another (...), As Clem. Alexan. in
lib. 1. stro. The Apostles themselves did not Preach altogether by Sermons. By
writing of the Gospel they were Evangelists, and did preach the Gospel to
unbielevers; by writing of their Epistles, they did teach the Church, and
therefore Saint Paul does call his Epistle to the Romans, his Gospel, Romans
2.16. Solomon was a famous Preacher; yet we are not certain that he Preached
otherwise then by writing. The Prophets were Preachers too, but they did not
preach altogether by Sermons. The Prophet Jeremy is commanded to write his
Visions and Revelations imparted to him, Chap. 30.2. Mr. Calvin says in his
Preface to Isaiah, Prophet is mos fuit, postquam justi sunt, aliquid populo
nunciare, paucis summam rerum complecti, and valvis templi praefigere: It was
the manner of the Prophets, when they were commanded to deelare any thing to
the people, to contract the sum of the matter in writing, and fix it upon the
doors of the Temple.

Lastly, there is a Preaching in ones own person, and a Preaching by Proxy. A
Preaching in ones own person. Thus Christ himself Preached while he dwelt
amongst us, and thus the Apostles Preached where they came themselves. Then
there is a preaching by Proxy: And thus Christ himself preached after his
Ascension into Heaven, Ephesians. 2.17. He came and preached peace unto you, i. e.
by his Apostles; And thus the Apostles preached, where they came not
themselves, by the Evangelists there substitutes.

From these kinds of preaching I shall deduce two or three Corollaries more,
and so conclude this part of my undertaking.

First, That that frequency of preaching cannot be expected from us, that was
used by the Prophets, and Apostles: because they preached by inspiration, we by
pains and industry only.

Secondly, That men may preach in a Gospel-notion, and yet never make a Sermon
in a vulgar Notion. They may Preach by Writing, and Preach by Proxy, Preach by
their Hand, as well as by their Tongue. See Dr. Holdsworth in praelect. prima,
non procul ab Initio.

Thirdly, That seeing our Preaching is not by immediate inspiration of the
Spirit, it is infallible, and subject to error; and therefore is ordinable by
our Superiors, and reducible to such directions and rules as most conduce to
the promotion of Peace and Piety.

CHAP. II. To whom this Office of Preaching primarily belongs.
THe second thing I stand charged withal, See Dr. Casaubon in his treatise of
preaching. page 1^, 17.
is to enquire and resolve, to whom this office of preaching primarily belongs:
Forasmuch as it is Gods will, that nothing should be done in his service either
rashly, or disorderly. Ubi etiam, and a quibus peragi vult, ipse excelsissima
sua voluntate definivit, Clem. Romans page 52. He has defined by his most
Heavenly will, both in what place, and by what persons, he will have divine
offices performed. It stands us in hand then, to know to whom this office
belongs; And the examination and resolution of this will open a fair way to the
justification of many things in his Sacred Majesty's late Directions. But for
the Indagation of this I must premise certain Principles and Maxims.

The first is, that the foundation of all Authority is in Christ. All
Ecclesiastical Authority, or Authority to any Ecclesiastical Office is in
Christ originally; in others but Derivately. For as it was foretold, That the
Government should be upon his shoulders, Isa. 9.6. So that the Spirit of the
Lord was upon him and anointed him to preach glad tidings, Isa. 62.1. And this
trust which his Father committed to him, he discharged in his own person, while
he was upon the Earth. He Preached the Gospel, converted Sinners, made
Disciples: Hence he is styled (...), Doctor, (...), an Apostle, (...), The
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 2.25.

The Second is, that the authority, and power necessary for the Government of
his Church, which was inherent in his own person, during the oeconomie of his
Humiliation, he did before his Ascension delegate to his Apostles,
Inchoatively, John 20.21, 22, 23. fully and perfectly upon the day of
Pentecost, when by the descending of the holy Ghost upon them, he endued them
with power from above, according to his promise, Luke 24.49. Acts 1.8. But the
particular delegation to this power of preaching, we have in particular
mentioned by it self. Once Mat. 10.6, 7. But this was limited to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel. The general commission was given them, Mat. 28.19, 20.
In which our Lord and Savior impowereth them as Planters, to preach the Gospel
to unbelievers: as Governors and Pastors to feed his flocks, the Church. If it
be objected here, That our Lord and Savior granted a Commission to the Seventy
to preach the Gospel, as well as to the Apostles, Luke 10.1.

I grant it, but withal answer, That that was (...), temporary of short
duration, and to expire at their return; But this is of perpetual duration.

And that is the third thing I would lay as a ground, that the Apostolate is of
perpetual duration, though the Apostles taken divisim in their persons were to
die shortly after; yet taken conjunctim with their Successors, as Abraham with
his Posterity, they are to continue to the Worlds end. Though the Persons of
the Apostles were mortal like other men, yet the Office of the Apostolate was,
quoad ordinariam potestatem, ever to continue in the Church. This is evident,
First, by Christ's promise added by way of encouragement in their Commission,
Mat. 28. ult. I am with you to the end of the World: but he could not be with
them in their persons to the end of the World; and therefore, though they
failed in their persons, yet the Apostolate must continue. Secondly, by matter
of fact, for when Judas by transgression fell, Matthias by the eleven was
chosen to the Apostleship in his room; and it was thought in St. Peter's
judgment a thing necessary, Acts 1.20. When James was slain, Saul and Barnabas
were called to the Apostolate. And it is very memorable what Clemens Romanus in
his Epistle to the Corinthians avoucheth to this purpose: Our Apostles (says
he) knew by the Lord Jesus Christ that there would be contention, (...), about
the name of Episcopacy; and for this cause being endued with perfect prescience
ordained the foresaid persons, and afterward made a Law or order, that when
they died other approved men should succeed in their Office, and execute the
Function. Lastly, by the testimony of St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. ver. 11, 12, 13. He
gave some Apostles, etc. (...) till we all meet together; and that could not be
within the compass of that Generation wherein the twelve primary Apostles
lived, and therefore there were Secondary Apostles to follow them. Lyra upon
the place observes, that those words, till we all meet, etc. do denote the
duration of that Office till Christ's coming again to judgment.

All the question is now concerning the Persons who succeed in the Apostolate;
and we might supersede that enquiry, if we would hearken to the unanimous
suffrage and voice of Antiquity delivered to us by St. Jerome in his Epistle to
Marcella against Montanus, who (he says) places the Bishops in the third
place, but apud nos Apostolorum locum tenent Episcopi, with us Bishops hold the
place of the Apostles. Thus much is evident out of the Scripture it self, that
as the Apostolate is called by St. Luke a Bishopric, Acts 1.20. so afterward
Bishops were called Apostles; which argues the identity of the Apostolate and
Episcopacy. St. Paul was none of the twelve, yet called an Apostle (...), St.
James Bishop of Jerusalem was none of the twelve, 1 Cor. 15.5, 7. yet called an
Apostle, Gal. 1.19. Epaphroditus was none of the twelve, yet called an Apostle,
Phil. 2.25. (...), thus Timothy, Titus, Clemens, and many others being Bishops
are all called by the Ancients Apostles. All which abundantly shows the
identity of the ordinary power of the Apostleship and Episcopacy. These things
being premised, it will be easy to determine to whom the Office of Preaching
chiefly belongs; namely, to those who succeed in the Apostolate, to them who
are Secondary Apostles, Bishops, as will further appear by three things.

First, because Bishops have the chief cure of all Souls in their Diocese; all
Presbyters entrusted with the cure of Souls are but their Curates, and so were
anciently called, and so styled still in our Liturgy, Send down upon our
Bishops and Curates, etc. in the 40. Canon of the Apostles. Presbyters and
Deacons are forbidden to attempt any thing without the Bishop; and the reason
is added, nam Domini populus ipsi commissus est, and pro animabus earum hie
redditurus est rationem: The Lords people is committed to him, and for their
Souls he must give an account. This agrees with a Canon of St. Paul's, Heb.
13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, for they watch for you Souls as
they that must give an account. Who are these Rulers whom the Apostle requires
us to obey? (...), he speaks of Bishops (says Oecumenius.) Bishops then have
the chief cure of Souls.

Secondly, because they are concerned to see the Unity of the Church kept. The
chief end (says St. Jerome) of Episcopacy, was to obstruct the diffusion of
Heresy and Schism, Comment. in Titum, cap. 1. In toto orb decretum est, ut
unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris, ut Schismatum semina
tollerentur: It was decreed in all the World, that one being chosen out of the
Presbyters should be set over the rest, that the seeds of Schism should be
taken away. But how can Episcopacy be a deletory of Schism and Heresy, if the
Bishop have not the chief power of regulating the Pulpit, and prescribing forms
of wholesome Doctrine, within which all shall be obliged to contain themselves?
without this it is impossible to preserve either Peace or Truth in any Nation,
or Christianity it self, which is made up of both these.

Thirdly, by the Titles given them in the holy Scripture, they are called
Prophets, not of prediction only, but of ordinary Function, Acts 13.1. they are
called Doctors, Ephesians. 4.11. they are called Pastors, Pastor is the Bishops
Title (says the Scholiast) and therefore the Apostle does not distinguish them
as he did the other. He has given some Pastors, some Doctors, but joins them
by a (...), some Pastors and Doctors; for certain the Title of Pastor remained
peculiar to Bishops for many hundred years after Christ; insomuch that the most
Learned Bishop of Winchester does challenge Moulin to show him where ever it
was given to a Presbyter. Eo ergo te revoco, ut apud Christianos veteres, apud
prisca secula, de eorum scriptis edoceas, adhiberi nomen Pastoris, ubi de
Episcopo non loquuntur. And if Bishops be the Prophets, and Pastors, and
Doctors of the Church, to whom should the Office of Preaching chiefly and
primarily belong but them? The practice of the ancient Church confirms this. In
Justin Martyr the (...) stood up and made the exhortation, i. e. the Bishop. In
the 19. Canon of the Council of Laodicea, the style of the Church shows this
was the practice of the Church at that time, (...), after the Homilies of the
Bishops; in Alexandria Soromon writes, that (...), the Bishop alone of the City
does teach. St. Chrysostom in 1. ad Tim. cap. 4. says, (...), that the dignity
of the Priesthood and teaching was great, referring to the (...), the
Priesthood Timothy was chosen to, and that was the high Priesthood of
Episcopacy, Thom. Aquin. supplem. 3. par. quaest. 36. artic. 2. in prim. argum.
calls Preaching opus Episcopalissimum, the most Episcopal work; Estius upon the
Sentences speaking of Preaching, says, verum hoc munus principaliter Episcopis
incumbit, qui proprie secundum Apostolum, Ephesians. 4.11. in Ecclesia constituti
sunt Pastores, and Doctores: Secundario autem Parochis, qui Episcopis in hoc
subsidiariam navant operam. But this Office of Preaching is primarily incumbent
upon the Bishops, who properly according to the Apostle are ordained Pastors
and Doctors. Secondarily, the Parish Priests are to be subservient to the
Bishop in this; the Office of Preaching primarily belongs to the Bishop, a
subsidiary labor as the Bishops substitute belongs to the Presbyter, Estius
tom. 4. lib. 4. cap. 20.

But here there may be a question moved, how the Presbyter has the power of
Preaching derived to him, whether ex vi ordinis, or ex licentia Episcopi; by
virtue of his order, or from the Bishops license. But granting that all
Presbyters receive a power to preach by their Orders, as in the Church of
England; yet it is only in actu primo, not in actu secundo: though they have a
power conferred upon them, yet the exercise of that power is restrained by the
Canons till they have a License from the Bishop. I have not met with any thing
concerning the forms of Ordination used in the ancient Church, but I suppose,
howsoever the matter of Ordination and Imposition of hands by a Bishop be an
Apostolical Tradition, yet the form of words used in Ordination is not so, but
of Ecclesiastical institution; whence it comes that most Churches vary in their
forms of Ordination. In the Greek Church the form is divina gratia, quae semper
infirma sanat, and quae desunt supplet, creat seu promovet N. venerabilem
Diaconum in Presbyterum, Dei amabilissimum Presbyterum in Episcopum: The divine
Grace, which always heales our infirmities, and supplies our wants, does
create or promote N. the Venerable Subdeacon to be a Deacon, the Venerable
Deacon to be a Presbyter, the Presbyter most beloved of God to be a Bishop. In
the Western Church they use another form, and in that confer a double power
upon the Presbyter, potestatem conficiendi corpus Domini, and potestatem
ligandi and solvendi, power of Consecrating the Elements in the Sacrament of
the Holy Eucharist, and power of binding and loosing, Our Britanick Church
(which is a part of the Western) has a form peculiar to her self, yet very
much like the old Greek form mentioned by S. Clem. in his Constitutions, l. 8.
c. 16. wherein the power of Preaching also is conferred upon the Presbyter. And
yet I have reason enough to believe that actual Preaching (especially according
to the common understanding of that word nowadays) is not so essential to the
Order of a Presbyter, but that he may sometimes upon good grounds be debarred
from it.

First, because if a Presbyter be suspended ab officio, from his Office of
Preaching, he remains a Presbyter still: The Character is indeleble. Nay if a
Presbyter be suspended not only from the Office of Preaching, but of
Consecrating or Baptizing, or in any kind Officiating in the Church; nay, if he
be excommunicated, yet his Character is indeleble, he remains a Presbyter
still; and whatsoever he does by virtue of that Character is valid de facto,
though contra jus. This St. Jerome proves at large in his Book against the
Luciferians, that a Presbyter cannot lose his Order. And St. Augustine in his
Book de bono conjugali, cap. 24. says expressly, Si siat Ordinatio cleri ad
plebem congregandam, etiamsi plebis congregatio non subsequatur, manet tamen in
ordinatis, ordinationis sacramentum: Et si ob aliquam culpam, quispiam ab
officio removeatur, Sacramento Domini non carebit: If their be an Ordination of
the Clergy for the Congregation of the people, although they have not a
Corgregation or a Parish to attend upon; yet the Sacrament of Ordination
remains in them once ordained: And if for some fault any one be removed from
his Office, yet he wants not the Sacrament of the Lord.

Secondly, because I find that the Church in prudence anciently did not suffer
all Presbyters to Preach, but only such as were eminent for their Prudence,
Gravity, Piety, and Abilities. Presbyters and Deacons, (says Grotius in his
Annot. upon S. Luke 10.1.) did not all Preach, but they alone, quibus docendi
populum potestas ab Episcopo facta est, to whom the power of teaching the
people was granted by the Bishop: which Presbyters therefore (he says) were
called by Eusebius (...), Presbyters entrusted with the explication of the word
of God.

Thirdly, because I see in the ancient Church, there were Presbyteri Monachi,
Presbyters Monks, Presbyters in Monasteries, which had no cure of souls. St.
Hierome in his Epistle ad Dammachium tells us of five Presbyters they had in
the Monastery of Bethlehem, on purpose to administer the Sacrament to devout
people there. Such a Presbyter was Saint Hierome himself, who preached not
officio vocis, by Sermons, but by writing; and did, as many others, quiescere
in monasterio.

Lastly, because I know the Church of England has ordained, allowed, employed
many Presbyters, who were no Preachers. In the beginning of the Reformation
('it is well known) we had many Presbyters, that never preached at all. Within
this 50 or 60 years, amongst ten Presbyters, there was not one Preacher. In our
Cathedralls at this day, there are diverse Singing-men Presbyters no Preachers;
And Presbyters they must be by the rules and statutes of their respective
Churches, wherein they serve and attend the Quire.

But if Preaching be not essential to the order of a Presbyter, what office,
or duty is incumbent on him, in case he be not qualified, or licensed to preach?

Gulielmus Lunicensis in his book before alleged, enumerates diverse branches
of the Presbyters office besides Preaching. Praeesse, subesse, orare, offerre,
baptizare, benedicere, reconciliare, communicare animas Deo commendare, corpora
sepelire. It is his office to be subordinate to the Bishop, and to obey him
from the heart in all things lawful: It is his office to govern his flocks, to
know the state of them, and to direct them in their repentance; It is his
office to pray for the people; It is his office to bless people in marriage; It
is his office to reconcile men in articulo mortis; It is his office to
communicate all the faithful; It is his office to commend the Souls of the
faithful going out of their bodies to God by prayer. It is his office to bury
the bodies of Christian people. So there are you see many offices of a
Presbyter besides preaching; and those not despicable, but honorable, and
sufficient to take a great part of a man's time in greater Parishes. And yet
preaching is incumbent on him by the Canons of our own, and the ancient Church
also; but still with this proviso, that it be cum licentia Episcopi; And by
virtue of that, a Deacon (as in the Church of England) may preach as well as a
Presbyter. For certain Origin did, before he was a Presbyter. Origenes licet
nondum Presbyterii gradu positus, ab Episcopis, qui ibi erant, non ad
disputandum solum, sed etiam ad Scripturas explicandas magnopere in
ecclesiastico consessu rogatus est. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 13. Origin though he
had not yet attained the degree of a Presbyter, yet he was earnestly entreated
by the Bishops who were there present, not only to dispute, but to explain the
Scriptures in a Church-assembly.

Well then, having advanced so far, though with much weakness, yet I hope with
some evidence of truth, That primarily Preaching belongs to a Bishop, and but
secondarily to the Presbyter ex licentia Episcopi; There is one difficulty
behind to remove, before I leave this part of my undertaking; concerning the
non-preaching of Bishops. For if they be properly the Doctors and Pastors of
the Church, it seems altogether inexcusable, that they preach not at all, or
very seldom. To this I offer three things to be seriously considered.

First, that if they be hindered by Sickness, old age, or some other natural or
even accidental defects, that I suppose will be easily confessed a sufficient
reason to excuse them from it.

Secondly, If they shall be encumbred with multiplicity of business in the
Government of the Church (as surely since the increase of Christians, and the
enlarging of Parishes and Dioceses, they find daily more than enough,) that
also cannot but be allowed to be a most just and reasonable excuse. Else why
does St. Paul make (...) Governments an office in the Church? An office which
all must grant is of as great use, as any in the Church of God, and which the
same Apostle appropriates to a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.5. (...); how shall he take
care of the Church of God? To take care of the Church of God is Essential to
that superior order, as the very name imports.

Thirdly, supposing there be no such Impediment, yet if they send others as
their Curates to instruct Christian people in all things necessary for
Salvation, they Preach by their Proxies, as the Apostles Preached, when they
came not themselves, by the Evangelist. Valerius Bishop of Hippo being a Greek
born, and not skilled in the language of the Africans, could not Preach to the
people himself, but employed St. Augustine, being then but a Presbyter, to
Preach in his stead; And that was then contra morem Ecclesiae for a Presbyter
to Preach in the presence of a Bishop; And yet Valerius was an excellent good
Bishop. Possidon. in vit. August.

Fourthly, that if they write Confutations of Errors, or Comments upon the
Scripture, or Directions of holy Life, as Epistles to their people, for the
admonition of them in their duty, they Preach by so doing. Many of the
Primitive Bishops, because they could not through distance of place instruct
their people viva voce, did it per Epistolas Encyclicas, circular or orbicular
Epistles; of this sort were the Epistles of Clemens Romanus, St. Ignatius, St.
Cyprian, in whom are frequent Epistles to be found to the Clergy and people of
his Diocese: And of this sort were the Epistles of St. Paul, and the Catholic
Epistles of St. Peter, St. James, St. John, and St. Jude. But if none of these
be satisfactory, take for a full and final answer the Apology of Gregory
Nazianzen a Learned and holy Bishop, who being taxed by Keleusius the
Governor, for his silence and retiredness; In an Epistle told him this Parable.

The Swallows upon a time derided and scoffed at the Swans, because they did
fly the converse of men, and betook themselves to Lakes, Rivers, and Desert
places; were such enemies to Music, that they sung but little; and when they
did, they sung to themselves alone, and no body heard them, as if they were
ashamed of their Melody: whereas they the Swallows affected the company of men,
and lived about Houses and Cities, and sung continually. The Swans at first
would not vouchsafe to answer; but when they did, they thus excused themselves.
If any come when we lift up our wings to the West, and warble out our
harmonious Ditties, they may perceive, though we do not sing much, yet our
Music is artificial: But you make such continual chattering, that you are
grievous to them that hear you; you enter into men's Houses and molest them with
your daily obstreperousness; and this is the cause why you dislike us, because
your selves are over-garrulous. Thou understandest what I mean, as Pindarus
says, thou may find my silence better than thy garrulity. For Conclusion,
I Will tell thee a Proverb very short, but true, (...), then the Swans shall sing
when the Jackdawes hold their peace, vid. Greg. Naz. Epist. prima ad Keleusium
Praesidem.

By this time the Judicious Reader may easily perceive how many things in His
Majesty's Directions concerning the Person employed in Preaching, are taken out
of the Archives of the Church, and derived from Venerable Antiquity, as

First, that actual Preaching by forming Discourses of their own upon the
Scriptures was not anciently the work of every Priest, being not simply
necessary to their order.

Secondly, that Preaching was restrained to the choicest persons for Gravity,
Prudence, and Learning.

Thirdly, that no Priest might Preach without a License.

Fourthly, that none can justly give a License to a Priest to qualify him for
Preaching, but the Archbishop or Bishop, they being the sole Pastors of the
Church.

CHAP. III. How it was managed in the ancient Church.
THe third part of my undertaking is to show the prudent managery of this
Preaching in the ancient Church; And this thing if it were accurately done
might serve as a pattern upon the Mount for us all to conform unto. It Is a rule
in Metaphysics, that primum in unoquoque genere est regula sequentium; the
first and best of every kind is the rule of all that follows. Now the Fathers
of the Church were the first and best Preachers for their Learning, for their
Integrity, for their Freedom from secular Interests, for their Wisdom and Zele
in saving Souls, as appears by the happy success of their labors in bringing
so many Heathens to Christianity, so many Christians to Mortification and
contempt of the World, and Martyrdom it self. But to give a perfect account of
their practice (I confess) requires a man better versed in Antiquity than my
self, who through want of time, books and other encouragements have been kept
from those flights which others have made into the lofty Regions of Antiquity;
where the great Lights of the Church, the Stars of the first Magnitude, moved
and shined: yet some few beams of their prudence I have observed, which may
serve to show His Majesty's late Directions in their genuine Colors, and
render them more Illustrious.

And one act of prudence in them observable, was a careful and wise provision,
that Sermons should not perk up into the Tribunal with the Word, and sit in the
same Throne with it. To preserve the Authority of the word of God entire and
inviolate, they distinguished betwixt the word of God and Sermons. They did not
call their Sermons the word of God, as now, but used terms of diminution to
denominate them by; as Homilies, Allocutions, Disputations, mostly they were
called Tractatus by the Latin Fathers. Thus Possidonius in the life of St.
Augustine calls all his Sermons Tractatus, Treatises; And thus St. Augustine
calls his own Sermons upon the Gospel and Epistles of St. John, Tractatus: And
as they called their Sermons Tractatus, so they called the Preachers
Tractatores, insomuch that St. Jerome who Preached not officio vocis, seems to
reckon himself amongst the Tractators. Non sum tantae faelicitatis, quantae
plerique hujus temporis Tractatores, I am not of so much dexterity as most
Tractators of these times are. It is very certain, that as they opposed these
Tractators in respect of their Authority to the Penmen of holy Writ, so they
did their Sermons and Writings to the holy Scripture, which they esteemed as
the infallible dictate of the holy Spirit; but the Sermons of the wisest
Tractators fallible and obnoxious to error; And therefore when S. Jerome was
taxed for reading of Origin an Heterodox Author, he excuses himself, that he
read him as he did other Tractators obnoxious to error. Epistola 75. adversus
Vigilant.

A second act of Prudence as I take it was this, that they kept the Pulpit from
quarrelling with the Desk. Their Sermons did not interfere or clash with their
Liturgy; though Preaching was frequent and had its due place and esteem, yet it
was not so magnified as the Liturgy was laid aside, or curtailed to make way
for a Sermon. There was no antipathy then betwixt Sermons and Common Prayers,
they did not then walk as Antipodes, contrary one to another, nor were they as
contraries, (...), destructive one to another, but did afford one another their
mutual help, and walk in the House of God as Friends, as may be demonstrated
diverse ways.

First, by the constant employment of other Officers in Gods public service
besides Tractators; Namely Deacons, Psalmists, Lectors. The Preacher did not
begin till the Reader had done. It Is observed in Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. (...),
when the Reader had done, the Preacher made the Exhortation.

Secondly, by the time when the Sermons came in, which was post recitationem
Evangelii, after the rehearsal of the Gospel; whence in aftertimes Sermons
were called Postills (I conjecture) quasi post ille, because they were after
the Epistles and Gospels.

Thirdly, by the solemn service after the Sermon every Lord's Day. There were
ever two parts of the Liturgy, the first and second service: The second service
consisted of the Venerable Mystery of Christ's Body and Blood, and the
Supplications, Interpellations, Thanksgivings wherewith it was Celebrated,
which were standing forms, and some of them derived from the Apostles, as
sursum corda, aequum and bonum, etc. And if this Service did constantly follow
the Homily, then the Sermon did not shoulder out the Liturgy, nor the Liturgy
the Sermon.

Fourthly, by the singular respect the most famous Pulpit-men had for Liturgy
in general. Not to speak of St. James, an Apostolical Preacher, who compiled a
Liturgy, as the Council of Trullo acknowledged long ago, and the Greek Church
to this very day. It is well known that St. Basil and St. Chrysostom were two
incomparable Preachers in their times, and yet both lovers and compilers of
Liturgies. It Is recorded by Proclus, Patriark of Constantinople, that St. Basil
and St. Chrysostom finding men through slothfulness and profaneness begin to
nauseate the length of the holy Liturgies composed by St. James and St. Clemens
two Apostolical men; they contracted their Liturgies and made them shorter,
that people might not through the subtilty of Satan apostatize from the Divine
and Apostolical Tradition of Liturgy. Biblioth. Patr. tom. 4. page 15, 16. Now
let the impartial Reader recollect all these Arguments, and judge whether in
the opinion and practice of the ancient Church, the Sermon did quarrel with the
Liturgy and cast it out of the Church? And whether His Sacred Majesty had not
just cause to take care in His Directions that they should fairly correspond
and agree together, and for that purpose to enjoin the use of one as well as the
other?

A third act of Prudence in the ancient Church, was the confining of themselves
and the Preachers to the occasion of their meeting. If it were a Festival, to
the commendation of that Saint, in whose Memory the day was observed. If it
were a greater Celebrity, the Nativity, Epiphany, Passion, or Resurrection of
Christ; always they handled something fit to explain the Mystery: If it were
not upon such a Festival day, they kept themselves to the Lesson read for the
day. This Justin Martyr seems to intimate in the forementioned place, When the
Reader has done (says he) the (...), i. e. the Bishop in a Speech instructs
and exhorts the people to the imitation of such Excellent things, (...), these
good things signanter rehearsed in the Lessons. That this was the manner of
after-ages, Optatus signifies in his writings against the Donatists; it was the
manner of the Donatists (says he) and of Parmenian by name, when they had
begun to Preach upon the Lessons for the day, to fall from a due explication of
them to the railing upon the Orthodox. Nullus vestrum, qui non aliud initiet,
aliud explicet. Lectiones dominicas incipitis, and tractatus vestros ad nostras
injurias explicatis. If the Authority of Optatus be not sufficient, we have St.
Augustines own practice recorded by himself to second it, who in his Sermons de
verbis Domini, does not only handle the Gospels read, but refers to them as the
subject he was obliged to treat on. Audivimus Evangelium and in eo, etc. Sermon.
1. Sancti Evangelii capitulum, quod modo cum legeretur audivimus, valde me
vexavit. Sermon. 4. De lectione Sancti Evangelii hortatus est nos Dominus. Sermon.
5. Happily the Gospels read then, were not the same with ours read now in our
second Service before the Communion. It Is certain that the use of Dominic^ls,
Epistles and Gospels for the day was very ancient. Walafridus Strabo will have
them as ancient as St. Jerome, cap. 22. and not without some ground, for St.
Jerome himself does make mention of them in his Book against Vigilantius: Per
totas orientis Ecclesias, quando legendum est Evangelium accenduntur luminaria,
jam sole rutilante, non utique ad fugandas tenebras, sed ad signum laetitiae
demonstrandum. In all the Churches of the East, when the Gospel is read,
Candles are lighted; not to drive away darkness, but by this sign to testify
our joy. By this it is evident, that in S. Hieroms time some Gospel was read,
and it is probable some Gospel in the second Service at the Altar, because there
Candles were lighted and used. Rabanus Maurus goes higher, and says, they
obtained from the beginning, Sed enim initio mos iste cantandi non erat qui
nunc in Ecclesia ante sacrificium celebratur, sed Epistolae Pauli recitabantur,
and sanctum Evangelium; lib. 2. cap. 32. de Institut. Cleric. But that manner
of singing which is now used before the celebration of the Eucharist was not
from the beginning, yet the Epistles of S. Paul and the Gospel were read. The
use of those Dominicals was very ancient no question, and so was the Preaching
upon them; and it were a happy thing if Preachers, as anciently, were still
confined unto them.

First, to hold correspondency with the ancient Catholic Church, whose example
lays a moral obligation upon us of imitation in things lawful and laudable
(...).

2. To hold Conformity with some eminent reformed Churches. The Lutherans
retain the custom of Preaching upon the Dominicals.

3. To prevent wild Vagaries and Excursions when men are left to themselves.

4. To acquaint the people with those parts of Scripture, and the meaning of
them, which most concern their salvation. For such singular wisdom is used in
the Epistles and Gospels for the day; that as the Gospel lays before them the
mysteries of our Redemption, so the Epistles all the Rules of holy life. The
Gospel is a Record of the Life and Death of our blessed Savior; the Epistles
are Instructions for the edification of the Church in pious and Christian
Conversation. The Gospel represents unto us the prime Principles and
Foundations of Christianity; the Epistles contain Superstructures upon the
Foundation. And if those were duly and faithfully explained to the People, the
knowledge of them were sufficient to guide them in the way to Life Eternal, and
would prevent an horrible abuse of the Scriptures by peoples petulancy in
meddling with Obscure, Prophetical, Apocalyptical parts of Scripture, which
they understand not, and for want of understanding wrest to their own
destruction.

A fourth Act of Prudence it was in the ancient Church, That in order to the
preservation of Peace and Piety they would not susser all men that were
licensed to preach out of their own stock and abilities, but required them to
preach ex thesauro Ecclesiae, out of the treasures of the Church. All men that
did preach, did not undertake it of their own store, of their own judgment and
invention, making and composing Sermons as they pleased; but they borrowed out
of the treasures of the Church, and read the Homilies of the Fathers. Thus it
was ordered in the Council of Vase, can. 4. Power being granted to the
Presbyters to preach in every City; in case they were hindered by any
infirmity, the Deacons were enjoined to read the Homilies of the Fathers,
Sanctorum Patrum Homiliae recitentur. And the reason follows; Si enim digni
sunt Diaconi quae Christus in Evangelio locutus est legere, quare indigni
judicentur sanctorum Patrum expositiones public recitare? If the Deacons be
worthy to read the Gospel of Christ, why should they be thought unworthy to
rehearse publicly the Expositions of the Fathers? And this gives us some
ground of conjecture, that the Presbyters read Homilies of the Fathers too; for
certainly not only Deacons and Presbyters, but even Bishops themselves did so.
Gennadius in his book de illustribus Ecclesiae scriptoribus testifies, that
Cyril Bishop of Alexandria had written Homilies, which many Fishops of Greece
used afterward: Cyrillus (says he) Alexandrinae Ecclesiae Episcopus Homilias
composuit plurimas, quae ad declamandum a Graecis Episcopis memoriae
commendantur; cap. 57. Sixtus Senens. lib. 4. page 222. Cyril Bishop of
Alexandria composed many Homilies, which the Greek Bishops getting by heart
preached unto the People. This may happily seem a dishonorable thing to some men
to be thus limited; but if it may tend to the peace of the Church, it ought not
to be grievous. How requisite some such Order is in this Church, where so many
are employed in Preaching, who through faction do (...), make merchandise of
the Word of God, or through want of Learning turn Plagiaries, and do vivere ex
rapto, preach Sermons in Print, and oftentimes according to their
prepossessions take the worst, and leave the best; is easy to discern: For had
they not better be appointed where they should borrow stuff for their weekly
tasks, be limited and confined to the Homilies of the Church, and the Fathers
of the Church; than be suffered to rake into the kennels of Faction and Schism,
out of which they first suck poison themselves, and then propine it to their
hearers?

A fifth Act of Prudence in the ancient Church was, A wise Accommodation of
themselves to the capacity of their hearers, avoiding in their Sermons the
discussion of sublime and subtle Questions, which conduced not to the
Edification of their Auditory: They generally distinguished betwixt (...) and
(...), things to be published and things to be kept secret: they did not think
it meet to publish all the mysteries of Christianity to them who were not
Initiati, Initiate in the school of Christ, as Heathens, etc. Neither did they
judge it expedient to handle high and difficult Questions before the unskilful
Multitude, though Initiati, Initiate in the school of Christ; but condescended
in their Sermons to the understanding of the Vulgar. From hence it was that
they called their Sermons Homilies: An Homily is a familiar Sermon or Speech,
accommodated to the sense and understanding of the Vulgar. It is a memorable
and grave sentence of the Emperor Constantine, recorded by Eusebius, lib. 2.
de vita Constant. cap. 67. Such Questions as no Canon or Law of the Church has
prescribed, but are the products of dissolute Idleness, though they may serve
to exercise the sharpness of the wit, we are to lock up in the closet of our
Breasts, and neither rashly broach them in the Conventions of the People, nor
inconsiderately commit them to the ears of the People. For what man is there
amongst many that can accurately understand them, or worthily explane the
meaning of such Mysteries involved in so much obscurity? And if any man be so
conceited of himself, as he thinks he can do it; who are they amongst the
People that can understand them? Or who is he at length who can meddle in the
indagation of such curious Questions without danger of Lapsing? Wherefore
Loquacity in such things is to be restrained, lest that we either through
imbecility of wit fail of the true explication of them, or the hearers through
the tardity of understanding come short of a right apprehension of them, and so
fall into a necessity or blaspheming, or dissension among themselves. So far
the Emperor. And that Rule of Prudence he commends, was carefully observed by
the Ancients in their popular Sermons. Gregory Nyssen writes of his Father
Basil, in the beginning of his Hexameron, that he did not Verborum contentiones
aucupari, nec facile sese quastionibus implicabat, sed simplici verborum
expositione audientium simplicitati sic orationem suam accommodabat, ut variam
tamen externae philosophiae doctrinam redolens peritioribus etiam satisfaceret:
Latin. edit. page 284. excus. anno 1562. The sum whereof is this, that he did
not seek after contentions of words, nor lightly involve himself in hard
Questions, but by a simple exposition of the Text applied himself to the
capacity of the hearers. Metaphrastes writes of S. Chrysostom, that having once
soared aloft in a Sermon above the reach of his hearers, a certain woman met
him, and reprehended him openly for his unprofitable Sermon, which being above
her understanding, she had not gained that by it she expected at her coming:
Whereupon that holy Father afterward descended from that sublimity of matter
to such simplicity and plainness in the course of his Preaching, as he might be
understood of all that heard him; (...), Savil. page 383, 384. He resolved to
apply himself to the instruction and care of the weak. S. Augustine in his 11.
Sermon de verbis Domini, treating of the sin against the Holy Ghost, says,
Semper in Sermonibus quos ad populum habui, hujus quaestionis difficultatem
molestiamque vitavi: Always in my Sermons which I had to the People, I avoided
that difficult question. And in 157. Epist. ad Optatum, touching upon that nice
question, Whether the Souls were traduced by generation, or infused by
creation? he writes, In tam multis opusculis meis, nunquam me fuisse ausum de
hac quaestione definitam proferre sententiam; In so many Works of mine, I never
durst publish my Opinion in that point. Thus for the matter of his Doctrine,
this Father was careful it should not consist of Curiosities; and so he was for
the manner of his Style, whence he had that as a Proverb in his mouth, Malo ut
me reprehendant Grammatici, quam non intelligant populi: Sixtus Senens. lib.
4.205.

If any shall object, That S. Augustine notwithstanding this in his books de
bono perseverantiae does contend earnestly for the preaching of Predestination,
a profound, intricate, and abstruse point of Divinity.

That this may seem no diminution to the prudence of the ancients, I return
three things by way of answer.

First, That he does it with some limitation, where the Auditory were capable
of it. He would not have it preached promiscuously to all. Dicatur ergo verum,
maxim ubi aliqua quaestio ut dicatur impellit, et capiunt qui possunt. Facile
est enim, imo stabile, ut taceatur aliquod verum propter incapaces. Nam utile
est illud domini, Adhuc multa habeo vobis dicere, sed non potestis ista portare
modo; et illud Apostoli, Non potui vobis loqui, quasi spiritalibus, sed quasi
carnalibus. Let truth be spoken, when necessity requires it, and men are able
to receive it. It is obvious that, and certain, that some truth is to be
concealed for the incapacity of the hearers. For that is profitable, which our
Lord and Savior says, I have many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear
them now: And that of the Apostle, I could not speak unto you as unto
Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ.

Secondly, That St. Augustine's design was not to have the speculative part of
Predestination preached, or that abyss of Gods counsel dived into; but to have
the effect of that decree, as he had conceived on it, maintained in Sermons;
namely Free grace; that grace was not given secundum merita. For we must know,
that St. Austin was singular in using that weapon of Predestination against the
Pelagians for the defense of Grace. He defined Predestination to be a
preparation of Grace, and Grace to be an effect of Predestination; and
thereupon opin'd, that they mutually inferred one another, and that wheresever
Free grace was preached, Predestination was preached also. This is evident by
an ocular demonstration in that book of the Fathers: for he avoucheth
considently, That St. Cyprian preached Predestination in those words, In nullo
gloriandum est, quando nostrum nihil est. We must glory in nothing, because
nothing is ours. His Cypriani verbis proculdubio praedestinatio praed catur. In
those words (says the Father) of Cyprian, without all doubt Predestination was
preached; by this it should seem, that S. Augustine only intended the
preaching of Free grace. But whatsoever his intention was, and how innocent
soever his meaning, yet,

Thirdly, I answer, That this was apprehended in S. Augustine as a great
Novelty, not only by the Massilians, who ceased not to clamor against him for
it; but by them also who were as great Assertors of all kinds of Grace in
opposition to the Pelagians, as he himself. For thus says Hillary, The
Orthodox complain, what necessity was there hujusmodi disputationis incerto,
tot minus intelligentium corda turbari? etc. That the minds of so many
Christian people should be troubled with this doubtful disputation. The
Catholic Faith has been defended so many years, by so many Tractators, by so
many books of yours and others, as well against other Heretics as against the
Pelagians, without this Definition. And Prosper in an Epistle to S. Augustine
complained, that the Massilians charged this Doctrine of Predestination with
contrariety to the Doctrine of the Fathers before, and the sense of the Church.
And again, obstinationem suam vetustate defendunt, they defend their obstinacy
by Antiquity. For certain he himself was so puzzled with this Objection
concerning the Novelty of S. Augustines Doctrine, that he begs the favor of a
pertinent Question, Illud qualiter diluatur, quaesumus patienter insipientiam
nostram ferendo demonstres. It Is certain, though S. Augustine was a most
renowned Champion of the Church at that time in the propugnation of Grace, and
his Doctrine in the defense of Grace against the Pelagians was generally owned,
approved of, authorized as Orthodox; yet that way of maintaining, by the new
Topic of Predestination, was not esteemed of all hands either necessary or
safe, but looked upon as Additamentum Augustinianum, and an intercurrent
question. Happy was the Christian World when the Pulpit was delivered from the
perplexities of that Doctrine, and so it remained for the space of three or
four hundred years, till Gotteschalk, an irregular Monk in France, out of his
Hypocondriack Zele fell a preaching it amain, and thereby raised a new violent
storm in the Church, which for the space of eleven years miserably tossed, rent
and shaked the Ark of Christ's Church, even to the danger of shipwreck.
Gotteschalk himself escaped not the fury of the Tempest, for by two Synods he
was condemned, one at Mentz, another at Rhemes; and when in the last he
malapertly behaved himself toward the Bishops there, he was ordered to be
whipped; and, lest he should draw away Disciples after him, he was committed to
prison. But Remigius Bishop of Lions, moved with commiseration toward this
miserable Monk, called another Synod at Valentia in France, wherein as
Gotteschalk found some favor, so by a Christian moderation and a wise
accommodation of things, the heats were allayed; yet in the explication of the
first Canon they do acknowledge, that the questions of Prescience and
Predestination were such, as thereby the minds of Christian people were
scandalized; and therefore ordered, that for the future men should preach ex
maternae Ecclesiae visceribus. Thus ended the tragedy of Gotteschalk.

But as Euphorbus was born again in Pythagoras, and as the mind of Jovinian was
revived in Vigilantius, according to S. Jerome; so was the spirit of Gotteschalk
revived in Luther, who in the heat of opposition maintained not only that
Predestination was to be preached, but Predetermination also, that all things
came by necessity. Erasmus, a person of incomparable learning and moderation,
applied an Expedient to the growing of this Evil; but Luther as a phrenetick
Patient threw away the physic, and flew upon the face of the Doctor that
prescribed it: and yet afterward in cool blood considering the scandal might
be taken at the absurdity of this Doctrine, he retracts, leaves an Antidote
upon record against the poison of it, in enarrat. ad cap. 26. Genesis Haec
studiose and accurate monere and tradere volui, etc. These things I desired
purposely to give warning of, because after my death many may bring forth my
books, and from thence confirm all manner of Errors and Madness: I did write
indeed amongst other things, That all things were absolute and necessary; but I
added withal, That God was to be looked upon as he had revealed himself in his
Word: Vos ergo qui nunc me audistis, memineritis me hoc docuisse, non esse
inquirendum de Dei absconditi Praedestinatione; You therefore which now hear
me, I pray remember that I taught this, That we ought not to search into the
Predestination of God.

But howsoever Luther faultred in the matter, yet Zanchy will stand to his
tackling, and he undertakes to maintain, Miscell. de praedestin, Sanctorum cap.
5. That the Preaching of Predestination was not only lawful and profitable;
but necessary. But thank God he begins with a good Caution; Though
Predestination is to be preached (says he) yet Sobrie and prudenter, juxta ea
quae de hac re in Scriptura revelata sunt; hoc est, sermon ita attemperato, ut
neque ad licentiam neque ad desperationem adducat, sed ad aedificationem
faciat: Soberly and prudently, according to what is revealed in the Scripture,
i. e. in such a manner as may neither lead men to licentiousness nor
desperation, but promote their Edification. Strict Terms, and hard to be
performed by men of all Persuasions, if not impossible: yet in the
Demonstration he is more cautelous still; for there explaining what
Predestination it was which was taught in the Gospel, and ought to be preached,
he thus describes it; Praecipua pars Evangelii est doctrina de incommutabili
electione eorum, qui credunt in Christum ad vitam aeternam; and aeterna and
incommutabili reprobatione little, qui nunquam in Christo vere credunt: The
principal part of the Gospel is the Doctrine of the immutable Election of them
who believe in Christ to life eternal, and the eternal and immutable
Reprobation of them who never believe truly in Christ. Whatsoever the meaning
of the Author be in this Argument, yet his words are capable of such a sense as
make for the preaching of a Conditional Election and a Conditional Reprobation:
but we must bear with Zanchy at this time, who was upon a design of calling in
Luther and Melanchthon as Auxiliaries to help him at a dead lift against
Erasmus, and therefore was forced to state the Question in such a latitude as
might admit of them his Parties, though they differed as much from Zanchy in
their judgments about Predestination as Erasmus himself. It skills not much how
that learned Theologue discharged himself of his Undertaking, nor what he
opin'd in the matter; we have the judgment of two great Lights of our Church to
confront him, and balance his Authority in the Reformed Churches; one is the
learned and reverend Bishop of Salisbury, Dr. Davenant, who in his Epistle to
John Duraeus, commending of some sovereign Remedies for composing the
differences betwixt the Lutherans and the Calvinists, one whereof is occasioned
by the diversity of judgment about Predestination, he writes thus, p. 117. A
popularibus concionibus ac vernaculo sermon conscriptis tractatibus
removeantur arduae omnes, and indecisae controversiae, and habeantur potius
inter exercitamenta scholarum quam alimenta animarum. Nullo enim incommodo
subtiles quaestiones and perplexae controversiae a pulpitis abesse possunt, at
charitas, quae ex talium quaestionum ventilatione laedi solet, absque extremo
animarum periculo a cordibus Christianorum abesse non potest. Ludit illis
animus vulgi, non proficit; and cum ludere desierint, hisce controversiis
minime intellectis, pugnare inter se incipiunt, and digladiari: Let all hard
and undecided Controversies be far removed from popular Sermons and Treatises
written in the Vulgar Tongue, and let them rather be accounted the Exercitation
of the Schools, than the Food of Christian Souls. For subtle and perplexed
Controversies may without any detriment at all be absent from the Pulpit; but
Charity, which is broken by the ventilation of such Questions, can without
extreme danger be wanting to Christian souls. The minds of the Vulgar are not
edified by them; they do but play and make a sport of them, and when they have
ceased to play with them, for want of a right understanding of them, they begin
to scuffle about them, and quarrel one with another even to Daggers-drawing.
The other is the late Lord Bishop of Norwich, Dr. Hall, who in his Clerum to
the Synod of Dort tells them, that there was Duplex Theologia, Scholastica and
Popularis; haec teligionis basin spectare videtur, illa tectorii formam and
ornamenta respicit; hujus cognitio Christianum facit, illa Disceptatorem: There
is a twofold Divinity, one Scholastical, another Popular; Popular Divinity
concerns the foundation of Religion, Scholastical the superstructures and
ornaments; the knowledge of Popular Divinity makes a man a Christian, of
Scholastical a Disputant. And having afterward sharply snibb'd the curiosity
and presumption of common people for prying into Gods Decrees, and discoursing
of the manner of Predestination, he adds, Neque tam plebem incuso isthic, quam
Doctores ipsos, qui hac tam parum tempestive populi auribus animisque
oggessenint. Imprudenter sane factum, ita haec abstrusissima mysteria a
suggestis palam sonuisse, quasi in iis solis Christianorum res unica
constitisset. Neither do I accuse the People so much for this, as the Teachers
themselves, who so unseasonably infused those things into the ears and minds of
the People. It is an high act of Imprudence certainly, that those most abstruse
Mysteries should be handled openly in the Pulpit, as if the life and soul, the
substance of Christianity consisted in them alone. And a little after he says,
That there were two things very much infested the Batavian Churches, Nimium
acumen, and nimia prophetandi libertas; Too much Curiosity, and too great
liberty of Prophesying. I wish to God the Britannick Churches had not cause to
complain of these evils also: But if we look upon the present face of things,
or trace our late Confusions to the original, we shall find that Liberty of
Prophesying and Dogmatizing about Predestination has had no small influence
into our miseries. Just cause then had His Sacred Majesty to set bounds to the
Liberty of Prophesying, and to prohibit the itch of Disputing or handling those
high speculations of Gods Decrees in popular Sermons; from which, as from a
source or fountain, such waters of Marah, and waters of Meribah, of Contention,
have continually flowed. And moreover, to confine Preachers to Catechetical
Doctrine, more fit to edify men in faith and holy life; as the manner was in
former times. Lindwood tells us in lib. 1. de officio Archidiaconi, That the
Archdeacon by his office was to see, that every Presbyter, who had a cure of
souls, should preach to his people the Articles of the Apostles Creed, the Ten
Commandments, the Two Commandments of Love, and against the Seven deadly Sins,
etc. And if people would still content themselves with such salutary Doctrine,
and Ministers would confine themselves to such safe and profitable Divinity, no
doubt but truth and piety would flourish, and abundance of peace, so long as
the Moon endures.

The sixth and last act of prudence I shall mention, was their constant and
faithful preaching of obedience to all superiors in Church and State; whereby
they kept the people in an admirable subordination; gained a huge repute to
Christianity, and prevailed much upon the gainsaying world. For superiors in
the Church, they taught people to be subject to their Priests, and both Priest
and People to their Bishop; and that with so much zeal and earnestness, that
it is wonderful to see how St. Ignatius (a holy Martyr, and a Father contemporary
with some of the Apostles, and one of those 500 that saw Christ in the flesh
after his resurrection) in his genuine Epistles does in every page almost
inculcate this Doctrine of peoples Subjection to their Deacons, Priests, and
Bishops. And St. Hierom, who when angered, though touchy, and something unequal
to that superior order; yet when pacifick, and undisturbed, how gravely does
he admonish his Friend Nepotian to be subject to his Bishop, and to receive him
as the parent of his soul; seeing what Aaron and his Sons were in the time of
the Law, that the Bishop and his Priests are in the time of the Gospel?

For their superiors in the State, they taught as St. Paul and St. Peter,
Christian people to be Subject to the higher powers for the Lords sake; not
only when they were Christians, but when they were Heathens, Tyrants,
Persecutors of Christians; And this they did, when Christians were numerous,
and strong enough to have cast off the yoke of obedience, if it had been
lawful. They condemned Rebellion, not only as inconsistent with Christianity,
but also destructive to the doctrine of the cross; whereby it came to pass,
that instead of raising an army of Rebels against their Emperors, they raised
an holy army of Martyrs, who resisted unto blood striving against sin, and by
their blood did sow the seeds of Christianity, and conquered the Heathen World.
Their Doctrines to this purpose are collected by Hugo Grotius, de jure belli,
lib. 1. cap. 4. I shall therefore supersede the trouble of presenting the
Reader with those luculent testimonies, and only infer from hence, How much
Ministers are beholding to His Sacred Majesty, for calling them out of their
bypaths and new ways, into the good old ways wherein the Apostles, and
Apostolical preachers walked; in taking all occasions faithfully to instruct
Christian people in their bounden duty of subjection and obedience to their
governors, superior, and subordinate of all sorts. And how much Christianity
it self owes to his Majesty for taking care that no foul spots by the
Antichristian Doctrines of rebellion, should be cast upon the face of that
beautiful Virgin.

CHAP. IV. What Innovations have been introduced in these latter times.
THe fourth and last part of my undertaking, Is to exhibit a Scheme of some
Innovations introduced concerning preaching. It cannot be denied, but preaching
has arrived to as much perfection amongst us in this Church, as in any Church
of Christendom: since the Knowledge of arts and tongues have flourished, and
artificial methods have been devised, and these improved by srequent practice,
many have approved themselves excellent preachers. But as time and chance
happen to all things: so they have done to this preaching. By the lovers of
novelty and change, some accessions have been made to this practice, which have
much altered the face, and complexion of it. And though people discern them not
when once made legitimate by general custom and observance; yet surely as
Tertullian, quod primum verum, and as St. Hierom, sine istis mundus Christianus
fuit. The world was Christian without these for the space of 1500 years, and so
may be still. It would be too long to enumerate all the Novelties of this kind,
that are insensibly crept in upon us, and insist upon them at large. As
profanas as vocum novitates, which St. Paul admonishes us to avoid; the
affectation of new forms of words, canting language, etc. The preaching
sometimes half a year upon a text, nay upon one Doctrine sometimes. The cogging
of doctrines out of a text (...) by sleight of hand, as Gamesters do their Dice
to cheat, and deceive. These and many more might be rehearsed; But I shall
only insist upon some few, which are more general, and of dangerous
consequence.

And one of these, I take to be the use of conceiving long prayers of our own
before Sermon. A thing so novel, that howsoever it be looked upon as an
essential part of a Sermon, and finds general favor, and patronage amongst the
many; yet it is but of yesterday; born into the world some years since the
Reformation it self, and can scarce yet write fourscore years old. It were
happily prejudice enough against this usage, that in a Church where Liturgy is
established for Gods public worship, and a Liturgy so well stored with Divine
and Heavenly Collects for all occasions necessary, these Pulpit-conceptions are
altogether needless. But besides this, if it be brought to the touch, it will
be found a mere novelty. For whereas the great Patrons of this Liberty, pretend
Gospel-antiquity for all they do, here they are at a loss, and can show neither
Command nor Example to justify their practice. There is no Command for it in
the Gospel, nor any Example of Christ or his Apostles: though there be many of
their Sermons upon Record, yet no mention of any praying before them: Nay,
which is more, there is no Church-antiquity for it neither. I know it is avouch'd
by some very learned men, as Ferrarius de ritu concionum, Lib. 1. cap. 8. Mr.
Thorndike in his book of religious assemblies, cap. 7. page 228. That the
Fathers begun their Homilies with prayers; But what manner of prayers were
they? Some vota pacis, or benedictions of the people, or implorations of Gods
assistance in some short ejaculations. Ferrarius exemplifieth in the practice
of St. Paul, who begun and ended his Epistles with short prayers; And moreover
testifies, that the Fathers used such kind of prayers, not only in the
beginning of their Sermons, but sometimes in the midst of them also: when they
were about to treat of a matter of difficulty, they did in a short prayer
implore Gods assistance, as may be seen frequently in the Homilies of S.
Chrysostom. Ferrar. lib. 1. cap. 23. There is a prayer ('it is confessed) that S.
Ambrose used before his Sermon extant, but it was a short prayer, a form of
prayer constantly used without variation: And there is something may justify
S. Ambrose in this practice, which extends not to all; he was an Archbishop,
and invested with power to regulate and order the public prayers of the Church
in all his Diocese, and so had singular Authority to compose a Collect for
himself upon some exigent of the Church. It will not follow from hence, that
every green-headed fellow may take a liberty of conceiving prayers before his
Sermon thirty or forty times as long as S. Ambrose's prayer was, and very every
Lords day, nay twice a day sometimes, and obtrude those upon the World as all
the Common prayers requisite in a Church.

But they have another Plea (I see in Mr. Bernard) for the Antiquity of these
Conceptions before Sermon, from the Authority of S. Augustine, who in his
fourth book de Doctrina Christiana cap. 3. says, Si enim regina Esther oravit
pro suae gentis temporaria salute loquutura apud regem, ut in os ejus Deus
congruum sermonem daret; quanto magis orare debet, ut tale munus accipiat, qui
pro aeterna hominum salute in verbo and doctrina laborat? If Queen Esther
prayed for the temporal safety of her Nation, when she was to speak before the
King, that God would put into her mouth congruous words; how much more ought he
to pray for such a gift, who labors in the Word and Doctrine for the eternal
salvation of Men's souls? But whether S. Augustine intend public or private
prayer is not here expressed. It Is certain Esthers prayer was private. If public
prayer, whether he intends a prayer of the Churches composing, or of our own
conceiving, is not mentioned. In the 15. cap. of the same book we have another
passage to the same purpose; Ipsa jam hora ut dicat accedens, priusquam exerat
proferentem linguam, ad Deum levet sitientem animam: The hour being come that
he should speak, before he opens his mouth, let him lift up his thirsting soul.
But this may be done by a mental prayer, and it seems the Father speaks of
that; for he says, Before he makes use of his tongue, let him lift up his
thirsting soul. That he could not intend a public vocal prayer, I think is
manifest by the 12. Canon of the Milevitan Council, wherein S. Augustine
himself was present, when it was by him and other Fathers decreed, That no
prayers should be used in the Church, Nisi quae a prudentioribus tractatae, vel
comprobatae fuerint in Synodo, ne forte aliquid contra fidem per ignorantiam
vel per minus studium sit compositum: But such as were first examined by the
more prudent, or appointed in an open Synod, lest happily something against the
Faith, either through ignorance or carelessness, fall from any. If any man
question whether S. Augustine were present in this Council, and had a hand in
this Canon, let him hear what Micrologus says, cap. 5. de authenticis or
ationibus; Nam octavum Africanae provinciae concilium (cui sanctus Augustinus,
immo ducenti and quatuordecim sancti Patres interfuerunt) cap. 12. ita
constituit, Nullae preces vel orationes dicantur, nisi quae in concilio fuerint
probatae: The eighth Council of the Province of Africa (wherein S. Augustine
and two hundred Fathers more were gathered together) ordained, That no prayers
should be used, but such as were approved of in the Council. And the third
Council of Carthage, wherein S. Augustine also was present, made a Canon to the
same purpose. If S. Augustine himself, and so many Fathers in two Councils,
interdicted the use of all prayers in public, but such as were approved of in
open Synod; then S. Augustine cannot be understood of prayers of our own
conceiving, but either private prayers, or public prayers of the Churches
composing. It is no vain conjecture therefore of Walafridus Strabo upon S.
Augustines own practice; for he observing that S. Augustine concluding many of
his Homilies with this clause, Conversi ad dominum, used to subjoyn a Common
prayer, Sicut etiamnum solent sacerdotes in conclusionibus nocturnae vel
diurnae Synaxews orationes breves and collect as subjungere: Strabo 22. In
Strabo his judgment then it was nothing but a short Collect, such as the
Priests used in the conclusion of their Nocturnal or Diurnal Office. They that
have read S. Augustines Homilies, have taken notice I doubt not of that prayer;
but because all have not the opportunity to observe it, I have here transcribed
it: Conversi ad Dominum Deum Patrem omnipotentem puro cord, ei quantum potest
parvit as nostra, maximas atque uberes grati as agamus, precantes toto animo
singularem magnitudinem ejus, ut preces nostr as in beneplacito suo exaudire
dignetur, inimicum quoque a nostris actibus and cogitationibus sua virtute
expellat, nobis multiplicet fidem, mentem gubernet, spirituales cogitationes
concedat, and ad beatitudinem suam perducat. Turning unto the Lord God Father
almighty, let us render unto him all possible thanks, beseeching him with all
our hearts, that he would out of his singular mercy and good pleasure vouchsafe
to hear our prayers, drive away the enemy from our actions and thoughts,
increase our faith, govern our minds, grant spiritual cogitations, and at last
bring us to his happiness through Jesus Christ his Son. Amen.

This was S. Augustines prayer he concludes his Sermon withal sometimes; and
yet if it be observed, it is no formal prayer, but an invitation to prayer, a
Bidding prayer, like that in our Canons. Bidding prayers, it seems, were in use
before ours in the Canon. I wish to God that these later Ages had contained
themselves within the bounds and limits of his sobriety and modesty, we should
have had no cause then to complain of the innumerable evils occasioned by the
abuse of this Liberty: As,

First, the hiding and concealing the beauty of the Liturgy from the common
people, which had shined as illustriously as the Sun at noonday, had not this
novel usage (as the Moon) interposed it self betwixt it and their sight: Though
all men that took up that fashion did not foresee the evil, nor intend it; Yet
this was clearly the event and the design also of those Empiricks, who
pretended to a peculiar gift of prayer, and praying by the Spirit; for if they
were guided by the Spirit in their Conceptions, and the Church not guided by
the Spirit in her solemn Forms, what else could follow in the peoples Logic,
but that the Common prayers of the Church were vain and superfluous?

Secondly, the diffemination of False Doctrine. S. Jerome observes lib. 2.
epist. 81. that there are many Habentes affectum erroris, cum praedicandi
eundem non habent libertatem; Love errors, that have not liberty to preach it:
And because they have not liberty to preach it, by this new arrifice they learn
to pray it, broach all manner of false Doctrine in their prayers. If the
prayers of these men be not looked into as well as their Sermons, they will pray
all into confusion, the King out of his Throne, Peace and Truth out of the
Church, and People out of their Wits.

A third evil comes by this Liberty, is singular dishonor to God, and scandal
to Christian People. For the most Seraphick of these men, when they venture
upon extemporary prayers, happen to lose themselves oftentimes; and that their
imperfections may not be discerned, they have an art to fill up the chasmes
with Humms and Haws, which the poor people are made to believe are the
groanings of the Spirit; or else with miserable tautologies, or which is worse,
execrable blasphemies. If all the nonsense and blasphemy were gathered
together, which have fallen from men in their effusrons of late time, they would
make a volume as great as Thomas Aquin as sums. I shall (...) foul a little
paper with a narration of some of them, and those no stories taken up upon
common fame and flying report, but such as were attested by persons of
integrity, and ear witnesses.

We pray thee O God (says one) not only to destroy Heaven, but all the glory
that has been in the Souls of thy people, and create a new Heaven and a new
Earth, wherein may dwell the immediate ashes of thine own glory. Though thou
sit in the highest Heavens, yet thou beholdest all things, that are done
here below, both in Heaven and Earth.

Let the Keys of our hearts (O Lord) hang at the girdle of our God.

O Lord tie our hands behind us, that we may not cut the throats of our own
souls.

Another being at a loss in his prayer, prayed God to give him Conserve of
Barberies.

At a Market Town in Norfolk, there being a solemn meeting in order to the
setting up of the Presbyterian Government; when one had in his Sermon, given
instruction to the Lay Elders how to demean themselves; and told them for that
purpose, they must be as Chirurgions; have Ladies hands, Hawks eyes, and Lions
hearts. A zealous Disciplinarian taking upon him to pray over the Sermon,
besought God to give to the Lay Elders, Ladies hands, Hawks eyes, and Lions
paws.

When the twelve Bishops were sent to the Tower in the beginning of the long
Parliament, one in his prayer before his Sermon gave God thanks, that he had
set Christ Jesus twelve steps higher upon his throne, than ever he was before.

Another being to preach a Funeral Sermon, when the honest Curate had read the
8. chap. of Eccles. verse 4. where Solomon delivered the Divine Maxim, Where
the word of a King is, there is power, and who can say to him what do thou?
fearing the people might be poisoned with Solomon's Divinity, used this Antidote
in his prayer before his Sermon, O Lord, though Solomon taught, that Kings
might not be controld, yet we thy people know by thy spirit that Kings may be
questioned, and called to account, etc.

Another, when a great many Horses dyed of the disease about him, desired God
in his prayer before Sermon, to take off the Disease from innocent Beasts, and
lay it upon Men.

The same at another time, prayed God to forgive him and the people assembled
the sins of their Norfolkness.

Another upon a defeat given to the Parliaments army by the Kings forces, used
this expression in his prayer before Sermon, O Lord thou have gone forth with
our armies, why do thou now hang an arse?

Was there ever such unclean unhallowed stuff brought into the Sanctuary? did
the Jews when they were most profane, pollute the great name of God with such
lame and maimed sacrifice? did ever the Heathen invoke their false deities in
such a rude and barbarous manner? who took care, ne quid praepostere dicatur.
Let all sober and prudent men judge, whether these look like dictates of the
Spirit. Did the Spirit teach the Apostles (...), to speak wisely and
sententioussy? And does it now teach men to play the fool, and pray like mad
men? Let men consider whether these deformed conceptions be comparable to the
grave and solemn prayers of the Church, the production of 1500 years wisdom
and experience; or whether it be fit to leave men to their liberty of praying
in public, when they have thus abused it to their own shame, to the scandal of
people, and the infinite dishonor of God.

Another Innovation it seems to me, is the Preaching of very young men out of
their own stocks and abilities. Amongst the Jews none were privileged to decide
matters of Controversy in the Law, till they were learned in the School of a
Doctor, and forty years of age. Our Lord and Savior Christ, and John Baptist,
begun not to preach till they were thirty years of age: For which cause the
Church afterward in several Canons forbad that any should be made a Presbyter
till he was thirty years of age. The Canons are extant in Gratian. distinct.
78. I shall name only the 11. Can. of the Neocaesarian Council. Presbyter ante
triginta annorum aetatem non ordinetur, quamvis sit probabilis vitae; sed
observet usque ad praefinitum tempus. Dominus enim trigesimo anno babtizatus
erat, and praedicavit. Let no Presbyter, though he be of a good life, be
ordained, till he be thirty years, but let him wait till the time appointed.
For our Lord and Savior was baptized the Thirtieth year of his age, and then
began to Preach. If there were no Canon upon Record to attest the sense and
practice of the Church; yet the very title of Presbyter, which belongs to men
of that order, were enough to do it. For the word Presbyter is not only Nomen
(...), but (...), a name of dignity, but of age; and infinuates, that they were
all men of years admitted into that order. Erasmus in the life of St. Jerome
testifies, that when Paulinianus Brohter to St. Hierome upon his singular
merit was made Presbyter, before those canonical years, Hoc nomine postea
calumniam struxit Jeronimo Joannes Hierosolymitanus, quod infra legitimam
aetatem, ad hoc honoris esset evectus, olim enim ante tricesimum annum nullus
erat maturus honori Presbyteri. John B. of Jerusalem afterward went about to
detract from S. Hierom, because his Brother was promoted to that order being
under age: For anciently (says he) before the thirtieth year, none were ripe
for the honor of a Presbyter. In which words Erasmus acknowledges both the
antiquity of that custom of the Church, and the great censure St. Heirom lay
under, for promoting or suffering his Brothers Ordination before the legitimate
age. And though happily our Church in the beginning of the reformation through
scarcity of men to serve in those Sacred offices, was forced to abate something
of the rigor of those Canons, and admit men into the order of Presbyterate,
before they were arrived to that maturity of years; yet there was no necessity
of suffering them to preach ex proprio, out of their own stocks and abilities.
If in the ancient Church, where none were Presbyters till they were thirty
years of age, all Presbyters were not suffered to preach, but only such as gave
good security for the prudent managery of the office; it may seem an oversight
to suffer young men to preach, and then leave them to their liberty in
preaching. The Church of England has paid dear for her indulgence in this
thing; Nothing has been more detrimental to the peace, order, and government
of the Church; than the preaching of these youngsters, who not being rightly
biased at their first setting out, through the fervor of youth, and some
youthful lusts, as pride, vain glory, popularity, have often fallen into the
snare of the Devil, and proved desperate Sect-Masters, trumpets of Schism and
Sedition. If any have escaped this Charybdis, yet they have dashed their foot
against another Scilla, through their ungroundedness and unskilfulness in
Divinity; for howsoever young men may be of pregnant parts, excel in
subordinate Arts and Sciences, yet for want of years and maturity of judgment,
they cannot be masters of such a sound body of Divinity, as is requisite for
the undertaking so weighty a province. Divinity is a vast and comprehensive
Science, full of depths and profundities; a great part of it Polemical; the
very Practicals encumbered with many difficulties. Besides, to the right
interpretation of Scripture, a duty incumbent on the Preacher, there is
required acquaintance with the Writings of the Fathers; for in a Canon of our
own Church, the Expositions of the Fathers are to be the rule of our
Expositions; and how can such young men make this the Canon of their
Interpretation, when they scarce know their Names, much less are conversant in
their Writings? As every Man is not fit to make a Scholar, no more is every
Scholar fit to make a Preacher. Men should be Divines before they are
Preachers; and to be Divines there is time, and pains, and maturity of judgment
required. Whereupon S. Jerome advises his friends Nepotian and Pammachius, diu
discere before they did docere. He tells Nepotian, De vita Cleric. Nolo te
declamatorem esse and rabulam, garrulumque sine ratione, sed mysteriorum
peritum: I would not have you a declaimer, a jangler, and garrulous without
reason, but skilful in Divine mysteries. He admonishes Rusticus the Monk, Si
clericatus titillat de siderium, disce quod poss is docere, ne miles antequam
tyro, ne prius magister sis quam discipulus: If the desire of being a
Clergyman tickled him, he should learn himself what to teach others, lest he
should take upon him to be a soldier before he handled a weapon, and a master
before he was a scholar. Anciently it was required men should be Divines before
they were Preachers, but since men have turned Preachers before they were
Divines, their Preaching has been but (...), a backward forwarding of the
matter; though Preaching has gained, yet Religion has lost, and people have
been led aside into Sects and Factions. It was a memorable passage that Erasmus
relates of S. Jerome in his Life; S. Jerome once undertook to interpret
allegorically the Prophecy of Obadiah, when he did not himself understand the
literal meaning of it; this Comment of his was by many very highly extolled,
when he himself was ashamed to own it; whereupon afterward he writes thus
merrily of himself, Fateor miratus sum, quod quantumvis aliquis male
scripserit, invenit similem sui lectorem. Ille praedicabat, ego erubescebam;
ille my sticos sensus ferebat ad coelum, etc. I confess I wonder, that though a
man writes never so ill, yet he finds a Reader like himself. He highly
commended it, I blushed at it; he extolled the mystical sense unto the skies, I
hung my head and secretly condemned it. What he ingenuously acknowledged of his
juvenile Writings, young Preachers may of their youthful Sermons. It was the
saying of a reverend Prelate of this Church, Young Divines must have young
Divinity: And though young Divines have the luck to be Men-pleasers, yea and
Women-pleasers too; yet young Divinity will never conduce to the peace and
happiness of Gods Church, no nor to the edification of men in piety and
holiness. It is the observation of His Sacred Majesty in his Letter to the
Lords Grace of Canterbury, That it is the work of young Divines and Ministers,
either out of a spirit of contention and contradiction, or in a vain
oftentation of their Learning, to embroil the Church and State. And we have
found it true by experience: for as we read of a great King destroyed by the
counsel of young men, so we may remember a great and good King also destroyed
by these young Divines and their young Divinity.

A third Innovation (as I take it) is the Preaching of Lecturers: but by
Lecturers I do not understand all that go under that name, but such as are
merely of the Peoples setting up, against the mind and without the special
License of the Governors of the Church. These Lecturers are a new order of
Ecclesiastics, that like Cartesius Philosophy are made up of rare Principles,
but all Novelties.

Their Ordination (if they have any) is a Novelty; for it is either by
Presbyters sine Episcopo, or by Bishops sine titulo. If it be by Presbyters
without a Bishop, it is a Novelty, as being against Tradition Apostolical, the
Practice and Constitution of the ancient Church, and of the universal Church
for the space of 1500. years after Christ. Ordination ever was the Bishops
peculiar; and all Ordinations without the Bishop were esteemed uncanonical, and
pronounced null and void; Vide Council. Constantinop. 1. can. 6. If it be by
Bishops without a Title, it is a Novelty too, against a Canon of our own Churhc,
can. 33. and against the Canons of the ancient Church, Nullum absolute
ordinaridebere Presbyterum, etc. Council. Chalced. can. 6. No Presbyter is
absolutely to be ordained. And I doubt such a Lecture of the peoples setting up
will never prove a Title in Law nor in the Churches esteem; and if it be not,
their Ordination is a Novelty and a Nullity also.

Their Congregation is a Novelty, as being against the Doctrine, Practice and
Canons of the ancient Church too, by which no Presbyter is suffered to hold
Meetings or Conventions by himself contrary to the Bishops mind and order. We
find it very early in the Canons of the Apostles; Si quis Presbyter contemnens
Episcopum suum seorsim collegerit, and altar aliud erexerit, nihil habens quod
reprehendat Episcopum suum in causa pietat is and justitiae, deponatur, quasi
principatus amator existens; est enim tyrannus, and caeteri clerici, quicunque
tali consentiunt, deponantur, laici vero segregentur. Can. 32. If any Presbyter
despising his Bishop shall hold a Meeting by himself, and erect another Altar,
having nothing in the mean time to accuse the Bishop of in matter of piety and
justice, let him be deposed as one that loves Preeminence; for he is a Tyrant,
and other Clergymen that join with him are to be deposed, and the Laics
excommunicate. To this agrees a Canon of the Council of Carthage, Si quis
Presbyter ab Episcopo suo correptus, tumore vel superbia inflatus, putaverit
separatim sacrificia Deo offerenda, vel aliud erigendum altar centra eccle
siasbicam fidem, vel disciplinam crediderit, non exeat impunitus: If any
Presbyter being rebuked and censured by the Bishop, shall in a separation offer
sacrifice to God, or erect another Altar against the Ecclesiastical Faith and
Discipline, let him not go unpunished. But these Lecturers hold Conventions and
Meetings in the Church without the Bishops License, and against the Canons of
the Church, and all Ecclesiastical Discipline; therefore their Congregation is
a Novelty.

Their Election is a Novelty, as being by the suffrage of the People only;
though sometimes the Bishops anciently did consult the People before their
Ordination, ad testimonium, for their testimony; yet never ad electionem, for
their suffrage in the choice of them: much less after Ordination did they leave
it to the People to make choice of their own Curates, but they themselves
appointed and sent out fit men to their several Cures. There are several Canons
wherein the People are barred this liberty of Election in the ancient Church:
the 13. can. of the Council of Laodicea may serve alone to give us a taste; Non
est populis concedendum Electionem facere little, qui altaris ministerio sunt
applicandi. It is not to be left to the people to make choice of those, who are
to serve at the altar. But these Lecturers come in all by popular Election, and
maintain the peoples election an authentic Call and sufficient without any
Mission or Commission from the Bishop; and therefore their Election is a
Novelty.

Their Maintenance is a Novelty, as being Elemosinary of the peoples
benevolence; they live not upon any Church revenue of tithes, or glebe, or
oblations, but upon the peoples contributions. Whereas the maintenance of the
Clergy was ever of tithes, or some Church revenue, or before the settlement of
tithes by secular powers, certain honorable stipends distributed at the
discretion of the Bishop, according to the merits of the person, weekly or
monthly out of the Churches treasure, whereupon Presbyters were called by St.
Cyprian, Sportulantes fratres, Epist. 66. and those stipends sportulae, Epist.
34. Caeterum Presbyterii honorem nos designasse illis jam sciatis, ^t et
sportulis eisdem cum Presbyteris honorentur. But you may know we have designed
the honor of the Presbyterate for them, that they may be dignified with the
same stipends Presbyters are. As amongst the Romans, the word sportulae was
used for a certain allowance of food or money given by great men to their
followers; so in Saint Cyprian it signifies the allowance or stipends which the
Bishop out of the Church treasure paid to the Priests that depended upon him.
For as the Churches treasure was solely at the Bishops disposing; so the Clergy
depended upon the Bishop for their maintenance out of that treasure. And
therefore it is provided in the 7 Can. of the Council of Gangres, Siquis
oblationes ecclesiae accipere, vel dare voluerit praeter conscientiam Episcopi,
vel ejus cui hujusmodi officia commissa sunt, nec cum ejus voluerit agere
consilio, Anathema sit. That if any should presume to take or give the
oblations of the Church without the knowledge or consent of the Bishop, he
should be Anathema; whereby it appears, that the Priests and other orders of
the Clergy depended upon the Bishop for their maintenance; But these Lecturers
depend upon the people for their maintenance. And therefore their maintenance
is a novelty.

Their Doctrine is a novelty. As they are the peoples creatures, so they are
the peoples servants, and take great care to please them, populo ut placerent
quas fecissent fabulas; and forasmuch as people are lovers of novelties, they
must be sure to bring new things to their ears daily. It is not enough for them
to preach nove, after a new manner, but they must preach nova, and not bona
nova but mala nova; nay nova mala, new Gods in Israel; nova dogmata sunt novi
dii (says Vineentius) new opinions are new Gods; And if these be not new
opinions, new doctrines; That the government of the Church by Bishops is
Antichristian; That murdering of Kings is lawful; That Rebellion and Schism are
no sins; That Christ's Gospel, as Mahumetanism, is to be propagated by the
Sword; That the greatest disturbers and violaters of the public peace, are the
only Saints, and most godly Men, Let them that know any thing of antiquity
judge; And yet this is the Systeme of their Divinity.

Lastly, they themselves are the greatest Novelty of all. I find no order of
Clergymen in former times that resembles them, but the Mendicant Friars in the
Roman Church, an order set up by St. Dominick, and St. Francis about the time
of Innocent the third, and Innocent the fourth Bishops of Rome, and with them
they hold correspondency in two things, As the Mendicant Friars being exempted
from the jurisdiction of Bishops, brought the Bishops into contempt with the
people: so these Lecturers exempting themselves from the jurisdiction of
Bishops, do all they can to the diminution of their Order, and honor, that
they may become the scorn of the vulgar. As the Mendicant Friars having
Charters from the Pope to preach in every Parish, without the license of the
proper Curate; to take confessions, to visit the sick, and bury the dead;
rendered the secular Clergy contemptible, and by that means brought all the
Grist to their own Mills: so these Lecturers by their industrious preaching of
novelties bring the regular Clergy, who live in subordination to the King, and
the Bishops, into contempt with the people. But as omne simile est etiam
dissimile, though these Mendicant Friars were in some things exorbitant, yet in
the main they were true and faithful to the interest of the Church: But these
Lecturers are ever false, and perfidious to the Church that gave them
Christendom; ever bandying publicly against her Doctrine and Discipline, or
undermining privately her walls, and bulwarks. An army of Turks could not have
made a greater devastation in the Church, and Nation, than they did of late by
their seditious Doctrines. They poisoned all the corporations of England with
their principles of Schism, and Rebellion. They blew the trumpets to war in the
pulpit, before they were sounded in the field. When they could not slay their
two enemies, Kingship and Episcopacy, gladio or is, with the Sword of their
mouth, they did it ore gladii, with the edge of the Sword. They are ever at
defiance with their lawful superiors, but damnable flatterers of the people,
and verify that maxim of Tertullian, nusquam mag is proficitur, quam in
castris rebellium, ubi esse est promereri. There is no such proficiency as in
the tents of Schismatics, where the very being is meritorious. If any will but
follow them and hear their Lectures, they canonize them for Saints before they
are Christians, and make them sure of salvation, before they understand the
first principles of the oracles of God; in a word, they are the false Prophets
of the Nation, by whom God tries us whether we will love him, or obey him as we
ought to do, and whom he forbids us to harken unto; for though they come to us
in Sheeps-clothing, yet inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Gulielmus de Sancto
Amore, a Learned Theologue, who lived about the first rising of these Mendicant
Friars, writ a Book upon that occasion de periculis Ecclesiae, and in that a
Treatise, de signis pseudoprophetarum. If any will take the pains to read over
that treatise, which he may find transcribed, and translated in the book of
Martyrs, he shall find that in most of them, they agree to these Lecturers. O
that people would but see their sin and danger in following such false lights!
O that these deceivers would consider of the judgments of God threatened against
them, for abusing of the people, renting of the Church, and embroyling of the
State; And at last become obedient Sons of an Indulgent Mother, the Church,
that we might all say and sing, quam bonum, et quam jucundum.

FINIS.

