THE METHOD TO Science.

By I. S.

LONDON, Printed by W. Redmayne for the Author, and are to be Sold by Thomas
Metcalf, Bookseller, over against Earl's-Court in Drury Lane, 1696.

Book I. Of the First Operation of our Understanding.
Less. 1. OF NOTIONS, or the very First Ground on which all Science is built.
Less. 2. Of the Distinction of Natural Notions, and of the Reducing them under
Ten Common Heads. p. 10 Less. 3. How these Common Heads of Notions are to be
Divided, and of the Common Head of SUBSTANCE. p. 25 ^ess. 4. Some
Considerations belonging to those Heads of Notions, or to the Ten Predicaments
in Common. p. 36 ^ess. 5. Of the Common Head called QUANTITY. p. 50 ^ess. 6. Of
the Common Head of QUALITY. p. 60 ^ess. 7. Of the Common Head of RELATION. p.
71 Less. 8. Of the Common Heads of ACTION and PASSION. p. 81 Less. 9. Of the
Common Head of UBI, or WHERE. p. 89 Less. 10. Of the Common Head o^ QUANDO, or
WHEN. p. 9^ Less. 11. Of the Expressions of ou^ NOTIONS by WORDS. p. 100
Book II. Of the Second Operation o^ our Understanding, or JUDG^MENTS.
Less. 1. OF the Nature of Judg^ments, or Propositions, Common; Of their Parts;
Of (...) Ground of their Verification, (...) of the several Manners of
Predic^ting. p. 11^ Less. 2. Of Self-evident Propositions First Principles. p.
1^^ Less. 3. That First Principles are Ide^^tical Propositions, proved by
Insta^^ces. The Use that is to be made of them. Also, of some Other
Propositions, either in whole or in part, Formally Identical; and of the
Reducing of Inferior Truths to Self-evident Propositions. p. 15^ Less. 4. Of
the Generating of Knowledge in us; and of the Method how this is performed. p.
163
Book III. Of the Third Operation of our Understanding, DISCOURSE; and of the
Effects and Defects of it.
Less. 1. OF Artificial Discourse, the Force of Consequence, and of the Only
Right Figure of a Syllogism. p. 225 Less. 2. Of the several Manners or Moods of
a Syllogism, and of the Laws of Concluding. p. 235 Less. 3. Of the Matter of a
Conclusive Syllogism; or, what Middle Term is Proper for Demonstration. p. 248
Less. 4. How every Truth is to be Reduced to an Identical Proposition; and,
consequently, every Error to a Contradiction: What Consequences follow thence
of one Truth being in another; and of the Science of Pure Spirits. p. 261 Less.
5. Of other Mediums for Demonstration from the Four Causes. p. 272 Less. 6.
Several Instances of Demonstration. p. 288 Less. 7. Other Instances of
Demonstration. p. 302 Advertisement. p. 316 Less. 8. Of Opinion and Faith. p.
322 Less. 9. Of Assent, Suspense, Certainty and Uncertainty. p. 344 Less. 10.
Of Disputation and Paralogisms. p. 356 Appendix. p. 374
The Errata's in the Preface.
PRef. P. 26. l. 15. out of. P. 28. l. 19. cast about. P. 46. l. 19. the
Cartesian.

Corrections of the Errata.
PAge 5. Line 8. only which. P. 18. l. 10. as is. P. 21. l. 18. that Motion.
P. 62. l. 6. most nearly. P. 69. l. 23. but their. P. 75. l. 1. become. P. 77.
l. 6. has besides. P. 106. l. 2. False. P. 107. l. 17. Proposition. P. 122. l.
31. A whole. P. 128. l. 12. Sophroniscus. P. 147. l. 18. make. P. 236. l. 16.
Proposition is Identical. P. 245. l. 27. and nunc. P. 250. l. 5. that can. P.
255. l. 7. Sensitivum. P. 257. l. 30. it is Evidently. P. 258. l. ult. Basis. P.
270. l. 31. at one. P. 273. l. 33. est of. P. 281. l. 27. be a kind. P. 301. l.
1. Cause of. P. 308. l. 20. exercise it is. P. 311. l. 25. there. P. 318. l. 18.
Frailty which. P. 321. l. 23. all own. P. 322. l. 3. main. P. 326. l. 1. what
is, is. P. 354. l. 20. Erroneous. P. 362. l. 13. he is not. P. 364. l. 30.
Grammatical. P. 369. l. 13. The Sixth. P. 370. l. 34. a proud. P. 381. l. 17.
with no. P. 388. l. 3. to be. P. 393. l. 19. gives: P. 414. l. 26. very small.
P. 417. l. 22. Slender, Flexible and. l. 24. contiguous. P. 419. l. 25. Art. P.
424. l. 18. Is it. P. 425. l. 13. so they. l. 16. do. P. 427. l. 7. Lock. P.
273. l. 17. and seeing. P. 396. l. 21. that is, it is.

PREFACE DEDICATORY TO THE LEARNED STUDENTS OF Both Our Universities.
REason being Man's Nature, and the Proper Act of Reason, the Deducing
Evidently New Knowledges out of Antecedent ones, it may seem Wonderful that
Mankind, after the using their Reason and Disputing so long time, should still
Disagree in their Sentiments, and contradict one another in inferring their
Conclusions: so that those who are sam'd for the Greatest Philosophers, do
still remain in Perpetual, and (as far as it can be discerned) Endless and
Irreconcilable Variance and Dissension about their Tenets. It seems to shock
the very Definition of Man, and to lay in some sort a scandal upon Creative
Wisdom it self, that, whereas all other Creatures do arrive at the Natural End
for which they were made, Mankind alone, nay the Noblest Portion of that Kind,
who cultivate their Thoughts with the most exact care that may be, should still
miss of Reasoning rightly, and so fall short of True Knowledge, which is their
Natural Perfection. What Tree but bears the Fruit Proper to its Kind? Or, what
Cause in the World but produces such Effects as are suitable to its Nature? And
though, by the Interfering of Cross-Agents, there happens now and then a
Deficiency in some very Few Particulars, yet that Defect is never found in a
Considerable part of the Species; for Chance would not be Chance if it did come
near the reaching an Universality: whereas Mankind, in its whole Latitude,
seems to fall short of improving it self in Truth; at least, in gaining
Certainty of it; or, if some have attained it, yet the Number of those Right
Reasoners is so very Inconsiderable, that they are lost amongst the Crowd of
those who stray into Error. Nor can those Happy Few who have light on it,
obtain Quiet Possession of what they have Acquired; but their Title to it is
perpetually Disputed by Great Multitudes of Pretenders; who put in their Claim,
and set up their Pleas for their Opposite Tenets. Whence, our First Enquiry
ought to be, how Man's Nature comes to be so Disabled from performing its
Primary Operation, or from Reasoning rightly; that so we may bethink our selves
by what Means it may (if possible) recover the true use of its Natural Faculty;
how it may be cured of the Impotency it labors under; and be freed from those
Impediments which hinder it from Acting as it ought.

2. Divines will tell us that this mischief happens through Original Sin. Nor can
it be doubted but there is some Truth in what they allege. For, questionless,
Passion distorts the Understanding by the Ascendent which the Depraved Will has
over it in such Concerns as the Will is addicted to, and has espoused an
Interest in. But, this comes not up fully to our difficulty. For, granting
that, when the Soul is thus originally tainted, the Will influences and byasses
the Understanding, so as it cannot discern clearly the just value of Spiritual
Goods, and, by addicting it to such False Goods for which it self has a
Passionate Concern, it makes it overvalue Vile Pleasures, Aerie Honor or
Sordid Profit; whence, it becomes blinded and makes wrong Judgments both of the
one and the other; yet, I see no Reason why Original Sin, which works only by
giving us Corrupt Inclinations, should hinder us from concluding right in
points merely Speculative, to which our Discourse confines us; nor why an
Archimedes, an Euclid, an Aristotle, or an Hippocrates, though Heathens, may not
arrive a^ Truth in Mathematics, and other Sciences to which they applied
themselves; nor why a man of a Wicked Life, whose Soul is Corrupted with Actual
Sin added to Original, may not cast up an Account right, as well as he might
have done had Adam never fallen. To deduce Consequences right out of other
Knowledges, which we call the Premises, is so nearly allied to our very
Essence and Rational Nature, that quite to lose that Faculty seems the same as
to lose our Manhood; which we cannot be thought to have forfeited by the Fault
of our First Parents. Nor has the Depravation of our Will any Interest or
Inclination tempting it to be Accessory to such a Miscarriage: Rather the
Acquisition of Science is so Agreeable to our Innate Vanity and Desire of
Esteem, that it runs along with the grain of that primigenial Imperfection. The
Honor that accrues to an Eminent Scholar prints him in such a Character, and
is so grateful to Pride and Self-love, that it excites In^ustry, whets the Wit,
and, thence conduces to clear the Understanding. So that t^ exercise our
Natural Faculty as we ought (...) such kind of Studies, and so arrive at an
E^cellency in Reasoning, does sooth and not thwart those Vicious Inclinations.
Besides, there have been without doubt, many Persons of Eminent Virtue among
the Schoolmen both of the present and former Ages; who by a long practiced
Habit of Virtue have rectified those sinister Propensions of the Will inherited
from their Parents; and yet, by their Contradicting one another, we may (...)
^ssured that one side does still miss of Truth. Whence we may conclude that
neither Virtuous Inclinations do avail the Good, nor do Vicious ones
considerably or discernibly hinder the Bad in order to their Attainment of
Science: Wherefore, we must look for Another reason for these constant
Miscarriages, and this Unaccountable Disagreement among Philosophers and
Speculaters; and how it comes that the Truth or Falsehood of very few
Conclusions have, in so many Ages, been decisively Determined; or, which is the
same, why Truth, in things subject to Reason, cannot, in so long time, be made
clearly ap^ear.

Reflecting then that Mathematicians do very rarely disagree in their
Conclusions; or, if any differ from the rest, as in the Quadrature of the
Circle, or such like, either through Surprise, or Unattentiveness to the long
train of Consequences which are prae-requisit to those Conclusions; and that by
this means a Mistake happens, the Error is evidently discovered, so that even
the Mistaker himself is convinced of his Failing, when it comes to be thoroughly
examined by others, Learned in the same Art, who like Bystanders see more than
did the Gamester; this leads us naturally to consider whether the same Clear
Way has been taken in other parts of Philosophy, as has been in that Science.
And, at first sight it appears manifestly it has not. For it is evident that
Geometricians do lay for their Axioms Self-evident Propositions and clear
Definitions; and their Postulatums are not such as are merely begged or
supposed, and so need our Favor to let them pass for Truths; but they claim
our Assent to them as their Due; and the Consequenees they draw are all of them
Immediate; which makes the Contexture of the whole Work Close and Compacted.
Whereas I have not observed that any other sort of Philosophers have taken that
Clear Method. Whence we have good reason to suspect that the want of observing
this Method, or something Equivalent to it, has been the sole oecasion of all
those Deviations from Truth and Disagreements among Philosophers in their
Conclusions and Tenets, which we find in the World. I say, [or something
Equivalent to it.] For, I do not expect that every Demonstrater should be tied
to observe that severe Method in rigor. This were to condemn Aristotle, and
all the Philosophers that ever writ hitherto. It Is too laborious to the Author
to cast his Thoughts perpetually into that Nice and Exact Frame; and very
Uneasy for the Readers also, and would too much strain their Brains to keep
them still bent to such a Solicitous Attention. Besides, a Discourse that
proceeds endways by Immediate Connection, does comprehend as much in one page,
as in Euclid's Method could be contained in Many. It Is enough then that such
Discourses be so perfectly Consequential, that they can, if need be, bear that
most Rigorous Test. And such they must be; or, otherwise, they will scarce pass
muster with Acute Wits, who heartily and unbyassedly pursue Truth.

Nor does this precise Mathematical Method suit, in all regards, with the other
parts of Philosophy. For the Notions that Science is employed in are, for the
most part, Extension and Figure; which being perceptible to our Sight, they
show the thing, in some sort, to our Eye, as well as demonstrate it by Reason
to our Understanding; whereas, scarce any Other Science affords us this
advantage; which forces us to have recourse only to our Notions, and to strive
to make them Clear by Definitions. In which, having no assistance from our
Fancy or Material Representations, they are hence less easily Imprinted and
Reflected on; which makes our Attainment of Science more Laborious. Yet,
notwithstanding this Accidental Disadvantage, their Productions are not at all
less Evident or less Certain to the Judgment. For, it is not the Noting them
with A, B, C, that either makes them True, or shows them to be so; but the
Connection of the Notions we have of those Lines, Angles, or other Quantities,
and of their Proportions to one another, which we voluntarily agree to signify
by such Letters. Whence results this Evident and Comfortable Corollary that
Clear Demonstrations may be had, and, consequently, Science attained, in other
parts of Philosophy, and in all Other Subjects, as well (though not so easily) as
in those of the Mathematics; so the Notions belonging to those Subjects be but
Cleared and rightly Connected; sinee it is the Connection of Notions, or (as
Logicians phrase it) the Connection of Terms, which does beget Science, and not
the Formality of Lines and Letters used by Mathematicians.

By this time we may seem to have discovered the true reason of the General
Miscarriages of most Philosophers in the pursuit of Truth. For, since it is
Impossible that he who intends to Travel to London, though he have both Clear
Eyes, and Strong Legs, and employs both of them to his utmost, should ever
arrive at his Iourney's End if he does not take the Right Way to it; so it is
equally Impossible any Man should arrive at Science, if he takes not the right
Method or Way to attain it, though he have never so Clear a Natural Wit, and a
Strong Brain, and labors never so industriously to make use of both to his
best advantage. Providence therefore is justified, and the Ability of our
Natural Faculty asserted; and the Blame lies wholly at the doors of the Persons
who do not first apply their Thoughts to know the Way to Truth, ever they set
forwards in quest of it: but chiefly in those who pretend to be Guides to
others, and yet are Themselves Ignorant of the Method that can bring men to it.
Mathematicians take the Way, and so arrive at it. Others (a very few exeepted)
do not take it, and therefore miss of it. Whence we may establish this
Fundamental and most Useful Maxim, that The First and Chief Study of those who
pursue true Knowledge in Philosophy, is to apply their Industry to comprehend
the METHOD or WAY to it: that, If they find not that, their most earnest Study
is lost Labor; but that, having once found it, they cannot doubt of compassing
their End by using such Proper Means.

But is not the Knowledge of this Method insuperably hard to be attained? For,
if it be, we are never the nearer, but still at the same Loss. To give a Stop
to such an apprehension, I must avow that no part of Mathematics is more
Demonstrable than is the Way to Demonstrate, or the METHOD TO SCIENCE. Nature
(as we experience) gives us our Notions; on which, as on its Elements, all
Science is grounded. To make these Clear and Distinct, we can distribute them
under Common Heads, and Divide those Heads by Intrinsecal Differences, or such
as are Proper to each of them, till we come to the Notion we are to discourse
of. While we thus Divide them, we at the same time, and with the same labor,
frame Denitions of each Notion comprehended under those respective Heads; by
doing which we gain a Distinct and Clear Conception of them; which does, to a
fair degree, facilitate our Judging whether such or such of them may be with
Truth connected in Propositions, (or in such Speeches as Affirm or Deny,) in
which Truth does Formally consist. To do this more exactly, we consider that
those Propositions must either be such as show of themselves that the Two
Notions (called it Terms) must be Connected; and then they are Self-connected
or Self-evident: Or else they need to be shown Connected by means of some other
Notion which is Connected with them both; to show which we call Proving. Those
of the Former sort, if perfectly such, are fit to be First Principles; whose
Nature, as Common Sense tells us, is not to need or admit of Proof. The
Connection of the later sort is made known by Proof, or by their joint Connection
with a Third, which we call the Middle Term, Medium or Argument; to do which is
the Proper work of Discourse or Ratiocination: These Three Terms rightly placed
or put together, compound that most Close and Exact Discourse called a
Syllogism. Certain and most Evident Rules may be assigned how to place those
Three Terms in the two first Propositions, so as that Discourse may be most
Clear and Perspicuous; as also, how to find out such a Middle Term as is Proper
to Connect the other Two, whose Connection or Truth is under Dispute; and to
show the Force of the Consequence, and why a New Proposition called the
Conclusion, must most necessarily follow out of the Former ones. All which
being Demonstrated, (as I have reason to presume is done in this following
Treatise) and the Equivocation of the Words that express our Notions being
avoided, I see not what more can be substantially necessary to the METHOD TO
SCIENCE. For, our Notions being Cleared, First Principles established, the true
Form of a Syllogism manifested, Proper Middle Terms found, and the Necessity of
the Consequence evidenced; all those Conclusions may be Deduced with
Demonstrative Evidence, which ly within our Ken, or which we can have occasion
to enquire after; that is, all that we have Notions of: provided those Notions
be not merely Accidental, or very Remote from one another, and therefore
Incapable of being Connected.

Yet still there is one Difficulty that sticks, and lies in our way; and which
is more, seems hard to be removed. For LOGIC, or the Art of Reasoning rightly,
being the Skill which is to teach us this Method to Science; and so many
Logicks being written by Learned Men, and studied by such Multitudes; how comes
it that, notwithstanding such Helps, men do still differ in their Tenets, that
is, many or most of them do still err, as much as if they had never had such
Proper Assistances. For, if Logic shows them the way to Science, and they take
that way, and have a Natural Ability to follow it or walk in it, they must all
arrive at Science; and their Thoughts center in the same Truths without any
Disagreement; the contrary to which we do notwithstanding Experience. To give
an Answer to this, I shall be hard put to it how to bear my self between the
two Extremes of Modesty, Dissimulation and Boasting. For, if I grant those
Logicks are as they ought to be, that is, Full and Evident, and followed by Men
of diverse Sentiments, I must confess I know not how to reply, or solve the
Objection. On the other side, to condemn all the Logicks since Aristotle's
time, or all Logicks which are not according to his Grounds, is to set up our
selves, and savours of Arrogance. In this porplexity I have no way to secure my
self but to speak the plain Truth, and to hope it will bear me out. I must
then, in behalf of Truth, declare, that the Pretended Logicks themselves are in
the greatest Fault. For, it is easy to observe, that they do indeed give many
dry and unprov'd Rules and Maxims; they afford many Definitions, some right,
some wrong, being oftentimes Illogical and framed out of Fancy; they pester
their Books with many unnecessary Divisions and Subdivisions; they treat very
largely of the Predicaments, of Single, Opposite and Aequipollent Propositions;
they are prolix and superfluous in their Doctrine about Syllogisms, their
Moods, Figures, several sorts of idle Fallacies, etc. All which look very
Learned to New Beginners; who do, therefore, take much pains to lay them up in
their Memory; I say in their Memory, for none of those passages being
Demonstrated, they never sunk into or settled in their Reason. And therefore,
notwithstanding all this, when they have as it were got without Book all these
particulars, the Readers are no wiser how to demonstrate any point practically,
or how to set himself about it, than he was before he read those Treatises.

I have studied many of those Logicks my self when I was young, and all of any
note I had seen then, and considered them very attentively, till I had almost
lost my Natural Reason by dwelling upon them; yet notwithstanding (and I
believe the same passes with other young Students) I knew no more how to go to
work to demonstrate any thing, than if I had never seen them. They started now
and then some curious, amusing (but jejune and useless) Questions about Ens
rationis, Unions, etc. and set many confused Ideas of the several parts of
Logic in my Memory; but still my Reason was not Enlightened, nor enabled to
perform those fine things they had told me of. Nor was it any wonder; for they
spoke not to my Reason, nor endeavored to ground their Discourse on the Nature
of the Things in hand; nor to show demonstratively why every Step they led me,
or Lesson they taught me, must be True; nor how it did influence True
Knowledge, or advance directly toward the Acquisition of Science; so that it
looked more like a kind of History of what those Authors had said or writ,
than like a Method to find out Truth; insomuch that I came at length to suspect
that the Intention of those kind of Logicians, was not to pursue the Knowledge
of Truth, which is only to be had by Clear Demonstration; but that they meant
to furnish young Wits with certain Modes of Talking with a show of Learning,
and of signalizing themselves for being able to argue pro or con indifferently
in Scholastic Dissertations. It resembled the Tiring of a Hawk, serving only
to exercise its Nibbling Faculty, and whet the Appetite, but had nothing of
Nutritive in it to satisfy it. For, Reflection will teach us very Evidently,
that only that which is made Clear to our Reason, can Settle in it, Nourish and
Dilate it, as being Proper and Connatural Food to a Rational Soul; and that
whatever we take in or carelessly swallow, that is not such, but merely Wordish
only fills us full of Wind and Air, which breaks out in Insipid Talk.

The Fault then lies evidently in the Logicks which have been used in the
Schools hitherto, none of which have attempted to show Demonstratively the Way
how to Demonstrate, or given us a Connected Discourse of the METHOD TO SCIENCE.
It Is noted that the Practice of the Preacher going along with his Doctrine,
makes the Doctrine it self more Edifying: and, by parity, had the Teachers of
Logic Practiced Demonstration all the while they had taught how to
Demonstrate, those Rules, so Rationally imprinted, sinking deep into their
Soul, and thence becoming as it were a Limb or Faculty of their Judgment, would
have truly Enabled them how to act accordingly; whereas, while they swim only
in their Memory, they serve for nothing but to pour out indigestedly what they
had rawly taken in.

But now, where is that Author who has hitherto made such an Useful and
Necessary Attempt? None that I know of. The Treatise called Ars cogitandi has
diverse Excellent things in it, and in some places has made many good steps
toward True Logic; and the Examples it brings are very Illustrating. But yet,
in the main, it amounts to no more but The Schools Reformed into Method and
Elegancy. It abounds with many useless particulars: It does not bottom it self
upon Nature, only which can give Solidity to our Reasons: It has many Unprov'd
Suppositions, and bare Sayings without offering any Proof. And, yet I do verily
believe that, had not the Authors calculated it for that particular sort of
Philosophy they had espoused, which could bear no Evidence, but had followed
the guidance of their own Natural Genius (which, doubtless, was very
Extraordinary) it would have much excelled its present self. * Mr. Le Grand's
Method says much, but proves little; and I believe, both Cartesius, and
himself, did first consider and survey the whole Scheme of their Doctrine, and
then fitted their Logic to it. Which is Preposterous and Praeter-natural; for
the certain Way to the End of our Journey should be foreknown, ere we set the
First step toward it. Mr. Lushington has with much pains gone about to
demonstrate some particulars of the Summulist part of Logic, and chiefly that
about Predication. But, there is nothing at all of Nature in his Grounds. He
regards not the Common Notions of Mankind, nor in what they consist; and
therefore his Discourses are so perfectly Artificial, that they have nothing to
say to Nature, nor Nature to them. He imposes imprudently new Language and new
Terms upon his Readers, which he might have assured himself they would never
take pains to learn. He affects the way of A, B, C, which makes a show of
Science; but the Product of his Discourse is, oftentimes, no more but the bare
Proposition he is to prove, only dressed up in a Mathematical Garb. His whole
Book, in my judgment, might have been more clearly comprised in one Sheet of
Paper: And, lastly, as for want of Nature to ground his Conceptions, his
several Proofs can never enter into the Reason, so it is almost Impossible they
should ever stay long in the Memory. Yet his Attempt to demonstrate in such a
Skeptical Age, and his Industry, deserve a fair Commendation, and may provoke
others to make the same Attempt with better Success. Burgersdicius is clearly
contrived for the Memory only, and not for the Reason; and he confounds and
over-burthens it too, with the Multitude of his Canons, Rules, and Divisions;
for which he seldom or never gives any reason, but puts them to be Believed by
his Reader if he pleases; and, so leaves him still in the dark. Yet he might be
made Useful to New Beginners; were something of every thing, that is to
purpose, picked out; Unnecessary things (in which he super-abounds) cut off;
his Errors, which are not a few, Corrected by some Learned hand; and his
shattered thrumsends woven into some kind of Connection, and Dependence on one
another; to do which, little Transitions from one passage to another are
Insufficient. But, as he is, he informs not the Understanding of any one thing
groundedly or solidly. He falls exceedingly short of Ars cogitandi in many
regards: How, he may please Climates of a duller Genius I know not; but I
should much wonder if any Learned Englishman should consider or esteem him. Mr.
Clark, far exceeds him in good Sense, and in giving some Reasons for what he
says in many particular passages. But, by his framing the Contexture of his
Book out of Authors of different Principles, his Discourses do sometimes
appear Desultory, and like a kind of Elaborate Rhapsody, laid well together by
his own good Wit. He mistakes Aristotle now and then, by taking his Sentiments
as represented by his Adversaries; whose Interest and Principles conspire to
make them misconceive him. He abounds with many Reflections not all conducing to
Science. A Fault, from which Aristotle himself was not altogether free; which
makes it more pardonable. For instance; To what purpose are his many
Distinctions of his Propositions, especially those he calls Exponibiles? Let
but the Learner know certainly and liquidly, what are the Subject and Predicate
in any Proposition, which is easy to be discovered by the Copula that is to
come between them, and unite them; and have a care that the words that express
them are Univocal; he will be furnished with means to see the Form of
Connection, which is Essential to a Proposition, and is only Conducive to
Science, which wholly consists in the Connection of Terms. His chief Misfortune
is, that he does not seem either at the beginning, or in the Process of his
Book, to know, at least to build upon this Truth and stand to it, that our
Notions, or (as the Moderns have taken a Toy to call them) Ideas, are the very
Natures of the Things in our Understanding imprinted by Outward Objects;
without which no Stability of those Notions or Ideas can be, with Evidence,
asserted; nor any Solid knowledge possibly be had of our Predications; nor the
true Ground of Truth or Falsehood be understood; nor, consequently, ean there be
any Firmness in our Judgments or Discourses. Whence, I could wish that every
Beginner were at first well instructed and settled in this point; for, without
this, all will be but Loose, and Ungrounded Talk in the Air. And, though I lose
Credit with our late Wits, I must avow that Aristotle's dry Assertion, that
[Anima intelligendo fit omnia,] though it may seem to some a wild Paradox, has
more Solid Sense in it, were it rightly understood, and is more Useful to true
Philosophy, than all the other Maxims that do not proceed upon it, and suppose
it; which yet I see the Goodness of Nature intimates to many, and forces them
to ground their Discourses on it Practically; even though, while they speculate,
they deny it, or, at least, seem to doubt of it, or disregard it.

Observing therefore this great want under which Philosophy (which is the Study
of Truth) labors, I have, out of my true Zeal of improving Science, and
beating down Skepticism, (the professed Patron of Ignorance, and covert Parent of
all Irreligion) hazarded the Opinion of Singularity in endeavoring to write
and publish a Demonstrative Logic; at least I have given such Reasons, quite
thorough it, as I judged to be Clear and Conclusive, in every piece of it that
has any Influence upon Scientifical Knowledge. What my Reader may expect from
me is this. I begin with our Natural Notions, the Bottom-Ground of all our
Knowledge. I show them to be the very Natures of the Things; whose Metaphysical
Verity being Established by Creative Wisdom, does, consequently, give
Stability, and Solidity to all our Discourses that are built on them. I
distribute those Natural Notions under those several Common Heads, and manifest
why there must be so many and no (...) show how their Definitions are to be
framed, which make our Conceptions of the^ (...) and Distinct. I lay Rules to
escape (...) Snares, which Equivocal Words lay (...) way while we are
Discoursing. I show ^he Reason of all Truth and Falsehood in Connected Notions,
or Propositions: Which, if Self-evident and Identical, have Title to be First
Principles, as from many Heads I demonstrate. I trace Nature in all those nice
and Immediate steps she takes to generate Knowledge in us at First. Coming to
those Propositions that need Proof, and the Way of Proving them, I lay open the
Fundamental Ground of the Force of Consequence, which gives the Nerves to every
Act of True Reasoning, and of the Certainty and Evidence of every Conclusion
which we rightly infer. To perform which, I manifest that there can be but One
Necessary or Natural Figure of a Syllogism, and but Four Moods of that Figure.
I lay down and fix the Fundamental Laws of Concluding. I evidence the Nature of
that Third Notion or Middle Term; by the Connection of which with the Two Terms
of the Thesis to be Proved, they must inevitably be joined with one another,
and so the Thesis it self must be rightly Concluded; and, therefore, Infallibly
True. I show how to find out a Middle Term fit for our purpose, and thence
prepare the way for Demonstration. I lay open how every Truth must have at the
Bottom an Identical Proposition, and every Error a Contradiction as their
First Principles, and how they may be reduced to those Principles of theirs: To
do which (though more laborious) is the best Way of Demonstrating. I manifest
thence how one Truth is in another, and what strange Consequences follow
thence. Also, how Middle Terms, Proper for Demonstration, may be taken from all
the Four Causes. To clear better the Notion of Science, I treat of the Natures
of Opinion, and (Human) Faith; their Grounds, and how the Former of these two
last Deviates from Right Reason; and when the Later does, or does not. Then I
consider the Effects issuing from all sorts of Proof; viz. Assent, Suspense,
Certainty, and Uncertainty. And, to put in Practice my self what I do persuade,
and recommend to others, I add Seven Demonstrations of the most Considerable
Theses in diverse Sciences. And, lastly, I lay open the Ways and Methods of
Disputation; and detect the weak Stratagems, and inefficacious Attacques of
Fallacies, or Paralogisms.

This is the Sum of my Endeavors in common. But, besides these, many
particular Knowledges light in on the by, (and, as I hope, very Useful ones)
which it would be tedious to enumerate. The Manner I use to carry on the Scheme
of my Doctrine, is, not to propose my Conceptions Magisterially, or to expect
any one should assent to the least Tittle of what I say upon my Word: But, I
offer my Reasons for every Paragraph I advance, if it can be conceived to need
any; by doing which I speak to the Reason of my Readers, and withal I expose
my self to the Severe Examination of the most Acute and Judicious Wits; of
which, I doubt not, there are Multitudes in those Seminaries of Learning, our
two Famous Universities; to whom I humbly dedicate this small Present. I
neither strive to ingratiate my self by my Style, nor to surprise any by
Plausible Discourses; much less to Impose upon their Understandings by
Voluntary Suppositions. I draw now and then diverse Useful Corollaries, and some
that will seem, I doubt not, Paradoxical; that so I may carry on my Doctrine to
farther Consequences, and show withal to what Unthought-of Conclusions Reason
will lead us if we follow her close and home. Nor am I ashamed to declare
openly, that I hold, that the Chief End of Science is to beget Virtue; and not
only to raise us to Higher Contemplation, but also to comfort, and strengthen
Divine Faith in us, and to make it more Lively and Operative. Whence I have
taken occasion to excite my Reader's Devotion out of the Reflections on diverse
Points, that seemed of themselves to be but Dry Speculations: making account
that Good Thoughts arising, upon the Spot, but of Truths newly Cleared to our
Reason, do affect the Will most connaturally, raise Devotion, heighten
Contemplation, and make it Solid; and, consequently, keep the Soul Clear from
Idle Fancies, and set her above Light Bigotteries.

I have not enumerated these Particulars to boast my Performances, (for these
are yet to be Decided, by examining whether the Reasons I have all along
produced will bear the Test) but to bespeak my Reader's Pardon, if, traveling
in an unbeaten Road, I happen now and then to stumble. Which as I am not
conscious to my self to have done at all, so I shall hope I no where do in any
passage that substantially concerns the METHOD TO SCIENCE: Rather, I must
positively avow that it is impossible for any Wit of Man to invent any other
Way, than what I have proposed, that is Solid and Evident. For, it is granted by
all Mankind hitherto (unless, perhaps, the Cartesians) that Truth is
fundamentally the Conformity of our Judgment to the Nature of the Thing, and
that it consists Formally in the Connection of the Terms; both which I have
followed most exactly; and, as some Readers (I doubt not) will think, too
superstitiously.

Now, since Rectum est mensura sui and obliqui, my Design engages me to show
(as far as the Brevity of a Preface will allow) that the different Methods
taken by Others do not lead us to true Science. And, indeed, there is a kind of
Necessity laid upon me to make this Charge good: For, since we take Different
Methods, if theirs be a Right one, mine must be a Wrong; and my Publishing it
no Advantage, but an Injury to Truth, and to my Greatest Neighbor, the World.
The METHODS which I pitch upon to examine, shall be of two sorts, viz. that of
Speculative, and that of Experimental Philosophers; The Former of which pretend
to proceed by Reason and Principles; the Later by Induction; and both of them
aim at advancing Science. Looking about for an Instance if the Former sort, I
did not think Epicurus, and his School worth my taking notice of; for he who
supposes all his Principles, bids Defiance to all Methods of Concluding any
thing. And, as for our Modern School-Philosophers, they have so disputed
themselves quite out of breath for want of any Certain Method, that they have
brought all Science to an Indifferency of Opinions, or maintaining any thing
with Equal Evidence (or rather No-Evidence) a thing absolutely impossible for
those who lay any right Method to Science. And this Deficiency of theirs,
losing their Credit with our late Wits, have given them occasion to east about
how to model Philosophy anew, and frame it wholly in another Mould: for the
Schoolmen on the one side represented Aristotle wrong, and on the other side
his (perhaps affected) Obscurity, won them rather to believe the Schools
concerning his Doctrine, than to be at the Expense of Pains and Patience to
understand him right, speaking by himself, or by his First Interpreters.

The Inconsiderableness then of other Pretenders to a Method to Science, and
the Weakness of their Pleas, throws me forcibly upon examining the Method of
that Great Man, Cartesius: It must be confessed his Method is vastly different
from mine. He pretends to a First Principle, and the Self-evidence of that
Principle; which therefore I must either disprove, or give up my Cause, and
condemn what I have written; since it is impossible that two Methods, contrary
to one another, can both of them be the right one; or lay just Claim to
Self-evidence in their Principles. But, with how Potent an Adversary has my
Unlucky Audaciousness, in attempting to lay a Demonstrative Method to Science
obliged me to grapple! It must be acknowledged that he was a a Man of that
Prodigious Wit, that scarce any Age has produced his Equal. His School has
dilated it self into diverse Nations; and his Scholars and Followers are of such
Eminent Rank and Name, that it would terrify any Man to encounter his
Doctrine, especially his Principles (which must be the solidest, strongest, and
clearest parts of it) who had not an unshaken Confidence in the Invincible
Strength of TRUTH, under whose ^anner he fights. He dazles the Understanding of
his Reader with his most Ingenious and Clear Way of Discoursing; a Talent
peculiar to himself; and he lays his Thoughts together with such an Artificial
and smoothly-flowing Currency, in proper and unaffected Language, that he
captivates it at unawares into a Complaisant Assent; and his greatest Adversary
must be forced to confess that, if his Doctrine be not True, at least Truth was
never so exactly and handsomely Counterfeited. He postures his Thoughts so
dexterously, that nothing but perfect Evidence can break their Ranks, or make a
hostile Impression upon them; so that, if his Hypothesis be False, and hap to
be overthrown, it will certainly be the most Glorious Victory Truth ever
gained. But all those Bug-bears cannot deter me from the Defense of Truth; in
such a Cause, Non Divum parcimus ulli and the more his Doctrine resembles Truth
and has Greater Patrons to abet and carry i^ on, the higher Obligation it lays
upon me t^ detect its Falsehood, if I sincerely judge i^ Fallacious, and think I
can show it to be so I would not be misunderstood to intend her^ a Confutation
of his Doctrine; it is neithe^ a Work for a Preface, nor for a Man of m^ small
Leisure; but only to take Minutes o^ some few, (but main) Hinges of his
Do^ctrine in order to confute his Method; leaving it to others who have better
parts and less Employments, to carry on my slight Animadversions, if they may
be found of weight, to farther Reflections.

To begin then with his six Meditations. In the first place, I cannot conceive
why they should be styled his Metaphysics. For it is proper for that Noblest
and Highest Science to treat of Ens, as Ens, or of sueh Notions as concern
Being; which I cannot discern to have been the direct Scope of those Treatises.

He sets himself to investigate some First Principle, to fix upon, by a
laborious Divesting himself of all those Knowledges he is seemingly possessed
of; and, after much tossing his Thoughts to and from a long time, with doubting
or pretending to doubt, of all he had hitherto known, he arrives at length at
that odd first Principle of his [Cogito, ergo sum] and triumphs mightily with a
(...) at his having found it. Against which Procedure (waving here what I have
said of it, Book 2. Less. 4.) I have diverse Exceptions, as Irrational in many
Respects. For,

First he might as well have made that Inference, or have found that First
Principle at the very beginning, when he made his first Doubt; since [Dubito
ergo sum] is full as Conclusive of his own Existence as [Cogito ergo sum] can
be pretended to be. Nor can any reason be given why [Ego sum dubitans] does not
include in it [Ego sum] as well as [Ego sum Cogitans] does. And Cartesius
himself (Medit. 3d.) confesses the same expressly. To what end then did he run
on in a long ramble of Doubting, when as the very first Act of Doubting, would
have done his whole business, and have proved that he is? If it be pretended
that [Ego cogito] was more comprehensive than [Ego dubito] because Doubting is
one Head, or sort of Thinking, then his Argument should have been put thus
[Dubito ergo cogito] as we argue from [Est Homo] (which is one kind of Animal)
to Ergo est Animal; whereas he takes and pursues a quite different Method.

2dly. He infers his First Principle, [Ego sum] and so makes it a kind of
Conclusion; which is clearly against the Nature of First Principles, they being
Self-evident, and, therefore Incapable of being Inferred or Proved; because
there is nothing more Evident than themselves to infer or prove them by.

I know Spinoza, and some others of his School, deny he meant an Inference, but
intended by these Words one positive proposition, viz. Ego sum cogitans, or
P^es cogitans. But, what means then the Illative particle [Ergo] or what sense
bears it? Or, why did himself in his Third Meditation say expressly, [Ex eo quod
dubito SEQUITUR me esse?] Again, his first Principle is denied by himself to be
[Ego sum res cogitans] but merely [Ego sum,] at which he arrives by the means
of Ego cogito: For, in the 2d. Meditation he has these words. Nunquam efficiet
Deceptor ille sum potens, etc. ut nihil sim, quamdiu me aliquid esse
cogitabo; adeo ut -- denique statuendum sit hoc pronunciatum, [Ego sum,] [Ego
existo] -- necessario esse verum. But, not to hold him too severely to his own
words, though no Man uses to express himself more clearly, let his First
Principle be [Ego sum cogitans;] I object then farther against it.

3dly, That, notwithstanding all that can be alleged, it must be granted, he
has inferred and proved that whole First Principle. For was not all that
anteceded to the finding it so many Discourses or Reasonings? And did he not
evidently infer this to be True, because all else might be doubted of? If not,
to what purpose did he pretend he might doubt of all else? For, if this was
Evident of it self, and not needed to be Proved, he might have proposed it at
first, without making all that a-do.

4thly, Since he must necessarily grant that something or other is inferred or
Proved by him, that is, follows from his Antecedent Discourses; and, it is
evident that, in his opinion, something did follow thence, because he
discoursed or Argued all the while, and used more than once the word
[Sequitur;] and no such Discourse can be, but something must still follow out
of what went before; he ought, in the First place, and ere he began his
Discourse, or went about to speak consequentially, to have been perfectly
satisfied himself, and have shown his Readers, so as to put it past all Doubt,
what the Force of a right Consequence is, and in what it consists; and that
himself, while he discoursed, did make use of such right Consequences. And, he
should the rather have done this, because Men do more frequently err in drawing
Consequences, than in judging that they have a Body, that they see, feel, hear,
or use their other Senses; all which he represents as possible to be doubted
of. Whereas, he never starts or makes the least Doubt of his Consequences,
which are to bind the parts of his Discourse together all along, and so bring
him orderly to his First Principle; nor gives any Reason why they may not be
Doubted of as well as the rest; nor takes care to settle that Doubt. Which
shows that he is not true to his own extravagant Method of settling his First
Principle, by Doubting of every thing till he comes at it; but leaves it, and
consequently his First Principle, which depends on it, Uncertain.

5thly, and Lastly, No man can have a Clear and Distinct Idea, (in which,
according to him, all Knowledge consists) of any thing following out of a First
Principle, unless he have a Clear and Distinct Knowledge of that Principle it
self: But Cartesius, when, in the Progress of his Thoughts, he came to the
settling Ego cogito (or Ego sum) for his First Principle, had no Clear and
Distinct Idea of that Principle it self; therefore he could have no Clear and
Distinct Idea of any thing which followed out of that Principle; and,
consequently, all that Method to Science laid by him is Useless to that End,
and Fruitless. The Minor (which only can need proof) is thus manifested. For,
he had not, as soon as he had arrived at that Principle, as yet any Clear and
Distinct Knowledge of the Subject of that Principle (or Proposition) [Ego] and
therefore he had no such Knowledge of the Proposition or Principle it self. The
Antecedent is confessed by himself in the words immediately following the place
lately cited, viz. [Nondum tamen satis intelligo quisnam sim ego ille qui jam
necessario sum] and thence he proceeds to find, after he had found his First
Principle, what Ego means, and at length conciudes that he was praecise res
Cogitans, Men's, Ratio, etc. which Clear and Distinct Conception of himself he
had not before, though he pretended he knew his First Principle. Again, when he
was newly come to the Knowledge of that First Principle, he is put to know
nothing but barely that; nor could he gather this Clear Knowledge of himself
from that Principle alone, while it was yet Unknown. It were worth our Enquiry
then, how, and whence he had this Clear and Distinct Knowledge of himself.

He concludes the Soul to be a Distinct Thing from the Body, because the Idea
he has of it, and of its Properties and Affections are clearly different from
the Idea, he has of the Body, and its Modifications. By which it is most Evident
that, for want of Logic, he reflects not on the Difference between the Nature,
and the Suppositum which has the Nature in it; that is, between the Essence or
Nature, and the Ens or Thing. For, if he did, he would have seen that from the
having Different, nay Contradictory Ideas of two distinct NATURES, it does not
necessarily follow that they must be two THINGS, meaning by Thing the
Suppositum. Surely he has a vastly Different Idea of the Divine and Human
Natures, and yet will grant that they were both in One Suppositum, or (which is
the same in an Intelligent Being) in the same Person, And, I am sure, if he
holds the Incarnation, he must renounce this Principle of his, that whenever he
has distinct Ideas of two Natures, there must be Two Individual Things or
Suppositums. It being one of the most Chief and most Fundamental Articles of
our Christian Faith, that there is in Christ our Savior but One Hypostasis or
Suppositum; though the Essences and Properties of the Divine and Humane Nature,
and the Ideas (as he calls it) of them, do still keep their Exact Distinction,
and remain Unconfounded; and that, whoever holds otherwise, and makes them two
Suppositums, does (in the Christian Phrase) Solvere Christum, 1 Io. 4.3.

I have not time to reckon up, even hintingly, the many Absurdities that spring
from this ill-coherent Position of theirs. But, I will keep to this very Maxim
of his, and demonstrate that, even according to that, Man, which must be meant
by the Pronoun [Ego] is truly one thing consisting of Soul and Body, and not a
mere Men's. To show this, I deny that he has a C^^ar and Distinct Idea of
himself, unless he conceives himself to be a Rational thing; or, as he calls
himself, Ratio; nor can he clearly conceive himself to be a Rational Thing, but
he must conceive himself to be a Thing that infers new Knowledges out of
foregoing ones, leasurely, or with succession of Time, which belongs properly
to Bodies and Bodily Motion. Wherefore, something of Corporeal, Extended, or
Divisible is found in the Clear and Distinct Idea of Ego, or Himself, if he be
a Ratio or Rational Thing; for, were he merely a Men's or Spirit, his Operations
would be Indivisible, Simultaneous and Unsuccessive, as is abundantly
demonstrated in diverse places of the following Treatise; particularly in my
Seventh Demonstration, Book 3. Lesson 7.

Among the other points, he brings as possible to be yet doubted of, he puts
this for one, that a Four-squar'd thing has in it four sides and no more; of
which he pretends he may yet doubt, because some most Powerful Agent may
possibly make that appear to him to be so, though it be not true in reality. Now,
it is the very Notion or Essence of a Quadratum, to have but four sides; and,
therefore, the Proposition affirming that it has just four sides, is perfectly
Identical, and the same as to say, What has but four sides, has but four sides.
It being then impossible any thing can be more Certain, or more Evident than an
Identical Proposition; I would ask why he might not as well be Deceivable in
his First Principle [Cogito ergo sum] as in that Self-evident Proposition! Or,
if he pretends that Proposition, [Ego sum cogitans] is more Evident than the
other; then, since all Evidence of the Truth of any Proposition, consists in
the Close and Clear Connection of its Terms, I would demand of him or his
Scholars, whether there be any Connection of Terms more Close and more Clear,
than there is of those found in an Identical Proposition, which affirms the
Same is the Same with it self? Or, if they say there is, then to know of them
in what that Evidence consists, or how it comes to be more Evident?

To make way toward the settling his beloved and self-pleasing Ideas; he falls
to Doubt of the Certainty of all our Senses in order to Knowledge; and that not
only as a Supposition for Discourse sake, as he pretended to doubt of other
things, but really and seriously; and his Scholar Malbranche B. 1. chapter 6.
assures us, the Eyes (and the same he says of the other senses) are not given
us to judge of the Truth of Things, but only to discern those things which may
either Profit, or injure us; and all over, he makes them improper Means to
attain Knowledge by. Which Tenet of theirs lies open to many Exceptions. For,

First, The Reason Cartesius assigns, viz. [Prudentiae est nunquam illis plane
confidere qui nos vel semel deceperunt. It Is a part of Prudence not to trust
them at all, who have so much as once deceived us] is utterly unworthy so Great
a Man: For, it discredits all Nature, for some few Men's Morality; which is a
strange Argument for a Philosopher. He that has but once deceived us
designedly, is presumed to have done it out of Knavery; and consequently, may
not deserve to be trusted the second time, because it is to be feared he is
still disposed to do the same again: But, what is this to Corporeal Nature, in
which (taking in all circumstances) things are carried on from Proper Causes to
Proper Effects. Weak men are sometimes deceived by their Senses; but
Speculative or Learned men, who penetrate the Reasons how the Senses came to
misinform them, are aware of those undue circumstances, and by that means
easily prevent the being led by them into Error.

2dly, No wise man builds his Judgments barely on the Impressions made on his
Senses, being taught by their Reason, as well as by the Senses themselves
better circumstanced (that is, by Experience) that they do sometime, deceive
us. Whence, they reserve in their Minds certain (...), in what circumstances we
may truly give Credit to their Testimony, in what, not. Now, since Exceptio
firmat Regulam, to say their Information is to be Excepted against in such
Circumstances, is to acknowledge that in all others they are to be trusted.

3dly, As Art does preserve the Learned from being Deceived by the Shortness of
the Senses in some Cases, so (as was said lately) the Senses themselves do
generally correct the False Judgments they may have occasioned in Weak People.
For example, (to use some of the Instances they object,) a Brand whirled round
represents a Circle of Fire; a Stick in the Water looks Crooked; a Square Tower
seen a far off appears Round, and Great Bodies Little. But when the Seer comes
near the Brand, the Tower and those Great Bodies, or beholds the Stick out of
the Water, he having now a more exact View of them in better Circumstances, is
informed certainly by the same Sense, (and, if need be, by others conspiring
with it,) that the former representations were not sincere; whence he easily
corrects his former Mistakes. Why then must the Senses be quite discarded as
Useless Servants for Knowledge, and be branded for constant Liars and
Deceivers? since, if we apply them as we ought, they are the Proper Means to
make us correct these too forward Judgments, which in improper Circumstances
they may have occasioned. Nay, they advance our Knowledge accidentally even
when they happen to misinform us; by stirring us up to enquire whence it came,
that the right Impressions on them, from the Objects, which were Customary, was
thus perverted; which, doubtless has been the Cause of very many New Knowledges
in Nature.

4thly, What is all this to Science, or to our purpose? For in the Method to
Science, we neither need, nor do build our JUDGMENTS on the Senses alone. All
we require is, that they convey into our Knowing Power right A^PREHENSIONS or
NOTIONS of the things in Nature: And, this it is Evident they must do; for though,
as they object, a Large Square Steeple seen a far off seems Round and Little;
and therefore who Judges it such is Deceived; yet it imprints truly in my Mind
the Notion of Little and Round; and, it is on these unmistakable NOTIONS all our
Science is built; and our Judging right in our Speculations is chiefly grounded
on other Principles, as will be seen hereafter.

Lastly, Themselves must either grant the Certainty of those Impressions on the
Senses, or they must confess all their Ideas are nothing worth. For, since they
hold that the Objects imprint Motions on the Fibers of the Senses, which,
making such a Report (as it were) to the Soul, the Proper and Medit. 3.
Ingenit Ideas of such a Body are either Excited in the Soul, or else are, as
Cartesius elsewhere expresses it, Elicited, that is Produced by it, upon the
hint given it by such a Motion; in case the Impressions causing such Motions be
not Sincere, and do not truly inform her, a wrong Idea may come to be made use
of, and so they can never have any certain Knowledge of any thing.

Having thus got rid of the Senses giving us notice of outward things, by
imprinting Notions in them, which Experience teaches us is the Ordinary Way of
Knowing any thing; it follows of course, that they must recurr to Extraordinary
ways by Inward means, or to Inward Light; which is the Method of Fanatics in
Religion, when they have rejected the Ordinary ways of believing their Proper
Teachers. And, hence, the Cartesians tell us, they know there is a God, by the
Divine Idea of himself Which he has imprinted in them; which is in other Terms,
to say, that they have it ky Divine Revelation; for Knowledge, according to
them, being caused in them by those Ideas, nay, consisting formally in thoir
having the Ideas of things in them; and GOD giving them those Ideas without the
help of Second Causes, it follows that GOD is the Immediate Cause of all our
Knowledge; and, so, no thanks at all to the things in Nature, or to Natural
Agents. These Ideas I can observe by Cartesius's Discourse, are either of
Propositions, or else Simple Ideas. Of the former they say, that whatever we
clearly and distinctly conceive to be, is true. By which if they mean no more
but that whatever we know to be, is; or that we cannot truly know that to be
which is not, nothing is more certain or more Evident by Common Sense; only
they run counter in their Discourse, and make not the Understanding to be True,
because the Outward Thing is so, but they argue that the Thing is therefore
thus or thus, because the Idea in the Understanding is such or such; and, so,
they seem to make Truth consist, not in the Conformity of the Understanding to
the Thing, but in the Thing's being Conformable to the Idea in my
Understanding; as Cartesius himself affirms in his Answer to the Instances of
Gassendus.

How solidly he argues from Simple Ideas may be seen by his Demonstration of a
Deity, which he concludes to be, because he has an Idea of a Being that has all
Perfections in it, amongst which Existence is one; which Idea he contends he
could never have had from the Things without us, and therefore it must have
been imprinted by GOD himself Immediately. In making which proof passable, though
Cartesius exerts the utmost of his Great Wit, yet this plain Discourse will
manifest how untoward and Inconclusive it is. I can have a Notien or Idea of
Finis, of non, and of Perfection, and Thing, and All, and lastly of Existence;
and had I not such distinct Ideas of all these, I could not understand the
Meaning of those Words; for an Idea can be nothing but what is meant by those
Words. Having distinct Ideas of all these, I can compound an Idea pf all these,
or frame an Idea of a thing that has all Perfections in it, and Existence among
the rest: And this Idea is in my Mind, and the Effect purely of my Mind,
already imbued with those Simple Ideas, and Compounding them; for I had it not
from any one Thing directly, nor did I gather it by Discourse from the Natures
of Things I was pre-acquainted with. But how comes it, or how can he argue that
because I have such an Idea framed by my Mind, it must exist without my Mind,
or have a Reality there: unless my Mind could Coin or Create Beings at her
pleasure, as often as I have a desire to compound such Ideas together? He plays
wittily upon the word [Existence.] But we may consider the Notion of Existence,
or (which is all one) know the Meaning of that Word, and yet abstract whether
it does actually put its Formal Effect, that is, whether that Existence is
exercised or not exercised in the thing: which consideration alone spoils his
whole Argument: Let us put a parallel. I have a complex Idea of these Words, My
Debtor will pay me a Hundred Pounds to Morrow, at Ten a Clock, at his
Goldsmiths; that is, I have in my Mind the Meaning of all these Words; and
Existence is necessarily involved in the Meaning of those words, for they
signify Determinate Persons, Time, Place, and Action, all which involve
Existence; will it therefore follow, that that Action of Paying me Money will
be, because my Idea includes the Existence of that Action, so determinately
circumstanc'd? Yet upon his Knowledge of a Deity by this Demonstration,
depends, by his Discourse, all the Knowledge he has of any Truth, except
perhaps of Ego Cogito. What need was there to run after Whimseys coined in the
Mint of our own Mind, to Demonstrate a Deity, when there are so many Clear
Demonstrations of it from solid Grounds in Nature?

It may seem harsh that I should resemble, though Cartesian Method to Fanaticism,
or pretend they bring a kind of Enthusiasm into Philosophy. Let the so much
applauded Malbranche be my Compurgator. That very Ingenious and Eloquent
Person, who has a peculiar Talent of talking Nonsense as prettily and plausibly
as any Man I ever read, in his Preface to the First Volume of his Search after
Truth, acquaints us with many Extraordinary things, which would no doubt (as
Bays says) very much Elevate and Surprise an ordinary Reader. In Common, he
confounds all our Moral and Christian Knowledges, which are immediately
ordained to raise us toward Heaven, and advance Virtue and Sanctity, with the
Speculative Knowledges belonging to mere Philosophy; and most untowardly
misapplies the sayings of the Scriptures and Fathers, which were never meant
for his purpose, but in order to Devotion, or Mystical Theology, (nay to the
Beatifical State of GOD's manifesting his Divine Essence to the Saints in
Heaven) to the Maxims and Methods by which we are to attain Human Science. In
particular, speaking his own sense, according to the Cartesian Doctrine; he
tells us, we must judge of things by the pure Ideas of the Mind; whereas, I
should rather have thought, that we ought to guide our Thoughts, and judge of
them, by the Conformity they have to the Things in Nature: since we are sure
Creative Wisdom made them, and implanted Truth in them; whereas, it is Uncertain
whether GOD or our Whimsical Fancies gave us our Ideas; and, it is certain they
are the Offspring of the later, if they be not conformable to the Things
without us.

He tells us farther that, All Sciences are learned by the Attention of the
Mind, which is nothing but its Return and Conversion toward God, who only can
teach us Truth by the Manifestation of his Substance. I am heartily glad to
know, that Euclid and Archimedes were converted to God, and that they were so
infinitely Happy as to see God's Substance (which is his Essence) so
manifestly. He proceeds, Men must look within themselves, and draw near unto
the Light that shines there continually, that their Reason may be the more
Illuminated. -- The Mind ought to examine all Human Sciences by the Pure Light
of Truth which guides it, without hearkening to the False, and confused
Testimonies of the Senses. -- Those that hear us do not learn the Truths we
speak to their Ears, unless he that discovered them to us, (he means GOD the
Giver of Ideas) do reveal them at the same time to the Mind. So that all
Science it seems, comes by Divine Revelation. To what end then are Teachers,
Professors, Schools and Universities, if, when we have done what we can by all
our Teaching and Learning, nothing but Divine Revelation must do the business,
or gain us any Science. But now he advances to a higher point. The Mind (says
he) is immediately, and after a very strict manner United to God; nay, after a
stricter and more Essential manner than with the Body. Now, if this be true, I
dare affirm that the Mind is more United to God Naturally, than our Savior's
Humanity was Supernaturally and Miraculously. For, This was but United
Hypostatically, or according to the Suppositum or Person of the Eternal Word;
whereas, by this new Philosophy, every Human Mind is United Essentially to God,
that is to the Godhead it self. For, to be united Essentially is for one
Essence to be united to another Essence, that is, to be one or the same Essence
with the Divine Essence. Was ever such Quakerism heard of among Philosophers!
Or, plain honest Human Reason so subtiliz'd and exhaled into Mystic Theology,
by Spiritual Alchymy!

Yet, to say True, this is very Consonant to the Doctrine of Ideas. They slight
the Instruction of Nature, they scorn to be beholding to their Senses, and
Outward Objects; which forces them upon Introversion, and to observe (as the
same Author says) what Eternal Truth tells us in the Recesses of our Reason;
that is, in their Darling Ideas.

Now common Reason ever taught me, and every Man who did but reflect upon what
passes within his Understanding, that the Proper and Effectual way to gain a
Clear and Distinct Knowledge of our Simple Notions, is to make DEFINITIONS of
them; and there are most Certain Rules of Art, how those Definitions may be
framed. But, this was too Ordinary a way to please Minds so Extraordinarily
Elevated as these Gentlemen pretend to be blessed with. The highest Flights of
Nature do flag, it seems, too low for their Supernatural pitch, nor can reach
the Degrees of their Elevation above our dull Horizon. They are Inspired with
Heaven implanted Ideas; and, so, they have no more to do but retire their
Thoughts into the Inward Recesses of their Mind, embellished and gilded with
these Shining Innate Ideas, and their work is done without any need of
Definitions made by sublunary Art. Sometimes I am apt to think, that they had
recourse to those Spiritual Pourtraitures, out of despair of explicating any
other way the Essences of Things, or in what they consisted; and, I fear two of
our Learned men lately mentioned, apprehend them to be Inscrutable and
In-explicable. Whereas, speaking of Essences in Common, I do assure them, that
nothing can be plainer; and that every Clown were he interrogated orderly,
could give us the true Essences, or (which is the same) the true Natures of the
things he is conversant with. For, whatever makes Mankind call and esteem any
Bodies, such or such Things in Distinction from all others, is truly their
Essence; or, (to speak in the Language of a Philosopher) let but Matter be
determined by such a Complexion of Accidents, with that Harmony or Proportion
of parts, connected with that Constancy, that it is fit to act a Distinct part
upon Nature's stage, or perform its Primary Operation; that Complexion of
Accidents, (I say) is truly the Essence of that Body, or the Form that
constitutes it such an Ens, or such a Part of, or in, Nature.

Perhaps the Cartesians will say, they allow Definitions to make their Ideas
Clear and Distinct. But how can this cohere? Definitions are the Effects of
Art, whereas these Ideas are imprinted by God's Hand who gave them their
Nature, and Medit 3.
Cartesius says expressly, they are Ingenitae. This being so, and GOD's
immediate Works being Perfect, and those Ideas being intended to give them
Knowledge, they can need nothing to make them more Clear and Distinct; nor
consequently can the Users of them have any occasion for Definitions, unless
perhaps to explain their Ideas to us; who think we have a firmer Basis to build
them on, than those Ideas of theirs. Nature gives the Ground, and Art, the
Rules to make them: And they are such necessary Instruments to true and solid
Science, that I could wish for the Improvement of Knowledge, that our
Universities would appoint a Committee of Learned Men to compile a Dictionary
of Definitions for the Notions we use in all parts of Philosophy whatever.
Monsieur de Furetiere has attempted to perform this for all words whatever, in
Three Volumes; Out of which may be Collected those that make for our purpose;
which being, by the Ioynt-labour and Concurrence of the Persons deputed,
Examined; if faulty, Amended, and proposed to the World; it could not fail of
advancing Science highly. In carrying forward such a Noble Work, and so
Beneficial to Mandkind, I should willingly contribute my Quota of Endeavors,
nor think my pains better bestowed in any thing I know of. For Definitions
explicating or unfolding the Nature of the Thing, and all Proper Causes and
Effects being so nearly allied to the Nature of the Thing, it follows that
there lies involved in the Definitions, all Essential and Proper Middle Terms,
to demonstrate whatever belongs to the Notion Defined, if Right Logic and
studious Industry be not wanting.

He blames St. Austin, and wishes he had not attributed to External Bodies all
the sensible Qualities we perceive by their means. And why? Because (says he)
they are not clearly contained in the Idea he had of Matter. What Idea St.
Austin had of Matter is little to purpose; but, if he proceeded consequently to
his Thoughts, he could not conceive the First Matter to be such as they put
theirs to be. For, what Man of Common Sense can frame any Idea of a Thing that
has only Extension in it; but is not to any degree either Dense or Rare, Easy
or Hard to be Divided, Fluid nor Solid, Soft nor Hard? etc. And, if their
Quaint Ideas and Clear and Distinct Conceptions, which seem to be the Ground of
all their Witty Discourses, or Divine Revelations (as Malbranche calls them) of
Science, be no Wiser or Solider than this, which is, or should be the chief
Subject of their Physics, I shall dare to affirm, that they are in plain Terms
most ridiculous and most unintelligible Fopperies; as I have shown at large in
my Appendix. And, indeed, how should we make any Clear Idea of their Matter
when themselves speak Contradictions concerning it; as may be seen hereafter,
p. 417. where I shall hope I have demonstrated that their Forced Silence, Open
Prevarications, and perfect Inconsistency in telling us the Intrinsecal Nature
of that First Matter of theirs, has rendered them utterly Incapable of
explicating any Body in Nature. Nor can we need any greater Confirmation, that
their Natural Philosophy is utterly Unprincipled and Unaccountable in the most
Essential part of it, than to observe that neither Cartesius himself, nor
Regius, Rohault, Regis, Le Grand, nor any of that School I have met with, have
(as I must think) been Able to give us any Light of it; since they neither
Attempt, nor Mention it; which shows they are at an utter Loss about the
Primordial Constitution of their First Matter; of which, notwithstanding, they
acknowledge all their Three Elements, and, consequently, all Nature was made.

These few Particulars (omitting innumerable others) I have thought fit to
hint, to show that the Method to Science, which the Great Cartesius follows is
utterly Incompetent to attain it, and that the Scheme of his Doctrine is merely
a piece of Wit. That which gives it most Credit is, that, his Suppositions
granted, he proceeds consequently, in the subsequent parts of it, which are
purely Mathematical. But, what signifies that, if he neither observes True
Logic in laying his Principles; nor Nature in his Physics, which he cannot
pretend to do, unless he gives us a particular account of the Intrinsecal
Constitution of his First Matter, upon which all depends. A Task, I say again,
his Followers neither will ever attempt, nor can possibly perform by his
Principles, as is shown at large in my Appendix.

Yet it must be confessed, that those kind of Discourses are very Plausible and
Taking with the Middling sort of Readers; and with such who are much pleased
with a Melodious Gingle of Words, prettily laid together with Neat Eloquence,
Quaint Wit, and Unusual Remarks. For those kind of Embellishments do divert the
Reader, make the Authors pass for Curious men, and bear a fine Appearance of
Truth; till they come to be scanned Exactly, and grasped close by Severe Reason
reducing them to Principles and Connection of Terms. Which done, it will be
found that they afford to the Learner who sincerely seeks for Truth, nothing
but certain Bright Flashes or Coruscations; which do indeed for a time dazzle
the Fancy, but they settle in the Judgment no Constant Steady Light to direct
them in their Way to true Science. Farther, I must declare, for the Honor of
our English Genius, that, though we do not match the French in the Finery,
Gayity, and Neatness of their delivering their Conceptions (a Talent in which
they are very Excellent) any more than we do in our Outward Garb, and Dress;
yet, that there are more Solid Productions, well built Truths, and more
Judicious and Ingenious Thoughts of his own in our Learned Countryman Mr.
Locke's Treatise, Entitled, An Essay concerning Human Understanding, than (as
far as I have observed) is found in great Multitudes of such slight Discoursers
put together.

We are come now to consider the Other pretended Method to Science, which is
the Way of Experiments or Induction. Concerning which, (not to repeat what I
have occasionally, by way of Reason, alleged against it in my following Book)
I need say no more, but that Matter of Fact shows evidently, that this Method,
alone, and Unassisted by Principles, is utterly Incompetent or Unable to beget
Science. For, what one Universal Conclusion in Natural Philosophy, (in knowing
which kind of Truths Science consists) has been Demonstrated by Experiments,
since the the time that Great man, Sir Francis Bacon, writ his Natural History?
The very Title of which laborious Work shows, that himself did not think
Science was attainable by that Method. For, if we reflect well on what manner
such pieces are writ, we shall find that it is, (as he calls it) merely
Historical, and Narrative of Particular Observations; from which to deduce
Universal Conclusions is against plain Logic, and Common Sense. To aim at
Science by such a Method, may be resembled to the Study of finding out the
Philosopher's Stone. The Chemist lights on many Useful and Promising things by
the way which feed him with false hopes, and decoy him farther; but he still
falls short of his End. What man of any past, or of our present Curious Age,
did ever so excel in those Industrious and Ingenious Researches, as that
Honor of our Nation, the Incomparable Mr. Boil? yet after he had ransacked
all the hidden Recesses of Nature, as far as that Way could carry him, he was
still a Sceptick in his Principles of Natural Philosophy; nor could, with the
utmost Inquisitiveness, practiced by so great a Wit, arrive at any Certain
Knowledge whether there was a Vacuum or no: And certainly, we can expect no
Science from such a Method that can give us no Certain Knowledge, whether in
such a Space there be Something, or Nothing: which, of all others, should be
the most easily Distinguishable and Knowable. Lastly, we may observe, that when
an Experiment, or (which is the same) a Matter of Fact in Nature is discovered,
we are never the nearer knowing what is the Proper Cause of such an Effect,
into which we may certainly refu^d it; which, and only which, is the Work of
SCIENCE. For, Gassendus will explicate it according to his Principles,
Cartesius, according to his; the Noble Sir Kenelin Digby, and his most Learned
Master. Albius, (whom I Judge to have followed the true Aristotelian
Principles) according to theirs; So that, after all, the assigning the True
Natural Cause for that Effect, and explicating it right, must be Decided by way
of Reason; that is, by Demonstrating first whose Principles of Natural
Philosophy are True and Solid; and only He or They, who can approve their
Principles to be such, can pretend to explicate that Natural Production right
by resolving it into its Proper Causes, or to have Science how it is done; and,
however the Experimental Men may be highly Commendable in other Respects, yet
only those who can lay just Claim to True Principles, and make out their Title
to them, can be truly held Natural PHILOSOPHERS. Which sufficiently shows that
the Way of Experiments cannot be a True METHOD TO SCIENCE.

But to leave other Men's Failings, and Return home to my Self. To obviate the
Superficial ways of Reason, so magnified by other Speculaters, I have
endeavored to take the quite Contrary Method; and have laid my Discourses as
deep as I could possibly; and, perhaps, it will be thought I have overdone in
those about Identical Propositions; for which yet I shall hope, the Reasons I
have given there for that procedure, will bear me out and justify me. For the
same inducement I have very frequently drawn my Arguments from Metaphysics;
being well assured that such Mediums do make the Dicourses, built on them,
approach nearest to Self-evidence. Nor do I fear it should be objected, that,
in a Logical Treatise, I bring such Instances and Corollaries as entrench upon,
and make an In-road into diverse other Sciences. Rather, I must profess that I
held it a precise Duty in my Circumstances; because Logic, or the Art of
Reasoning, being a Common Instrument to attain all Science, I was to show how
it was, upon occasion, to be Applied to as many of them as I could; so I do not
make unreasonable Excursions to hunt for them in Foreign Subjects, but that
they light Naturally in my way. Lastly, I thought it became a Lover of Peace
and Union among Christians to endeavor they should not wrangle about Equivocal
Words, so their Meanings be justifiable.

In a word, it is Connection of Terms which I only esteem as Proper to advance
Science. Where I find not such Connection, and the Discourse grounded on
Self-evident Principles, or (which is the same) on the Metaphysical Verity of
the Subject, which engages the Nature of the Thing, I neither expect Science
can be gained, nor the Method to Science Established. But, this done, I make
account both the one and the other may be hoped for. How well I have behaved my
self in attempting this, is left to the Judgment of those who are the Proper
Umpires in such Matters, I mean your selves.

Your True Honourer and Humble Servant, I. S.

THE METHOD TO SCIENCE. BOOK I.
LESSON I. Of Notions, or the very First Ground on which all Science is built.
1. WE experience, that Impressions are made upon our Senses, and that those
Impressions are Different, according to the different Nature of the Objects
that imprint them.

2. We experience also, that those Impressions do not stay in the Outward
Senses, but reach the Soul, and affect it.

3. Every thing being received according to the nature of the Subject that
receives it, and the nature of the Soul being a Capacity of Knowledge; hence,
those Impressions must so affect the Soul, as to cause some kind of Knowledge
in her, how rude and Imperfect soever it may yet be.

4. The Impressions from Objects that affect the Senses, and by them the Soul,
do carry the very Nature of those Objects along with them, and imprint them in
the Soul: which Prints, or, as it were, Stamps, as received in the
Understanding, we call Notions.

5. Wherefore Notions are the First and Rudest Draughts of Knowledge; being
most Simple, and Naturally wrought in the Soul by the strokes of occurring
Objects, without any Industry or Active Concurrence on our part.

6. That these Notions are the very Natures of the Thing, or the Thing it self
existing in us intellectually, and not a bare Idea or Similitude of it, appears
hence evidently, that when we say interiourly, or judge A Stone is hard, we do
not intend to affirm, That the Likeness or Idea of a Stone is hard, but the
very Stone it self. And were it not so, the Proposition would be false; (for
the Similitude of a Stone in our Mind is not Hard:) whereas yet we are well
assured that Proposition is True.

7. Again, we experience, that we consider, judge, and dis^ourse of the very
Thing it self, and of its very Nature; which (these being Interior or Immanent
Acts, bred and perfected within our Soul) we could not do, unless the Objects
of those Acts, or the very Things themselves were there.

8. Lastly, It cannot be denied, but that we have in our Soul the full and
complete Sense of this Proposition, and Notions of every distinct part of it,
viz. [There is in me the Idea or Likeness of a Stone.] Therefore there is in me
something signified by the word [ Stone] not only distinct from Idea and
Likeness, but moreover Relatively Opposite to it, as the thing Represented is
to that which represents it; which can be nothing but the very Stone it self.

9. Nor need it cause any Wonder, that the same Ens or Thing may have diverse
Manners of Existing; one Corporeal, the other Intellectual or Spiritual; since
the Thing (v. g. Peter) See (...) 3. (...)
abstracts even from Existence it self; for it is not found in the Notion or
Meaning of that word, that the Thing signified by it Exists, or not Exists;
much more then does the Notion of Thing abstract from (that is, is Indifferent
to) all Manners of Existing.

10. The words Notion, Simple Apprehension, Conception, and Meaning, are all
synonymous terms. They are called Notions, because they are the Parts or
Elements of Knowledge; which, put and considered together, make Cognition,
which is Proper and Complete Knowledge. They are called Simple Apprehensi^ns,
to distinguish them from Judgments, which are compounded of more Notions, and
belong to the second Operation of our Understanding. Or rather, because by them
we simply or barely Apprehend, that is, say hold of, or take into us the thing,
about which we a^terwards Judge or Discourse. They are called Meanings, because
they affect the Mind, which only can mean or intend; or else, in relation to
the Words whose Meanings they are. They are called Conceptions, in order to the
Power, which, impregnated by the Object, conceives or (as it were) breeds them
as the Embryo's of Knowledge. Lastly, they are said to be the Natures of the
Things, because (as was shown) they are such essentially and formally; in
nothing differing from them, but only that they connotate a new Manner of
Existing, which B. 3. L. 7 S. 4, 6.
is Extrinsecal to the Thing, and to the Nature or Essence of it.

The word [ Idea] is the least proper, because it seems to signify a bare
Similitude; unless the Users of it would express themselves to take it in that
sense in which we take the word [ Notion] here; or, as we use to understand it
when we say, that the Idea's of all things were in the Divine Intellect before
they were created; that is, their very Essences.

11. Notions are called Simple Apprehensions, not from the Fewness of the words
that express them, nor from their not having any Grammatical Composition or
Syntax in them: but, from the nature or manner of this Operation of our
Understanding. For, since (as was said) they are called Simple Apprehensions,
because by them we simply or barely apprehend or lay hold of the Nature of the
Thing intellectually; it matters not how many or how few the words are, so we
do no more than merely Apprehend or Take the Meaning of the Words, or the
Notions, into our Minds, without Judging or Discoursing of them. Whence, we may
have a simple Apprehension of a long Sentence, nay, of a whole Sermon or a
great Book; as long as we do not set our selves to Judge or Discourse of the
Truth or Falsehood of what is said or writ; but purely to Apprehend the Sense or
Meaning of the Speaker or Writer.

12. Notions being the Natures of the Things in us, have neither Truth nor
Falsehood in them formally; since they do neither affirm or deny (only with
Speeches are capable of Formal Verity or Falsity) any more than does the Thing
it self as it stands in Nature, or out of the Understanding.

13. All the Verity they have is their Metaphysical Verity, or their being
truly what they are. And they partake this from the Idea's in the Divine
Understanding, from which they unerringly flow, and which are essentially
Unchangeable. By which we see how the God of Truth is the sole Author of all
the Truth that is in us, and how he does (ordinarily) communicate it to us,
viz. by Fixing unalterably the Natures or Essences of Things; from which, being
thus Established and imprinted on our Minds by our Senses, all Science and
Truth in us have their Certainty originally.

14. All true Science being thus built on the Immovable Stability of the
Essences or Natures of Created Beings, it follows necessarily, that all
Discourses that are not Agreeable to the Natures of Things, and Grounded on
them, are Frothy, Incoherent, and False, and, if pursued home, must be found to
have a Contradiction for their First Principle, in regard they make the Natures
of Things to be what they are not.

15. Wherefore Notions being the Natures of the Things in our Understanding,
the Method to pursue True Science is, to attend and hold heedfully and steadily
to those Notions which the Things without us have imprinted or stamped in our
Minds; and to be very careful lest Imaginations (which are the Offsprings of
Fancy, and do often misrepresent the Thing) do delude us, or the Equivocation of
Words draw us aside, and make us deviate from those Genuine and Nature
instilled Notions.

COROLARIES.
Corol. I. Hence is seen how Unreasonable the Scepticks are who endeavor to
undermine all Science, by pretending that all our Notions are Uncertain. For
they being caused by Natural Impressions on our Senses, those Men may as well
pretend, that Water does not wet, or Fire burn, as that the Objects work not
their several Effects upon our Senses. If they contend, that, every Man's
individual Temper being different, our Notions must therefore differ to some
Degree in every Man, they oppose not us, who say the same; nor will this break
any square, in our Discoursing and our Understanding one another; for few Men
(perhaps none) can reach these Individual Differences, nor consequently mean
them or intend to speak of them when they discourse. But, if they say they are
not the same in all Men (whose Senses o^ imagination are not disordered by some
Accidental Disease) substantially and in the main; then, besides what has been
now alleged, they are confuted by this, that Mankind has now for some
thousands of Years held Conversation with one another, yet it was never
observed that they could not understand one another Meaning in Discourse about
Natural Objects; or if any hap'd to occurr which was Ambiguous, that they could
not make their Notions known by Explications; or if there had been some notable
variation in their Notions, (as when to Icterical persons, all things seem
yellow, or sweet things bitter to depraved Tastes) the Mistake can easily be
made manifest and corrected by the Standard of the Generality of Mankind, who
assure them of their Misapprehension; and of Learned Men particularly, who find
the Cause of their Mistake to proceed from some Disease perverting Nature, or
some Circumstances of the unduly-proposed Object, or of the Medium; or from our
Inability to reach to some minute Considerations belonging to its Composition,
Figure. etc. which hinder not our having Science of it in other Cases.

Corol. II. Hence also is shown the Vanity of that Tenet that maintains the
Pre-existence of Souls, as far as it depends on this Ground, That Knowledges
are only Excited or Awakened (as it were) by the Objects working on the Senses,
and not Imprinted there by them. For, this Ground shakes, by manifesting the
Ways and Means laid by Nature to beget those Knowledges in the Soul, and convey
them thither from the Objects. Besides, (which overthrows all their Hypothesis)
the Knowledge that I am hic and nunc thus affected, cannot with any sense be
pretended to have been Pre-existent to the Time and Place in which that
Particular Knowledge was made; since neither ehat Time nor (perhaps) Place was
then in Being. Whence it follows, that the Soul can gain some new Knowledges,
and this by the Senses; and if any or some, why not, with equal reason, all
that the same Senses can receive from Objects imprinted in her; which (as far
as it depends on this way of instilling Knowledge) may reach in a manner ad
N^tu^^, and by the assistance of Reflection, Discourse and Art improving it, may
stretch it self much farther.

Corol. III. From this whole Discourse it appears, that whatever other Method
of attaining Science some may propose, however it may seem witty, and one piece
of their Doctrine be consonant to the other, and all of them consequent to the
Principles they lay* yet it will, I say, evide^tly appear, that the way they
take can never be that which GOD and Nature have laid to ingraft Knowledge in
us. Whence, though such Discoursers may show much Art, yet, in reality, and if it
be examined to the bottom, all their Plausible Contexture and Explication of
their own Scheme, will be found no better than the running pretty strains of
Division upon no Ground; since their pretended Knowledges do not begin with,
nor grow up orderly from the Natures of the Things themselves, or from our
Natural Notions, which are the Seeds of Science.

Corol. IV. Our Discourse here abstracts from that Question, Whether sensible
Qualities are Inherent in the Object or in the (...)? It is enough for my
purpose that the Objects work upon the Senses, so as to imprint by their means
several Notions in the Mind. Yet, I do not see how Mr. Hobbs proves (for he
does not so much as attempt it) that Light coming from the Object does not
carry away with it some Particles of it; since we experience, that the Sun
beams dry up great Ponds, which they could not do, unless they did, when
reflected, dip their dry Wings in that moist Element, and return with some
Particles of Water into the Air; which, when multiplied, are condensed
afterward into Clouds: And I believe it will be granted, that the Sunbeams
reflected from the Moon bring along with them moist Vapors. Much less is it
conceivable* that in Smells and Tastes nothing at all of the Nature of those
Objects should be conveyed by the Nerves to the Brain, but only a certain kind
of Moti^n. It Is not my task to defend the Opinions of Schoolmen, nor those of
vulgar Philosophers, which he impugns, but to mind my own business. Though had I
a mind to lose a little time, it were easy to show, that he seems to mistake
all-along our P^^^eptions for what is perceived of the Object: And I might as
easily deny, that Color (for example) is n^thing but Light; and affirm that
it is such a disposition in the surface of a Body, Figured thus or thus with
Parts and Pores, as is apt to reflect more or less of the Light, and then to
assert, that that Disposition of the Surface is truly and really Inherent in
the Object or Body it self, -- sed haec obiter.

LESSON II. Of the Distinction of Natural Notions, and of the Reducing them
under Ten Common Heads.
1. EVery individual Thing not only (as was said) Less. 1.2.
imprints a Notion of it self in our Minds, but many diverse Notions, according
to the Various Impressions it makes upon the same or diverse Senses. This is
manifest by Experience; for we find that an Orange (for example) causes in us
the several Notions of Yellow, Heavy, Round, Juicy, Hard, etc.

2. We can consider One of those Notions, without considering the Others. For
we experience, that we can abstract the Notion of Round from the notion of
Heavy, (or any of the rest) and Consider it apart, and Discourse of it
accordingly.

(3.) Note, That since the Object or Thing in our Understanding is capable of
being considered diversely, hence [ Notion] gets the name of [ Considerability]
and diverse Notions are said to be diverse Considerabilities of the Thing;
which yet is no more but the same Thing as diversely considered.

3. Whether or no there be any Knower of a superior Order, that can at one
Intuitive View comprehend the whole thing, yet it is certain that our Soul, in
this state, can have no Science of any thing, otherwise than by these
Abstracted Notions. For since Less. 1. Sect. 13, 14, 15.
our Notions are the Ground of all our Knowledge or Science, and (as will be
seen shortly) we have no Notion of any Object, but by Impressions on the
Senses, and those Impressions do differently affect us, and so breed Different
or Abstracted Notions; it is manifest that we can no otherwise know any thing
here, but by Different, that is, Abstracted, Partial or Inadequate Notions.

4. It Is necessary to Science, that it be Distinct and Clear, and not Gross and
Confus^d. This is evident from the very Terms; for Science signifies a Distinct
and Clear Knowledge.

5. Our Soul cannot in this state wield more Notions at once, nor consider
them, or Discourse clearly of them together; or rather, indeed, not at all.
This will appear evidently, by an easy reflection on our Interior: For, we
shall find, that we can Discourse of each single abstracted Notion in an Orange
viz. on its Bigness, Roundness, Color, Taste, etc. But if we would go about to
Consider or Discourse of us Roundness and Taste both together, (and the same may
be said of any other two that are Disparate, or not included one in the other)
we shall find our selves at a loss, and in Confusion, not knowing how to begin,
nor how to proceed.

6. We cannot in this state know, even singly, every particular Considerability
found in the thing: For, though (for example) we can by our Common Sight discern
the Color or Figure of a thing, or of its Grosser parts, yet a Microscope will
discover to us innumerable Particularities which escaped our Common View; and
had we a Glass that magnified more, there would be found still more and more
Particularities than did appear when we observed it formerly. Wherefore, since
every New Observation we can possibly make begets a New Notion in us, L. 1 S.
13, 14, 15.
and all our Knowledge is grounded on our Notions, we can no more know the last
Considerability, which is in the thing, than we can know the least Part that is
to be found in Quantity, or in the Differences of Figure, Color, and other
Respects which each of those very least parts may have; and therefore they are
not All knowable by us in this state.

7. Much less can we, in this state, know perfectly, or discourse
scientifically of any Whole Individual thing, or (as the Schools call it) the
Suppositum, taken in bulk. For, * since all the Considerabilities that
integrate it, and consequently the Notions it begets in us, are blended
confusedly in the entire Notion of the Suppositum or Thing. Again, since these
are Sect. 6.
innumerable, and many of them Unknowable by us; it follows, that no one of
them (that is, Nothing in that whole Suppositum) can be distinctly or clearly
known, while we discourse of that which has them all in bulk; that is, while we
discourse of them all at once; and consequently, the Notion of the Suppositum,
which contains them all, cannot be clearly or perfectly known by us, nor
discoursed of scientifically.

8. Wherefore we cannot know in this state any One entire Thing perfectly,
since we can never have any perfect Science of it, S. 7.
either taking it in bulk, S. 6.
or by Detail.

9. Wherefore all we can do in this state, is to glean from the Objects by our
Senses so many Notions of them as may suffice to distinguish them from one
another; and may serve for our Common Use, Needful Speculation; or, lastly, for
our Contemplation.

10. Notwithstanding this, the Science attainable in this State may arrive to
be in a manner Infinite. For, since our Notions L. 1. S. 6, 7, 8.
are the very Natures of the Things, and the L. 1. S. 13, 14.
Natures of the Things are the Seeds of all Science, and diverse Truths spring
from them, and other Truths do still follow by Connection with the former; and,
See B. 3. L. 4. S. 12, 13, 14.
since no stint is assignable of the Connection of Truths, or of our Deduction
of one Truth from another; it follows that there is no Bound or Limit of our
Science attainable here, but that (if Art and Industry be used) it may be in a
manner Infinite.

11. It Is a most Fundamental Error to fancy that there are many kinds of
little Things in the Object, corresponding to all the different Notions or
Considerations which we make of it. For, since the least Pa^ticle that is in it
does ground diverse Notions of it, and every various Consideration of each
Particle, either according to what is Intrinsecal or Extrinsecal to it, does
still beget more: Again, since no Particle can be so small, but we can conceive
or have distinct Notions of Two Halves, and many other proportionate Parts in
it, and the Particles that are or may be conceived to be in Quantitative Things
are Numberless; it follows, that, were all the Distinct Considerabilities in
the Object distinct Things, we could never pitch upon any of those Things (they
still including others in them) which we could say is One or Undivided in its
self; nor consequently could we know what Ens or Thing meant in Corporeal or
Quantitative Things, with which we converse; which would Fundamentally destroy
and pervert all Human Speech and Discourse about any Thing, and make all
Science impossible.

12. From what is said it is deduced, that it is one necessary and main Part of
the Method to Science, to distinguish our Notions Clearly, and to keep them
distinct Carefully. For, L. 1. S. 13, 14.
since all Science is grounded on our Notions, and Science must be Clear, and
this cannot be S. 5.
if any Two of them be confounded, or taken together at once; it is manifest,
that it is one necessary and main part of the Method to Science, to distinguish
our Notions Clearly, and to keep them distinct carefully.

13. The best way to do this, is to rank all our Notions under distinct common
Heads. For, this done, it will be easy to know, to which of those common Heads
they belong; and those common Heads being easily distinguished from one
another, because they differ most vastly, or (as the Schools phrase it) toto
genere, it will follow that the several Notions comprised under each of those
Heads, must likewise, to a fair degree, be clearly known to be Distinct also.

14. There is but one only Notion that is perfectly Absolute, viz. that of
Existence, and all the rest are in some manner or other, Respective: For, since
all Notions that are, must be either of the Thing it self, or of what relates
or belongs to it, and the Thing it self relates to Existence, of which (since
only a Thing can be) it is a Capacity; and Existence, as being the last
Actuality conceivable in the Line of Being, relates to no other or farther
Notion; it follows that only the Notion of Existence is perfectly Absolute, and
all the rest are some way or other Respective.

15. Whence it follows, that the Notion of Existence is imprinted in the Soul
before any other in priority of Nature. For, since Sect. 14
all other Notions are Respective, and so consist in some (at least confused or
rude) Comparisons, as it were, of that Notion to what it respects; to have
which is much harder than to have that which is perfectly Absolute, more Simple
and not Comparative at all; hence the Notion of Existence is the most Easy,
and therefore the first in priority of nature. Again, since (as Less. 8. Sect.
7.
will be shown hereafter) the substance of all Operation is nothing but the
Existence of the Object imprinted on the Patient, and the Soul must have a
Notion of the Operation made upon her, that is, a Notion of the Existence of
the thing imprinting it; it follows necessarily, that the Notion of the
Existence of that thing is first in her.

16. From this last Reason it is evinced, that the Notion of the Man's own
Existence is wrought in the Soul before the Notion of things without him, and
this by the Man himself as his own Object, and is not imprinted by Outward
ones. For Less. 1. Sect. 1, 3, 5.
since the Soul has Notions of Objects, not by Emission of its Virtue to them,
but by their being Received in it, and Existing in it Intellectually; nor could
it have a Notion of them, that is, they could not exist in the Soul, without
its having a Notion first (in priority of Nature) of its own or the Man's
Existence; it follows, that the Notion of the Man's Existence comes into the
Soul before the Notion of other things, and consequently that it is imprinted
by the Man himself, as his own Object, and is not caused by Outward ones.
Again, since the Existence of the Man is Naturally in him, and consequently in
the Soul, (when she has a Notion of him) after its manner, that is,
intellectually; it follows, that it has (as it were) Naturally a Notion of the
Man's Existence, and consequently, before it has the Notion of any other thing.

Note 1. To explicate how this is done, and why it must be so, Anatomists tell
us, that the Embryo lies in a manner round in the Womb; whence some parts of it
do continually and necessarily touch some others. Wherefore as soon as the Soul
is infused, and it is now from a mere Animal become a Man, and has got an
Understanding Power capable to receive Notions of Objects; those Touches or
Impressions of some parts of himself upon others, do naturally affect the
Sense, and by it the Soul, and beget a blind Notion there of the Man; and by a
natural kind of Consciousness or Experience, that he Operates thus upon
himself, L. 8. S. 7
of his own Existence.

Note 2 d. Hence follows, against the Cartesians, that there is no kind of
Necessity of Innate Idea's: For, having once got, by this means, the Notion of
Existence, and all other Notions being Respective or Comparative to it; and the
Soul being of its own nature a Comparative Power, since (as will be seen
hereafter) both our Acts of Judging and of Discoursing are Comparative Acts;
hence the Soul becomes provided with Means to have all other Natural Notions
whatever, by what it has from the Object, and by it self. But of this Point
more toward the end of this Lesson. Only it is to be remarked, that it is not
here intended that the Soul has only the Notion of Existence alone, and
afterward others; for at the same time it has the Notion of the Man existing,
and existing thus by his operating thus. We only discourse which of those
Notions is first in priority of Nature, that is, of its own Nature most
Knowable or Perceptible.

17. All other Notions of the Thing besides Existence, being Respective, are
either of something Intrinsecally belonging to it, or else of something
Extrinsecally referred to it by our Understanding. This is evident; for we can
have no Notion of Non-Ens, or Nothing, nor consequently of what belongs to it.

18. Intrinsecal Notions are but Four. For, since Existence is the only
Absolute Notion, and can be referred to no other, all other Notions must either
Immediately or Mediately refer to it; Wherefore all Intrinsecal Notions must
either refer the Thing it self immediately to its Existence, by considering the
Ens to be of such an Essence, as it is capable to recieve it; and then Essence
being the Immediate Power to Existence, they are Essential Notions, and belong
to that Common Head we call Ens or Substance. Or else they refer the Thing to
some Common Manner or Modification (that is, Consideration) of it, in which all
things we converse with do agree; that is, to its Bigness or Quantity. Or else
they refer the thing to some Modification or Consideration belonging to its own
peculiar Nature, denoting how it is well or ill disposed in that respect; which
Common Head is called Quality. Or, lastly, they refer some one Individuum,
according to something Intrinsecal to it, to another Individuum; which
constitutes the Common Head of Relation. And more Common Heads of Intrinsecal
Respects cannot be invented; therefore there are only Four Common Heads of
Intrinsecal Notions.

19. Those Notions that refer not something that is Intrinsecal to the thing,
but what is Extrinsecal to it, are conceived to apply that Extrinsecal to it
either by way of Motion, or in Rest. If by way of Motion, then, since Motion
has two terms, it may be considered either as coming from the Mover, and it is
the Notion of Action; or as affecting the thing Moved, and then it is called
Passion. And, because the most Regular and most Equable, Motion, to our
apprehension is that of the Sun, called Time, and therefore all Sublunary
Motions must bear a proportion to it, and be measured by it, being performed
while such a proportionable part of it was Flowing; and Mankind is forced to
need and make use of such a Measure to Adjust, Proportion, and Design all their
Motions or Actions by, and to know the determinate distance of them from known
and notorious Periods; hence there must be a Common Head of the time When those
Motions were performed, which we call Quando.

If the Extrinsecal application be conceived to be made to the Subject or thing
in Rest, then, either that Extrinsecal thing is conceived to be barely applied
to the whole, that is, to be Immediate to it, or merely to Contain it, which
grounds the Notion, and answers to the Question Where, or Ubi: Or, it denotes
some certain determinate Manners how it is applied to the whole or to some
parts of it; and then either the whole, or at least some Parts of the Subject
or thing, must be conceived to be plied and accommodated to the parts of the
Extrinsecal thing, and it is called its Site or Situation; or else the
Extrinsecal thing, or its parts, are conceived to be Fitted, Plied, or
Accommodated to the Subject or Thing, and then it is called Habit.

20. These ten Common Heads are called Predicaments, that is, Common
Receptacles, which Contain, and whence we may draw, all our Predicates for the
Common Subject, Thing: which we may briefly exemplify thus: Peter1, though but a
yard2 and half high, yet a Ualiant3 Subject4, fought5 and was wounded6
yesterday7, in8 the Field, standing9 upon his guard, armed10.

21. All these Notions, under whatever Head, if they be Corporeal ones, are
Natural and Common to all Mankind. For, since they are made by Impressions on
the Senses, which are Common to all Mankind, it follows, that the Notions which
are the Effects of those Impressions, must be such also; since the same Causes
upon the same-natur'd Subjects, must work the same Effects.

22. Our Soul has in it a Power of Compounding those several Notions together,
of Considering them diverse ways, of Reflecting on its own Thoughts and
Affections; and, lastly, of joining a Negative to its Natural Notions if there
be occasion; such as are the Notions of Indivisible, Immaterial, Incorruptible,
Unactive, Insignificant, etc. which particularly happens when we would strive
to frame Notions of spiritual Things. All which is manifest by plain
Experience, if we reflect never so little on what passes in our own Interior.

23. No Notions can be imagined that do not arise from one of these Heads: For
Corporeal Notions are imprinted direct^y; Spiritual Notions by Reflection on our
Mind, and on its Operations or Affections; or else by joining a Negative to our
Positive natural Notions. And Mixed or Compound Notions are framed by joining
our former simple Notions. Wherefore, since there can be nothing imagined which
is not either Corporeal, Spiritual, or Mixed, or Compounded of Former Notions,
it is manifest, that all the Notions we have or can have, do arise from one of
those Heads.

24. Wherefore it is hence farther shown, that there is no necessity at all of
making some Notions to be Innate; and consequently that Conceit of the
Cartesians is Groundless, who affirm, That by a Motion made on the Senses, the
Soul, by an unknown Virtue peculiar to its self, Excites or awakens such and
such an Innate Idea, which till then lay dormant in it, because they find that
that Notion is nothing like to the Idea it excites: For, first, how do they
prove that only Motion is communicated to the Brain from the Object, or, that
that Motion does not carry along with it different-natur'd Particles or
Effluviums of these several Bodies, which are (as it were) little Models of
their Nature? It is certain this passes thus in the grosser Senses, and no more
is requisite to do it in the subtiler, but that the Particles emitted be more
subtle; which cannot shock the Fancy or Reason of a Natural Philosopher, who
knows well into what almost-infinite smallness Body is Divisible: And, of all
Men in the World, the Cartesians should not be startled at it: whose Principles
do allow lesser Particles than those Effluviums, and to pass through far lesser
Pores than those within the Nerves, or even than such as are in the substance
of the Nerves themselves. Now, this being granted, the whole contexture of this
Doctrine of ours has a clear Coherence. For, such Particles bearing the nature
of the thing along with them, are apt, when they are carried to the Seat of
Knowledge, to breed in the Mind, or convey into it the Nature, (or an
Intellectual Notion) of the Thing it self. To do which, there can need no more,
than that every thing (according to the Maxim) be received according to the
Nature or Manner of the Receiver; viz. that those Effluviums, by affecting the
Body Corporeally, do affect the Soul Intellectually.

Secondly, How is it conceivable, or any way Explicable, that a Motion, which
they confess is utterly Unlike the Idea in the Mind, should be the Proper
Exciter of such an Idea? Indeed, were those Motions of the Nature of our Signs,
that are voluntarily agreed on and fore-known to the Users of them, they might
have a Power to make such a peculiar Excitation of those Ideas, as our Words do
now; or as any odd and disagreeing Things are made use of by us when we
practice the Art of Memory. But here things are quite otherwise; for we have no
Foreknowledge either by Agreement, nor by our voluntary Designation, that such
Motions shall excite such Idea's or Notions; nor, as is confessed, are they
Naturally alike; wherefore it is altogether inexplicable how they should ever
come to excite such particular Idea's. Add, That this hidden Virtue in the
Soul, to make such a particular Idea start up as soon as that Motion is made in
the Nerve, is both said gratis, and is as Obscure as an Occult Quality; and so
far from Explicable, that even themselves (as far as I can learn) have not so
much as attempted to explain it: but it seems to be in part taken up gratis, to
make good their Doctrine of innate Idea's, as the Tenet of such Idea's is to
prove the Soul is a distinct Thing from the Body.

Lastly, Their Argument drawn from Experience, that the Idea in the Mind is
quite different from that Impression in the Senses or any Bodily Faculty, is
shown to be Inconclusive, by alleging, (as was said lately) that the Nature of
the Object found in those emitted Particles, and the Nature of it found in the
Soul Intellectually (or as standing under Notion) are the self-same, and not so
Unlike as they imagine. Add, That their Argument faulters in this too, that the
makers of it did not duly reflect, when they advanced it, on that 'foresaid
Axiom, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis: For, had they done
this, they could not have wondered that an Affection of the Body (which is
imprinted directly) and an Affection of the Soul which is spiritual (and known
only by Reflection) should have a Different Appearance: The two Manners of
Existing, with which the same Nature is vested, differing toto genere, that is
as far as Body and Spirit (their subjects) can distance them.

To explicate this more fully, and to show the difference between Corporeal and
Spiritual Idea's, I offer to their thoughts this Reflection concerning the
distinct nature of a Phantasm, which is a Corporeal Resemblance, and the nature
of the thing in the Mind (that is its N^tion) expressed by a D^finition, which
is Intellectual and Spiritual. The Phantasm or Corporeal Resemblance of a Man
is a kind of Picture of a thing with two Legs, two Arms, such a Face, with a
Head placed uprightly, that grows, moves itself, etc. Let us regard next the
Definition of a Man, or rather (which is, abating the Expression, the same) the
Notion of him; which is, that he is a Rational Creature; and we shall easily
discern of how different a shape it is from the other; how it abstracts from
many Corporeal Qualities, Figures of the Parts, and other Considerations, which
were Essential Ingredients to the Picture or Phantasm, and not at all Essential
to It, nor found in the Definition; and how some Considerations too are added
in the Definition, or implied in it (as to Apprehend, Judge, Discourse, etc.)
which no more belong to the Phantasm, than it did to Zeuxis's Grapes, to have
the Definition of the Fruit of such a Vegetable predicated of them. In a word,
one of them is a kind of Portraicture, outwardly resembling; the other speaks
the most Intrinsecal Essence of the thing Defined. The one signifies Bodily
Parts belonging to such an Animal, and therefore is Corporeal: the other does
not signify, but is the Nature signified; and this too by Words which denote
to us the Mind or Meaning (that is, the Notion) of the speaker; which is
therefore Spiritual, at least in part. Whence the Complete Essence of Man could
not be understood, nor a Definition of it framed, without making use of some of
these Notions or Idea's, which are made by our Understanding, reflecting upon
its own Spiritual Operations.

LESSON III. How these Common Heads of Notions are to be Divided.
1. THE Differences that divide each Common Head must be Intrinsecal to it.
For, since Less. 2. Sect. 5.
we cannot discourse of two Disparate Notions at once; and since were those
Heads divided by Differences that are Extrinsecal to the Common Genus, (or
taken from another Head) each Species of it would consist of two Disparate
Notions; hence it is absolutely necessary to Science that the Differences which
divide these Common Heads be such as belong to no other Common Head, but be
within the Limits of that Head, or Intrinsecal to it. Again, since the
Difference is most Formal in constituting the Species, and the Genus only
Material; were the Differences Extrinsecal or Borrowed from another Head, it
would follow, that all the Species of the Head divided by such Differences
would belong to another Head, viz. to that Head whence those Differences are
taken: Which would put all our Notions into Confusion, and involve a direct
Contradiction, as making Substances to be Quantities, Qualities, etc.

2. Intrinsecal Differences can be no other but more and less of the Common
Notion: For since, being Intrinsecal, S. 1.
they cannot be taken from any other Head, it follows, that they must partake
of the Common Notion of their own respective Heads. Again, since, if they did
partake of the Common Notion Equally, they would not differ in that Notion, and
so would not be Differences of it; it follows, that they must partake of it
Unequally; that is, they must be more and less of the Common Notion.

3. Hence the Common Notion of Ens, Thing or Substence being that which is
capable of Existence, is Immediately, Intrinsecally, or Essentially divided
into what is more and less capable of Existence. Wherefore,

4. Divisible and Indivisible, which constitute Body and Spirit, are the proper
and intrinsecal Differences of the Common Head of Substance: For, since Actual
Division of the Entity makes the thing to be no longer indivisum in se; that
is, to be unum; that is, to be Ens; that is, to be capable of Existence; it
follows, that that Ens which is Divisible (or Body) is less capable of
Existence, that is, has less of the nature of Ens or Substance; and the Ens
that is Indivisible (or Spirit) has more. Again, since Things Divisible, or
Bodies, can only have their own Being or Existence, whereas Things indivisible,
or Spirits, are capable of being Other things also, or of having in them the
Natures and Existences of all the things they know; hence they have a greater
Capacity of Existence than Bodies have; since they have enough for themselves,
and can impart it to Millions of Other things besides; and, consequently, Body
and Spirit are constituted by Divisible and Indivisible, as by the proper,
immediate, and Intrinsecal Differences that divide Substance or Ens.

5. The Divisibility and Indivisibility that are the Intrinsecal Differences of
Ens, are not those of being Quantitative and not Quantitative. For, were it so,
it would follow, that some Intrinsecal Differences of Ens in Common would be
taken from some other Head, viz. that of Quantity, and S. 1.
so, the Differences being what is most Formal in the Species, hence those
Species of Ens would rather be under that Head than its own. Again, that
Divisibility, which is of Quantity, may oftentimes be put into Act, and yet the
same Ens remain; v. g. a Man may lose the Quantity of an Arm; a Tree, of a
Branch, etc. and yet remain still the same Things; whereas, if Quantitative
Divisibility were the Intrinsecal Difference which constituted it such an Ens,
Quantitative Division must by consequence make it cease to be that Ens.

Moreover, since Quantity (as will be Less. 4. Sect. 2, 4.
shortly seen) is Divisibility, and Divisibility in Unity, in case Quantity did
Intrinsecally divide Ens, and constitute Body, wherever there were Quantity
there would be Unity under that notion; and so all Quantitative things would be
but one Ens or one Body; which is the highest absurdity. Therefore the
Divisibility and Indivisibility which are the intrinsecal Differences of Ens,
are not those of being Quantitative and not Quantitative.

6. Therefore the Divisibility and Indivisibility which divide Ens
Intrinsecally, must be the Divisibility and Indivisibility of the Constituents
of Ens, as such; that is, the Divisibility of it into Matter and Form, and
Indivisibility of it into such Constituent parts: Which differences do
Essentially divide the Genus of Ens, and constitute the species of Body and
Spirit. For, since we see Bodies changed into one another, and therefore, the
former Body had really somewhat in it determining it to be actually what it
was, which we call the Form; and somewhat by which it could be Another, which
we call the Power to be another, or Matter: Again, since we see that the Form,
which made the former Thing be what it was, is gone when it is made Another
Thing, and a New Form succeeds into the same Matter; hence we can frame diverse
Conceptions of Body, which belong to it as such an Ens, viz. Matter and Form;
and have a Ground in Nature to say there is a Real divisibility between them.
Wherefore since that Ens called Body, by being divisible into Matter and Form,
becomes liable to have the Form, that constituted it such an Ens, separated
from the Matter, and so to lose its being the same Ens it was, and incapable of
existing any longer; and, for the same reason, a Spirit, by its not being
divisible into Matter and Form, has not in its Essence any Principle giving it
a Capacity not to Exist, as had the other; but has in its self, or rather is of
its self a more simple and more perfect kind of Unity, and consequently a more
Noble kind of Entity or Capacity of existing, than is the other; Therefore the
Divisibility and Indivisibility which divide Ens Intrinsecally, must be the
Divisibility and Indivisibility of it into Matter and Form; which we call
Metaphysical Divisibility, because it is the divisibility of the parts of Ens
as such; that is, of Ens under the Notion of Ens.

7. For the same Reason given above, ( Sect. 1, 2.) Mixed and Simple are the
Intrinsecal Differences of Body: For, since Simple Bodies, which we call
Elements, have in them but the Nature or Essence of One kind of Body only, and
Mixed Bodies have both the nature of That Kind, and of other Elements besides;
it is manifest that they divide the Common Notion of Body by more and less,
which are Intrinsecal Differences.

8. For the same reason Mixed Body is divided into Living Bodies, and not Living
by Intrinsecal Differences; because Those are more mixed, These less.

9, For the same Reason, a Living Body, being that which has a Principle of
Motion in it self, is divided, as by Intrinsecal Differences into Animal, which
is more Living, or more moving it self (viz. by every slight Impression on the
Senses) and Plant, or Vegetable, which is less-moving it self.

10. For the same Reason, Animal, which is a Body moving it self by Impression
on the Senses, is intrinsecally divided into Brutes, which do thus move
themselves only to a set Determinate number of Actions, which is to be less
moving it self by impressions on the Senses; and Man, who by his Reason and
Knowledge is apt to move himself to a kind of Universality of Action, which is
to be more moving himself by means of such impressions.

11. For the same Reason, Man, or Rational Animal, is divided intrinsecally and
essentially into those who have more and less the Faculty or Power of
Reasoning; who are, therefore, properly and essentially more and less Men.

Note, That Common Logicians, because we cannot descend or reach to those
particular intrinsecal Differences which constitute Individuals, do therefore
make [ Man] the lowest species: But it is one thing what may serve for Logical
Speculation; another, what the nature of the thing bears, and the right
division of the Commoner Notion by Intrinsecal differences requires: Wherefore,
though not able to discern the intermediate Species, and (as far as I have
observed) not reflecting that more and less of the common Notion do make the
Intrinsecal and Essential Differences that constitute its Species, Common
Logicians do content themselves to put Individuums immediately under Man, and
thence mistake Man to have no Essential Differences at all, but Accidental ones
only; yet it is manifest, that, since all Individuums are diverse Entia or
Things, and Essence does formally Constitute an Ens, the Differences that
constitute diverse Entia must necessarily be Essential. So that amongst Men
there may be many Degrees of more or less Rational, constituting diverse under-
Species of Man, could we have light to distinguish them; as well as there are
diverse species of Dogs, Horses, Trees, and Flowers.

12. Particular or Singular Things are properly called Individuums, because
they cannot be divided into more of the same Notion, as all others in the same
Line could. For Socrates cannot be divided into more that have the particular
Nature of Socrates in them, as Man could into more that have the Common Nature
of Man.

13. Individuals only are properly and completely Entia or Things, and capable
of existing. For, since the Notion of Thing is [ Capable of Existing] and all
Notions that are superior to the Individuum are Inadequate or Partial Notions
of it, as is manifest; and the Individuum is the Whole, as comprizing all those
Parts; and no Part can exist by its own Virtue, or out of the whole; in regard
it would then be of it self a whole Ens and not a Part only; it follows, that
only Individuals are properly and completely Entia or capable of Existing.

14. Individuals are the proper Subject or Suppositum of all other Notions or
Natures both of its own Line, and of all the rest. For, Sect. 13
since Individuals only are properly Things, or capable of Existing; it
follows, that both all in its own Line, and much more in all the other Lines
(which have not at all in their peculiar Notions any Order or Title to
Existence) must exist and subsist in Individuals, as in their suppositum or
subject; which lends them to be, and sustains them in Being.

COROLARIES.
1. Hence, it is Logically demonstrated that every individual Man is but One Ens
or Thing; since he descends Lineally from that Common Head by intrinsecal
Differences of more and less, which constitute him truly One in that Line; that
is, one Ens, or one Thing. Whence the contrary Position ravels all the
Well-ordered Frame of Human Notions, and the Division of them by intrinsecal
Differences; which (as L. 2. Sect. 12, 13.
has been shown) must needs put all our thoughts into Confusion, and wholly
obstruct the Way to Science. Nor matters it that there are two contrary Natures
in him, Corporeal and Spiritual; since the Notion of Ens is not the Notion of
the Nature, Sect. 14.
but of the suppositum which has the nature in it. Add, that the notion of Ens
is indifferent to both Natures; and therefore, if they may be coordinate to
one End, and that it wrong no other Principle, they may both club into one
Thing, and compound one Ens: As appears in the Incarnation, in which the Second
Person of the Trinity assumed Human Nature, and joined it to it self in the
same suppositum.

2. The Notion of Rational (which is in some sort truly Spiritual) may be
Coordinate to the Notion of some kind of Body. For, since Animal is directly
subsum'd under the Notion of Body, and the Notion of Animal (or of a Thing
moving it self by Impressions on the Senses) is Intrinsecally divided by
less-moving it self thus, which constitutes Brutes; and more-moving it self
thus, which is manifestly done by its being Rational, that is in part
spiritual; It follows, that the Notion of Rational or Spiritual may be
Coordinate to some Body, ( viz. to Animal) as one of the Proper and
Intrinsecal Differences of that Genus, as is shown above.

3. Notwithstanding Man cannot be both Body and Spirit formally. For, then he
must necessarily be Two Entities in distinct Lines of Substance; the one under
the Genus of Body, the other of Spirit. Whence, he would be Vnum and non-Vnum,
in the same regard, or according to the same Formal Notion; that is, he would
be Ens and non Ens; and consist formally of two Things as perfectly distinct as
an Angel and an Ape; and even be more monstrous than a Hircocervus or Chimaera;
because he would be formally, that is essentially, made up of two
more-generically-opposit Things than these are conceived to be. Wherefore, the
Notion of Man being deduced by Intrinsecal Differences from the Genus of Body,
he is formally a Body, though his Soul be of a spiritual Nature, which makes him
virtually a Spirit. Whence also, the manner of Existence following from what is
Formal in the Thing, he has, in this State, a Corporeal Manner of Existence; as
appears by his gleaning Knowledge by the Senses; his being Measurable by
Quantity, Alterable by Corporeal Qualities; nay, even his peculiar and proper
Action of Discourse attends the slow pace of Fancy and Bodily Motion; none of
which could be competent to a Pure Spirit that exists after a Spiritual and
Indivisible manner. Nor does this more prejudice the Spiritual Nature of a Soul
that it exists and works in some regards after the manner of a Body, than it
does prejudice the Nature of a Body, (a Stone, for example) that it exists in
us spiritually; as it does when we know it, or have the Notion or Nature of it
in our Understanding.

4. Hence is seen what Notions do formally belong to the Line of Substance, or
to Ens as Ens, viz. the several species of it descending downwards from the
Common Head, till we come to the I^dividuum; which therefore is a complete Ens,
as including all those Superior or partial Notions; and * therefore it only is
in proper speech, an Ens or Thing; in regard It only being ultimately
determined to be This or That, only It is, by consequence, capable of existing,
which is the Definition of Ens. Whence all Potential or Indeterminate Notions
of Ens, such as are Ens, Corpus, Vivens, or Animal in Common, are, for the same
reason, incapable of Existing, otherwise than as they are Parts of the complete
Ens or Individuum; and therefore they are phras'd by the Schools, Substantiae
Secundae, and the Individuum Substantia Prima. Lower than the Individuum in the
Line of Ens we cannot go, nor can any Notion be superadded to it that belong
Properly to Ens, but that of Existence, of which Ens is a Capacity. Whence we
do not call Existence a Form (or Act,) for This joined with the Matter (or
Power) does constitute that compound Ens called Body, and, therefore, are both
presupposed to Existence; but we call it the last Formality of every created
Ens, because it has no Potentiality at all in that Line, but is Pure Actuality;
and therefore most resembles GOD, our Creator and the sole Giver of It, whose
very Essence is Self-Existence.

5. All those Notions before said, taking them precisely as determining the
common Notion of Ens, and belonging to it (even to the last Actuality of it
[Existence] inclusively) are Metaphysical Notions: The proper Object of which
Science is Ens; not taken as it abstracts from Existence, but as it abstracts
from all the other Predicaments or common Heads of Notions; that is, from all
Matter and Motion, and all Modes or Manners of them. For which Reason
Existence, which more perfectly abstracts from both, does more formally belong
to the Object of Metaphysics.

LESSON IV. Some Considerations belonging to those Ten Heads of Notions, or to
the Ten Predicaments in Common.
1. THE last Nine Predicaments, called Accidents, are not truly Things, nor (of
themselves) capable of Existence; and therefore they are only Capable of Being
by their Identity with Substance. For, since L. 1. S. 3, 4, 5.
we cannot clearly know any thing but by framing diverse Notions or
Considerations of it, L. 2. S. 17, 18, 19, 20.
and all the Notions we have are divided into Ten common Heads, L. 2. S. 4, 5.
and it hinders the way to Science, if we keep not the Distinction of those
Heads unmingled: Wherefore, it being manifest and undeniable, that among those
Heads there is one which is truly the Notion of Ens or Thing, that is, of
[apable of Existing] viz. that of Substance. Hence, in case we should conceive,
or put all the rest to be also Entities or Things, or of themselves capable of
Existence, we should confound and jumble all the Common Heads of our Notions
together; which would fundamentally destroy all possibility of Science, even
while we are laying it.

2. Notwithstanding this, the Notions or Natures of those Nine Heads are not
Fictitious, or framed gratis by our Understanding, but real Affections or
Modifications of the Thing. For, since L. 2. S. 5.7.
we cannot comprehend all that is in the thing at once, but are forced to make
diverse Considerations of it; nor could we do this unless the thing were
diversely Considerable; it follows, that these Nine Heads (as well as the First)
are diverse Considerabilities of the same Thing; that is, the real Thing it
self as diversely considered or conceived by us; and therefore, since they are
not Things by virtue of their distinct Notions, and yet are really the Thing
diversely considered (which takes nothing from their Re^lity) it is left that
they must be Real Affections, Modifications, Respects or Determinations of it,
and not mere Nothings or Fictitious; but, (as we may say) somewhat of the
Thing, or belonging to it; which Logicians phrase to be a Thing in an
Analogical or Secondary sense.

3. The Distinction of these Considerabilities is partly taken from the
Understanding, partly from Nature it self. For, since the diverse
Considerabilities of the Thing L. 2. S. 11.
are not so many little Entities found in it, but the same thin^ diversely
conceived; the distinction of them cannot be taken from the Thing it self,
singly consi^^red. On the other side, L..1 S. 3, 5.7.
since our Understanding is naturally apt to make diverse Abstract Notions of
the Thing; nay, is forced to do it because it cannot discourse clearly of more
of them to^ether, much less of the whole suppositum; and, that the Impressions
on the Senses which cause those Notions are naturally diverse; and, that the
Causes in Nature do often work upon the suppositum or thing, according to some
one Notion or Considerability of it, and not according to another: for example,
on its Figure, and not on its Color; on its Locality or Situation, and not on
its Substance; hence ample occasion is ministered to the Understanding to
consider it diversely; that is, to make diverse Conceptions or Notions of it.
Wherefore the distinction of these Considerabilities is partly taken from the
Understanding, partly from Nature it self; Nature affording Ground and Occasion
for the Understanding to make this Distinction, and the Understanding making it
formally.

4. Hence follows, that the only way to acquire solid Knowledge of the Nature
of Things, or (which is the same) of those Nature-imprinted Notions, is, not to
frame high-flying speculations of them, beaten out of our own Brain, or coined
by our own Wit: but, to gain by attentive Reflection, the true and genuine
Meaning of those Words, which the Generality of Mankind, or the Vulgar, make
use of to signify those Notions: For, this known, Less. 1. S. 6.
the Meaning of the Word being the Meaning or Notion of those that use it, and
their Less. 1. S. 6.7, 8^
Notion being the Nature of the Thing, it follows, that the Nature of the Thing
will be known likewise. Wherefore, this is the best Test to know which
Speculations are Aerie, which solid and Grounded on Nature. For Instance.

To know what is properly meant by the word [ Thing], ask an honest Country
fellow (as my self did once to satisfy a Sceptick) how many Things lie upon
the Table; and we shall see that he will readily reckon up all the individual
Substances, and be ready to swear there are no more: Which shows, that Nature
teaches him that only an individual Substance is truly and properly a Thing.
This done, tell him he has not reckoned all the Things there, but has omitted
Bigness, Whiteness, Roundness, etc. which are not Nothings, but Things, and
really there. Which done, you will find you have blunder'd him, by putting him
to distinguish, which he is not good at: Yet, for all that, he will stand to
his former Answer, and tell you, These are not such Things as we call Things;
and that in reckoning up the Other things, he reckoned up Those into the
bargain. Which rude Answer contains the sum of this present Discourse; viz.
that only Individual Substances are truly Things; the others somewhat of the
Thing, or belonging to it; and that they are no otherwise things, but as they
are it, or somewhat of it; and consequently are not, or have no Existence of
their own, but its.

5. Artificial things are in no One of these Heads. For, since Artificial
things are either more things joined together, or some one Natural Body, not as
it stands in Nature, but as vested with a new ^rtificial Form, introduced by
A^t; it cannot have one Notion; nor, consequently, can it be comprised under
any one Head. Nor are these Notions Common to all Mankind; nor, lastly, are
they constituted by Essential or In^rinsecal Differences in the Line of Ens,
but such as are Accidental or Extrinsecal, and generally by their Figures or
Situation of their Parts.

6. What Is Infinite can be in none of these Heads. For, since an Infinite Ens
(for example) involves in its self all that is or can belong to the Notion of
Ens, and can be but One, in regard, were there more, one of them would have
something of Entity in it which the other has not, and so they would limit one
another, and both of them would be Finite; it follows, that what is Infinite can
neither be a Common Head it self, because it can have no Particular Infinites
under it; nor can it be a Particular under that Common Head, because it could
have no Genus to it, nor Intrinsecal Differences to divide that Genus, and to
constitute a Distinct Infinite from the other.

7. Ens, diversely conceived, is the Adequate Object of our Understanding,
working naturally. This is evident from the whole Scheme of our Discourse
concerning the Ten Common Heads of all our Notions, showing they are nothing
but diverse Conceptions of Ens.

8. Hence we can have no proper Notion of a pure Nonentity; not only for the
Reason now given, but also, because a Non-Ens could never make any impression
on our Senses, and thence convey it^ ^otion into our Minds.

9. For the same reason we can have no proper and direct Notions of
Indivisibles or Points, or of what is purely Negative of Ens, or of any real
Affection of Ens, taking them as purely Negative, without connotating the
Subject, or the Thing; whose notion only is truly Positive. For (as has been
shown) all our Conceptions are Notions of the Things as conceived by us; which
when, by a Reflex Act, we consider to be Limited, and to reach no farther under
such or such a Notion, we abstract Limitedness from the Real Notion; and
because we can have no Conception but under the notion of Ens, we are forced to
use an improper Notion, and conceive it as a kind of Ens; even though at the same
time wise Reflecters judge and say, it is none of it self, or, as totally
abstracted from the Thing. In which case no harm is done by our barely
Apprehending it so, for it is Natural, and we cannot help it; but if, not
distinguishing our Manner of Conceiving from what is found in the Thing, we
come to judge that to be an Entity which, by the Thing's reaching no farther,
is evident that of it self it is none; or to be Diverse Entities because our
Conceptions are different, it will certainly pervert all our Discourses, and
make them Aerie, Fantastical, and Contradictory.

10. Hence it is a most Intolerable Error, to make Imaginary Space, or an
Immense Vacuum beyond the World to Exist; and, by consequence to belong to some
one of those Common Heads. For, the word Vacuum must either be taken as a
Concrete, and then it must signify a Subject or Ens which has an Accident in
it called Vacuity; in which case, since none says that that Ens is a Spirit;
nor can it be a Body, being put to be beyond the World, that is, beyond the
whole Mass of Bodies; it follows, that it is no Ens at all, but a mere Nothing;
and so, to put a Nothing to be, is against Common Sense, the Light of Nature,
and the very First Principle of our Understanding; for it puts that to be,
which, being no Ens, is not capable to be; that is, it puts a perfect
Impossibility or Contradiction. Or else it is a mere Abstract Term, and means a
Vacuity; and then the Asserters of it must put a Form to be without any Matter
or Subject informed by it; which wanting, it can be no Form; or an Accident to
subsist without any Subject, which makes it no Accident; since an Accident is
that which does accidere substantiae, or is Adventitious to it. Again, the Name
they give it, viz. Imaginary Space, by which they distinguish it from Real
Space, confesses it not to be in re, but only in our Imagination: Which words
can have no sense, unless they mean, that the Imagination is the Only Subject
in which it subsists. Wherefore, to speak consequently, they ought to say, that
our Imagination, in which only it has any Being, is some infinitely-extended
Thing beyond the World; for there they put this Imaginary Space to be; but
this is so notorious a Banger, that they dare not say this neither; and,
therefore, they can make no piece of their Tenet cohere, nor make any Sense of
their own Words. But let them wriggle what way they will, their putting it to
be without the World, and yet not to exist in re, but in our Imagination only,
which is within the World, is so full fraught with variety of Contradictions,
that they cannot even name it or talk of it, without speaking palpable Nonsense
at every step of their Discourse. Moreover, they deny it to be a Thing, and yet
they attribute to it the Properties of a Real Thing, by making it have
assignable Parts in it; as also to be Extended, Measurable, etc. which is the
highest strain of Contradiction imaginable. For, since Ens and Non-Ens do
differ more than toto genere, and as far as Contradiction can distance them;
whatever is affirmed of an Ens must necessarily be denied of Non-Ens; so that,
if a Thing (a Body for example) can be extended, measured, passed through, or
moved in; it must necessarily be affirmed, that a Non-Ens cannot be moved in,
extended, measured, or have Parts. Lastly, Imaginary Space or Vacuum never
affected our Senses; and therefore, since we can have no distinct Notion of it
from outward Objects, neither can it, consequently, belong to any of those
Common Heads of Notions; whence follows that one of these Heads, which gives
Being to all the other, being Ens, Imaginary Space and Vacuum are mere Nothings.

Note 1. That this Discourse equally concludes against Vacuum within the World.
For that Imagined Space would neither be Body nor Spirit, Subject nor Accident;
and therefore it must be merely Nothing. Nor, consequently, could it be
Measured, Extended, Moved in, etc.

Note 2. That these two Tenets being overthrown, the whole Epicurean
Hypothesis, built on them, falls to the Ground, and needs no farther
Confutation.

11. Hence it is Logically demonstrated, that there can be no Protuberancy in
the outmost Superficies of the World; for, were this so, there would be some
Distance between the Extreme Surface and that Protuberancy; and that distance
could be Measurable, Divisible, etc. which would make Non-Ens to be Ens.

12. This Humor of Fancy, or of ill-govern'd Reason, making Entities of
Non-Entities; and conceiting every Negative, purely as such, to be a Thing,
because we cannot conceive Nothings but as Thin^s, destroys all Science, and
makes it Chimerical. For, every Species in Nature includes a Negation of all
other Species, and every Individuum in the World of all other Individuums: at
which rate we should have far more Nothings in the World than Things, if we
come to put all those Negations to be. It were very proper, but withal very
pleasant, if such Men of Fancy would, in pursuance of their Tenet, frame us a
new No-Logick of their own, and put Non-Ens in Common to be the First Head of
their Negative Notions; and then divide it by more of Non-ens that is, Nobody,
and Less of it, or no Spirit; and then descend to its proper Individuums. as
Non-Petrus, Non-Ioannes, Non-Bucephalus, etc. This would be consequent to their
Fantastic Tenet. But, even then they must be forced to contradict themselves,
and confess, that as Non-ens means not capable of existing; so, by the same
reason, they ought to make Non-Corpus to be Non-quantum, Non-quale,
Non-passivum, Non-locabile, etc. which would spoil all their Positions of
Vacuum and Imaginary Space. So certain it is that all Errors, pursued home to
their bad Principles, will still confute themselves. Hence the distinction some
make of Ens into Ens-Positivum, Privativum, and Negativum, is no wiser than was
the saying of the Fanatic Preacher in Ben's Play. viz. That he had three
Lights in him; a Great Light, a Little Light, and No Light at all.

13. We have no Natural Notion, nor Ground, from Nature, of an Union, as they
call it. For, the Asserters of it, neither make it the Action that unites two
things or parts, nor the Effect of that Action wrought upon the Subject, that
is, their being united, (which hinders it from belonging to the Common Heads of
Action or Passion) but an Intervening Little Entity, whose nature it is to tie
them together. And, since such a Notion was never imprinted by our Senses, it is
plain it can be no Natural Notion as those in the Predicaments are, nor belong
to any of those Common Heads. Nor can it be collected by Reason; for since the
Matter, before the Union be made, is Ultimately disposed by Nature to receive
the Form, and the Form is Proper, and by the course of Causes, Necessary to be
received into the Matter thus disposed, there can need nothing to Unite them
(as they call it) but the Efficient, making the Form result from such Matter as
was fitted for it and required it, which is to be in it; any more than, if Fire
be apt to burn what is Combustible, and what is Combustible be perfectly fit to
be burnt by Fire, there can need any thing but Application, to burn it, or
(which in their Phrase is the same) to unite the Form of Fire to the Matter of
the Wood. This Conceit therefore of those little Entities, called (...), to
tack things together at every turn, is a mere Chimera coined by Fancy; and
seems to be borrowed from those men's observing that two Things, unapt otherwise
to cohere, (diverse pieces of Wood, for example) do need Glue, or Pitch, or
some such tenacious stuff, to fix them together; whence, by an Unsuitable and
Ill-grounded Metaphor, they translate it to the Uniting the parts of Natural
Entities; which, by the wise Conduct of the Author of Nature, are always ready
for an Union e're they come to be made One, and can need nothing at all to
unite them or make them One Entitatively. Union therefore is the Effect of the
Action of Uniting, or the same with their being united or their Unity, and not
an Intermediating Entity; since whatever Things or Parts are naturally United
do cling together into one Entity by a kind of spontaneous Inclination; and by
means of the antecedent Dispositions requiring the Form, are such good Friends
of themselves beforehand, that there can need nothing to Reconcile them.
Besides, this Conceit is ill-grounded in another respect; for, the Inventers of
it make account that those Vnible Parts were, before they were united, Two
Things; whereas, in reality, there was but One Thing, disposed to be changed
into another, by sitting the Matter to receive a new Form. Which Discourse may
be applied to those who ask, How, or by what means, the Soul and Body were
United or made One Thing? To which the proper Answer is, They were never Two
Things.

14. We can have no One Notion of a Transcendent; for, since Transcendents are
those that run through all or many of the Predicaments, and the Predicaments
are so many Heads of Notions Generically distinct; it is impossible to have any
one Notion of Transcendents; Again, there is no more common Genus, which can be
divided into those Ten Heads, as its Species, by Intrinsecal Differences; but
those several Summa Genera are distinguished from one another by their own
Common Notions. Whence the Words that signify them, whether Vnum, Verum,
Bonum, Idem, Diversum, or what ever they be, are the most Equivocal of any that
can be imagined, and have a vastly different signification as applied to the
Notions in each of those Heads.

15. No Part of an Ens* can belong to any Predicament: For a Part of an Ens is
no more an Ens, than a part of an Apple is an Apple: Nor, can Parts have
Intrinsecal Differences in the Line of Substance; for such Differences would
with the Genus make the Part to be a Totum in that Line.

COROLLARY.
Hence by the way, we may frame a Logical Demonstration against Actual Parts in
a Compound. For, were they Actually Distinct, they must have each of them
Matter and Form of its own; which being the proper Constituents of such an Ens,
each of them would be such an Ens or a Body; and so they would have each of
them, a Title to Existence, which is the proper Notion of a complete Ens; and
by consequence each Part would be a Whole.

16. The Notions of Genus, Speci^s, and the Terms of Art, framed by the
Reflection of our Understanding, are not Things distinct from the Notions of
Ens, Corpus, Vivens, etc. which Logicians call by those Names; nor are they in
any of those Common Heads. For, First, ( S. 18.
as will appear) these Notions are but Parts of the Individuum, which is the
whole Ens. Next Terms of Art are made by Men of Art, who are Reflecters, and
not directly imprinted by Nature, or Common to all Mankind: For which Reason we
must learn the Meaning of those Words, and, consequently, those Notions
themselves, from Learned Men, and not from the Generality.

17. Notwithstanding, it must be Granted, That Nature gives our Understanding
Hints or Ground to frame such Artificial Conceptions; without which they would
be Fictitious and Chimerical: For Example, by observing that all the Men we
ever knew, do proceed to Action upon some Reason or other; hence, we frame a
Common Notion of a species or Kind, called a Rational Thing; and, observing
farther, that Beasts as well as Men have Senses, and are excited and moved by
means of them; hence we frame a Higher Notion, common to both the Kinds of Man
and Beast, and call it a Genus; and so still upwards. Nature all along
affording us some Ground of framing Universal Notions, and the Understanding
making and framing them actually. And, where these Notions were bred, there
they dwell or exist; for, out of the Understanding, and in Nature, there is
nothing but Individuals.

18. Note, that the Notions of Genus, Species, etc. as abstracted and raised to
a Common pitch by Men of Art, or Logicians, reflecting on the Agreement of more
under that one Notion, are (as such) Wholes; but, as considered in the Ens or
Individuum, and as causing our Natural Notions of them, they are but Parts, and
the Individuum is the Whole, in respect of them: For, since the whole is that
which is larger than some parts are, or rather which comprehends all the Parts;
it follows, that those Notions, thus abstractedly considered, being (according
to the condition they have in our Understanding) larger than the Inferior
Notions, and comprehending all under them, are therefore certain kinds of
Wholes, as thus considered. On the other side, since only Individuums are truly
the Complete and Whole Entia, as being only Capable of Existing; and the
Notions of Ens, Corpus, Vivens, Animal, Homo, are but Partial and Inadequate
Notions of the Individuum; it follows, that the Individuum does, in reality,
comprehend what answers to the Notions of each or all of them: wherefore, thus
considered, (that is, as they stand in Nature) they are but Parts, and the
Individuum is the Whole.

LESSON V. Of the Common Head called Quantity.
1. QUantity may either be considered Mathematically, as abstracted from
Motion, and merely Extending the Body, as it were, in Rest; or Physically, as
affecting Body, its Subject, in order to Motion; that is, as to natural Action
and Passion. This needs no Proof, since it is Evident that Quantity may be
considered both these ways, and we experience that we can both these ways
consider it.

2. The Essential Notion of Quantity is Divisibility into Parts; and, such a
Divisibility as that each of its Parts, after Division, becomes a Whole. For,
since the Essential Notion of it cannot consist in its having Matter and Form,
which make it an Ens, and so fit it for Existence (as it was in a Divisible
Substance or L. 3. Sect. 5.
Body) the Essence of it (such as it is) must be taken from some Consideration
belonging to its own single Abstracted Notion, and from that in the first place
that best expresses its Metaphysical Unity. And, since nothing can be said to
be Divisible, or capable to be made more, but it must be said eo ipso to be
Actually and truly One; therefore Divisibility, or a Capacity to be made more,
is the very Notion of its Unity, only connotating that it is such an Unity as
makes its subject Capable to be made more, or dissolved by Division into Parts.
Again, L. 4. S. 4.
as was said above, and will more evidently be shown hereafter, that is the
true Notion of any Nature to which the Sayings of Mankind do agree: But
Divisibility is thus shown to be the Notion of Quantity. For example, ask what
a Mile is, it will be answered, That it has so many Furlongs, Paces, or Yards
in it. Ask what a Yard is, it will be answered, It consists of so many Feet;
and so of the rest. And when we come to so small a Quantity, that we can no
more give an account of it, or assign the parts into which it is divisible, we
find our selves at a plunge, and know not how to define it, but seem to have
lost the Notion of it. Therefore, however Extension, Measurability, and such
others, may truly belong to Quantity as its Properties, yet only Divisibility
is its Primary and Essential Notion, because it is this only denotes its Unity.
And, since it is not a Divisibility into such parts as could not remain Wholes
after their separation, such as were Matter and Form, which are the Essential
parts of Substance; hence the Divisibility which Quantity gives to its Subject
must be such as makes it remain so many Wholes after the Division is made; as
Experience also shows us.

3. Quantity is adequately divided into Continued, or Coherent; and Discrete,
or Number. For, since it is impossible to ask any Question concerning the
Quantity of Things, but either how Many they are, if more Things; or, how great
it is, (that is how much there is of it) if it be but One thing; it is evident
that Mankind has no Notion of any other kind of Quantity but of Discrete and
Continued; and, therefore, the Division of Quantity into these two Species is
Adequate. Note, that Discrete Quantity is less Quantity than Continued, because
it is less Divisible; or rather it is not so properly Quantity as is the other,
because it has no Unity to distinguish it from a mere Confused Multitude of
Ones but by means of the Understanding, conceiving it to be so many Units
terminated by the last; yet, because Plurality and Paucity are More and Less of
any one Determinate Number, and that there is a Ground in Nature for our
Understanding to consider many Scattered Ones and comprehend or bind them
together into one Notion, and that such Notions are useful or necessary to
Mankind; therefore this Ordered Multitude of discrete or shattered Ones, called
Number, is rightly placed in the Predicament of Quantity. For, it is to be noted,
that when it is said Quantity is Divisibilis in semper Divisibilia, it was not
meant of Quantity in Common, or all Quantity, but only of that Species of
Quantity called Continued.

4. The Unity proper to Extended Quantity is Continuity of its parts; For, if
the parts of this sort of Quantity be Discontinu'd, either Nothing (or vacuum)
comes between them, and then they are still Continued against the Supposition;
for Nothing can do nothing and therefore cannot discontinue the Parts of
Quantity. Or else some Body comes between them and Discontinues them; and then,
since all Bodies bring their own Quantities along with them, however the
Bodies, A. and B. are distanced by C's coming between them, because every Body
has its determinate bounds and Limits; yet, the Quantity of those three Bodies,
precisely considered, has none, but goes on Smoothly in the self same tenor
through the whole Mass of Body, whether those Bodies be Different or the Same;
without Notches or Nicks butting and bounding it here and there, or in the
least diversifying it; what ever Variety is found in the Figure, Color,
Hardness, Softness or in any other consideration belonging to those Bodies.
Again, since this Species of Quantity has its peculiar Notion, Nature, or
Essence, it must have some kind of Unity too peculiar to it self: But, none is
imaginable except Continuity, nor does any so directly subsume under the notion
of Quantity, which is Divisibility or Unity of its potential parts, or suit so
exactly with it. Nay, were the parts of Quantity discontinu'd quantitatively,
they would be divided quantitatively, that is, not Divisible or One; that is
none, or Not-Quantity, against the Supposition. Therefore the Unity proper to
this Species of Quantity is Continuity of its parts.

Cor. I. Therefore the Quantity of the whole World is One Uninterrupted
Continuity, and the World it self (speaking of Quantitative Unity) One Great
Continuum.

5. Quantity, according to its precise Notion, cannot be Essential to Body,
because it can neither be the Genus of it, nor the Intrinsecal Difference that
constitutes it; as is proved L. 3. S. 1, 2, 5.
above.

6. Yet Quantity, Materially considered, and not according to its precise and
formal notion of Divisibility, may (as it were) per accidens contribute to the
Essence of Individual Bodies. For, since nothing is truly and perfectly Ens, or
Capable of Existence, but Individuals; nor (since Thing in common cannot exist)
can any thing be Capable of Existing, but by being ultimately Determinated, and
thence completely fitted to be This or That; and this Determination,
distinguishing one Individuum from all others, is performed by means of such a
particular Complexion of Accidents as fits them for their Primary Operation for
which Nature ordained them; and this Complexion of Accidents is either of
Quantity, or else (as is shown in Physics) of different modifications of
Quantity; it follows, that Quantity, materially considered, and not according
to its Formal notion of Divisibility, may (as it were) by Accident contribute
to the Essence of Individual Bodies.

7. The Intrinsecal Differences of Quantity are more and less of the Notion of
Quantity. This is proved Less. 7. Sect. 1, 2.
formerly, when we treated of the Division of Substance; and the reason given
there holds equally here.

8. The Proper Species of Quantity, mathematically considered, or as it
abstracts from Motion, are Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity; otherwise
called Linea, Superficies, and Corpus. For, it is evident that Latitude is
another sort of Quantity, and has more of that Notion in it than Longitude has;
and that Profundity is a different sort of Quantity, and has in it more of
Quantity, thus considered, than either of the other, as containing in it self
all the three Dimensions.

9. Therefore, the Intrinsecal Differences of each of these continued
Quantities (considered Mathematically, as abstracted from all Order to Motion)
are Divisibility into greater or into lesser determinate parts: For, since the
Notion of Quantity is Divisibility, and Divisibility respects the Parts into
which it may be divided; and this respect cannot be to Indeterminate parts into
which it may be divided, they being (as Euclid has demonstrated) Infinite, as
well in the greatest as the least Quantities, so that they cannot have any
differences, thus considered; wherefore Divisibility into Greater and Lesser
parts, being the Intrinsecal Differences of all such Quantities, in regard that
the Greater have more of the Immediate Generical Notion, or of that kind of
Quantity, in them; the smaller, less of it; and Divisibility into parts which
are Determinate, may bear the Notion of Greater or lesser Divisibility, which
Divisibility into Potential parts (as was said) cannot; it follows that
Divisibility into Greater and Lesser Determinate parts are the Intrinsecal
Differences of this kind of Quantity, Mathematically considered. Besides,
Greater and Lesser bear in their Notions some Proportion between those parts;
which cannot be conceived unless those Parts be Determinate.

10. The Proper and Intrinsecal Differences of Continued Quantity considered
Physically, or in Order to Motion; that is, Affecting it is subject as apt to be
wrought upon by Natural Causes, are more or less Divisible or capable to be
wrought upon and divided by those Causes. This is evident from the very same
Reason, supposing Intrinsecal Differences to be only more or less of the
immediate common Notion, or of the Genus they are to divide.

11. The More and Less Divisibility of Continued Quantity thus considered, is
to be more easily or less easily wrought upon or divided by Natural Agents.
For, since Quantity, thus considered, does not respect the Parts it contains or
may be divided into, but the Causes in Nature, and their Operation upon its
Subject, Body; it follows, that the Notion of its being more or less Divisible,
as thus considered, can only mean more or less susceptive of the Efficiency of
Natural Causes; that is, more easily or less easily Divisible by the said
Causes; which is to be Rare and Dense.

12. The Division of Continued Quantity into Permanent and Successive, is made
by Accidental Differences, and not by Essential ones, as were the former
Divisions of it: For, since to move and to stand still are Accidental to
Quantity, and have no respect to that Generical Notion, as more and less of it,
as had the other Differences above mentioned; it follows, that these
Differences are Accidental to their Generical Notion, and not Essential or
Intrinsecal to it. Again, more and less, which are Intrinsecal Differences,
signify some Proportion or Comparison of one to the other, which can have no
place in Permanent and Successive Quantities; for, what sense bears it to say,
that a Yard is as Long as an Hour? Wherefore, since it is a most certain Maxim,
That Comparisons are made of things which are of the same Genus or kind (which
by the way shows, that Intrinsecal Differences of any Genus or Kind are
Comparative Notions, or More and Less of it) it is Evident that Continued
Quantity is not a Proper Genus to them, as such; nor They Proper Species of it,
or constituted such under it by Intrinsecal Differences; but each of them is
the very Genus it self of Continued Quantity, considered under diverse States
altogether disparate; and one of them, viz. Successive, connotating the
Predicament of Action, the other seeming rather to hold on the side of mere
Quantity; though that Common Head does, in rigor, Abstract from both those
States.

13. The Division of Permanent Continued Quantity into Extensive, containing
the three Species Sect. 8.
above mentioned; and Intensive or Weight, is yet more defective than the other:
For, first, part of the Genus it self ( viz. Permanent) is Accidental to
Quantity. Next, (there being no Natural Propension one way or other Inherent in
Bodies while in Rest, (as is shown in Physics) Weight must be taken for an
Actual tendency downwards; and so it belongs to the Predicament of Action or
Passion, according as the Body that weighs is considered either as pressed upon
by the superior body, or pressing that below it. Whence, whatever else we can
conceive of the Notion of Weight in any Body is nothing else but its Density;
for this makes it apt to receive the full Impression of the descending Air, and
better and more swiftly cut the medium, when its Motion is once determined;
whereas Rare Bodies suffer the descending Particles to slip through them, and do
but dully and slowly divide the Medium through which they are to pass in their
descent. But of this more in Physics.

14. Infinite Discrete Quantity, that is Infinite Number cannot belong to the
Predicament of Quantity; For then, it must either have the place there of a
Genus, or of a Species; whereas it can be neither, because the Generical Notion
would in that case be Common to more Infinite Numbers as its Species, which is a
Contradiction: For, since each of these Species, being Infinite in such a line,
or under such a Notion, must comprehend All that can be in that Line, they
would each of them contain the whole Line of Number; and so each of them would
be of as large a Notion as their Genus; nor would they, in that case, be
Different from one another in that Line, because one of them can have nothing
which the other has not; nor consequently can they be diverse Species, nor can
Infinite Quantity be their Genus.

Besides, two Infinits, under what Notion soever, limit, and so destroy one
another: nor can it be solved by saying, that Quantity may be divided into
Finit and Infinite, and that Species that is Infinite be but one, or have no more
of its kind but its single self; for, since Infinite in any Notion includes All
that can belong to that Notion, nothing of the Genus would be left for its
fellow- species to partake of; which makes Finite Number to be no Species.
Lastly, As the Differences of Continued Quantity were Greater or Lesser
determinate parts, so the Differences of Number must be More or Fewer
determinate parts; which can bear no Sense if one of the species have All, or
be Endless or Indeterminate.

15. Hence it is Logically demonstrated that Infinite Number is Impossible and
Contradictory; since it contradicts the Methods and Maxims of all our Natural
Notions. For, were it put, it ought to belong to the Common Head of Quantity,
which we see is in many regards Implicatory. Add, That as no Ens is capable of
Existence unless it be first Ultimately determined to be This or That; so no
Affection of Ens, v. g. Number, can possibly exist in Things, unless it be
determined in its own Line to be This or That Number; which is here forbidden
it by the very Notion of Infinite, which signifies Indeterminate.

16^ Therefore Continued Quantity, for the same reason, cannot be Infinite; that
is, there cannot be an Infinite Extent or Expansion of Body; for, then the
Subject would verify it, that there must be in it an Infinite Number of Yards,
which is now proved Impossible.

17. For the same reason there cannot have been Infinite Time; for then, again,
there must have been an Infinite Number, viz. of Hours. Again, let us put Time
to have been Infinite, that is, never to have begun; then there must have
succeeded an Infinite Number of Hours; wherefore in that whole Collection of
Hours there must either have been some one hour distant from this present hour
by Infinite Intermediate ones, or no one Hour thus distant. If no one, then the
whole Collection of Hours (consisting of Ones) is Finite: If some one Hour be
distant from this present one by Infinite Intermediate ones, then we are forced
to put an Infinite which has two Ends, viz. that Hour said to be Infinitely long
ago, and this present Hour that now passes; that is, we must put an Infinite to
be Finite.

Corol. Hence is demonstrated, that the Course of Nature, consisting in Motion,
had a Beginning or First Motion; therefore a First-Mover, therefore some
Spiritual Nature; as B. 3. L. 6. S. 4.
will be demonstrated hereafter.

LESSON VI. Of the Common Head of Quality.
1. THE Notion of Substance being What a Thing is; and that of Quantity, how
Great it is, or how much there is of it; the Common Notion of Quality, (as was
said above, and indeed as the very word imports) is how a thing is in respect
to its own peculiar nature; that is, whether it be so as it should be or no.
This will be farther Evident from the whole following Discourse.

2. Wherefore there must be so many Common Kinds or Species of Quality as there
may be Common Considerations of How a thing is in regard to its own peculiar
nature.

3. Wherefore, seeing the Subject may be thus Considered, either according to
its Intrinsecals, or according to Extrinsecals, to which it may be referred:
And, if to Intrinsecals, then, either according to some Perfection or
Imperfection of its Intrinsecal Temperature or Constitution, which we call
Habit, if Permanent; or Disposition, if Transitory; or to its outward Shape
conceived to inhere in it, called Figure. If it be considered according to
Extrinsecals, then, either according to the Causes from which it may suffer or
be variable, which we call Passible Quality, if steady; or Passion, if sudden
and fleeting; or to the Effects or Operations it may or may not produce; which
we name its Power or Impotency: Hence Quality in common is divided into Four
Kinds and no more; nor can more sorts of Answers to the Question, How a Thing
is, be invented or imagined.

Examples of the Questions proper to Quality are such as these: How do you? To
which is Answered, Sick or in Health, well or ill disposed. How is he as to his
Understanding? Learned or Ignorant; which Answers we call Habits or
Dispositions. How is he as to his Walking, or using his Natural Faculties? To
which we answer, well able to walk, or Lame, etc. which signify his Power or
Impotency. How is the Milk that is over the Fire, or the Bread in the Oven? To
which is answered, Hot or Cold; Dough-bak'd or Enough: which are Passible
Qualities. How is he affected to me? To which is answered, Angry, which is
Passion. Lastly, it may be asked, How he is as to his outward shape? To which
is answered, well or ill shaped, Handsome or Ugly, which Quality is called
Figure.

4. The Intrinsecal Differences of more or less in this Common Head of Quality,
are more properly to be called Better and Worse qualified, since they fall into
the same as more and less; only the latter Expressions suit better, having a
qualifying sense.

5. Wherefore Power and Impotency are the First Species of Quality, because
they spring immediately out of the Essence as it is Properties, and most merely
concern it as to making it Better or Worse; as also, because they most dispose
or indispose the Subject to the substance (as it were) of it is Natural
Operations. Habit and Disposition are the Second; because they Supervene to the
Power, and only give it a better or worse Facility or Difficulty to Operate.
Passible Quality and Passion, taken as such, are the Third; because, taken as
such, they merely qualify the Subject to be Passive or Alterable by another. I
say, taken as such, that is, as Passible; for, if they be considered as Active,
as Heat in Fire is conceived to be apt to effect Heat in another thing, then
it is a calefactive Virtue, and has the Notion of Power. Lastly, Figure has the
least share of the Notion of Quality, because it only regards the Outward
Lineaments and Appearance, which are the sleightest of all other Qualities.
Though it may sometimes, (especially in Organical Bodies and their several
parts,) contribute to their Power or Impotency; as an Acute Figure in Dense
Bodies makes them better divide the Air, and other Bodies, adding thus an
Accidental perfection to their Power of Dividing; and Splay-footedness hinders
the Power of Walking, whereas Straightness helps it. Accidental, I say, for
the, Essential Notion of Figure is only to terminate thus, or thus the
Quantity of Bodies, as will be shown hereafter.

6. Wherefore, the Intrinsecal Differences of Quality being to make the Subject
of them better or worse, hence most Qualities may admit of several Degrees in
each of it is Species, or, as the Schools phrase it, may be Intended or
Remitted; whereas neither Substance nor Quantity can. Not Substance; because,
as we no sooner step out of the Notion of Ens in common but we plunge into
Non-Ens, so we cannot depart from the Essential Notion of Hoc Ens, but we must
fall into Non-hoc-Ens or Another Ens. Not Quantity; for, let us design any
particular or determinate Species of Quantity (a Yard for example) and but in
the least Increase or Diminish it quantitatively, and immediately it becomes no
yard but of an other Species really, though perhaps so little may be added or
detracted that we may want a Name for it.

7. Power differs from Habit also in this that Powers are Natural, and spring
out of the Essences of things as their Properties; as the Power of Walking,
Seeing, Hearing, Fancying, Understanding, Willing, Heating, Dividing, etc.
Whereas Habits are generally, Acquired by frequent Acts. In things Inanimate,
and Vegetables, and in some sort of Animals they are properly called Virtues;
thus we say such a Mineral or Herb has the Virtue of Drying, Cooling, Healing,
Cauterizing, Poisoning. In Animals, they are called Natural Faculties; as those
of Seeing Walking, Flying, etc. Where the word Faculty is not taken in the same
Sense in which we use it, when we tell one he has got a Faculty of doing this
or that, meaning thereby a Facility or Habit of doing it, but for the Power it
self which is to be facilitated by that Habit. The Privations or want of those
Powers due to Nature we call Impotences; as Deafness, Blindness, Doltishness,
etc. Which signify Inabilities to perform such Operations as we ought, were the
Subjects Qualified as they should be.

8. Habits are generally Acquired by Acts: yet some may seem to be had by
Nature: as Healthfulness and Sickliness. Of the former we use to say such a one
has got a Habit of Dancing, Drinking, Brawling, Swearing, Praying, etc. Of
which sort are all kind of Skill's in moving the Body, and all Arts and
Sciences qualifying the Mind, and their Opposites: All which we shall find to
be Perfections or Imperfections, belonging either to the particular Nature of
the Body, as Dancing, Pronouncing, etc. or else suitable or disagreeable to the
peculiar Temper of the Mind, which is Reason; such as are Sciences, Virtues,
Vices, Ignorance, etc. But those that are Innate, and have withal some constant
Ground of Stability by the steady or fixed course of Causes, are rather called
States or Conditions than Habits; such as are Original Justice, Original Sin,
Impeccableness in the Saints in Heaven, Obdurateness in Sin in the Devils; and,
Healthfulness or Sickliness, if it comes out of a Man's Natural Constitution.
All which, though less properly Habits than those that are Acquired, yet Habit
having in it is Notion a kind of Constancy, we do therefore from their Steady
manner of working, denominate Habitual Propensions, Dispositions, Affections,
or Determinations of the Subjects, and reduce them to the Species of Habit.

9. Those Natural Affections of Body, considered as apt to render the Subject,
not to be determinately This or That in the Line of Ens; nor Bigger or Lesser,
but only Alterable thus or thus, without changing the Entity, are for the most
part Passible Qualities. This is manifest; For considering them thus, there is
no Predicament but that of Quality, nor any Species of Quality but This, under
which they can be rank't. Under the Genus of Passible Quality are particularly
The Four First Qualities, Heat, Coldness, Moisture, Dryness; and the Second,
(and perhaps Third) Qualities compounded of these, with a variety almost
Infinite, of which more in Physics.

10 All Passible Qualities are Objects of the Senses, Otherwise they would not
be Natural Notions, nor belong to any Common Head; and, consequently, we could
not discourse or think of them, which yet we experience we do.

11. Yet it is not the Consideration of them as the Objects of our Senses which
Constitutes them, nor Essentially Distinguishes them* This is evident, for
their Essence, as Qualities, must be taken from their manner of affecting their
own Subject, and thence giving us ground of denominating it diversely, or
framing distinct Notions of it. Besides, to be an Object of any Power, can, as
such, be Essential to Nothing; because it is perfectly Extrinsecal to the Thing
or it is Power to which it is an Object; as will be farther seen when we come to
treat of the Predicament of L. 7. S. 10, 11.
Relation. Wherefore, the Division of this Species of of Quality into Visible,
Audible, Tangible, etc. is Accidental to Quality and far from Intrinsecal or
Essential.

12. Notwithstanding what is said above, some Qualities may contribute to the
Essence of a Thing, and so be in part Essential. For, since (as is shown in
Metaphysics) the Complexion of Accidents, and of some Qualities, among the
rest, do determine a Thing to be This and Distinct from all others, and withal
fit it for its Primary Operation; and consequently do help to constitute the
Essence of an Individual Body as part of it is Form; Passible Qualities, in
particular, may contribute to the Essence of a Thing; or be in part, and, as
joined with Quantity, Essential to it. Yet so, that each of these considered
Alone is an Accident: but all of them taken together and as clubbing to
determine the matter ultimately to be This, they are to be considered not as
merely Quantitative, nor as Qualificative, but as belonging to the Substantial
Form.

13. No other Species of Quality but Passible Qualities has this Prerogative,
Not Power: For Powers are Properties; and, so, are conceived to follow the
Essence constituted, and presuppose it; much less Habits, for they supervene to
the Natural Powers. And least of all Figure, for this is Extrinsecal to the
Constitution of the Body; however in Organical Bodies they may help to
determine the Species or Individuum.

14. Figure is nothing but the Termination of the Quantity of a Body, or (which
is the same) Body thus Terminated. For, since Figure is nothing but such a
Superficies, and the Superficies is the Termination of Profundity which is the
proper Quantity of Body; it follows that Figure is nothing else but the
Termination of the Quantity of Body. Again, if we look narrowly into particular
Figures, we shall find them nothing but that the Quantity goes no further, or
ends, here and there. Whence the Figure of it must necessarily be thus and
thus. And this is all can be made of it as it is distinguished from the Body it
self or its Quantity; however we are prone to conceit it, as it is distinct from
Body, to be a kind of Ens.

15. Figure alone is Incapable of more or Less in the same Species. For, since
Figure is the Termination of the Quantity of Body, and Quantity being
Divisibility, the Termination or No-fartherness of Quantity must be no
Quantity, and therefore Indivisible, and there can be no Degrees in
Indivisibles; it follows that Figure is not capable of more and less within the
same Species, but every Alteration of the Figure is a New Species of it.

16. Hence the Termination of the Self-same Quantity (though being oft-times
Imperceptible, it happens to be Nameless,) after Several Manners make so many
particular Figures. For example, the self same Quantity, ( viz. a Pint of
Water,) may be put into a Round viol and a Square or Oval one; which being
terminated after a particular manner, do make so many particular kinds of
Figures.

Corol. I. Hence is seen that there is a Real Divisibility (that is such a
Notional one as is grounded in Nature) between Quantity and Figure; since the
subject may be changed according to Figure and not according to Quantity, of
which we can have no better nor more familiar Instance than a Pastry-Cook's
forming the same quantity of Dow into a Pie, and a Lid for it, or into Pyes of
several Figures.

17. The Termination of the Quantity of Body, being the Outside, that
Circumscribes and Comprehends all the Body enclosed in it, which is the
Containing it; the Species of Figure, simply speaking, must be More or less a
Capacity to contain Body; that is, to Contain more or less of it. Hence a Round
Figure is the best, a Quadrate Worse, and a Parallelogram still worse than the
former: I say, simply speaking; or regarding Body in common; for otherwise, if
the nature of some sorts of Bodies (Organical Ones for Example) requires such a
determinate Figure, then that Figure is Better or Worse, which approaches more
or less to such a Figure as best suits with that Nature, fits it best for its
Operations, and makes the Symmetry with its other parts most perfect. Things
endowed with this Quality we use to call Well shaped or Handsome; which, with
fit Colors rightly placed in the respective Parts, make up that amiable
Quality we call Beauty.

18. All Corporeal Qualities are in reality the very Particles or Parts of
Body. This has been proved L. 4. S. 1.
above, where it was shown, that Accidents are not Entities, nor can exist of
themselves, but merely by their Identity with their subject.

19. Wherefore Corporeal Powers are nothing but several Mixed Parts, so
contrived and Organized, as enable the Compounds to perform such and such
Operations. Corporeal Habits are nothing but the same Parts by Use and Bending
to and fro made pliable, and, so, apt to perform them more easily. The Passible
Qualities are the same Parts as rendering the Subject either perfectly or
imperfectly Divisible or Capable to be Altered by Natural Causes. Figure can
the least be thought to have any Being of its own, since it is only the
Termination of Quantity which is it self but a Determination of Body.

Corol. II. Hence is evident that all the Qualities that affect our Senses are
nothing but the minute and subtle particles or Effluviums of Bodies; sent out
from them, and lighting on those most tender and sensible Receivers, and
affecting them agreeably or disagreebly to the nature of the Subjects. And the
same may be said of the Ideas lodged in the Fancy or Imaginative Power it self.
Nor will this be hard to conceive if we reflect attentively, how Quantitative
particles may be still less and less, almost Infinitely.

Corol. III. Nor will it hence follow, that Cartesians and Aristotelians agree
in the main about the Explication of Nature, in regard they do both of them
hold, that there is nothing but the Matter or Substance thus or thus Modified.
For, the Aristotelians give an account of there Minima Naturalia; they make
them Mixed Bodies; they reduce them to their First or Original Mixture; and show
the Intrinsecal Temperature or Constitution of their Subject, or the Informed
Matter of which they consist, from the Conjunction of the highest and most
known Notions in nature, viz. of that matter and Quantity diversely
proportioned; whence arise the Natures of Rarity and Density in the First
species of Bodies. None of which the Cartesians do; nor can they by their
Principles reach the Explication of their First Matter, or render any tolerable
account of it; whether it is Dense or Rare, Hard or Soft, etc. as will be more
amply demonstrated in the Appendix.

20. Nothing more obstructs the way to Natural Science than the doctrine of
Vulgar Philosophers, That Qualities are certain Kinds of little Entities, which
of themselves have a diminutive sort of Being, and are able to produce such and
such Effects. For example, Ask them how a Bell works that effect upon my Ear
which we call Sound; they will tell you there is a Quality in the Bell called
Sonoreity, whose nature it is to make a Sound. Ask how a Green thing makes such
a pleasing Impression on my Eye; they will answer, There is a certain Quality in
it called Greenness, whose nature it is to work such an Effect; and so of the
rest. Which ridiculous Method explicates nothing, but makes the Silliest old
wife as good a Philosopher as the most Learned Naturalist, if she can but name
the Word that Signifies that Quality. Next, it makes Learners rest easily
contented, and well appay'd with a mere Word; whence they will grow Negligent
and Careless to take pains to look into the Natures of the Things; or else (if
they have any wit in them,) to despair of all knowledge of Nature, by seeing
their Masters so profoundly Ignorant, and so Superficially Learned. And lastly,
it hinders Learners from Seeing, or even endeavoring to see, the Natural
Proportion and Alliance between Proper Causes and their Effects; and inclines
them to take purely upon trust the whole Administration of Nature, and all
Consequence of one thing from another, which renders all natural Science
precarious. For, it is not Science, unless we use our own Eyes, and see the
point Demonstrated. Jurare in verba -- is (in such cases) the Fool's Oath; and
is, in plain terms, to swear the Devoting or giving up our Reason to a Slothful
Contentedness never to grow Wiser.

LESSON VII. Of the Common Head of Relation.
1. THE Notion of Relation being what one Individual Thing is, if compared to
another, there must be some Real Ground of it in the thing Referred, which is
the Reason of our Referring it, and by which formally we do thus Refer it: For
otherwise Relation would be a Chimerical and Fictitious Notion; and not a Real
or Natural one, common to all Mankind, and held by them to be such; which yet
we experience, by our daily Converse with them, it is.

2. This Ground cannot be their having Disparate or Disagreeing Notions in
them, or their being of Disparate Orders, which have nothing to do with one
another: For, we find that we cannot Refer or compare Green and Hard, Youthful
and Transparent, Hot and Triangular, nor any other disparate Notions; nor yet a
Writer and a Ploughshare, a Father and a Millstone, a Brother and a Handsaw,
etc. because they are in Disparate Orders, and have no Respect to one another,
grounding our Referring them or Comparing them together, as have a Writer and a
Writing, a Father and a Son, a Baker and Bread, etc.

3. Wherefore the Ground of Relation must either be some Notion agreeing to
both the things related, that is, found to belong to both, either Intrinsecally
or Extrinsecally, or else their having Communication with one another by way of
natural Action and Passion. This is proved by the former Section, and is
evident, because there can be no other Considerations by which they can be
ordered to one another, or be of the same Order, but their having some
Intrinsecal Notion common to both, or else their Acting and Suffering upon and
from one another, which is an Extrinsecal Consideration.

4. Relations of the first sort, which have one and the same Notion in them,
are of as many kinds as there are Heads of Notions, since all these have a kind
of Nature or Notion in them, and so some kind of Transcendent Unity. Thus, if
they have the same Nature or Essence in them which belongs to the Common Head
of Substance, the Relation between them is called Identity, which is their
being of one and the same kind of Entity. If of one and the same Notion of
Quantity, it is called Equality, which is their being of one and the same
Quantity: If of Quality, it is called Likeness: if of Action, (singly
considered) they are called Co-actors, as Fellow Soldiers, Fellow Servants,
etc. If of Passion (singly considered) Fellow Sufferers, Fellow-Martyrs, etc.
If of Place, (or Vbi) Bed-fellows, Chamber-fellows, Townsmen, Countrymen, etc.
If of Time, Contemporaries, Co-eve, or born at the same time. If of Habit,
Fellow-Mourners, Fellow-Curassiers, Fellow Soldiers of the Blew or Gray
Regiment. If of Situation, Fellow-Assessors or Sitters; though such as this
seldom occur. Nay there may be a Relation grounded on having the same notion
even of Relation in them; as Parents or Fellow-begetters.

5. Of the second sort grounded on Action and Passion, not singly considered,
but with an Order to one another, or as Inferring one another, are such as
these, viz. Father and Son, Master and Servant, Prince and Subject, Tutor and
Pupil; which are grounded on the Actions and Passions of Begetting and being
Begotten, Commanding and being Commanded, Governing and being Governed,
Teaching and being Taught, etc.

6. In both these sorts of Relations the things Referred must have their
Correlates; that is, there must be a mutual Relation on both sides. In the
former of them, because there is the selfsame Ground or Reason of Referring in
one as in the other, viz. that one same Notion, Common or Belonging to Both, to
wit, the same Essence, same Quantity, same Quality, same Relation, same Place,
same Time, same sort of Action and Passion, same Situation, and the same Habit.

7. This Agreeing and Corresponding of the two things thus Related in those of
the former kind of Relation, must be meant to be their Agreeing in the same
Abstracted and Common or Specifical Notion, and not in the same Individual one.
For, otherwise two Men could not have Identity in their Individual Essence,
since then they would be the same and not the same, that is, Vnum and Non-unum:
And, for the same reason, Intrinsecal Accidents being Identify'd with the
Subjects in which they inhere, and having no Entity but theirs, they can have
no Individuality but by them, and so the same Individual Intrinsecal Accident
cannot be Common to two Subjects or Substances, but must be Individually Two,
as They are. Whence the Relations grounded on them must be upon their being the
same in Species or Kind, and not Individually. Which reason holds equally for
those Relations that are grounded on Action, Passion, and Situation, and the
rest: For, two things cannot be in one Individual place (that is, in a place
capable to hold but one Individual thing) without Penetration of Bodies: Nor is
it possible, in the course of Natural Causes, that two should be born or dye at
the same precise Time, that is, in such a portion of Time as is terminated by
the same Instants: Nor can Two wear the same Individual Arms, etc. at once.
Wherefore it must be meant, that the Notion common to both must be an
abstracted or specifical Notion, and not the Individual.

8. The Relations of the later sort became Mutual upon another score, viz.
because Action and its proper Passion corresponding to it, do infer one
another; For, nothing can Act, but it must Act upon something that receives
that Action, or suffers by it; nor suffer or be Acted upon, but by something
that Acts on it.

9. There is a Third Mixed sort of Relation, called, Of the thing Measured to
the Measure; that is, when the Thing Related depends for its Essence or its
Perfection, on Another, and that other does not at all depend for either on it.
For Example, When a Picture is drawn from the Prototype, it depends on the
Prototype for its Perfection, and is, as it were, Measured by it, in regard
it is only so far Good or Bad as it resembles the Man it was drawn for; but the
Prototype or the Man, gets Nothing, nor is in the least Better or Worse, by
having a Picture drawn from him. Again, there is a common Notion of Lineaments
and Color found in both, which makes it seem to partake of the first sort of
Relation; also the Prototype, by imprinting an Idea of it self in the Painter,
enables him in some sort to draw him, and so contributes something to that
Action which gives it to partake of the Second Kind: so that this Kind of
Relation seems to be Mixed of the other two, and yet (as will be shown) is
perfectly of Neither.

10. This kind of Relation is not Mutual, but is found only on the side of the
thing measured: For, since the Measure ( v. g. the Prototype) has no natural
Order of Agency or Patiency by which it respects the Picture, because the Man
is not a Thing naturally ordained to work upon the Fancy of the Painter so to
render him, a perfect Efficient cause of the Picture, as Fire is Ordained to
Heat, a Master to Command, etc. Nor is there a true Unity of Form, to wit, of
Color and Figure, in both, but only some Counterfeit Resemblance of them;
whence we cannot, without speaking nonsense, say, The Man is like his Picture,
as we can that the Picture is like the Man, or that two white Walls are like
one another; nor (as was said) does the Man receive any degree of Perfection or
Imperfection by being pictured; it follows, that there is no Ground or Reason
on the Man's side to make him Related to his Picture; wherefore he has no Real
Relation to it at all, but only a Verbal one, consisting in the Grammatical
chiming of the word pictured to ^^^ure.

11. Of this sort are the Relations between all our Powers, whether Corporeal
or Intellectual, to their Objects; for the very Essence and Nature of those
Powers is to see, hear, or understand the Objects: and the Perfections of the
Powers in their several kinds, are Measured and rated by their doing this
Better or Worse; whereas the Objects are never the Better by being seen, heard,
or known. Wherefore there wants on those Objects side a Real Ground, and
therefore a Real Relation to our Powers; however, the words Seer and Seen,
Knower and Known, do answer one another, as if they were proper Agents and
Patients, and Ordered mutually to each other.

12. Of this sort too is the Relation between GOD, as Creator, and his
Creatures. For, seeing the Creature has received all it has, or can have, from
its Creator; that is, has to be an Ens, and not a mere Nothing from the
Essential Ideas it had from all Eternity in the Divine Understanding; and was
put afterward into Actual Being or Existence, and is conserved in the same by
his continual Influence; and has, besides all its Accidental Perfections and
Conveniences, by the course of Causes, laid by his Divine Providence (all which
is demonstrated in Metaphysics): Hence there is all the Ground imaginable of a
Real Relation on the Creature's part toward GOD. On the other side, since GOD
gains no kind of perfection by making Creatures, nor is intrinsecally better in
the least by his Creating them, there can be no Ground at all of a Real
Relation on GOD's side to the Creature, but only a Verbal Sound of [ Creator]
answering Grammatically to Creature, as Creature does to Creator. So important
a thing it is in Philosophy not to be deluded by Articulate Air, or mere
Characters, but to look deeply and attentively into the Thing it self, and to
guide our Thoughts by what we find there, lest we come to frame Mock-notions
out of our Fancy which Nature never gave us.

Corol. I. Hence follows, that all the Expressions of the Holy Scripture of a
Pact or Covenant between God and Creatures, That, upon their behaving
themselves thus and thus, he enters an Obligation of doing thus or thus toward
them; the which do, consequently, put God and the Creature upon the same rank
of Agency and Patiency: It follows, I say, that such Expressions are purely
Metaphorical, and far from Proper or Literally True; but are spoken humano
more, or in accommodation to our Human Actions and Manners of Proceeding. For,
on God's side there is nothing but his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, carrying on
Supernatural Good Dispositions to conformable Effects, as he does Natural
Dispositions to Effects suitable to the Nature of such things. Which Rectitude
of his Will being Essential to him, and consequently Independent on Creatures
or their Actions, had produced the same Effects whether he had made any such
Covenant or no. And the same may be said proportionably of God's Promising,
Threatening, Commanding, Requiring Satisfaction, Accepting the Payment of it,
and suchlike; which though Metaphorical, are notwithstanding True, amount to the
same, and induce the same Effects, though in a more sovereign way, and more
becoming God's Infinite Majesty, than the Gross Capacity of the Generality of
Mankind (for whose sake those low Conceptions and Expressions were used) can
apprehend.

13. There is yet another sort of Mutual Relations, which are partly
Artificial, partly Natural; such as are those of Genus and Species, Antecedent
and Consequent, Subject and Predicate, Premises and Conclusion, etc. These are
partly Natural, in regard our Understanding has its distinct Nature or Notion,
as well as Whiteness, Action or any other Ground of Relation hitherto spoken
of; and these are grounded on the Manner of the Objects existing in our
Understanding; where they are as truly Universal and Particular, Subject and
Predicate, etc. as the Wall is White, or the Quantity a Yard, etc. And they are
also partly Artificial, because Artists in Logic, who reflect on the things as
they are in our Minds, do make use of such to clear their Notions, predicate
them of one another, and discourse of them exactly.

14. Wherefore those Logicians who call them Relationes Rationis, meaning to
oppose them by that Expression to Real Relations, seem to forget that the L. 3.
S. 6.
Understanding and its manner of working are Real; whereas they have more of
Entity, and consequently of Reality, in them than Bodies, and their Powers or
Manners of Working have; and, consequently, those Relations are far more Real
than those which are grounded on Corporeal Powers and their Operations.

15. The Substance (as it were) of Relation consists in that Immediate Ground
which is the Reason of our referring one thing to another. For, it is Evident,
that it is the Thing it self in my Mind which is Referred, and not the Act of
the Mind Referring it. For example; Two White things have Unity of Form, or the
same Notion in them, which makes them Really Alike of themselves, were they in
a Comparing Power, that could actually Referr them and denominate them
Relatively as their Nature requires; so that it is not the Act of my
Understanding which made the white Walls really Alike, but their own Natures
which are the Object of my Act; by means notwithstanding of the Comparative Act
of my Understanding, which they informed, as a necessary Condition to relate
them actually, and without which they had each of them had but the Absolute
Notion of White, and not the Relative one of being Alike.

Corol. II. Hence we have some light given us how there may be True and Real
Relations in God, Knowing and Loving himself; and, how they depend and not
depend on our Understanding.

16. The Intrinsecal Differences of Relation being more and less, and our Act
adding nothing to the Substance of the Relation, they must be taken from the
Greater or Lesser Ground or Reason why the thing is referred to another. Hence
our greatest Relation is to God, because all the good we have or can have does
entirely Referr us to him. Upon which therefore is founded all our Religious
Respects, and our Duties of Serving, Obeying and Adoring him. Next follows the
Relation of a Husband to a Wife, who is (in some manner) the same Individual
with himself. After them comes our Relation to our Parents, who concurred to
our Being, gave us Education, and provided for our Subsistence. Then to
Mankind, to whom we are Related by Identity of Nature; to our Country, our
King, and other Superiors, according to their several Ranks; to our Kinsfolks,
Neighbors, etc. from which Relations arise several Duties in proportion to the
more or less important Reason or Ground that makes them more or less nearer or
remotely Related to us.

LESSON VIII. Of the Common Heads of Action and Passion.
1. THERE are Two, and but Two, Common Heads of Extrinsecals conceived to be
applied to one another by way of Motion. For, since Motion has two Terms, viz.
that thing from whence it comes, and that to which it reaches, and these are
distinct Considerations; hence we have Two Common Heads of one Extrinsecal
thing conceived to be applied to another by way of Motion. Nor can there be
more; for Motion, considered (as it were) in the Midway between those Terms,
has no Notion but that of mere Motion; whence it is the very Notion of
Successive Quantity, and belongs clearly to that Common Head, and therefore
cannot belong to another, or constitute a new one.

2. The Notion of Motion is the most Imperfect of all our Notions, and most
approaching to Nonentity. For, since Motion, as it superadds to the Extensive
Quantity of its Subject, is wholly made up of not being in this place, or that;
or, of not being still here and not being yet there; nor has any thing of
Permanency, which is in a manner the same Notion with Actual Being; it follows,
that, besides the Common disadvantage other Accidents are liable to, of having
no Entity of their own but what is borrowed of their Subjects, it has moreover
this, that neither it self, nor any part of it self, exists so much as for one
Moment. Wherefore Ens being a Capacity of Existence, Motion seems to be (in a
manner) incapable of Existence, or a Nonentity; and this out of its own
peculiar Nature or Notion. Again, since in every part of Motion the thing moved
is in a space bigger than it self, and Place (as will be shown Less. 3. Sect. 9.
hereafter) properly such, is but Equal to the thing it contains, and not
bigger than it, hence Motion hinders its Subject to be, properly speaking, in
any place, that is any where, which amongst Bodies seems next akin to not being
at all. Lastly, Motion is destructive of Actual Being in those things that are
arrived to their full state of perfection; which shows its nature to be in some
sense directly opposite to the Notion of Being, which has some kind of Constancy
and Stability in it. Nor can it be said that it gives Actual Being or Existence
to the new Entities it helps to produce, for Existence Book 3. L. 7. S. 5. Prop
6, 7.
is the proper Effect of Self-Existence or the First Cause. Wherefore the
Notion of Motion is the most Imperfect of all our Notions, and most approaching
to Nonentity.

Corol. I. Hence is demonstrated that, since every Agent produces an Effect
suitable to its own Nature, and therefore an Agent infinitely perfect cannot be
the Immediate Cause of what is most Imperfect; therefore Motion, being both most
imperfect, and withal most disagreeable, nay, directly contrary, to God's
Nature, which is pure Self-Existence and Essentially Immovable and Unchangeable,
was not immediately caused by God, but by See B. 3. L 6. S. 4.
some imperfect Agent, or some Creature, that is, by such a Cause as of it self
is a Nonentity.

3. The Notion of Action, as it superadds to mere Motion is, the Exercise of a
Power, which is Effective of something. For, since to Act is to Do, and to do
Nothing is not to do, it follows, that to Act is to Do something; but to do
something presupposes a Power to do it; and this so as not to stay in the
Notion of mere Power; for, if it stays there, it only denominates the Thing
Able to do, which (again) is not to do; wherefore Action is not the Notion of a
sluggish Power, but of a Power Exerted and Exercised, that is, Effecting
something; whence the Power is called Effective, the Action Efficiency, and the
Something it does is termed an Effect. All which superadd to the notion of mere
Motion.

4. The Primary and Chief Natural Action is Division. For, since Substance is
the Subject of all Accidents; and, which being changed, all the Accidents do
suffer a change with it; hence that Action that works upon a Body according to
the Substantial Notion of it, has more of Action in it, as working a Greater
Effect: But Division makes Two Things of One, and so destroys the former Vnum
or Ens, and makes Two new ones, therefore Division is the Primary and Chief of
all other Natural Actions.

Note, That this is to be understood of Perfect Division, which makes the thing
Divided, and is therefore only properly to be called Division; for, Imperfect
Division only alters the Figure. It may be objected, That Rarefaction and
Condensation, if they be in a great degree, change the Substance as well as
Division does. Answ. This arises out of the nature of some particular sort of
Bodies, and not out of the precise Notion of those Actions: For, it is evident
that Rarefaction and Condensation import no more in their Notion but the
altering the Subject according to some Quality; whereas Division imports
directly the taking away the Unity of the Thing, and consequently its Entity.
Again, mere Rarefaction does not change the Substance, but the Degree of it,
when it comes to great height; and every Body admits Rarefaction a long time
without losing its former Essence; whereas Division consists in an Indivisible,
so that the Divisum esse is esse aliud, or esse duo ex uno; whereas the
Rarefactum esse may be without any such Effect following it.

5. Rarefaction and Condensation are the next Actions in Dignity: For, since
(as was proved above) Rarity and Density are the First Intrinsecal Differences
of Quantity, as it affects Body (in order to natural Action and Passion, it
follows, that those natural Actions that cause Rarity or Density, are the next
in dignity to Division, which works more upon Divisibility their Genus.

6. These three sorts of Action take up the whole Head of Natural Action. For,
since the Genus and its two Differences must needs comprehend all under any
common Head, as being Adequate to it, and Division answers to Divisibility, the
Genus, and Rarefaction, and Condensation to the Intrinsecal Differences of more
or less thus Divisible; it follows, that these three sorts of Action do take up
all that Head, so that there cannot be any kind of Natural Action, which is not
reducible to some of these, or not comprehended under them. Besides, all the
First and Second Passible Qualities, which generally are the Immediate Objects
of Natural Actions, are comprehended in, or spring out of, Rarity and Density;
as will be seen in Physics.

7. The Formal Virtue of Acting, or working any Effect, which we call its
Causality, is the Agent's being what it is, or its very Existence applied by
Motion to the Patient, and Communicated to it, or (as it were) imprinted on it.
For, since no particular Agent in Nature can do every thing whatever, the
reason why such particular Causes work such particular Effects must spring
hence, that the Effect has something in its Nature that is like the Cause,
comes from it, and is Communicated to the Patient, or partak'd by it. Whence
come those Vulgar Axioms, Operari sequitur esse, Every thing acts as it is; An
Effect is a participation of the immediate Ca^se, etc. Thus the Cause or Reason
why Water moistens, is because it is moist in it self, and imparts that Quality
to another thing. The reason why a Seal makes such an Impression, is; because
it self is of such a stamp. The reason why God Creates, or is the Cause of
Being, is, because Being is Essential to him.

Corol. II. Hence Motion is only requisite to apply the Virtue or Existence of
the Agent to the Matter or Patient; but the Substance of the Effect springs
from the Cause's being what it is: Whence it happens, that the Effect from the
same Causes is more or less perfect, according as the Existence of a Cause
which is of such a Nature or Essence, or more or fewer parts of it, are applied
better or worse to the Patient, or to more or fewer parts of it, by a feebler
or smarter Motion.

8. It follows from this discourse that there must be Four Sorts of Causes
necessarily belonging to every Effect in Nature, viz. There must be an Acter
which we call the Efficient Cause; a Subject for the Acter to work upon, called
the Material Cause. The Effect wrought in that Matter or Received in it, which
makes it otherwise than it was before, and therefore has the Notion of some
Form newly accruing to it; which constitutes the Formal Cause. And, since
Corporeal Action is Motion, and no Body can move it self, and therefore all
Motion in Nature must be caused (either Mediately or Immediately) by something
that is not a Body, that is, by a Spiritual or Intelligent Being: and such
Agents do design or act for an End; therefore, there must also be a Final Cause
to make those Agents to move Bodies, and make them act as they do in every
particular Action though never so minute; which grounds our Notion of Providence
adequately Governing the World even as to the least circumstance of it.
Wherefore, there are to every Action in Nature Four Causes necessarily
requisite; which will afford Reflecters ample occasion for Speculation and
Contemplation. For example, When I write a Letter, the Efficient Cause is my
Self; the Material Cause, Paper, which receives the Effect of my Writing; The
Formal Cause, the Characters received in the Paper; the Final Cause, to gratify
my Friend, treat of Business, or acquaint him with News.

9. There is no Fifth Cause called an Idea, as Plato affirms. For, either that
Idea is conceived as introduced in the matter and Received there, and then it is
clearly a Formal Cause: or, as it is in the Mind of the Artificer; and then it
concurrs to make him an Efficient Cause; for without such an Idea he could not
produce such an Artificial Effect.

10. Operation has not the same Notion with Action, but is Indifferent to
Action and Passion, or rather a kind of Neutral Notion made up of both. For
example, Notions or Simple Apprehensions are said to be the First Operation of
our Understanding, though the Soul in having them is purely Passive. So also my
Acts of Discoursing, Willing etc. are called Operations, though they be both
performed by my Soul and Received in it; Whence they have a kind of Neutral
Notion, such as have Curro, ardeo, and suchlike, taking such words not in a
Grammatical, but in a Philosophical and Natural Sense. Of which kind are all
Immanent Actions or Acts; And, therefore, these are not so properly called
Actions, as Operations, in order to what they have of Effective in them; or
else Acts, because they Actuate or Inform the Subject in which they are as well
Received, as they are Produced by it. Whence Action, in the Proper and Obvious
Sense, signifies the Efficience of a Natural Cause; which has a Transitive
Notion, and inferrs Passion; and, consequently, some Effect in the Extrinsecal
Subject it lights on.

Note, That since Action inferrs Passion, and referrs to it, hence whatever is
discoursed here of Action, may, by turning the Tables (as it were) or
considering Motion in order to its other Term, be understood likewise of
Passion; for which reason we treat of both those Heads in the same Discourse.

LESSON IX. Of the Common Head of Ubi or Where.
1. UBI or Where signifying [ in what Place] the Notion of Place, must first be
rightly understood e're we can have a right Notion of the Common Head called
Ubi. And the word [ Place] being no Artificial Term but a Natural one, and used
by all Mankind, we are to learn the true and proper meaning of it from the
Users of it; that is, we must take the Notion of Place, not from men of Art or
Speculaters, but from the Vulgar; and the surest way to do this, is to gather
their Sense by reflecting on their Sayings and known Intentions.

2. Since then the Vulgar agree naturally to say a thing is in a Place; the
Notion of Place is to be a Container of the thing that is in it; and, withal,
such a Container as is not Intrinsecal to the Thing of which it is inquired
where it is, but Extrinsecal to it; for it would be very odd and
dissatisfactory, and look like a Jest, if when we are asked, Where such a man
is? we should Answer, He is in his Skin. Whence, pursuing these Natural
Apprehensions of theirs exactly, we shall find, that the Proper Place of any
Body must be Another Body that is Immediate and Equal to it; for were it
Distant from it, and so, Unequal to it, or too wide for it, then (since there
is no Vacuum) that too-large Container would be a Common Place to other Bodies
as well as it, and so would not be its Proper Place, (which was the Question
that was asked) since it would be no more Its Place than that others, but a
Common Place to both; which, therefore, would be no competent Answer to the
Question where It was? Whence, by Reflection, we shall discover, that Place, in
proper and exact speech, is the Ambient Superficies of the next Body; for, this
is Immediate, and therefore Equal to it, because an Indivisible (such as the
Superficies is in respect to Body) can add no Quantity to it or make the
Container Unequal to the thing Contained. But it is to be observed, that the
Vulgar, whose only aim it is to find a thing by asking for its Place, do not
reflect oftentimes upon their own Notion, or as it were refine it to an
Exactness, but content themselves to know near what Visible thing that which
they look for is placed; as on the Cup-board, behind the door, under the
Beds-feet, etc. which is a Slubberd or Imperfect Notion of Place, even
according to their own Sayings; for these do put the thing sought for to be in
that Place, whereas perhaps many other things are on the Cup-board, or near the
Bed's feet, as well as the thing sought for.

3. Again, since the Intention of Mankind in asking Where a Thing is? can be no
other but to know how to find it, it follows that Place must be certainly
Knowable, that is, such as does not it self need seeking for. Nor could it be
such if it were still Subject to be Removed; for then we should be at a loss
both to find It and other things by it: and our selves would be at the same
plunge as are those that practice the Art of Memory; who, being to range the
things they would remember in ^et Places their Fancy had designed, do affix
them to Stools, Chairs, Brooms, and such like; which being taken away and
Removed, they have lost the Memory of the thing their Fancy had placed there;
wherefore Place must have as much Immobility as may Serve for our finding a
thing, so that our Enquiry where, or in what Place the thing is, be not
defeated; and no more is requisite. All farther Immobility being nothing to the
purpose mankind intended, and therefore was no part of their Notion of Place.

4. Wherefore, there is no Necessity of having recourse to Imaginary Space or
Subsistent Dimensions, to find something which is Immovable Absolutely, which
some do upon this account, because all things in Nature are subject to motion.
For, we experience, that we can find any thing that we can have necessity to
use or know well enough without recurring thither. Besides, Place must be more
Knowable then the thing we look for; whereas, these Imaginary Vbies are not
Distinguishable or Knowable at all. So that such wild Conceits as these are
Extravagant even to madness. We have proved Vacuum to be purely Nothing, and
consequently Vnknowable; and, therefore, to be in a Vacuum is to be in no place
or no where. And, as for Subsistent Dimensions, it is a plain Contradiction upon
another score; because it puts Quantity to be Substance, and capable of
subsisting alone or without a Subject.

5. It Is not much less ridiculous to invent little Entities called Vbies for
Bodies, or for Spirits (which are incapable of being in place) of which we can
give no account. For, since the surface of the containing Body, in a
Determinate distance from some Parts of the House, the Town, the Country, or
the World, which to our apprehension are fixed, answers all Questions that can
be proposed about the Place of a thing, and we can be furnished with this by our
Natural Notions; it follows, that all other far-fetcht Conceits, invented to
explicate Place, are Needless and Senseless. Such strange extravagancies
capering wits are apt to fall into, when they relinquish Nature and the Solid
Notions she imprints in them, to follow mere Fancy, the mint of a thousand
ungrounded Capricio's and Chimera's.

6. Examples of Vbi may be such as this. Quest. Where, or in what Place, lives
Dr. H.? Answ. In Kings-street. Q. Where is that Kings-street? A. In high
Holborn. Q. Where is Holborn? A. At the West end of London. Q. Where is London?
A. About the middle of England. Q. Where is England? A. In such a part of
Europe. Q. Where is Europe? A. In the Northwest part of the Earth. And, farther
than this (or rather not so far) none of the Generality of Mankind can have
occasion to enquire; though perhaps Artists, or Geographers and Astronomers, may;
nor needs there any more Immobility to be ascertained, to find out where that
Skilful Doctor lives, since this may serve our purpose of finding him. And we
may do this easily, (let the whole Earth move round never so swiftly) by
getting an Answer to some of these Questions, without the help of Imaginary
Space, Subsistent Dimensions, or those little Entities called Vbies, which no
mortal Man's Eyes ever saw, or any man of Sense could ever understand.

Corol. I. Hence it is a Contradiction to say the World is in Place, since it
Contains all Space, and, consequently, all Place in its self, and therefore is
Contained by none; which (as was shown) is requisite to the Notion of being in
Place; nor is there any necessity or sense it should; unless we should Fancy
that some ultra-mundane Traveller bewildered in Imaginary Space, should be put
to it to ask some of the Chimera's there, which is the way to the World?

Corol. II. Hence is seen, that the Concave Superficies of a Body, considered
as affecting its own Subject, is in the Head of Quantity; but, as Containing
another Body, and connotating a respect to some other things, so fixed and
known, that by knowing them and It, we may know where the thing contained is;
it constitutes the Common Head of Vbi, and consequently of Place.

Corol. III. It Is seen also that Angels are not properly in Place, nor
consequently have properly any Vbi; since they have nothing in them which can
have any Commensuration to a Superficies, or be Contained within it. Wherefore
their being in Place can only be understood of their working upon Bodies which
are in Place.

7. From what is said it will appear, that the true and proper Notion of Ubi is
not Place it self, but the being in such or such a Place; that is, it consists
formally in the Application of one Extrinsecal thing to another, in Rest; viz.
of the Body Contained to the Superficies of the Body Containing, with a
Connotation of the respects abovementioned. Yet, because to be in a Place
includes Place in its Notion, it was proper and necessary to treat of it under
this Head, seeing it belonged to it Formally, and to Quantity only Materially.

LESSON X. Of the Common Head of Quando or When.
1. THere is some Motion that is Even and Regular, at least to our
Apprehension; and withal Knowable to all Mankind. For, every man sees that the
Sun moves (at least it appears so to us) and if there be any Irregularity or
Unevenness in its Motion, yet it is to us Undiscernable.

2. Therefore this Regular and Known Motion is fit to be a Measure to all our
other Motions. For, since there are but three things Requisite to complete the
Notion of a Measure, viz. that it be apt to bear a Proportion to the Thing
Measured, and to be compared to it, which all Motions have from being
Quantities of the same kind, viz. being Successive Quantity; and that its
Quantity be more Known than the Quantity of the thing Measured; and, lastly,
that it be fixed or Constantly the same, that so it may be a Standard to the
others; and, since the Motion of the Sun has both these last Properties, as
well as it has the First from its being of the same Kind of Quantity with other
Motions, therefore this proportionable, known, and even Motion of the Sun is
every way fit to be a Measure to all our less known and less regular Motions;
which kind of Measure we call Time.

3. Hence Motion may be considered three several ways, and thence ground three
several Notions: One, as it respects the parts into which it is Divisible, and
its peculiar manner of having no two Parts at once; the former of which gives
it the Notion of Quantity, the latter to be of that Species of Quantity called
Successive. Next, it may be considered as it respects the two Terms or Things,
viz. that from which it begins, and that on which it lights and where it ends
its Career; which Considerations of Motion ground Action and Passion: And,
lastly, it may be considered as bearing a proportion to other Motions, and as
having such other Properties as fit it to Measure them; and Motion, as
conceived to be furnished with these Requisites to Measure all others, is that
which we properly call Time.

4. The Notion of Time is a Natural Notion, and Common to all Mankind. This is
evident; For all Mankind, the Rudest as well as the most Learned, (as we find
by their expressions) has that Notion, must need it, and does use it.

5. Though the Notion of Time be clearly grounded in Nature, yet it needs some
help of the Understanding to make it completely and actually a Measure: For,
when I write an hour (for example) that motion of Writing was really performed
while the Sun did run the four and twentieth part of his Diurnal course; and
so, that Motion of my Pen was in reality proportioned to such a part of Time.
On the other side, since every particular Measure bears in its Notion to be
determinately thus much, and there is no Determination in Nature of any part of
the Sun's Motion, nor any part of it at once, and only my Understanding divides
its Annual and Diurnal Motion into so many Proportionate and Determinate parts;
and (though the Motion it self be perpetually fleeting) yet it resumes so much of
it into one Determinate and Constant Notion ( viz. of an Hour) without which
Determination it could not actually be a Measure; therefore, though the Notion of
Time be clearly grounded in Nature, yet it needs some help of the Understanding
to make it completely and actually a Measure.

6. The Notion of Time depends on our Understanding in the same manner that
Relati^n did: For, the Ground, Reason, and Substance of Times being a Measure,
is found in Nature; and yet the otherwise-Indeterminate parts of the Sun's
Motion must be made Determinate by our comprizing so much of them at once into
one Notion, and then considering them as Proportioned, that is, by our
Referring or Comparing them to other Motions, e're they can be Actually a
Measure.

7. Hence may be collected, that the True and Genuin Notion of the Common Head
of Quando or When, is not the mere precise Notion of Time it self, but of being
in such a determinate part of Time; that is, its Notion consists in the
Application of the Extrinsecal Motion of the Sun to Sublunary (or perhaps in
Artists who reach further) to subsolary or supersolary Motions; and the Answer
to Quando tells us to what part of Time they belong, or are conceived to be
Applied. For example, these Expressions; I writ yesterday, I will come to
morrow, I will speak with you within an hour, and suchlike, do Apply our Past,
Present, or Future Actions to some different part of Time. Yet, because their
being performed in such a Time includes Time in its Notion; and that Time, though
it be materially Successive Quantity, yet taking it formally, it is not
considered in order to its own Subject, of which it is an Intrinsecal Accident,
but in order to Another; it was necessary to treat of it under this Head; since
taken thus formally it can belong to this, and cannot to any other.

Corol. I. Hence it is a mere Chimera, and as senseless as that of Imaginary
Space to fancy Time before or after the World. For, it is in direct terms to
put Motion and Time to be when they are not, which is, to put it to be and not
be at once.

Corol. II. For the same reason mere Being, without Order to Motion, has
nothing to do with Time, nor can be said to be in it, or subject to it, or
measurable by it. For Being, precisely as such, has no parts by which it may be
proportioned to the Sun's Motion, or Commensurable to it: Wherefore, to fancy
God's Eternity (which consists in the most Absolute Impossibility of his
not-being) to be Commensurate to an Infinite flux of Time, is a Groundless and
Senseless Imagination. Though his never-altering Being does, even for its being
such, eminently include all Possible Time and all Differences of Time, Past,
Present, and Future, and this concentered in it all at once.

Corol. III. For the like reason the Internal Operations of Spirits being
Indivisible and Instantaneous, can have no Commensuration to the Motion of the
Sun, or to Time; though their External Operation upon Bodies may; correspondently
to what is said before of their being in Place.

8. The Questions of Quando, and their proper Answers, are such as these; When
was Christ born? Ans. 1696 Years ago. When will there be a Leap-year? Ans. This
Year. When did Mustapha the Turkish Emperor begin his Reign? Ans. The last Year.

9. The Differences of Quando are Past, Present and Future. Though the Present is
not in reality, it being an Instant and Indivisible; yet, since our
Understanding can comprise such a portion of Time into one Notion, and consider
it, and conceive it, and thence speak of it by a participle of the Present
Tense, and as one entire Part of Time, and say it is Running, till as much as we
had framed a Notion of were run out or ended; hence we can truly say, something
is doing this present Age, Year, Month, Day and Hour, nay, this very Moment,
taking Moment for some short Indeterminate part of Time.

10. The Differences of Past and Future are more and less distant from the
Present prefixed Time; for Past signifies before it, Future, after it.
Inferior Differences also must be taken from some determinate point, (as it
were) as, from the Creation, the first Olympiad, the Birth of our Savior, etc.

Note, That it is very nicely to be remarked, that when Questions are asked, by
how much or how little of Time? the Answer belongs to the Predicament of
Successive Quantity; whence an Age, a Year, a Month, etc. are Quantitative
Notions, divided by more and less of Successive Quantity or Motion, and
constituted by them; and only what answers precisely to When, belongs to this
Predicament of Quando. Thus, if we ask how long Time it is since the Invasion
of William the Conqueror; the Answer is, Six hundred and thirty years; which is
a quantitative Notion consisting of both Continued and Discrete Quantity. But
if you ask, When was the first Olympiad? the Answer will be, In the three
thousandth two hundredth twenty eighth year from the Creation; and so it will
belong to this Head; for then it formally signifies, that the Motion or Action
of the Games in the first Olympiad were celebrated while such a part of the
Sun's Motion was passing.

The Predicaments of Situation and Habit are of little use, therefore not worth
the dilating on them.

LESSON XI. Of the Expression of Our Notions by Words.
1. NOtions being (as was said) the Meanings of Words, it comes next to be
examined, what Advantage or Disadvantage may accrue to Science, by the
expressing our Notions by Words, either distinctly or confusedly. If the word
have but one Sense or Signification, either taken alone or as applied to other
Notions, it is said to be Univocal, or to be spoken Vnivocally of them; because
Vex or Word differing from mere Sound in this, that a Voice is apt to express
our Inward Sense, Mind, or Notion, so that Sense seems to be the Form or Soul
of a Word, and Sound only the material part or (as it were) the Body of it:
Hence a Word is said to be Univocal, when it has but One Sense or Meaning, and
Equivocal when it has or may have more.

2. Since, as B. 1. L. 1
was proved above, Notions are the Natures of the things in our Understanding,
and so can have no Falsity, in regard they have their Metaphysical Verity; that
is, they are what they are, and cannot be other than they are; nor can they
have Formal Falsity, for this consists in the Compounding two Notions together
by Affirming or Denying, neither of which is found in Notions or Simple
Apprehensions, which are not thus Compounded; hence no Error can possibly
proceed from the Notions, but all Truth; wherefore, were all Words Univocal,
and had but One Notion or Meaning, there could be no more possibility of Error
from Words than there could be from the Notions themselves, which are signified
by those Words. Wherefore, on the contrary, if words be Equivocal, that is,
Ambiguous, or liable to be taken in a double Meaning, or (which is the same) to
signify diverse Notions, and it happen that some of the persons that use them
do take them in one sense, others in another, they must necessarily speak and
discourse of different things, and, so fall into different sentiments, and
contradict one another.

3. Hence, supposing the Persons be sincere, and that there be no Fault in
their Will, most of the Contests and Wranglings in the World do arise from the
Equivocal Meaning of Words: For, since the Use of Words is Common to all
Mankind, and most Single Words are Equivocal, and the Contexture of them, or
the whole Clause, may also be oftentimes taken in a different sense; hence,
unless the double sense of the Words be Cleared and Distinguished, Innumerable
and Endless Contests must necessarily happen from the Equivocal Meaning of
those Words.

4. Written Words are far more liable to those Inconveniences than words
Spoken, especially if the Authors of those Written Words be Dead, and no
Certain way of Interpreting them be agreed on by all Parties. For, if an
Equivocation happen in Words spoken, the Speaker, if alive, may easily come to
see he is misunderstood, and by a Pertinent Distinction showing the double
sense of the Word, and in which of the senses he means it, may come to a right
understanding with his Opposite; which is Impossible in Written Words, when the
Author is Dead, and there is no Certain way of Interpreting those words Agreed
on; as it happens in the followers of Aristotle or any other Dead Authors.

Corol. I. This Method or way of Interpreting such Words must either be Evident
of it self, or made Evident by Proof; and it must, besides, be Agreed by both
the contending Parties. Evident, because it is a kind of Principle to find out
the true sense of the Author. And it must be Agreed on; for otherwise the
Principle not been yielded to, all Contests which depend upon that Principle
must remain Undecided, and end (if they ever do so) in a mere Logomachy or
Word-skirmish.

5. For the same reason, even the same person, if he be deluded by the
Ambiguous Sound of a Word, and, through Inadvertence or want of Skill to keep his
Thoughts steady, happen to take it now in one sense, now in another, must
necessarily blunder in his Discourse, and speak Incoherently. For, since the
true Notion of the Thing does Ground all our Knowledge of it, and all our
Discourses concerning it; it follows, that he who proceeds now upon one Notion,
then upon another, must needs vary and hobble in his Discourse, and talk
Incoherently; having no Certain and Fixed Notion affording him Light to guide
his Steps to the same End, or take the right Way to it.

6. The Meaning of those words that express Natural Notions is to be taken from
the Vulgar; and the sense of Artificial Words from Men who are Learned in those
respective Arts: For, the signification of Words can only be taken from the
Authors and Users of them; which in the former sort of Words is the Vulgar; in
the later, Men of Art.

7. Hence Criticisms, generally speaking, are Incompetent to give us the
Certain Sense of Words. For, Critics do very frequently ground the Sense of
Words upon Etymologies, or the Derivation of them from other words: Or else, on
the Sense in which some few learned Writers do take them; both which are
Fallacious Rules to know their Sense certainly. The former, because the Reason
why the word was Imposed, and the Sense it self of those words are many times
Different Notions: For example, a Stone (as some of them tell us) is in Latin
named Lapis, a laedend^ pedes; but the Notion or signification of that word is
the very Substance it self of such a Body. Nor is the latter Rule competent to
give us the true Meanings of those words that express Natural Notions; first,
because those Learned Men use to speak Learnedly or Rhetorically with Tropes
and Figures, and affect to deliver their thoughts neatly and finely, with
quaint Phrases, Allusions, Metaphors, and other knacks of Language; all which
are so many Deviations from the Natural manner of Expression Common to all
Mankind, and, consequently, Unsuitable to our Natural Conceptions. Besides
that, a Few Authors suffice the Critics to build their Observations upon; All
which falls infinitely short of that Certainty and Plainness which the Common
and Constant Use of the Generality of Mankind, or the Vulgar, affords us.

8. Equivocal Words are either Simply and Absolutely such, which we call
Equivocal by chance; or Relatively, which we call Equivocal by design.
Absolutely, when there is no kind of Reason or Ground why the same word should
have two different senses; as when [ Far] in English signifies a great way; in
Latin, Bread-Corn; or any word in one Language happens merely casually to have
a different Signification in another. In which sort of Equivocation there can
be no danger to Science, those two Senses of the Word being so vastly
disparate: Relatively, when there is some kind of Ground why the same word
should be transferred from one Notion to another. And this may be done for two
different reasons. One, when it is referred to another for some Connection with
them as Cause and Effect; as, when the word [ Healthful] which properly belongs
to an Animal, is; transferred to Meat, because it is the Cause of Health in the
Animal; and to Urine, because it is an Effect of its Health, and therefore a
Natural Sign of it. Or, as when we say there is much Art in such a Picture or
Poem, it means the Effect of Art; for Art in proper speech is to be found only
in the Understanding of the Artificer. The other Reason of the words being
Transferred from one to another, and consequently, Referred back to it again,
is, when this is done for some Proportion or Resemblance between them: As, when
we say of a good Governor, that he is the Pilot of the Commonwealth, to steer
it into a safe Harbor, and preserve it from splitting upon the Rocks of
Division. Where the word [ Pilot] which in the First and Proper Meaning
signifies a Director of a Ship, is transferred to a Governor, because he does
the same in Proportion in a Commonwealth which the other does in a Ship. Thus
Tranquillity, which is properly said of the Sea in a Calm, is Transferred to a
State or Kingdom, because its Peaceable Condition resembles or bears a kind of
Proportion to the Undisturbed Quiet found in a Calm Sea.

9. Words Transferred to another for some Proportion or Resemblance between
them are called Metaphors, or Metaphorical; and the best Metaphors are, when
the thing, from which it is Transferred, is Eminent under that Notion we intend
to express. As when we call a Valiant Man a Lion, and a Meek man a Lamb;
because Courage and Mildness are Eminent in those Animals. A Continued Metaphor
is called an Allegory. As, in the Example lately given, the word Pilot, steer,
harbor, splitting and Rocks, are all Metaphors, and therefore the whole speech
is Allegorical.

10. There is no Danger nor Detriment to Science that such words are used in
Common Speech, or Loose Rhetorical Discourses; but they are exceedingly
pernicious to it when we are treating of Dogmatical Tenets, and searching for
Truth out of the Words of Written Authors. For, since those Metaphors, however
they be True while understood to be meant in Proportion and Resemblance only,
yet are Literally Tals; and in delivering Doctrines or Dogmatical Tenets only
Litteral Truth is aimed at; and, if the Reader happen to take a Metaphorical
Expression for a Literal one, he will most certainly embrace an Error for a
Truth; or, if he takes a word Literally meant for a Metaphor, he will take a
Truth for an Error; hence, it must Needs be most pernicious to Science not to
distinguish between the Metaphorical and Literal sense of the words, but
mistake one for the other. And, therefore, unless some Certain Rule be
Established, by which we may be ascertained when Written Words are to be taken
Literally, when Metaphorically, it is impossible to be Certain of any Truth
merely by those Written Words.

11. Those Words which are Transferred from Corporeal to Spiritual Natures are,
by far, more highly Metaphorical than can be any Transferred from one Body to
another; and therefore, the Misunderstanding them must needs be very
destructive to Science: For, since Corporeal and Spiritual are the First
Species of Ens, and the Division of that Genus into those Species is made by
the Contradictory Differences of Divisible and Indivisible; it follows
demonstratively, that whatever, except the precise Notion of Ens, is properly
Affirmed of Body must be properly Denied of Spirit: and therefore the words
Transferred from Bodies to Spirits which are in Different Lines are far more
Improper than those which are Tranferr'd from one Body to another; they being
in the same Line, and so less Disparate.

Corol. II. Hence is confirmed the former doc^rine that Spirits are not in
place; nor are Themselves, or their Spiritual Actions, Subject to Time ^r
Commensurable to it, etc. Since all these may ^roperly be said of Bodies; and
therefore must ^roperly be denied of Spirits.

Corol. III. From the two last Sections it fol^ows evidently that no Dogmatical
Tenet can be ^rov'd from Books that treat of Spiritual Natures, ^r of such
considerations as belong to them, unless ^ome Certain Rule be first Established
by which the Reader may know when the words are to be taken ^iterally, when
Metaphorically in this or that place; ^nce a Mistake in this may make the
Reader em^race a Falsehood for a Truth, or a Truth for a Fals^ood in matters of
greatest Importance. For ex^mple, this Proportion, [ God is moved by our
pray^rs] is Literally False; for to be Moved is to be Changed, and God is
Esse^tially unchangeable. Wherefore, it is only True in a Metaphorical ^ence;
and the Word [ moved] is a metaphor of the last sort, viz. of Words transferred
to another for some Proportion or Resemblance between them; and, so, the true
sense is this; God, though Unmoved in himself, yet acts in the same manner
toward him that prays to him, as a good Man here (who is properly Moved) would
act toward one that Petitions him.

Corol. IV. Hence also is demonstrated that all the Names and Words we can use
when we speak of the Divine Nature and its Attributes, are in the highest
manner Metaphorical and Improper. For, since we can no other wise name or speak
of a thing but as we Conceive it, and all our Conceptions are Notions taken
from Natural Objects, and only said of them with Propriety; and no otherwise
said of Created Spirits but only Metaphorically; and that God's Infinite
Perfections do far more excel Created Spirits, than those Spirits do Bodies; it
follows that all the Names and Words we can make use of to speak of the Divine
Nature and its Attributes, are in the highest manner Metaphorical and Improper:
as may be farther shown in Metaphysics.

12. The Word Ens, as applied to Substantial and Accidental Notions is of the
former sort of Equivocal words, and Analogically spoken of them; that is, first
and properly, of Substance; and Secondarily or Improperly of Accidents. For,
since (as was shown above) Ens signifies Capable of being, and none of the
Accidents is of itself Capable of Being, but only comes to have some Title to
Existence by the Substance, from whose Being they have entirely all the Being
they have, and that Its being: it follows that the word Ens must be
Analogically said of them; that is, Properly of Substance, and Improperly of
Accidents.

13. Since it appears, from what is said hitherto, that the Equivocation of
words is most highly Prejudicial to Science, it is one necessary part of of the
Method to Science to detect the Snares it lays in the way of our Discourse,
that we may avoid them. And this may be done.

14. First, by observing the Explication we make of the Word that is applied to
different Notions, that so we may know which is the proper Signification of it.
For, by doing this we shall certainly find that the less proper Notion, when
the word is explicated, will still include the Notion of the Proper one, and
bear up to it. As if we would Explicate the word Strong as it is spoken of Ale
or Wine, we shall be forced to say (if we be put to express our selves
Literally, and tell what it means) that as he is called a Strong Man, who is
able to overthrow his Enemy, so we call Wine or Beer Strong when it is able to
overpower our Brain. Or, if we call a man Hard-hearted, it would be explicated
thus, that his Humor is as Hard and Inflexible, considering the Temper of a
Rational Creature which ought to be moved by Reason, as Hard things, which are
very difficult to bend, are among Natural Bodies; for which reason they
sometimes call such men [ Stony-hearted] or [ Iron-hearted]; in both which we
see that [ Strength] is properly in Man, and Hardness in such Bodies as Stone
or Iron, and improperly in Wine or the Heart. And the same may be observed in
the word [ Pilot] applied to a Governor; in [ Moved] applied to God; in [
Healthful] to Meat or Urine. Thus the word [ Religious Honor, Worship or
Respect] is first and properly apprehended as belonging or Due to God, the sole
End and Author of all Religion, and Analogically or Improperly to Holy Persons,
either on Earth or in Heaven, as his Servants; and to Sacred Books, Pictures,
and Churches, as either Causing, Exciting, Increasing or Belonging to the
Religious Honor due properly to Him Alone. Whence Religious Honor given to
any other things cannot be Explicated, but in Reference to God, the only proper
Object of Religion; which therefore will be found Included in the Explication
of that Religious Honor which is given to any thing else. And yet what Endless
Squabbles, Contests and Animosities has this one Equivocation produced, while
Passionate or Ignorant men will needs take the word [ Religious] when spoken of
those Different things, to be Univocal, which is most clearly Analogical.

15. The next way is, to observe the Notions any way Connected in our Common
Speech with that Word whose Equivocalness we doubt of; that is, to consider the
Causes, Effects, Antecedents, Consequents, Contraries, its Superior and
Inferior Notions, its Circumstances, etc. For, if some or any of these do not
agree to the Meaning of any Word when spoken of more things, or found in
diverse Contexts, then we may be sure it is spoken in diverse Senses, and is
Equivocal; and then, by the foregoing Rule we may certainly come to know its
proper Signification. So, in the Notion of Religious Honor applied to God as
properly due to him, and Adoration of him, the chief part of which is an humble
Acknowledgment of him to be our Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier, the Supreme Lord
of Heaven and Earth, the Searcher of Hearts, and Judge of all our Actions, etc.
none of these are possible to be Connected, or Agree to any of the other
Improperly called Objects of Religious Worship: So, when we style any Eminent
Person for Learning [ a Great Man] we shall easily find it is Equivocal and
Improper, because Greatness means, in Proper Speech, much of Quantity, and has
that Common Head for its Genus; whereas a very Little Man in Quantity may be
Great in the sense in which we meant it.

16. The Third way is, to attend to what True Science or Faith teach us. For,
since one Truth cannot contradict another, therefore we may be assured, that,
in case we be Certain that what the Writer meant is True, his Words must be
taken in that sense which is Agreeable to True Science, or Faith. Hence, when
it is said that God made two Great Lights, the Sun and the Moon, it being
Evident by Science, that Other Stars are incomparably Greater than the Moon,
hence the words [ Great Lights] in that place, cannot be meant of Great in it
self, but as to their Appearance to us. But, care is to be taken that we have
true Science of the thing expressed by such words, and that the Subject be not
such as exceeds our pitch of Knowledge.

17. The Context may help much to give us the right Notion of the Words;
especially when the Literal Truth is aimed at, Axioms and evident Principles
are laid, and the Discourse is perfectly Connected or Coherent. For, in that
case the Symmetry found in the parts of the whole Discourse forbids any word to
be taken in a wrong signification; as we experience in Mathematics and other
Close Discourses.

18. The Intention of the Author, and the Argument and Scope of the Book, avail
much to direct us to the right sense of those words in it which are most
Material and Significant. For, the Notions meant by such words are as it were
the steps which lie level all the way, and lead to the End at which the Author
aimed them; and, therefore, cannot easily permit a Deviation from their true
Sense, or suffer their Meaning to be mistaken.

19. The Words in which Laws are conceived are best interpreted by the Common
Practice of those who are subject to those Laws. For, since those Laws are the
Causes of the Common Practice, and the Common Practice is the Effect of those
Laws, hence the sense of the Laws is demonstrated by the Common Practice a
posteriori.

20. But the very best and most assured way to detect and avoid Equivocation in
all words whatever, is to observe and examine, whether the same Definition
agrees to the word as found in diverse places: For, since the Definition
consists of a Determinate Genus, and its Intrinsecal or Proper Differences, it
must needs give us the precise Notion or Meaning of the Word; since, if it be
either under any Other Genus, or constituted by any Other Differences, the
Essence which they constitute must needs be a different Essence; and,
therefore, the Word which signifies it, must necessarily have another Meaning
or Notion.

Corol. V. Words being invented to express Sense or Meaning, it follows, that
those Words that have many Senses, and all of them True and coherent to one
another, have the highest perfection that Words can possibly have. Wherefore
those passages in Holy Scripture that bear both a Literal, Tropological (or
Moral) Analogical and Anagogical sense (or several of them) are of a more
sublime nature than other Words are, and argue, that they were endited by a
Divine Author.

BOOK II. OF THE SECOND Operation OF OUR Understanding, or Judgments.
LESSON I. Of the Nature of Judgments, or Propositions in Common; of their
Parts; of the Ground of their Verification; and of the several Manners of
Predicating.
1. HAving treated of Notions, and of their Clear Distinction and Expression,
to that degree as may be sufficient for Science, it follows of course that we
treat next of Cognition, or the putting together of Notions; and this not
joining them together on any fashion, by rote as it were, in our Memory, as a
Schoolboy gets a Latin Sentence without book, the meaning of whose words he
understands and revolves in his Mind, but regards not whether it be True or no;
nor yet, the putting them together according to Grammatical Congruity, as is
this Sentence, [ Virtue and Vice are both equally Laudable] in which the Words
do Cohere indeed according to Grammar Rules, but the Sense is False, and
Incoherent: But (as the word [ Cognition] imports) it must be the Connecting or
Joining them together, in order to Knowledge; that is, with an Application of
our Knowing Power to see whether they ought to be thus put together or no; or,
(which is the same) whether the Proposition be True.

2. Wherefore, since we cannot know any thing to be so, but what is truly so,
it follows, that all Knowledge must be of some Verity or Truth; and this not of
a Truth which is materially such, or repeated in our Mind, (for this amounts to
no more but a Complex Notion or Apprehension) but to make up the Notion of
Knowledge, we must see the Notions of which that Truth does Formally consist,
to be truly and indeed Connected. As, when we say [ A Stone is Hard] we must
see that what is meant by [ Stone] and by [ Hard] are some way or other
Connected in the Thing; or, otherwise (all Truths being taken from the things)
we cannot be said to Know it to be True.

3. Judging, in proper speech is not merely and precisely the Seeing or Knowing
that the Notions are Connected, but the Saying Interiourly or Assenting
heartily that they are so. Otherwise, since nothing can be Known to be so, but
what is so, it would follow that there would be no False Judgments. Wherefore,
Judging adds to the mere notion of Knowledge, that it is the subduing of all
Hesitation, or the Fixure of our Intellective Faculty about the Verity or
Falsity of any thing. Whence Judging is the Effect immediately and necessarily
resulting from our Knowledge that the Notions are really Connected, when it is a
True Judgment; or else from our only Conceiting them to be Connected, when the
Judgment is False. Whence, this is a right consequence, I see or know the
Notions cohere, therefore I judge the Saying or Sentence that signifies they
are connected to be True; which is the Method that all Rational or Judicious
men take: Whereas Passionate or Ignorant men, who are blindly addicted to their
own Sentiment, take the Contrary way; and will have the Notions to cohere, and
the Proposition to be True, because they had prejudged it so upon some other
Motive than the seeing that the Terms themselves were indeed connected.

It will be objected, that Knowledge also fixes our Understanding; and,
therefore, Knowing is Judging. I answer, That to fix the Understanding so as to
acquiesce to what it sees, is to make it Judge; but the Notion of Knowing is
completed in the bare Seeing the Terms Connected, and is terminated in
regarding the Object or the Proposition that is Known: But Judging superadds to
it, that it is moreover the yielding to reject all farther disquisition, and
adhering firmly to that Knowledge; which (though the distinction between them be
nice and delicate) is another Consideration superadded to mere Knowing, and
sinks and rivets the Object more deeply and unremovably in the Soul. Lastly,
the Intuitive Knowledge of Pure Spirits is True Knowledge; but it is not made
by our way of Judging, in regard they neither Abstract, nor Compound or Divide
Notions.

4. Hence is seen that to make Judgments of things out of True Knowledge, is
the Greatest Natural Perfection our Soul is capable of. For, since nothing can
be Known to be so but what is so, or True* all Judgments resulting from True
Knowledge not only fill our Mind with Truths, but are, moreoever, a Firm
Adhesion to Truths and the Secure Possession of those incomparable Endowments,
which are the Best Perfections of our Understanding, and make us like the God
of Truth. Nor ends the Advantage we gain by Truth in mere Speculation; but,
Truth excluding from its notion all Possible Error, it makes it Impossible we
should ever embrace any Error while we thus Judge. Which, since Omnis peccans
ignorant, and that every Sinner (as the Proverb is) has his blind side; must
therefore, if Truth be Express in our Understanding, and kept awake there,
Preserve such a mind from Sin; and by making right and Lively Judgments of our
Present and Future State, and of our several Duties here, most certainly bring
us to Eternal Happiness hereafter.

5. That Speech that Connects Notions in order to Knowledge, or Expresses a
Judgment, is called a Proposition; that is, such a Speech as proposes the
Notions, and puts them into such a Frame or Posture of Connection, as best
serves for us to Judge whether they are really Connected or no. Whence it must
consist of three parts, viz. that which is Affirmed or Denied of another, which
in an Artificial term we call Predicated, and that notion the Predicate. That
of which it is Affirmed or Denied, called the Subject: and that Notion which
signifies their Connection, called the Copula. The two first are also called the
Terms or Extremes of a Proposition; whence all Truth is said to consist in the
Connection of the Terms; and, if the Terms be not found to cohere, the
Proposition is justly held to be False.

6. Since Propositions may be both in the Mind and in Words, and the Meanings
of the Words are the same with our Notions; it follows hence (so the words be
not Equivocal) that Mental and Verbal Propositions are the same thing; so that
it is, in reality, all one to treat them under either of these Considerations.
Therefore, in regard we must use Words in our Discourses concerning
Propositions, and many times Artificial ones, we shall treat of them
indifferently as taken in either condition; and sometimes use the Word [
Judgments] sometimes [ Propositions] as it lights. Only let it be remembered,
that Judgments are only in the Mind Formally and Truly: and in Verbal
Propositions, only as in Signs of the Mental ones. Though even taking them as in
our Understanding, they have, even there, their Subject, Copula and Predicate,
as well as when they are Pronounced, or Writ in Words.

Corol. I. Hence is deduc't, that the rude Vulgar, nay, even Children who
cannot Speak or Discourse, may have Mental Propositions, and Consequently what
answers to Subject, Copula and Predicate in their Understandings; though they
cannot Reflect or Distinguish them, and (as it were) dissect and Anatomize
their own Thoughts and Inward Acts, as do Men of Art. For Example, when a Clown
Knows or Judges that there is such a place as London, or a Child that what it
sees is Milk; they have in their Minds the True, tho Rough, draught of these
two Propositions, [ London is Existent] and [ this is Milk] and, consequently,
of what corresponded to the several parts of those Propositions, after a
Natural manner; tho they cannot yet lick their rude Embryo Judgments into Form,
or bring them to a perfect shape, by distinguishing in them these several parts.

Corol. II. Hence also, though we cannot know the precise time in which Children
begin to judge, yet we may be assured it must be as soon as they have Cognition
or Knowledge of Common and Familiar Objects, and of their Agreeableness to
their own Nature. And, first of all, of that which is next to them and most
Knowable, Viz. that themselves exist; as will be seen hereafter. The reason is,
because Judgments are the Immediate Effects resulting out of Knowledge; and,
therefore, as soon as they know any object is Agreeable or disagreeable to
them, or that it Exists, they cannot but Judge so after their dull fashion.

6. To proceed. As the Metaphysical Verity (of which only our Notions are
capable) is taken from the Things, and Consists in their being truly what they
are: so the Formal Verity of our Judgments must be also taken from the Thing's
being such as we Judge it to be; Whence Truth is by some defined to the
Conformity of the understanding to the Thing, wherefore, when we affirm the
Thing to be This or That, or to be such or such, the true Meaning of that
Affirmation is, that what corresponds to both those Notions of the Subject and
Predicate is found or exists in the same Thing or Being; and, were not this so,
it would be False to affirm that one of them is the other.

7. Wherefore the meaning of the word [ is] which is the Copula, is this, that
those Words are Fundamentally Connected in the same Thing and Identify'd with
it Materially; however those Notions themselves be Formally Different, provided
they be not Incompossible; for then the Proposition must, for the reason now
given, be necessarily False. As when we say [ a Stone is Hard] the Truth of
that Proposition consists in this, that the Nature of [ hard] is found in that
Thing or Suppositum called a Stone, and is in part Identify'd with it; however
the Notions of Stone and Hard be Formally Distinct. Or, (which is the same) it
is as much as to say, that that Thing which is Stone is the same thing that is
Hard.

8. The Copula [ is] has always the sense now given, except when we are to
Speak of Nothings which (the adequate Object of our understanding being Ens) we
are forced to apprehend as Things, even when at the same time we Judge them to
be otherwise. As when we say [ Imaginary Species a Chimera] and yet, even then,
it expresses a kind of Identity of the two Nothings, and affirms them to be the
same Nonsense, and that to put a Space or Quantity to be no Quantity: or to put
a Non-Ens to be Ens is Contradictory and ridiculous. And, indeed, these kind of
Propositions are in effect no more than to say, that Non-Ens, Non est Ens, or,
What is not Capable of Being cannot be.

9. The Copula [is] is the most proper to give us a Clear Intellectual Light;
and, by consequence to fix our Judgment. First, because the Notion of is, or
Actual Being, is impossible to admit any Explication (and therefore it is
self-known) as any one may evidently experience, if he goes about to Explain
it; for he will find that he must be forced to put is, or some word that
imports Actual Being in its Explication; which makes the Explication to be
none, but leaves it as obscure as it was before; nay, more Obscure than
formerly by adding other Notions more Obscure than it self was. For example,
Ask what it is to be or Exist, all that can be said of it is, that it is Esse
extra Causas; where ( Esse being the same with Existere) we vainly endeavor to
explicate the same thing by its self; and to make it look like an Explication,
we add extra Causas, which two Notions are less Clear than Esse it self was.
2dly, The Notion of [is] is most Determinate of its own nature, and so most
Fixed of it is self; and, therefore, most proper to fix the Judgment. 3dly,
Because all other Notions having some Potentiality and Indifferency in them,
are (as it were) wavering between two or more Notions; called Differences.
Whereas the Notion of [ is] having none, is only Absolutely Steady, Immovable
or Undeterminable to any other Notion. Lastly, Because hence, in Literal, and
not Figurative, Speeches, the word that expresses this Notion, can never be
Equivocal, since it is impossible to distnguish it into this or that sense; all
Distnguishing or Differencing Notions being evidently more Formal, Actual and
Determinate than the Notion to be Distinguished: which is in this case,
Impossible.

10. To proceed: There being (as was said) a Real Relation between those
Notions which are the Subject and Predicate, the later being really in the
understanding as That which is said of the Former, and the Former that of which
it is said; and Relation being necessarily completed and actually such, by the
Act of a Comparing Power; it follows, that every Judgment is a Referring or
Comparing one of those Notions to the other, and (by means of the Copula) of
both of them to the same Stock of Being on which they are engrafted, or the
same Ens; where they are Entitatively Connected (or the same Materially) before
they are Seen or Judged to be so by our understanding.

11. It is sufficient that the two Terms be Materially the same, or Identify'd
with the same Ens, when the Subject is a Concrete; whether it be Substantially
a Concrete, that is, consisting of the Nature and the Suppositum, as when we
say Petrus or Homo is Animal. Or Accidentally; as when we say Album est Dulce.
But in Abstract Notions, they must, besides this, be moreover the same
Essentially or Formally; that is, they must not only be found in the same
Material Ens or thing, but those very Notions themselves must have the same
Formality, either in part, or in whole, in our Understanding. In Whole, as when
we say Petreitas est Petreitas, Quantitas est Divisibilitas; In part, as, when
we say, Petreitas est Humanitas or Animalitas; for then Humanitas and
Animalitas are as Essential to Petreitas, and Petreitas as much includes and is
the Subject of their Notions and of its own Differnces besides, as Petrus does
or is of the Notions of Homo or Animal.

12. An Abstract and a Concrete Term can never be Subject and Predicate in the
same Proposition; though never so Essential to one another; For an Abstract
Notion, out of the very Nature of its Abstraction, is formally a Part; and a
Concrete Notion in respect to it a Whole; and a Part, though taken materially, it
may belong to the same Ens which is a Whole, and be the same Thing with it; yet
taken formally, it cannot; for then a Whole would be Formally a Part, and a
Part Formally a Whole. Hence we cannot say Petreitas est Petrus, or Petrus est
Petreitas, etc. Hence also this Proposition Quantitas est Quanta (and such
like) is False; for Quanta being a Concrete, signifies the Subject which has
Quantity in it; and it is False to say that Quantity alone is Quantity and its
Subject too.

13. From what is said above we may gather, that there may be diverse manners of
Predicating or referring one Notion to another, and they are reckoned by
Porphyrius to be Five, called by the Schools Predicables; that is, several
Manners how one Notion may be predicated of another. Whose Pardon we must beg,
if following the Dictates of Reason, which we Judge Evident, and not the Track
beaten by others, we dissent from them, and assign Six. The first is, when the
whole Notion is Predicated of the whole, as when we say [Quantity is
Divisibility.] [ A. Whole consists of all its parts; or, when we Predicate the
Definition of ^he Notion Defi^'d, as, [Man is a Rational Animal]; or, all the
Dividing Members of the Notion Divided. And this Manner we call Entirely
Identical; that is, the predicating of the same Whole Notion wholly of it self.
In the rest ^ Part only is Predicated of the whole; and then ^he Predicate is
either Essential to the Subject, or ^ot. If Essential, then it either
predicates that part of his Nature which (in the common acce^tation of Mankind
not reaching to inferior Differences) is immediately Superior to it, and is
thought to denote the whole Essence of the thing, and then it is called a
Species; as, Petrus est Homo. Or, but some lesser part of its Essence; as,
Petrus ^st Animal, Vivens or Substantia, which are called the Genus or
Generical Notion. And both these (as also the first) are said to be predicated
in Quid, because they are Essential Predicates and answer differently, though
imperfectly and but in part to the Question made by Quid. As ask, Quid est
Petrus, we answer appositely, Homo, Animal, Vivens, etc. Or else the Predicate
is that Compart which distinguishes the Genus Essentially from others of the
same Common kind, and constitutes it in an inferior Class under the Common
Notion; and is therefore Referred to what it thus constituted, as its Essential
Difference; as, Homo est Rationalis. And, this supposes the Question made by
Quid, or what Thing, and answers to a further Question, What kind of Thing. And
therefore, it is said to be predicated not merely in quale, for then it might
have been a mere Quality, and not Essential; but in Quale quid, as both giving
account of the particular Nature of the Thing, as also of its belonging to the
Essence of it. If the Predicate be not Essential, then either one notion is
Referred to another, and Predicated of it (not as any Part of its Essence, but
yet) as more or less Connected with it, as an Effect or Sign of it; as, Capable
of Admiring, or the being affected with Music, Proportion, or Beauty, are
Connected with Rational Nature or Man, and referred to him accordingly, that is
Predicated of him as a Property. Thus Combustive or Rarefactive are Connected
with Fire; Opacous with Earth; and referred to those Subjects, or predicated of
them as Properties. Or, lastly, the Predicate is Com^par'd or Referred to the
Subject, as having no kind of (at least known) Connection with the Essence, but
merely casually belonging to it; or, as Indifferent to the Essence whether it
belong to it or no. As Armed, Placed, Situated, etc. belongs to Man or Body:
and then it is said to be predicated as an Accident, that is, as affecting him
only Casually and Accidentally.

Note 1. That in this last Predicable only the Manner how it is Predicated or
Compared to the Subject is considered, and not the Nature of that which is
Predicated; nor, whether it be a substantial Notion, or, whether it does belong
to some one of the other (...) Accidents, so it be but Casually or Accidentally
belonging to the Subject, or Referred to it; for Wooden, Golden, and Earthen
are all Predicated as Accidents, or Accidentally, of Cup (for it is still
equally a Cup, whether it be made of any of those, or of any other matter though
Wood, Gold, and Earth be substantial Notions. Whence the word ( Accident) does
not here signify what Inheres in the Substance, as it does in those
Predicamental Accidents which are Intrinsecal ones; but that which belongs to a
Subject by Chance or Casuality; so that the Notion of the Subject is preserved
entire, whether it has it, or has it not.

Note 2. That since it was clearly the Intention of him who invented these
Predicables, and of those who followed him and used them, to comprehend all the
Different Manners how Notions could be Predicated of their Subjects; and, the
being Predicated as a whole of the whole, is most evidently one Manner of
Predicating, and Distinct from the Five they assigned; it is manifest, that
their Account of the Predicables was Defective, and our Supplying it Rational
and Necessary. Add, that they omitted that Predicable, or Manner of
Predicating, which, if it were not the most Useful, at least it was the Chief
and First in Dignity, all the First Principles having (as will be shown
hereafter) this Manner of Predication, and consequently having Title to belong
to this Predicable. Besides that, scarce any thing can be so Useful to Science
as are those First Principles, and the Definition's being Predicated of the
Thing Defined; These being the Propositions which give us chiefly all our
Certainty, and all the Ground, to Scientifical Knowledge.

14. When the Notions of the two Terms are of an Unequal Extent, the Subject of
the Proposition ought to be the Inferior or more Particular Notion, and the
Predicate that which is the superior or more Common one. For, since, when the
Notions are not entirely the same, and the Whole Predicated of the Whole, they
can belong to one another, but in part, and the Predicate is conceived (even as
to its whole Notion) to be something belonging to the Subject to which it is
Attributed, and as it were received in it; and, that this hinders not the
Subject from having many other Notions belonging to it as well as That; hence,
the Subject is conceived to be a kind of a Whole, in respect of the Predicate,
and the Predicate but a Part, in respect of it. Again, since (as was shown
formerly) all the Superior and Larger Notions are but Parts of the Inferior
ones, the Lowest ( v. g. Peter) comprizing in it self Actually all the
Superior ones ( v. g. Man, Animal, Vivens, Corpus, and Ens) and adding, over
and above, other Notions to them which Particularize or Individuate it: it
follows, that when two notions are of an unequal size, the Superior, which is
the Partial notion, ought to have the place of the Predicate; and the Inferior,
which contains in it self both what corresponds to it, and also to other
superior and Partial Notions, and therefore is a kind of whole in respect of
them, ought to have the Place of the Subject; since a Whole cannot be properly
said to belong to a Part, (or to be Received in it) but a Part in the Whole.
And, Nature it self seems to abet the Reason now given; for it sounds naturally
to say, Peter is a Man; but most absurdly and unnaturally to say, A Man is
Peter. Nor matters it that the Superior Notion is a Whole in the way of
Abstraction, and the inferior but a Part of it as thus considered; for the
Copula [ is] by which all Predication is made, does not necessarily express
what or how the Notions are in their Abstracted state, where they are only
Potential, and (as such) only found in the Mind, and made meer^y by our manner
of understanding; but what passes Actually in the Thing in which the Notions of
the Predicate and Subject are to be the same Ens or Actually Identify'd. And,
it is Evident, (as was now shown) that in the Thing, whether it be without or
within our Understanding, there goes more to make up the Nature or Notion of
the Inferior than there does to make up that of the Superior Notion.

15. However, the Predicate has of it self a Large sense, taken alone and
Abstractedly; yet, when attributed to the Subject, it is restrained by ^t to
mean only such a proportional part of its Notion as befits the Subject to
receive. Thus, when we say, Petrus est Homo or Animal, it cannot be meant that
he is Homo or Animal at large or in common; (for, were it so, Peter might as
well be a Brute as a Man) but one Determinat^ Man or Animal. And the same
passes in the Thing, as it does in our Understanding. For, though Albedo taken
alone may reach all the whiteness in the World, yet apply it to a Subject, by
saying Paries est Albus, it is restrained to signify only some part of Albedo
in common, or as much of it as affects the Wall: Whence, thus considered, it
means only Haec Albedo, or Albedo Parietis; that is, so much of Whiteness as is
in the Wall, and no more.

16. Thus much of the Nature or Essence of s^^gle Propositions; their Quantity
and Quality come next to be considered. As for the former, either the Predicate
is referred to more Particulars, as the^ agree in one Common notion; as, Every
Man (...) an Animal, and then it is called an Universal Proposition. Or to some
one only; and this either Indeterminately; as, some Man is wise; and then it is
called a Particular Proposition: or determinately* as, Socrates was the son of
Sophronisens; and the^ it is called a Singular Proposition. These need no
Reflections on them, it suffices to name them (they being Artificial Words) and
to explicat^ what we mean by them: Only we may note, tha^ in regard the Subject
is as it were the Matter, and Matter is properly determinable by Quantity, the
words expressing the Quantity of the Proposition can only be applied to the
Subject; as Nature also will inform us.

17. The Quality of a Proposition, is either its being Affirmative or Negative,
which can need no farther Remarks. Or lastly, its being Evident or Inevident:
And Evidence is Two fold; Self-evidence and Evidence by Deduction or Proof; of
both which hereafter.

Note that the Negative particle [ non] must affect the Copula, and not either
of the Terms; otherwise it is no Proposition, or a Speech predicating one
Notion of another; in regard such a Speech wants one of the three Notions; as,
Petrus est non-brutum; or, Non-homo est Bucephalus: For, the Particle [ Non]
destroys the Positive Notions of Brutum and Homo, and puts no other in their
stead.

18. If Propositions be Compared to one-another, they are either Equivalent in
sense, or Opposite. Equivalents have no difficulty in them. Opposits are either
Contradictories which affirm and deny the same in all respects; as, Petrus hic
and nunc currit, Petrus hic and nunc non currit; or Contraries, which are the
Extremes in any kind, having middle Notions between them; as White and Black
are in Colors. Whence these Propositions, All Men are wise, No Man is wise,
are said to be Contraries, because they are Extremely distant, and have middle
Propositions between them, viz. Some Man is wise, Some Man is not wise; which
Differ or are Opposed only according to their Quality; the one being
Affirmative, the other Negative; for, the Quantity in both is the same; whence
they are called Particularly Opposite. But, if one Proposition be an Universal
Affirmative, and be opposed to a Middle Proposition that is Negative, as Omnis
homo est sapiens, Aliquis homo non est sapiens; or, if it be an Universal
Negative, and be opposed to a Particular Affirmative, as Nullus homo est
sapiens, Aliquis homo est sapiens; then they are said to be Subcontraries,
because the one of them opposes the other not fully, as do Omnis homo est
sapiens, Nullus homo est sapiens, but in part only. Singular Propositions have
no Opposition but that of Contradiction, which happens when one affirms what
the other denies of the same Subject in all respects, as was said above.

LESSON II. Of Self-Evident Propositions, or First Principles.
1. SINCE, as was said, Judgments or Propositions may be True or False, and in
laying the Method to Science we can have no occasion to Speak of False
Judgments, but in order to the avoiding them, which is easily done, if we
settle the Knowledge of the True ones; hence that which concerns us, is, to
treat of True Judgments or Truths; and, in the first place, of Those
Propositions or Judgments that are the First Truths which we call First
Principles. Again, since al^ Propositions are either Evident or Inevident, and
Inevident or Obscure ones cannot avail us in our quest of Science, it follows,
that only Evident Propositions are to be treated of, or made use of by those
who aim at Scientifical Knowledge. Wherefore, since all Propositions or
Judgments that are Evident must either be Self-evident, or made evident, which
is done by way of Proof, and these Latter must depend on the Former for their
Evi^dence, we are therefore to begin with the Former which are Self-evident.

2. All First Principles, as being the First Truths must be Self-evident
Propositions. This is manifest from the very Terms. For, being the First they
can have no other before them, out of which they may be Deduced or made
Evident; or, into which their Evidence, if lesser, may be Resolved. Wherefore
they must either not be Evident at all, which would destroy all Possibility of
any Evidence, or they must be Self-evident.

3. Our Knowledges may either be considered according to the Order by which
they are Generated in us at first, or according to the Dependence of one Truth
on another, and the Resolving them finally into First and Self-evident
Principles. The Former of these is the way that Nature takes to instill Useful
Knowledges into us, when as yet we know nothing; the Later is the Method which
Art makes use of to polish and promote those Rude and Short Knowledges had from
Nature; then to link many of those Knowledges together; and lastly, to render
them Exact and Evident by Resolving them into First or Self-evident Principles;
to do which, we call to beget Science, or to frame a Science of them. The
Former comes by Experience Unreflectingly; the Later is attained by Study and
Reflection. And it is of this Later sort of Knowledge, and its First Principles,
we intend to treat in this and the next Lesson; reserving the Former
Consideration of how and in what manner Knowledge is first Generated, till
Lesson IV.

4. The Self-Evidence belonging to First Principles consists in this, that the
two Terms must be Formally Identical. For, since (as was shown above) the Terms
in every Ordinary and Inferior Proposition, nay, in every Conclusion that is
True, must be materially the same, and so the Proposition it self materially
Identical, it follows, that the Terms of the First Principles, which ought to
be more evident than They, as being Self-evident, must be Formally Identical.

5. The Terms of the First Principles must no^ only be Formally Identical in
sense, or be the same Formal Notion; but it is, moreover, most convenient that
they be such in the Expression also; th^^ is, it is fit that the Subject and
Predicate in those Propositions should be the same Word taken in the same
sense. For, since First Principles must be the most Evident, and the most
Clearly Expressive o^ Truth that can be imagined, and not liable to the least
Mistake; and Words are subject to Equivocation, which is apt to breed Mistake,
Obscurity and Error; hence, First Principles should not only be Formally
Identical in sense; as when we say, Ho^^ est Animal Rationale; but it is most
Convenient they should be such in Expression too; as, Hom^ est Homo, Idem est
Idem sibi ipsi, Quod est est, etc. For then, whatever Distinction (in case of
Ambiguity) affects the Predicate, must also affect the Subject; and so the
Proposition will not only remain still most Formally, but also most Evidently,
i^ every regard, Identical.

Note, That though this be most Convenient, yet it may suffice that the Terms,
when explicated are reducible to the same Formal Expression by the same Word;
as when we say [ A Whole is Greater than a part] For, a Whole being that which
consists of Parts, and a thing being that of which it consists; hence, a Whole
is All its Parts: that is, is one part and more than one part, whence, the
Proportion is reducible to this, [ what is more than a part is more than a part]
which is not only most Formally, but besides most Evidently Identical.

6. This Proposition [ Self-Existence is Self-existence] is, of it self, most
Supremely Self-Evident, ^or if the meaning of the word [ self] which is ^oyn'd
with Existence be but understood, and that the Addition of this word to
Existence be not meant ^o signify any the least Composition in it but the most
^imple and most Uncompounded Actuality that can ^e imagined; then the same
Formality in every respect is predicated Entirely of the same, and so it is also
most perfectly Self-evident. And it is most Su^remely such, because it expresses
the Existence of ^he Deity, which is Infinitely more Simple, and more
necessarily it self than any Created Exi^tence can be. Again, since every
thing, the more Potential it is, is more Confused; that is, less distinct and
less Intelligible; and, the more Actual it is, the more Intelligible; and the
Divine Nature, which ^s meant by Self-Existence, is a most infinitely Pure
Actuality; it follows, that this proposition [ Self-Existence is
Self-Existence] is, of its self, the most supremely Self-evident Proposition
that can be Imagined.

7. This Proposition [ what is is] or [ Existence is Existence] is the most
Self-evident Proposition that can be imagined to be taken from Created things.
For, since Existence is the most Evident Notion that can be found amongst all
our Notions that can be had from Creatures, that Proposition must needs be the
most Evident, (and consequently, amongst Self-evident ones, the most
Self-evident) in which not only the Notion of the Copula, but of the Subject
and Predicate too, is Existence. Again, since the Clearness of all Truths
whatever depends on the Connection of the Terms by the word [ is] it follows,
that unless the Nature or Notion of Existence be first immovably Fixed or
Established, to be Coherent with its self, that is, unless this Proposition
What is is, or Existence is Existence, be Self-evident, no Proposition whatever
could be Absolutely Certain, Clear, or Coherent; and so, there would be no
possibility of any Truth, Certainty, or Evidence in the World. Lastly, since
both the Essences of things, and the Existence they have are in the Divine
Understanding, and the Essences which are only Capacities of Being, belong to
things as they are Limited, or apt to be Created, that is, belong to them
according to the Notion of Creatures; which being only Potential as to Being,
they can have no Claim thence to actual Being or Existence, but merely by the
Free Gift of Him who is Essential Being; hence the Nature of the Existence of
Creatures, and their being such is taken purely from God's side, and holds
entirely of him. Whence it is most actual, and most Like him; that is, most
defecated from all Alloy of Potentiality, most Pure, most Intelligibly Clear,
and most Established, above whatever else we can conceive in Creatures; and
therefore, It alone is able to give Certainty, Clear Light, and Establishment
to all other Truths.

8. Equivalent to the Former, or perfectly Identified with it, (abating the
putting it in a diverse Logical Frame) is this Proposition, [ Existence is not
Non-Existence] or which is in effect the same, [ It Is impossible the same thing
should be and not be at once.] For, if the Notion of Existence and
Nonexistence could at once belong to the same Subject, then, since the Notion
of Existence, as being most Simple and most Actual, can admit of no Distinction
of being in part Existence, and in part Nonexistence; that is, of being in
part such, in part not-such, as Potential Notions can; it would follow, that
the entire and most simple Notion of Existence is Nonexistence; which is
directly contradictory to this Principle now mentioned, and consequently, to
the equivalent Proposition [ What is is]; whence it would be unavoidably
consequent, that all we could say must necessarily be False, because the Notion
of Existence, by which only we can affirm or say, would involve a Contradiction
in its own Bowels, as being Indifferent to Being and not Being, or rather as
being both of them.

Note, That the same may be said, in some proportion, (that is, as to the
Extent of their own Notion) of all Propositions that are equivalent to First
Principles in any particular Subjects; as of Homo est homo, Aequale est aequale
sibi, etc. to which are equivalent Homo non est non homo, Aequale non est non
aequale sibi, etc. For, the same Inconveniences would follow in all Discourses
upon those particular Subjects, as did in all Discourses whatever, by wronging
the former Self-evident and Universal Propositions; that is, all that could be
said of such Subjects would be Incoherent, Contradictory and False.

9. The next Self-evident Proposition is that of (Ens is Ens.) For, since the
notion of Ens is most nearly allied to Existence, being wholly ordered to it,
and a Capacity of it, it follows, that that Proposition which predicates Ens of
Ens, is the next, in Self-Evidence, to those which predicate Existence of
Existence.

10. Hence all propositions consisting of particular Notions that subsume under
Ens, that is, such propositions which affirm that particular Notion or Nature
to be what it is, are likewise Self-evident: For, since Ens, taken as
Undistinguished, or in its whole Latitude, has the force of an Universal, and
is equivalent to all; and an Universal engages every particular under it, of
which it consists; so that if the terms expressing those particulars be not
Self-coherent and Self-evident, it would follow, that neither would the terms
of this proposition [ Ens is Ens] be such: Hence all propositions consisting of
particular Notions, that subsume directly under Ens, must be likewise
Self-evident. Again, since the proposition ( Ens is Ens) is for no other reason
Self-evident, but because the Notions of the two terms are every way formally
Identical; and this reason is found in those propositions, the notions of whose
terms subsume under Ens; it follows, that these also must, for the same reason,
be likewise Self-evident.

Corol. I. Hence Homo est Homo, Quantitas est Quantitas, etc. being
Self-evident, are the First Principles to all Discourses treating about the
Nature of Man or Quantity; that is, they are the last and most Clear
propositions in that Matter or Subject, into which all that can be said of Man
or Quantity is finally resolved; and, moreover, the Test of the Truth or
Falsehood of all that can be said of them. So that if any part of those
Discourses do hap to violate those Principles, that is, if it deviates from
those Natures, or does, by consequence, make Man not to be Man, or Quantity not
to be Quantity, it is most evidently convicted of Falsity: As, on the other
side, if those Discourses do proceed Agreeably to these Principles, it must
most certainly and evidently be True.

Corol. II. It is not meant here, that these lastmentioned self-evident
Propositions do follow the former by way of Proof or Deduction; but we are only
enquiring what Propositions in the resolving of Truths into their Principles
are most Self-evident; and therefore, in priority of Nature, presupposed to the
other, and implied in them, as those without the Certainty and Evidence of
which no Certainty or Evidence at all could be had of any of the others which
are thus Implied, or Contained in the former, and engage their Verity (as it
were) a posteriori. As if Homo, which is a particular Ens, be not that
particular Ens or Homo; then, neither is Ens Ens, nor Existentia Existentia,
because there is the same reason for the Former to be Self-evident as for these
Later, though not altogether in the same degree.

Corol. III. From the Self-evidence and Truth of that Proposition
Self-existence is Self-existence, and from the Ground of Verity in all
Propositions whatever that are True, we may demonstrate the Existence of a
Deity. For, since not only our Simple Notions or Apprehensions are taken from
the Things, but also all Connexions of those Notions or Propositions are
therefore True, because what is meant by the two Terms exists in the same Thing;
so that neither this Proposition [ A Stone is hard] could be True, unless
what is meant by Stone and Hard were found in the same Entity; nor even could
this Self-evident Proposition ( Homo est Homo) be True, unless there were
something, or such a thing as, by being Fixed in its determinate Nature, or by
being the same with it self, had thence a power to verify it; it follows, that
neither could this Self-evident Proposition [ Self-existence is Self-existence]
be True, unless there were some most Actual Being, which, by being most
perfectly the same with it self, did verify that Proposition. But such an
Actual Being can only be the Deity, there is therefore a Deity.

It may be replied, That we can compound Notions, and join Self to Existence;
which done, this Compound Notion, having such a nature in our Understanding,
has, consequently, a determinate Nature or Actual Being in our Mind only, and
thence a kind of Metaphysical Unity or Verity there, which gives it to be
predicated of it self; so that there is no necessity that such a Thing should
be put to be in re to verify it. It Is answered, That our Argument is not
grounded merely upon our having such a Notion; for we do not argue as Cartesius
does, upon the Notion or Idea of such a Subject; but we grant, that we may
Compound such a one, and yet remain Uncertain whether that Nature be or not;
but our Argument proceeds also, and chiefly, upon our Verifying that
Proposition, which is done formally by the Copula; and I affirm, that the
Copula [ is] could not verify it, unless there were something out of the
Understanding that obliged us to do so; which I explain thus: This Copula
sometimes merely puts together Fictitious Notions, or Non-Entities, which (all
Truth being grounded on Ens or the Thing) have consequently direct Opposition
to Being, and therefore Falsity in their very Natures, or rather No-natures;
as, when we say [ Imaginary Space is a Chimaera], for then, indeed, the
Connection is merely in our Understanding, there being no Thing, nor any Terms,
which have an Entitative Notion to be Connected or Verified: or rather indeed
there was no Connection at all; but, as the Terms were Mock-things, so they
could only have a Mock-Connexion. In all other Cases, since the Copula [ is]
cannot signify nothing at all, (for this would make it a mere Sound and no
Word) it can only signify the Actual Existence or Co-existence of what is meant
by the Terms, in the same Thing; and this (as was L. 1. S. 7, and 11.
said) whether that Co-existence be only Material or Formal. And, should it be
denied that the Copula [ is] has this signification, we can never know any
thing which we say, or can say, is true; because we can never know, nor see,
that the Notions are Agreeable or Conformable to the Thing. Since then the
notion of Self-existence is so far from having Nonexistence in its Notion (as
the others had Non-ens) that it is the most perfect in that kind that can be
imagined; the 'foresaid Proposition could not be true, unless there were
actually something that has, in that Supreme Manner, Metaphysical Verity and
Unity in it self, to verify it. In the same manner as [ Homo est homo] could
never have been True, had there not been Something which had such a
Metaphysical Unity and Verity in its self, as grounded that Proposition. So
that the Objecter must either find more significations and uses of the word [
is] than we have assigned (which is impossible) or allege, that the Notion of
Self-existence is Chimerical, or Destructive of Existence, as Non-Ens is of
Ens, which is as absurd as the other; or, he must be forced to grant our
Conclusion, and acknowledge our Argument to be a true Logical Demonstration.

I know it will run in the Objecter's Fancy, that we can connect Notions which
our selves have coined; but he may easily correct these Misconceits, by
reflecting, that this Proposition is True; and that Truth must not be grounded
on our Aerie Fancies, but on the solid Nature of the Thing to which it is a
Conformity. I know too he will fancy that the Copula [ is] has an Office of
merely Connecting without any reference to the Existence of the Thing which is
its proper signification; but he may see the Folly of such a Conceit, if he but
consider that we cannot with truth conjoyn Notions in our Minds that are not
Conjoined beforehand in the Thing; and that when the Notions are of some
Positive Being, or such as are not Chimerical and Contradictory, the Copula [
is] must signify Exists, and does but say in our Mind what is in the thing, if
the Saying be true. Also, that that Copula cannot divest it self of all sense
while it conjoyns such Terms; and he will do more than Miracle to invent any
other for it but that of Exists.

It may yet be further Objected, that these Propositions ( Rosa est Rosa,
Animal est Animal) and suchlike, are still True, though their Subjects do not
actually Exist when we thus Predicate of them; and that therefore it is not
necessary the Copula ( est) should always signify Existence, even though the
Notions of the Terms be Positive Entities. It Is answered, that either the
Subjects ( Rosa) and ( Animal) mean the Individuals of those Natures; and then,
if once they are perished, the Propositions are False; for haec Rosa is no
longer Rosa, nor is hoc Animal Animal, when they are corrupted or turned into
another thing. Or else these words mean the Abstracted Notions of Rosa and
Animal; and then, since Abstracted Natures, or Vniversals, do (as such) no
where exist but in the Understanding, they have their Actual Existence where
they ought to have it; and the Copula [ est] signifies they have their
Existence there; and so the Proposition is True. And it is to be farther noted,
that they could not have been even there, unless there had actually been
diverse Individuals from which they might be Abstracted. But now, in our Case,
it is quite otherwise; for Self-existence being the simplest Notion that can be
conceived, nay, more Actual than any Notion of Existence found in Creatures, it
is Impossible there should be any abstracted notion of it; both because that
Abstracted Notion would have Potentiality in it, which would destroy that
Notion, and make it Chimerical and Self-Contradictory; as also, because (as
Metaphysics demonstrate) Self-Existence is Unlimited or Infinite in Existence,
and so, can be but One. Wherefore the Copula ( est) does not merely Conjoyn
such Positive Notions, but always signifies Existence, when the Notions it
connects are not Chimerical or Opposite to Existence, as Non-Ens is to Ens; and
consequently, if this Proposition [ Self-existence is Self-existence] be True,
there must Actually be, and this out of our Understanding, some Being that
verifies it, which can be nothing but the Deity.

It may be asked, What is to be said of these Propositions, such a Thing is
Possible or Future. It Is answered, the word [ Possible] signifies possible to
be, or capable of Being, which is the very notion of Ens; and so, it means that
such a Possible thing is an Ens; and then it might be true, could we Frame such
a Proposition of a thing merely possible, which is Impossible; for, if the
thing be only [ possible to be] it never was; and so (all our Notions being
taken from the Thing) we could have no Notion of it; and therefore the
Proposition would be none, since we want that Notion that makes the Subject.
The Proposition [such a thing is Future] is in rigor False, (for that which is
not at all, can have nothing predicated of it) and it can only be True, as it
signifies that there are determinate Causes laid to produce it: which is to
say, those Causes are, and so the Copula [ est] still signifies Existence.

11. To settle this main point, that First Principles must be such Propositions
as are most formally Identical, in the manner declared above, many other Proofs
may be alleged; as, that Contradictions are the First of Falsehoods; therefore
those Propositions that are directly Opposite to them must be the First Truths
or First Principles: But only Propositions thus perfectly Identical are
directly Opposite to Contradictions; Therefore these only are the First Truths
or First Principles. To prove the Minor, we shall find by reflection, that the
two Contradictory propositions are comprizable into one which is equivalent to
both; as to ( Peter here and now runs, Peter here and now runs not) is
equivalent ( what here and now runs, does not here and now run). Whence is seen
clearly, that only such Identical propositions are directly opposite to
Contradictions; since Man's Wit cannot invent a proposition directly Opposite to
( what runs runs not) but ( what runs runs) which is perfectly Identical. Add,
that all Fault consisting in this, that it is a Privation of the Opposite Good,
Contradictions would not be at all Faulty, but that they violate the Truth of
Identical propositions, (as has been now proved) since there are no other
Truths which they directly and formally Oppose or destroy.

12. Again, as will be seen hereafter, to Conclude is to show the Terms of the
Conclusion to be Connected, by their being Connected with a Third or Middle
Term in the Premises. But, how can we show that Middle Term is really
connected with those Two other Terms in the Premises? By finding still another
Middle Term to be connected with the Terms of the proposition to be proved.
And, how far must this go on? Endlesly! or no? If Endlesly, it is impossible
any thing should ever come to be proved; if not, then we must come to some
proposition whose Terms are so Connected that no Middle Term can come between
them; that is, such as cannot be Connected by means of Another; that is, which
cannot be proved or made evident; that is, which are self-connected or
self-evident; that is, which are formally Identical. To enforce this, we may
observe that the more Remot^ the Terms of a proposition are from Formal
Identity, the less evident they are, and the more proo^ they require; as also,
that they grow still nearer to Evidence, according to the degree of their
Approaching to be Formally the same. Wherefore, since all Approach of Distant
things ends in their Conjoyning and Centering in the same; it is manifest that
all Approach of Distant Notions ends in their being the same in Notion, or in a
proposition Formally Identical, as in a First and Self-evident Principle.

13. Besides, all Causality, or the whole Course of Nature, is finally refunded
into this Self-evident Principle, that Things are such as they are, that is,
are what they are. For, since an Effect is a Participation of something that is
in the Cause; and the Cause, as such, is that which imparts or communicates
something it has to the Matter on which it works its Effect. Again, since the
Effect is such as the Cause is, as to that which is imparted to it; and if the
Cause be of another sort, the Effect still varies accordingly; there can be no
doubt but that Causality is the Imprinting the Existence of that Essence or
Thing which is the Cause, upon the Matter. Whence follows evidently, that the
very Notion of Natural Causality, and the whole Efficacy of it, consists in the
Causes existing (that is being what it is. Only Motion is added as a Common
Requisite to apply that Existing Cause better or worse; which is refunded into a
Nature Superior to Body; as will be shown B. 3. L. 7
hereafter.

14. Lastly, God himself has expressed his own Supreme Essence by this Identical
Proposition Ego Sum qui Sum; that is, I exist (or am) Existence. Which is the
same, in a manner, with ( Self existence is Self-Existence) Which, therefore,
is the First Increated Truth; as it is the First Created one that ( what is is)
or A thing is what it is; which is therefore True, because God is what He is;
or, because Self-existence is Self-existence. From which Divine and Sovereign
Verity all our Created First Principles derive their Truth. For, were not This
True, all our Identical Proposition and First Principles would all be False: in
regard they have their Verity from the Natures of the Things, and of our
Understanding; neither of which could have their Metaphysical Verity, nor,
consequently, could they ground or be capable of any Truth at all, if
Self-Existence, their Cause, were not Self-Existence, and thence Unlimited in
Power, Wisdom and Goodness to Create and Conserve those Beings which are the
Foundation of all the Truth we have or can have. The Reader is desired to
referr this Section, to the Third Corollary, and to consider them well
together, because they mutually give Light to one another. And, if we rightly
consider it, as the Proposition ( Homo est Homo) is only the reducing the
Metaphysical Verity of Homo into a Formal Truth; so (Self Existence is
self-Existence) is the same in respect of the Sovereign Metaphysical Verity of
the Divine Nature.

Corol. IV. Hence is seen that an Atheist can have no perfectly Certain
Knowledge or Evidence of any thing; but that, by denying his Maker, he
deservedly comes to lose the best Perfection of his own Nature. For, if a
Sceptick should put him to prove that things have any Metaphysical Verity in
them grounding our first Principles, and* consequently, all our Knowledge; and
object, that for any thing he knows, Things are Chimerical, and so contrived as
to beget in us False Judgments; he is utterly at a loss through his denying a
First Cause: whose Unchangeable and Essential Truth and Goodness has Established
their Natures to be Unalterably what they are: whence only any Certain and
Evident Knowledge of them is possible to be attained.

15. Definitions, though very useful to Science, are not Self evident; nor are
those Propositions that Predicate the Definition of the Notion Defined, First
Principles. For, Self-evident Principles, by force of their very Terms, do
oblige the Understanding to assent, which such Propositions do not. Again, Art
is requisite to make such Definitions as are Proper and Adjusted to the Thing
Defined; whereas First Principles must antecede all Art, and be known by the
Natural Light of our Understanding. Besides, the Possibility of being defind,
goes before the Definition; which Possibility the Thing has from its
Metaphysical Verity, determining it to be This and no other. For, if the thing
were not truly what it is, it could not be exexplaind to be what it is; were it
not One, that is, Undivided in its self and Divided from all others; it could
not be comprised in one Definition; and, if it were not Determinately of this
or that Nature, it is certain, Bounds and Limits could not be drawn, which is
done by the Definition. Whence it is manifest, that that proposition which
affirms, that a Thing is what it is, is the First Principle and Ground to all
Definitions: and therefore Definitions themselves are not First Principles.

16. This is further evinced, because, Words being liable to Equivocalness,
where there are more words (as there are in Definitions) there is more room for
Equivocation; which Inconvenience appears no where more than in the known
Definition of Man: For, there wants not many Witty, (or rather half-witted)
Discoursers, who Distinguish, that is makes Ambiguous, the Word [Rational] and
do not stick to maintain that Man is Rational, or ( Concluding being the Proper
Act of Reason) can Conclude Evidently in Lines and Numbers, but not in Logic,
Physics, Ethics or Metaphysics, much less in Theology; and, by this means
they cramp the Definition to less than half the sense the words contain. There
are others too, who make Brutes Rational in many things (and they make Men to
be Rational but in some) and so quite destroy the said Definition by Enlarging
and Ampliating it, and making it Common and Indifferent to Man and Beast; and
not applied to either of them adequately, but only in some Degree only: And
yet the same men, even though perfect Scepticks, would not dispute the Truth of
this Proposition, A Man is a Man. Wherefore, since it is directly against the
nature of First Principles to be Disputable, Definitions cannot be First
Principles; and, consequently, only Propositions most perfectly Identical can
be such.

17. There is another kind of Self-evidence called Practical, which is
Inferior to this we have hitherto spoken of, and Proper to the Vulgar. This is
called Self-evidence, not because its Evidence is seen in the very Notion of
the Terms, as was the other, but because it is bred or instilled from the
Things themselves without Speculation or Study, by a Practical converse with
those things. Thus the Vulgar know evidently what is Moist, Dry, Hard, etc. as
well as the best Philosophers, though they cannot define them as the others can.
Nay, the best Philosophers (as will be seen hereafter) must learn from their
Sayings how to make their Definitions of all such Natural Notions. Thus they
know Evidently (though Naturally) the force of Witnessing Authority, when it is
Universal, and of Sensible Matters of Fact: For example, They know there was
such a one as Queen Elizabeth, or the Long Civil War in England, for, they know
Men could not be deceived themselves in knowing such things, and that they
could not All universally conspire to deceive their Children in attesting such
a Falsehood; or, if they had had a mind to it, they know that the Cheat must
needs have been discovered by some among so many thousands.

Note, That this is called Evidence, because, though it be a Rude Knowledge, yet
it is a True one; and it is the Work of Learned men to Polish by Art those rough
Draughts of Evidence which the Vulgar have by a Natural way; as will be farther
seen hereafter.

18. Those Speculations only being well grounded which are according to Nature,
it will add a great confirmation to this new piece of Doctrine, that First
Principles are Identical Propositions (and help withal to satisfy some
superficial Readers, who perhaps may think such Speculations A^ery) to show
that the Nature-instructed Vulgar do abet this Doctrine, and make use of
Propositions exactly Identical, when they would express themselves to stand
finally to some Truth which they judge to be most Evident. For example, if you
would force a Clown to deny a thing which he is sure of, or knows to be True;
he will tell you soberly, and (if you press him much) angrily, that Truth is
Truth, or that he is sure A Spade is a Spade, or that he knows what he knows;
or, if it be in a point belonging to Justice, that Right is Right, and he
brings these as Evidences from whence he can never be driven. Which signifies
clearly, that such Truths as these are Judged by him Self-evident, and to be
the Principles which naturally determine and fix him in an Immovable Adherence
to the point, as the Vltimate Ressort and Reason of his Persuasion; that is,
Nature teaches him to have recourse to these, as to his First Principles.

19. The other Test, by which to examine the Truth of this Discourse of ours
about First Principles, is to desire the Objecter to settle some First
Principles of his own, after his Fashion; which done, it will manifestly
appear, that, if he takes any other way, either his First Principles will not
be Self-evident at all, which yet First Principles must be; or, in case he
pretends them such, he will not be able to tell you or explicate in what that
Self-evidence of theirs consists; or else, he will produce such as he will tell
you he will undertake to prove to be Evident, which (since what is Proved is
concluded) will be the same as to offer to obtrude upon us Conclusions instead
of First Principles. Or, lastly, they will be mere Fancies of his own, put
together prettily, and expressed wittily and plausibly; which, when they are
divested of their gay Dress, and their naked sense is laid open, will be either
mere voluntary Talk or plain Nonsense in cuerpo. Into which Fault of Groundless
and boldly and Magisterially pronounced (though wittily expressed) Assertions, and
the Imposing them upon us for Principles, the Author of the Leviathan does fall
very frequently; and I could wish all his Followers would please to examine all
his Principles by this Test, and they would quickly discover how strangely they
fall short of Self-Evidence, that is, of the Nature of First Principles. Or, in
case they judge I have stated (...) the Nature of First Principles, I should
take it for a Favor, if they would vouchsafe me an Answer to my several
Reasons for my Doctrine, as to this point, in this Lesson and the next; and, in
a full Discourse, settle their own First Principles, and show me my Error;
which, I am very confident, they will never think fit to Attempt.

LESSON III. That First Principles are Identical Propositions proved by
Instances. The Use that is to be made of them. Also of some other Propositions,
either in whole or in part, Formally Identical; and of the Reducing of
Inferior Truths to Self-evident Propositions.
1. THAT the First Principles in Metaphysics are Identical Propositions, has
already Less. 2. Sect. 6, 7, 8, 9.
been cleared. It remains to show they are such in other Sciences also. We will
begin with Physics. The First Principle that grounds that whole Science,
according to some Modern Philosophers, is, [ Corpus est Quantum], in which though
the Subject and Predicate do indeed differ Grammatically, the one of them being
Substantively the other Adjectively expressed, yet if we rifle the Words to get
out the Inward Sense, (as Philosophers ought) we shall find that, since all the
Essential Differences they allow between a Body and a Spirit, is this only,
that That is Divisible, This Indivisible, as also, that Quantity and
Divisibility into Integral parts are (with them) the same Notion; it will
appear Eyidently, that, according to them, this Proposition [ Body is
Quantitative] is perfectly equivalent to this [ What Is Divisible is Divisible]
which is every way Identical. I say, with them, for they deny all Metaphysical
Divisibility of Body into Matter and Form See Appendix.
by denying all Formal Mutation. The same Discourse holds, if they put for
their First Principle [ Corpus est Extensum]; for, in that Supposition, they
hold that Extension is the Notion that Intrinsecally constitutes Body or
Matter, and differences it Essentially from Spirit. Whence the Proposition [
Corpus est Extensum] is the same as [ Ens Extensum est Ens Extensum, or Corpus
est Corpus] which are most Formally Identical.

2. That the First Principle which grounds all Ratiocination in Logic is an
Identical Proposition, will be shown hereafter, Sect. 10. when we come to show
the Use of First Principles.

3. The First principle that grounds all Ethics, or Morality, is, [ A Will is
a Will]. For, since all Morality (at least in its practice) consists in Acting
for an End, and no man acts for an End but because it appears to him a Good,
and therefore an appearing Good is the proper Object of that Active Power
called the Will; and Powers are specified by their proper Objects, and have
their Essences from them; it is as certain the Will cannot act when there
appears to the Man no Good, and that it will act for what appears to him,
taking him as thus Disposed, hic and nunc a Good, as it is that A Will is a
Will.

Object. This takes away the Freedom of the Will, to tie it up to First
Principles, or pretend that its Actions can be reduced to Rules of Science or
Demonstration; for, this seems to hamper it, and lay a Necessity upon it, which
destroys its Free Nature.

I answer, that the Will has a Nature of its own, which it can no more forgo
than Homo can not be Homo. Whenever then there is but one Appearing Good, the
Will is not free in that circumstance, because in such a Case its Essence is
engaged; and it is not in the power of the Will to choose whether it will be its
self or no. In all other Cases where its Essence is not engaged the Will is
free, provided there be on the Object's side Variety enough for Choice: Yet, in
the former Case, those Acts of the Will, though not free, are Voluntary, because
they are more according to what is Essential to it, or to its very Nature; and
would, if the Will did not bear it self accordingly, make the Will to be no
Will.

Corol. I. Hence is seen, that the only solid way to perfect our Souls in
Christian Morality or True Virtue, is by Wise Judgments or Frequentation of
Devout Thoughts and Actions, to gain a Lively and Hearty Conceit of the
Transcendent Excellency of Heavenly Goods, and of the Vileness of all Temporary
Goods in comparison, since it is the very Nature of our Will to pursue that with
her Interior Acts which appears lively to be the Greater Good; that is, to be
hic and nunc, a Good to him that wills.

4. Lastly, to omit others, the First Principles in Mathematics are Identical.
For example; At our first entrance into Euclid, we are met with those Famous
and Useful Principles: Those things that are Equal to the same, are Equal to
one another. If Equals be added to Equals, the Wholes are Equal. If Equals be
taken away from Equals, the Remainders are Equal. Those which are twice as big
as the same, are Equals. Those which are Halfs of the same are Equals. All
which are in effect but this Identical Proposition [ Aequale est aequale sibi];
or else diverse Inferior Identicals, subsuming under that Common one, as Homo
est homo does under Ens est ens. For example, this Proposition [ If Equals be
added to Equals, the Wholes are Equal] is that common Identical Proposition
thrice (as it were) Repeated; and is plainly as much as to say, the two
supposed Equals are Equal to one another: the two Equals added are Equal to one
another; and so the two Equal Wholes, made up of both those Equal parts, are
Equal to one another.

There are many other such Identical Propositions on which that great
Mathematician builds as on his Principles; and among the rest [ A Whole is
greater than a part of it self] which I have shown above to be, in sense.
Formally Identical.

5. As for the Use that may be made of First Principles; First, they cannot be
the Conclusion, for that is the thing to be proved, and First Principles are
above Proof, as not being to be made Evident, because they are Self-evident.
Nor can they be either of the Premises; for (as will be more clearly shown
hereafter) the Middle Term must be Connected with one of the Terms of the
Conclusion in one of the Premises, and with the other Term in the other; which
could not be, if the self same Notion were used twice in one of those
Premises; for then the Syllogism must either be framed thus, [ Omnis Homo est
Homo, Aliquod Animal est rationale, ergo aliquod Rationale est Homo]; or thus,
[ Nullus Homo est Irrationalis; Ted aliquis Homo est Homo, ergo Aliquod
irrationale non est Homo:] where we see (to omit other faults) that the Notion
of Homo is taken thrice, whereas in a Legitimate Syllogism no Term ought to be
taken more than twice; and, so the whole Discourse is Preternatural and Absurd.

6. Hence follows, that since the Use of First Principles cannot be the
bringing down or deducing Truths, which are yet unknown, from them; therefore
the Use of them must consist in the bringing up or Reducing Truths to them;
which is done by Resolving less-clear Truths into others still Clearer, till we
arise to those which are the Clearest of all, that is, to Self-evident
Principles; to show which by Instances, or lay open the way how this is done,
is not proper for this place, but belongs to the next Book, where we shall
treat of Rigorous Discourse or Demonstration.

7. To make this use of First Principles is no more, in effect, but to attend
heedfully to the Nature of the Thing, and not to deviate from it. This is
Evident; for, to Deviate in a Discourse about Homo or Corpus, from their
Natures, is, by consequence, to make Homo not to be Homo, and Corpus not to be
Corpus; which Propositions are Contradictory to Homo est Homo and Corpus est
Corpus, which are the First Principles in those Discourses.

8. Quaere. It may be asked, if there be no more in the business but to attend
to the Metaphysical Verity or Nature of the Thing, why we keep such a pother
about putting it into such nice, and dry, and seemingly Insignificant Identical
Propositions, since we may attend to our Notion, or the Nature of the Thing,
without framing Formal Propositions about it, or saying It is what it is? It Is
answered, Because all our Discourses are made up of Propositions, without which
we cannot say or affirm any thing; and therefore those Sayings into which we do
finally resolve their Evidence and Truth, as into what is most true and evident,
must be Propositions also. Besides, Self-evident Propositions, which advance
the Metaphysical Verity of the thing into Formal Verity, do reflect and
redouble (as it were) the Notion of it upon it self by expressing its being
what it is; and thence gives an advantage to our bare Single Notion, by not
only having had (as had the Single Notion) its Metaphysical Verity in it, but
by expressing that Metaphysical Verity, so as to make it more fit to be
discoursed of.

9. Though First Principles cannot be any Proposition in a Legitimate or Regular
Syllogism, yet this hinders not but that those particular Identical
Propositions which subsume under Ens est Ens See B. 2. L. 2. Corol. 2.
, may in some sort and improperly be Deducible from that Common one. For, since
a Common Notion, taken without restriction, is Equivalent to an Universal, and
includes All that have that Notion, and All includes and signifies Every
particular one, as a Whole does its parts; hence follows, that if Ens be Ens,
then Homo is Homo, Lapis is Lapis; and the same may be said of every particular
thing that is comprehended under that Universal.

Note, That this is not performed by virtue of those Terms orderly placed and
connected, as it is done in a Syllogism; but by virtue of some Logical Maxims
applying or referring the Common propositions to those particular Identical
ones, as appears in the proof of this last Section.

Corol. II. Hence is seen how Metaphysics give the Principles to all Inferior
Sciences that treat of particular Subjects; and how they establish both the
Truth, Certainty and Evidence of those respective Principles.

10. The other main Use of First Principles is to Establish all our
Ratiocination or Deduction of New Truths out of others formerly known: this is
evident, because all Inference, Concluding or Proving is performed by
Identifying the two terms of the proposition to be Concluded with a Middle term
in the premises; and if it be found that they are both of them the same with
it, it is thence Inferred that they are the same with one another, and that the
Conclusion is true. But, what if that Middle term be not the same with its own
self, but Divided within it self? Why then it must certainly follow, that we
could Infer or prove Nothing: For if that Middle term were divided in it self,
as Hirco-cervus, Chimera, and all Non-Entities are, then one of the terms of
the proposition to be proved might be Identify'd with it according to one of
those Considerations, and the other term Identify'd with it according to the
other; and so, it would not follow that the terms of the Propositions to be
proved are at all Identified or Connected in the Conclusion by being both of
them Identified with it in the Premises; but rather it will follow, that they
would be Diversified or Unconnected, because that Middle term had Diversity and
not Identity in it self. Wherefore all the Force of Inference, nay, all
possibility of Concluding or proving any thing is entirely grounded on this
Self-evident proposition, Idem est Idem sibi ipsi, or, a Thing is the same with
it self. Which shows how Useful First principles are, and how they are both the
First Truths in themselves; and, besides, the Bottom-Ground to all Others which
are not Evident in themselves, but need Proof to make them so; how Dry and
Insignificant soever they may appear at first sight, or seem ridiculous to
Superficial Talkers, or some Men of more Wit and Fancy than of Exact
Speculation.

Corol. III. Hence is seen that the Light of Reason or the Light by which we
draw New knowledges out of foregoing ones, is the Light that shines in this
Self-evident proposition: A thing is the same with it is self.

Corol. IV. Hence also, if the Terms be Univocally understood, and do agree to
the Middle Term in the Premises, we may be as Infallibly Certain our
Conclusion is True as we are that The same is the same with it self. Which will
give a great Encouragement, to the Laborious Pursuers of True Science, and
comfort the pains they take in Seeking after Truth.

Corol. V. Hence, lastly, if any Discourse be so framed as to thwart this First
Principle or clash with it: it is Self-evidently Absurd, False and
Contradictory; as will be particularly seen when we come to treat of Discourse
or Ratiocination.

11. There are other Propositions which are, either in the whole or in part,
Formally Identical, ^ho' not most Formally: that is, such as have the ^ame
Formal Notion in whole, or in part; and therefore are, upon a slight
reflection, Evident, ^ho' not self-evident from the very Terms, as were First
Principles. Of the first sort are those whose Predicates belong to the First
Predicable, in which ^he whole Notion is predicated of the Whole. And ^hese are
either Definitions (of which we have spo^en above) as when we say Homo est
Animal Ratio^ale; or the Members of such Divisions as are made ^y Contradictory
Differences. For since there ^an be no Middle or Third between two
Contra^ictory Notions, and therefore the Dividing parts, ^f Contradictory, do
take up all the Parts of the whole, and consequently (abating the manner of
Expression) are perfectly and Entirely the Whole it self; it follows, that such
parts, taken Divisively, ^re predicated of the Notion Divided as the Whole ^f
the Whole. For example, Animal is divided into Rational and Irrational (that
is, not-Rational) and Number into Even and Odd, (that is, not-even). Whence in
those Propositions, [Animal is either Rational or Irrational] and (Number is
either Even or Odd) all the Parts or the whole is predicated of the Whole, and
the Propositions are Formally Identical and Evident in the manner explicated in
our former Note.

Note 2. That these are called Formally Identical, because they are Evident by
their own Terms when they are once Explaind; without needing any Formal Proof
for the Learned to discern the Connection of those Terms; only there is
required some slight Reflection on certain Common Maxims, known by the Light of
Nature: such as is that a thing either is or is not, and that therefore there
can be no Middle between them; and that All the Parts are the Whole. They are
also Self-evident Practically (that is Evident without Study) to the Vulgar,
because they cannot but know those maxims by their Mother-wit. In like manner
as they know also the Substance of the Definition of those Notions they are
conversant with, if plainly and fully expressed; tho they cannot compile or frame
it Artificially: whence they will heartily acknowledge it to be true when it is
thus proposed to them, finding the Notion or Sense of it in their own
Understanding.

12. Propositions whose Terms are Formal in part are those whose Predicates
belong to the second, third and fourth Predicables; that is, such as are
predicated as the Genus Species and DiffeDifference; for all these do in part
belong essentially to the Thing or Individuum; as Petrus est Animal, Homo,
Rationalis. They belong to it Essentially; because they are deduced by
Intrinsecal Differences in the same Line: In part, because the Thing or
Individuum ( v. g. Peter) comprehends both them, and more than them, viz. his
Individual Essence.

13. Those Propositions whose Predicates belong to the Fifth Predicable (viz.
Properties) are neither in Part nor in Whole Formally Identical, and therefore
not Evident; though they are oftentimes easily reducible to Evidence. For, since
such Predicates are not of the same Line as the Thing is, but in another, they
cannot be at all Essential to it, or any direct part of its Formal Notion or
Definition; and, so, not at all Evident from the Terms, but must be made so by
Proof. Yet, since all Deduction or Proof is made by Connection of Notions, and
those Notions (or what corresponds to them) must be Connected in the Thing e're
they can be so in our Understanding; and Properties are more nearly allied to
the Essence than other Accidents, as resulting necessarily from it, or being
immediately Connected with it; hence they are, by consequence, most easily
Proveable to belong truly to the Thing; and therefore very fit to be made use
of in Demonstrations.

14. Of this sort are all Propositions whose Predicates are Proper Causes and
Effects; and, more immediately, the Powers or Virtues by which they Act on
others, or Suffer from others; as will be seen when we come to treat of
Demonstration.

15. Propositions whose Predicates belong to the last Predicable are utterly
Inevident, and, as such, not easily Evidenceable. For, since (as was shown B.
2. S. 13.
above) such Predicates do belong to the Subject but by chance, or as their
very name imports, by Accident; and Chance signifies a Cause which we do not
see or know; it follows, that the Connection of such Predicates with the Subject
can never be known by Reason, or proved that they must belong to it, because we
can never know al^ the Causes that concurred to make them belong to it.
Wherefore such Propositions are utterly Inevident, nor (as they are Accidents
or Unconnected with the Essence) easily Evidenceable by way of Reason, that
they must belong to them; however they may be known to belong actually to them
hic and nunc by Sense or Experience. Such Predicates are mostly those of the
six last Predicaments, and many Quantities, Qualities, and Relations.

16. Notwithstanding, those Propositions which have such Accidental Predicates,
were all the Causes by which they hap to belong to the Subject perfectly known,
might be perfectly Evident and Demonstrable. For, as we can Demonstrate one
Effect that needs but one Cause to put it, from that single Cause; so, did we
know all the Causes that concurred to any Effect which is brought about by many
Causes, we could certainly conclude and know such an Effect would follow; in
which case the Predicate would be no longer an Accident, but the Proper Effect
of that Complex of Causes; nor would the Proposition it self be any longer
merely Accidental.

Corol. VI. Hence there is nothing Contingent or Accidental to God, but all
Events, though never so minute or so odd, are Equally Certain to him, as the most
Immediate Effect of the most Proper and most Necessary Causes; because he lays
and comprehends the whole Series of Causes that concur to bring about every
least Effect.

LESSON IV. Of the Generating of Knowledge in us, and of the Method how this is
performed.
HItherto of Knowledges or Judgments, according to their Dependence on one
another, and their being Resolved Artificially into First Principles. Our next
task is, to consider them according to the Order they are instilled into us
Naturally.

1. The Soul, or the Understanding, is at first void of all kind of Knowledge,
or Rasa Tabula. For, since the Author of Nature does nothing in vain, nor acts
needlessly, he puts no Effects immediately, or without Second Causes, when there
are Causes laid by him to produce them; and, since we experience that Causes
are laid by Him, apt to imprint Notions in us; and that the Nature of our Soul
being evidently Comparative, we can compare those Notions, and can see how they
Agree or Disagree, which is to know: Hence, in case the Soul had any Notions or
Knowledges infused into her otherwis^ than by those Causes, it would frustrate
and make void that Course of natural Agents which is apt to beget Knowledge in
us, and make Nature contradict her self. Again, since we experience that we
know no more than we have Notions of, and that we can compare those Notions,
and can know all things we have Notions of and do thus rightly Compare; and,
that both those effects do follow naturally from the Impressions of Objects,
and from the nature of the Soul; it falls into the same Absurdity, to affirm,
that those Causes do only Excite, and not Beget Knowledge in us. Lastly, the
contrary Opinion supposes the Soul to be an Ens before the Body, or at least
distinct from it; and then it is both Unconceivable and Inexplicable how they
can ever come to be United so as to compound one Ens. For, this cannot be done
Quantitatively, as is evident, nor by their Acting together, as the Cartesians
hold; both because all Action presupposes the Being of a thing; whence they
must be one Ens before they can Act as one Ens; as also, because the Line or
predicament of Action is Book 1. L. 2. S. 18.
distinct from that of Ens, and Extrinsecal to it, and so cannot Book 1. L. 3.
S. 1.
Intrinsecally constitute those Joynt-Acters One Ens or Thing. Nor can it be
conceived that the Body, if it be not one Ens with the Soul, can act with it
otherwise than as its Instrument; and it would be most Absurd, to say that my
Hand and Pen are o^e thing because they jointly concur in their different
ways, to the Action of Writing. Wherefore the Soul has no Antecedent Knowledge,
but is a Rasa Tabula, capable to receive such Impressions as beget Knowledge in
her.

2. The First Judgment in order of Nature the Soul has, is. that its self or
the Man exists. For, since (as B 1. L 2. S. 16.
was shown) the First Notions the Soul has are of the Man himself, and of his
Existence, and B. 2 L. 1. S 10.
all Judgmen^s are made by Compounding or Comparing of Notions; it follows,
that the most Obvious, most Easy, most Natural, and consequently the First
Judgment, in priority of Nature, that a Man has when he is ripe to judge, is,
that Himself is, or [ I am].

3. The next Judgment is, that [ He is struck] or affected by some Object
without him; for, since the Course of Nature is Motion, and therefore Objects
are continually moving where the Man is, and, so, do light and act on his
Senses, that is, do work Experimental Knowledge in him that he is acted upon or
struck by them, it follows, that he must, after he comes to frame Judgments,
necessarily and frequently know, and, consequently, Judge he is struck. Nor can
this be the first Judgment, both for the Reason lately given Sect. 2. as also
because in this Proposition [ I am struck] the Proposition [ I am] is most
Simple, and manifestly antecedes [ I am struck]; the Notion of [ struck] being
clearly superadded to it.

4. The next Knowledge or next Judgment to the former, in order of Nature, is,
[I am struck thus] or Affected after such a manner. For, the Notion of [ I am
struck] is more Simple, and so, antecedes [I am struck thus] which superadds to
it: Whence this proposition is proved by the same reason that was brought for
the third Section.

5. These Judgments had, we are furnished by Nature with Means of Knowing in
some measure the Distinct Natures of all things that affect us. For, since we
get all our Notions or the Natures of things into us by Impressions from
Objects; and by such Impressions, or by their affecting us thus or thus, their
Different Natures; that is, Knowledge how those things Differ from one another;
and Differences do constitute the Nature of the thing by Distinguishing it from
all others; it is manifest that from the Judgment or Knowledge that we are
struck thus and thus by these and these Objects, we are furnished with means of
Knowing, in some measure, the Distinct Natures of all things that affect us,
and of our own Bodies in the first place. And our Soul having the power of
Comparing them to themselves, and to Other Natures that are also in her, we
hence become capable of framing Innumerable Judgments concerning them, or
Knowledges of them.

6. These Knowledges of all things that affect our Senses being gained, to a
fair degree, by the Different Impressions of Objects, are made more Express,
and Improved very much by Study and Reflection. For, since Study and Reflection
are not the Inventing New or Counterfeit Notions or Natures of our own coining,
but the Receiving frequently, and minding heedfully the true and solid Notions
of the things which Nature had imprinted there before; it follows, that, as in
Corporeal Sight, by our Regarding the Object frequently, wistly and
attentively, we come to observe more and more in it; so, by often Reflecting on
and Revolving Intellectual Objects, or the Natures of things in us, the Eye of
our Mind must needs look deeper into them, make new Discoveries of diverse
Considerations in them which escaped a single Cursory view, and gain more exact
and more penetrative Knowledge of them.

7. By Methods of Discoursing or Ratiocination made evident by Maxims of Art,
this Improvement of Knowledge (were not vita brevis) might come to be in a
manner Infinite. For, all this is performed by Evident Connection of Terms, both
in some propositions which are Truths, and the deducing others by necessary
consequence from them, and so forwards. Since then there is no stint assignable
of the Connection of Truths, and (as will be shown hereafter) there are Rules or
Maxims of Art to teach us how to connect Terms Aptly and Evidently; it follows,
that there can be no Bounds of the Improvement of Knowledge.

8. From what is said above, it is manifest that this proposition [ Ego cogito]
cannot be the first-known Truth whence all our Science is Generated; for, since
this proposition ( Ego cogito) if put entirely or explicitly as it ought, is (
Ego sum cogitans) and in the order of Nature the proposition ( Ego sum) is
antecedent to ( Ego sum cogitans) and more simple than it; so that if it be not
supposed to be known, the other cannot possibly be known; it is most Evident
that (Cogito) or ( Ego cogito) or, which is the same ( Ego sum cogitans) cannot
be the first-known Proposition or First Truth that can be laid in the Method of
Generating Science.

9. The proposition ( Ego sum cogitans) is less clear and evident than many
other propositions that have for their predicate Notions directly imprinted on
our Senses such as are; I am Heated, Hurt, Extended, Moving, etc. For, since
all our first-known notions (the Soul being Rasa Tabula) come by Impressions of
Objects on our Senses, those propositions are most Clear whose predicates are
the Immediate Effects of those Impressions, and, joined with Ego sum (which is
the first Judgment) do compound those propositions. But such are the predicates
abovesaid, and not the predicate ( Cogitans). Therefore the proposition ( Ego
sum Cogitans) is less clear than are the propositions which have those directly
imprinted Notions for their Predicates. That the other predicates are notions
more known than is Cogitans, I prove thus. The notion of Cogitans is Spiritual,
and therefore could not be imprinted in the Soul by a Direct stroke of the
Object on the Senses, as are the Others, but must be known by Reflection; but
what is known by Reflection is less easily and less early known, that is less
Evident to us, taking us as not yet imbued with other Knowledges, than that
which is known by Experience or Directly; therefore the notion of ( Cogitans)
is less known than are those other predicates; and consequently this
proposition (Ego sum Cogitans) is less Clear than the propositions (Ego sum
Extensus, vulneratus, movens, etc. Again, were the predicate (Cogitans) known
experimentally, or by Impressions on the Sense, which it is not at all but as
it is joined with the Imagination (the most Fallacious Faculty we have)
cooperating with the Understanding; nay, were it an Affection of the Man, and
its Notion directly imprinted in him, and, so, as easily and early known as any
of the rest; yet the proposition ( Ego sum Cogitans) could not be the First or
Second in the Order of Knowable: for, since (as was shown) [ I am struck or
Affected] antecedes [I am affected thus] or have such an affection in me, and
Cogitans is not barely to be Affected by Objects, but to have such a manner of
Affection; hence the proposition (I am affected by Objects) is more Simple, and
therefore, in priority of Nature, precedes (I am affected thus) or (I am
Thinking) and is more Clear than it.

11. Hence the proposition ( Ego cogito) is also less Certain than multitudes
of other propositions, whose predicates are experimentally known by Direct
Impressions on the Senses. For Certainty follows Evidence as its Proper Cause,
as Judging does Knowing. Wherefore, if that proposition be less Evident, it is
also less Certain.

12. If it be alleged, that it is Certain by way of Evident Proof that this
proposition (Ego cogito) is the most absolutely firm Ground we can rely on to
generate and principiate all our other Knowledges, because though we would
voluntarily divest our selves of all other Knowledges, and call them into
doubt; that is, were all the rest Uncertain, and my self Insecure whether I
think True or False in holding them; yet it is Unquestionably Certain, and
Impossible to be doubted of, but that, whether I think right or wrong, still I
think; whence follows, that the proposition ( Ego cogito) seems to be a firm
basis to ground all the rest upon. I answer, that the whole Discourse seems to
me to be a Paralogism, and a kind of Fallacy of non causa pro causa; for, the
Question is not whether it be not more Certain that I think than that I think
wrong or right; for, it is granted that this proposition [ I think] is more
Simple, and therefore antecedes, and is presupposed to the propositions [I
think right or wrong, or thus and thus] and, consequently, it is more Evident
and more Certain than These are. But the true point is, whether I am more
Certain that I think at all, than that I am Certain that I am; since if it be
not presupposed that I am, it is most Certain that it is Impossible that I
should be Certain that I am thinking, or any thing like it. The Objecter then
slides over the Certainty of this proposition (I think) as compared with the
proposition ( I am) and other Judgments experimentally known; and compares it
with other propositions subsequent to (I think). Wherefore he first supposes it
to be most Certain, that is, more Certain than they are, and prefers it before
all others, without Comparing it with those others; which is to suppose it so
gratis, and (which is yet more strange) he grounds all Knowledge whatever upon
it.

13. It Is yet a worse Error, that whereas Ens or Being is the Basis of all
other Notions, so that if no Thing be, They cannot be; the Alledger, by arguing
thus [ Cogito ergo sum] does by a strange Hysteron proteron, put an Operation
to be Antecedent to Being it self; and that [ to be Thinking] is a more Simple,
Clear, and Distinct Notion than [ to be]. And then, from an Operation found out
or supposed, he concludes the very Notion of Being it self to be in the Thing.
Nay, which is yet more odd, he supposes the Notion of Knowledge of Himself,
imported by the Word ( Ego) and supposes that Ens (or Ego) to be, as is
signified by the Copula (Sum); nay more, he supposes that Ens, or ( himself)
not only to be, ^ut moreover to be such, viz. Operating or Thinking, which
most evidently speak or imply Existence; and when he has done all this, he
Infers thence, (contrary to our 3d. and 4th. Sect.) the simple being of that
which he had not only put to be and be known; but, which he had over and above
put to be (or be known) to be such: that is to be Operating or Thinking.

14. Hence, this Method of Generating Science is Unnatural, Preposterous and
Self-contradictory. It Is Unnatural, first because the way Nature takes to Beget
Knowledge in us is not by divesting our selves of all other Knowledges to find
out what is most Certain: but, she at first instills Knowledge into us by a
Natural way of Imprinting Notions in our Mind, and our Conparing them; and
thence letting us See whether they Agree or Disagree: 2 ly, because it strains
Nature to fancy our selves Ignorant of many Clear Truths which the goodness of
the same Nature forces us to assent to as Evident. And, 3 ly, because [ I am]
is according to the Order of Nature Antecedent to [ I am Thinking]. It Is
Preposterous, because it argues from Compound Judgments which are less known,
to in^er what is more Simple, and, so, more known. And lastly, it is Self
contradictory, because it supposes that to be or to be known; which, as yet
according to that doctrine is not, or is not known: but is to be Concluded,
that is, made known; as is shown Section 13th.

15. Hypothetical Philosophy, which is grounded on Suppositions; and beggs that
such and such things may be yielded and then it will explicate al^ Nature, is
built on mere Fancy, and is unworthy the name of Philosophy. For, since it
belongs to a Philosopher to Resolve all Truths into their Principles, and all
Natural Effects into their Proper Causes; and, finally, (if need be) into their
first Principles or First Causes: and a Hypothetical Philosopher can never
perform this Duty which is most Essential to a Philosopher; in regard the First
Grounds he lays are barely begged or Supposed; that is neither self-Evident
nor made Evident by way of Proof: Hence, Hypothetical Philosophy is utterly
unworthy the name of Philosophy; since all its Assertions and Conclusions, if
driven home, are resolved finally into Precarious Suppositions. Again* since
all Speculation is Aerie and Fantastical that is not grounded on the Things as
they are found in Nature, and such Discoursers do not finally build their
Discourses on the Natures of the Things as they find them to be, but on their
being such as they suppose them or would have them to be; it follows, that the
whole Scheme of their Doctrine and all the speculations they advance, how
Ingenious so ever they may appear, are far from Solid, and, in reality
Groundless, Aerie and Fantastical.

16. Hence follows, that who ever supposes any Principle or Proposition that
influences his Explication of Nature, or of Natural Effects which ar^ apt to be
produced by Natural Causes, and demonstrated by them: whether that Principle be
that Matter is divided into such or such parts, or that it is moved in such a
manner; That it continues its motion without a Natural Motive Cause continually
acting on it, notwithstanding that it still meets with Rubbs from other parts
of Matter which it ^reaks asunder; That there are such Figures of it is Parts;
or such Qualities affecting the Subject and giving it a Virtue of Operating
thus or thus; That ^here are multitudes of little Entities, brought in ^o serve
a present turn when the Discourser is at (...) plunge; or Atoms, pursuing and
over taking their fellows, and clinging together conveniently ^or his purpose:
without giving a reason why and (...) they must do so, (as is the manner of the
Epi^ureans) or, what ever other useful Expedient he ^upposes to carry on the
Clockwork of his Scheme; such a man is no true Philosopher.

17. Likewise, who ever lays for his Ground that neither is nor can be: viz.
Vacuum, Imaginary Space, Subsistent Dimensions, Infinite Expansion of Continued
Quantity. Infinite Number of Atoms and suchlike, can be no true Philosopher;
since they (as do the former) Resolve things finally into their own Unprov'd
and Ridi^ulous Suppositions: and would have us accept their Groundless Fancies
for First Principles; when as many ^imes the contrary to these is clearly
demonstrable.

18. Whoever proceeds merely upon Experiments and Induction, and cannot assign
Proper Causes for the Effects or Matters of Fact they see ^one; how ever their
Inquisitiveness into Nature may merit Commendation, and oblige Artificers and
Practical men by many useful Observations; and, in some measure* help
Speculative Men also, who do make use of Principles, to find out more easily
the Proper Causes of many Effects: from which Industrious Researches into
Nature, such men may deserve the name of Virtuosi, or Curious and Ingenious
persons; yet since (as will be shown hereafter) they cannot, by that Method
alone, without making use of Principles, refund Effects into their Proper
Causes, nor give the true reason of the Effects they Experience; nor Deduce so
much as one Scientifical Conclusion; they cannot, in true speech, be called Men
of Science or Philosophers.

19. Those of the Vulgar who have good Mother-witts, and addict themselves to
think much and attentively of some certain Natural Objects, may, by Practical
Self-evidence, well improved, arrive to such a true Knowledge of the Causes of
things, as may rank them in the next Class of Knowers to Scientifical Men, or
true Philosophers. For, such Men, by an Innate or Casual Addiction of their
Thoughts to some particular sorts of Natures; and by industrious and frequent
consideration of them, joined with a natural Sagacity to penetrate them, and
natural Logic to discourse them in their thoughts; are furnished with all the
Materials (as it were) that are requisite to Science: Nor, while they attend to
the Natures of the Things, can they want First Principles by which to guide
their thoughts; so that, they only want Maxims of Art to put their Thoughts
into the posture of Science, to make them more firm, distinct and express, and
to improve them by drawing new Consequences from them: Wherefore such Acute Men
(some of which are found in every Country and every Age,) by having their
Knowledge grounded on solid Nature, may far exceed Hypothetical Philosophers,
or any of the others beforementioned, in True Knowledge; and, so, come nearer
the being true Philosophers than any of them; nay, than Great Artists and
Reputed Scholars; though they caper in the Air never so nimbly and quaintly
with School-Terms, Distinctions, and Witty and Congruous Explications of their
own Schemes; if they do not begin with, and build upon, Good Honest Solid
Nature.

BOOK III. Of the Third Operation of our Understanding, Discourse; and of the
Effects and Defects of it.
LESSON I. Of Artificial Discourse, the Force of Consequence, and of the only
Right Figure of a Syllogism.
1. DIscourse may either mean Common Reasoning used by all Mankind in their
Ordinary Conversation, or by some in Rhetorical Speeches; which may fitly be
called Loose Discourse: Or, it may mean that Artificial way of Reasoning, which
consists in such a Connection of Terms in two Propositions, called the Major and
Minor (or the Premises) as that a Third Proposition, called the Conclusion,
must naturally and necessarily follow from them; which may be properly named
Contracted or Strict Discourse, and by Logicians is called a Syllogism.

2. This following or Consequence of such a Proposition out of two others, is
called Inference, Deduction, Concluding, Argumentation and Proving. So that the
Essence of a Syllogism consists as formally in the Consequence of that
Proposition, which is Concluded from the Premises, (expressed by the Illative
Particle [ ergo] as the Essence of a Proposition does in the Copula that
connects its Terms, and Predicates or says something of another.

3. Wherefore, since, if the Consequence, in which consists the Essence and all
the Force and Nerves of Discourse, be not Clear and Evident, there could be no
Certainty or Evidence of any thing that needs to be made known or concluded;
and, so, our Faculty of Exact Reasoning would have been given us to no purpose:
hence it is manifest that, however one Proposition may be made known by others
that are Connected and Consequential to one another; yet, the Consequence it
self cannot be proved or made clear by another Consequence; for the Question
would still return how, and in virtue of what, that Consequence which made the
other Evident is Evident it self; and so in infinitum. Whence it follows, that
the Evidence of all Consequences whatever, must be built on something in a
higher manner Evident than any Consequence or Proof can make it; that is, on a
Self-evident or Identical Proposition, as will be shown hereafter.

4. Hence we may gather manifestly, that a Syllogism can have but Three Terms
in it; Two of which are given us in the Proposition to be Concluded; and the
Third is that Middle Term, by finding which to be Identify'd with the other Two
in the Premises, we come to be assured, by virtue of the self-evident
Proposition hinted above, that they are Identify^d in the Conclusion; or, which
is the same, that the Conclusion is True.

5. From what is said it appears that a Syllogism is the T^st of all other
Discourses; by reducing them to which their Truth is to be tried. For, since
whatever is most Perfect in its Kind, ought to be the Standard or Test by which
to Measure and try the Perfection of all others of the same Kind; and a
Syllogism is the best and most firmly grounded Act of our Natural Reason, made
exact by Art which is to perfect Nature; and therefore absolutely the very Best
that can be in its Kind, or the best Discourse; it follows that it is to be the
true Test and Standard of all other Discourses; to which the Verity, Sense or
Coherence of all the rest are to be reduced, and to be tried by it.

Corol. I. Hence, it is of very Excellent Use for Young Wits to exercise
themselves in Reducing loose Discourses to strict ones, or Syllogisms; For, by
endeavoring this, they will, to their Admiration, find how Shallow and far
from Evident the Grounds; how precarious* unprov'd, and oft-times
contradictious the particular Assertions; and how Open and Incoherent the
Contexture and Consequences are in many Rhetorical Discourses and Speeches;
which, dressed up in fine Language and embell^sht with little Tropes and Figures,
and other pretty Tricks of Wit and Fancy, did before look very plausible, and
made a gay Appearance of most Excellent Sense. Perhaps scarce any one Expedient
can be invented that is more useful to advance Truth, beat down Error, and keep
the Generality of Mankind from being deluded, than thus to divest such empty
Discourses of their Glossy Outside; and to let them see how deformed a Hag
Error will appear to the Eye of Reason, when exposed stark-naked. Whereas, on
the other side, it is the Glory of Truth to be stripped of these Ornamental
Tri^^es; for by this means her Native Beauty and the Symmetry of all her parts
will appear more Amiable in the Eye of those who do sincerely affect her.

6. From the third. it manifestly follows, that, the Consequence of a Syllogism
having a self-evident Proposition for its Basis, if upon severe examination, we
find that any Discourse does indeed bear that Test, and can be Reduced to a
rigorous Syllogism; and the Premises (which the Consequence supposes to be
True) be really so, or can be by this Method proved True; it follows, I say,
that we may be as perfectly assured as that we are that the Conclusion is
Consequent, and True; and, that sooner, may all the Material World crumble into
Incoherent Atoms, or relapse into the Abyss of Nothingness, than that any
Conclusion, thus deduced, can be False; since, if it could, then that Identical
Proposition, on which the Consequence is grounded, would be False; and, so a
Contradiction would be True; which falsifies the Metaphysical Verity of
Creatures, and of the Ideas of them in the Divine Understanding; which would
consequently shock the Wisdom, and even the Essence of the Godhead it self: For
self-existence might not be self-existence if a Contradiction might be True.

Corol. II. Were that which is said here, and some other main Hinges of
Science, which occur in this Treatise, duly considered and well penetrated, it
might be hoped, that they would to a fair degree cure the Disease of
Skepticism, so Epidemical among our late Wits. For, even the worst of Scepticks
will grant that an Identical Proposition must be True; and he may see here,
that by this Doctrine both First Principles must be such, and that all force of
Consequence also (which two are the main Pillars of Science) must be grounded
on such.

This last. requires and supposes that none of the Words which are to signify
any of the three Terms be taken there Equivocally. For, if any of them be taken
now in one sense, now in another, that is, if any of these words have, in the
same Syllogism, two Meanings or Notions; then, however the Sound or Character
o^ that Word may seem the same in a Verbal Syllogism, and make a show of its
having only Three Terms; yet, in a Mental Syllogism, (which only is Formally
and Essentially such) there are Four Notions of the Extremes, that is, four
Terms. Wherefore such a Discourse (if it be indeed at all such, and not a mere
Blunder) is a Paralogism, or a Fal^e and Deceitful Argumentation, and not a
Syllogism; because a Syllogism ought to be apt to prove the Connection of Two
Terms by their joint-Connexion with a Third, and therefore can consist but of
Three Terms.

8. It is most requisite also that a Syllogism be framed after the best Manner;
which is done by disposing all its parts in such a Figure as may make the
Connection of the Middle Term with the other Two most Clear; For, we experience
that the placing the Words aptly, renders every Common Discourse clearer; much
more is it requisite in so Nice and Exact a Discourse as a Syllogism is, where
there are but Three Terms to be placed.

9. To place the Parts of a Syllogism right, no more is requisite but to place
rightly the Middle Term in the Premises. For, the Proposition that is to be
Concluded or Proved, and consequently the order of its Terms, is given us to
our hands, and already determin^d; and the C^pula must of necessity still keep
its own place. So that nothing more can be required but to place rightly the
Middle Term in the Premises; for, that done, the Place of the other two Terms,
conjoined with it there, must (as will appear presently) be likewise
necessarily determined; and, so, all the parts of the Syllogism will be placed
and ordered as they ought to be.

10. The Middle Term is then placed rightly, when it is placed in the Middle, or
between those other two Terms which it is to conjoyn with one another. This is
evident by the Light of Nature; for, were it not joined to both, it could not
be the Means of conjoyning them; nor could it be joined to both, unless its
Notion were in the middle or between both:

11. Hence the Middle Term must be Inferior in Notion to one of those Terms,
and Superior to the other. For, since (as has been shown above) Notions do
arise orderly from the Inferior to the Superior ones; it follows, that that
Notion is in the Middle between other two which is Inferior to one of those
Notions and Superior to the other.

12. Wherefore the middle Term must, in the two Propositions which are the
Premises, be the Subject to one of the Terms, and the Predicate to the other.
For, since the middle Term must be Inferior in Notion to one of those Terms,
and Superior to the other; and the Inferior or Narrower Notion, by virtue of
its place, B. 2. l. ^. ^. 14.
is to be the Subject, and the Superior and Larger Notion the Predicate; it
follows that the Middle Term must be the Subject in one of the Premises, and
the Predicate in the other.

For Example, in this Syllogism.

Virtue is Laudable, Courtesy is a Virtue, therefore Courtesy is Laudable.
The Proposition (Courtesy is Laudable) is the Conclusion, and to be Proved;
and so, the placing of it is Terms is already determined: The middle Term
[Virtue] is placed in the middle, being subject to, or under Laudable in the
Major, and above or Superior to Courtesy in the Minor.

13. Though the place of the Terms of the Conclusion were not determined, yet the
reason lately given would determine it. For if Laudble be above Virtue, and
Virtue above Courtesy, it must follow a fortiori tht Laudable must be above
Courtesy, which is the lowest of the Three; or, that Laudable must be the
Predicate in the Conclusion.

14. Wherefore the other two Figures are Unnatural and Monstrous; For, since
Nature has shown us that what conjoyns two Notions ought to be placed in the
middle between them, it is against Nature and Reason to place it either above
them both, as is done in that they call the Second Figure, or under them both,
as is done in that Figure they call the Third.

15. Hence no determinate Conclusion can follow in either of the last Figures
from the disposal of the parts in the Syllogism: For, since as appears 13. the
Extreme which is predicated of the middle Term in the Major, has thence a title
to be the Predicate in the Conclusion, because it is above the Middle Term,
which is the Predicate or above the other Extreme in the Minor; it follows
that, if the Middle Term be twice above or twice below the other two Terms in
the Premises, that Reason ceases; and, so, it is left indifferent which of the
other two Terms is to be the Subject or Predicate in the Conclusion; and the
Indeterminate Conclusion follows not from the Artificial Form of the Syllogism,
but merely from the material Identity of all the three Terms; or from this,
that their Notions are found in the same Ens. Wherefore from these Premises,
Some Laudable thing is Virtue, Courtesy is a Virtue,


Or from these, Virtue is Laudable, Some Virtue is Courtesy,


The Conclusion might either be, Therefore Courtesy is Laudable, or Some
Laudable thing is Courtesy.
So that to argue on that fashion, or to make use of these awkward Figures, is
not to know certainly the End or Conclusion we aim at, but to shoot our bolt at
no determinate Mark, since no determinate Conclusion can in that case follow.

16. From these eight last. it is manifest that nothing can be more Unnatural
and more Inartificial, than to invent two other Figures, and then to study how
to lay many Elaborate Rules how to reduce them again to the First. For, it will
appear by our last Discourse, that this is no better than to use our Wits to
contrive how to Err and go out of the way* and, when that is done, to take
twice as much pains in showing how we may get into it again; whenas we might
easily have stayed in the right way when we were in it, and have saved all that
Misspent Labor.

17. Wherefore, if an Adversary puts a Syllogism in Baroco or Bocardo, or in
any Mood of the two last misshapen Figures, the Respondent ought, by the Reason
here given, to show him plainly, and then tell him roundly, that his Syllogism
is Illogical and Inartificial, and require of him to mend it. And, if the
Opponent, to justify his proceeding, alleges Universal Custom of the Schools,
then to tell him smartly that no Authority, Custom or Prescription ought to be
allowed as a Just Plea against Reason in Matters subject to Reason; And that
Art ought to perfect, and not to pervert Nature. Nor can the Arguer have any
Just Reason to make use of those two last Figures, since (as will shortly be
shown) all Questions what ever may be proved in the First Figure. Nay, he will
be convicted of seeking to blunder and obscure Truth, and not to clear it;
since he leaves a plain and easy path of Reasoning for an Intricate and
Perplexed one.

LESSON II. Of the several Manners or Moods of a Syllogism; and of the Laws of
Concluding.
1. THE Right Figure or Position of the Lesser Parts of a Syllogism, ( viz.
it is Terms) being shown to be but one, and the force of it is Consequence, in
which consists it is Essence, being still the same; the Variety of Syllogisms,
or the several sorts or Moods of them can only be taken from its greater Parts,
the Propositions, or from something belonging to them. This is manifest,
because there is nothing, besides these, from which the Distinction of those
Moods can be taken.

2. The Moods of Syllogisms may be in part taken from the Quantity of the
several Propositions. For, since the Essence of a Syllogism, or the force of
Consequence does consist in the Connection or Identification of Two Terms with a
Third; and, to be universally or particularly Identify'd, are evidently diverse
Manners of being Identify'd; It Is manifest that the variety of Syllogisms may
be in part taken from the Quantity of the Propositions.

3. The Moods, or several manners of Syllogisms must be taken also in part from
the Propositions being Affirmative or Negative: For, since Affirmative
Propositions do express the Agreement of the two Extremes with the Middle Term,
and those which are Negative their Disagreement with it; and this Agreement or
Disagreement with it have equal Influence upon the Consequence, and diversifie
it, or make it follow after a diverse manner; it follows that the Moods or
Manners of a Syllogism must also be taken from those Propositions being
Affirmative or Negative.

4. As it is self-evident that the same is the same with it self; so it is
equally self-evident that what is Different or Diverse from another is not the
same with it, or different from it. This is Evident both by the Rule of
Contraries, as also because this Proposition is Identical as well as the other.

5. The Quantity and Quality which ought to be in the several Propositions of
the Syllogisms of each Mood, are by a kind of Art of Memory, signified by these
four words, Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Fe^i^ in which the three Syllables
correspond to the three Propositions found in a Syllogism; and the Vowels in
each Syllable tell us the Quantity and Quality of each Proposition. A and E
signifying an Universal Affirmative and Negative; I and O a Particular
Affirmative and Negative.

6. We are also to reflect on what was shown above, that, in the way of
Predication, an Universal is considered as a kind of Whole in respect of the
Particulars contained under it, and the Particulars are conceived to be Parts
of that Whole; whence an Universal Proposition expresses the Identity of its
Terms in the Whole or Totally, and a Particular one but in part.

7. The distinction of Moods may also in some part be taken from the
Conclusions in the several Syllogisms. For, since those Conclusions are all of
them Propositions, and all Propositions (Singular ones excepted, as not
belonging to Science) must be either Universal Affirmatives or Universal
Negatives, Particular Affirmatives, or Particular Negatives; and the Vowels in
the last Syllable of those four Words do answer to all these several
Conclusions, and the two Vowels in the two former Syllables of each word do
tell us of what Nature the Premises must be, if we would conclude such
Propositions: it follows that the number of those several Moods, or several
manners of Concluding, may, in some sort, be taken from the Propositions that
are to be proved or Concluded, as from the End we aim at, and by which we are
to contrive or cast our Premises.

8. Hence, as we showed before there ought to be but one Figure, so it is shown
here, that there can be no more Moods of that Figure Necessary but these Four
now mentioned; because these do fully direct us (as far as concerns the Form of
a Syllogism) how to Conclude or Prove all the several Questions or Theses that
can be asked, or propos^d to be Proved. And, since all these Moods do belong to
that which they call the First Figure, hence also, by the way, is farther
confirmed what we proved above, that there cannot need, and therefore ought not
to be, any more than that one Figure.

9. But, because in treating of the Method to Science, we ought not to deviate
from that Method our selves while we are showing it to others; hence, we become
obliged not barely to tell the Reader, as it were by rote, how the Syllogisms
in each Mood do conclude, or by pretty Inventions to help their Memory how to
do this; but we are bound to inform their Understanding, and to show them why
such Premises must necessarily infer such Conclusions as those four Words do
hint to us; or, which is in a manner the same, why or for what reason such
Conclusions must follow from such Premises.

10. As the substance of the Connection of the Terms in the Conclusion depends
wholly on the Connection of them with the Middle Term in the Premises, so the
Degree of their Connection in the Conclusion must depend on the Degree of their
Connection with it in the said Premises. This is evident, because all the
Connexions those Extremes have, is from their Connection with the Medium;
wherefore, if they be more Connected with the Middle Term in the Premises,
they must be more Connected with one another in the Conclusion; if less, less
Connected.

11. Hence, from two Premises which are both of them Universal Affirmatives
must follow a Conclusion Universally Affirmative; because the Middle Term in
the Premises was Totally or Universally the same with one of the Extremes, and
the other Extreme Totally or Universally the same with it; whence follows, that
those Extremes must be Totally or Universally the same with one another in the
Conclusion. For example.

Bar-Every Body is Divisible, ba-Every Atome is a Body, therefore ra-Every
Atome is Divisible.
12. When one of the Extremes is Universally denied of the Medium in the Major,
and the Medium Universally Affirmed of the other in the Minor, the Conclusion
must be an Universal Negative. For, were the Extremes to any degree the same in
the Conclusion, when one of them is Totally the same with the Medium in the
Minor, and Totally not the same with it in the Major, it would follow that the
Middle Term would be (in part at least) not the same with it is self, as being
in part Identify'd with two Extremes, which are not Identify'd at all. For
Example.

Ce -- no Indivisible thing is Corruptible, la -- Every Spirit is an
Indivisible thing, therefore rent -- No Spirit is Corruptible
13. When one of the Premises affirms Universally, the other Particularly, the
Conclusion must be a particular Affirmative. For though one of the Extremes be
Universally or Totally connected with the Medium, yet the other Extreme is but
Particularly or in part Connected with it: and so, it can never infer the Total
Connection of them, nor can the Conclusion be an Universal Affirmative See. 10
because they were not to that degree Connected with the Medium in the
Premises. For Example, Da -- Every Good Man is Charitable, ri -- Some Rich Man
is a Good Man; Therefore i -- Some Rich Man is Charitable.


14. When one of the Extremes is Universally denied of the Medium, and the
Medium particularly affirmed of the other Extreme, the Conclusion must be a
particular Negative. For, were the Terms Totally the same in the Minor, as it
was in Celarent, then the Terms of the Conclusion had been not at all the same,
but Universally denied of one another as it was there; wherefore, being but in
part the same in the Minor, they can only be in part not the same in the
Conclusion. For Example, Fe-No harmful thing is to be used, ri -- Some Mirth is
a harmful thing, therefore o -- Some Mirth is not to be used.


From these Grounds, the Reason may be given for diverse Maxims or Axioms,
commonly used by Logicians, concerning this present matter; telling us when and
how the Conclusions follow or not follow; such as are,

15. From two Universal Negatives nothing follows. Because neither Extreme is
Connected with the Medium, either in whole or in part; nor, from this that two
Notions are different from a Third, is it consequent that they are or are not
the same thing with one another. Wherefore, a Syllogism being such an
Artificial and perfectly ordered Discourse, that, putting the Premises to be
True, the Conclusion must be True also, such as this (and the same may be said
in part of those other that follow) wanting that due Connection of the Terms
which is Essential to a Syllogism; are not Syllogisms, but Paralogisms, v. g.

No Brute is Rational No Man is a Brute; Therefore No Man is Rational
16. From two particular Propositions nothing follows. For a Particular
Proposition expressing but some part of the whole Notion of the Middle Term
with which it is joined, and there being more parts in that whole Notion, one
of the Extremes may be united with it according to one part or Consideration of
it, and the other according to another part; in which case it cannot follow
they are united at all with one another in the Conclusion: v. g.

Some Man is a Fool. Some Wise Man is a Man, Therefore Some Wise Man is a Fool
Where some Man, the Medium, is taken for a diverse Part as it were, of Man in
common; and so the Medium, as considered according to it is Parts which are
Diverse, is not One it self: nor, consequently, can it unite others by it is
being one or the same with it is self, which is the Fundamental Ground of all
Consequence.

Corol. Hence follows immediately that one of the Premises must be an
Universal, else nothing is Concluded. Which deserves Remarking, this being
useful to confute some Wrong Methods to Science.

17. A Negative Conclusion cannot be deduced from Affirmative Premises.
Because, if the Extremes were the same with the Medium in the Premises, and
not the same with one another in the Conclusion, it would follow that the
Middle Term is the same and not the same with it self; or else, that the
Connection or Inconnexion of the Terms in the Conclusion is not to be taken from
the Connection or Inconnexion with the Middle Term in the Premises, which
utterly subverts all Ground of Discoursing.

18. The Conclusion cannot be Universal, unless the Medium be once taken
Universally in the Premises. Because, otherwise, both the Premises would be
Particulars; from which (as was proved. 16.) no Conclusion can follow.

19. The Conclusion always follows the worser part; that is, it must be
Negative or Particular, if either of the Premises be such. The reason of the
former is, because, if either of the Premises be Negative, then the Medium is
not the same with one of the Terms of the Conclusion; and, therefore, it can
never be the cause of Identifying them both, which is done by inferring an
Affirmative Conclusion. The reason of the latter is, because if it be only in
part the same with one of the Extremes, it cannot prove those Extremes to be
wholly the same, which can only be done by their being united with it
universally; for it can give no greater degree of Connection to the two Extremes
than it self has with them, as was shown. 10.

These Maxims or Positions being shown to be Rational, and necessarily
Consequent to the Grounds of Rigorous or Syllogistical Discoursing, we proceed
in our intended Method.

20. A Singular Proposition may supply the Place of a Particular one in the
Minor of Darii and Ferio. For a Singular or Individual Notion is, in reality,
some part of the Common Notion; and the words [Some Man] or [Some Men] do
signify some Individual Man, or Men; wherefore, abating the manner of the
Indeterminate Expression, the sense is the same in both. Hence these are right
Syllogisms and Conclusive.

Da-Every Philosopher resolves Effects into their Proper Causes, ri --
Aristotle is a Philosopher; therefore i -- Aristotle resolves Effects into
their Proper Causes. Fe-No Man who supposes his Grounds gratis is a
Philosopher, ri -- Epicurus supposes his Grounds gratis; therefore, o --
Epicurus is not a Philosopher.
21. Expository Syllogisms, that consist of Singular Propositions are true and
perfect Syllogisms. For, since a Syllogism is such a Discourse as from the
Clear Connection of a Middle Notion with the two Extremes inferrs the Connection
of those Extremes with one another, and Singulars have their Notions as well as
Universals, and may be connected with one another; it follows that (in case
these Discourses be not Faulty in other respects) they cannot, from the regard
of their consisting wholly of Singulars, be degraded from being true and
perfect Syllogisms. v. g.

Tom Long brought me a Letter This Man is Tom Long; Therefore This Man brought
me a Letter.
22. Such Syllogisms do not advance Science. For, since we experience that our
Soul is not only Capable of having Universal Notions, but that it is her
peculiar Nature to Abstract, that is, to draw Singular Notions to Universal
ones; and, since Notions are the Ground of all Knowledge, and, consequently,
Universal Notions of Universal Knowledges; and Science is a Perfection of our
Mind according to her Nature; and, therefore, does dilate and enlarge her
Natural Capacity by Extending it to the Knowledge of Universal Truths:
Wherefore, since, on the other side, an Expository Syllogism, as consisting of
Singulars; can Conclude, or gain the Soul knowledge of no more but some one
Singular, it Cramps, Contracts or makes Narrow her Natural Capacity; whence it
follows, that such Syllogisms are far from Perfecting the Soul, or from
generating Science, which is her Natural Perfection.

23. Hence follows, that such Syllogisms are good for Use and Practice, and
only for That: For, since such Syllogisms are True Discourses, and, therefore,
are not wholly in vain, but must be good for something; Wherefore, since they
conduce not at all to Speculation or generating Science; it follows that they
must be good for Use or Practice, and for that only. Again, since all Outward
Action, Use and Practice is wholly employed about such Subjects as Exist, and
nothing Exists but Suppositums, Individuums, or Singulars; it follows, that
Singulars are the Proper Subjects of Artificers, or such as work Outwardly upon
Determinate Matters; and the Knowledge of the Nature of those Singulars is
Useful and Necessary for such men; for, by this, they know how to work upon
those Subjects and Manage them accordingly. For example, an Architect by
knowing the certain Quantities and Proportions of his Materials (Wood, Brick,
or Stone,) may build a House; but he cannot, without the Science of
Mathematics, have a Clear knowledge (out of the Natures of those Quantities)
why it must be so always, though it hit to do so once, or hic est nunc.

Note that Practical Self evidence may oftentimes (as was shown formerly) in a
great Measure supply here the place of Science, and Operate like it; though it
can never arrive to that Clear and Grounded Penetration into the reasons of
such, Actions as is found in Scientifical Men.

24. Hence, the way of arguing by Induction can never breed Science. First,
because out of pure Particulars nothing follows. Next, because to Argue from
some Part or Parts to the Whole, is Inconsequent. Wherefore, we cannot thence
Infer an Universal Proposition or gain Science of any Nature, unless we could
enumerate all the Singulars in the World, that is, all the Parts so to make up
an Equivalent to the Whole, which is Impossible.

25. Hence follows immediately that some Universal Proposition must be taken in
if we would Conclude any thing from a Singular one. This has been amply Showed
above; and, accordingly, in Mathematics Universal Maxims and Axioms use to be
first laid, without which nothing in any Subject can be known scientifically.

26. Further, it is collected from our former Discourse that Hypotheticall or
Conditional Syllogisms are, in proper Speech, no Legitimate Syllogisms; nor,
consequently, can they generate Science, but by seeing, in common and
confusedly, they are the same in sense with Categorical ones. For, since we
cannot see Evidently the Truth of any Conclusion or have Science of it, but by
seeing Evidently the Connection of the Two Extremes with the Middle Term; and,
this cannot be seen Evidently unless all the Terms be posturd in their right
place, as is done in the First Figure; therefore, since neither this Clear
Position of the Terms, nor any thing like it, is found in Hypothetical
Syllogisms, they are not in proper Speech, Syllogisms; any more than are some
sort of more concise Rhetorical Discourses, which have oftentimes virtually the
sense of a Categorical Syllogism in them, though the parts of it be disjoynted
and out of that due Order that ought to be in a Syllogism.

27. Wherefore all Hypothetical Syllogisms ought in Disputes to be reduced to
Categorical ones. For, the Major neither absolutely affirms nor denies; and
therefore cannot be absolutely either affirmed or denied. Next, the same Major
proposition has a kind of Consequence in its single self; and so is a kind of
imperfect Syllogism even taken alone. 3ly. It does not identifie it is Terms;
and, lastly, unless they be reduced to Categorical ones, the Figure of its
parts cannot clearly appear.

28. The way to reduce them is to vary the phrase or tenor of the Words, still
keeping the same sense.

For example this Hypothetical, (If Science be a perfection of the mind it
ought to sought after. But Science is a perfection of the Mind; Therefore
Science ought to be sought after.)


May easily be reduced to a Categorical Syllogism in Barbara thus.

What ever is a perfection of the Mind ought to be looked after. But all
Science is a perfection of the mind, therefore All Science ought to be looked
after.
29. For some of the same reasons Disjunctive Syllogisms ought to be reduced to
Categorical ones, as It is either Day or Night. But it is not day; Therefore
It Is Night.


Which may be reduced to a Categorical in Darii thus.

Da-What ever time is not Day is Night ri -- This present time is not Day,
therefore i -- This present time is Night.
LESSON III. Of the Matter of a Conclusive Syllogism; or, what Middle* Term is
proper for Demonstration.
THE right Manner of framing a Conclusive Syllogism, or of drawing a
Consequence right, which is the Form of it, being thus laid open from its
Grounds; there remains no more to be done as to the Attainment of Science, but
to show what is the proper Matter of such a rigorous Discourse: For, since the
Matter and Form do constitute the whole Essence or Nature of every thing; if
both these be made known, there can nothing more be wanting for us to conclude
or prove Evidently; which is the sole end and aim of the whole Art of Logic.
Wherefore, all the elaborate Rules that occurr in common Logicians, which
conduce not to this end, are Frivolous, and merely invented for vain Show and
Ostentation; and are so far from advancing Science, that they pester the way to
it by making in more Perplexed and Intricate, which obstructs the attainment of
it.

2. Such a Middle Term as is Proper to conjoyn the other two is the only Matter
of a Conclusive Syllogism. For; since there can be in a Lawful Syllogism but
Three Terms, and Two of them are given to our hands in the Thesis to be proved,
and the right Placing of those Terms belongs to the Form of it; there is no
Consideration left that can be conceived to be the Matter of it, or which,
joined with the Former, makes it Evidently Conclude, but such a Middle Term
which is apt to conjoyn the other Two in the Conclusion.

3. Wherefore, such a Term being found and ordered in the right Form, nothing
more can be required to gain Science of any Proposition whatever. For, this
done, the Conclusion so necessarily follows, that it is as Impossible it should
not be True as it is that an Identical Proposition should be False; or (which
is the same) that a Contradiction should be True, which are the highest
Impossibilities. Wherefore, since to have Science of any thing, is to know
evidently the thing is so and cannot but be so, and this is known by the means
now mentioned; it follows that no thing more can be required to gain Science of
any Proposition whatever.

4. Hence such a Syllogism is Demonstrative, and to produce or frame such a
Syllogism is to Demonstrate: For, since a Demonstration bears in its Notion
that it must be the most Certain and most Evident Proof than can be; and no
Proof can be more Certain than that which renders it absolutely Impossible the
Conclusion should not be True; nor more Evident than that which engages
immediately the highest Evidence of an Identical Proposition; and all this (as
has been proved) is found in a Syllogism consisting of such a Matter and such a
Form, it follows that such a Syllogism is a Demonstrative one, and that to
Prove by such a Syllogism is to Demonstrate.

5. All Middle Terms that are Proper for Demonstration must be taken Originally
from the Nature of the Thlng or from it is Metaphysical Verity, For, since all
Inferior Truths are therefore such because they are finally resolvable into
Identical Propositions which are the First Truths; that is, because those First
Truths are virtually in them; and Identical propositions are therefore true
(because the thing is what it is, in which consists its Metaphysical verity; it
follows that the Verity of all Inferior Truths (such as are the Premises) on
whose Truth all Demonstration and Truth of the Conclusion necessarily depends,
is taken originally from the Metaphysical verity of the Subject and Predicate.
Again, since (as has been shown) the force of all Consequence is grounded on
this that the Middle Term is the same with it is self, or what it is; It follows
that the Force of all Middle Terms that any way conduce to Demonstration must
be taken originally from the Nature of the Thing, or from it is Metaphysical
Verity.

6. We can have no Demonstration of the Whole Thing taken in gross. For, the
Whole Thing, as was said, may be considered diverse ways, and so ground many
Notions, and contains in it confusedly what corresponds to all those Notions we
can frame of it; since then we cannot have at once a Distinct and Clear
knowledge of what corresponds formally to any two Notions, it follows that we
can have no Demonstration (or Distinct and Clear Knowledge) of the whole thing
taken in Gross.

7. Wherefore, if we would demonstrate the Nature of the Thing according to
what is Essential to it, we must take in pieces, Unfold, Explicate, and, as it
were, Detail the Thing into it is Essential Parts, that so we may look more
clearly through it is Nature or Essence; which is done by Definitions of the Whole
first, and then of it is several Essential Parts, till we come to those Parts of
it which are most known, or to the Common Head. For, we experience that we have
but a Confused Notion of a Thing while it is expressed but in One Word; but, when
Many Words are used to tell the Nature of it, our knowledge of it grows Clearer,
and still more Clear and Distinct after each of those Words also has It Is
Meaning told, or is Defind. For Example, ask what such a Thing is, it is
answered a Man; which gives us, indeed, a True but a Confused Knowledge of it.
Whence we may have occasion to ask farther what is a Man? and the Answer is a
Rational Animal; which clears the Notion of Man to a fair degree. But, the word
Animal is also Confused, though less than Homo was; wherefore, to gain a more
Distinct Knowledge of it, we set our selves to define It, and we find it to be a
Living or Self-moving Thing that is Sensitive, or which is moved by Impression
on the Senses. And thus still to gain Clearer Light of more and more Essential
Notions or Considerations of Man, we may drive on farther the Definitions of
the ascending Genus till we come to Ens or Substantia, which is the Supreme in
that Line, (and the Clearest of any except Existence) which stints our quest.
By which way of defining still upwards, we gain many Distinct Notions of Man's
Essence, which were before confusedly blended in the single word [ Man]. And,
were the Collateral Differences, which constitute the Inferior notions to Ens,
Defined too as well as each Genus, descending in a right Line from it, we
should gain a most Distinct and clear Essential Notion of Man.

8. It remains to define the Difference [ Rational] which is the other
Essential Notion that compounds the Entire Notion of Man. If we ask then what
Reason is, it will be answered that it is a Faculty of Deducing some new
knowledge out of foregoing ones; or (to express it in the Language of Art) to
draw a Proposition called the Conclusion from two other true ones called the
Premises. To know more distinctly what this Definition means, we may ask what
a Proposition is, and what True means, and it will be answered that a
Proposition is defined, A Speech by which one Notion is Affirmed (or Denied) of
another. Next, ask what a Notion is and we are answered by the Definition of
it, that a Notion is the very Thing as conceived by us, or, the Thing as
existing in our Understanding. Ask what True is, it is answered, it is the
Conformity of what is in our Mind to the Thing without us. Ask what Affirming
is, it is answered, it is the Comparing one of the Terms of ^he Proposition to
the other, or seeing they both ^gree in the same Ens. Ask what Deducing is, and
it is answered it is a Comparing two Terms ^o a Third, and seeing them to be the
same with it, and thence the same with one another; All which being known, we
shall have gained ^he Distinct and Clear Notion of Reasoning or Exact
Discoursing, and consequently of Rationa^ity, the Power which produces that Act.

9. Hence Proper Middle Terms may be taken from the Line of Ens (and the same
may be said of any other Common Head) for Demonstrations of any Truth that
belongs Essen^ially to any Notion or Nature in those ^espective Lines. For they
are taken from the Definitions, afforded us by the Genus and Dif^erence in each
Line, both parts of which De^initions are Essential.

10. Though when it happens otherwise it wrongs not the Demonstration, yet this
is best done when the Superior Notion is predicated of that which is the
Immediate Inferior, and that Inferior of the Notion immediately under it. For
then the Middle Term is not by our Choice or Ordering, but ex natura rei placed
in the middle between them. as Every Animal is a Living thing, Every Man is an
Animal, therefore Every Man is a Living thing. Every Man is an Animal. Peter is
a Man, therefore Peter is an Animal.


10. The same may be said when any of the Intrinsecal Differences is used for
the Middle Term; even though it be Remote, in the same Line, from one of the
Extremes; as Every Sensitive thing is an Animal, Every Worm is a Sensitive
thing; Therefore Every Worm is an Animal.


The same holds in all the rest, whether they be Generical or Differential
Notions; whether Immediate or Mediate. For, the same Reason concludes for one
as for the other. viz. because all such are Essential Predicates; and, being
found in the same Essence, are not only Identify'd in the same Thing
materially, as is done when in a true Proposition the Subjects and Predicates
are in Distinct Lines as Aethiops est niger; but being, either expressly, or by
consequence, Included in some part of the Definition, the Formality of one is,
in some part, the Formality of the others; as the Notions of Ens, Corpus,
Mixtum, Vivens, Sensituum, are found in part to be Formally in the Entire
Notion of Homo.

The Art of Dividing right is requisite to make exact Definitions. Because the
Genus and one of the Proper Differences that divide that Common Notion do
constitute and integrate the Definition.

Note that the Genus must be Immediate; because, otherwise, it confounds the
Intermemediate Notions with the Species; and, so, gives a less-distinct
Conception of the Notion to be defined. Hence, Ens or Vivens Rationale is not a
good Definition of Homo; because Ens and Vivens do but Confusedly, or in part,
speak the Notion or Nature of Animal. Nor is Rationale the Proper and Immediate
Difference of Ens and Vivens.

12. Hence Dichotomy, or a Division made by two Members, is the best. For, in
such a Division, the Parts, if rightly expressed, may be most easily seen to be
Equivalent to the Whole.

That Dichotomy in which the Members are Contradictory is the very best
Division that can be imagined. As that of Ens into Divisible and Indivisible;
(that is not-Divisible) of Animal into Rational and Irrational; (that is
not-Rational) of Number, into Odd and Even (or not-Odd) For, since there can be
no Middle between Contradictories, it is Evident there can be no more Members
than Two; and, consequently, that those Two parts are Equivalent to the Whole.

13. The Whole Definition, and All the Members of a Division that is rightly
made, (if taken together,) may be a proper Medium for a Demonstration. For both
of these, taken together, are Equivalent to the Whole Notion Defined and
Divided; and may as well be a Middle Term as that Whole Notion expressed by one
word, as by Man. Animal, etc. v. g.

Every Rational Animal is capable of Science, Every Clown is a Rational Animal,
therefore Every Clown is Capable of Science.
Whatever is either Even or Odd is capable of Proportion, All Number is either
Even or Odd, therefore All Number is capable of Proportion.
14. Out of what has been proved it is seen that Definitions are one of the Best
Instruments or Best Means to attain Science. For, since all Knowledge is taken
from the Nature of the Thing; and, therefore all Distinct and Clear Knowledge
(such as Science ought to be) from the nature of the Thing distinctly and
clearly represented; and this (as has been shown) is done by Definitions; it
follows that Definitions are one of the Best Instruments or Best Means to
attain to Science.

15. Another use to be made of Definitions in order to Demonstration is this;
when two Notions, by being Remote, seem in a manner Disparate, and, so, the
Proposition is Obscure; we are to pursue home the Definitions of each of the
Terms till something that is Formally Identical appears in both of them, Which
done, all farther disquisition ceases, and the Point is demonstrated. For
example; If we would prove that Virtue is Laudable, we shall find that the word
[ Laudable] signifies [ deserving to be spoke well of] and Practical
Self-Evidence, as well as Reason, telling us, that, our Speech being nothing
but Signs agreed on by Mankind to express their thoughts, that thing deserves
to be spoken well of which deserves to be thought well of; and that what is
according to the true Nature of him that speaks or thinks, or to true Reason,
deserves to be judged by him Right and Good, that is, thought well of, To which
add that Virtue is nothing but a Disposition to Act according to True Reason,
it comes to appear that [ Virtuo] and [ Laudable] have something couch't in
their notions that is Formally Identical; and that this Proposition, [ Virtue
is Laudable] is full as Certain as that What Is according to right Reason is
according to right Reason, or what is Laudable is Laudable; which seen, perfect
Knowledge is had of the Truth of [ Virtue is Laudable] that is, it is the
Proposition; Evidently Concluded or Demonstrated.

Note hence that, in Resolving Truths thus into first Principles, Rigorous
Definitions do not always need, but Explications of the two Notions (or of the
Meaning of the Words that express the two Terms) may serve, so they be True and
Solid; since no more is necessary in this case but to resolve the Inferior
Truths, and the Notions that compound them, into Superior ones. For which
reason also Practical Self-evidence, or a Knowledge agreed on by all Mankind in
their Natural Thoughts, through Converse with those Natural Objects, is
sufficient: For this is a Solid Knowledge, though it be not lick't into Artificial
shape. Whence it may Suffice oftentimes without Framing the Demonstration,
coucht in these Discourses, into a Syllogistick Method; unless the Form of the
Discourse be Denied.

16. Hence follows, that All Truths have at the bottom Identical Propositions,
and are Grounded on them. For, since all Truths are therefore such, because
they are Conformable to the Nature of the Thing, or to its being what it is,
which is expressed by an Identical Proposition; it follows that all Truths have
at the bottom Identical Propositions and are Grounded on them.

17. Hence every Error has at the bottom a fect Contradiction, and is grounded
on it. For, since all Truths, as being Conformable to the Nature of the Thing,
are grounded on the things being what it is, and so have an Identical
Proposition for their Bases; therefore, for the same reason, every Error, being
a Dis-conformity to the Thing, or a Deviation from its being what it is, must
be Grounded on this, as its first Principle, that the Thing is not what it is,
which is a perfect Contradiction.

18. Hence follows necessarily, that, if Art and Industry be not wanting, Every
Truth is Reducible to a Self evid^nt or an Identical Proposition, and every
Error to a Contradiction. For, since these (as has been proved) are the Bas^s
or bottom-Principles of all Truths and Falsehoods; and all Inferior
Propositions derive all their Truth or Falsehood from the First Truths or
Falsehoods, that is, from Identical Propositions or Contradictions; it follows
that, either no Truth or Falsehood can be finally known, or be Knowable or
Provable to be such; or else they must be Reducible either to Identical
Propositions or to Contradictions, as the Tests of their Truth or Falsity.

Corol. I. Hence follows that, all Learning being Knowledge, those Men only
ought to be accounted, Absolutely speaking, True Scholars or perfectly
Learned, who can thus settle Truth and confute Error; that is, thus
Demonstrate the Conformity of the Position he maintains to the Nature of the
Thing, or the Disconformity of his Adversaries Thesis to the Essence of the
Subject under Dispute. By which it will appear how Unjustly many Men are
esteemed Learned, by the Generality, merely for their having read a Multitude
of Authors: Since the Former know the Truth of the Things, or of the Subjects
discoursed of; These only know it to be True, that such and such Authors, say
thus or thus. Those are such Scholars as have God and Nature for their
Masters. These are only the Scholars of mere Men; who, if they take not this
way, speak out of Fancy, which is Ungrounded, and therefore Various and
Inconstant: Whence, such Men of Reading use to fill their Heads with a
gallimowfry of thrums ends of Sayings gleaned from diverse Logicians or
Philosophers discoursing thus or thus; but if you put them to Demonstrate any
point, or to Reduce it to its First Principles, they are utterly at a Loss. A
certain Sign they do not, in true speech, know any thing.

Corol. II. Were the Method of Reducing Truths, as is abovesaid, well settled,
Probability in Speculatives (which is the bane of Science) would be quite
dashed out of countenance, and shamed out of the Schools. To do which, how
highly it conduces to the Advancement of Science, is ^^sily discernible by the
dimmest Eye.

LESSON IV. How every Truth is to be Reduced to an Identical Proposition; and
consequently, every Error to a Contradiction; What Consequences follow thence
of one Truth being in another; and of the Science of Pure Spirits.
1. TO Reduce any Truth to an Identical Proposition is nothing but to show
clearly that, if you deny such a Truth, you must, by consequence, deny the
Identical one which is proper to that Subject, and expresses its being what it
is. For, since the Reducing Inferior Truths in any Subject to those which are
Supreme or Identical is performed by way of Discourse or drawing Consequences;
and, it is Evident that those Propositions which are Inferior Truths, and the
Supreme ones cannot be the same Formally and Expressly; it follows that they can
only be the same Virtually, or as one Truth is Included in another. Wherefore
as Deducing is nothing but Deriving downwards the verity which was in some
Higher Truths to the Inferior ones; so Reducing is the carrying upwards or
Resolving those Inferior Truths into those Higher ones on which they Depend,
and the showing them to be by consequence the Same; or that the Inferior
Thesis must needs be True, if the Identical or Supreme one be so; and that the
Supreme one cannot be True, unless the Inferior one be such also: So that the
verity of the Supreme Truth does by consequence stand engaged in the Patronage
of the Inferior one.

L^mma. All Essences consist in an Indivisible. For, since Essence is the Form
of the Ens, and Ens that which is Capable of Existing, and nothing can Exist
but that which is Ultimately determined in the line of Ens, and distinguished
from all others in that Line; and, any Essential Predicate taken away, it wants
Part of its Essence, that is, Part of that which was to Constitute it such an
Ens, and distinguish it from all others, that is, which Determine it to be This;
it follows that the Notion of Ens or Essence requires a Totality of all its
Essential parts: But a Totality (since the least part defalkt from it makes it
to be no Totum) consists in an Indivisibility; therefore All Essences consist
in an Indivisible.

2. Hence an easy way is chalkt out how to Reduce any Truth to an Identical
Proposition or any Error to a Contradiction. For, let but the Subject of the
Discourse ( Homo for example) be Defined, and the two parts of its Definition
be Defind likewise, and so forwards; we shall have gained a clear and distinct
Notion of the Subject, and of all its Essential parts. If, then, the Discourse
be about the Nature or Essence of Homo; all the Divisions of the parts of that
Essence, which are Common Notions, being (as they ought) made by Contradictory
Differences, and this from the Notion of Ens to the very Notion Discoursed of;
consequently, that Discourse must either evidently clash with and Contradict
some one of those Essential Parts, or Agree to them All. If it contradicts any
one of them, then, since Essences consist in an Indivisible, it does, by
consequence, destroy the whole Essence of the Subject, and make homo not to be
homo; and, if it Agrees with All its parts, then, since, All the parts are
evidently the whole, it is by consequence as Certain as it is that Homo is Homo;
since to say that Homo is an Ens, and such an Ens as is Corpus, and such a
Corpus as is Compounded, and such a Compound Body as is Vivens, and such a
Vivens, as is Sensitive or an Animal, and such an Animal as can have Notions in
it, and can Compare one Notion to another, and two to a Third, is evidently to
say in Equivalent Terms Homo est Homo:

3. Another Method of Resolving all Truths into Identical Propositions is to
Define both the Subject and Predicate, and to pursue their Definitions till
some Notion that is perfectly Identical appears in both; as is Instanced in
this proposition [Virtue is Laudable] in the last Lesson. 15.

4. Moreover, all Conclusions formally as such, that is, considering them as
Inferred or Concluded, are resolved finally into this Identical Proposition, [
The same is the same with its self] as has been demonstrated above B. 2. L. 3..
10.

5. Wherefore, the Method being settled of Reducing to Identical Propositions
both Inferior Truths, which are the Premises; and, also the Necessity of the
Following of the Conclusions from their respective Premises, which is the
Consequence; it is hard to conceive what can be farther wanting to the Method
to Science; so these Rules be thoroughly penetrated, and industriously put in
Practice.

6. All Truths whatever that concern the Essences of things, if we have but
Notions of the Terms of the Propositions which express them, do come within the
Compass of this Method, and are Demonstrable. For, since all Truths, whose
Terms we understand, do consist of Notions; and, its not hard to know to what
Common Head those Notions do belong, nor insuperably hard to Divide by Proper
Differences that Common Head; nor the less General Notions under that Head,
till we come to the very Notions whose Connection is in question; it follows,
that all Propositions belonging to any Head, are, for the same reason, equally
Reducible to their Proper Identicals; since all the Predicates in the nine last
Common Heads, which are Analogically Entia, have also their Analogical
Essences; of which we can have as clear and distinct Notions as we have of the
First Common Head which is properly Ens; and, so we can as easily define their
Abstract Notions as we can the other, (or rather much more easily) and
consequently Reduce them to their Identicals.

7. Hence we can Discourse Scientifically, or have true Science, not only of
Quantities, which are the Subject of Mathematics; but, with equal reason, of
Virtues and Vices, which are the Subject of Ethics. For, we can equally
Abstract the Notions of the several Virtues, have a Distinct Conception of
them, equally define them, and by that means equally Reduce them to their
Identicals. And the same may be said of other Qualities that affect our Senses
very distinctly, as Heat, Cold, Moist, Dry: etc.

Note, that in such as these, if it be too laborious to arrive at their
Definitions by dividing the Common Genus, as it often happens when the Dividing
Members are more than Two, and are not Contradictory to one another; then we
may frame our Definitions of them by observing the carriage of the Vulgar
toward them, or their Sayings concerning them, For such Qualities, being
sensible ones, are the Objects of the Senses of Mankind, and do imprint Lively
and Distinct Notions of themselves in all men. Wherefore their Sayings being
the Effect of the true Notions they have of them, they (if enough of them be
collected) must give us the true Notion of them; or which is all one, of what
they mean by the Word that expresses them, which is equivalent in Sense to a
perfect Definition. For example, when they speak of those Qualities we call Dry
and Moist, we shall observe that they are sollicitous lest Moist things should
squander and run about, and therefore they are careful themselves to put such
things in some Receptacle or Vessel that may keep them from doing so; or they
bid their Servants do it. On the Contrary, they bid them set Dry things on the
Cupboard, or on a Shelf; and never put them in a Vessel, or be at the needless
labor of pounding them into a Pot or Tub, out of fear they should squander
about. Which sayings and behavior of theirs gives us the Definitions of both
those Qualities; viz. that Moist is that which difficultly keeps its own bounds
or Figure, and is easily accommodated to the bounds of another thing; and Dry
is that which easily retains its own bounds or Figure, and is Difficulty
accommodated to the bounds of another; which are the very Definitions, which
that great Observer of Nature, Aristotle, gives us of those two Qualities.

Note II. Whence we may, with a humble Acknowledgment and Thanks, reflect on
the Infinite Goodness of the God of Truth, who unenviously bestows knowledge on
all, who will dispose themselves to receive it; that, wherever Art, by reason
of our Shortness, is at a plunge, he supplies it by Practical Self-evidence, or
the naturally instilled Knowledge of the Vulgar: whence it is a high Pride in
the greatest Men of Art, to conceit that they are above being still the
Children of Nature; whereas it is the best Title they have to True and Solid
Learning. -- Sus Minervam --

8. All Conclusions are virtually in the Premises; For, since the Premises,
by Means of the Middle Term and the right Placing of it, have in them the whole
force of the Consequence; and the Consequence cannot be of nothing but must be
of some Determinate Proposition, which can be nothing but the Conclusion; it
follows that all Conclusions are virtually in the Premises. Again, since,
before we Conclude Determinately and Expressly we must know what to Conclude,
and we know what to Conclude by knowing the Premises, and the Conclusion is
that Proposition which is to be Concluded; it follows evidently that, since we
know the Conclusion, ever we Actually Infer and Express it, to be in the
Premises, it is there virtually.

9. All Deduced Truths are virtually in one another. For, since all Deduced
Truths are Conclusions, and the Conclusions are virtually in the Premises; and
the same reason holds for all the following Conclusions as for the first, or
for one single one; it follows that, let there be never so many
orderly-succeeding Syllogisms necessary to prove any point, the Conclusions are
still in the Premises and the following ones in those that went before them.

10. All Truths are virtually in the Identical Propositions; and, consequently,
in the Definitions. For since all Truths are taken from the Nature of the
Things, and from their Metaphysical verity, and consequently are in the Nature
of the Thing fundamentally; and This is Contained and Expressed in the whole by
Identical Propositions, and in all its parts by the Definitions; it follows
that all Truths are Virtually contained in Identical Propositions, and,
consequently, in the Definitions.

11. From what is lately said, it is evinced that, if a Middle Term be taken
which is a Proper Cause or Proper Effect, the Conclusion is seen to be in the
Premises. For, though the Proper Causes and Effects be not the very Essence of
the Thing; yet, since an Effect is a Participation of the Cause, and so is apt
to manifest the Nature of the Proper Cause that produced it; and, the Operation
of a Proper Cause is nothing but the B. 1. L. 8.. 7.
Existence of such a Cause (which is suitable to its Essence) imprinted upon the
Patient; hence, such Mediums do Demonstrably and Mutually infer one another;
and therefore nothing hinders, but that the Conclusions may be seen to be in
the Premises as well in such Syllogisms as in those which have an Essential
Notion for their Middle Term.

12. Hence all Natural Truths, and this throughout the whole Course of Nature,
from the very Creation, are virtually in one another, For, since, as will be
more clearly seen hereafter, all those Natural Effects were Demonstrative of
their Proper Causes, and those Causes Demonstrative of their proper Effects;
and this from the First starting of Nature into Motion; and so were apt to
Infer one another all along; that is, new Conclusions were still apt to spring
from such Middle Terms Connected with the two Extremes in the Premises; and,
consequently, the Truth of those Conclusions were all along Virtually in those
several Premises; it follows that all Natural Truths are in one another, and
this throughout the whole Series or Course of Nature from the very Creation.

13. Hence, had we lived in every Place, and in every part of Time, where and
when those several Causes wrought those several Effects, and had been endowed
with Capacity Sufficient for such a performance, and not been diverted with
other thoughts from Application to that work; we might have actually
Demonstrated those Effects by their Proper Causes or those Causes by their
Proper Effects, through the whole Series or Course of the World, from the
beginning to the end; except Miracle had altered that Natural Course. For, in
that case, all those Subjects had afforded us Matter or fit Mediums for
Demonstration, as well as any single Subject does now; Wherefore, if we had had
wit enough to demonstrate as aforesaid, and that wit sufficiently applied in
every circumstance, it had been done.

14. Hence every Soul separated from the Body that knows any one Natural Truth
knows all Nature, and this all at once, at the first Instant of her Separation.
For, since all Nature is carried on by Proper Causes, and Proper Effects, and
those Mutually infer one another; that is, the Truth grounded on the one is
seen to be in the Truth grounded on the other, as being Virtually in one
another, and we experience that the Capacity of the Soul to know Truths is not
filled by knowing many Truths, but is Enlarged and Enabled to know still more;
and, being clear of the Body, she is not distracted by Objects working upon the
Senses and the Fancy, but intimately and necessarily present to her self, and,
consequently, to what is in her self; and so is Addicted, Applied and Naturally
Necessitated to know the Nature of her Body, and, consequently of her self, as
being the Form of that Body, and fitted for it; and, by her self to know all
the Truths Connected with the Knowledge of her self, that is (as was shown) all
Nature; and this, not Successively, one Truth after another, as she did when
she was in the Body and needed the Fancy, and so accommodated her manner of
working to its slow pace, but, being now a Pure Spirit and Indivisible* and so
not commensurable to Time, or to before and after, which are the Differences of
Time, she is to know all she could know in the first instant she was a Pure
Spirit, that is, at the Instant of her Separation. These things being evidently
so, it follows that every Soul separated from the Body, that knew any one
Natural Truth, knows all Nature, and this, all at once, in the first instant of
her Separation. But of this more hereafter.

Corol. I. Hence we may frame some imperfect Conception how our Science differs
from that of Angels, and how Angels must know things Intuitively. For, since
they have no Senses, they can have no Abstracted Notions by different
Impressions from the Objects on the Senses; nor, consequently, can they
Compound any two Notions to frame a Proposition; much less can they Discourse,
or Compare Two Notions to a Third, and so deduce thence New Knowledges, called
Conclusions: It is left therefore, that they must a tone view, comprehend
entirely the Metaphysical verity of the whole Thing, and all that is in it,
which we express by an Identical Proposition. Whence this Knowledge or
Intuition of theirs, abating the Composition found in an Identical Proposition
(which too is the least that is Imaginable) is the nearest akin to that which
we have of these Identicals. By which we see that the Supremum Infimi, in
respect of an Angel's and Man's manner of Knowledge, is (as the Order of
Entities requires) contiguous as it were, to that which is Superior to it.

Corol. II. Hence also is seen how a Separated Soul knows all things after a
different manner than Angels do. For, though the Substance of a Separated
Soul's Operation be Intuitive, as is the Angels; yet, because her natural
Genius led and forced her here to d^scourse and gather one Truth by another,
that is, to see one Truth in another; hence, she retains a modification or a
kind of tang of the Discoursiveness she had here, though she cannot in that
State exercise it; and that, though she cannot then actually deduce new Truths,
yet she sees all Truths as Deducible from one another, or following one another
by Consequence.

We may frame some imperfect conception how this passes by this course
Similitude. When we look upon a Picture called a Prospective, all the parts of
it are equally near our Eye in themselves, and we see them too all at once;
yet, they appear to us as if one of them were farther of than another, even to
a vast distance; observing still a perfect Order and decorum in their greater
Propinquity or Remoteness, according as those parts are more or less Shadowed
or Luminous. So the Soul knows all at once whatever is Knowable by her, and
they are equally near the Eye of her understanding; yet, because of her
acquiring them here by way of Discourse, that is, by proceeding from more-Clear
to less Clear Truths, she sees them as following one another, or, as it were,
beyond one another; because they were not to her in this state so clear as the
other in themselves, but depending on the others for their Evidence.

LESSON V. Of other Mediums for Demonstration taken from the Four Causes.
1. THere must necessarily be See B. 1. L. 8. * 8.
Four Causes concurring to every Effect in Nature. For, since Nothing can do
Nothing, it follows that Nothing can be Done, unless there be something that
Does or Acts, that is unless there be an Efficient Cause. Which Efficient must
act upon something or some Patient, which is the Matter on which it works, or
the Material Cause. And it must work something in that Matter, which, being
Received in it, must be some Form (either Substantial or Accidental) which must
consequently concur to that Action Formally, or be the Formal Cause of it.
And, since the Orderer of all Nature, or the First Cause, is an Intelligent
Being and not Blind Chance, (for what is Blind can Order nothing) and this First
Cause is the Adequate Governor of the World, and, being an Intelligent Being
acts Seeingly or with design, that is, with prospect of some End in every thing
that is done, how great or minute soever; and every Intelligent Creature that
administers the World, in their several Stations, under him* (wh^^her they be
Angels or Men) do, for the same reason, act Designingly too; that is, do
propose to themselves some end, Good, Reason or Mo^ive for which they Act, and
without which it is against their Nature to Act; and since Metaphysics do
clearly Demonstrate that the Immediate action of the First Cause is only to
give Being, and * the Economy of the World is administered Immediately by other
Intelligent Beings under him; hence, there must be a Final cause too for every
Effect that is done in the World, how small and inconsiderable soever it may
seem. Wherefore, there must necessarily be Four Causes concurring to ev^ry
Effect in Nature, viz. The Efficient, Ma^^rial, Formal, and Final. For Example,
in my Action of Writing a Letter, the Efficient Cause is my self: the Material
Cause, is the Paper; the Formal, the Characters drawn in the Paper; and the
Final, to gratify my friend, acquaint him with News, etc.

2. Hence we can demonstrate the An est of those Four Causes in the whole Mass
of Corporeal Nature, how Remote soever it is from us; and that they must concur
to every Effect, though we do not know the Quid est of them. The first part of
our Thesis is proved; For, since the An est of all those Causes, or that there
must be such four Causes necessarily concurring to every Effect, follows out of
the nature of Action, from the Subject^s being Quantitative and consequently
variable Substantially or Accidentally, and from the Supreme Agent's being
Intelligent; and these are equally found in all parts of the Universe, how
Remote soever they be, or in the whole Mass of Bodies; it follows that the same
Causes do concur to every Effect all over the World, as they do in those Bodies
near us, and with whose Operations we are acquainted. The Second part is
evident, since the knowledge of the An est or [ that there is something] may it
be known by Experience, though we know not what that thing is; as we experience
when we hit casually upon something in the dark, or run against it, though we
neither see or know what that thing is; or, when we see a thing a far off, we
know that that thing is, though as yet we know not what it is.

The Course of Nature is carried on by Efficient Cau^es and Effects; For since
a First Cause being supposed who is Infinitely Wise, he Administ^rs his
workmanship, the World, after the wisest and best manner; which is, that the
contexture of the whole be not loose and slack, but perfectly Coherent; nor can
this be done, among an infinite variety of Bodies, by any other means (so as to
make up the Course of Nature) but by making Effects necessarily follow from
their Causes; since, if that were not, the Course of Nature would be at a
stand, and need the Artificers hand at every turn to make it go on, which
argues an Imperfection in the Workmanship it self: it follows, that the Course
of Nature must be carried on by Efficient Causes and Effects.

4. The Course of Nature must be c^^ry'd on by such Efficient Causes and
Effects as (...) ^roper to one another. For, were ^ot ^^ese ^auses and Effects
Proper to one another* any (...) might do any thing, or suffer from any thing:
v. g. Fire might both heat, and cool, and m^i^ten; and Water might be as
combustible as dry Wood, and so of all the rest. In which case no man could
tell how to Order his Actions, or what Efficient Cause, or what Matter, rather
than another, he is to make use of to produce any Effect; nor, consequentl^,
sin^e ^uch Essences are ordained for such and such Ends, could the Essences or
Natures of things be Known or Distinguished more than in Outward Appearance.

5. Hence follows immediately that every such Proper Efficient Cause put to be
Actually Causing, must most necessarily produce (...) Proper Effect. For since
to Caus^ is (...) do and to do nothing is not to do, what (...) Actually
causing must cause something or pro^uce some Effect. An^ this Effect must be a
Proper one as has been proved.. 4.

6. All the Efficient Causes in Nature are Actually causing. For, since the
Virtue or Power of working is in the Efficient Cause it self, as being nothing
but it is Existence, and the Matter to be wrought upon is Quantitative, that is,
of it is own nature either Perfectly or Imperfectly Divisible, and Variable
innumerable Manners of ways according to it is Qualities; nor can it have an
Infinite Power of resisting the Efficiency of the least Cause, hence, it is apt
to have an Impression made upon it to some degree by any Quantitative Agent,
provided there be but Immediate Application of the Agent to the Patient, and
that it is pr^st upon it: But, there being no vacuum, immediate Application of
one Natural Body to another must needs be throughout all Nature; and the Course
of Nature consisting in Mo^ion, one Body must necessarily press upon that which
is next it. From all which it follows evidently that all the Efficient Causes
in Nature are Actually Causing.

7. From these Discourses it is evident that we can Demonstrate Proper Effects
from Proper Efficient Causes, which we call Demonstrating a priori; and Proper
Efficient Causes from Proper Effects, which is called Demonstrating a
posteriori. For, since a Cause and a Reason do only differ in this, that the
word [Cause] speaks the thing as it is in Nature, and [ Reason] the same thing
as it is in our understanding; and Proper Causes and Effects in Nature are
necessarily connected to one another, and, consequently, do Infer one another
naturally; it follows, that those Causes (and, for the same reason Effects) as
they are in our Understanding must be the Reason why one infers the other in
our Understanding: Whence follows, that those Causes and Effects can be u^'d as
Proper Middle Terms to Infer or Conclude one another. And, that Proofs made by
such Mediums are Demonstrative is clear; for no Proof can be more Clear than
that which is Grounded on those Notions or Natures being connected Naturally
and, so Connected that it is Impossible it should be otherwise; as it is shown
these are.. 5. and 6.

8. This is farther confirmed, because, Two Bodies that are Immediate, do Act
and Re-act, or are (in some respect) mutually Causes and Effects to one
another: For since their Existences (which is their Power of Acting) are
immediately Applied; and by the Course of Nature, consisting in Motion, pressed
upon one another; and no Natural Agent is of Infinite Power, nor consequently
can it subdue all the Resistance of the Patient in an Instant; it follows that,
till one of them be, by degrees, totally subdued, the Resisting Body must
necessarily, for the reason given, Re-act upon it; whence they will be, to some
degree or in some respect, Mutual Causes and Effects in regard of each other.

Corol. I. The carrying on this Connected Course of Natural Causes is called
Providence; and, as joined with a Course of Supernatural ones (Interior and
Exterior) perfecting and stre^gthening the Will all along to the very end, and
ripening Souls for Bliss (which we call Grace) is that which is truly meant by
Predestination; which sounds so terribly and is such ^ ^ugbea^ to those that
mis-understand it.

Cor^^. ^I. Every Step of this Order of Causes has Entity or Goodness in it.
For it is manifestly the Causing of Something by Something.

Corol. ^^I. Therefore it is directly against the (...) of ^^e First Cause to
cause, or lay any (...), for Sin. For, Sin (formally as such) has no kind of
Entity or Goodness in it, either ^etaphysical, Physical or Moral; but is
formally a mere Privation of some Entity or Goodness which ought to be in an
Intelligent Creature; whence it comes that, by falling-short here in using the
Means, that Creature falls short hereafter of attaining the End, which is only
attainable by such Means. To explicate which high Points fully is left to Solid
Divines. I mean such as do not guide themselves by mere Words, but by Reason
and Good Sense.

Corol. IV. Hence follows also that, were all the Efficient Causes that produce
any Effect, known to us, we could have no Accidental Predications, nor
consequently any Opinions; but the Effect would still be equally Demonst^able
from the Complexion of those Causes, as it is now from some one single
Efficient, as was hinted formerly.

Corol. V. Hence, to one that comprehends the Complexion of all Causes, there
could be no Chance; nor could such a Man have any Ground for such a Notion;
For, Chance (as the common use of the word tells us) signifies an Unseen or
Vnforeseen Cause; whereas no Cause is Unseen to him who sees Demonstratively
how all Natural Effects follow all along from the Causes, and that they cannot
but follow from such Causes.

Corol. VI. Hence, though we know not particularly the Quid est of this Exact
Order of the World, or the Course of Nature, because we Comprehend not all
Causes, nor know what Cause or Causes did all a long produce such Effects; yet,
since we know and can demonstrate the An est of this Order, or that the Course
of Nature is still carried on by Proper Causes and Effects; hence, we can
demonstrate there is no such thing as that Chimerical Cause, called Chance,
governing the World; which Fantastic whimsy is imputed to the Epicureans.

Corol. 7. Hence we can Demonstrate that every the least motion of a Fly or an
Insect, the Figure of every leaf of a Tree, or grain of Sand on the Sea Shore,
do come within the Compass of this Course of Nature, or Gods Providence; which
neglects not the least of his Creatures, but has a Superintendency over all.
Which Considerations, though they may at first sight seem Incredible and
paradoxical, and Stun our Reason; yet, after that, by recourse to our
Principles, we have recovered our dazzled sight, and clearly see they must be
True, will exceedingly conduce to raise our Souls connaturally to deep
Contemplations of Gods Infinite Wisdom, Goodness and Providence and ground in us
a perfect Resignation to his Will in all occurrences; and let us see and be
ashamed of our froward, proud, peevish and selfish humor, which nothing will
content but the having the Whole Course of Nature altered for our sakes; as if
the World were made merely for us, or that Causes should not have their Proper
Effects. Which being a Contradiction, is therefore, as Unreasonable and Foolish
as it is in a Man, that wants Money, to be angry that Two and Three Shillings
do not make Forty.

Corol. VIII. Hence, none can have just occasion to grumble at God's Providence
for Ill Successes. For, since we know a priori that God, he being Infinitely
wise, casts the whole Frame of the World, or the Course of Causes, in the most
perfect and best Order; to wish we should be otherwise, after we see that no
Causes can bring our endeavoring it to Effect, is to wish the Whole World
should be worse for the Interest of one Inconsiderable piece of it: which is
against Common sense and the Light of Nature to expect from a Common Governor,
who is to provide in the first place for the Common Good; and is even against
the Judgment and Generous Practice of diverse Heathens, who for the Common Good
of a Small part of the World, (their own Country) have not cared to ruin their
Private Concerns, nay to Sacrifice their Lives.

Corol. IX. On this Doctrine is grounded the Duty of Gratitude we owe to God
for all the Good we have, of what nature soever. For, it is hence seen
demonstratively, that God is as much the Giver of that Good, by laying such a
steady Course of innumerable Causes to convey it to us, as if he had given it
by his own hand Immediately; nay, it ought more to increase our Gratitude, to
see that he has Ordered such an Infinity of Causes, from the beginning of the
World, to be Instrumental to our Good.

Corol. X. Hence, lastly, is shown the Wisdom of Christianity; which instructs
all its Followers to express in their Common Language, and to put in practice
all the Substance of those Truths, which we have, with so much labor,
Speculatively Demonstrated. As when they say that, Every thing that happens is
Gods Will; pray his Will may be done; Resign to it; Acknowledge that all the
Good they have comes from God, thank him for it, free him from all Imputation
of Injustice when any Harm lights to them, and bear it with a Humble Patience,
etc.

9. There is a certain Order, or priority of Nature, in our Notions taken from
the same subject, by which one of them (or which is the same, the Subject as
grounding one of those Notions) is conceived to be kind of Efficient Cause of
Another of them. For it is Evident that the First Efficiency of Fire is the
making that smart Impression on our Feeling Sense which we call Heating; out of
which, if continued, it follows that it dissipates or shatters asunder all the
parts of the mixed Body on which it works. To which it is Consequent, that it
Disgregates the Heterogeneous parts of it, and Congregates the Homogeneous
ones; from which latter Effects of Heating, as being most obvious and
discernible to Mankind, Aristotle takes his Definition of Hot things. Thus, out
of Rationality springs a Solid and Serious Content in Discovering new Truths,
which are the Natural Perfection of a Soul; and, from this Content a greater
degree of the Love of seeing still more Truths. Thus Risibility springs from
Rationality; the Object of which is not a Solid Food, nourishing and dilating
the Soul as is this later, which causes some increase of Science in her; but as
it were a kind of Light Repast and Recreation to her, sprung from the Observing
some trifling particulars which were Odd, Awkward, and Sudden or Unexpected,
and withal not Harmful or Contristating.

10. In those Subjects which have many Accidents in them, we must Separate
those Accidents from the Subject, and consider attentively according to which
of them it produces such an Effect; which found, we shall discover a Proper
Cause and its Proper Effect. For example, put case we experience Aloes purges
Choler, we must separate its Color, Smell, Hardness, Bitter Taste, and the rest
of its Accidents, and endeavor to find out, according to which of them it
produces that Effect; and if we can find it does this precisely as Bitter, we
shall discover that Bitterness is the proper Medicine against Choler; and
thence we can gain this Certain Knowledge, and establish this Universal
Conclusion, that Every Bitter Thing is good against Choler; according to that
Solid Maxim in Logic, A Quatenus ad Omne valet consequentia.

Note, That Induction in such cases gives great light to a Man already well
versed in Natural Principles. But, this former Maxim must be Understood with
this Provis^ that it be meant to hold per se loquendo, as the Schools phrase
it; that is, if nothing hinders; as it does often in the Practice of Physic.
For, in Mixed Bodies there is a Strange Variety and Medly of Accidents or
Qualities; diverse of which are of a Disparate and sometimes of a Sub-contrary
or Contrary nature to one another; so that it requires a great Sagacity to add
to them such other Mixts as may obviate their Interfering, and make the
intended Effect follow.

Thus much of Demonstration from the thing as it is Active, or from the
Efficient; which is the first of the Four Causes.

11. Demonstrations may be taken also from the Matter or Material Cause, that
is from the Thing or Subject, as it is Passive. For, from the Divisibility of a
Thing (whether that Divisibility be Metaphysical, or Physical) we may
demonstrate the Corruptibility of it; which, necessarily following out of the
Thing as it is Divisible, is therefore a Property of it. Thus, capable of
Admiring is a Property necessarily Inferring Rationality in it is Subject:
Admiration being nothing but a Suspension of the Rational Faculty at a stand,
or non-plust, to find a Reason for the thing it admires; whence it inferrs
demonstratively a Power of Reasoning, capable to act or exercise it self in
other things. Of this kind are all Passive Properties, which are quarto modo
(as the Schools Phrase is) or properly such: For, these springing necessarily
or immediately out of the Essence, are, by consequence, Naturally Connected with
it, and the Essence with them; whence they are Proper Mediums to infer
demonstratively such an Essence a Posteriori, and the Essence a fit Medium to
demonstrate them a priori.

12. That Demonstrations may be taken from the Formal Cause or from the Subject
as it is Formally and Essentially such, has been shown above Lesson. 3.. 7. and
8. where it was manifested that the Middle Notions in the Gradual Line, giving
us the parts that were included in the Definition, are Proper Middle Terms to
connect demonstratively the Inferior and Superior Notions.

13. The Causality of the Final cause consiststing in this, that it moves the
Efficient to act, this Cause can have no place but in Intelligent Beings. This
is Evident, because only such can know an End or consequently aim at it, or
work for it.

Corol. II. Wherefore, when it is said that such an Effect (v. g. the following
of water in a Pump) happens in Nature ne detur vacuum, that Nature flies from
or abhors vacuum; that (as Aristotle acutely speculated) Entia nolunt male
gubernari; and such like; the true Meaning of those Sayings can only be this,
that it is highly against the Nature of the First Intelligent Being who created
the World, and of the Inferior ones (Angels) who manage it under him, that
Ground should be laid in Nature for a Contradiction to be True, or that the
Course of Nature should be contrived in a bad method or carried on after an
absurd manner.

Corol. XII. Hence, these sayings, thus rightly understood, have in them the
force of a Nobler and more Solid Demonstration from the Final Cause, than can
be taken from any Corporeal Efficients and Effects, though they be never so
Proper to one another. For, these Sayings engage the Nature of the Supreme
Cause, and of the Noblest causes under him; and which, had they not Rectitude
in their Understandings, Wills and Operations, all Nature would be wrong, and
ground or beget in us nothing but Error. The Demonstration stands thus. The
Immediate End of those Causes is that the World should be Ordered Wisely, that
is, so as that the Things should be a Ground for Truth; therefore it is most
highly Impossible there can be any Ground for a Contradiction, in Things which
the First Cause did make, and the others do manage: But, were there a vacuum
there would be Ground for a Contradiction. Ergo, etc.

Corol. XIII. Hence, we may with pity remark the Ignorance, Folly or rather
Phrenzy of those gross Speculators, who, by allowing nothing but the Course of
Nature, are forc^d by their Impious and Foolish Tenet to speak of Insensible
things, as if they were Intelligent. It Is something pardonable in Lovers, when
they speak to Trees, Rivers, and Mountains to vent the Passion that be-mads
them; but it is shameful in Pretenders to Philosophy, who are to reduce Natural
Effects to their Causes, and to speak of both literally as they are. Yet, such
and so applied, must be the Common language of mere Naturalists, who look no
higher than Matter, and talk of Great Nature, or the Soul of the World, and
such windy whimsies, Ordering things thus and thus, that is Designing an End;
Hating and Abhorring this thing, Affecting another. Which yet, all the while,
they deny to be Intelligent things, lest they should grant a First Being making
Nature, and Spiritual Second Causes carrying on the Course of it, and Moving it
regularly. Nor Matters it that we had now and than to use the same Language;
for we do acknowledge it to be Improper, and can reduce it to a Litteral Sense
agreeing to the Natures of those things managed by such Governors, which these
Men cannot.

14. There can be no Final Cause in respect to GOD. For End and Good being the
same, and GOD being Infinitely Perfect and Infinitely Happy in Himself, there
can no Good accrue to him from any thing out of himself, or from Creatures, and
so they cannot have the Notion of an End in respect to him. Wherefore, when it
is said that GOD aims at the Good of his Creatures, or that to Govern the World
wisely is his End; the meaning of these words is only this, that he acts as
becomes his Wisdom, or (his Wisdom being his Essence) he acts as he is.

15. Speaking of Mankind, we can demonstrate some Acts of his Will from the
Final Cause supposed, and a Final Cause from the supposed Acts of his Will.
For, since the Will is a Power, and all Powers are specified or have their
particular Essence from the respect they have to such or such Objects; and the
Object of the Will is an Appearing Good, it follows that it is Essential to the
Will to act for an Appearing Good, Wherefore, if we can demonstrate (as we may
often) that such a particular Object must (all things considered) appear a Good
to a Man in such circumstances; it will both follow a priori that, if his Will
acts, it is for an Appearing Good; and also a posteriori, that, if there be an
Appearing Good, there will follow an Act of his Will. The Proof of both is
plain, For, since the Will is a Power to Act for an Appearing Good, if it did
not (in due circumstance) act for it, it would follow that the Will is not a
Will; or else it must follow, that an Appearing Good is not the Object of the
Will. Whence, since it can have no other Object Imaginable, it would follow
again that the Will is no Power; and consequently, no Will. Nor does this take
away the Liberty of the Will, which is exercised in Choosing one out of many,
but establishes the Essence of it.

Corol. 14. Hence the most easy and most connaturall way to manage or treat
with Mankind, is, to make that, which you would bring them to do, appear to be
their Good; for then they will be sure to obey. And if, either through
Perverseness or Delusion by others, they will not be brought to see that which
is for the Common Good to be their own, there is no way left but to Overawe
them with fear; that so, at least, it may appear to them a Good to avoid
Punishment.

LESSON VI. Several Instances of Demonstration.
1. THE Method of Demonstrating is twofold; the One Is performed by Exact
Syllogisms in right Mood and Figure. The other by laying first certain Maxims,
Axioms, or Pestulatums. and then proving the Theses by the Concatenation of
many Propositions orderly succeeding one another, which is the way Euclid
takes. For this later way may be full as solid as the other, though it looks not
so Artificially; provided it is several Consequences be Immediate, and nothing
be assumed which is not some way Evident. This way also is Shorter, and more
fit to comprize much Truth, or many Syllogisms, in a little room. The other way
is Clearer at first sight. This is more fit for Writers, whose Productions may
be scanned leasurely by multitudes of Readers and Examiners. That, is proper
for Disputants in the Schools, who are to Argue or Answer upon the Spot: and
ought to be so well verst in the Rules of Art as to be ready to act the part of
Opponent or Respondent ex tempore, and without Studying. Amongst the other
differences between them this is one, that if an obstinate Adversary denies any
Link, in the Demonstration of the Second kind, to be connected to the Other
part of the Chain, recourse must be forcibly had to the Syllogistick Method, to
convince him by plain Self-evident Principles of our Understanding, on which
all Force of Consequence is built, We shall give here some few Examples, of
either Method. The first of which is purely Logical; the Second, Arithmetical:
The Third and Fourth, Physical: The Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh, Metaphysical.

Thesis I. Infinite Number is Impossible.
Demonstration First.
Bar-Whatever involves a Contradiction is Impossible; but ba-All Infinite Number
involves a Contradiction; therefore ra-All Infinite Number is Impossible.
The Minor is thus proved.

Bar-Whatever Notion comprised under any of the Common heads is neither the
Genus of it is Particular Kind, nor any Species under that Genus, involves a
Contradiction, but ba-All Infinite Number (it being Discrete Quantity) is
Comprised under one of the Common Heads, and yet is neither the Generical
Notion of Discrete Quantity, nor any Species of it; therefore ra-All Infinite
Number involves a Contradiction.
2. The Major is evident. For all the Notions of any Common Head, till we come
to the bottom of that Scale, are either Generical or Specifical. Whence, such a
Notion as Infinite Number would be under that Common Head (as it is evident
Discrete Quantity is under Quantity) and yet it would not be under it, because
Infinite Number is neither the Genus of Discrete Quantity, nor any Species of it.

The Minor likewise as to it is First part is most Evident, because Infinite
Number is a Number; nor is it less a Number for it is being Infinite, but more.

The same Minor, as to it is Second part, viz. that Infinite Number cannot be the
Genus, or the whole Notion of Discrete Quantity, is thus proved.

Ce-No Notion that is not Comprehended in each of it is Species can be a
Generical Notion or a Genus; but la-Every Infinite Number is a Notion that is
not comprehended in each of the Species of Discrete Quantity therefore rent-No
infinite Number can be the Generical Notion of Discrete Quantity.
3. The Major is Evident. For the Genus or Superior Notion is but a Part of
the Inferior or the Species, and a Part must necessarily be Comprehended in
the Whole. And, accordingly, we find the whole Notion and Definition of Animal
to be in Homo, of Corpus in Vivens, and of Ens in all under it.

4. This last Minor is likewise most evident: For Ten and Twenty are Species of
Discrete Quantity, being both of them Numbers; and yet it is impossible that the
Notion of Infinite Discrete Quantity or Infinite Number, should be found in each
of these; which yet it must be, if Infinite Quantity be their Genus.

5. The Former Minor, according to it is Third part, viz. that Infinite Number
can be no Species of Number or Discrete Quantity, is thus proved.

Ce-No Species comprehends all that is in it is fellow-Species, but leaves it
somewhat which it self has not; but la-Every Infinite Number comprehends all
that is in it is fellow-Species, and does not leave it somewhat which it self
had not; therefore rent. No Infinite Number can be a Species of Discrete
Quantity.
6. The Minor is proved: For, Essential Differences that constitute the
Species, are more and less of the Genus, and not All and None. And, as for the
Formal part of the several Species of Number, they are Constituted formally by
some one Unity shutting up the rest; otherwise those Species had had no
Distinct Notion, being Indeterminate: v. g. Ten and Twenty are Formally such
Species of Number, because there is a Tenth Unity and a Twentieth in them,
shutting up or Determining (that is Terminating) those Unities which were
presupposed. Wherefore, for the same reason, if Infinite Number be a Distinct
Species, it must have, besides It Is other Material Constituents, something
belonging to it is own Intrinsical and Particular nature, constituting it
formally of such a Species; which can be nothing but an Infinitth one,
Determining or Terminating it in the Line of Number; which is a clear
contradiction and makes an Infinite to be Finite.

The same Thesis Infinite Number is impossible.
Demonstration Second.
Axiom. Units are the Elements of which all Number consists, v. g. The Number
of Twenty is Twenty Ones, The Number of a Hundred is a Hundred Ones; and for
the same reason, an Infinite Number consists of Infinite Ones. Da-Whatever Tenet
puts some One to be Infinitely distant in the Line of Number from Another One
assignable, or puts an Infinitth One, puts a Contradiction; but ri-The Tenet of
an Infinite Number puts some One to be Infinitely distant in the Line of Number
from Another One assignable, or an Infinitth One; therefore i-The Tenet of an
Infinite Number puts a Contradiction.
7. The Major is self-evident, for it clearly puts an Infinite or Endless
Number, to have Two Ends; viz. this One assignable, and that other One Supposed
Infinitely distant from it, or the Infinitth One.

8. The Minor is also Evident. For, since, by the Axiom, all Number, even though
Infinite, consists of One's as it is constituent parts, if no One be an
Infinitth, then every one is a Finitth; and so ( all the parts being the whole)
that Whole, or the Infinite Number it self, must be Finite which is a
Contradiction.

Thesis II. All Continued Quantity is one Whole consisting of Potential, or
still Divisible, Parts.
Demonstration III.
Axiom I. Quantity is Divisible without end, This is supposed proved by Euclid,
Element. Lib. 6. Prop. 10 th.

Axiom II. What is Actually distinct in any Line, is determinate in that Line.
All Act coming from the Form; which being Determinate it self, makes those
Subjects in which it is Determinate likewise.

Axiom III. A Quatenus ad omne valet consequentia.

Proposition I. Quantity cannot be compounded of a Finite Number of
Indivisibles.
Co-Nothing that is Infinitely Divisible can consist of a Finite Number of
Indivibles; but la-All Quantity is Infinitely Divisible, therefore Axl 1.
rent-No Quantity can consist of a Finite Number of Indivisibles.
9. The Major is evident, For, putting it to consist of a Finite Number of
Indivisibles, ( Ten for example,) when it is Divided into those Ten, it can be
no longer Divisible, and so no Quantity, by the Ax. I.

Proposition II. Quantity cannot be compounded of an Infinite Number of
Indivisibles.
Ce-No One Indivisible added to Another can make Quantity; but la- Prop. 1.
All Infinite Number of Indivisibles Consists of, or is One Indivisible added to
Another: Therefore rent-No Infinite Number of Indivisibles can make Quantity.
10. The Minor is Evident; for all Number (though Infinite) consists of Ones; that
is, of One added to another. Add that it is demonstrated above that all Infinite
Number is Impossible.

Proposition III. If any two parts of Quantity be Actually distinct, All the
parts must be Actually distinct also.
Bar-What ever springs out of the precise nature of Quantity must be equally
found where ever there is Quantity, or throughout all the parts of Quantity, by
Axiom 3 d. But ba-All Actual Distinction of the parts of Quantity (if put in
any two) springs out of the precise Notion of Quantity, therefore ra-All Actual
Distinction of the parts of Quantity (if put in any two) must be equally found
wherever there is Quantity, or throughout all the parts of Quantity.
11. The Minor is proved; for, all Unity and Distinction in any Line follows
out of the Entity to which it is peculiar, that is, in our case, out of the
Entity or Essence of Quantity. Again, this Actual Distinction of Quantitative
parts cannot spring from Substance; for this has no Distinction of parts, but
that of Matter and Form. Nor out of any other Line; for all those do presuppose
Quantity, and spring from it as the Primary Affection of Body; therefore, if
any two parts of Quantity be actually Distinct, that Distinction must proceed
from the Nature of Quantity it self.

12. Now, that all the parts of Quantity should be Actually Distinct, destroys
the Nature of Quantity, and is Contradictory; is thus proved.

Prop. 2*
Da-Whatever makes Quantity consist of Infinite Indivisibles contradicts the
Nature of Quantity. But ri-That Position which makes all the parts of Quantity
Actually Distinct, makes Quantity consist of Infinite Indivisibles, therefore
i-That Position which makes all the parts of Quantity, actually Distinct,
contradicts the nature of Quantity.
13. The Minor is Evident; For, those things which are Actually Distinct
quantitatively may be Divided quantitatively; or rather are already so; as
those which are Actually Distinct in the Line of Substance, are Distinct
Substances or Distinct things in that Line, Wherefore, since the Nature of such
a Subject, as they put Quantity to be, does bear it, let us suppose Quantity
divided into all it is Actual parts it can be divided into; that is, into All,
they being all of them supposed Actually Distinct; it is manifest there could
remain only Infinite Indivisibles. They must be Indivisible, because it is
supposed to be Divided into all it could be Divided into; and they must be
Infinite, for Divisibility that is but Finite, would contradict Euclid's Clear
and most Approved Demonstration. Besides, it would follow hence, that if all
the parts of Quantity were Actually Distinct, each of them must be Determinate
in the line of Quantity; Wherefore, they being also Infinite in Number (for a
Finite Number of parts makes Quantity not to be Divisible Infinitely against
Euclid's Demonstration) it would follow that each least Quantity would be of
Infinite Extension; for the least Determinate Quantity, Infinite times repeated,
makes an Infinite Extension.

14. Hence is evinced our Main Demonstration, that, since Continued Quantity is
neither compounded of a Finit, nor of an Infinite Number of Indivisibles, nor of
Actual parts, it is made up of Potential parts: that is, there is but One
Actual Whole in the Line of Quantity; and this Whole is Divisible without end.

Corol. I. Hence is farther demonstrated the Unity of the whole World as to
it is Quantity; or which is the same, the Continuity of the whole imaginable
Mass of Body.

Corol. II. Hence is demonstrated likewise that all Vacuum, and Epicurus's
Scheme of Plenum and Vacuum are Contradictory: As likewise that there cannot
possibly be more Worlds than One; the very Nature of Quantity being but One
whole, Divisible still into its Potential parts, or parts still farther
Divisible.

Thesis III. 15. Successive Quantity or Motion, and, consequently, the Course
of Nature, could not have been ab Aeterno, but must have had a Beginning.
Demonstration IV.
Bar-All Infinite Motion or Time is Impossible, but ba-All Duration of Motion ab
Aeterno must have been for an Infinite Time, therefore ra-All Duration of Motion
ab aeterno is Impossible.
The Minor is Self-evident; The Major is thus proved.

Bar-All Infinite Time must be an Infinite Number of Determinate Parts of Time,
v. g. Infinite Hours; but ba-All Infinite Number of the Determinate parts of Time
is Impossible; Therefore ra-All Infinite Time is Impossible.
16. The Major is clearly Evident; for, were the Number of the Determinate
parts of Time Finite, then all the Parts (which are equivalent to the Whole)
being Finite, the Whole must likewise be Finite,

The Minor is proved above Demonstration 1. and 2. where it was demonstrated
that all Infinite Number is Impossible.

17. Whence is Demonstrated our main Thesis, that Time, Motion, or the Course
of Nature had a beginning. Whence many useful Conclusions may be drawn against
Heathens and Atheists. Note, that it is the same as to our Argument, whether
there be an Infinite Number of parts of Time, which are Actually Determined and
Measured, or no; it is sufficient the Subject [ Infinite Motion, or Infinite Time]
bears the having such a Determination made, by having that in it which
corresponds to all those Infinite Determinate parts; for this necessarily
induces and enforces a Contradiction.

Thesis IV. There are Spiritual Beings, which we call Angels.
Demonstration V.
Axiom. 1. What acts, is.

2. Every thing acts as it is; and, a fortiori, cannot act directly contrary to
what it is, especially as an Immediate Agent.

3. Motion is Change

4. There are no Created Beings, but either Divisible or Indivisible ones, that
is Body or Spirit.

5. The First Being is Essentially Unchangeable.

Ax. 1.
Da-Whatever must be the Immediate Cause of some Effect acts, and, consequently,
is: but ri-An Angel must be the Immediate Cause of some Effect; viz. of the
First Motion in Nature, therefore i-An Angel acts; and, consequently is,
The Minor is thus proved.

Ax. 4.
Da-Every Effect that can neither be caused Immediat^ly by the First Cause no^
by a Body: must have been caused immediately by a Created Spirit or an Angel;
But ri-The First Motion in Nature is an Effect which could not have been caused
Immediately by the First Cause nor by a Body; Therefore i-The first Motion in
Nature must have been caused Immediately by an Angel; and, consequently, an
Angel acts and is.
The former part of the Minor, viz. that the first Motion could not be caused
immediately by the First Cause, is thus demonstrated.

19. Fe-No Ax. 2.
being that is Essentially Unchangeable, and whose Nature is directly contrary
to the Nature of Change, can be the Immediate Cause o Ax. 3.
Change or Motion; nor, consequently, of the First Motion in Nature, but ri-The
First Being is Ax. 5.
Essentially Unchangeable, and his Nature is directly contrary to the Nature of
Change or Motion; therefore i-The First Being cannot be the Immediate Cause of
Motion or Change; nor, consequently, of the First Motion in Nature.
20. The latter part of the former Minor, viz. that a Body could not have been
the Immediate Cause of the First Motion in Nature, is thus proved.

Ce-Nothing that, antecedently to the First Motion, was not-Moving, or in Rest,
Ax. 2.
could have been the Immediate Cause of the First Motion in Nature, but
la-Every Body antecedently to the First Motion in Nature was not-Moving, or in
Rest; therefore rent-No Body could have been the Immediate Cause of the First
Motion in Nature.
Note that this Demonstration supposes a First Motion in Nature, which was
proved. Demonstration 4.

LESSON VII. Other Instances of Demonstration.
Thesis V. THere is a First Self-Existent Being; or a Deity.
Demonstration VI.
Proposition I. The Notion or Nature of Ens and of Existent in Creatures, (and
consequently of Essence and Existence) are Distinct.
Da-Every Notion of which [ Existent] and [ not-existent] may be truly
predicated is Different from the Notion of Existent; But ri-The Notion of Ens
(in its First and Proper Signification, taken for an Individual Substance) is a
Notion of which Existent and not-existent may be predicated; therefore i -- The
Notion of Ens (thus understood) is d^fferent from the Notion of Existent; and,
consequently, the Notions of Essence and Existence are also Distinct.
2. The Minor is Evident. For we can truly say that [ Petrus est] while he is
Living; and as truly say of the same Peter, that [ Fuit] or [ non-est] when he
is Dead.

3. The Major is no less Evident; For, when we say [ Petrus est] or [ Peter is
Existent] were the notion of the Predicate [ Existent] the same with [ Peter]
the Subject, the Proposition would be (in sense) formally Identical, and the
same as it is to say, [what's Existent is Existent] Wherefore, when we say [
Petrus non est] or Peter is not-Existent, Peter Signifying the same as
Existent, it would be the same as if we said, what is Existent is not Existent,
which is a Contradiction.

Proposition II. 4. The Notion of Ens Abstracts from Existence, or is
Indifferent to it and to Nonexistence.
This needs no farther Proof? For, in the two Propositions lately mentioned,
Existent and not Existent are truly predicated of the same Ens viz. Peter;
which could not be, unless the Subject [ Peter] did Abstract from both, or were
Indifferent to both. Besides, all the Words which we use to express the Notions
or Natures of any Created Ens whatever, do so perfectly Abstract from
Existence, that it is neither Expressed, Implied, nor in the least Hinted in
them; as appears in the words, Lapis, Quercus, Bucephalus, Petrus, Raphael;
which give us not the least light or intimation that they are Existent or
not-Existent.

Proposition III. 5. Were there any Inclination in Created Entities to one more
than to the other, it seems to be rather to Not-being; than to Being.
For, since Peter, even though possessed of Actual Being, is still no less capable
of Not-being; it seems as if he had a particular Natural Tendency to Not-being;
because, though supported Formally (as it were) by it is Opposite [ Actual
Existence] he is notwithstanding, no less a Capacity of Not-existing; his
Original nothingness being so radicated in his Nature as he is a Creature, that
it sticks to it, and inclines him to it, even while he is.

Proposition IV. 6. Existence is no ways Intrinsical to any Created Ens; either
Essentially, or as an Affection springing out of it is Essence.
This has been demonstrated Prop. 2 d. and 3 d. Because Every nature requires
all it is Intrinsicals, and what follows out of them, or is Connected with them;
and is not Indifferent to have them or not have them, as Ens is to have or not
have Existence.

Proposition V. 7. All Created things have their Existence from something that
is Extrinsical to them.
For, whatever has any thing and not from it is self, or from it is own
Intrinsical Nature, must have it from Another, or from something that is
Extrinsical to it; there being no Third sort of Cause imaginable, which is
neither Intrinsical nor Extrinsical; that is, which is neither it is self nor
Another.

Proposition VI.
8. No Created Ens can give Existence to another, For though (as was shown
formerly) the virtue by which the Ens operates be the Existence of that Ens;
yet it can work no otherwise than as the Thing it self is, or according to the
Nature of the Thing, which has that Existence; whose Nature it actually
Imprints (as it were) on the Subject, as we find in Fire heating, in Water
moistning, and in the whole Line of Universal Causality. Again, since the whole
Line of Causality also bears that no Cause can act unless it be first
Determined, and, as it were Appropriated to work such an Effect, (whence come
those established Maxims that the Course of Nature is carried on by Proper
Causes to Proper Effects, and Ex indifferente nihil sequitur.) Therefore,
seeing (Prop. 2.) The Created Ens to which such an Existence belongs, and,
consequently, the Nature or Essence of that Ens, Abstracts from all Existence;
and is perfectly Indifferent even to it is own, and much more to the Existence
of any other Ens; it follows demonstratively that no Created Ens can give
Existence to another, or be the Proper Cause of it. Therefore

Proposition VII. 9. There must be some Uncreated Cause that gives Existence to
all Created Entities.
This is already Prop. 5.6.
Evident; since no Created Entity can have it is Existence either from it is own
Intrinsical Nature, or from any other Creature.

Proposition VIII. 10. This Uncreated Cause of all Existence must be
Self-Existent; that is, his Essence must be his Existence.
For, were his Essence Indifferent to Existence, or Existence Accidental to him
and not Essential, he would need Another Cause to give him Existence, for the
same reason Creatures do, and, so He would not be Uncreated.

Therefore there is a First Self-existent Being or a DEITY.

Corol. III. Hence it is seen that all that Created Causes operate upon
Entities, grown to maturity is to dispose to the not being of the things they
work upon; by Altering the Matter so that, out of those Alterations brought to
such a point, the Body ceases to be any longer of such a Nature or Kind; and
consequently loses it is Existence. At which Instant the Providence of the First
Being so Orders his World, that those Determinations of Matter, which were
Inconsistent with the Former Ens, should be Proper for the New Ens that is to
succeed; to which in the very First Instant the other ceases to be, and this
new one is Ultimately Determined to be this, He, by his Bountiful and Steady
Emanation of Being, gives it such a peculiar Existence as is Commensurated and
Proper to it is Essence.

Thesis VI. An Angel cannot undergo any Change after the First Instant of it is
Being.
Demonstration VII.
Axiom 1. If Agent and Patient be perfectly fitted as to the nature of Agent
and Patient, there needs no more to begin the Effect, actually but Application.

2. If Agent and Patient be perfectly fitted as to the nature of Agent and
Patient, and the Effect be Indivisible, there needs no more to begin and end,
that is to Complete the Effect at once, but Application.

3. An Indivisible Effect cannot be performed by piecemeal or by parts.

4. Every thing operates as it is.

5. No Change can be made without the Operation of some Cause.

6. A Pure Spirit is not Quantitative, a Body is.

Proposition I. No Corporeal Operation is without Local Motion.
For, since Ax. 4. Every thing operates as it is, what is Quantitative operates
Quantitatively; but, nothing can operate Quantitatively, or exercise it is
Quantity, when it perfectly rests according to it is Quantity, that is, moves
not according to it is Quantity: It follows, then, that to Operate
Quantitatively is to move according to Quantity. Wherefore, since nothing can
move according to it is Quantity, but either Intrinsically, by having it is
Quantity made greater or less; or Extrinsically, that is, by having it is
Quantity (unmoved as to it is own parts or it is self) moved toward Another; and
both these do evidently require some kind of Local Motion; it is Evident
likewise, that No C^^poreal Operation is without Local Motion.

Proposition II. 13. That an Angel is not susceptible of Local Motion.
For, since Motion is Mutation; and, consequently, Local Motion, Mutation or
Change according to Place; and Change of Place does necessarily require some
Space, and Space is Quantity; it follows, that Local Motion cannot be made in a
Subject which has no Quantity. But Angels (they being Pure Spirits) Ax. 6.
are not Quantitative; therefore they are not Susceptible of Local Motion, or
capable of having Local Motion made in them.

Proposition III. 15. That no Body can cause a Change in an Angel.
For, since no Prop. 1.
Operation of Body is without Local Motion; and Prop. 2.
an Angel (it being a Pure Spirit) is not susceptible of Local Motion; it
follows, that neither is it Susceptible of the Operation of Body. But Ax. 5.
No Cause can change any thing unless that Cause operates upon it; Therefore no
Body can cause any Change in an Angel.

Proposition IV. 16. That an Angel cannot change it self after the First
Instant.
For, since a Cause, the self same in all respects, if the Patient be likewise
the self same, and the Application also the self same, produces the self-same
Effect equally in any time assignable that is sufficient for such an Effect;
and an Angel, put to act upon it self or change it self after the first
Instant, is put to be the self-same, as to its being a Cause in every Instant
before it acts; as likewise to be the self-same Patient in all respects, and
the Application of it self to its self cannot but be Equal; it follows that in
any time sufficient for the same Effect it will produce the same Effect, that
is, act upon it self or change it self. Wherefore, since an Effect in an
Indivisible subject is Indivisible, that is, Impossible not to be all at once,
or in one Instant; and an Angel, being a Pure Spirit, is Ax. 3.
Ax. 6.
an Indivisible Subject; it is Evident that this Effect, or the Action of that
Spirit upon it self, would be equally made in every Instant in case it were not
already made; that is, can only be made in the First Instant. Wherefore an
Angel cannot change it self after the First Instant.

Proposition V.
17. If there were only Two Angels Existent, one of them could not act upon the
other after the very First Instant of their Being.

Let there be only Two Angels, the one whereof can work upon the other; and let
the Agent be A: the Patient B: and, because they are supposed not to act in the
First Instant, but after some Duration, let the Duration assigned be C; the
Instant at the end of that Duration in which they first work D. Since neither
A. nor B. are able to work upon themselves except in the First Instant, Prop. 4.
and (as is supposed) one works not upon the other till the Instant D: they
must necessarily remain in all respects the same they were in the First Instant
till the Instant D; that is, for the whole Intermediat Duration C: Therefore
they are equally fitted in point of Agent and Patient in each (nay in the very
First) Instant of the Duration C: as they are in the Instant D; But in the
Instant D, in which they acted, they were in all points fitted to act;
therefore, they were also in all points perfectly fitted to act in the very
first Instant of the Duration C: Wherefore Ax. 1.
the Effect Begun, and, the Subject being Indivisible, Ax 2.
Ended in the very First Instant, in case their wanted not Application of the
perfectly-ready Agent to the perfectly-dispos'd Patient. But there wanted not
Application in the very First Instant; For, since Quantitative Application, or
Propinquity, is not competent to Pure Spirits; all the Application they can be
imagined to have to one another is by Knowledge and Will. But they had the same
Knowledge and Will for the Whole Duration antecedent, because they are supposed
Unchanged and perfectly the same for that whole Duration. And, though they had
not had it formerly, the Argument returns with the same force; that they could
not have had this new Knowledge and Will from Themselves in any part of that
Duration, nor from a Body, and therefore they must have had it from another
Spirit; and this in the First Instant, because Ax. 1.2.
that Other was then perfectly apt to give it, This perfectly apt to receive
it. And, consequently, If there were only Two Angels Existent one of them could
not act upon the other after the very First Instant of their Being.

Proposition VI. 18. Put any multitude of Angels, how great soever, all that
they can work upon one another will be performed in the First Instant of their
Being.
For, since, where there are only Two, Prop. 5.
one must therefore act upon the other in the First Instant or not at all,
because all the imaginable Concurrents to that Action were then adequately put;
the rest also, where there are more, will for the same reason be wrought upon
in the same Instant, in case the Causes of that Action be then adequately put.
But they are all Adequately put in the same First Instant; For the second Angel
that acts either is a perfect Agent, and perfectly applied by what it has of it
self, or by what it has from another; wherefore, since it can never want what
it has of it self, or by it is self, it cannot want any thing to work upon the
Third, unless it be to be wrought upon by the First, and so be fitted to work
upon the Third, but this is done in the very Prop. 5.
first Instant, wherefore also the Third will, for the same reason, be wrought
upon in the self-same Instant. Again, since the Third cannot be imagined to
want any thing to enable it to work upon the Fourth, but to be changed by the
Second, and this was done as was now shown, in the First Instant; the Causes of
changing the Fourth were adequately put in the same Instant too, and Ax. 3.
consequently the Effect. And, since how far soever we proceed, the same reason
holds, viz. that the Effects are still Indivisible, and all the Causes of each
immediately succeeding Effect, still adequately put in the first Instant, it
will follow, that the Effects will still be put in the same Instant, by the
same necessity that the Effect of the First up on the Second was put in the
First Instant of their Being; Therefore, all whatever any Multitude of Angels,
how great soever, can work upon one another is performed in the First Instant
of their Being.

Proposition VII. 19. That it is Infinitely more Impossible an Angel should be
changed by God after the first Instant, than by any other Spirit.
For, since the Angel is in the same manner capable of Change, as far as
concerns it is self or it is own power to be changed, whether God or any other
Spirit be to change it, on that side precisely there is a perfect Equality.
Wherefore seeing, on the other side, it is infinitely more Impossible that GOD
should not have Power to change her in the First Instant, than that any other
Spirit should not have such a Power; and Infinitely more Impossible that GOD
should not, of himself, be ultimately disposed to act where the nature of the
thing is capable of it, his Nature being Pure Actuality. Also, since it is
Infinitely more Impossible that GOD should, after some Duration, receive any
Change in himself, fitting him to produce that Effect, than that any other
Spirit should; And, lastly, since it is Infinitely more Impossible his Active
Power should not be Applied to the Patient; both in regard he most necessarily
and comprehensively knows it, and most intimately, by himself, conserves it in
Being. Wherefore, since from these Considerations or Reasons, however Infinitely
short in Creatures, it is concluded to be Impossible that even any Other
Spirit, if it should change an Angel at all, should not change it in the First
Instant, and these Considerations or Reasons are found to be in GOD with
Infinitely greater Advantage; it is Evident that it is Infinitely more Impossible
that GOD, if he change an Angel at all, should not change it in the first
Instant, that is, should change it in the Intermediate Duration; than that any
other Spirit should.

Proposition IX. 20. That it is absolutely Impossible an Angel should be Changed
after the First Instant of it is Being.
For, since Ax. 5.
no Change can be made without ^he working of Some Cause; and no Prop. 2.3.
Body can work upon an Angel, and all that it self or any other Created Spirit
can work upon it, must necessarily be in the very First Instant of it is Being;
Prop. 8^
and Prop. 4.5.6.7.
it is much more Impossible GOD should work upon it, unless in the First
Instant, than that any Created Spirit should; and there can be no Cause
possible or Imaginable besides GOD, Created Spirits, or Bodies; it follows that
there can be no Cause at all to work upon an Angel, or to Change it after the
First Instant of it is Being; and, therefore, it can undergo no Change after
that First Instant.

ADVERTISEMENT.
1. THIS last Conclusion may seem a strange Paradox to some Readers, whose
Reason and Principles have not raised them above Fancy. But not to insist
farther on the Evidence of our Consequences from Undeniable Principles, which
have forced the Necessity of our Conclusion, such men are desir^d to reflect
that [ Ens] being divided as by it is Proper Differences, by [ Divisible] and [
Indivisible] and these Differences being Contradictory to one another; it
follows that [ Body] and [ Spirit] which are the Species constituted by those
Differences, do agree in nothing at all but in the Common and Generical notion
of Ens; or in this that they are, both of them, Capable of Being. Whence, it is
Logically demonstrated that they must Differ, nay contradictorily disagree, in
every thing else; so that whatever else is Affirmed literally of the one must
be denied of the other. Wherefore, since we can truly and literally Affirm that
Body is Quantitative, Corruptible, in Place moved Locally, Changed by Time or
Subject to it, Capable of Succession, or of Before and After which are the
Differences of time etc. we must be forced with equal Truth Literally to Deny
all these of Pure Spirits or Angels, because none of these do belong to the
Common Generical Notion of Ens, but to that Difference which constitutes that
Species called Body; and, therefore, the Contradictory to all these, and
amongst them to be Vnsuccessive in it is Operations, must be predicated of the
other Species, called Spirit.

It will, I doubt not, be much wondered at too, that the Devils should be
Damned in the First Instant of their being; which looks as if they were Created
in the state of Damnation; A thing certainly, most Unworthy GOD, who is
Essentially and Infinitely Good. But, their wonder will cease if they reflect
that those Bad Angels had far more Knowledge, and consequently more perfect
Deliberation (such as they can have) in that one Single Instant than We could
have had though we have been a thousand years Considering and Deliberating ever
we had made our Choice of our last End, and fix our Resolution to adhere to it
Finally. So that it never lay in the power of any Man to have so Clear a
Knowledge of his Duty, and so perfect and full sight of all the Motives to
continue in that Duty, as the Devil and his Angels had in that one Instant.
Whence, the Crime of Lucifer, and his Adherents, was a Sin of pure Malice, and
not mere Frailty, or mixed with Frailty; much less of Inadvertence, Speculative
Ignorance, or suggested by the Soul's depraved Companion, the Body; as are the
Sins of the Generality of Mankind, some Inconsiderable number of them excepted,
whose Souls are thoroughly poisoned with Spiritual Sin's peculiar to the Devil;
such as are Spiritual Pride, Malice, Envy or such like; which wicked Sinners
are therefore, even while here, so many Limbs (as it were) of the Devil, and
very difficult to be brought to any Repentance. And this is the reason why
GOD's Wisdom, Goodness and Justice laid so many Miracles of Mercy to save poor
weak Mankind; and left the Fallen Angels in the sad condition, in which they had
so wilfully and desperately engulft themselves. Wisely and Justly placing it in
the Order of Causes, that that Sin, which was so perfectly, and (in despite of
all Motives to the contrary) so Wilfully Resolute, should be Irretractable;
whereas, on the other side, Sins of mere Frailty are not hard to be repented
of, when the alluring circumstance is past and gone; The same Faculty which
permitted them to fall, leaving them likewise in a Pliableness to reform and
retract what their Reason, abused by Passion, had; perhaps either by surprise
or after much struggling, (that is half unwillingly) yielded to.

Corol. I. Hence, abstracting from Faith and Theology) it is Demonstrated
against the Originists, by Reason reflecting on the nature of Things, that the
Devils are to be Eternally Damned; and how, and why it is Impossible their Hell
should have an End. For, they cannot be saved without Repentance, nor repent
without having some new Motive which they either knew not of before, or did not
well consider of it. Neither of which can have place here; for, since they
acquire no New Knowledge either by the Senses, or by Discourse, it follows that
they have all in the first Instant that is due to their Natures; that is they
know all they could possibly know, and out of that Knowledge made their Full and
Final Choice. Nor can there be Consideration in a Knower that sees all things
by Simple Intuition. For, Consideration is the Comparing one Motive with
another, and therefore it is an Operation Proper to that Knower that works by
Abstracted Notions or Considerations of the Thing. Whence it is most Improper
and Incompetent to such an Intelligent Being as knows all as once by way of
Simple Intuition.

Corol. II. Though all that can concern the Internal Operations of Angels was
finished in an Instant, yet we may, for all that, conceive certain Priorities
of Nature, in the Course or Process (as it were) of what belongs to them in
that First Instant. v. g. We can conceive them to be; and to be Good according
to their Essence and Existence, as coming Immediately out of God's hand, ere we
conceive their own Depraved Will made them Bad. We can conceive them to know
Themselves ere they knew in and by Themselves the whole Angelical Order, and
the whole Course of Nature. We can conceive them to know Themselves as most fit
(under God) to preside over Humane Nature, ere they knew that a Man, by the
Incarnation of the Word was to be their Head, and (as it were) take their
office out of their hands, and be Lord of themselves too; We can conceive them
to know This (which was the cause of their Aversion from GOD) ere we can
conceive them to have had that Aversion from him, for his thus Ordering things.
We can conceive Lucifer, their Ringleader, to have had that Aversion ere he
proposed his Seditious thoughts to other Angels, to debauch them from their
Allegiance. We can conceive him to have Debaucht them, ere we conceive the
Contrast and Battle was between Michael and his Loyal Angels, and Lucifer with
his Rebellious Troops. Lastly, we can conceive this Battle fought, ere the
latter black Squadrons were cast down from their Sublime Height into Hell. All
these, I say, may be Conceived to have had certain Priorities of Nature to one
another, such as those Causes and Effects use to have which are in the same
Instant: So that this Single Instant of theirs is, (tho not Formally, yet)
virtually, and in order to the many Indivisible Effects producible in it,
Equivalent or (as we use to say) as good as a Long Series of our Time: Not by
way of Quantitative Commensuration of one to the other, but by the Eminency of
the Angelical Duration or Aeviternity, which is of a Superior Nature to Body,
and consequently Bodily Motion or Time; and Comprehending it all Indivisibly
and Instantaneously.

Corol. III. Hence it follows, that the Several Instants which Divines put in
Angelical Actions, and particularly in Lucifer and his Fiends, before their
Fall, can be no way Solidly explicated and conformably to the nature of Pure
Spirits, but by those Priorities of Nature: For since Comparisons can only be
made of those Natures which are ejusdem generis we cannot Compare, or
Commensurate those Actions which are Spiritual to the Succession found in the
Actions of Bodies, which are Measurable by Time, any more than we can their
Essence to the Nature of a Body; and it would be an odd Comparison to say, an
Angel is as Knowing as a Horse is Strong, or as a Wall is Hard: Wherefore,
[Before] and [After] which are Differences of Time or Successive Motion, can
never be with good Sense applied to the Operations of Pure Spirits. Again,
should we allow such Instants Succeeding one another, it would avail nothing:
B. 8. L. 6.. 8.9.10.
For, since one Indivisible added to another cannot make a thing Greater, nor,
consequently, a Duration Longer; the putting many of them advances no farther
than the First Indivisible or the First Instant. Add, that even those Divines
who put diverse Instants, do all owe our Principles, that Angels are
Indivisible Substances (for did they hold them Corporeal, as some of the
Fathers did, I should not wonder at their Inconsistency) but they are frightened
from the Conclusions that Naturally and Necessarily follow thence; either
because they vainly fear Scripture-Texts, expressing things humano more, or in
Accommodation to our low Conceptions, cannot otherwise be verified; or else,
because those Conclusions too much shock their Fancy by their seeming
Extravagancy; or lastly, because they are willing to gratify and please the
Fancy of the Vulgar which is startled at such uncouth propositions: And this is
one mane Hindrance to the Advancement of Science, when men are afraid of their
own Conclusions; because the herd of vulgar Philosophers will dislike and decry
them: A Fault which, I hope, I have not been Guilty of in this former Treatise;
but have both avoided it my self, and have Endeavored to prevent it in others;
by holding firmly, and directing others to hold to the right Notions or Natures
of the things, and to pursue steadily the Consequences that do naturally Issue
from them; how Awkward soever the Conclusions may seem, to those who take their
Measures from Fancy how to frame their Rules of Logic, which are to direct
their Reason.

LESSON VIII. Of Opinion and Faith.
1. SCience being grounded on Intrinsical Mediums, and on such as are Proper or
Immediately Connected with the Extrems, whence it has to be Evident; it
follows, that those Mediums which are either Extrinsical to the thing, or
Common ones cannot beget Science, but some Inevident or Obscure kinds of Light,
called Faith and Opinion: The former of which is grounded on an Extrinsical
Medium called Witnessing Authority or Testimony; the Later, on Remote or Common
Mediums; which seem to bend or lean toward the Conclusion, but do not by any
Maxim of true Logic reach it, or infer it; Examples of both may be these.

2. That which is Attested unanimously by such a Multitude of Witnesses, and so
Circumstanc'd, that they can neither be Mistaken in it Themselves, nor Conspire
to deceive others is true; But

That there is such a City as Rome is attested by such a multitude of
Witnesses, and so Circumstanc'd, that they can neither be Mistaken in it
Themselves, nor Conspire to deceive others; therefore

That there is such a City as Rome is True.

What Is Promised will be; but

That my Debtor will pay me money to morrow is what is promised; therefore

That my Debtor will pay me money to morrow will be;

Where Omitting the Former at present, the Medium [what's Promis'd] is a Common
Notion in respect of Paying; whence we use to say, All Promises are either
Broken or Kept: Besides, it is far from being Proper or Immediate to the Effect
of Paying; in regard that multitudes of Cross-causes may intervene, hindering
that Effect from following, though never so really intended; whereas taking a
Proper Effect [viz. my Chambers being Enlightn'd] proved by it is Proper Cause
[the Suns darting it is Rays in through my Window] at which rate all the Course
of Nature, and all the Demonstrations that might be framed of it all along, do
hang together, nothing can intervene to hinder it; the Efficiency of the Cause
being still the Putting the Effect.

3. Common Mediums not being immediate but Remote, are not in true Speech
Mediums apt to Connect the Extremes. For, since what Connects two others must
it self be Connected with them both; and what is Connected to two things must
be Immediate to them both; it follows, that a Common Notion, not being
Immediate to the Two Extremes, cannot Connect them; and, so, cannot be in
proper Speech, or Univocally, a Middle Term with that which is Immediate.

4. Wherefore, all Assent to a Conclusion from a Common Medium is a Deviation
from Humane Nature; and, consequently, Opprobrious. Whence comes the Proverb
Turpe est opinari, it is Shameful to Assent upon Uncertain and Inconclusive
Mediums, such as are Common ones. To which agrees that saying of Holy Writ, Qui
credit cito levis est cord; He that assents hastily is light of heart; that is
Inconstant or Unsteady in his Thoughts and Actions. Whence also he that adheres
stiffly upon Opinionative Grounds incurrs the Note of being an Opiniatre. The
reason is, because, Reason being Man's Nature, so that as Brutes are led by
Sense so he is led by some Reason (good or bad) in all his Actions, and True
Reason being a Power to draw True Conclusions out of True Premises; hence,
every Assent Involves (as it were practically) that the thing is True for such
a Reason; which Proposition is False if that Reason, for which he assents, does
not Conclude it True, as Common Mediums do not. Wherefore, Reason being the
true Nature given us by GOD; and Truth the Perfection of that Nature, all
Assents upon Incompetent or Inconclusive Grounds do doubly injure our Nature;
First, as to its Essence, by Concluding unduely; next, as to it is Perfection,
in making it embrace a Falsho^d; and, such a Falsehood as makes it liable to
fall into many others, by imbuing the understanding with a wrong Method of
Reasoning; whence he lies exposed, by leaving the paths of Right Reason, to the
Disrepute of being either Passionate or Ignorant.

5. They who do Assent upon such an Inconclusive Medium, notwithstanding that
they see it is Inconclusive, are convinced to be Deserters of Humane Nature,
and led blindly by Passion. For, since all Reasoning is built upon First
Principles, they who come nearest the Deny^ng First Principles, do radically
(as it were) put off and abdicate their Whole Nature; But such Assenters come
as near as is possible to the Denying First Principles; for they Assent, that
is, they Judge or say interiourly, the Conclusion is True, or that the thing
is; and yet they see at the same time, that the Reason, on which only they
rely for that Assent, does not Con^lude it to be; that is, they see it may not
be, notwithstanding that Reason: which is to Assent or Judge that to be, which
yet, at the same time, they Judge may not be: which is in Substance, though not
in Direct Terms, (Nature not permitting such a palpable Contradiction to settle
in a Subject made to see Truth) as it is to Deny the First Principle [ what it
is] or, It is Impossible a Thing should be and not be at once.

Corol. I. Hence, such Men are convinced to belly their own knowledge, to be
False to themselves, Self-condemned, highly Passionate, Prejudiced and Governed
by mere Will; that is, to be blindly Willful; which is the Greatest and most
Unnatural Depravation, that a Spiritual or Knowing Nature is capable of.
Wherefore, they are Justly held to be disposed for any Ill that a Depraved Soul
can desire. Which ought to make every prudent Man wary in his Conversing or
Negotiating with them, if he cannot well avoid them totally; since, having
renounced the Conduct of Evident Reason, no Reason can manage them, nor the
wisest Man give any guess at what they will do, or whether the blind Impulse of
Ungovernable Passion will hurry them.

6. Whatever Allowance may be made for Weak or Ignorant People, there can be no
Excuse for a Learned Man if he Assents upon a Common or Inconclusive Medium.
Because there can be no Necessity Imaginable that can compel him to Interior
Assent, as (perhaps) there may be to force him to Outward Actions; in regard
God has given us a Faculty of Suspending our Assent till we see Evidence; lest
our Weakness or Carelessness should at every turn precipitate us into Error.

7. From what has been said, it is seen that Common Mediums can, at most, but
prove a thing Probable or likely to be; which may consist with it is not-being
or being False. The Former part is proved, because Proper Mediums only make the
Conclusion Certain; and therefore such as these can only render it Probable or
Likely. The Second part is proved by every days Experience, which shows us how
often we are Deceived in Likelihoods or Probabilities, even though Great ones;
and that the Contrary frequently happens to what such slight Grounds made us
expect.

8. When those who are Invincibly Ignorant do assent upon such Common Mediums,
it leaves no Note upon them more than that of Weakness and Ignorance; For,
since such Men do, as is supposed, use the best of their Understanding, their
Erring does not spring from the Obliquity or Bias of their Wills perverting
their Light of Reason, which secures their Morality Untainted.

9. Though we ought not to Act thus Interiourly, or Assent, upon Inconclusive
Mediums; yet Probability is very often enough to make us act Exteriourly when
those Actions are Necessary to be done; even though they be subject to great
hazard. Thus Merchants venture their Effects to Sea, even in the time of War,
because their State of life requires it; yet, even then, they must have
Evidence that it is best to venture; otherwise their Reason is some way
Defective. So that Humane Nature still Obliges all Men to Act upon some
Evidence.

10. In Cases of Conscience, and Lawsuits, which are only Probable, and in
which Interest is concerned; the safest way is first to purge our Affections
from Coveting that which is perhaps our Neighbors; next, not to trust to
Casuists whom we apprehend to have Large Cases favorable to our Interest; nor
to make choice of a Lawyer who is a Crafty Knave; but rather one who is reputed
Honest, so he be Intelligent. For, while we proceed thus, the Will and
Conscience is kept Clear; however the Decision of the matter may hap to be
Unjust.

11. Thus far of Opinion: FAITH or Belief (speaking of Human Faith to which our
Circumstances determine our Discourse) is built on Human Testimony or Witnessing
Authority. To which ere we ought to yield Assent, two things are Prerequisit,
viz. That we be Certain it could certainly know the things it Attests, and that
it speaks truly when it does Attest them: that is, there are requisite Knowledge
and Veracity in the Attesters.

12. If we certainly know that the Attesters knew the thing, and did not only
fancy they knew it, it is most Certain the thing is so as they knew it to be;
For, since to know a thing is to have the thing in our Understanding as it is
in it self, and none can know what is not Knowable, or is not: it follows, that
all Knowledge of the Thing's Being, or of it is being thus or thus, does most
certainly Infer that thing to be as the Asserters knew it to be.

13. Care is to be had that the Attesters did truly Know the Thing and not only
fancy they knew it when they knew it not. For, since Mankind is often deceived
in thinking they know, and only True Knowledge in the Attesters can ground our
Second-hand Knowledge that it is, grounded on their Knowing it to be; it
follows, that we must be sure those Attesters could not err in knowing that
thing, ere we can Rationally believe them.

14. Wherefore no Testimony built on their Knowing Speculative Points can have
any force upon our Understanding or Oblige it to Belief. For, since we
experience that even Learned Men do often err in their Speculations, either
through Inadvertency, the Obscurity or Perplexedness of the Object, Ambiguity of
Words, Dread of some Authority which over-aws their Reason, or, lastly, through
want of Logic or a Right Method how to manage their Thoughts: It follows, that
we cannot be Sure that they do not err, or that they do truly know Speculative
Points; nor, consequently, can we be Certain that the thing is truly so as they
pretend to know it is. All the power they have over us is, to make us prudently
wary not to oppose such Speculaters, but upon Evident Reason: especially if
they be many and of Repute; but much more if they pretend to go upon
Intrinsical Mediums; in which the Mistake is both seldom, and quickly
discovered if brought to the Test.

Corol. II. Hence no Credit at all is to be given to such Reasoners who do not
so much as pretend to Demonstrate, tho never so many. For such men do not so
much as affirm themselves to be Knowers, or that the thing is Certainly so as
they deem it to be; and, so, they can have no kind of Authority, even though
their Speculative thoughts were a thing Attestable. Whence we may establish
this Maxim, viz. That No Reasoner (precisely as such) has any kind of Authority
but by virtue of the Reason he produces; that is, the Reason, which he
alleges, and not his Saying or Word ought to have any force at all upon our
Understanding.

15. Wherefore Testimony has for it is Object either Particular things, or
Matters of Fact necessarily knowable by Mankind, using their Common and
Frequent Sensations, or relying on Vnerrable Experience. For since Universal
Notions are the Object of Speculation, and men ^. 14.
may err in their Speculations; Vniversals cannot be the Objects of Witnessing
Authority or Testimony, but Particulars only. Again, since every Particular is
not obvious to Sense, but many of them are so Circumstanc'd, Insensible, or
Remote, that we can have no Certain Experience of them; it follows that only
such Particular Objects or Matters of Fact, as make a lively and Certain
Impression on the Senses, are those which can be Attested or be the Object of
Testimony.

16. Experience may be so Circumstanced, that it is Impossible the thing
Experienced should be otherwise. For, since the Senses of Mankind, in due
circumstances, are as apt to convey sincere Impressions of Sensible Objects
into our Minds, as other Natural Causes to produce their Effects, they being
designed and fitted by God and Nature for that end: it follows, that (if other
Circumstances be agreeaable) it is Impossible but they should give us such
Experiential Knowledge of Sensible Matters of Fact, or Particulars, as may
assure us of the things being as we Experience it. The Circumstances required
to this Absolute Assurance is, that the Object proposed be of a thing Subject
to Sense; that it be within a Convenient Distance; and, that the I^pression be
not hindered or perverted by an Inconvenient Medium. Hence, we can be absolutely
Certain what House or Street we live in, of our Acquaintance, or Employment,
who reigns in such a year; and of Notable Actions, Universally Knowable, that
happened in such or such a time; lastly, of Multitudes of Private Actions,
familiarly known to our selves only.

17. Besides Knowledge in the Attester, there is also requisite Veracity in him
to ground Human Faith. For, let the Attester know the Object never so well, if
we cannot be Certain he tells us True when he says he knows it, his Original
Knowledge cannot have any Effect on us, or beget a Second-hand Knowledge in us,
derivable from his Pretended Knowledge of that Object.

18. No Authority deserves Assent farther then Reason gives it to deserve. For,
let us take two Authorities, one that of a whole Town, the other of a Knight of
the Post; and (since our Nature allows us that Privilege) let it be asked why
the Latter is not to be credited as much as the Former? and the answer will be,
For such a Reason. So that Reason, in Common, is the Ground of our Believing at
all, as well as of our believing one Authority rather than Another. And, this
because Reason is our Nature given us by GOD; and, therefore, every Act of our
Soul that is not for some Reason and according to Reason, is totally without
Reason; that is Unnatural, that is Irrational, that is Brutal or Unbecoming a
Man.

19. Wherefore no Man can be obliged to believe beyond the Motive he has to
believe. For, that degree of Belief that is beyond the Motive or the Reason, as
far as it is beyond the Reason is Evidently without Reason, or Irrational.
Whence follows that our Reason is to give us our Grounds of Belief, both as to
the Knowledge and the Veracity of the Attesters. For otherwise our Belief would
have no Reason at all for the Grounds it is to rely upon, and so would be
perfectly Irrational.

Corol. III. Wherefore, since God governs his Creatures according to the Nature
he has given them; he does not Command us to Assent absolutely upon any
Authority which may either be Deceived or Deceive us. For, otherwise, men may
be led into Error by obeying GOD's Command; that is, since GOD laid that
Command, by GOD Himself.

20. Wherefore both the Knowledge and Veracity of the Attesters must be Knowable
by Intrinsical Mediums taken from the Nature of the Thing; and those must be
also Conclusive ones. For, their Knowledge and Veracity must either be made
known by Intrinsical Mediums, or by Extrinsical ones; that is by Another
Authority; and the same question recurrs, How we are Certain of the Knowledge
and Veracity of that other Authority, and so in infinitum. Whence we must come
to be certain of the Knowledge and Veracity of Authority by Intrinsical Mediums,
or we can have no Ground at all to believe any Authority. Moreover, the proper
work of Reason is to Demonstrate, which is done by Intrinsical Mediums; and,
unless they be Conclusive, they prove nothing, and so are good for nothing.

21. The Knowledge of the First Attesters is ascertained by what has been
proved... 15.16. Their Veracity must be proved by showing there could be no
Apparent Good to move their Wills to deceive us; and the best proof (omitting
the Impossibility of joining in such an Universal Conspiracy to deceive, the
Certain loss of their Credit to tell a Lie against Notorious Matters of Fact
etc.) is the seen Impossibility of Compassing their Immediate End, which was to
Deceive. Which reason is grounded on this, that no one man, who is not
perfectly Frantic, acts for an End that he plainly sees Impossible to be
compassed. For example, to fly to the Moon, or to swim over Thames upon a Pig
of Lead. Thus it is Demonstrable that all England could not Conspire to deceive
those born since, in asserting to them that there was a King Charles the First,
or a Long Parliament which raised a Civil War here; because they must see it is
impossible to gain Belief of it, which was their Immediate End; (whatever
farther End they might propose to themselves) So many Records, Practices, Laws,
and other Consequences Issuing thence, giving them the Lie; besides the
Histories of our own and other Countries; and the Concatenation of Causes and
Effects in the Political part of our Neighboring Nations, all conspiring
unanimously and appositly to detect the Cheat. Wherefore, the End being
Evidently Impossible to be achieved; it could never be an Apparent good to
them in such a case to act for such an End, or to attempt to deceive us by
Attesting it; and, therefore, they could not tell such a Lie in such a Case;
therefore they were Veracious while they Attested it.

22. Though both the Knowledge and Veracity of the Attesters be Demonstrated, and,
Consequently, the thing Attested by them be most Certainly and necessarily
True; yet our Assent to the Truth of that thing is neither Science no^ Opinion.
It cannot be Opinion, because the Medium that begets Opinion is not Necessarily
Connected with the Extremes, as is found here. Nor can it be Science, because
our Knowledge of the thing is not taken from the Thing it self that is attested,
causing such a Notion or Impression in us directly by it is self, or by Reflex
Knowledges upon those Direct ones (on which kind of Impressions all Science is
built) but it is a Knowledge Reflected to us from Another Knowledge of it, or a
kind of Second-hand Knowledge. Nor is the Knowledge which even the Attesters had
of the Object at First-hand, a Proper Effect of the Ens or Thing which is the
Object of that Knowledge. Nor is the Thing, as an Object, the Proper Cause of
that Knowledge; only which can beget Science. For, a Proper Cause has a Real
Order or Relation, to it is Proper Effect; whereas the Objects have no Real
Relation at all to the Senses or our Knowing Power, as was shown above where we
treated of Relation; By which we may farther more clearly discover the
Essential Differences between Science, Faith, and Opinion.

It may be objected that Intelligibility is a Property of Ens; therefore every
Ens is a Proper Cause of Knowledge. It Is answered that it is only a Property of
Ens Negatively (as it were) in regard nothing can be understood but Ens; Non
Ens not being able to cause any knowledge in us. Or, it may mean that it is only
a Property of Ens in order to an Extrinsical thing, not a true Property,
Perfecting it Intrinsically; as Properties due to a thing by Nature, and
Springing from their Essences, do. It may be objected farther that all Natural
Powers are true Properties though they respect Extrinsical things on which they
are to work. It Is answered, that they perfect those Entities Intrinsically, or
give them some perfection in their Intrinsical Nature, which, Intelligibility
does not; for nothing is Intrinsically better, or otherwise than it would be,
for being Known or Understood. To explicate this better, we may consider that
every Entity, being a Part of the World, has some Office or Place there, and
some part which it is to act on the Stage of Nature. And, accordingly,
Metaphysics teach us that every Body is constituted such by it is having some
Primary Operation, which it is fitted to produce; as Fire to heat, Water to
Cool, etc. Whence, what ever fits it for such an Operation is either Essential
to it, or a Property immediately Connected with it is Essence; such as are those
Natural Powers objected. Now it is Evident that those Powers do perfect each
Nature Intrinsically; since without them it would be Imperfect and Impotent to
perform that which it was Essentially Ordained for; and so the whole course of
Nature, carried on by such Proper Causes to Proper Effects, would be quite out
of frame and Order; whereas, it is manifest it would suffer no detriment at all
in it self, whether those Proper Causes or Effects were Understood or no. Which
shows that their being Known by the First Attesters, or made known to us by
their Knowing them, is not a Proper Effect of those Causes, nor Intrinsical to
them as they are parts of Corporeal Nature, but Accidental to them as such; but
yet so Accidental that it is Inseparable from them; and, so, does Necessarily
infer the Conclusion.

23. Testimony on which Human Faith relies, is adequately divided into Living
and Dead; that is into such Attesters as speak viva voce, and those that speak
by Writing. Because there is no Common or Ordinary way but Speech and Written
or Printed Characters by which Men can relate Matters of Fact to others, or
testify to them their Knowledge of such things.

24. Matters of fact done long a go, if very Concerning to have the Knowledge of
them Continued, and that they were known at first by the Experience of a great
portion of Mankind, may be made known to us who live now, by a Delivery of them
down from the foregoing Age to the succeeding One. Which Continued Testimony or
Delivery of them is called Tradition. For, since the Generality of First
Attesters, who lived in the same time when they happened, could not but know
them; and the Continual Concern of them could not but still prompt and provoke
Foregoers to speak of them to their Descendents; it follows, that the
Continuance of those Causes may still continue the same Effect, and bring the
Knowledge of them down to our times.

25. Practice, if Frequent, and Obligatory to be Continued, will most certainly
bring down the Tradition of Former Matters of Fact. This is Evident; for it is
Impossible that the Martyrdom of King Charles the First, or the horrid Powder
Treason should ever be forgotten, if the Anniversary of them have a Continued
Obligation of celebrating such Matters of Fact but once a Year; much more, were
such Practices often repeated.

26. Such a Tradition of such Matters of Fact is Equally Certain though the thing
Attested had happened some Thousands of Years ago, as if it had happened but an
Hundred Years since. For, since it is equally Easy for the succeeding Age to
understand the Attesters, Witnessing still all along that they had been told
it, as it was to understand the First Attesters relating they had seen it;
Their Testimony, as far as concerns their Knowledge of what was transmitted,
has equal force as had the First Attestation: And, since the Wills of the
Intermediate Attesters had the same Object ( viz. an Apparent Good) which they
could not desert or go against, or act without it, and an Evident Impossibility
could not be an Apparent Good; and it was equally acting for an Evident
Impossibility, to conspire to say they had such a thing Universally Testified
to them by their Forefathers, or to hope to gain Belief of it, if it had not
been so Attested; their Veracity, in Attesting they thus received it, was no
less Assured. Wherefore, the same Causes being put all along in each succeeding
Age as were at the first, the same Effect of Delivering it down with the same
Certainty, must still be Continued, though for some thousands of Years.

27. No Dead Testimony or History has any Authority, but by virtue of Living
Testimony or Tradition. For, since Falsehoods may be Written or Printed as well
as Truths, it follows that nothing is therefore of any Authority, because it is
Written or Printed. Wherefore, no Book or History can Authenticate another
Book; whence follows that, if it have any Authority, it must have it from
Living Authority or Tradition, continuing down to us the Consent of the World,
from the time that Author Writ, or the matters of Fact it relates were done,
that the things it relates are True in the main; and, consequently, that the
Book that relates them deserves Credit, or is (as we use to say) an Authentic
History. For example, had a Romance, (soberly penned,) and Curtius's History
been found in a Trunk for many Hundreds of Years after they were writ; and the
Tradition of the former Ages had been perfectly Silent concerning them both,
and the Matters they relate; we must either have taken both of them for a
Romance, or both for a True History; being destitute of any Light to make the
least difference between them.

28. Tradition not only authenticates Books in the bulk, but it gives moreover
the d^stinct degrees of Credibility to diverse passages in the same Book already
authenticated in gross. For no wise Man can give the same degree of Credibility
to Alexander's cutting the Gordian Knot, or to his speaking such and such words
to Hephaestion or Parmenio, as he is forced to give to his Conquest of Asia:
And why? all of them being Equally in the Books? Certainly, because the latter
being Visible, Remarkable, and of great Concern to Innumerable Attesters of it
at first, so vast a source of Original Attesters did, consequently, carry down
a Matter of fact so hugely Notorious with a vast sway; whereas the others,
being particulars, of small Concern or Note, and seen or heard but by a few at
first, wanted a strong Tradition to recommend them for Certain Truths. Whence,
(for ought we know,) they were grounded and writ upon Hearsay, as our News and
many particular Actions and Sayings of Great Men are now adays, which
oftentimes prove False.

29. Hence appears, that Historical Faith, merely as Historical, that is, in
passages Vnabetted by Tradition, is not Absolutely Certain, but is liable to be
False or Erroneous, and so is not without some Degree of Levity to be
absolutely Assented to; though we cannot generally with prudence Contradict them,
but let them pass as if they were Truths, till some good occasion awakens our
Doubt of them: The reason is given, in our last Paragraph, from this, that all
Particulars are of slight Credit that were not Abetted by a Large and
well-grounded Tradition.

30. Tradition thus qualified as is abovesaid, viz. So that the Matters of
Fact were Certainly Experienced by very great Multitudes of the First
Attesters; that they were of great or universal Concern, and so prompting them
still to relate them to the next Age; that they were Abetted by some obligatory
Practice; and, lastly Impossible to gain a Belief, if they had not been; and
thence, Obliging the Attesters to Veracity: Such a Tradition, I say, is more
than Morally, that is, Absolutely Certain. To omit the foregoing reasons, which
have evinced the force of each of these particulars. This will be Evidently
seen, or rather Experientially felt; by Reflecting on our own Interior; and by
observing how Nature works in Mankind and forces them to Assent firmly to the
points which such a Tradition recommends, and to Suspend as to the other. For
Instance; Let us take some Particular that is only Morally Certain; as, that I
shall not dye this Night; or, that when I walk abroad a Tile shall not fall
from a House, and kill me; or, that the House I live in shall not fall down and
crush me; or such like. I find at first sight, that these are highly Unlikely,
because it very seldom happens; and many reasons may occurr why I think it will
not be; Yet if I severely call to account my most Serious and Deliberate
thoughts to find any Absolutely Certain Reason, why that may not happen to me
which has happened to others; I shall perceive that I can find none such.
Whence, I can entertain some Degree of Suspense, whether it may not possibly
happen to me or no; which restrains me from Assenting absolutely that it will
not. This duly reflected on, let us propose to our selves Another Particular,
to be scanned likewise by our most strictly-examining Thoughts: viz. whether
there was a Henry the 8 th. a Julius Caesar, or that Alexander conquered Asia.
Which being proposed to our Examination, let us again consult our Thoughts, and
put on the most Skeptical Disquisitiveness we are able, to find out some
reason, why these may not possibly be False, as well as the others might. And,
in despite of all our most Exact search, and our utmost endeavors to put our
selves upon doubting of these said particulars, we shall still find the
Affirmative of each of them writ in our Breast in such Indelible Characters,
and so Solidly Imprinted there by Nature (I say, by Nature, for that Certainty
was not Acquired by Study and Speculation) that we can never be able to invent
any kind of Reason that can breed in us the least degree of Suspense, as to the
Verity of these, and such like Matters of Fact; or unfix us from our most
steadfast Adherence to them as most Certain Truths. Which shows Evidently that
the former were only Morally Certain, that is, had some Contingency in them,
and so, might possibly be otherwise than we, till we came to reflect, deemed
them; whereas those Latter were more than Morally, that is Absolutely Certain;
because, after the most accurate Reflection, we could not invent, and heartily
embrace, any Ground or Reason to admit the least Suspense as to their Truth;
nor how or why they might possibly be False, or (which is the same) that the
Testimony or Tradition for them could be Fallacious.

Corol. IV. Hence we may make a farther Discovery of the force of Practical
Self-evidence instilled by Nature without Study: and, that it is a solid
Knowledge of the An est of the thing Attested, and, consequently, of the
Conclusive Force of Tradition, as also of many other Truths; the Quid est of
which (or the Grounds on which our Rational Nature Unreflectingly, and as it
were, at unawares proceeded,) is to be Demonstrated by Learned Men, looking
exactly into Intrinsecal Mediums; and thence discovering how this Effect, viz.
such a Firm Adhesion, was wrought in us Connaturally; or why such an Authority
could not deceive us in Attesting such Particulars.

Note, That some of these Matters of Fact now mentioned, do fall short as to
some of the best Qualifications found in diverse other Traditions; viz. as to
that of their being Practical. Which gives us farther light to discern the
Incomparable Strength of Tradition, and how every way Impossible it is it
should deceive us, were it furnished with all the Advantages it might have.

13. Hence is seen that Opinionative Faith is as much Irrational as Opinion was
shown to be, taking it as Opposed to Science; for example.

What an Old Wife said is True That she saw a Spright is what an Old Wife said;
therefore That she saw a Spright is True.
LESSON IX. Of Assent, Suspense, Certainty and Uncertainty.
1. THE Notion of Potentiality, Indifferency, Indetermination, and Uncertainty,
as conceived to be in the Thing, are one and the same; For, if the Thing be
considered merely as a Power to be This or That, or to be thus or thus, it is
evident from the Terms that it is not (as thus conceived,) Actually,
Particularly, Determinately or Certainly this, or thus; since all Difference,
Determination, and, consequently, Certainty in the thing (which, if well
reflected on, are no more but it is being what it is) do spring from the Act or
Form; as all Potentiality, Indifferency, Indetermination and Uncertainty of
being this, or being thus, does from the Matter.

2. Existence, as being the Last Actuality, takes away all Potentiality,
Indifferency, and Uncertainty of being this, or thus that can possibly be in
the Thing. This is as Evident as it is that Perfect Light takes away Darkness,
or, that any Opposite is Inconsistent with the other Opposite in the same kind;
or, to come nearer our point, that what is, has, while it is, lost all
Potentiality or Power of not being while it is.

3. Wherefore, considering the Thing as it is in our Understanding, it remains
Indeterminate and Uncertain to us; that is, our Understanding, which is
Informed by it, is Potential or Indeterminate it self; and consequently, we are
Uncertain Intellectually till we see it is. The reason is, because all our
Knowledge is Entirely and Adequately taken from the Thing, which makes the
Understanding Conformable to it according to the degree of Clearness or
Obscurity whereby it is represented to us, or affects us: Whence follows, that,
when we see the Existence of the Thing, or that it is, our Understanding is
ultimately Determinate, that is, we are Absolutely Certain.

4. Wherefore, on the contrary, while we see the Thing may not be for ought we
know, our Understanding is Indeterminate as to it is Being; that is, we must
remain Uncertain that it is. For, it is against a First Principle of our
Understanding, that the Thing may not be and be at once.

5. Wherefore, [ Assent] being the Judging that a thing is, all that passes in
us (if we act Rationally) is Suspense till we come to a Proof that Concludes it
is. This is manifest from the Terms; For the Words [Suspending of Assent] do
show that, take away all Suspense, Assent succeeds: and, consequently, that
(unless it so happens that we see a thing to be clearly False) all is Suspense
till we come at Assent.

6. Wherefore all Common and Remote Mediums, which are only apt to ground
Opinion, being unable to conclude the Thing is; they are, consequently, unable
to Determine the Understanding that the Thing is, and, therefore, they must
leave it (if it works rationally) in some degree of Suspense; Indetermination
or (which is (...) same) in Uncertainty. This is Evident; because such Proofs
do reach only to show the thing Likely to be, which falls short of it is Being
really and Indeed; for Likelihood to be is not the Notion of Being, since [what
is, most Certainly is] which goes beyond all Likelihoods, how great soever they
may be imagined to be.

7. Suspense may be considered as Indifferently hovering between the Things
being or not being, or without Inclining to either of them. For, sometimes we
have no kind of Reason inclining us to the Likelihood of the one more than of
the other. As we experience it happens to us as to our Determining whether the
Number of the Stars be Even or Odd.

8. Hence Assent consists in an Indivisible (as does also Dissent, or a
Judgment that the thing is not) but all Suspense is Divisible or Capable of
Different Degrees. The former part is Evident, because it is proper Object, [
is] or [ being] is Indivisible, as is also the Object of Dissent [ is not,]
whereas the Objects of Suspense are seeming Distances from the things being so
Actually, or Approaches toward it; or in Dissent, Approaches toward it is
seeming not to be so; that is, Removes from it is being so.

9. The Differences of this perfectly Indifferent Suspense are more and Less
seemingly Distant from, or Approaching to, the Actual Being of the Thing. For
this Indifferent Suspense, by it is being Indifferent, is a kind of Genus to the
others, and abstracts from them both; and therefore, the Differences of it must
be more and less in that kind.

Corol. I. The Disinclining toward Assent or Inclining toward Dissent that
the thing is, is called Doubt; and, if the Being of that Thing is our Good, it
grounds that Passion called Fear of loosing it. And, the Inclining toward
Assent in such a Case, or Disinclining to Dissent, causes a disposition in the
Understanding opposite to Doubt; which, (tho we want a name for it) is a certain
chearing Glimpse in the Understanding, which was in perfect Darkness before,
and grounds that Passion which we call Hope. Both which Passions are Rational
or Irrational, according as the Likelihoods on which they are built are Great
or Slight.

10. Those Different Inclinations or Propensions of the Understanding toward
the Things being or not being may be taken from Innumerable Heads: viz. From
the mere Frequency or Seldomness of the things Happening; from Historical
Relations unabetted by Tradition; from Rumor and Common Talk; from Writers of
Uncertain Authority, or proceeding upon Speculation or Opinion; from the
Multitude of such Authors as do not so much as pretend to know, yet are of
great Name or Authority; from the bare Sentiments of Antiquity; from relying on
our Nurses, Parents or Tutors; from Medals, Monuments, Inscriptions, Fables,
etc. From Misconceits deluding our Fancy; from Equivocation of words; from
Interest and Prejudice; from ill-agreeing Observations made by our selves of
the same happening in a like case; from Mistakes of Proper Causes, etc. All
which agree in this that they are Common or Remote Mediums.

11. Some Degrees of Suspense are so small and Indiscernable, that they are not
easy to be discovered, so that they counterfeit an Assent even in the Wisest,
and cause a Real Assent in Weak People. Such as are the Instances of Moral
Certainty mentioned L. 3.. 30.
above.

12. The way to discover whether they be Assents or Suspences is to Reflect on
our own Interior, and to study better our careless thoughts, by asking our
selves what Certain Ground we had for them. For, it is Evident that we have many
Effects wrought in us by Nature, which, for want of Reflection, we are not aware
of; in regard our Thoughts, and the several natures of them, cannot possibly be
known but by Reflection. For, to use our former Example, we seem to Assent
Absolutely that we shall not dye this Night; and even the Wisest Men, if they
be now in perfect health, do seem to take it to be altogether Certain, or (to
speak more properly) that themselves are Absolutely Certain of it; yet, upon
recourse to their Grounds, finding themselves unable to fathom the Series of
Hidden Causes and the multitude of Casualties that may occur, which they
habitually knew beforehand that they did not certainly know; we shall find
that, notwithstanding this seeming Assent of theirs, they yet retained some
small Degree of Suspense whether it might happen or no, which hindered them
from truly Assenting.

13. From what is said it appears that Certainty is a Qualification of Assent,
giving it it is best perfection by Securing it from Error; and making it, at
the same time, Incapable of ever admitting the least Degree of Suspense. For,
since our Assent may hap to be, and oft-times is, upon Irrational and
Inconclusive Grounds; which expose it, when discovered, to the shame of a
future Retractation; but Certain Assent, cannot be liable to that Hazard and
Inconvenience, because what is Certain to us, is True beyond all Peradventure;
it is evident that Certainty superadds to Assent the highest Perfection that
can be.

14. Certainty may either be considered as it is in the Object or the Thing; or
else, as it is in the Subject or Person who is Ascertained by by that Object.

15. Certainty on the Objects side is nothing but the Things being
Determinately what it is, or as it is. This is in a manner Self-evident; For
every thing that is, is Determinate; and it is being Fixed to be such, is to be
Certainly such of it is own Nature; independently on any thing but on the First
Cause Establishing that Nature to be what it is; or ordering it, by Second
Causes, to be as it is.

16. Certainty on the Subject's side is the Conformity of our Understanding to
this Objective Certainty. For, we can neither be Certain nor Uncertain without
Reasons or Motives; and those must either be taken from the Established or
Certain Nature of the Things, or they can be no Reasons.

17. Wherefore, when we discourse or dispute about the Certainty of any Point,
it can only be meant of Certainty in the Subject, or of Certainty to us: for,
of Certainty on the Object's side, or that the Thing is Certainly or
Determinately what it is, there can be no Dispute.

Corol. II. Hence, Certainty being the Determination of the Understanding,
which is to be led by Reason; all Determination of our Understanding which
springs from the Will, and not from Reason, is not to be called Certainty, but
Resolvedness or Wiliful Adhesion.

18. Wherefore it is most Irrational, and a most senseless Abuse of the word [
Certainty] to ground it on the Subjects or the Person's own Persuasion that the
thing is so, and not on the Thing it self. For, since our Soul is of her self
Tabula rasa, all our Knowledge, and the Firmness or Solidity of our Knowledge,
that is our Certainty, must either be taken from the Things that are without
us, or (since Nature can have no other Method but tha^;) it must be inspired
Supernaturally. Wherefore, such a Fantastic and Catachrestical Certainty, is
convinced to be nothing in those men that are capable of weighing Reasons, but
a Self-conceited Resolution to hold or think thus, and to Stick to it, out of
mere Wilfulness (its true and only Ground) in defiance of all Reason, and of
the Natures of Things which do ground all our Reason.

19. Hence follows, that that Certainty they Nickname [ Moral] is in reality,
Uncertainty. For, since all Certainty has for it is Object or Cause the
Existence of the Thing on which all true Assent is grounded; and this,
consisting in an Indivisible has no Degrees; it follows that as when you step
never so little out of the Notion of [is] which is its Object, you plunge into
[is not] so you no sooner relinguish (though never so little) the true Notion of
Certainty but you fall into Uncertainty, in regard the Object of it permits no
degrees of passing from one to the other, or Approaching to it nearer by little
and little. Wherefore, since Moral Certainty imports some Diminution of True
Certainty, it must necessarily be some kind, or some degree of Uncertainty,
Whence to say [ I am morally certain of a Thing] is, in rigor, the same
Nonsense as it is to say I am Uncertainly Certain, or (which is consequent to
it) I ignorantly know, I suspendingly or hoveringly Assent, I diffidently
believe or can probably demonstrate. Wherefore, when in common speech men use
to say they are morally certain, it is a Catachrestical phrase, and signifies
only that the thing is highly likely, or that they Incline strongly to think
it is True.

20. Hence follows, that Certainty and Infallibility are all one, or the
self-same Notion. For, since Nothing sounds more contrary to the Common Sense
of Mankind than to say, we are Certain of any thing peradventure, Certainty
must be such a Fixure of the Mind, as to the Existence of the Thing, as is
beyond all Peradventures of being Deceived in that thing, or beyond all
Contingency that it may happen to be otherwise than we are Certain it is.
Again, since Certainty is the Immediate Effect of our Knowledge of the Thing,
and the thing is Infallibly, what it self is; and our knowledge of a Thing (it
being Essentially a Conformity to that thing) is Infallibly as the Thing is: it
follows demonstratively that Certainty, which determins and fixes our
Understanding by such a Knowledge, or a Knowledge so grounded, must be likewise
Infallible. Lastly, (to omit many other Conclusive Proofs) If Infallibility and
Certainty be not the same Notion, then they are different Notions; that is,
[Infallible] is one of the Differences of Certainty, distinguishing it from
other sorts or Species of Certainty; wherefore there must (in that supposition)
be another species of Certainty which is not Infallible; that is, (since what
is not Infallible must be Fallible) there must be another Species of Certainty
which is Fallible Certainty; But this is against the Common Sense and Language
of Mankind; nor can there be greater Nonsense than to say, I am Fallibly
Certain of such a Thing; nor, (though there could not want occasions to use
such words) was it ever heard or read since the Creation that any man did ever
join these two words [ Fallibly and Certain] together in their Discourses and
Writings. Therefore, [ Infallible] is not a Difference of Certainty as its
Genus or (which the same) a Notion Different from it; whence it is Logically
demonstrated that it is the same Notion with it, or that Certainty and
Infallibility are all one.

Quaere. Why is [Infallible] then added to [Certainty] if it have no Different
Signification from it, or do not add some degree of Certainty to it? Or why
does Mankind use such a needless Tautology? It Is answered; We may observe that
though to say I am Infallibly Certain of such a Thing, suits very well with the
Notions and the Sense and Language of Mankind, yet men never use it but when
some Circumstance requires it to put others out of all possible Doubt of the
Thing in question: And then Nature puts them upon Redoubling, as it were, their
Words or Expressions to assure them of their Certainty of that Thing. Thus in
such Cases, they use to say, I know it, I tell you once again, I know it to be
so; or, they think it not enough to say barely I saw it, or I heard it, but
they express themselves thus, I saw it with my own eyes; or I heard it with my
own ears; which, were it not on such an occasion, would seem foolish and
Tautological; since no man can see but with his own Eyes, nor hear but with his
own Ears: Or, it may be answered that some men use in such occasions to join [
Infallible] to [ Certainty] to signify True Certainty, and to distinguish it
from that Mock-Certainty called Moral; which must be a Fallible Certainty if it
be any Certainty at all, that is, an Uncertain Certainty. Whence, since Mankind
never used such a phrase as Fallibly Certain, though they might have had many
occasions to do so, had it not been Chimerical and Nonsense, and against their
Natural Notion of Certainty; we may hence farther demonstrate (in confirmation
of our 19th. Sect.) that Moral Certainty, being (if any) a Fallible Certainty,
is no kind of Certainty at all; and that it is as great Nonsense to say Morally
Certain (meaning by those words such a Certainty as we may be Deceived in) as
to say Fallibly Certain; and it would be as much abhorred by Mankind, were not
the Phrase cloak'd, and the sense of it clouded by the Unintelligible Notion of
the word [ Moral] which, as they use it, has no determinate Bounds; and so it
cannot be Defined, nor Consequently distinctly Understood. Nor (as far as I
have observed) do we read such an Expression in the Ancient Latin Authors,
either Heathens or Christians, but the word Verisimilitude or Likelihood only;
which is not so apt to impose upon Learners or Readers; till some late
Speculaters being most of them Skeptical, and blundering between Certainty and
Uncertainty, invented this odd Mixture called Moral Certainty, which should be
partly the one, partly the other. To which they were forced by their bad
Speculation, and the Care of their Credit: For, it was highly opprobrious to
say they had No Certainty at all in their Writings; and it was Impossible for
such Superficial Discoursers to show any thing truly Certain, because they
durst not undertake to Demonstrate any thing; and, therefore, to uphold their
Repute on some fashion, they were obliged to advance this Ambidextrous Notion
of Moral Certainty, which might be either Certain or Uncertain as occasion
served. Whereas, (as has been shown above) they might with full as much reason
have invented a Compound of [ is] and [ is not] which would have done a great
kindness to Skepticism, and have been a most excellent ground to verify
Contradictions. Nor is this spoken in the air; Diverse of them have made many
great steps toward this Heroic Exploit to un-man Mankind by their putting
Vacuum, Imaginary Space, Subsistent Dimensions, Negative Entities and such
Chimaeras to have a being; though, either directly or by consequence, they have
been manifested to be Pure Nothings. And as they dealt with the Notion of Ens
by confounding it with Non Entities, so they labor hard to do the same with
the Notion of Existence too, as is seen above. For they are utterly destroying
the Notion of [ is] and the Truth of this Proposition [ what is, is] while all
their Skeptical Discourses would have those best Perfections of our
Understanding (I mean Certainties) that are Immediately grounded on, and
correspond to, the being of the Thing, to be possible not to be as the thing
is, or possible to be False; which they must be, if the Notion of Certainty may
be compounded with Moral.

21. No Testimony that is Fallible in what it attests, can prove the thing
Attested by it to be True. For, since Knowledge in the Attester is necessary to
ground all Attestation, and give it any Weight; and a Testimony that is
Fallible in what it attests, may be Deceived in what it attests; it cannot be
said to Know that thing it Attests, because all knowledge consists in this that
the Understanding be Formally, that is Infallibly, as the Thing is. Whence
follows that, how firmly soever such Attesters may deem or opine that the Thing
is highly Likely to be True; yet they cannot be said to know, really and
indeed, that the Thing is True. Whence it is Concluded that such Attesters can
never prove the Truth of that thing: Truth, Fundamentally considered,
consisting in an Indivisible, as being the Existence of the thing Known; and
Formal Truth (or Truth in us) being the Conformity of our Understanding to the
Thing thus Existing; and, therefore, consisting likewise in an Indivisible.
Which sets it above all Gradual Approaches of Likelihood, or Probability of
being so; nay, above all Possibility of no^ being so, that is, of being False.
Again, they who are Fallible in the thing they Attest may be deceived in that
thing; that is, may be in an Error; and so what is built on their Testimony may
be Erroneous or False: But what is True cannot be False; therefore a Fallible
Testimony cannot be a Ground or Reason to prove a Thing, no better Attested, to
be True.

Note that this Proposition [what is True cannot be False] does hold in all
Truths, but those which are in materia contingenti; as, when we say to day [it
Rains] this Proposition may be False to morrow, when it is Fair; because the
Matter or Subject, viz. the Temper of the Air on which it is built, is Altered.
But, this Exception has no place in Speculative Truths; which Abstract from
such Contingency, and are grounded on our Natural Notions, or the Natures of
things and their Metaphysical Verity, which cannot Alter.

22. Therefore no Fallible Testimony can deserve Assent to what it Attests or
says. For, since a Fallible Testimony may attest a Falsehood, and Falsehoods do
deprave the Understanding, and to Assent to a Falsehood is a certain and Actual
Depravation of it; and, therefore, to Assent to a thing that may be false is to
hazard to deprave it; and none ought to hazard such an Injury to his Soul,
especially when there is no necessity of doing himself that harm, or of
Assenting in such a Case; both because GOD and Nature have furnished us with a
Faculty of Suspending till we have Evidence; as also, because no Outward Force
can impel us to Assent; nor any Interior Force, but that of Clear Evidence;
and a Motive that may be False (as Fallible Testimony may) cannot lay Claim to
Clear Evidence, either of it is self, or of its Grounds. It follows that such a
Testimony cannot deserve our hazarding to embrace an Error; nor, consequently,
to make us Assent upon its Attestation.

LESSON X. Of Disputation, and Paralogisms.
DIsputation must be fitted to the Occasions, and to the Ends, we aim at; which
may be either to clear Truth by combating our Adversary with downright Reason;
or only to gain a Victory over the Defendant by Stratagem. The manners of
Disputing may be shown by putting Four Cases or Circumstances which vary the
Method of it.

1. When the Defendent holds a False Thesis, the way to convince him will not
be Difficult, if the Doctrine delivered above be well considered and dexterously
made use of. For, if a fit Middle Term be taken and rightly placed, the
Conclusion will necessarily follow against him; so that he will be certainly
overthrown, and his Cause lost. But, if the Disputant be so Skilful as to
Reduce his Discourse to Identical Propositions, he will not have the face to
own his Position any longer; the First Lights of Nature standing so Evidently
against him.

2. To know in what Mood we are to frame our Syllogism, we must take the
Proposition which is Contradictory to the Defendents Tenet; and, by the Certain
Rules given as B. 2. L. 2.
above, it will be easy to know in which of the Four Moods such a Conclusion
is to be proved. For Example, suppose the Defendent holds that [Some Body is
Unchangeable] you must take and prove the Contradictory to it, viz. [No Body is
Unchangeable] which being an Universal Negative, and withal the Proposition
which is to be the Conclusion, it can only be proved in Celarent; as Ce-No
Divisible thing is Unchangeable; but la-Every Body is a Divisible thing;
therefore rent-No Body is Unchangeable.


3. The same Method must be taken if the Defendent absolutely denies any of the
Premises of the First Syllogism, or any of the Succeeding ones; or, if, by
Distinguishing, he alters the more Universal or Ambiguous Proposition, to a
more Determinate one; Only you must not now take the Contradictory to it, as
you did at first, for then it was your Adversary's Proposition which you were
to disprove, now it is your own which you are to prove; and, therefore, you must
take your Measures now from it self. For example; if he Denies the Minor, which
was an Universal Affirmative, you must prove it in Barbara, thus.

Every Quantitative thing is Divisible, but Every Body is a Quantitative thing;
therefore Every Body is Divisible.
4. Besides the having a Middle Term, and knowing in what Form to argue, some
other Rules must be Observed.

1. Get an Exact Notion of the Terms of the Proposition under debate; that is,
consider well in what Common Head they are, and how defined; which is the same
as to look attentively into the Nature of the Thing. For this will best furnish
you with Proper Mediums.

2. Agree beforehand with the Defendent about the Meaning of the Words which
express those Terms; which is the most Solid way of Stating the Question, and
of avoiding Wordish Distinctions.

3. See the Mediums be Proper or Immediate; otherwise, not being well
connected, they cannot Conclude certainly, although the Form be right.

4. Take heed of Equivocation of Words; For, otherwise, you will hazard to be
carried aside from the True State of the Question, and lose sight of the true
Nature of the Thing by mistaking one Notion for another; and, so, you will be
certainly non-plust. And, the longer you dispute, the farther still you will
err.

5. Observe well the Doctrine of Dividing right, and be sure that each Member of
the Distinction he brings, has in it the true Notion of the Term Divided or
Distinguished. Otherwise he will baffle and confound you with impertinent
Distinctions, introduce a new Question, and put you besides your Argument. For
example, if he distinguishes Space into Real and Imaginary, and obtains of you
to admit Imaginary Space for one kind of Space (which is in reality Nothing) he
will defeat your Argument, and put you to fight against the Air; while, by
getting you to admit Non ens for Ens, he may answer or say any thing. You have
lost all your strength when you forego Nature, and suffer your Natural Notions
to be perverted. The same may be said of the Distinction of Ens into Positivum
and Negativum which is plainly to distinguish Ens, into Ens and Non Ens.

6. When the Defendent grants any thing, then to lay up in careful memory his
own Concessions, and make use of them against him to force him to admit Truth
or retract. For, otherwise, he may perhaps in the beginning of the Dispute
yield heartily to diverse things; which, afterward, when he finds himself
pincht and reduced to streights, he will flatly deny.

7. To be true to your Cause, and to seek the Victory of Truth over Error,
rather than your own over your Adversary; that is, to hold him still to the
Point, and to pursue the Eviction of that; and not, leaving that pursuit, to
catch the Adversary at advantages, and follow on that game to show him Weak and
Self-contradictory; (though it is not amiss to hint, and then wave it) as is the
less-laudable way of those who fall to argue ad hominem. Yet, if the repute of
the Person happens to weigh more with his Followers than the Strength of his
Reasons, and that he is held Obstinate and to want Candor; it may be a Duty to
Truth, and to the Cause, to Expose him to Contempt by Baffling him.

8. To reflect that, though the Words in Common have the same Sense; yet, as
standing in the Context, it may have diverse Constructions, and so cause that
Fallacy we call Amphibology.

9. That not only Single words and Sentences may be Ambiguous, but there may
lurk an Equivocation even in the Connection it self; as when the Middle Term is
Accidentally joined to one Extreme by [ is] and Essentially to another.

Thus far of Disputation when the Defendent holds a False Tenet; which is the
only Method an Honest Man, whose sole End is to evince Truth and beat down
Error, ought to take. The following ways are more becoming vain Sophisters,
whose aim it is to combat Truth on any Fashion. Yet, it is fit that Honest Men
should know them, that they may know how to avoid the Ambushes and Snares of
Truth's Enemy.

5. The second Case then is when the Defendent holds a True point. v. g. [that
there are Angels] and yet holds a False one Inconsistent with it. v. g. that
[That which is no where (or in no place) is not.] The Disputant, if crafty, may
make use of this False Thesis to overthrow the True one, Thus Nothing that is
in no where (or in no place) is; but All Angels are no where; therefore No
Angels are.


6. The Third Case is, when the Defendent does not hold an Inconsistent Thesis,
yet he is Ignorant of the Antecedents and Consequents of his Tenet. In which
case, if the Defendent can be brought to deny some Truth necessarily Connected
with his Thesis, he will be forced to deny the Thesis it self. As, put case the
Defendent holds that GOD, our Creator, is Infinitely Perfect in himself; yet,
through want of Logic, is Ignorant that GOD has no Real Relation to Creatures;
and therefore that the word [ Creator] applied to him is merely an Extrinsecal
Denomination, and no ways Intrinsecally perfecting Him or affecting him; such a
Man may be in danger of foregoing his Christian Tenet by this Argument.

Fe-Nothing that depends on another for some Perfection is Infinitely perfect in
it self: but ri-GOD depends on Creatures for his being a Creator, which is some
Perfection in him; therefore a-GOD is not Infinitely Perfect in Himself.
7. The Fourth is, when the Defendent Understands only his own Thesis, and is
in a manner Ignorant of all others. For example; Let us suppose that some
Defendent by the Language of Christianity, with which he is imbued, or by some
Solid Discourse he has accidently heard, and (though not Learned yet) having a
good Mother-wit is made well Understand, does hold that GOD is Unchangeable;
but yet, being not used to Disputes or Speculative Reflections, he is little
verst in other points; as in the Nature of Christian Language in Spiritual
Points, of which, consequently, we have no Natural Notions; and therefore is
not aware that all our Words we use when we speak of them are Equivocal and
Improper; and, especially, when we speak of GOD, highly Metaphorical: Such a
man, no better qualified, may be stumbled and perhaps made forego that Evident
and True Tenet by a Contentious alleging things very Foreign which he not
skilful in, and then backing them with Authority, on this manner. What is not
GOD Pleased when we do well, and when we Sin becomes displeased; that is,
changes from being Pleased to be Angry; and, when we repent, is he not Pleased
again? Will or dare you deny that which Scripture, Fathers, Catechisms,
Prayer-books, and Sermons do so often inculcate, and the Consent of all good
Christians does Unanimously and Constantly avow? Why are we afraid of Sinning,
but for fear of losing GOD's Favor, and of a Friend making him become our
Enemy? Will any but a Heretic deny this? Again; is not GOD Omnipotent? cannot
he do all things? It Is an Article of our Creed he both is and can; since then
to change Himself is to do Something; will you stint GOD's Omnipotence, and say
there is Something he cannot do? Such Insulting Talk as this, though there be
never a wise word in it, working upon the Weakness of half-witted People, may
hap to make them forego their True Tenet; and even fright them to renounce
their Faith out of Fear of renouncing it.

Corol. I. These three last Cases inform us how dangerous it is that any man be
allowed to be Truth's Champion, and to undertake her cause, unless he be
thorow-pac'd in Logic, and such other knowledges as are requisite to defend
her; lest Truth it self Suffer for the Confident Weakness of the Unable
Undertaker.

Corol. II. This last Case belongs to such Disputants, who, to maintain Absurd
and Impossible things, do use to argue from Divine Omnipotence; by alleging
and magnifying which, they hope to fright the Piety of a well-meaning, but
weak, Defendent to admit any thing though never so Senseless or Ridiculous. The
way to answer these men, is to show the Effect to be contrary to our Natural
Notions, and, consequently, to the Wise Conduct of the World, which was the
Cause of those Notions; And, therefore, what GOD can do, or cannot do, is
nothing to the purpose, unless the thing in question be Agreeable to his Wisdom
and Goodness, which determine his Power to act; and without which it cannot be
that he should act. Whence it is generally more Safe, more Edifying, and more
Proper, to say in such Cases; that it cannot be that GOD should will to do such
a thing, than bluntly to say GOD cannot do it. For, This flatly limits
Omnipotency; That only restrains its exerting it self hic and nunc because of
some Attribute of the Divine Nature to which it is Disagreeable. I say
Generally; For often times such Discourses would have GOD's Power to do perfect
Contradictions; that is, to undo the Natures of things Established by himself;
which is not to do. As in the Instance of his Changing Himself; which is the
same in Effect as not being Himself. Or, when they say, GOD has a Power to
Annihilate; For, since Powers are specified by their Objects, and Non-ens
(which can do nothing in any kind, nor consequently specify a Power) is the
Object of Annihilation; a Power to Annihilate is to be no Power. And it is as
ill to say GOD can suspend his Action of Conserving; for this takes away from
GOD his Goodness, or the Redundancy, Exuberancy or Communicativeness of Being;
which is Essential to him, and was the Sole Cause of the Creation.

Thus far of Disputation it self or True Syllogisms. The Faults of it come next
to be considered, which are called Fallacies, or Paralogisms.

8. Fallacies are of two sorts. Those which arise out of Words; which happens
when the Ambiguity of some Single word, or of some Words put together, do lead
us into a Mistake of the Thing. And those which are not in the Words, but arise
out of the Thing or the Sense; and thence, make us mistake the Thing and the
Words too.

9. Those of the Former sort are, almost all, little Gramarical Quibbles; and
it would do too much honor to them, to spend labor to name them, being too
open of themselves to need Exposing. Those which are less discernable and worth
Remark are such as this.

He that says you are an Animal says true, but He that says you are an Ass says
you are an Animal: Therefore He that says you are an Ass says true.
Where, B. 2 L. 2. ^5
as has been particularly shown above, the word [ Animal] is taken in diverse
Senses; for in this Proposition [ Peter is an Animal] it is restrained by the
Subject to signify one Individual Animal and of such a kind, viz. Rational;
But, in the Proposition [An Ass is an Animal] it is restrained to signify an
Animal of Another kind, viz. Irrational. whence it is no Syllogism, because it
has Four Terms.

10. Of these Fallacies which are not grounded on the Ambiguity of the Words,
but are built on the Thing or the Sense; the First worth remarking is that
called the Fallacy ex Accidente; which happens when the Middle Term is only
Accidentally connected with the Extremes, and not per se, or out of its own
Nature, As, Bar-Whatever breeds stirs in a Commonwealth is bad; but ba-All
Religion breeds stirs in a Commonwealth; therefore ra-All Religion is bad.


The Common answer is to distinguish the Major and Minor both; and to say, that
what breeds Stirs out of its own Nature, is Bad; but not that which breeds them
Accidentally; for, otherwise a Sword and Wine must be bad, because the one
sometimes helps to commit Murder, and the other causes Drunkenness. But, the
more Solid way, and which bears up best to Logical Grounds; is to deny it to be
a Syllogism; because, though the Form of it be Legitimate, yet the Matter or
the Middle Term, is not so. For, a Syllogism being a Speech contrived by True
Logicians to Conclude a Third Proposition out of the Premises, so as by
Connection of the Medium with the Extremes, we may know it to be Certainly True
(for that which leaves us Uncertain leaves us Ignorant) it follows, that the
Middle Term must be either a Notion Essentially Connected with the Extremes, or
else as a Proper Cause or Effect of it; neither of which it can be if it be but
Accidentally belonging to them. We may Note here how Accidental Mediums are
Common and Remote ones, or such as beget Opinion: For, between Religion and
Commotions, intervene Perversity of will, Disregard of Virtue, Irrational
Assents upon Opinionative Ground, Pride, and Faction against Church Governors,
who would bind them to good Principles and Religious Duties, Interest etc. All
which, or some (if not most) of them, are the Proper and Immediate Causes of
Dissension; at least, nearer and more Proper Causes of it than Religion it
self; the Principles of which do Oblige men to the preservation of Peace and
Unity.

11. The Second is called Ignoratio Elenchi, which, in easier Language, is the
attempting to prove what is not in question; or, putting upon our Adversary to
hold a Tenet he never owned nor held; as it usually passes among Passionate
Discourses and Scolds, when they object to others what they neither held nor
thought, that they may the more easily confute them or render them Odious. This
is avoided in disputes by Stating the Question right, and by Agreeing
beforehand in the Signification of the Words in which the Question is
conceived; as was recommended in the second and third Rule. Or, if this be not
done before the Dispute begins, it is answered by saying Transeat totum, and
forcing the Adversary, weary with aiming his blows amiss, to recur to the true
point, and to Conclude the Contradictory to the Defendents Tenet; which was his
only Duty, and ought to have been done at first.

12. The Third is, Begging the Question, or Supposing that which should have
been Proved. Which is manifestly faulty: For the Premises must be Clearer than
the Conclusion; which they cannot be if the Proof, in whole or in part, is as
Unknown and Obscure as is the Conclusion it self; as it must be if it is barely
Supposed; and begged gratis. Of which Fallacy therefore all the whole Body of
Hypothetical Philosophy is Guilty, as also that Fallacy called An Ill
Enumeration of the Parts, as follows here.

13. The Fourth is that of an Imperfect or Incomplete Division, which happens
when it is falsely pretended that the thing in Question must be one of those
which are Nominated; or, that it must be performed one of the ways Assigned;
when, perhaps, there is Another way how that thing may be done, which was never
assigned, but either Unthought of or Neglected. As, if it should be asserted
that Motion must either happen by Atoms descending in an Immense Vacuum, or by
the Impression of so much Motion in the Mass of Matter at First by GOD, and his
Continuing it ever since; when as a third way may be assigned, viz. that a
Created Intelligent Being Causes, and all along, Continues, the Motion of the
first-moved Bodies, which move the rest. This Fallacy is defeated by Denying
the Proposition, which contains the Enumeration of all those Causes or Manners
of Action; and, by Obliging the Disputant to show his Division to be Adequate.

14. The Fifth is called non causa pro causa. That is, in plain terms, the
bringing a Medium that does not Conclude; or the pretending the Conclusion
follows from a Medium that cannot necessarily infer it. This Fallacy, if it
must be called so, happens chiefly to Experimental Philosophers; who, going by
mere Induction, and laying no Evident or Certain Principles of Nature, a
priori, to guide their Thoughts by, but Hypothetical ones only; do, hence,
refund all the Effects of Nature into false-pretended Causes; whence every man
who sets up a new Scheme, does still assign new Reasons or Causes, according to
which he strives to Explicate Nature, and into which he endeavors to Resolve
all the several Productions and Effects of it. But, why this should be called a
Fallacy, I cannot comprehend. At this rate every Argument that does not
Conclude may be called a Fallacy. For, since the Premises in a Demonstrative
Syllogism are the Cause of the Conclusion; whoever argues ill, argues
Fallaciously; and assigns a wrong Cause, by producing an Incompetent Medium.
But, in case the Disputant puts it upon the Defendent to have made use of such
a Ground as he never meant, it is then enough to deny it; and put him to prove
that that was indeed his Ground, as was pretended.

15. The Fifth is the Arguing from what is taken in a Divided sense, as if it
were taken in a Compound sense or conjoyntly; or from what is taken in a
compound sense or conjoyntly to infer the same thing in a Divided sense;
Example of the Former is this, He that is actually sitting may Walk, Peter is
actually sitting; therefore Peter actually sitting (or while he sits) may walk.


Where the Major is False, unless Sitting and Walking be taken Divisively; and
mean that he who sits now, may Walk hereafter. An Example of the later may be
this.

Two and Three are Even and Odd. Five is Two and Three: Therefore Five is Even
and Odd.
Where the Major is False, unless Two and Three be taken Divisively, whereas in
the Minor they are taken Conjoyntly. Or, it may be said that Five are See B. 3.
L. 6.. 6.
not Two and Three formally, but only materially: In which sense Aristotle said
that Bis tria non sunt sex.

16. The Seventh Fallacy is when the Opponent argues a dicto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter. Which kind of Fallacy is the Erroneous Principle that
begets the Vice of Pride, and therefore is peculiar to all Proud People. For
the sin of Pride does not consist in Knowing what Endowments any one truly has,
or Esteeming himself as having such Endowments; for this is a Truth; and did he
not know it, and what degree of Perfection it adds to him, he would neither
strive to perfect himself, nor know how much he is particularly bound to Love
and Thank GOD, who bestowed on him those Accomplishments or Advantages above
others. But Pride, (as all other Vices have) has a Lie for it is Principle; and
consists in this, that a Proud Person over values himself, and Preferrs himself
Absolutely before all others; that is, Concludes himself to be the very Best,
or Better than others, and to deserve more Esteem than they, because he is Good
or Estimable secundum quid, or in some particular which is far short of
rendering him so highly Estimable. Thus, some self-conceited Lady Esteems or
Concludes her self to be the Best Woman in all the Country, because she has a
New-fashion'd Gown, or is Finer, Handsomer, or Richer than others. Thus a King
or Lord preferrs himself absolutely before all others, because he has more
Power, or can reckon up more Titles than others can. Thus a Great Scholar who
is Proud, values himself absolutely to be Better than those who are Unlearned.
Whereas a Poor, Ignorant, Ragged Beggar, who has more Virtue or Love of GOD in
him, has more Intrinsic Worth in him, and is, absolutely speaking, more
Valuable than any or all of them; notwithstanding their Gayness, Beauty,
Riches, Knowledge, Honor and Power. All the rest are but only Good secundum
quid, and he is for his Sanctity, Good and Valuable simpliciter.

17. Thus much concerning those Fallacies that are worth noting; if, indeed,
any of them do much deserve it. For, I cannot discern but that, if the Rules
for Distinguishing our Notions, of Predicating one of them of another, and
lastly the Right Methods of Arguing, both as to the Matter and Form of
Syllogisms, were observed Exactly; there is nothing in them that can require
the treating of them so elaborately, or making such a pother about them as
Authors do. The Agreeing with our Adversary about the Meaning of the Words in
which the Question is conceived, forestalls those Fallacies of Ignoratio
Elenchi, and that of Begging the Question. B. 1. Lesson last.
The Doctrine given above how to detect the Equivocation of Single Words, will
prevent any advantage that can be taken from the Ambiguity of the Terms; and
the Rules of Predicating, by showing how a word that is Univocal, taken single,
may become Equivocal by being joined to Different Subjects, will defeat all
Stratagems that lurk secretly in such Propositions, See B. 2. L. 1.. 15.
as is seen in the First Fallacy. 9. The Doctrine of using only such Middle
Terms as are either Essential, or Proper Causes and Effects, renders
Ineffectual the Fallacy ex Accidenti; as also those of Non causa pro causa, and
a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. The Common Doctrine concerning
Division, viz. that it is Members be Adequate to the Notion Divided, makes void
and insignificant, that Fallacy called mala Enumeratio partium. In a word, let
but the Rules given here be warily observed, and it will scarce be possible the
Defender of Truth should be circumvented by any Fallacious manner of Arguing;
but it will either be seen that the Terms are Ambiguous, or (which generally
happens) it will be found that the Syllogism has Four Terms; and, so, is no
Legitimate Syllogism. The subtlest of them seems to be the First. For the
single word [ Animal] seems to be taken in the same sense, both in the Major
and Minor, and has the same Definition in both places; and yet, by reason of
the Different Subjects, it is not Predicated in the same sense, but according
to Different Parts of it is Entire Notion or Signification; whence the Syllogism
has Four Terms in sense; that is, in reality, or in our Mind, where Syllogisms
are only Properly and Formally; however the Word [ Animal] be the same
materially.

18. The Syllogism which is implied in every Practical Judgment of a Sinner,
has Four Terms, or else one of the Premises which he grants to himself is
False; and therefore both It and the Action that proceeds from it, is a
Deviation from Right Reason, and a Perversion of Human Nature. v. g.

Justice is to be done, That Satisfaction be taken of my Enemy who injured me,
is Justice; Therefore That Satisfaction is to be taken by my self of my Enemy,
is to be done, or I may revenge my self.
Where the Major is True, so is the Minor; but when the injured person comes to
conclude, instead of the true Conclusion [Therefore that Satisfaction be taken
of him that injured me is to be done] which abstracts from Who is to take that
Satisfaction or Revenge, whether Himself or the Magistrate, who is the Overseer
of the Laws and the Proper Revenger of Injuries, his Passion, and not Right
Reason, coggs in a Fourth Term, not found in the Premises, viz. Satisfaction
is to be taken [ by my self.] And the same may be observed in the Practical
Judgment of any other Sinner, whether their Sin be Theft, Incontinency,
Rebellion, etc.

Corol. III. Hence, all Right Reasoning, which causes Science and Truth, is
also, of its own nature, the Parent of Virtue; and can dictate nothing but what
tends to True Morality. As, on the contrary, all False Reasoning, does
naturally and necessarily beget Error; and, by means of Error, leads to Vice.

APPENDIX.
THE Grand Controversy Concerning Formal Mutation Decided In favor of the
Peripatetick School.
The Question be^ween the Peri^^^eticks and Antiperipatetick^, stated in common.
1. THE main Hinge on which the greatest Contests between the Peripateticks and
Anti-Peripateticks turn, is, Whether or no there be that Composition and
Division in Natural Bodies, called Formal; and, consequently, FORMAL MUTATION.
The Corpuscularian Philosophers and Atomists deny there is any Mutation in the
Thing it self, either in the Whole or any Part of it; and they affirm that
there is only an Extrinsecal Application of Particles Figured, Moved and Placed
in various manners; and, consequently, that the whole Contexture of Natural
Bodies is a mere Mechanism. On the contrary, the Peripateticks (by which word I
do not mean the Common Schoolmen, but those who take pains to understand
Aristotle, either by his own Books, or by his First Interpreters) do grant some
kind of Particles and Minima Naturalia; that is, some Least Size of Bodies,
which are (generally) no farther Divisible because there want Natural Causes
little enough to pass between their parts and divide them; but they say,
moreover, that there is not only Local or Situal (which are Extrinsecal) but
also Intrinsecal or Formal Composition and Division, and, consequently Formal
Mutation in them, either in Whole or in Part; that is, a Change in them
according to the Form, and not according to the Matter or Subject; and they
deny that any Solid Discourse or Explication either of Nature or Transnaturals
(which we call Metaphysics) can possibly be made, unless this be admitted.

2. The Parts of which they affirm all the Essences or Natures, The Grounds of
the Peripatetick Doctrine concerning Matter and Form.
of all those Entities we converse with, are Compounded, they call Act and
Power, or Form and Matter; whether those be Essential or Accidental. And, they
put the Matter and Essential Form to be necessarily found in every Body, and in
each of the most minute and insensible Atoms and Particles that can be
imagined. The reason they give for this Assertion is, because each of them is a
Distinct Ens from the Others, in regard it can subsist alone, and so, is
Capable of a Distinct Being: whence they conceive there must be Somewhat in
every Body and every Atome, by which it is Distinguished from all Others, and
somewhat in which it Agrees with them. That which Distinguishes them they call
the Form, and that in which they Agree, the Matter. And they think that,
however their Adversaries may quarrel the Words, yet they must allow the Sense:
Nature and daily Experience teaching us that One Thing is made of Another;
which cannot be, unless Somewhat of it remains, and Somewhat be lost. For,
otherwise, one Thing could not truly be said to be made of another; but the
Former Ens, of which Nothing remains, would be Annihilated; and the Ens or
Body, newly produced, would be made of Nothing; that is, Created.

The mistake of the Antiperipateticks concerning Matter and Form.
3. Now, when the Peripateticks speak of Matter and Form, and that each thing is
Compounded of these; and consequently, that there is some kind of Divisibility
or Difference between them; the Corpuscularians, who fancy nothing but
Particles commodiously laid together, are presently apt to conceit that those
Parts (as it were) that Compound a Body, are meant to be two certain kinds of
Things joined together into One; and, if this be denied, they are ready to
conclude, that they are either two Nothings, or at least that they leave us in
the dark, and at a loss how to distinguish Things from Nothings: and thence
object that this doctrine of Matter and Form cannot explicate any thing, or make
a man one Jot the wiser. And, indeed, in case the Asserters of them did stay in
these Common Expressions, and not draw many Clear Consequences from them,
giving a farther account of them, the bare Saying there are such Part^ so
named, would be as Insignificant as to talk of Occult Qualities.

4. To rectify this Misconceit of theirs, The true Doctrine of the Peripateticks
concerning Formal Composition
sprung from a just Prejudice against mere School-terms, the Aristotelians
defend themselves, by declaring their Meaning to be that One and the same Thing
does ground those diverse Notion^ of it self in us. That the Faecundity (as it
were) of the Thing, not being Comprehensible at one view by our short Sighted
Understanding, which knows nothing here but by Impressions on our Senses, which
are Distinct and of many sorts, forces us to frame Inadequate or Partial
Conceptions of it. And, because we cannot Speak of a thing otherwise than as we
Conceive it, hence we can truly say, One of those Notions or Conceptions of the
Thing is not the other; which yet means no more, but that that Thing as thus
Conceived, is not the same Thing as otherwise Conceived; or that the Thing, as
working by my Sense upon my Understanding thus, is not the Thing as working by
the same or another Sense upon my Understanding otherwise. Whence, because what
corresponds to both these Conceptions or Notions is found in the same Thing,
hence they affirm that there is a certain kind of Composition of them both, in
the Thing it self; which is no more, in reality, but that there is found in
that Thing what corresponds to, and grounds, both these Conceptions.

The true Doctrine of the Peripateticks concerning Formal Divisibility and
Formal Mutation, which are Essential.
5. Farther, they declare, that, since Nature shows us that the Thing may be
Changed according to somewhat in it that answers to One of these Conceptions,
Notions, or Natures, and not Changed according to what answers to the Other;
hence, we must be forced to grant that there is a kind of Divisibility between
them in the Thing, answering to the foresaid Composition; and consequently, a
Capacity of Formal Mutation, by which the Thing may be Changed according to one
of them, viz. the Form, and not Changed according to the Matter. Whether that
Form remains or no after such a Change is Another Point, and Extrinsical to our
present business.

6. For Instance; We experience that that Thing we call ( Wood) is Changed into
Another Thing called ( Fire; The same Doctrine declared by an Instance.
) and, therefore, unless we will say that Wood is Annihilated and Fire Created
in its room (which we are forbid to do by the very Notion of its being Changed
into another) there must have been Somewhat in Wood by which it was Actually
Such a Thing before the Change was made, and which is Lost by its being Changed
into Fire; and also Somewhat in it which remains in the Fire into which it is
Changed. The Former they call the Form, the Later the Matter; and thence
conclude there must have been a Composition of Matter and Form in the Wood.
And, since all Mankind agrees that Wood is One Thing and Fire Another Thing;
hence, ( Essence being the Form that constitutes an Ens, or makes it Formally a
Thing) they do farther affirm, that that which was in Fire, and made us
denominate it such a Thing or Ens, is an Essential Form. And, because the
Matter of the Wood had, (or rather was) a Power to have such a Form as made it
now to be Wood, (and also a Power to be afterward Fire) hence they say that
that Thing, Ens or Substance we called Wood, did consist of Matter and Form, or
was Compounded of them; that is, Wood had truly in it what corresponded to both
these Natures or Notions. Lastly, because Wood was Changed according to One of
them only, viz. the Form, hence they conclude there was Formal Mutation made in
the Wood; which, therefore, was a Change according to somewhat that was most
Intrinsecal to it; because it changed it is Essence by making it become Another
Thing; and, consequently, that Change was an Essential one. Thus much of the
Doctrine of the Peripateticks concerning Formal Composition and Mutation which
is Essential. Of that other Formal Composition and Mutation which is Accidental.


7. But, besides this Formal Composition, and the Divisibility of that
Essential part called the Form from the Matter, which we have now spoken of,
there is moreover, (say the Peripateticks) another sort of Formal Composition
and Mutation, which is Accidental. For even the Entire Thing, consisting of
Matt^r and the Essential Form, has many Ac^idental Forms or Modifications in
it, which are also truly Intrinsecal to the Thing, though not Essential to it.
Which Forms are Compounded with the Entire Thing as with the Matter or Subject
of them. For example; We say a piece of Wood is Round, Hard, Long, Green, and
such like; and, therefore, since Wood has in it, besides it is Essential Form,
these Accidental Forms of Hardness, Length, etc. there is therefore a Real
Composition of Wood (which is a Complete Ens, and their Subject) with these
supervening Forms; because the Thing has really in it what grounds and answers
to all these several Conceptions. Farther (say they) there is, consequently, a
Real Divisibility between the Wood and these Additional Forms; in regard the
Causes in Nature can work upon and Change the Wood according to it is Length,
Roundness, Hardness, etc. and yet not change the Nature or Essence of Wood.
Therefore (say the Peripateticks) the Wood, which is the Subject, can be
Changed according to these Accidental Forms; that is, there may be Formal
Mutation in it according to those Accidental Notions or Natures, though it
remains Substantially and Essentially the same. And, since the Form, of what
nature soever it be, That all Formal Mutations are Intrinsecal.
is conceived to be in the Subject, hence (say they) both these sorts of Formal
Mutation are also Intrinsecal; or a Change of the Thing according to somewhat
that is truly conceived to be in it.

8. I expect that all this Discourse will look like Gibberish to the
Corpuscularians, whose thoughts beat upon nothing but upon Particles thus
Figured, Moved and Situated; and all the while they read this, they will be
conceiting how dexterously all this may be explicated to be performed by their
Hypothesis; and therefore how needless it is to have recourse to such abstruse
Speculations as are those about Matter and Essential Forms that are
Intrinsecal; and, especially, to such unintelligible points as Formal
Composition and Mutation. But I must beg their Patience to suspend their
thoughts till we come to the Proof of Formal Mutation, which we are not yet got
to. What we are now about, is barely to declare and lay open the Scheme of the
Aristotelian Doctrine; resting confident that in the sequel of this Discourse,
the main point we have undertaken will be forced upon them with such Evidence,
that it will be unavoidably necessary to admit it. In the mean time the
Aristotelians, with so less Assurance than they use Confidence, do peremptorily
challenge their thoughts, and bring them as Witnesses against themselves, if
ever they reflected on the Common Rudiments of True Logic, and they set upon
them thus.

9. It must be granted that we cannot have Science of any thing but by means of
Discourse; The Peripatetical Doctrine proved from Logic and the known Method of
Discoursing.
That the most Exact, and most Evident Discourses are those we call Syllogisms:
That Syllogisms are resolved into Propositions; and Propositions into Two
Terms, and a Copula that connects them: That all that we can say of those Parts
of a Proposition is, that they are Notions, or Meanings of the Words that
express them: That, therefore, all Discourse is built on the right putting
together of these Notions, and can be built on nothing else, nor made on any
other fashion: That no Discourse can be Solid but what is grounded on the
Natures of the Things themselves: without which they must necessarily be Aerie
and Chimerical, and impossible to beget Knowledge: That, for this reason, our
Notions, which ground all our Discourse and Knowledge, are the very Natures of
the Things without us, existing Spiritually in our Understanding; That our
Operations of Apprehending, Judging, and Discoursing of the Natures of Things
being Immanent, or Performed and Perfected within us, the Objects of those
Operations, or the very Natures of the Things, must be likewise within us: That
it is Evident by Experience that we do make Diverse Conceptions or Notions of
the same Thing; that is, all the Operations of our Mind are built on those
Partial and Inadequate Notions of the Thing about which we are to Discourse:
That we can frame a great Number of these Abstracted or Partial Notions of the
same Thing, and many of them Intrinsecal ones: That, therefore, that Thing must
have in it what corresponds to all those several Notions; which we call Formal
Composition: That, hence, there is a Divisibility in the Thing as grounding one
of those Notions from the same thing as grounding Another of them, by reason
that Natural Causes are apt to work upon the Thing according to that in it (or
that part of it, as it were) which is thus conceived, and yet not work upon it
according to what in it is otherwise conceived, or, to what grounds a different
Notion. Whence they make account is inferr^d this Grand Conclusion, that
therefore There is FORMAL MUTATION, in regard it can be wrought upon according
to that in it which corresponds to the Notion of FORM, and not to that in it
which answers to the Notion of Matter: Whence follows unavoidably that there is
Formal Composition, Divisibility and Mutation in it, as is above explained.
Which Conclusion must necessarily follow, if they allow (as they must) this
Method of Discoursing; each part of which has been made good in the foregoing
Treatise. And the Aristotelians presume it is altogether Impossible for them to
assign any other that can bear the least show of Sense or Coherence.

9. The Peripatetick School has yet another great Exception against the
Corpuscularians; The Doctrine of the Ant^^peripatetick^ is Unprincipled.
which is, that, because their Schemes do not take their rise from our solid
Natural Notions, made by Impressions of the Things upon our Senses, and thence
conveyed to the Mind; they come by this means to have little regard to the
Nature of the Things, or to their Metaphysical Verity, the only Firm and
Deep-laid Ground of all Knowledge. Through which neglect having rendered
themselves Incapable of laying any First on Self-evident Principles, (taken
from our most Firm and most Radical Conceptions of the Thing, and Predicated of
it accordingly) to which they may finally reduce their Discou^ses; hence, they
are forced to coin to themselves Principles from their own Wit and Fancy: Out
of which they contrive certain Hypotheses; which granted, they hope they can
make some congruous Explication of Nature. By which manner of proceeding, their
Systems of Natural Philosophy, being Grounded on such Supposed Principles, is
merely Conditional or Hypothetical. Whence, they not only disable themselves
from Concluding any thing, or Advancing Science; but, instead of doing this,
which is the Duty of a Philosopher, they breed an utter Despair of it, and
introduce mere Skepticism. To pursue the Truth of which is not our Task at
present, nor suits it with our intended Brevity.

This last Charge made good.
10. Yet to show the Justice of this Objection, it may suffice to remark at
present, that neither does Epicurus regard the Intrinsecal Nature of his Plenum
or Atoms, or go about to show why they must be so Infractil, nor in what their
more than Adamantin Hardness consists; nor how the Potential parts of these
Atoms do come to have such an insuperably-Firm Coherence. Nor yet does
Cartesius explicate to us of what Nature his First Mass of Matter is; what
Degree of Consistency or Density it has; and, if any (as it must have some or
other) why it was to be of that Density, or in what that Density consists.
Which shows that neither of them regarded or minded the Intrinsecal Nature of
their First Matter; though this must needs have had great Influence on the
Economy of the World, and have afforded us much Light to know the Constitution
and Temper of Natural Bodies, and consequently of their Proper Causes and
Effects; as also of many Intrinsecal Modifications of them, highly conducing to
give account of, and explicate the Operations of Natural Agents. The only thing
they seem to have regarded was the Extension of their First Matter, and the
Motion, Figure and Situation of it is parts; which are Extrinsical or Common
Considerations; but to give any account of what Intrinsecal or Essential Nature
that Matter was, they are perfectly silent. They suppose it to be, but they do
not so much as Suppose it to be of such or such an Intrinsical Nature; which
yet they must be bound to do, since all Extrinsical respects came by Motion,
which was not yet begun. Or, if Epicurus does, by making his Atoms Infractil,
it is both said gratis; and, besides, he gives us no Account in what that
Quality of Indissoluble Hardness consists, or how it is to be Explicated.

11. Hence the Peripateticks allege that, however the Authors of those Sects
are men of Great Wits and strong Brains, (for it is not a Task for Ordinary
Capacities to undertake a Design that fathoms and comprehends all Nature) yet
they can never begin with Evident Categorical Propositions and First
Principles, or carry on their Discourses so as to bear the Test of True Logic;
but, either their Principles must be far from Self-evident, and must need
Proof, which is against the nature of First Principles; or else their
Consequences must be Loose and Slack. And the only way to refute this Objection
is, for some of their School to put it to the Trial by laying their Principles,
and, proceeding forwards, to draw all along Evident Conclusions without
intermingling their own Suppositions. But the Peripateticks are very Confident
they neither can do this, nor will ever Attempt it. I mean so as to carry it
along with Connection and Evidence; in which Spinoza, though perhaps the best
Writer of the Cartesian School falls, very short, and pieces out his Discourse
with many unprov'd Suppositions; as is hinted above in my Preface.

12. And hence it is that the Corpuscularians, being forced by their Cause to
decline such a severe Method, The Indirect Methods used by the
Antiperipateticks.
strive to avail themselves and uphold their Cause by Witty Discourses, Smooth
Language, Clear Expressions, Apt Similitudes, Ingenious Experiments that bear a
Semblance of Agreeing with their Doctrine, and such like Stratagems, to make a
Plausible Show of Science. But their Chief Reliance is on the Facil and
Familiar Appearances to Fancy; with which they court that Delusive and easily
Deluded Faculty: And, to this end, they gratify it with such Proposals as are
apt to sink into it most pleasingly; such as are Particles of Matter, whose
Variety of Imaginary Figures, and the Diverse Positions of them, they, without
Study, quickly apprehend. And conceiting that all is done when they have thus
Fancied or Apprehended them, they argue thus; If these Pores and Parts will do
the business, what need is there of those Abstruse and Metaphysical
Speculations of Formal Composition and Mutation, and those many Intrinsical
Changes, of which Fancy, can frame no Idea's or Shapes. And, indeed, such high
Points seem to that Superficial Faculty Mysterious Whimsies; they disgust it
with the Laboriousness of comprehending them; and persuade men of Fancy it is
Impossible to explicate Nature by such Principles, because they are raised
beyond it is reach. And, indeed, if Nature could be solidly explicated by a kind
of Contessellation of Particles, Fancy would have (as it never has) Some
Reason: But, if, upon Examination, we come to find that such Schemes go no
deeper than the Surface of the Essences of Things, that they can never reach to
the Bottom-Principles of Nature, nor give Solid Satisfaction of the true
Intrinsical Natures of any thing, to the Judgment attending to Maxims of
Evident Reason, and to true Logic; then we must be forced to follow the
Aristotelian Doctrine, and have Recourse to Intrinsical and Formal Mutation;
especially, if the Necessity of Allowing it shall happen to be Demonstated.

13. To do which being our present Work, we will begin with Epicurus, The sum
of Epicurus his Doctrine.
a Scholar of the First Class in the School of Democritus. This Philosopher (if
we may call him so) puts Innumerable Atoms, or rather (contrary to a Clear
Demonstration) an Actually Infinite Number of them, and of an Infinite Number of
Figures, descending in an Infinite Imaginary Space or Vacuity; some of them
downwards, some of them overthwart (according as his Hypothesis had occasion)
that so they might overtake their fellow-Atomes. With which, clinging together
by virtue of their mere Figures, they compound several Worlds, and every
particular Body in each of those Worlds. That Natural Bodies become Rare or
Dense, according as they have in them more or fewer of those Atoms, or (as
they call it) Plenum, in proportion to the Vacuum. Thus much in common of his
Hypothesis; which, were the circumstance proper, it were easy to show,
(besides it being Vnprov'd) be a Hotch-potch of the most Refined Nonsense, in
every particular Sentence, and almost in every word; notwithstanding the
Explications and Patronage which Gassendus, Lucretius, and our Dr. Charleton
have lent him. While I am speaking of his Tenet, I note here by the way, that
by the Indivisibility of his Atoms, he means Insuperable Hardness or Absolute
Infractilness; and not that they consist in a Point, or want Extension; as he
is understood by Mr. Le Grand in his Entire Body of Philosophy, Part 4. c. 4..
6. For, to think that, since he makes them of several Figures, there should
want room or space to admit Division, could not be meant by such men as
Epicurus or Gassendus. But, to return to our business, what concerns us at
present is this, that let him contrive his Scheme as he pleases (for, in such
Fantastic Philosophy, all is as pleases Fancy, the Painter) yet he must be
forced to grant Intrinsecal and FORMAL MUTATION, even while he most
industriously strives to avoid it. At least, though, perhaps, his Followers will
not own the Conclusion, yet they must allow the Grounds of it, or the
Principles that ought to infer it.

14. To show which we ask, Are all his Atoms of the same Matter? That the
Ep^curean Atoms are ^ormally Changeable
He must grant it; for he allows no difference between them, but that of
Figure. Again, each of those Atoms must be granted to be an Ens or Thing,
because it can and does Exist alone; and, to be a Distinct Ens from all the
Other Atoms; for, otherwise, all his several Atoms might be but One Ens or
One Atome; which is both a flat Contradiction, and, besides, quite destroys his
own Hypothesis. Wherefore, each Atome must have something in it, that makes it
a Distinct Ens, or distinguishes it from all the rest; which cannot be the
Matter of the Atome; for That is Common to them All; and what is Common to all,
cannot distinguish One from Another. And, if there be Somewhat in each Atome
that makes it a Distinct Ens, then ( Essence being that which formally
constitutes an Ens,) it gives it a Distinct Essence, or distinguishes it
Essentially; which is what the Aristotelians mean by an Essential Form. So that
they are at unawares, in despite of their own Doctrine, become (thus far)
Aristotelians.

15. To proceed; Therefore it is not Impossible but each Atome may be Changed
according to the Form, and not according to the Matter; that is, each Atome is
Capable of Formal Mutation. Which I thus demonstrate, Whatever does not imply a
Contradiction is not Impossible; but The putting each Atome to be Changed
another to the Form, and not according to the Matter, does not imply a
Contradiction; therefore The putting each Atome to be thus Changed is not
Impossible.


The Minor, only which can need Proof, is thus Evidenced. For, since a
Contradiction is no where but in our Understanding, there can be no
Contradiction unless the Same be Affirmed and Denied Secundum Idem, or
according to the same Notion or Respect, in our Understanding. But, this cannot
be in our case: For the Notions of the Matter and Form of each Atome (as has
been in the last. Metaphysically demonstrated from the natures of Idem and
Diversum) are Distinct Notions that is, Distinct Considerations, Regards or
Respects of the same Thing; and therefore, to Affirm that the Atome is Changed
according to One of those Different Regards or Notions, viz. the Form, and
Not-chang'd according to the Other, viz. the Matter, has not the least show of
Affirming and Denying secundum idem; nor, consequently, the least show of a
Contradiction. Wherefore it is evidently Demonstrable from plain Logic,
acknowledged by all Mankind, that it is Possible each Atom should be Changed
according to the Form or Formally Changed; whence, if there be Causes in Nature
sufficient to change it, it will be Actually Changed or Broken; that is, it
will undergo such a Mutation as is not only Formal, but Essential; because the
former Ens is no more when Two Entities are made of it. It remains then only to
examine whether there be sufficient Causes in Nature to work this Change,
supposing each Atom of it is own Nature Changeable, as has been demonstrated.
That those Atoms de facto are Formally (...).


16. In order to which we are to reflect that Epicurus puts those Atoms of his
to be of all imaginable Figures: Wherefore, there must be some of them like
Needles, ending in the smallest Point that can be conceived. Others full of
Pores or very small holes, into which some of these sharpest Points will light;
and the more bulky part of the Atome not being able to enter it, that Point
will remain Wedged in that Pore or Cavity. Now this Point of the Atome may be
so almost infinitely Slender, that the least Impulse of other Atoms, crouding
and pressing upon it, may be able to break it; much more, when it happens (as
it needs must) that the vast weight of Mountains or a great Part of the Body of
the Earth do press with a Transverse or Side-motion upon that Atome. In which
case, it will be impossible to conceive how that smallest Point, perhaps a
million of times less than a Hair can be able to resist such a stupendous
Pressure. The same may be said of those Atoms made like our Hooks, clasping
with another Hooked one, when a very strong Divulsive force, able to rend Rocks
asunder, tears the Compound several ways; as when Mines of Gunpowder blow up
Castles or Mountains. Wherefore, since (as has been shown) the Atome is Capable
of being Broken, that is, Capable to be Intrinsecally or Formally Changed, and
there are Causes sufficient to break it; it follows that (whatever Epicurus
does extravagantly, and against the Sense of Mankind, suppose) his Atoms would
be de facto Broken; that is Two Entities would be made anew, and the Unity
(that is the Entity) of the Former Ens or Atome would be destroyed; and,
consequently, there must be not only Intrinsecal, but Essential, that is, the
Greatest of Formal Mutations, made in his Atoms.

17. The same is Demonstrated from the Notion of Mutation it self, The same
demonstrated from this infallible Ma^xim, that all our Notions are taken from
the Things.
and the Effects it causes in our Understanding. I discourse thus, Our Words
express our Notions, and our Notions (unless they be Fictitious) are taken from
the Thing. Wherefore, unless there be some Change or other in the Thing, our
Notions, and, consequently, our Expressions and Denominations, must still be
the same. But, when Local Motion of the Atom is made in the Vacuum, we must be
forced to speak of it or Denominate it diversely, and to say it is now Here, now
There, or in another place than it was before; for, otherwise, it could not be
said truly to be moved Locally if it did not change Place. There must then be
some Novelty or some Change in some Thing or other to ground this New Notion,
which causes this New Denomination. Themselves will not say it is in the Vacuum;
and, should they say so, it would be perfect Nonsense; for the Vacuum, being
nothing, cannot be Capable of Change; Therefore this Novelty or Change must be
in the Atome. Otherwise, did all the Causes whatever remain the Same, the same
Effect, viz. the same Notion and the same Denomination, and not a Different
one, must ensue; or else there would be an Effect (viz. this New Notion and
Denomination) without any Cause, which is Impossible. Wherefore it is Logically
Demonstrated that there must be Formal Mutation made in the Atome.

17. Perhaps they will say (for such Discoursers think they have given a
sufficient Answer if they can but give us a New Word) there is only an
Extrinsical Change made by the Application of the parts in the Atom to
Different parts of the Vacuum. The alleging Extrinsecal Mutation is both
Nonsense, and Incompetent.
But first a Vacuum can have no parts, much less any Difference of Parts. Next,
an Extrinsical Change is a most Improper Expression, and signifies a Thing may
be Changed, and yet no Change in it. But, suppose we should admit those Words,
yet themselves must say an Extrinsical Change means or implies a Change in some
Extrinsical Thing which is realy and Intrinsically Changed: and which, by being
thus Changed, give an Extrinsical Denomination to Another Thing; which is all
they can mean by these words [ Extrinsical Change] As when the Wall is
Extrinsically denominated [ Seen] from the Act of my Seeing Power, my Eye is
Intrinsically Changed by having that Act, and thence gives that Extrinsical
Denomination to the Wall: And if the words [ Extrinsically Chang'd] have not
this meaning, they can have no Sense, but are altogether Inexplicable. To be
Clothed, is an Extrinsical Denomination to the man on whom Clothes are put:
But then the Clothes suffer an Intrinsical Change of their Figure, and perhaps
their Quantity, by being fitted and acomodated to the Body of that man, and the
Air suffers the same while the Action or Motion of Clothing is performed. To
be Moved Locally is an Extrinsical Denomination to the Body that is Moved: but
then, Local Motion being a Division of the Medium through which that Motion is
made, there is an Intrinsical Change in the Medium Divided, and a New
Continuity of the parts of the thing Moved, to New parts of the Medium, is
acquired; which is a Quantitative, and therefore an Intrinsical Mutation;
whence the Extrinsical Denomination of [ Moved] accrues to the Moved Body.
Besides, it is scarce possible in Nature, where there can be no Action without
some Degree of Reaction, but the Body it self that is Moved must undergo some
small Change. But now, in the Scheme of Epicurus his Philosophy, all things are
quite otherwise; since neither the Vacuum, nor the Atoms (and he puts nothing
else) even according to his own Doctrine, are in the least degree Capable of
Change: Wherefore he is convinced to Deny this Self-evident Maxim [ Idem,
manens idem, semper facit idem,] while he must affirm that there can be a New
Effect, (viz. that New Notion and Denomination) without any Novelty or Change
in the Cause, or the Thing; that is, he must put a New Effect without any New
Cause; or (which is the same) an Effect without a Cause.

The Cartesians are forced by their own Doctrine to admit Formal Mutation.
18. But, leaving him, and turning our Discourse to our Modern Corpuscularians,
the Cartesians: These Philosophers tell us the Particles of their Ma^ter are
Crumbled or Shattered by Rubbing against one another. Wherefore their Matter,
and each Part of it was One Thing before it was Moved, and now is by Motion
become Many Things. Nor can it be denied, but that All of them were Entities
before their Motion; since both that Whole Mass of Matter, and each of the
first Divided Parts, were (antecedently to the Division) Capable of Existing
apart, and pre-suppos'd to the Division as the Subject of it. Wherefore, both
that Whole Bulk of Matter, and each of those Parts, by losing their Unity did
eo ipso lose their Entity too; and, consequently, the respective Forms that
constituted them such Entities; which is the Greatest Formal and Intrinsical
Mutation that can be; and far Greater, even by their own Doctrine, than could be
made afterward, according to any Accident or Modification of those foresaid
Entities.

19. Again, since Motion cannot be made in an Instant, that Mass of Matter must
be granted to have been Created, that is, to have had Being, antecedently, in
Priority of Nature, to Motion. Wherefore, it had in that Instant some kind of
Intrinsecal Nature; and somewhat in it which made it to be of that Nature:
Hence I argue thus; that Nature and the Form that constituted it, is either
Lost when it came to be Divided, and then it was Intrinsecally and Formally
Changed: Or else it retained that Nature after it was Divided; and then it is
Manifest that that Mass was Diminisht, that is Changed according to its
Extension (in regard the Greater Extension of that Original Mass was now made
Less) and yet was Unchanged according to its Nature. Let them take which of
these they please, they must unavoidably yield there was Formal Mutation; in
the former case, of its Essence; in the Later of its Extension; and a Formal
Divisibil^ty in it, either of its Form from its Matter; or of its Extension
from its Nature or Essence; in regard it was by Motion, Changed according to
the One, and not according to the Other. But, now, in case they make (as they
do) Extension to be the Essential Form of that Matter, Formal Mutation is made
more Unavoidable, and must be granted even by themselves.

The Cartesians can give no account of their First Matter.
20. To understand the force of this Demonstration more Clearly, it is to be
noted that the Cartesians do not make their First Matter to be only an
Abstracted Conception of an Ens or Body, as it has in it a Power to have a Form
and so to be a Thing, as the Aristotelians do; for which reason they rightly,
and acutely Define, or rather Describe it, as thus Abstracted by our
consideration, to be Neque Quid, neque Quantum, neque Quale, neque aliquod
aliud eorum quibus Ens determinatur; in regard that, as thus considered, it is a
mere Power to be any of them, or all of them, that is, none of them Actually.
But they put their first Matter to be Informed; otherwise they could not put it
to have Extension in it, which must necessarily be granted to be a Form either
Essentially Constituting it, or some Accident or Modification of some Thing
that has a Substantial Form. Whence, they must hold that their First Matter is
an Ens or Complete Thing, that is, Completely Capable of Existing; which
appears farther by its Terminating the Action of Creation; the peculiar Effect
of which is to give Actual Being; which concludes it to have been Complete
under the Notion of Ens; since it is Self-evident that that cannot Actually be,
which is not Capable to be; that is, which is not an Ens. This Note reflected
on, it is manifest it must have a Nature of its own, and Somewhat in it to
constitute that Nature, or some Essential Form; and so is Formally Mutable
(whether Extension be that Form or no) as is deduced by our Argument.. 19.

21. To come up closer to them, and enforce the Evidence of our Argument to a
Nonplusage of their Cause, we ask* Of what kind of Consistency was that
Original Matter, into which GOD (according to them) did infuse the first
Motion, and so Divided it. The very Terms tells us that it must have been of
it is own Nature either Easy or Hard to be Divided, nor do we ask the precise
Degree; Let them say it is either One or the Other, or a Middle Degree between
both, we are so reasonable it shall serve the turn. It being then indifferent
to our Question, in this perfect silence of theirs we will g^ess as well as we
can at what they should say as most congruous to their Doctrine; and so we will
suppose it to be Dense. We enquire next in what consists this Modification or
Affection of it called Density? or how they will explicate it? Motion had not
yet begun in that Instant in which it first was, by the Means of which they put
all Qualities (and this amongst the rest) to be Produced. If they should say)
which yet I do not read they do, nor so much as speak of it as it is found in
their First Matter) that it consists in the Rest of it is Parts. It Is replied
first that that Matter has as yet no Parts, for these are made by Motion, which
was not in that Instant begun. Or, if they mean only it is Potential parts, or
(which is the same) that One Actual Whole; not to pose them by what virtue
those Potential parts do formally cohere, which without making Divisibility
(which is Quantitative Unity or Continuity) the Essence of Quantity is
impossible to explicate; the Question returns and we demand how Firmly those
parts do cling together; that is, how Dense that Whole was, and in what it is
Density consisted! which we affirm must have been either in it is Intrinsical
Nature or such a degree of Consistency (which is in it is being to such a degree
more or less Divisible by Natural Causes) or in Nothing. Again, if Density
consisted in the Rest of it is Parts, and there was most perfect Rest before
there was any Motion, then the Density of it must have surpassed all Degrees;
and, therefore it must have been of the Nature of Epicurus his Atoms; that is,
Insuperably and Essentially Incapable of being Divided; which they must not say
who make their Elements made by the Rubbing of some parts of the Matter against
the others. Besides, in tha^ supposition GOD, as the Author of Nature, had
offered Violence to his own Creation, by Dividing it immediately at first.
Lastly, that Matter was of it is own nature Indifferent to be Moved or
not-Mov'd, that is, Indifferent to Rest or Motion; for Being and Extension
abstract from both; whereas in our case, Density (and the same may be said had
it been Rare) being Natural to it, and not Adventitious or Accidental by the
Operation of External Causes; it could not have been Indifferent to it; since
every thing necessarily Requires what is Natural to it self. Nor is a Thing,
merely by it is being in Rest, of another Nature. To understand this more
clearly, let us consider this Proposition [ That Thing called the First Matter
is in Rest] it is about the Essence or Nature or Intrinsecal Quality of the
Subject of this Proposition we are Enquiring; to which supervenes that
Accidental Predicate of being in Rest. Wherefore, to be in Rest does not alter
the Intrinsecals of their First Matter, but presupposes them; and, therefore,
all it is Intrinsecals must have belonged to it of it is own nature, whether it
had happened to be in Rest, or in Motion.

22. Density then in their First Matter cannot be explicated by Rest, nor,
consequently, That it is impossible the Car^esians should explicate Density in
their First Ma^ter, because they deny Formal Mutat^on.
Rarity by Motion. Let us search then farther in what we can conceive it to
consist, or how it may be Explicated. Now, we are to note, that all Particular
Natures or Notions, are to be Explicated by more Common and General ones, if we
go to work like Philosophers; for all Grounds and Principles are made up of
such Notions as are Common or Universal ones; and, to Explicate Particulars by
other Particulars, is the way of Proceeding by Similitudes; which may serve
sometimes to Elucidate, but never to Prove or to Resolve any thing or Notion
into its Formal Cause, which belongs properly to Philosophers. We find then,
abstracting from Rest and Motion, which are Accidental to that Matter, no
Notion or Nature in it that can be Superior to Density and Rarity, but the
Essence of it, that is, that Thing it Self called the First Matter, and its
Quantity: And Quantity may be considered two ways; Either as affecting the Body
merely in order to its Self; or else in order to the Causes that may work upon
it; The Former we call Extension, the latter, Divisibility (physically
considered.) Now, Density cannot any way be Explicated by Extension as that in
which it consists, as is most Evident; in regard a Body may be Equally
Extended, whether it be Rare or Dense; nor is any thing therefore Rarer or
Denser because it is Longer or Shorter. Let us apply then our Consideration to
Divisibility, taken in the sense spoken off lately, viz. as making its Subject
apt to be wrought upon or Divided by Natural Causes; and the Proper and
Intrinsecal Differences of every Common Notion being More and Less, and it
being also Evident from the very Notions, and from the Consent of Mankind, that
we call those Bodies [ Dense] which are Less Easy to be Divided, or Less
D^visible; and those [ Rare] which are more Divisible or more Easy to be
Divided, we are in a fair way to find out clearly what Rarity and Density do
consist in; viz. Rarity in an Excess or greater Proportion of Quantity (thus
considered) to the Matter or Subject of it; and Density in a Lesser Proportion
of the same Quantity to the Matter; that is, to the Subject of it according to
the Notion of it as Matter. Nor, does this more strain our Reason to conceive
this various participation of the same Accident [ Quantity] than it does to
conceive a Thing to partake the Quality of Whiteness Unequally, and be More or
Less White. For that Maxim of [ Quantitas non suscipit magis and minus] is
meant Evidently of Extension; in regard that the least imaginable Extension
being Added or Abstracted from the former, must necessarily vary the Species.

23. That we may bear up more directly to our main Thesis: Since Rarity, Formal
Mutation demonstrated from the Transmutation of Rare and Dense things into one
another.
or else Density must necessarily be in their First Matter, (for it is
impossible to conceive it to be at all Divisible by Natural Causes but it must
be either Easily or Hardly Divisible by them) if we join to this that Contraria
(according to the Maxim) sunt circa idem subjectum, it will and must follow
that the same Matter (whether theirs or ours) that had a Power in it to be Less
Divisible or Dense, had also a Power in it to be More Divisible or Rare; and
this not only in the First Matter it self, but also in every particular Body in
Nature made of it, and which has the nature of that Matter in it: whence
results this Conclusion, that Rare Bodies are Transmutable into Dense, and
Dense into Rare; and that, therefore, there is Formal Mutation in Bodies
according to these two Primary Qualities; and, consequently, according to all
Secondary Qualities too; which (as will be demonstrated in Physics) are made
up of those Primary ones. So that most of the Effects in Nature are carried on
by Formal Mutation; nor consequently, can Nature be ever rightly Explicated by
the Deniers of such a Formal Change.

24. Let it be well noted that I speak not in this last Discourse of
Contradictories, which have no Middle between them, and therefore cannot have
the same Matter or Subject, or make it Changeable from one to the other; as,
because Body is Divisible, it does not follow that the same Subject can be
Changed to Indivisible. What I discourse of, and from whence, in part, I drew
my Argument was, from the nature of Contraries, which are two Extremes under
the same kind of Quality, and therefore have Middling Qualities between both;
by passing through which, as by Degrees or Steps, the Body is Transmutable from
one of them into the other. And the reason is, because neither Extreme is
Infinitely such, and therefore has necessarily some Mixture of the Opposite
Quality an^ is (as it were) Allayed by it; so that it comes to be Finite under
that Notion. Whence the Subject which has one of those Extreme Qualities,
becomes a Capacity of Admitting the other Extreme. And therefore Epicurus seems
to go to work more like a Philosopher, in this point, than the Cartesians, by
supposing his Atoms Essentially that is Infinitely Dense or Incapable to be
Broken or Divided; though in most other things he falls very much short of
Cartesius his Clear Wit, by his building in a manner wholly on Suppositions;
That there are Proper Agents in Nature to Condense and (...).
and, those too, the most Extravagant ones an ill-grounded Judgment could
stumble into.

25. They will ask how or by what means can a Dense body be changed into a Rare
one, or a Rare into a Dense; or, what Causes do we find in Nature Proper to
produce such an Effect? And, it must be confessed the Question is very Pertinent.
For to put the Operations of Rarefaction and Condensation without any Proper
Agents to cause those Operations, is a thing unbecoming a Philosopher. We
answer then, that all Compressive and Divulsive Agents, which we experience are
Frequent and almost continually working in Nature, are as Proper to work upon
Quantity as such, and to make the Subject of it Rarer or Denser, as Dealbation
is to work upon a Subject as it is Colorable, or Combustion upon a thing as
it is Combustible, or any other Action to produce or infer it is Proper Effects,
or, to cause the Passions that correspond to it. Nor can there be any Notion or
Consideration found in a Body on which those two Actions of Compression and
Divulsion, can be conceived to work properly and precisely but on it is Quantity
or Divisibility, in order to make the same Matter have more or less Quantity in
it; or to make a Body that is Compressed or Drawn several ways to be Formally
Changed in those respects. So that we must either say that those two Common
Words, importing Natural Actions, and used by all Mankind, to have no sense in
them, or they must allow them their Proper Effects, which are to Shrink or
Dilate the Quantity of the thing, which is to make it Rarer or Denser. Granting
them that sometimes and even very often those Effects are performed by the
Intromission and Extrusion of subtle particles of other Bodies, (which as the
very Terms show, are improperly called Rarefaction and Condensation;) whenever
any Natural Body is Pressed or Stretched on all sides by other Bodies closely
besieging it, if Quantity be capable of those Effects as is demonstrated above.
15. it is, the Proper Effects of such kinds of Operations must ensue, and the
Body enclosed, will be to some degree Condensed or Rarefy'd.

26. Now, had Cartesius put these two First Qualities in the Matter Created by
God in the Beginning, The Cartesians Hypothesis is Praeternatural.
so that some parts of it had been Created Dense, some Rare, Nature had been
furnished with Immediate Causes to made Division or Motion connaturally,
(supposing them set on work, or moved first by some Superior Agent) in regard
Dense Bodies are naturally apt to Divide Rare ones, and Rare ones naturally apt
to be Divided by those which are Dense. Nor had he then needed to assign to
Essential Being whose Nature is Unchangeable, and in which there is no
Transmutatio aut Vicissitudinis obumbratio, James c. 1. v. 17.
that is, neither Change nor Shadow of Change, a Drudgery so Mis-becoming his
Essence, as to be the Immediate Cause of Motion or Change. Hence I argue: Since
neither to be Easily nor Hardly Divisible, is the Essence of that First Matter,
in regard it was Complete in the line of Ens, and terminated the Action of
Creation, and so could have subsisted whether it had been Rare or Dense, or,
though it had not been Divided at all, there is manifestly a Divisibility between
the Essence of that Matter and its Rarity or Density; and therefore, by the
same argument we brought formerly against Epicurus, that Matter might have been
Changed according to either of those Qualities, and not according to its
Essence, and yet no Contradiction ensue; which demonstrates it to be Possible.
Again, that Matter being Indifferent to either Rarity or Density, had GOD
Created some part of it Rare, some Dense, the course of Nature (as was lately
shown) had gone on more connaturally: Wherefore, since GOD, as the Author of
Nature, and abstracting from Miracle, does always act most connaturally or
agreeably to the Nature of Things; it follows that he did actually order that
some parts of the First Matter, of which the World was to be Formed, should be
Rarer, and some Denser than Others, and not of an Uniform or homogeneous
Nature. And, accordingly, we are taught by Holy Writ, that in the Beginning
there was Earth, Water, and Air. And, if the Cartesians will needs make their
First Matter Uniform, and that GOD must move it immediately, it is justly
Required of them to show this Tenet of theirs, most Agreeable to the Natures of
the Things: I mean to the nature of GOD whom they put to be the Immediate Cause
of the First Motition; and to the Nature of Matter, the Patient; and not
overleap and slide over the Proof of both these main Points and suppose them;
and this, not because they can even pretend that those suppositions do suit
best with the Natures of the Things themselves; but, merely, because it best
serves to introduce and carry on the Scheme of Doctrine they had resolved on.

27. From Essential Mutation of Things in Nature, or their losing their
Substantial Form, we come now to demonstrate that there is moreover Mutation in
them according to those Forms which are Accid^nt^l. That th^re is also Mu^ation
a^c^rding to (...).
In order to which we will premise this Consideration taught us by daily
Experience, that No Body becomes Another Thing in an Instant, but is Altered or
Disposed before hand ere it comes to Suffer an Essential Change. For example; A
piece of Wood ere it comes, by perfect Division, to be made two Things of One,
is first Altered according to its Figure, that is, Cleft or Nicked. Before the
same Wood is turned into Fire, it is first Heated; that is, it has that
Accidental Form called the Quality of Heat first introduced into it; and so in
all the rest respectively. Which Changes not being Essential ones, in regard
they antecede the Change of the E^tity as Dispositions to it, they must be
Accidental ones; and this, according to Quantity, Quality or Relation, which
are all the Accidental Notions we have of the Thing that are Intrinsecal to it.
Now, if we admit those Previous Alterations and Dispositions, we cannot avoid
the admitting Mutation of the Subject according to those Forms. Wax, by melting
is Rarifi'd, that is, Changed as to its former Density. A Man or Horse loses a
Limb, and consequently their former Quantity and Figure too; and yet they are
the same Individual Man and Horse. A Husband loses that Relation when his Wife
dies, and yet is the same Man he was. So that here is most manifestly a
Divisibility between the Natures of Essences of those Things, and these
Intrinsecal Accidents or Accidental Forms; and the Subjects are evidently
Changed by Natural Causes according to These, and not according to its Essence
or Nature; that is, the Subject undergoes so many Formal Mutations that are
Accidental. And, let them explicate these Terms as they please after their own
odd manner, they shall never avoid the Conclusion, if they do put the Subject
or Body to be truly an Ens, and that it may be otherwise than it was, and yet
not Immediately cease to be that Ens; either of which to deny were to bid
defiance to Mankind and to Common Sense.

28. I know it will be replied, that all Natural Bodies are Compound Entities,
or made up of many little Particles; which, put together, Moved and Placed
Commodiously, do enable them to perform those several Operations peculiar to
each; and that these do occasion our saying in our common Speech, it is such an
Ens. And that, therefore, all our Discourse concerning Formal Mutation falls to
the Ground; since all may be Explicated by the Taking away, Adding. Ordering
and Moving those Particles after such or such a manner. But, this comes not up
to the Point, nor can serve them to escape our Argument, but rather plunges
them into a more manifest and Direct Contradiction. For, admit that each
Compound Ens (as they are pleased to call those Many Entities) or at least a
great part of it, be made up of those little Particles; I am still to ask them
whether those Particles do really conspire to make it One Thing or no, after
the Composition? that is, whether after the Composition there remains only One
Actual Thing, or Many Actual Things or Entities? If the First, then our
Discourse proceeds with the same Force; for then, since this One Ens or Body is
Dissolvable or Corruptible, it must (as was proved above) have somewhat in it
that remains in the Compound which is to be made out of it, which we call Matter,
and Somewhat which Formally Constituted the Former Body to be what it was, and
consequently, which does not remain in the New One; which is what we call the
Form. And, because it did not cease to be or was Corrupted in an Instant, the
Former Subject or Body admitted of Alterations first; and, consequently, there
was Mutation in it, both according to those Substantial and those Accidental
Forms. But, if they say, (as I fear they will, because they must) that after
Composition there is no Ens which is truly One but Many; or, if they say that,
after Composition, there is One and Many which are properly and Formally
Entities; then they must say that the same Thing is both One according to the
Notion of Ens, and yet not One according to the Notion of Ens, which is a plain
Contradiction; for it Affirms and Denies Contradictories of the Thing acording
to the same respect. Whereas in the Aristotelian Doctrine, there is but One Ens
Actually, though made up of Potential Parts which have a Formal Divisibility
between them; or (which is the same) One Thing apt to verify different
Conceptions and Notions; which (as was said above) partly because we cannot
comprehend it all at once, partly because Natural Causes do change it according
to One Respect and not according to Another, we are naturally forced to make of
it. Now, to make the Subject consist of Potential parts, Destroys not the Unity
of the Compounded Ens but Establishes it; for, to say it is Potentially Many,
is the same as to say it is Actually One; and, to Compound an Ens of Potential
Parts proper to the Notion of Ens, neither of which were One Actual Part
before, is to make that Ens truly One though it had no other Titl^ to be One of
its own nature: For, to compound an Ens of Entitatine parts neither of which is
of its Self an Ens, is as plainly to make One Ens as words can express.

29. But, to put them past this Evasion and all hopes of eluding the force of
our Discourse by alleging that Natural Bodies are Compounds, I have purposely
drawn my Chief Arguments from the Atoms or Molicellae (as Gassendus calls
them) of Epicurus, and from that Original Mass of Matter, of which the
Cartesians affirm their Elements were made, which the Antiperipateticks must be
forced to confess are perfectly Uncompounded. And, I farther allege, that as
Many Quantums cannot compound One Quantum unless they be United Quantitatively;
so neither can Many Entities (such those Distinct Atoms and Particles must be)
compound One Ens, unless they be United Entitavely. Wherefore those parts can
be only Potentially in the Compound (as our Matter and its Essential and
Accidental Forms are) for, were they Actually there, they would be Entitatively
Many. Whence the Ens, made up of those Many Actual Entities, could not be
Entitatively Vnum or one Ens; but it would be an Vnum which is Divisum in se;
and which is worst, (to complete the Nonsense and make it a perfect
Contradiction) it would be in the same respect Divisum in se in which it is
Vnum or Indivisum in se, viz. in ratione Entis; which is to be perfectly
Chimerical.

30. Thus they come off, and so must every one, who guides himself by the sound
of Words without looking attentively into their Sense. For, the Word [
Compounded] is in reality a kind of Transcendent, and therefore in the highest
manner Equivocal; whence, while out of slightness of Reasoning and not heeding
where the Question pinches, they take the word in an Univocal signification,
they come to apprehend that the compounding many Entities together according to
some Extrinsecal respects (such as are Situation, Motion, joynt-Action and such
like,) is the same as to compound them according to that most Intrinsecal
respect called Substance; and is sufficient to make them One Entitatively, or
One Ens.

31. And let it be noted that this Discourse equally confutes their Position of
the Soul's being a Distinct Thing from the Body, which leads them into
Innumerable Errors. And, the absurdity in making These Two to be One Compound
Thing, is far greater than to make One Body compounded of those Particles; in
regard the Ranging of Particles may at least, make One Artificial Compound, (v.
g. a House) though not a Natural one; whereas a Spirit and a Body are forbid by
their natures to have any such Artificial or Mechanical Contexture; but must
unavoidably, when the Asserters of this Tenet have shifted and explicated all
they can, remain Two Actual Things; and, moreover, such Two, as are toto genere
Distinct; nor, consequently, can they, either by the Natural or Artificial
Names used by Mankind, be signified by One Word; or be called A Man; as the
former Compounds could be called a House, or a Clock. And I defy all the wit of
Man to invent any way how Two such Actual Things can have any Coalition into
One Natural thing, or have an Entitative Union, but by being joined together as
Act and Power, that is, as Matter and Form; which are the Potential Parts of an
Ens, and therefore are apt to compound One Ens, in regard neither of them is a
Thing Actually.

32. And indeed if we look more narrowly into the Doctrine of the Deniers of
Formal Mutation (the Antiperipateticks) we shall find that they have Perplex't
and rendered Obscure the most Common, Easy, Obvious, Useful and Necessary
Notion which Mankind has or can have, viz. the Notion of a Thing. For I cannot
discern that they make their First Mass of Matter to be One Natural Thing,
unless they fancy it to be a kind of Idea Platonica of Body, existing
Indeterminately or in Common: For they put the Form of it to be Extension, and
they make this Extension to be Indeterminate, that is not-Particular; that is,
to be Extension in Common. Nor can we learn of them what kind of Thing it is,
more than that it is barely thus Extended: Which tells us, indeed that it has
Quantity, but gives us no light of it is Intrinsecal Nature or Entity; that is,
they never explicate to us of what nature that thing is which is Extended. And
what man living can conceive a Body which has neither Figure, or Color,
Density or Rarity, Heat or Cold, Hardness or Softness in it, but merely
Extension? Again, I cannot see that they put those little Particles, made by
Motion out of that Matter, to be Natural Things, though they do Actually and
Distinctly exist in Nature; because they make them Principia or Elementa Rerum
Naturalium; and the Elements of which Things are made can no more, with good
Sense, be called Things, than Letters, which are the Elements of Words, can be
said to be Words. The Compound, made up of those Particles, they do, indeed,
expressly own to be a Thing; but, by making it consist of Many Things, (I mean
those Particles) each of which has a peculiar Actual Existence of its own, and
which are not United or made One according to the Notion of Ens, but only
according to the Notion of some Accident which is Extrinsecal to the Notion of
Ens and differs from it toto genere, they cannot with any show of Reason, call
such a Compound A Thing, or One Thing. Whence, according to their Hypothesis;
we can have no Clear Light what is to be called a Thing, or what the word [
Thing] means. As for our Four Elements (which perhaps they will object) they
either are found Pure, and out of the Compound; and then having an Actual
Existence of their own, they are truly Things. Or they do not, and then they
are Potential parts of the Compound in which they are; which, and only which,
Exists by One Actual Existence, which shows it to be One Thing; and not by
Many, as their Compound does, which makes it Many Things; at least such Things
as they will allow those Elements or Particles to be.

33. But to give them what Satisfaction we may without Injury to Truth, and
withal to Clear the true Aristotelian doctrine from the prejudices taken from
the bad speculations of those Schoolmen, who make Accidents so many little
Entities distinct from Substances, we will confess that many of those Forms we
call Qualities, are Effluiums or Particles sent out from other Bodies; which,
while they transiently affect that Body on which they light, they retain their
own Distinct Entities, and are called the Particles or Virtue of the Emittent
Body affecting another Body that is Passive from them. But, when they gain a
Permanency there, and, by Continuity of Quantity, or Similitude of Nature, or
any other Cause, they come to be naturally United to it, and assist it in its
Proper Operation, they lose their Actual Entity and Unity which they had
formerly, and become a Potential Part of the Subject that was Passive from
them, and Exist and Subsist in it. And; because the Notion of [ Form] is to be
Received in the Subject or Matter, and those Particles advene to it already
Existing, they are hence called Accidental Forms of it; and either give it such
an Alterableness as is agreeable to their nature, as is seen in Passible
Qualities; or, sometimes, if they suit with the Primogenial Constitution of
that Body, they strengthen and belong to some Habit, Disposition, Power or
Property of it; and piece out (as it were) those Qualities, and, in some degree
or other denominate the Subject thus or thus Qualified.

34. But to make it yet more manifest how industriously the Cartesians do wave
the giving any account of their First Matter, of which notwithstanding they
hold all their three Elements, and consequently all Nature, was made, we will
take notice of one prevarication of theirs more; which does evidently bewray at
what a plunge they are about it; by omitting that Consideration, which, even by
their own Doctrine, was the Chiefest and most Necessary. They affirm that Matter
of theirs to have been Divided first by God into greater parts, which again
being moved or jumbled one against another, did shave or wear off every small
particles of several sorts of which their First Element was made: Division then
was the first and Principal Physical Action, and that which most conduced to
frame all Nature: Nay, in case there be no Vacuum, (as they grant there is not)
it is manifest that the First Motion, and which was exercised Immediately upon
their Matter, as also all the following Motions exercised upon the said Matter,
was Division. Now, Divisibility of the Matter being the Proper Power that
answers to the Act of Division, or (which is the same) to Motion, and withal
directly speaking the nature of their Matter as apt to be wrought upon by those
Causes: how was it possible they should slip over that, and regard only the
Extension of it? Divisibility is a Natural Notion, and imports an Order to
Natural Action; whereas Extension is a dull sluggish Notion, and merely
Mathematical; that is, it does Abstract from Action and Motion both; For an
Extended thing is never the more or less Extended whether it Moves or stands
still; but its whole Nature and Notion is taken up in affecting its own
Subject, or Extending it, equally and all one whether it Acts or not acts. But,
the reason of this willful neglect is this, that, though they grant it to have
been Divided, yet, should they tell us it was thus Divisible, Common Reason
would lead us to pose them with asking whether it were Easily or Hardly
Divisible, that is Rare or Dense; of which Qualities in their Matter,
antecedently to Motion, and the Contexture of the particles made by that
Motion, their Principles can give no kind of account, nor possibly explicate
them.

35. I am apt to think that they foresaw this Rub in their way, which hindered
the Currency of all their Doctrine of Physics; and, seeing they could not
remove it, they very fairly let it alone; Yet, for a show they take notice of
the Word, but they turn it to a quite different Sense: For Mr. Le Graud Entire
Body of Philosophy Part 4. chapter 4. 11.
coming to give us account of the Divisibility of this Matter, where it was the
Proper place to acquaint us to what degree it was Divisible into particles by
Natural Causes, he starts aside to tell us that, being Quantitative, it is
Divisible in Infinitum; which is quite besides our purpose. This is a
Mathematical Divisibility; whereas a Physical Divisibility, or a disposition to
be divided by the Motion of the first-made parts, is only that which can
concern his Scheme or do it any service. For had it been insuperably Dense or
Hard (as Epicurus fancies his Atoms) they could not have been Divided at all,
nor consequently, his Three Elements have been made. Or, had it been Rare or
Soft, one part would have stuck to another, and could not have been shattered
and crumbled into those most subtle parts which make his First Element. To
declare then how and of what nature it was, in this respect, should have been
one of the First Principles in his Physics, his whole Hypothesis depending on
it; whereas it was not a straw's matter whether it were Divisible in Infinitum
or no, so it were but Divisible into parts little enough to make their First
Element and the rest. I must then, in behalf of Truth, declare that their
Avoiding this point, so necessary to their own Scheme, and to the explication
of Nature, is a most manifest prevarication, arising hence that they cannot,
notwithstanding they are Men of great Wit, make any sense of it according to
their Principles.

36. But though they do not treat of the Divisibility of their Matter de professo
and purposely, as they ought, yet it is scarce possible but they must, against
their Wills, be forced to say something at unawares of the Intrinsecal Nature
of their Matter as either Easily or Hardly Divisible, while they go about to
explicate themselves. Error then being the best Confuter of it self, let us
see what they say of it. The Ingenious Gentleman, now mentioned, Ib. chapter 6.. 6.
tells us that their First Element is made of Particles, which, like shavings*
are rubb^d off by Motion from Bodies. Now, since their Matter is held by them
to be Homogeneous or Uniform, a man would verily think by those expressions,
that the Nature of their Matter is Dense, Hard or (in a Manner) Friable or
Crumbling. For what is Rare, Soft and Tenacious, cannot be conceived Proper or
Fit to be Crumbl'd or Shattered into such very small dust by Rubbing. Yet the
same Author Ib., 6.
tells us the particles of their First Elements are slender and Flexible
accomodate themselves to the Figures of the Bodies they are contiguous to. By
which expressions one would verily imagine them to be Fluid, Soft, Moist or
Yielding, rather than of a Solid or Hard Nature, for only such can accomodate
themselves to other Bodies on all occasions. So that he makes it at once to be
both Hard and Soft; as being very apt to break, and yet at the same time very
apt to ply and bow too; that is, he puts Contrary qualities in the same Uniform
Matter: Which shows manifestly that they know not what to make of it, nor how
to speak coherently concerning it; and, withal, that, (which is the true Genius
of Hypothetical Philosophers) they blow and sup at once; and say any thing that
suites with their present occasion. It was for their turn to make them very
Flexible, for otherwise it had been impossible to avoid Vacuum, whenas Millions
of those Atoms were jumbled together; which, had they been Solid, had retained
their Figure, and then Vacuum must have filled the little Interstices: And, it
was very fitting too they should be Hard and Friable; otherwise they could
never have been Shattered by Rubbing into such minute dust, as they had
designed to make their First Element of. So that they play fast and loose with
their Reader; and, no wonder we know not where to have them, when they do not
know where they are themselves.

36. The same untoward way they take in expressing themselves, sometimes as if
they and we did perfectly agree in our sentiments. And because the Goodness of
our common Reason teaches us that the Nature of a Thing is in it, they do
therefore allow our well-meant words, and talk of Intrinsecal Forms both
Essential and Accidental; which granted they cannot deny Formal Mutation. Mr.
Le Grand Part 6. cap. 24. 9, 10, 11. gives us all these good words, though he
chooses sometimes rather to use the word [ Modification] than [ Form] and in his
10, 11. he discourses altogether as if he were an Aristotelian. But, alas! what
trust is to be given to mere Words! For, coming to the 12. he tells us plainly
his true Meaning, which is as opposite to ours (though using the same Words) as
the two Poles are to one another, viz. that in the Generation of Plants and
Beasts a new Substance is no more produced, than in the Framing a Statue, or
building a House: which he there exemplifies in some particulars, and then
concludes that Generation is nothing but the Translation or new Ranging of the
parts of the Matter, and that This is alike in Natural and Artifieial
Compositions. But, by his leave, if he that builds a House does not know the
Intrinsecal temperament or Consistency of his materials, viz. that Stones are
Dense or Hard, and therefore most fit to be the Foundation; that Wood is Dense,
and Lighter, and so more fit for the Superstructures: Lastly, that Mortar is
Soft at first, but Hard when it comes to be dry, and so is most fit to bind the
Stones together; I am afraid that if he be ignorant of these and such like
particulars, he will make but a ruinous and bungling piece of work of it, though
he be never so well verst in the Act of ranging the parts of the several
Materials artificially or mathematically. And, as has been shown, no man
living, no not themselves, can give any account of the Consistency of their
Matter, which is the only Material of which they build (pardon the Bull they
force us to) their Natural-Artificial Structures.

37. This then being his true sense, and, consequently, the true doctrine (if we
may believe him) of the Cartesian School; and the word [ Form] bearing in its
notion that it is in the Matter, and therefore is Intrinsecal to the Thing, and
makes it either Another if it be an Essential Form; or Intrinsecally otherwise
or Altered, if it be an Accidental one; and, it being likewise Evident that the
Ranging the parts of Matter, is only an Outward Application of them to one
another, which is merely an Extrinsecal Notion; we may hence clearly discover,
that they do not use the words [ Form] and [ Intrinsecal] in a proper and
Natural sense, but utterly pervert and abuse them.

38. By these expressions of his lately mentioned, and their putting nothing
but Extension in their Matter, which abstracts from Motion and Natural Action,
one would think they intended, in stead of Physics to give us a piece of mere
Mathematics, for bare Extension fits it for no other Science. Nor are we
mistaken in thinking so; for he tells us expressly Part 4. chap. 3.. 24.
that Natural Philosophy is one part of the Mathematics. Though the Abstraction
which, in the place now mentioned, he assigns to Quantity as a Genus, is very
odd and Illogical; For the Abstraction of Quantity from the Thing or from
Motion, is an Abstraction of the Accident from the Subject, or from Another
Accident; and therefore is quite another kind of Abstraction than that of the
Genus from the species; and it looks as if they hanker'd after Plato's exploded
conceit of a Subsistent Universal; and that they would have their First Matter,
contrary to all Logic and good sense, to be a Body in Common; and therefore
the Genus to all particular Bodies: Nor can any thing sound more awkwardly then
to make a Mathematical Treatise of Physics. But Cartesius was a Greater Master
of Mathematics than he was of Physics; and therefore had a vast Design to
reduce all Nature and all Philosophy within the Purlew of his own Art; in which
it must be confessed he was very Excellent.

39. But, to lay yet a Greater Force upon their backwardness to admit a Formal
Change in Bodies, we come now to more Palpable and Plain Instances, not fetched
from Metaphysics but from obvious Effects in Nature; which every man sees, and
themselves cannot but acknowledge. Let us then take into our consideration a
young lately-planted Oak growing in a Nursery; which in the space of a hundred
years, spreads it self into a vast Tree; dilating it is large and massy Branches
on all sides, and over-shadowing a spacious Extent of Ground. Can any man deny
but that this is the same Thing, or the same Tree it was at first? And yet it is
most evidently not the same in Quantity, it being now a thousand times Greater
than it was formerly. It Is manifest then that here is a Real Divisibility
between it is Quantity and it is Entity or Substance; and a Real Mutation
according to the Form of the Quantity, and not according to the Notions of Ens
or Thing. The same may be said of an Infant grown up to be a Man; which, when
it is now Bigger in Quantity, should they deny to be the same Thing or the same
Man, it would make mad work in the World by taking away Titles of Inheritances,
and altering the Right of Succession. The Infant might, perhaps, retain his
Title for some very small time; but the Identity of it being lost by the
accruing of new Matter and new Quantity, he has forfeited his Estate, ever he
comes at age to understand or manage it, by losing his Essenee.

41. I know that our late Philosophers will hope to evade this last Instance by
alleging that the Numerical Identity of a Man springs from his having the same
Soul. Which Tenet, (were it proper to confute it here) would prove as
Unreasonable and ill-grounded as any of the rest. I only note, on the by, that,
as it becomes God's Wisdom, as he is Author of Nature, to carry on the Course
of Causes by fitting Dispositions to the Production of farther and more Noble
Effects; and consequently, to suit and proportion what Supervenes to what
Prae-exists; and the Embryo in our case Praeexists, and, by having such
Dispositions in it as made it fit to concur (on it is part) to work Rationally
to such a Degree, made it require to have for it is Form such a Rational Soul
joined with it, and, thence, determined the Author of Nature to infuse it; it
follows that the thing is quite contrary to what they imagine; viz. that the
Soul was to be adjusted and proportioned to the Exigency of the Bodily part;
and that, therefore the Soul is Determinately such, or of such a Determinate
Degree of Rationality (which Essentially and Numerically distinguishes Souls,
and Men, from one another) as was fit to be infused into and work with such a
Body. And were not this so, it would be impossible to explicate how Original
Sin is connaturally transfused from Adam, or how the Soul becomes tainted by
being united to a Body made Job. 14.4
ex immundo semine. But, this is not the only ill Consequence that springs from
this Extravagant Tenet of the Soul's being a Distinct Thing from the Body, or
that Man is in reality compounded of Two Actual Things, and therefore not to be
placed in any one Line of the Predicament of Ens or Substance. For, that odd
Opinion does, besides, very much favor (at least, very well consist with) the
Praeexistence of Souls: Because, if the Soul be not proportioned to the
Disposition of the Corporeal part of Man, and so, be truly the Form of it, but
a kind of Assistant Spirit, only apt to join with it, and promote it in it is
Operations, it might as well Exist before the Body as after it. Whence it will
be very hard for them to assign any solid Reason from the Nature of such a
Spirit, (since it might indifferently fit other Bodies or assist more of them)
why there might not be also a Transmigration of Souls from one Man to another;
for it would be, in that case, no more but shifting their Office and assisting
now one of them then Another. Not to mention how this Doctrine (as is discourst
in the Preface) tends to introduce a kind of Fanaticism into the Philosophy
Schools, by making all their thoughts run upon nothing but Spiritual Conceits
and Innate Ideas, and having a Spiritual communication with God, when they know
any Natural Truth, after an unintelligible manner. Not considering that Man, in
this Mortal State here, is truly one part or piece of Nature; and subject to
the Impressions of Natural Causes affecting him, both as to his Corporeal and
Spiritual Capacity, according to the Different Natures of those Different
Recipients.

41. But, to return whence we diverted; Letting Man and his Individuality
alone, what can they say to the former Instance of a young Oak (or of any other
Vegetable or Animal) increast to it is Full Growth, which all Mankind agrees to
be still the same Thing, and yet not the same in Quantity? It is not hence
unanswerably Evident, that there is a Formal Mutation according to it is
Quantity and not according to it is Entity, and therefore a Formal Composition
and Divisibility in it according to those two Respects? They cannot say they
are the same Physically, or the same Physical Compound: For, since all Natural
Bodies, according to their Doctrine, are made solely of their First Matter, or
of the Particles made of it; where there is incomparably more Matter, there
must be a New-Compound or a New Body; in regard more and less must be the
Differences of every Notion in the same Line, as has been demonstrated:
Wherefore more or less of the Matter (it being informed, and, so truly an Ens
or a Body) ought to outweigh, in constituting Particular Bodies or Entities,
all consideration of Accidental Notions or Modifications of it, which are not
properly Entities but only Modes of Ens. It Is a Folly to alledg the Figure or
Extension of those Particles; for, if the Subjects, (I mean the Particles) be
not the same, all the Accidents which belong to those Numerically different
Subjects, must be Numerically different likewise; and, so, cannot constitute a
Thing to be Numerically One, but only add more Numerical Things to it to make
it Numerically Many Extension is held by them to be the only Essential Form of
their Matter; they so, ought, if they go to work Logically and consequentially,
to say that Particular Extensions of that Matter which come along with those
Particles, does give a particular Essence to each of those compounds which are
made of that Matter; and so make the Generical Notion hold in every Species and
Individuum of that common Body; as Entity which is the Form of Ens is found in
every Individual Thing in the whole world; and not to make the Essential
Difference of those Bodies consist in such respects as are not Essential. They
will tell us of many Modifications of each Compound: But they should consider
that Modifications of the Thing or Subject do supervene to it; and therefore
the Thing must first be supposed to be, ever it can be capable to be Modified;
and it looks odd to talk of Modifying what is not, or of modifying a Nothing.
Yet though it strains good sense, they tell us of other Essential Modifications
of the Matter in each Compound; as if Res were not, by all Mankind and by the
Light of Nature, presupposed to Modus rei. But this Catachesis they are forced
to by their pique against Essential Forms; the Sense of which the Goodness of
Rational Nature forces them to admit; though out of Aversion to the Word, they
generally change it into a worse.

42. Their last Evasion then is to say that those Vegetables and Animals are
the same Morally. And, indeed, they cannot in all humane Language pick out a
blinder Word, and of a more ambiguous Signification; and therefore, it is most
Proper to make use of for a subterfuge against Clear Reason. I never yet could
hear of any man that could define it; and it is as easy for the Tailor in the
Fable to fit the Moon with a Coat, as to fit it with a Definition. But, we will
do what we can to show the different senses it may have in our circumstances;
and that none of them can serve their purpose. Either then [ to be Morally the
same] Signifies that the Thing does seem to us to be the same, though it it be
not so Really. But, this comes over to us instead of opposing us; for, our
Question is what is, and not what seems; nor is such an Expression to be
Tolerated amongst Philosophers, whose Duty it is to consider what passes Really
in Nature, and not what only Appears so. Or else, these words must mean that
the Thing is not considerably Changed; and therefore, it is, morally speaking,
the Same. But, this is most evidently False; for, the overgrown Oak has a
thousand times more Quantity in it, and, consequently, according to them, more
Matter added to it than it had while it was but a S^yon- Wherefore, it must be
more than Morally, that is, Considerably Changed according to its Quantity, and
yet, not at all Changed as it is an Ens or Thing. And this is all I can imagine
the Antiperipateticks can any way plead to escape the force of our Argument for
Formal Mutation. An Essay concerning Humane Understanding. B. 2. Chapter 27.
Our ingenious Countryman, Mr. Lock, goes more solidly to work, by making it
to be the same Plant as long as it partakes of the same Life, in a like
continuing Organization, conformable to that sort of Plants. For, Life speaks
something Intrinsecal and Essential, (which the mere Ranging of Particles thus
or thus, does not) unless we will say that a Watch or Clock lives; And
therefore it argues some Formal Mutation of the Matter, while it is disposed,
fitted and (as it were) digested so as to continue that Life by Nourishing the
Vegetable. For, it will seem incredible to any Considerer, that Particles of
all sorts should be found, in such vast Quantities, in every little spot of
Ground where so many several Plants and Trees do grow, as are Proper to each,
and Sufficient to nourish them up, t^ll they increase to such a Prodigious
Bigness. yet, this must be asserted, if Formal Mutation be denied. But, I can
by no means allow what he says there that the Principium Individuationis is
Existence. For, since Created Entities have not Existence from their being
Entia or Things, or (which is the same) Individuums: all we can say of them is
that they are Capable of Existing; and this they must have antecedently, in
priority of Nature, to their Actual Existence. Wherefore their Individuation
must be presupposed to Existence; and, so, cannot depend on it as on its
Principle. Again, since Plato's Flash of Ideas existing in common, is now hist
out of all Schools (if indeed that Excellent Man meant them as his Opposers
apprehend him,) and that neither Man nor Horse in Common can Exist, but it must
be determinately, and particularly This or That Man, Horse, etc. It must be
supposed to be constituted Determinately This or That Individuum ere it can be
Capable of Existing. Wherefore Existence is an Accidental Formality,
supervening to the Individuum already Determined and made fit to Exist, that
is, to the Individuum already Constituted; and therefore Existence cannot cause
nor constitute it. Had I leisure, and were the place Proper, I would show my
respects to the Learned Author by giving him my thoughts of his Chapter
concerding Identity and Diversity; for it is an Important Subject, and I see it
is treated by him more elaborately than are some other parts of that worthy
Book.

43. Lastly, to say no more of Formal Mutation in Bodies, let us cast a short
view upon what passes in Spiritual Natures. When a Soul that before was
Ignorant becomes Knowing, or a Wicked Soul Virtuous, can it be denied that
those Souls are Changed according to that Form called Quality, and yet remain
the same according to their Essence? Surely, they cannot say that this is done
by New Atoms aggregated to that Soul, or by any other of those odd Requisites
they put to induce a new Accidental Form. And, if not, they must see and
confess that Formal Mutation is, beyond all Dispute, found in Spiritual
Natures. Much more then may it have place in Bodies; which, being Subject to
Motion, which is Essentially Change, are, consequently, of a nature far more
Changeable than Spiritual Beings are. What can be answered to those pressing
Arguments I cannot in their behalf imagine; nor, I am confident, can themselves
give any Reply that is Solid, or taken from the known and acknowledged Natures
of Things; however they may shuffle it off wittily, by throwing in some
Unprov'd Supposition, plainly expressed; and endeavoring to make that pass upon
their Readers. But it is Impossible they should even attempt to perform this by
bearing up to any Evident Principles, or by Deductions connected by such
Principles, or Reducible to them: only which can satisfy the Judgments of
Learned Considerers and true Philosophers.

From what is said hitherto is Established this Grand Conclusion, that FORMAL
MUTATION must unavoidably be granted. Which evinc't, all the Corpuscularian and
Atomical Hypotheses fall to the ground, and can need no farther Confutation.

FINIS.

