A SERMON Preached upon The Fast Day, June the 18th. 1690.

By a Presbyter of the Church of England, that Swore in the Sincerity of his
Heart, with a full satisfied Conscience, to King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

Licensed July 15th. 1690.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey. 1690.

PSALM LXII. Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1. Truly my soul waits upon God: from him
comes my salvation.

2. He only is my rock and my salvation: he is my defense; I shall not be
greatly moved.

3. How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of
you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.

4. They only consult to cast him down from his excellency, they delight in
lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.


THE Book of Psalms is for diverse weighty Reasons justly Sacred among
Christians, for it contains all the natural necessary Doctrines of Holy
Religion, it abounds with Pious Ejaculations proper for a Heavenly Mind in all
conditions to offer up to God Almighty; and I doubt not but with some
Churchmen, is one of the first amongst the Hagiographa, since it is
well-compos'd Anthems were duly used in the significant, and decent, and
glorious Celebration of the Judaic Ceremonial Divine Service; indeed it is a
Common Prayer Book, which a man would not wish to be altered (at least not, if
exactly translated) like as the Author of the better part of it was a Princely
Person, than whom the twelve Tribes could not have elected a fitter to sit on
the Throne of Israel, and Reign over the Lord's Inheritance: But how violent
and restless was the Opposition of the Sons of Belial, in favor of Ishbosheth?
They despised the Holy Oil poured by the inspired Prophet on the Royal Head of
David; they rebelled against the so openly declared Providence of God, and for
two years made good their Rebellion, till the pretending Prince, unhappy Son of
an abdicated Monarch, imprudently provoked his haughty General to a Fatal
Revolt, which brought the body of the Nation to due conformity, for when the
main Supporters of the Faction failed, the malepert underdealers in traitorous
disobedience, presently hearkened to Reason, plainly discerned their necessary
Duty, and wisely consulted their valuable Interest, as well as any of the more
forward Elders of the House of Judah. It Is probable that after this some few
unquiet wretches met in close Cabals, laid secret Plots, pursued wicked
Devices, struggled with weak Forces to dethrone the newchose King of Israel,
but Israel's new-chose King was the reverse Image of his Predecessor Saul, was
as careful of the Rights and Privileges of his Liege People, as he formerly
had been of the safety of his harmless Flocks; was as ready to serve the King
of Kings, as his Subjects could be to obey him in the due exercise of his
Lawful Power: this secured his new-gain'd Kingdom, this set him free from the
fear of being thrown down, headlong from the lofty Pinnacle of Glorious Honor,
to which he was raised by the special grace and favor of God, who inspired him
with a Spirit of Wisdom, and Courage, and Honesty, which qualified him for that
Commanding height, and disposed the hearts of the People to love, honor, and
obey him: it is probable the murmuring Malcontents might sometimes promise
themselves strange Success in attempting to overthrow his Righteous Settlement;
it is more than probable they hugged themselves, when their Treacherous Malice
dealing underhand with a Foreign Enemy, now and then distressed his Affairs,
and taught his thoughtful Heart mournful Song, a slow-breath'd Tune of heavy
Accents; but his Alexipharmacon, his Sovereign Remedy was always at hand, which
was this -- Truly my soul waits upon God, from him comes my salvation, he is
my defense, I shall not be greatly moved: then follows his Complaint, How long
will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of you; as a
bowing wall shall ye he, and a tottering fence. They only consult to thrust him
down from his excellency, they delight in lies, they bless with their mouth,
but they curse inwardly, -- plainly to declare the sense of this place,
usefully to apply that part of the History of David's Life, to which they
refer, is my present purpose: Upon the two first Verses, we need not be
beholding to the Critical Remarques of Interpreters, whose Learning may stand
us in some stead in the Exposition of the latter -- How long will ye imagine
mischief against a man? The Greek word here is an pax legmenon extant only in
this place, but meets with comprehensive large construction, Ye put upon a man,
rush upon him, devise mischief, sorrow against him; against a man -- a Poetical
expression, speaking of himself in the third Person, as if he had said, against
me, David, a single, honest, and innocent man: Or, against me, David, who have
shown my self a man, a Champion against the Enemies of my King that was, and
Country, -- ye shall be slain all of you, -- thus Passively rendered; this is a
Prediction, or Imprecation, which had its event, as is to be seen in the
History of Kings, and the Psalmist's sundry Songs of Deliverance, -- as a
bowing wall shall ye be, and a tottering fence, which is easily thrown down,
and utterly ruined. Others translate Actively, Ye do kill, or labor to slay
me, like a ruinous Wall or Fence, you hang over me, threatening my utter ruin.
-- They only consult to thrust him down from his excellency, i. e. me from my
Highness, from my Royal Dignity, so the Dutch Annotators, nay, and Dr. Hammond
Paraphrases, to pull me from the Throne, to wrest the Regal Power out of my
hand. Since Critics of so different a temper suppose David, when he penned
this Psalm, a crowned Head, I hope I may proceed on that Supposition.

The Version, which by being in our Common Prayer Book, is become Infallible,
has this expression -- Whom God will exalt: With reference to which I shall
consider how God exalted David, and whether God did not so act, as to leave it
to the People to have some share in it; They delight in lies, they bless with
their mouth, but they curse inwardly, i. e. with subtle and crafty Devices,
Lies, and Calumnies, they seek to overreach and ruin me, all and every of
them, with their mouth congratulate me, wish me well, religiously own my Title,
and in open Court swear Allegiance to me, but their hearts wander after the
abdicated House of Saul; so that all their Humble Addresses are but cheating
Formalities of Court-Flattery, and their professed Loyalty, a Canting term to
palliate a cursed Treason. The Words and Phrases of the Text being thus briefly
explained, I will make no nice division of the same, by which too often the
sense of God's Holy Word is crucified, and the patience of a Pious Auditory
abused; but among several weighty things, to the consideration of which they
invite, I shall select three as the most weighty, and confine my thoughts to
them, and they are so worthy your attention, that if there were no defect in
your Orator, you would listen with mighty expectation, and be filled in
answerable measure with pleasing satisfaction.

The first is, the exaltation of David to the Throne of Israel.

The second, the desperate wickedness of the Enemies of the King, their
contrivances to dethrone him, and their palliating their black Designs with
fair words.

The third, David's assurance that he should not be greatly moved, but his
Throne secured, and their rebellious Attempts punished.

I will first offer my thoughts concerning the exaltation of David to the
Throne of Israel; and it is necessary to begin with determining the Right of
this; for if David did not ascend the Throne by Lawful means, then he unjustly
complains of the endeavors of the party of Ishbosheth to dethrone him: And
supposing the means Lawful, yet the nature of those Lawful means must be
understood, else we shall not be able to judge concerning their Fact who
opposed his Authority. Though I think none will question but that David ascended
the Throne of Israel by just and lawful means, yet it was two years before the
generality of the People could be convinced of it. The Solemn Ceremony of
Sacred Unction, and the Testimony of a Righteous Prophet that poured it down
his Princely Temples, was not presently received as full Evidence, whom God did
design for the Jews to be their King; which is a Moral Demonstration to me,
that when God indulged them a Change of Government, he did not absolutely
overrule their Choice concerning the Person that should administer it; but
retiring from his own more immediate Theocrasie, left the new Regulation to be
conducted by the ordinary Methods in use among Men. Was then the Sacred Unction
to no end and purpose? Yes, to considerable end and purpose, as may be very
easily apprehended, for it satisfied David that God's gracious Providence was
engaged to exalt him: Filled now with the pleasing hope, and wrapped with the
wondrous expectation of the mighty Blessing, his mind naturally rose to high
thoughts, and sallied forth into bold Enterprises befitting a stout Warrior,
and a glorious Monarch. There was something Divine in the Message which
prepared David for the Regal Office, but that which had the immediate happy
effect on the People, inclining them to offer him the Government, was his true
Piety, and successful Virtue, his fervent Zeal for God's Worship, and his
sensible concern for the Nations Safety; they saw no man so forward in
regulating the Services of the Temple, no man his equal in Valor, when an
uncircumcised Monster defied the Armies of the Living God; this brought off
their Affections from the House of Saul, and the not well-known Son of the
worthy Jonathan. Had not such an unparalled Rival for Power advanced a Claim,
it had probably descended on Ishbosheth; but the Jews, who knew not the secret
of the Divine Right of Succession, set by, fore-clos'd, excluded the nearest of
Kin, not that they justly feared he had, or would endeavor to introduce a
Foreign Enemy, and an Idolatrous Religion, but only (as near as we can guess)
because he was not so well qualified to Protect them from their Hostile
Neighbors, and to Administer Justice between man and man.

Thus David succeeded Saul; not the eldest of his Loins, no, nor his Son, but
by Marriage of his Daughter. A special act of Providence opened the way, and he
ever after walked evenly, and made the best on it. The Jews either had forgot
his being anointed, or never knew its meaning; but his Prodigious Victories
were fresh in memory, he won Suffrages among the Tribes by ten thousands, i. e.
as fast as he slew Philistines. Nor was his Skill in Music to be lightly
esteemed, which often introduced him into the Presence, to his Advantage,
though not without his Danger. Providence had the greatest hand in his
Exaltation, yet the People's Choice was as free as it was good, and was as good
as Heaven and Earth could make it. Change but some Names, and here you have the
very Account of His Excellent Majesty King William's Accession to the Throne of
England, with all its Dependencies. The wary, invidious, and injurious
Jealousy of contriving Statesmen obscured his first years, withheld from him
the due Honors of his Ancestors, and from his Country an useful Protection.
David was not heard of, till Israel wanted a Champion to answer the proud
Challenge of a big-fighting Lubber: Nor the Prince of Orange, the Subject of
Public Discourse, till his mad Opposers had ruined themselves, and betrayed
their Nation. Divine Providence, and not Humane Foresight restored him to his
Rights, and by him delivered a harrass'd People from the Lust of a faithless
and bloody prevailing Invader.

The Consecrating David by the Prophet Samuel was not a more immediate Call for
him to signalize himself, as became a Candidate for Empire, than the Humble
Invitation of our Spiritual Guides, as well as Civil Patriots, was to the
Prince to hasten to the Redemption of our devoted Lives and Liberties. For why?
Samuel's knowledge of the mind of God, by whatever means it was revealed to
him, could not be more certain and unquestionable, than our Reverend Prelates
knowledge of the same, gathered from the plainest Revelation that ever was made
in the Holy Scripture. There they learned that Rulers were constituted for the
encouragement of good men, and for a terror to bad. There they learned to
suffer with Patience hard measure from the hands of their unbelieving
Authoritative Masters, but not to Sacrifice their Lives to the Lust of
Arbitrary Usurpation, when Wisdom and Courage might as well preserve them. If
an Invitation from such Persons, and thus grounded, was not equal to a Vision,
or a Voice from Heaven, by which Deliverers were raised up among the Jews, why
then the Gospel is a Cloud, and the Ministration under the Law was Sunshine.
As David was not only by receiving the Sacred Unction made to expect a Crown,
but also from that time forward safely guarded, by a constant, signal, watchful
Providence. So our Illustrious Deliverer, after his receiving a
well-deliberated, Just, and Religious Address from the Flower of our Gentry,
and the most Venerable of the Clergy, was conducted by a special Providence,
which loudly proclaimed all along, that it was God who had raised him up, to
restore our Israel, to deliver our Bodies from the Tyranny of Men, and our
Souls from the Doctrines of Devils. The Wisdom of God infatuated the Counsels
of his most Formidable Enemy, tempted that proud Son of Violence to slight the
Design, which could not so well have been pursued, till his Forces were
diverted; and when the Grand Disturber of Christendom was set down before
Philipsburgh, the Power of God with astonishing Wonders steered the Protestant
Prince's doubtful Course through all the dangers of the Deep: For the Storm
which his first putting to Sea met with, some wretched Worshippers of Saints
and Angels thanked the Virgin Mary, but really and truly God of his free Mercy
sent it, which prevented the Happy Expedition no farther, than what served to
make the Violaters of our Laws and Liberties more imprudent and secure: And
when afterward a favorable brisk Gale had carried the Fleet beyond their
Port, a contrary Wind was presently commissioned for a few hours, as if for no
other end but safely to land our Preservers. In the time of Saul, God was with
David, and strengthed his Arm, so that his Sword made Prodigious Slaughter
among the Philistines. But in conducting the Prince to the Throne, whereon he
is now righteously seated, Providence scattered the Enemy like Chaff before the
Wind, and gave him a Victory which pleased him better than all he had won with
the Sword, viz. a Victory without Blood.

Thus far God was (if I may so speak) miraculously alone in the Advancement of
the Prince toward the height of earthly Honor; and when the Eyes of the
Oppressed Nation were fully open, he left it to them to Choose their King, in
the room of their unhappy misled Abdicator, and they were not disobedient to
his Providence.

To speak the truth of this whole matter briefly, it is manifest from what we
read in Scripture concerning David, and what our Eyes have seen, and our Ears
have heard relating to the Prince of Orange, that both the one and the other of
them, were by the wonderful Providence of God called forth from their Private
ways of Living, in order to be made Kings, and the free Choice of their several
People made them so.

I come now to speak of the Second thing which I propounded from the Text, as
most fit to be reflected on, that is, the desperate Wickedness of the Enemies
of the King, their Contrivances to Dethrone, and their palliating their black
Designs with fair Words. And here first I Will mention what Evidence we have of
the Fact, and then touch some Circumstances which aggravate the Enormity of it.

The Royal Psalmist gives us, sometimes with mournful Eloquence, being in the
day of his Distress; sometimes with joyful Accents, being happily escaped from
Danger, large and passionate Accounts of the bold Attempts, and treacherous
Contrivances of his Enemies: They marked his steps, thinking evil against him;
i. e. they narrowly observed his conduct of Affairs, seeking occasion to
complain of his Maladministration. They wrested his word, and cast iniquity
upon him; when no fault could be found, they put false colors upon things, and
reproached him. They cursed him, they belied him, their teeth became spears,
and their tongue a sharp sword; i. e. they cursed him with so bitter
Imprecations, they belied him with such abominable false Suggestions, that the
plain signification of inartificial Words cannot express it, and Metaphorical
Language perhaps not sufficiently help us to guess at. They derided him,
derided him for his very trust in the Lord; they consulted, they only
consulted; i. e. they made it their chief aim with Hand and Heart, they
endeavored to cast him from the Throne, though God had exalted him, and the
People had submitted unto him; and they that did this were many, and were
strong, too many, and too strong for him; but that, He that has God his helper
need not be afraid, though ten thousands of the strongest of the sons of men
set themselves against him: though they palliate their Designs while they are
in contrivance with fair words, and as often as they are disappointed forswear
their unsuccessful Villainy. Thus much, and more to the same purpose, is to be
read in the Book of Psalms.

The Historical part of the Old Testament has not very many instances, nor
perhaps fully answering every Circumstance of so severe an Indictment; but I
suppose that was, because the Historical part is but a compendious Extract out
of Voluminous Records in the Archives of the Jews; and yet in the Royal
Chronicle we have an Account of Absalom's Rebellion, of his insinuating Arts to
steal the Affections of the People; his engaging (if I may use a Prolepsis) the
Jewish Matchiavil to his Rebellion; but Matchiavil learned of Ahithophel, I
therefore discharge my Allusion; Ahithophel is Name enough to brand a subtle
Rebel. We read farther, how Shimei let loose a railing Tongue, and lifted up
violent Hands against the distressed King. And also how Sheba the Son of Bichri
had likely to have shook the Throne more fatally than Absalom.

Thus you have an Account of the matter of Fact charged against David's
Enemies, their Fact admits aggravation from several Topics -- Is this the Man
whom God raised up for the Uprightness of his Heart, when he rejected Saul for
disobedience? Is this the Man, whose surprising Valor felled a tall Monument
of Pride down to the ground, before whom the whole Army of Israel trembled? Is
this the Man whose Success and Triumphs became the theme of every gladsom,
honest Heart, when they thought upon the Dangers which they dreaded, and the
Deliverance which they did not expect? Is this the Man, whom the People chose
after Experience of his Merit, to Administer the Government, which they so much
admired, that they preferred it before the Theocracy it self; it might perhaps
have been better for them, to have remained under God's Prophets a while
longer; but when they would not be satisfied without a King, they could not
have made a better Choice than David; yet even against David, David thus useful
to his Country, David thus beloved of his God, the Flatterers of an Ambitious
Son, and the unseasonable Abettors of Readiness House arose, and palliated, as
they could, their vile purposes with fair words.

Having thus spoke to the Second Head, I Will proceed, as I have begun, and join
the Parallel.

With equal wickedness as the rebellious Jews against David, unreasonable,
unruly men, have consulted to cast down from his excellency, that is the word in
our Translation, from his Throne, our Just and Lawful King, King William,
whence otherwise were necessary Impositions complained of, and the repayment of
a Debt exclaimed against, the Loan of which preserved our whole? Whence
otherwise was his Royal Name called into uncharitable Parties, when he came to
save the Nation? Whence else proceeded the many Forgeries of their Success, who
were ever better at Forging than Fighting? Whence else flowed remembrances to
his Health, who forsook when he could not destroy us, by Men, who had not a
good word for him in the day of his Power? Whence else have disputing Tongues
with the worst part of Ecclesiastical Skill raised a Dust to hide the fair and
full appearance of a plain and necessary Duty? Is this the Man, whom glorious
Providence in a wonderful manner brought from a Private Retirement, to
vindicate Oppressed States and Soveraignties? In a word, Is this the Man, whom
the most Honorable, and the most Wealthy, the most Honest, and the most Brave,
the most Learned, and the most Pious, invited hither, or approved the
Invitation, to save from Devastation, and from Fire, our Land, our Laws, our
Liberties, our Bibles, our Lives -- Good God! what desperate Wickedness is
this, that People obliged equal to their wishes, but much beyond their
expectation, should entertain an unthankful rebellious thought against their
successful Preserver and Defender of these near Concerns? What Villainy is it
beyond the reach of words to brand with sufficient Reproach that unquiet
Ahithophel, Shimei's, and Sheba's, should consult, and strive to throw him down
whom God by amazing Miracles advanced to Royalty, who succeeded on the Throne
over us, both by an Hereditary Right, and an uncorrupted Election? What black
and new-invented sin is this (deserving Punishment, I will not name, since his
God-like Mercy can remit) that they who have acknowledged the Hereditary Right
of King William, and elected his particular for their King, in the vacancy of
the Throne, by the majority of their Representatives, and taken their Corporal
Oath, many of them, to defend him, should defy their Oaths, and give their
Conscience the Lie, in Passion for a Tyrannous Bigott, whom they always
resisted after they had made him King, and never began to love, till they had
lent their helping hand to make him none. David's Enemies gave him great and
frequent occasion of Complaint, but no Affliction of his was so circumstanced
as that related in the 55 Psalm, where he mournfully Expostulates thus. It was
not an Enemy that reproached me, then I could have born it; neither was it he
that hated me, that did magnify himself against me, then I would have hid my
self from him: But it was thou, O man, my equal, my guide, and my acquaintance,
we took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company.
How may a Parallel-complaint be taken up, by him that is, how much soever
opposed, both in Right and Fact our King? It was not an open Enemy only, not
one alone that professed to hate me, that magnified himself against me; this
would not have so much surprised me, nor so nearly have affected my mind; it
was not a Babylonish Idolater, nor a Gothic Barbarian, nor such a senseless
Picture of Humanity as Juverna draws upon cold Boggs, that consulted to thrust
me away, whom God has exalted; but it was thou, of late the Reformation's
chief Support and Hope, whose laboring, over-loaded, and only not yielding
strength I hastened to relieve, but O my Soul, now while I build up, thou
pullest down. David concludes with Prophetic Rage, Let, etc. our Liege Lord
with winning Mercy, be forgiven -- may his Mercy prevail over all his Enemies,
over him their hatred never, it never shall; for to him and David one and the
same assurance remains fast; Truly my soul waits upon God, from him comes my
salvation, he is my defense, I shall not be greatly moved; and this is the
third and last Head to be considered. And first, with respect only to the Royal
Psalmist, and then to his Parallel.

Assurance is not always well grounded; nothing is more usual than to see the
confident frustrated of their pleasing expectations, and betrayed into sudden
and surprising Misery: But David's assurance was just, reasonably, and safely
relied upon; it had for its support, not partial self-love, which construes all
things in its own favor; nor proud contempt, which lessens the real strength
of an Enemy till the Battle is joined, and then finds it powerfully increased:
not unactive security, which ruins the very Favorites of Providence,
notwithstanding their vast Advantages. David's Assurance was upheld by these
two mighty Pillars, the Power and the Promise of God, the fram of Nature does
not stand firmer; his Royal Breast harbored no partial self-love, for he
speaks of himself in words of the lowest Humility, and admires the Divine
Goodness, which took him from the Sheep-folds, from following the Ewes great
with young, to feed Israel his People, and Jacob his Inheritance: reflecting on
the uncertain state of his own Affairs, he feared his Enemies, complained of
their number, and their strength, he was not unactive and secure; for though he
trusted not in his Bow, yet he drew the feathered Arrow to the head, and
bravely laid about him with his Sword, the Sword he won from the Monstrous
Philistine, and with it lopt off the proud Head of its Master, but he piously
owned his Salvation to have come from the assistance of the Lord of Hosts. How
weak soever a man is in himself, and his Friends, yet he must needs be safe if
God Almighty condescend to be his Protector, and to fight his Battles. Unto
David God often promised his Protection, upon Conditions, which no man more
diligently made it his business to perform than he; well might he therefore
upon the examination of his own Heart, and consciousness of his Righteousness
and trust in God, rest satisfied, that after all the subtle contrivances, and
bold efforts of his Adversaries, he should not be greatly moved; if troubled,
yet not overpowered; if distressed, yet not ruined; if assaulted, yet not
dethroned: Well might he, reflecting on the unjust and impious daring of his
Adversaries, conclude, Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high
degree are a lie.

Our Righteous King sits on the English with like assurance, as David on the
Throne of Israel, beloved of all, even beyond the Lines of the Reformation,
though no self-lover; as well acquainted with the Strength and Treachery of one
Enemy, as with the Cowardice and Treachery of another, a vigilant Observer, and
an indefatigable Providitator against both. But after all his Warlike
Provisions, after all his Powerful Alliances, the bravery of his Worthies, and
the Courage of his Army, and the steadiness of his own stout Heart and Hand, he
places his grand Satisfaction in the Justness of his Cause, and fixes his Trust
and Confidence in the Blessing of God Almighty, therefore has he appointed a
Monthly Fast to be observed, as his Proclamation informs us, in a most Solemn
and Devout manner for Supplicating Almighty God for the Pardon of our sins, and
for imploring his Blessing and Protection in the Preservation of His Majesty's
Sacred Person, and the Prosperity of his Arms in Ireland, and the Naval Forces.
What can I advance more on this Argument, than is already set before you, in
that excellent Form of Prayer which we have this day used. St. Matthew says of
our Savior, That coming to a certain place in his own Country, he could do no
mighty works there, because of the peoples unbelief. Oh let it not be said of
our Gracious Sovereign, that he has Victoriously led Armies of several Nations,
and done Wonders for the Protestant Interest abroad, but could not complete the
Settlement of these now his three Kingdoms, because of our crying sins here at
home, our Heats and Animosities, our careless way of Living, our uncharitable
way of Censuring; our Disputes and Cavils, our Discontents and Murmurings, our
secret Luxury, and our public Railing, our gainsaying Authority, and
worshipping Names given to Change when they become obstinate in an Error.
Remove from us, O God, these and all other our Offenses, whereby we have
dishonored thee, not duly honored our Sovereigns, King William and Queen
Mary, troubled the Peace of the State, hindered the Success of our Land and
Naval Forces, wronged our Brethren, or abused our selves, so shall we have hope
in thy Mercy; incline us to be hearty in worshipping thee, to be careful that
our Lives be henceforth reformed as well as our Profession; so though our
Enemies rage, yet they shall imagine but a vain thing; so though they set
themselves together against us, yet shall they not prevail, but we shall be
saved both we and our King.

I cannot but add a word upon occasion of the Happy Success of our Forces in
Ireland, under the Conduct of our Lawful King William, whose Subjects we are by
the justest and wisest Act that ever the Representatives of Englishmen made.

Blessed be the Lord God of Heaven, who has heard the Prayers of all the truly
Loyal and Honest Men in the Kingdom, who has given them their Hearts desire,
and has not denied them the request of their Lips, in covering their valiant
and forward King's Head in the Day of Battle, in protecting his Life, in which
their Safety was bound up, (which Life was in eminent danger, and very near
being took away, as if to show us how unworthy we are of him, and to affect us
with a true sense of the many Deliverances which Almighty God, the God of
Hosts, by his Warlike Hand works for us,) in scattering the Troops of that
unhappy man's profligate Adherents, who fights now only for a Power to destroy
us; in blasting the pernicious Hopes and cursed Prayers of unreasonable,
unconstant, unquiet, discontented Men, who might have every thing proper to
make them easy, could they but be so, without the Power to Lord it over the
Faith of their Brethren; in frustrating a sedulously-labour'd Bloody, Foreign
Invasion, by secret vile Practices brought about from the most barbarous
Tyrant, that ever owned the Name of Christian.

May these ineffable Mercies of the Divine Providence, which so carefully, and
tenderly watches over the Kingdom of England, as also over other Reformed
Churches, and Injured States, be ever mavelous in our Eyes, so mavelous, as
to cause us, when we cannot comprehend them, to endeavor to express a quick,
lively, becoming, and pious sense of them, in all Humble Obedience to the
Commands of our God in Scripture, in all Loyalty to our King, according to the
Laws of the Kingdom, in due compliance to those Laws, according to every
Capacity wherein they concern us, -- by which Laws, (the best of Laws I
believe) may He, the best of Kings undoubtedly, long Reign over us, and let all
the People, who fear God, Honor King William, and say Amen.

Postscript.
THE Scandalous neglect of the due Observance of the late enjoined Monthly Fast
prompted a Person of Honor, and good Affection to our Ancient English
Government, as it is now happily settled under King William and Queen Mary, to
recommend to the Author of this Sermon, the Penning and Preaching a Discourse
suitable to the Solemnity.

In the late Reign 'twas not an Angry Monarch could restrain the Clergy from
thankfully Commemorating (as it well became them) the Fifth of November's
Deliverance: But a late enjoined Fast, to beg Pardon of our sins, that they
might not hinder the happy course of King William's Victories, by which our
Laws and Lives have been rescued from Violence, and are from Violence defended,
has been not only not Observed, but also in some places, with contemptuous
frowardness a great deal worse used, than shall be mentioned, unless the Proof
be required, by such as did it without shame, and would without shame deny it.

To the Printing this honest, though mean and plain Discourse, the Author was
obstinately averse, alleging some excuses, which were allowed, even by them,
that loved him too much, and importuned him dangerously; yet at last he chose,
unasked, to Print, being overruled by an Accident, which, though he does not
publish, he is willing to declare to any Person, that may perchance discover
his Name, and accuse him, as a pragmatical, meddling Fellow, beyond what his
particular Station in the World, might be reasonably construed to warrant.

He thinks it reasonable that every Writer be obliged to set his Name to what
he Prints, that so the Public may have satisfaction, if injured; but he uses a
liberty commonly taken, both because the Bookseller promises to get the Trifle
Licensed, and also, for that, as he does not seek to be commended (of which
indeed there is no danger) so neither is he fond of hard censure, which yet he
does not much suspect from the Friends of the present Settlement, and in point
of deserving, has no need to fear from the Jacobite-People, who are certainly
the worst of Christians, and of Philosophers the most absurd, -- of
Philosophers the most absurd, for they have, now this long time debauched their
Reason, by giving Credit to false News concerning the late King's Northern
Forces, Foreign Aids, and Irish numbers; by believing the French King's
Irresistibility, Heaven defend them from taking up Infallibility, which the
Popes may chance to Iay down, if the Succession goes on in one or two good
Choices more. I call them the worst of Christians, the Formidable French Fleet
now in our Seas, evinces it. When we have weathered the Storm, (which a
Providential Wind in greatest part diverted) and of which, blessed be God,
there is now no great danger, it is to be hoped, that the unnatural raisers of
it will recover their Senses, and outwardly at least abhor their unsuccessful
Villainy, or else be forced to be so far Loyal as inability to do great mischief
amounts to. If any man should seem to wonder at this piece of Zeal from a
Clergyman against the faults of some of his Brethren, he bids this Reply be
made.

He has been often in the Company of Men of Quality, great Learning, and fair
Estates, amongst whom he has often heard the Clergy censured, for an unhappy,
unquiet Order, who have been in very great part, in all times Authors of the
Troubles and Calamities of the Nation; he thereupon resolved, if ever it fell
in his way, to offer one word on behalf of the Settlement, conducive (as far as
he is able) to the Security of the same, which he is glad that some Eminent
Clergymen with better Abilities, do honestly frequently endeavor; and he
wishes that more would do so, were it but for this reason, That the Lord's
peculiar Inheritance (as they call themselves) may no longer stink in the
nostrils of the People.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey, London.
INstitutio Grammaticae ad Juventutis captum summo studio and artificio
concinnata. In qua artis Ratio, and genuina Notio accurate disquiritur atque
enucleatim enodatur. Per A. M. M. A. In Octavo.

The Map of Man's Misery: Or, The Poor Man's Pocketbook. Being a Perpetual
Almanac of Spiritual Meditations, or Complete Directory for one endless Week.
Containing many useful Instructions and Prayers, plainly showing every
Christian so to walk, that he may please God. Twelves.

Man's whole Duty, and God's wonderful entreaty of him thereunto: Set forth
from 2 Cor. 5.20. By Daniel Burgess, Minister of the Word of Reconcillation.
Twelves.

Advice to Parents and Children: Being the sum of several Sermons, by the same
Author. In Twelves.


