Reason against Raillery: OR, A Full Answer TO Dr. TILLOTSON's PREFACE Against
J. S. With a farther EXAMINATION Of His Grounds of Religion.

The gravest Book that ever was written may be made ridiculous, by applying the
Sayings of it to a foolish purpose.

Dr. Tillot. Sermon. p. 121. Anno Dom. MDCLXXII.

Advertisement.
IT being the general Temper of Mankind to call any thing by an odious Name
which themselves dislike, and particularly the Humor of the Times to call
every thing Popery which comes cross to their Interest, I cannot expect my
present Adversary, whose Zeal (as will appear by the perusal of this Treatise)
carries him much farther than his Reason, should be exempt from a Failing so
Epidemical, and withal so Necessary for his Purpose. For nothing more easily
solves all Arguments, or more readily Answers any Book with the Vulgar than
this short Method; Inure them to a hideous apprehension of Popery, then call
any Production by that Name, and all farther Confute is needless. With the
Vulgar, I say; for I shall presume that whoever reads this Treatise will judge
it Incredible Dr. T. should hereafter attempt to write to such as are truly
Learned, till he thinks fit to settle and pursue some Conclusive Method of
Discoursing; which I am sure he will not, because his Cause will not bear it. I
am to expect then from the Disingenuity of my Opposers, that this Piece will be
branded for Popery, thence the publishing it made an Insolence, and (to lay on
more load) strained to an Immodest Abuse of the late Merciful Indulgence.

I am forced therefore to stop the Reader at the very Entrance, and to declare
to him beforehand, that in perusing this Treatise he shall find that the
Points at present maintained by me are only these, That Christian Faith and
the Tenet of a Deity are Absolutely Certain. If this be Popery, all the Sober
and Well-meaning Protestants, Presbyterians, and almost all England, nay all
True Christians are Papists; for not one of them who uses or discourses of the
word [FAITH] but r^tains in his natural thoughts (unless bad Speculation have
corrupted Nature) this hearty conceit of it, that it is absolutely Impossible to
be all a Ly for any thing any man living knows; and abhor the contrary Tenet;
that is, they are all on my side. If then Dr. T. does not in discoursing here
the Grounds of Faith, sustain this contrary Tenet, and so violate the Nature of
Faith, I have at present no quarrel with him, but he a very grievous one with
me for wronging him* and I must acknowledge I owe him Satisfaction as public
as the Injury. If he does, all Protestants, Presbyterians, etc. have the same
Quarrel with him I have, and so ought to join with me against him; and he will
owe Satisfaction to them all, as well as to Catholics, for corrupting the
Nature of Faith (which we all acknowledge necessary to Salvation) into Opinion,
and so quite enervating its force and influence toward bringing Souls to
Heaven, as will be shown hereafter.

I could allege, to justify my Writing at present, the earnest and daring
provocations of Dr. T. and his Friend, publicly in their late Books; also that
this Treatise was near Printed ere His Majesty's Gracious Declaration was
Published. But I shall make use of no other Justification but the nature of my
Cause, which is the Common Concern of all good Christians, and can never be
unseasonable to defend, or be offensive to any who is heartily a Friend to
Christianity, to see it defended. And, if any Clamours be raised against me for
so doing, it is abundantly satisfactory to me that the World beforehand
understands how worthy the Cause is for the maintaining of which I suffer this
reproach.

TO The Knowing Candid WITS of This Nation: Especially Those who are an
Ornament To the UNIVERSITIES, And other Learned SOCIETIES.
GENTLEMEN,
I Know not to whom all Attempts to advance Truth in any kind can more properly
belong than to You, to whom Knowledge gives Ability to discern; the professed
study of Truth, Candor and Sincerity to own what You discern, and both
together a perfect Qualification to be Judges in Affairs of this Nature. The
Enemies to Learning are Ignorance, and Passion; and I take you to be as much
above the later, as the World will witness you are free from all suspicion of
the former. I have great reason to believe I am not mistaken in the judgment I
make of You, and that few Nations can produce an equal number of Men so Acute
to discover the Truth, so Wise to judge of it, and (speaking generally) so
Unbiased to acknowledge it. This consideration gives me a high esteem for your
Authority, and that Esteem the Confidence to make choice of You for my Umpires.
The wise Justice of this Nation has provided that all differences betwixt
contending Parties be tried by their Peers; and though your dissenting from me,
in some particular Points, might possibly cause Jealousy in one who was not
well assured of his own Cause or your Integrity; yet the Interests of Learning
are common to us both, and of the Right or Injury done to That, you are the
Best, and peradventure Only Judges, and for that Point I confidently appeal to
You.

Having made my Address, give me leave in the next place to declare my Case.

I had observed with much grief the Swarms of new Sects (not to mention the
declining of many good Wits toward Atheism) which pester our Country, and
looking into the Causes of such sad Effects, it needed no great reach to
discover, that the Fancies of men being both by Nature and Circumstances framed
to great variety, it could not be expected but they should take their several
Plies, and sway men's Thoughts and Actions accordingly, unless some Principle,
Evident, in a manner, to all, should oblige the Judgment of the Wiser (at
least) to adhere unanimously to the same Profession of Faith, and satisfy by
Motives within their own ken, and even forestall, by the way of Nature, the
irregular deviations to which weaker Fancies must of necessity be subject. Nor
could I, nor indeed can any man think, but that as GOD, the Author of every
perfect Gift, settled Faith most firmly at first in the hearts of the Primitive
Believers by Evident Miracles, so he intended, and ordered, as far as was on
His part, that it should continue all along the same; or, that his Church
should persevere in Unity of Faith; and, consequently, that he settled such a
Rule to convey the knowledge of it to us, as was of a nature able to establish
it, and satisfy, according to their several capacities, both the Wise and the
Unwise. Whence necessarily follows that all division about Faith is to be
refunded into the faulty unwariness of men who deflect from that Rule, not into
want of foresight in the All-wise Founder of the Church, in leaving us such a
Rule of Faith as should set us all on wrangling, instead of keeping us at
Unity. These considerations discovered to me that I could not bestow my pains
better on any subject than in making known what was the Right Rule of Faith;
and evidencing, to men Capable of Evidence, out of the Nature of the Thing in
hand, that It had indeed the qualities proper to a Rule of Faith, that is,
Virtue or Power to acquaint us that live now (without the least danger of
Error) what Christ and his Apostles taught at first.

To this end, I showed first in Sure-footing that the Letter of Scripture had
not this Virtue, and by consequence could not be the Rule intended and left us
by Christ. Many Arguments I used from p. 1. to p. 41. though these two short
Discourses are sufficient to evince the point to any who is not beforehand
resolved he will not be convinced. First, that, that can never be a Rule or Way
to Faith, which many follow to their power, yet are misled, and this in most
Fundamental Points; as we experience in the Socinians and others. For I see not
how it can consist with Charity, or even with Humanity, to think that none
amongst the Socinians or other erring Sects endeavor to find out the true
sense of Scripture as far as they are able, nor how it can be made out that
all, without exception, either wilfully or negligently pervert it; and yet,
unless it be shown rational to believe this it can never be rational to believe
that the Letter of Scripture, as useful and as excellent as it is in other
respects, is the Rule of Faith; for, if They be not all wanting to themselves
and their Rule, it is unavoidable that their Rule is wanting to them. Next, They
who affirm the Letter is the Rule, must either say that the bare Letter as it
lies, antecedently to and abstracting from all Interpretation whatsoever, is
the Rule; and this cannot be with any sense maintained, for so God must be held
to have Hands, Feet, Passions, etc. Or else, that the Letter alone is not
sufficient to give as Assurance of Gods sense in Dogmatical Points of high
concern, as the Trinity, Incarnation, etc. without the Assistance of some
Interpretation; and, to say this, is to say as expressly as can be said, that
the Letter of Scripture alone is not the Rule of Faith, since it gives not the
Certain Sense of Christ without that Interpretation adjoined: Nay more, since
it is the nature of Interpretation to give the Sense of words, and the nature of
the Rule of Faith to give us the Sense of Christ, this Interpretation
manifestly is the Rule of Faith, and the Revelation to us who live now, of what
is Christ's Doctrine. I know it is sometimes said that the Letter may be
interpreted by it self, a clear place affording light to one more obscure: but,
taking the Letter as Antecedent to all Interpretation, as in this case it
ought, I can see no reason for this Pretense. For let us take two such places,
e. g. It repented God that he had made man, and, God is not as man that he
should repent; abstract from all interpretation, and let him tell me that can
of the two places taken alone, which is the clear, and which is the obscure
one. Atheists will be apt to take such pretenses to reject the Scripture, and
impiously accuse it of Contradiction; but how that method can assist a sincere
man, who hopes by the mere Letter to find his Faith, and hinder the Obscure
place from darkning the Clear place, as much as the Clear one enlightens the
Obscure one, I understand not. In fine, It exposes a man to the Scandal and
Temptation of thinking there is no Truth in Scripture, but Absolute assurance
of Truth it gives no man. Besides, the former of the Reasons Lately given
returns again: For the Socinians compare place to place as well as others;
other Sects do so too, and yet all err, and some in most fundamental Points.
Wherefore it must be either presumed they all err wilfully, or the Way cannot
be presumed a Right Way. Farther, it may be asked when one pitches upon a
determinate sense of any place beyond what the Letter inforces, by what light
he guides himself in that determination; and then shown that that Light,
whatever it is, and not the Letter, is indeed the Formal Revealer or Rule of
Faith. Much more might be said on this occasion, but my business now is to
state my Case, not to plead it.

The Letter Rule secluded, I advanced to prove that Tradition, or that Body
called the Church, which Christ by himself and his Apostles constituted, taken
as delivering her thoughts by a constant Tenor of living Voice and Practice
visible to the whole World, is the absolutely-certain way of conveying down the
Doctrine taught at first, from Age to Age, nay Year to Year, and so to our
time; which is in other Terms to say, that Pastors, and Fathers, and the
conversant Faithful, by discoursing, preaching, teaching, and catechizing, and
living and practicing, could from the very first, and so all along, better and
more certainly make their thoughts or Christ's Doctrine be understood by those
whom they instruct, than a Book which lies before them, and cannot accommodate
it self to the arising Difficulties of the Reader. I am not here to repeat my
Reasons, they are contained in my Book which I called Sure footing in
Christianity. And because I observed our improving Age had in this last half
Century exceedingly ripened, and advanced in manly Reason, straining toward
Perfect Satisfaction, and unwillingly resting on any thing in which appeared a
possibility to be otherwise; or, to express the same in other words, bent their
thoughts and hopeful endeavors to perfect Science; I endeavored in that
Treatise rigorously to pursue the way of Science, both in disproving the
Letter-Rule, and proving the Living Rule of Faith: beginning with some plain
Attributes belonging to the natures of Rule and Faith, and building my whole
discourse upon them, with care not to swerve from them in the least. And being
conscious to my self that I had, as I proposed to do, closely held to the
natures of the Things in hand, I had good reason to hold my first five
Discourses demonstrative, which is all I needed have done, as appears p. 57,
and 58. the rest that followed being added ex abundanti, and expressed by me An
endeavor to demonstrate, as by the Titles of the Sixth and Eighth Discourse is
manifest, though I do not perceive by the opposition of my Answerers why I
should not have better thoughts of them than at first I pretended.

This is the matter of Fact concerning that Book, as far as it related to me,
and a true account why I writ on that Subject, and in that manner: What
thoughts I had of its usefulness, and hopes it might prove serviceable toward
composing the differences in Religion, of which the World has so long
complained, though from the long and deep meditation I must necessarily have
made upon those Principles, I may reasonably be judged to see farther into
them, and know better whether they will carry, than those who look not so well
through them; yet it being an universal Temptation to flatter our selves with
our own Productions, I think best to omit. I am next to declare what reception
it found in the World. Men are subject to several Tempers, and Learned Men not
exempt from the weaknesses of Humanity. Candor and Obstinacy divide Mankind:
Some are fixed to nothing but Reason, and whenever that appears, whether
Conformable or Opposite to their former Persuasions, they always follow It,
striving to accommodate their Judgments to Reason, not Reason to their
Judgments, and resolute to be of the party of Reason, of whatever party Reason
be. Others are so fixed to their Persuasions that they can hardly be induced to
believe what is Contrary to Themselves can be Agreeable to Reason, and will
sooner believe Reason not to be Reason, than their own thoughts not reasonable.
This crosness of nature is heightened by the unhappy circumstances of our
Country, where the mixture of several Opinions, so strangely blended together,
breeds a great partiality to those Persuasions which Men have taken up, and
renders Reason less welcome and less effectual. My Book it seems, as it needs
must, encountered with some of this Spirit, and immediately a loud noise was
made against it, and a complaint of it to a Great Magistrate, as of a most
pernicious Treatise. He believing his Information, testified much resentment,
and expressed an intention of much severity against the Author; first Banishment,
then Imprisonment in that Banishment, and the liberty of ever writing more to
be debarred in that Imprisonment, for so far the Instigators pressed it. And this
was the First attempt to answer the Book, and I must confess a very strong one,
and which obliged me to a very secret retirement. But it happened that a Person
of Quality who had read the Book, gave a character of it that it was a serious
Piece, that it took the way of sober Reason, and was far from the Information
he had received of it, leaving one with him for his own perusal. From which
time I heard no more of his resentment. I conceive it was not thought
honorable to employ Authority against that which bore a semblance of Reason,
and permit Power to be abused in defense of other men's heats, and possibly the
less, where there was found a loyal deferrence to the State, p. 73. and
elsewhere. Whatever the reasons were, the Threats were changed into a desire of
a solid and home Answer, and this he recommended and pressed often and earnestly.
Hereupon five choice Persons whom I could name, met constantly on Mundays (as I
was informed) to consult and consider of it; which being all men of Parts and
Business, was found to be the day of greatest leisure.

Mean time I became acquainted with several Excellent Wits, to whose Civility I
am as much obliged as I was satisfied of their Parts; particularly with Mr.
Felton of Gonvil and Caies College in Cambridge, in whom (not to speak of
others) I found such a concourse of Excellent Endowments, that I cannot but
lament the loss of him as a great loss to Learning and the Nation; his Temper
was sweet and friendly, his Discourse calm and unpassionate, his Wit acute and
thoroughly penetrative, his Judgment, by attending heedfully to Principles,
solid and steady, his Expression clear and natural; and to all this he joined a
Sincerity and Candor which none could see without Esteem. From him I received
some Objections to my Book, of a strain far beyond what has since appeared;
wherefore finding in him Ability to say all that could be said, and yet so much
Candor as not to say what was not to purpose, I earnestly courted him by
Letters to undertake the Answer, that the World might have the satisfaction of
seeing the Truth impartially tried, and my self secured from the fear of
indirect dealing, and all pass without bitterness, and as a Great Man would
have it, with the sweetness of Love Letters. His modesty refused at first; yet
second thoughts prevailed with him. But Providence overrul'd my Hopes and
Expectations of so learned and fair an Adversary, and to the grief of all that
knew him, and the value due to learned Worth, particularly mine, took him soon
after away; though, if I be rightly informed, not before he had preached at St.
Mary's of the Absolute Certainty of Tradition, and ordered his Executors to
burn all his Papers; among which I conceive were those against me.

Being thus defeated of my best hopes, and informed of the Iunto of Five, I
began to consider if I could by any means contribute to their Endeavors, and
provide that the World might reap the benefit of a solid Satisfaction from our
common labors. Wherefore I writ and printed a little Piece which I entitled, A
Letter from the Author of Sure-footing to his Answerer; not out of vain glory
to boast my self Author of that Book, as Dr. T. whose zealous Nature and
Education, inclining him still to unhandsome misconstructions, puts upon me;
but because, not knowing yet the Persons name, I could only call him by the
Answerer of Sure-footing, and so was to express my self by the opposite
Relation I had to him as such. This Letter was full of Civility to the
Protestant Party, though I said no more than I truly meant, and unoffensive to
any. The sum of it was to desire that we might not abuse the World and our
selves by Discourses not pertinent, but closely pursue the Point in hand in a
method which might be truly Conclusive and Satisfactory; and if he liked not
the way which I had proposed, I humbly requested he would assign any other,
with which, provided he would show it was Conclusive, I should be content. I
heard some Queries were to be antecedently proposed to me, either in Writing or
in Print; but instead, as I conceive, thereof, a personal Conference was
desired with Dr. Tillotson, and another worthy Gentleman; to which I consented
readily, and when we met, discoursed freely, little suspecting the Return would
prove so unsuitable to my open plainness. The next News I heard was the Answer
it self, which came forth under the name of Dr. Tillotson, who whether he
foresaw the unlucky success of a Rigorous Method, or that his Genius lay more
for smart Irony than blunt Demonstration, or for whatever reason, He rejects
the Method I had proposed, and establishes no other instead of it, not
assigning any reason why he did so, but that he had the same liberty to manage
his Answer, which I had assumed to prescribe Laws to it; whereas I had
beforehand disclaimed any authority of prescribing, and only showed that
Reason and the Satisfaction of the World required it. Much Wit there was in his
Book, and much Art, and much good Language, but so little to the purpose, that
People could not but suspect, as he handled the matter, his purpose was not to
speak to purpose. Generally he neglects the import of my Discourse, and picks
out here and there something from its fellows, perverts and makes it fit to be
laughed at, and then laughs exquisitely at it. As if any degree of wit will not
serve to abuse and find fault, and a little wit furnish a man for Satyr, as he
has since taught the World himself, Sermon. p. 123. It Is common with him to deny
the Conclusion, and allege some pretty plausible thing against It, and never
take notice of the Premises, or attempt the Proof on which it is built; a method
against which Euclid himself has said nothing strong enough to be secure. Near
three parts of his Book impose wrong Tenets on me, changing constantly my
Sense, and sometimes my Words: And, whereas in things subject to Reason no
Scholar is bound to defend more than himself maintains, He often puts me to
defend the Reasonings of other men. As for Omissions and dextrous waving the
Principal Difficulty, they are endless; And these and some other Prevarications
of the like strain, are the Ingredients of that highly-applauded Book. The rest
of its commendations are a delicate Style, a fair Print, and good Paper;
whereof as the two last are of credit with the Vulgar, so I wonder to see the
number of those who are carried away with the first. Yet it suits well with a
prudential pitch, and such who are not much used to the strength of Reason;
especially being accompanied with the advantage of being truly victorious over
counterfeit Tenets; for in truth what he sets up most artificially, he pulls
down most irrecoverably.

I was grieved to see my well-meaning, and the pains I had taken for the
benefit of my Country, so crosly checked, and the more, to perceive by the loud
applause given to such a Piece, that the peevishness whether of humor or
faction, was either more numerous or more active than the sincerity of those
who meant well. I thought fit to give a stop to this wild carreer of Passion
and Partiality, and not being then in circumstances to make a full answer,
principally for want of health, which was then so bad that I thought I should
soon have ended this Dispute with my Life, I cursorily noted some few of its
defects in a little Treatise, which, as Dr. Stillingfleet had advised me, I
called a Letter of Thanks. In that I laid open in some signal passages of
universal concern that he quite mistook the question, and so insincerely
misrepresented in a manner the Whole, that his much-applauded Endeavors were
indeed no better than a well-worded Prevarication; and in short, by instancing
in several particulars I made good that charge of diverse faults which I have
here laid against his Book. And being then in the heat of my first Resentments,
and not judging it due to him who had provoked me without occasion to conceal
or diminish the faults of his Writing, I could not restrain the inclination of
my Genius, which leads me to show little respect to Those who show none for
Truth, but called his faults by their own course though true names. But I had
soon occasion to be sorry my nature was not framed to more wariness. For
letting my Book alone, an Argument ad hominem was used, of a temper much
stronger than those which are forged in the Schools. I know not by what
suggestions, but I know without other demerit more than I have here expressed,
an Order was procured by his best Friends to seiz upon my person, and my
Friends were informed by some Great Men, that if I were apprehended it was not
possible to save my life. To enforce this Project, besides diverse extravagant
Calumnies, Information was given to Magistrates making me Guilty of doing more
Good than it was almost possible any one single man should commit. I cannot
accuse Dr. T. of having a particular hand in this unhandsome malice; only I
can with truth aver, that the laying open in my Letter of Thanks his Faults as
a Writer, was (as appears by the circumstance) the immediate occasion of it;
and that about that time I was told by an honest Protestant who conversed with
all three, that he judged in his conscience D. W. was civiler than to take such
ungentile ways, and Dr. St. soberer or warier, but that I should have a care of
Dr. T. for it was easy to discern by his words that, if it lay in his power to
ruin me, he would do it. To the belief of which Information his known Genius
and Humor contributes too much; which is (poor man!) to be a great
Papist-hater; so that had Rome but one Neck, I know no man living more fit to
be the Executioner and strike a speeding blow.

Against this Storm I had no shelter but a lurking hole; into which I retired
the second time, and placed stricter Sentinels of Care upon my Security. In
this Confinement I began to write a very particular Answer to Dr. T's Book;
intending when the conjuncture was more seasonable, and my ability sufficient,
to publish it. But no favorable Crisis of this Morbus Animi appeared. Time had
not its usual influence upon Spirits implacably exulcerated, and the motion
continued very violent, though the first Impulse were long past. When my Person
appeared not, my Friends were found out, and a Family with which 'twas
suspected I conversed, designed for ruin: So exemplary virtuous and in all
respects worthy, that should I speak what I know, I might perhaps be thought to
flatter. Against these, while the rest of the Nation sat quiet in the
undisturbed comfort of the general Mercy, the severity of the Law was
prosecuted, and urged almost to the extremity before they could find out the
reason of the partiality used to them, for they were very far from giving
particular offense. At last, upon strict inquiry, they found that all this
Anger sprung from my being seen at their House, though that was both a very
little space, and long before; and that the same was intended against all who
should entertain me.

The apprehension of the like inconvenience drove me from the circumstances in
which I was, and which were all my Livelihood, nor could I easily find
admittance any where. I understood this to signify I was to be awed, at least
by the apprehension of my Friends danger, if I were more careless of my self,
from printing the Answer I had promised, was preparing, and was expected.
However, I proceeded in it, though I must confess I found the Task sufficiently
troublesome. For there being few passages in which my sense was not voluntarily
perverted, and not one in which the nature of the thing in debate was rightly
stated, and solidly prosecuted, my business still was by frequent repetition of
my own words to set the discourse right again, which had been so industriously
disordered: An employment which how wearisom and distasteful it is, those know
who have been condemned to the like drudgery. My Papers were grown pretty
bulky, when diverse of my most Judicious Friends, solicitous of my Safety, dealt
earnestly with me to surcease. They alleged that unpassionate Examiners might
easily discover, by what had been done already, how frivolous and insignificant
the whole way was which my Adversary took, and that another and more convictive
Reply might possibly heighten the anger to fatal extremities. That if I were
less sensible of my own safety, I should yet have regard to my Friends and all
Catholics; that it was to be feared that an exception against a particular
person, might in that Iuncture be enhanc'd to a Crime of the Whole, and the
crossing the humor or interest of that implacable Party, raise the storm of
the Great Diana of the Ephesians, and give the Gospel-Trumpeters occasion to
sound out aloud Papa ad Portas. To this was joined (for why should I be ashamed
to acknowledge my Poverty, into which that Persecution had driven me?) that I
had written more then I was able to print. In fine, Authority and Reason, and
Necessity prevailed with me, and I forbore to finish what I had begun, and to
publish what I had finished. But yet the desire I had to be instrumental in
settling so important a Truth, suggested to me a middle way, which, as I hoped,
would be incapable to be wrested into offense, so I saw plainly would be much
more beneficial to the world, and to the Learned more satisfactory.

I had observed in the Sermon which Dr. T. called the Wisdom of being
Religious, a Concession which amounted to this, that the very Tenet of a Deity
might possibly be false. I saw the same sense often implied in his Rule of
Faith, and p. 1^8. plainly owned. I perceived and knew all men of insight must
needs perceive with me, that, as this was the only material, so 'twas a full
Answer to my Book; and rendered the disquisition whether this or that be the
Rule of Faith very superfluous, if it might be maintained It had no Rule at
all, nor was capable of any. For a Rule (speaking of an Intellectual Rule as
both of us do) being a means to make us certainly know something to be a Truth,
He who says that thing may possibly be false, or not be a Truth, says it
neither has nor can have any Rule. I resolved therefore to write a Treatise in
behalf of Christian Faith in common, in which I endeavored to demonstrate from
all Heads I could invent that the Generality of Christians, or those who rely
on the common Motives left by God to the Church (as I expressed my self in my
Introduction) the assent called [Faith] must be Impossible to be False or
Erroneous. And applying this to Dr. T. and his Adherents, who as I showed from
his own words, granted his Assent built on that which he esteems his only Rule
of Faith, possible to be false, I concluded them beyond all possibility of
evasion not to have true Faith, nor be truly Faithful. And this I conceive was
to follow on my blow, as I had promised; it being unimaginable how the
Controversy could be pressed more home, than to conclude my Adversary and his
whole Cause from the very An Est of Faith, the Subject of our Dispute; nor how
his whole Book, which he calls the Rule of Faith, can be more fundamentally
overthrown than by showing from his own words and the Nature of the Thing, that
his mis-called Faith has no Rule at all, nor can have any. I conceived too that
this was to make good the engagement into which I had entered, to force them
either to lay Principles which would bear the Test, or let all the world see
they had none. For, in case they did manifest their Faith Impossible to be
False, they must of necessity build it upon such Grounds as would sustain such
a Building; if they did not, the World must needs judge by their silence that
they had none, and that they knew and confessed they could not evidence
themselves truly Faithful and right Christians. I saw besides that this method
permitted me to pursue a rational close way of Discourse, without the continual
interruption which the insisting upon my Adversaries mistakes must needs
occasion; which, as it was more satisfactory to me, and more creditable to my
Cause, so I judged it more beneficial to the intelligent Reader; for a
particular Answer must of necessity be made up for the greatest part of
accusations, where the Answerer thinks it his best play to mistake all along,
instead of direct confuting: I cannot say I am in the right, but I must say
likewise that who says otherwise is in the wrong, and that he either
misunderstands or misrepresents, and this either ignorantly or wilfully; to
show which is a task no more pleasant to the Reader than the Writer, People
being of opinion, and I think they have great reason, that the time and pains
spent in such wranglings might with much more advantage be employed in
convincing the Truth in question. Lastly, my aim was from the beginning to
bring Controversies to a Conclusion, in order to which I had proposed a
Conclusive Method; my Adversary neither accepted of mine, nor proposed any
other of his own, as I had desired; And I saw that by proceeding with him in
his talking fashion, the Point might come to be lost in a Wilderness of
Unconnected Words: Wherefore I judged it better to pursue my design more
closely, and by the bare stating the Nature of Christian Faith, to reduce all
Disputes to this short Period, Either produce and vouch such Grounds for your
Faith as are Impossible to be False, or it is evident you have none. It seemed
by the Event the way I took was not ill chosen. Dr. T. being still able to
boast his Book was not particularly answered, and so uphold his Credit with
those who look not deeply into Things, seemed by his silence well-appay'd; and
I heard of no more extraordinary Anger against me; And for my part I was
contented that superficial People should judge as their wit served them; it
being abundant satisfaction to my Labors that Intelligent and Insighted
Persons might perceive by them how matters stood, and into how narrow a compass
Controversy was reduced. And of this I have ample experience from the most
Judicious of our Nation, who unanimously assured me that it was impossible to
carry things farther, or bring Controversy to a shorter Method, since now the
whole Cause depended upon one single Proposition, by the sole examination of
which it was to be decided.

Thus stood the Controversy, and thus for some years it rested. For the future
I intended when it might be seasonable to write only such Grounds as I judged
might be a solid Foundation for Union, which as I have always looked upon as
the best of Works, so I know it is Impossible, till order be first taken to
secure the Absolute and Immovable Certainty of Faith it self, which I think is
not otherwise to be done, then by showing how and which way it comes to be
Certain.

In this Calm I heard several reports that the two Doctors wondered at my
silence, which they interpreted weakness, and despair of an Unmaintainable
Cause; and that I might not pretend want of means for my disability, some of
their Friends offered to get any thing printed which should concern either of
them. But I was not stirred, till a Gentleman of Quality and Worth, who, for
his friendship, as I conceive, to Dr. T. believed his Book truly unanswerable,
offered a Friend of mine to prevail with him to get License for me to print an
Answer, if I would or could make any. So fair an invitation moved me to accept
of it, and I solicited, with as much earnestness as I could, the performance.
But the Gentleman it seems mistook the Doctors Humor as much as his Book, for
his Credit prevailed not. All seemed bush'd and quiet, when Dr. St. publishes a
private Paper writ two years and an half before, with a Reply swelled into a
large Book, entitled, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry, etc. In the Preface
to which, and elsewhere, he insults over my silence, which he calls leaving my
poor Demonstrations alone to defend themselves, and with keen Ironies upbraids
my pretense to Principles and Demonstration, which in his language is but
Canting. Of all things in the world I should not have expected such an
Objection from a Scholar. For, certainly, whoever writes on a serious subject
so as to confess he has not concluded what he maintains, is an impudent
Trifler; and how to Conclude without Principles and Demonstration, is a thing
not known to any Logic which has hitherto appeared in the World. Dr. St. would
deserve wonderfully of Learning and the World, if he would please to teach us
this admirable new Logic of Concluding without demonstrating, and
demonstrating without Principles, for in the dull way of Learning hitherto in
use, it is so far from shameful in a Scholar to own he has demonstrated what he
pretends should be assented to, that it is unpardonably shameful to pretend
another man's assent to that which he does not pretend and judge to have
demonstrated.

I had not time to settle the thoughts which these and the like passages
stirred up, when I met with the Preface to Dr. T 's Sermons, directed
particularly to me, and meant, as far as I can guess, for an Answer to two or
three Books. I must confess the bitter smartness I found there, and the piquant
upbraiding me with deserting the defense of Sure-footing (though all men that
cared to consider any thing, saw I had already writ two Books in defense of it)
stirred me sufficiently; but I know not whether all this provoking Raillery
would have prevailed with me to Answer particularly, if I had not thought they
would not have urged me so pressingly, if their Friends had not indeed desired
I should write, and that certainly I should not offend sober Men of what
Persuasion soever, by doing only what themselves so pressed. Warier People have
indeed suggested to me that the desires of Adversaries are suspicious, and the
more because of the Time they had both chosen, since they could not but
foresee mine and others Answers would in likelihood come out about the time
when the Parliament was designed to sit, which might be looked upon as a proper
season to inflame the minds of such as were apt to believe them, and stir up a
new Persecution by making those Answers which themselves had so provokingly and
peremptorily pressed for, an argument of the Insolency of Papists, and the growth
of Popery. At least I see there can be no greater security for one in my
circumstances, than to mean uprightly; and I hope every Body will see by my
long silence I have used all the caution I can not to give just cause of
offense, and will acknowledge that it is none to write, when I am pressingly
and publicly solicited, and this with no other design than to contribute, if I
can, to the long desired happiness of bringing Disputes and Disagreements in
Religion to a period. If this be Insolence or Crime, I think there is no honest
man in this Nation or World who is innocent. Once more then I take my Pen in
hand, with this promise to Dr. T. and his Friend, that if it be not stopped again
by their indirect proceedings (as I have reason to judge the Printing of this
has been already by the diligent Searching for it) they shall have no reason to
complain of any Arrears of mine.

But what needs any Apologizing at present to prevent a sinister character of
my Writing. The Point in hand now is neither the defending any Tenet of
Protestant or Presbyterian on Dr. T's side, nor the impugning them, on mine.
The main business controverted between him and me at present, is, whether Faith
be Absolutely-Certain, or rather (as he calls it) only Morally such. In which
Point I doubt not but to have all unprejudiced conscientious men of both those
Parties now named on my side, and against Him. There is creeping into tho World
insensibly, and Skepticism is now hatching it, a Sect more dangerous than any
that has hitherto dissented from the Church in particular points: They go as
yet under the name of Christians, because they profess many perhaps most Points
of Christianity, but yet, if we may trust their own Expressions so as thence to
frame a Judgment of them, have notwithstanding no Faith at all, or no hearty
firm immovable Assent to those Points, or any of them, as Certain Truths, but
only a dwindling Apprehension, or at most* a good lusty Hope that by the grace
of GOD they are True, or at least may be True. Now these men, on the one side
owning no Infallible or Absolutely-Certain Authority, so to preserve the Nature
of Faith inviolate, or defend it from the weakness of their Speculation* that
is, to protect it from Possibility of being an Error; on the other side,
relying either on some Authority hic and nunc Fallible, that is, which they see
may perhaps be actually deceived in all it proposes, or else on their own
Speculation and Wit, whether exercised in arguing from things, or in
interpreting Scriptures Letter; and withal being men of some parts, and so,
seeing it impossible to make out that either those Reasons are Conclusive or
Demonstrative, or that their Interpretation of Scriptures Letter is not
possibly a Mistake; hence they are forced to confess in equivalent Terms, all
Christian Faith may possibly be a Ly; though they express it warily and
craftily, because they see the nature of Faith in the conceit of the Generality
who use that word, and the whole Genius of Christianity is opposite to their
Sentiments in that point. Nature therefore standing against them, necessitates
them (contrary perhaps to their intention, taking them in other circumstances)
to pursue indirect ways; and so at unawares, though certainly not without some
mixture of carelessness and precipitant passion, to undermine the solid
Foundation of Faith. The means by which they work this mischief, is, First, to
laugh at Principles and Demonstration, that is at all absolutely-Certain
Grounds and Conclusions; which if they can bring into disgrace and contempt (as
they hope they may because such reflections are unusual and unsuitable to the
Fancies of the Generality) they see plainly their work is done, and that all
Infallibility and Absolute Certainty which stands against them because they can
with no show of Reason pretend to it, must be quite overthrown. The next way
they take, is, to abuse with Ironies any man who offers or attempts to settle
Faith on immovably Certain Grounds, as Confident Swaggering men, or vapouring
Dogmatists; as if it were such a piece of Confidence to say and go about to
maintain, that Christian Faith cannot possibly be a lying Imposture, or that
God cannot deceive us in the Grounds he has laid for his Church to embrace
Faith. A third means they use, is, to abuse and baffle the nature of True
Certainty, by clapping to it the Epithet of Moral, and then proposing that to
the World, dilating upon it, and fitting it to Faith as well as they are able;
which conception being suitable to the Fancies even of the weakest, they hope
it will take with those who reflect not that the Basis of Mankind's Salvation
must be incomparably more secure than that which we usually have for the
attainment of a Bag of Money, a Place at Court, Merchandise from the Indies,
and such like trivial Concerns. Fourthly, they avoid by all means looking
narrowly into the Natures of Faith, Truth, Assent, Demonstration, Principles,
or showing the necessity of Consequence for any thing they produce, and above
all settling themselves, or yielding to any Conclusive Method of Discoursing
proposed by others, or any other things equivalent to these; and in their stead
they are given to talk much of Probabilities, Fair Proofs, Great Likelihoods,
More Credible Opinions, Prudential Reasons, or such as are fit to satisfy
prudent men in Humane Affairs, of not-doubting, seeing no just cause of doubt,
and suchlike bashful and feeble expressions, which they dress up plausibly,
and talk prettily, and doubt not but by this means to find Understandings enough
so shallow as to admire their superficial gayness. This is the Character of
this dangerous Sect, of which what opinion we are to have, or by what name to
to call them, this short Discourse will inform us.

If we know any thing of Christianity, or have any notion of what is meant by
that word, it is questionless this, that it is a means to attain Bliss or Heaven
by; nor does any Christian doubt but that it performs this by raising us to a
vigorous Hope of it as a thing attainable, and to an ardent and over powering
Love of it, in Christian Language called Charity, as also that both these
excellent Virtues are built upon the Basis of Faith, this being as S. Paul
calls it, the substance of things to be hoped for, the Argument (that is, the
Conviction) of things unseen: Again, common Reason informs us that the Assent
of Faith depends on its Grounds; and consequently cannot be stronger than They
are. These things understood, let us consider how Impossible it is that any one
should have an efficacious Hope and a Love of Heaven, while he judges himself
capable to understand all the Grounds of it as to our knowledge, and yet sees
they may be all False, and consequently that perhaps there is no such thing as
this thing called Heaven. Can any one that is not Frantic, connaturally hope
for and love effectually a thing which he sees perhaps is not, or has not
absolute Certainty of its Existence? A Merchant hopes and desires Wealth from
the Indies, but then he holds it absolutely True, that there is in Nature such
a Thing as Wealth, and that it is not a Chimera, else he were mad either to
hope or desire it: and stark mad to love it above all things, (as we must do
Heaven) even above the dearest Goods he at present sees, experiences, possesses
and actually enjoys. Wherefore, (to omit diverse Arguments produced for this
point in Faith vindicated, from p. 144. to p. 164.) it is concluded that the
denying any Grounds for Faith, but what we see are onely-morally Certain, that
is, possible to be false, is unable to breed that disposition in the Soul as
fits it for Heaven, and so (as far as is on its part) destroys the nature of
Christianity, (or the means to carry Souls to Heaven) in those men who see that
what they are to love above all things is perhaps a Chimera; wherefore, being
by this means destitute of the nature of Faith and Christianity, they are
concluded (taking them precisely as holding this Tenet of Faiths possible
Falsehood) to be in reality no Christians, though they should profess all the
points of Faith that are. How Catholics that Speculate amiss, become not
liable to this Note, I have shown in Faith Vindicated, p. 129, 130. and
elsewhere in this present Treatise.

If these men then be not indeed or in True Speech, Christians, what must we
call them? Seekers! No: For these, though they judge they have not yet found
out certainly what is Truth, yet they hold it is to be found, and thence
continue to enquire after it: Whereas these men are doubly Irrational; First in
resting satisfied when as they see they have not yet found out certainly that
what they hold to is Truth; and, which is much worse, equivalently say that it
cannot be found out to be Truth, by saying the nature of the thing cannot bear
it. Atheists or Jews they are not, because they deny not the Tenet of a Deity,
or Christianity, though they do not hold them absolutely Certain. Nor yet are
they, taken under this notion, Heretics; For those deny still some point of
Faith or other; whereas these men may deny none, but hold all, and yet be what
they are; their Error consisting in a wrong apprehension concerning the
Grounds or Certainty of Faith, which renders all the Points of Faith
Ineffectual for for what they were intended. Whence the malice of this Tenet is
something above that of Heresy, as not destroying some one or a few Points,
but quite enervating all Faith. Nor yet are they mere Scepticks in Religion, or
hovering indifferently between the opposite sides of the Contradiction; but
they bend strongly toward thinking it True. They are therefore certain
Incliners to Christianity, or Deemers that it is True; and, not of the
[FAITHFUL] that is, Holders of a Deity or Christs-Doctrine, but rather of the
[HOPEFUL.] For, whereas Faith being a firm Belief or Assent that Christ's
Doctrine is True, and so settles the existence of of it (and particularly of a
Heaven) in our minds antecedently to Hope of attaining Heaven, these men
substitute Hope to Faith, and only Hope those Points are true, or in all
likelihood may be true: Whence, though this be a good name (I must not say to
Christen them, but) to call them by, yet perhaps their own dear word Moral will
best suit with their Genius; and so we may call them Moral Christians; which
Epithet being opposite to Absolute, signifies they are not absolutely
Christians; and since nothing is indeed that which it is not absolutely, it is
true sense is, that they are indeed no Christians; yet since they like the word
[Moral] so extremely well when they are to express the certainty due to Faith,
it is but fitting they should wear it when we express them as Faithful. Though
then [The Hopeful] seems very well to represent their humor, yet it is but
fitting they should have the Privilege of naming themselves, and Moral
Christians let them be.

Against these Moral Christians, and Them only, I discourse in this present
Treatise. But what have I to do with the Persons? I doubt not, but Gods
Goodness (the Method of whose Gracious Providence is to support the Failings of
his Creatures as far as the Natures of Particular Things and the Order of the
World will permit) very often supplies the Defects of Men's Speculations with
Connatural ways of Knowledge, fixing them thus in a strong Adherence to the
most Concerning Truths, by ways which even their unreflecting selves are not
aware of: Whence, I am the farthest from judging any Man's Person perhaps of any
living, and endeavor all I can to retain a Charitable Opinion even of Dr. T's
Personal Intentions in common, and excuse him diverse times in this very
Treatise where I write against him, as far as Evidence of the contrary will
give me leave. It Is this wicked Tenet then (and It only) which I combat at
present, and which I see plainly so unsettles, unhinges, and renders useless
and ineffectual all Christianity, that I ought to declare an utter and
irreconcilable Enmity against It; and that I shall, through GOD's Assistance,
prosecute it home to the very doors of Skepticism, (the Bane of all Humane
Science as well as Faith) in whose gloomy Grott, situate in the Confines of
dark Ignorance, (Mankind's Natural Hell) they first saw the twilight, or rather
indeed were born blind.

Yet it cannot be expected that, declaring, as I do, a just Indignation against
this wicked Tenet, I should treat a Writer favorably, considering him
precisely as a Maintainer of it; or bear my self respectfully to those
insincere and unhandsome Methods and Ways which he makes use of to abet It, and
prejudice the Sacred Truth it opposes; whether those ways be Sophisms in
Reasoning, or else Scurrility supplying the place of Reason, the main Engine
employed in this Preface. I shall then take a little of that much liberty he
uses, to give them the Entertainment and Return due in Justice to their
Demerits. Yet, that I may avoid all just occasion of offense, I shall endeavor
for the most part to use his own words, (omitting still the rudest) hoping he
will have less Reason to be angry at his own Echo; since if he had not
Originiz'd it, it had not reflected. And if he assumed to himself the freedom
to abound so with Irony, and wholly neglect speaking to my Reasons, of which
(whatever they be) none can deny but that I use to have good store in my
Writings; I hope it will not be indecent if now and then I speak to those
plausible Ironies themselves, there being nothing else to refute; otherwise,
since according to Dr. T's Method of Disputing, these are my only Confuters,
and full of Brag and Triumph, he and his Friends would most certainly have
pretended, as they did formerly on the like occasion, that Inability to reply
had caused my desistance. I come then to examine this spruce Preface; in doing
which, I must be forced to lay open at large his knack of answering Books, that
so I may have just Title to make some Requests to You our Umpires, in behalf of
the Rights proper to Learning: Declaring beforehand, that wherever I am
large in any Discourse becoming a Scholar, it is not a Duty paid to his Preface,
which has nothing like a show of solid Scholarship in it, but a Respect due to
You, our Learned Judges, to whom I Appeal.

INDEX.
ASsent, Dissent, and Suspense, page 81, 82, etc. Catholic Divines vindicated,
p. 18, 179. Certainty of Scriptures Letter and Sense denied by Dr. T. p. 120,
121, 151. asserted by J. S. p. 121, 122. Definitions of General Councils, why
necessary, p. 181, 182. Demonstration, p. 41, 42, 43, 119, 120, 174. found in
Ethics and Physics, p. 57. to 63. First Principles Identical Propositions, p.
7. to 41. Dr. T 's Firm Principle shown weak, p. 71, 72, etc. Freedom from
doubt not sufficient for Faith, p. 84. to 94. p. 124. to 128. Infallibility
asserted, p. 64. to 67.112. to 116. requisite to Assent and Faith, p. 68, 69.
In what sense it admits of degrees, p. 138. to ^ 141. Unlearned Believers how
Infallible, p. 134, 135, 136, 181. Moral Certainty, p. 141. to 147. Objections
from Catholic Divines refuted, p. 175. to 179. Practical Self-evidence, p. 4,
5, 6, 116, 117. Prudential Grounds incompetent for Faith, p. 142, to 146.
Scriptures Letter no Rule, Pref. p. 5, 6, 7.199, 200. Tradition the Rule of
Faith, p. 32, 33, 183. Granted to be such by Dr. T. p. 192. to p. 200. Held by
other Catholic Divines in J. S. his sense, p. 212. to 216. Explained, p. 202.
to 212. Its Certainty, how a First Principle and Self-evident, p. 3, 4.
A Full Answer to Dr. T's Preface, with an Examination of his Grounds of
Religion.
DISCOURSE I.
Clearing the way to the following ones by manifesting his two Fundamental
Exceptions to be perfectly Injust, and voluntarily Insincere.

1. HIs Preface begins (p. 3.) with two Charges, viz. That I still persist to
maintain after so fair an Admonition, that first and self evident Principles
are fit to be demonstrated; to which he adds a Third, that I make Identical
Propositions to be First Principles in the matter under dispute. He argues too
against the two former imaginary Assertions of mine (which in this Preface is a
rare thing) thus, p. 37. There can be nothing to make First Principles more
Evident, because there is nothing before them to demonstrate them by. And I
acknowledge the reason given to be as victorious as any passage in his Rule of
Faith, where he has multitudes of such wrong-aim'd Arguments; intended, I
conceive, to show how far his Reason can carry when it shoots at rovers, for
it is levelled at no mark. But observe, I beseech you, Gentlemen, how I am dealt
with, and let these two leading Cases, discovering his way of Confute, obtain a
just suspense of your Judgments concerning all his other performances till you
see them examined.

2. In Sure footing p. 114. 2d Edit. (which I st^ll quote) I deduced two
Propositions; the former that Tradition is the First Principle IN WAY OF
AVTHORITY as it engages for matter of Fact long ago past; or, as in other
places I therefore name it, FIRST AUTHORITY; because it is manifest that the
Authentication of Books and Monuments all depend upon Tradition. The other was
this, Tradition in the matter of Tradition, or matter of Fact before our time,
is self-evident to all those who can need the knowledge of such things, that is
to all Mankind who use Common Reason: that is, self-evident Practically, or by
ordinary converse with the world (See Sure f. Disc. 1.. 12.) it being
impossible to conceive that those words [ all Mankind who use Common Reason]
should mean Speculaters. And it seems very consonant to Reason, that if the
Vulgar must rely on and use Attestation, as it is manifest they must, they
should (since they are not Schol^ars) know by a natural means that it is to be
relied on. The fair Admonition which he speaks of for these two Faults of mine,
is found Rule of Faith p. 47. where I am soberly warned to take heed how I go
about to demonstrate First and Self-evident Principles. Which, first, is no
fair return to a Scholar, to fall to exhort him with Fatherly Admonitions not
to hold his Conclusion (I mean that which is supposed his Conclusion) without
speaking at all to his Premises: Next, it is far from fair in another regard
which I am loath to mention, to pick out of those two Propositions now mentioned
those two words First Principle and Self-evident, so closely woven there with
other words to make up that one notion called the Predicate in either of them;
by this means making the Readers apprehend that I made Tradition not first [IN
WAY OF AUTHORITY] only, as I had expressed my self, but one of those Principles
which are the very first of all, or, as himself expresses it, such as have
nothing before them; as also that I made Tradition (or the Attestation of a
visible matter of Fact by so great multitudes as nothing can be imaginable to
have biased them, as I had often expressed my meaning) not self-known
Practically, but Speculatively; that is, of the self-same nature with the very
First Principles of all; such as are It Is impossible the same thing should be
and not be, A whole is greater than a part, and suchlike. Observe next I
beseech you, that all his confute is entirely built on his carriage here laid
open; for he attempts not to show that Tradition is not that which Principles,
Grounds, or which is all one Authenticates all other Authority, or that it is
not self-known practically, but all the Cry and Irony is spent upon my
ridiculousness in proving First and self-evident Principles, and this because
they have nothing before them and need no evidencing. How? NOTHING before them!
Does not every Scholar who ever read or studied the Subordination of Sciences
know very well that what is a First Principle to the Inferior Science, is a
Conclusion to the Superior! Does not all Mankind know that Maxims of Reason
are before Authority, and that No Authority deserves Assent farther than Right
Reason gives it to deserve? Does not the meanest Speculater know that most of
the employment of learned men is to make out speculatively, by looking into
Proper Causes, what is naturally or practically known to the Vulgar? An old
Wife knows by practice that such an herb cures such a malady; are Naturalists
therefore forbid to make out according to the nature of Causes how or by what
virtue it performs that effect? The vulgar have a rude yet true knowledge of
what is meant by Hot and Cold, Moist and Dry; Is it needless therefore for
Philosophers to define them artificially, and so gain a more express notion of
their natures? Is it needless for Picture-drawers to delineate with curiosity
and exactness, because some Country-fellow can draw a rude, yet right,
resemblance of a face upon a wall with a piece of charcoal? Or for learned men
to polish their knowledge and make it accurate and distinct, because the vulgar
know the same thing bluntly, confusedly and in gross? Lastly, Is Are needless
because there is Nature? Yet this is the very case: The vulgar know practically
that there was such a one as K. James; yet it is not needless for one who is
treating of the nature of Authority to make out speculatively that their
knowledge is rightly grounded on the nature of Mankind, and how this assurance
is wrought in them out of the practically-instill'd knowledge of that nature.

. 3. But what I most complain of, because (which I am loath to say) it argues a
perfect wilfulness of Insincerity, is this; that after I had in my Letter of
Thanks p. 10. offered my Proof that First Principles were Identical
Propositions, and could be no other; Also after that p. 24, 25. I had shown
that things practically self-evident may be demonstrated, and produced diverse
instances, as that the vulgar know the Diameter of the Square is a nearer way
than to go by the two sides* that things seen afar off are not so little as
they seem, which yet Mathematicians demonstrate, and none apprehends them to do
a needless action: Dr. T. not so much as attempts to answer either my Instances
or my Reasons, but perfectly conceals them from his Reader, and bears himself
all along triumphantly, as if I had produced none at all, barely says over
again his own raw sayings a little more merrily, and there is an end. I beseech
you, Gentlemen, would this be held a competent Answer in the
University-Schools; First, to admonish the Defendant to relinquish his
Conclusion instead of beating him from it by Reason; then to combat the
Conclusion instead of invalidating the Premises on which it is built; next to
pick a word or two out of those Conclusions which taken alone alter their whole
sense, and then confute only that new sense his designed alteration had given
them; and lastly, when he was told of it, his mistakes rectified, Reasons and
Instances brought to make good the true point, to neglect them all, say over
again barely what he had said before, break a jest or two upon a ridiculous
point merely invented by himself, and then cry victory! Certainly, though such
performances may serve a Prevaricator or a Terrae Filius, yet some wiser kind
of return ought in reason to be expected from a Scholar and a sober man.

As for that point which he most confutes with laughter, viz. That First
Principles are Identical Propositions, though something has been produced in my
Letter of Thanks in the place cited, and not yet answered, and so no farther
proof is due or needful; yet because the clearing this point fundamentally
conduces to settle the way to Science, therefore for their sakes who are truly
learned and aim at solid improvement of their minds by exact knowledge, more
than at pleasing their ears by pretty expressions, I shall treat the point more
accurately. The stating the nature of First Principles must needs be
Speculative, therefore those Readers who pretend not to Science may please to
pass over these two Discourses, and go on to what follows: though I shall
endeavor as well as the matter will bear, to deliver it so, that a good
natural Wit may in great part comprehend it.

DISCOURSE II.
Showing by Reason that every First Principle is an Identical Proposition.

THe great Architect of the Universe knew in Himself, or saw clearly and
distinctly in his own Divine Understanding, what he intended to make, and this
to the least thing in Nature, as is granted by all who hold such a Sovereign
Being: Also, there being nothing able to check or cross his omnipotent
Efficiency, we cannot doubt but they flowed from that First Source of all
Essence and Being without any Error, Mistake, or (as we may say) monstrous
Abortion, but perfectly adjusted and proportioned according to their several
degrees of Being, to the Idea's in the Divine Understanding of their Creator.
Hence each of them gain an Establishment in their Peculiar Natures or the
respective Portions of Being assigned them, (or rather which they essentially
are) and a kind of participated Immutability and Eternity by their Conformity,
Proportion or Essential Relation to those Divine Ideas. Wherefore since all our
Knowledge is either taken from the Things, or else proportioned to them; also
since there neither is nor can be any consideration in things so primary, so
fundamental or immoveably grounded as is this, it is manifest that the First,
most firm and most deeply grounded Truth which can be conceived or spoken of
any thing, is, that it is established thus immutably in its proper Nature by this
Sovereign Relation to what is essentially Immutable. Wherefore, if the First
Principles of all, must be the most Primary, most Fundamental, and most
immoveably-grounded Truths of all other, it is most evidently concluded that the
very First Principles can be no other but those Propositions which express the
establishment of Things in their very natures, or their being what they are,
which can no other way be expressed but by Identical Propositions.

. 2. Also, a Definition being granted by all the learned world a chief
Instrument to Science; if any thing could maintain a competition with Identical
Propositions to be ^he very first Principles, certainly Definitions, of all
other, seem to have the best claim. But what I contend is, that there is some
consideration taken from things antecedent to their Definitions, viz. their
Capableness or Possibility of being defined; Common sense teaching us that the
Power to be such, naturally goes before Actually being such. To declare this, I
desire the nature of a Definition may be looked into, which is to assign by way
of expression the certain bounds and limits of such a Nature, that so way may
be made to Science: But in case the Thing could bear two disparate Definitions,
first a Contradiction would follow, for neither of these two imagined
Definitions would be in reality any at all, since neither of them would
describe the certain limits of that nature; Next if the Thing could bear more
Definitions than one, the Discourser about it would be never the nearer to
Science, but in a perfect Confusion; now considering it thus, now not thus, but
otherwise; so that no Discourse could proceed for want of a steady Basis to
ground it, and make its several parts center in one point, or tend to one end.
Wherefore the Thing must be antecedently established to be incapable to bear
more Definitions than one, else no right Definition could be made of it, nor
any thing be known concerning it: Now that which establishes the Thing in an
Impossibility to bear but one true Definition, is its Metaphysical Verity and
Unity, or its being what it is; which frees its nature from Chimericalness and
Division in its self, whence it becomes intelligible, or capable to be known,
expressed, defined, and discoursed of. Wherefore the Things being what it is, is
that which not only Grounds all Definitions, but even all Possibility of
defining; and this it participates (as was said) from its Essential Relation
and Dependence on the Immutable Ideas or Forms in his Divine Understanding who
is Unchangeable Truth it self. It Is concluded therefore that Identical
Propositions, which express a Things being what it is, are antecedent in
priority of nature to Definitions, and consequently the very bottom Principles
of all Science. Nay Definitions themselves, which all the world admits for
Principles of our Discourses about the thing defined, are in reality nothing
else, setting apart the manner of expression, but Identical Propositions; for
it is the self-same sense to say, A Man is a Rational Creature, as to say, A Man
is a Man; nor were the Definition as it should be, if it were not Identical in
sense. So that, if he quarrel with First Principles for being Identical, or for
having a Subject and Predicate which are of the same notion, and not for being
worded alike (the reason of which shall be given anon) he must deny the use of
Definitions too, and by so doing oppose all the learned men in the world.

. 3. Thus far Metaphysics. Let us see next what Logic says to the Point. To
Conclude, is to show evidently that two notions we call the Subject and
Predicate are identify'd or truly connected in that Proposition we call the
Conclusion. To do this, we find a Third notion called a Middle Term, to be
identify'd with those two in the Premises, whence we infer them to be the same
with one another, and consequently assert the Truth of the Conclusion. But, how
shall we know that third notion to be t^uly connected with those two others;
that is, how shall we know the Major and Minor Propositions to be true? By
finding (if they need proof) another Medium connected with the two Terms found
in each of Them. And how far must this go on? Endlesly, or no? If endlesly,
then, since every following Connection is proved by some foregoing ones, in case
we cannot come to see some First Connection (or First Principle) we could
conclude or evidence nothing. And how must we evidence the Connection of the
Terms (or of the Subject and Predicate) in these First Principles? By another
Antecedent Connection of their Terms with a Third? No: for these are supposed
the First Connexions: Wherefore since they cannot be evidenced by any thing out
of themselves, and yet must be evident, else nothing could be evidenced by
them, it follows that they must be evident of themselves, or self-evident. And
in what consists this self-evidence? Manifestly in this, that no Middle Term
can come between the notions of their Subject and Predicate; which devolves
finally into this, that the Subject and Predicate are the self-same notion, or
that the Proposition is Identical: and this not only materially, or found in
the same Thing, for so are the Terms of every Remote Conclusion if it be True;
but Formally; and this either simply in notion only, as are the Definition and
the Thing defined; or else most formally and in expression also, as in those I
alleged.

. 4. Again, we experience that the most immediate notions, if they in the least
differ, (such are, Proper Causes and Effects) can be connected with the Subject
to which they belong in a Conclusion of a Syllogism, that is, they can be
concluded, or admit of Proof: Wherefore* since it is a contradiction to say that
the Prime Verities can admit Proof, their Terms must be farthest from having
any Middle Term coming between them that is imaginable, that is, must be of the
self-same notion; and so they must be Identical Propositions. The former of
these Discourses was put down by me ( Letter of Thanks p. 10, 11, 12.) which
one would think it became a Logician to speak to. But my Adversary is of
another metal, not the very same but near akin to aes sonans aut cymbalum
tinniens: He never meddles willingly with Premises or Proofs, but denies the
Conclusion stoutly, never acknowledging what was said in its behalf, and
tinkles a little Rhetoric against it; which done, (who would think it?)
immediately, as with some Charm, the Terms unconnect of themselves, and
miraculously fly asunder; and though before it looked like good honest Reason,
yet by his giving it a Disguise instead of a Confute, it is turned perfect
Nonsense. But to return to our Argument.

. 5. Logic tells us moreover, that (whatever accidental considerations may
enhance Opposition) it is agreed by all that a Contradiction is formally and
intrinsecally the greatest or First of Falsehoods; also that a Contradiction is
An affirming and denying the same of the same according to all the same
respects; wherefore the very First Principles being the First of Truths, ought
to be diametrically opposite to Those, that is, an Affirming (or denying) the
same of the same according to all the same respects, which is impossible to be
expressed but by an Identical Proposition.

. 6. Add that, since Contradiction is Faulty, and all Fault is a Privation of
the opposite Good which it violates, it follows that a Contradiction were
innocent did it not violate some opposite Truth: Since then the Light of Nature
teaches every Reflecter that it is impossible to assign any Truth Opposite to a
Contradiction but an Identical Proposition, it follows that First Truths or
First Principles must be Identical Propositions.

. 7. To explain this better, we shall find by reflection that two Contradictory
Propositions are comprisable into One equivalent to both, whose Subject and
Predicate contradict one another, as [ Peter here and now runs, Peter here and
now runs not] are necessarily equivalent to this, [ What here and now runs,
here and now runs not.] So likewise [ Scripture's Letter is a Rule, Scripture's
Letter is not a Rule] is equivalent to this [ Something which is a Rule, is not
a Rule] and so of the rest. By which it is easy to discern how clear a Truth it
is, that Identical Propositions are the proper opposites to Contradictions, or
the Truths they directly and immediately violate, and consequently. First
Principles: Since it is impossible man's wit racked to its utmost can invent any
Opposite to [ What runs, runs not] but [ What runs, runs] or to [ What is a
Rule, is not a Rule] but [ What is a Rule, is a Rule.] Lastly, The nature of
Contradiction in common puts a thing to be and not be at once, and consequently
puts this Proposition, [ What is not, is] to which the only opposite Truth is,
[ What is, is] which is therefore the First Standard of all Truth, and all
other First Principles, as [ A Rule is a Rule, A Man a Man, etc.] are but
particulars subsuming under it, and partaking in the most perfect manner of its
clearest Light.

. 8. Farther, it is observable that the more remote the Terms of a Proposition
are from Formal Identity, the less evident they are, and the more proof they
require; as also that they still grow nearer and nearer to evidence, according
to the degree of their approach toward the said Identity. Wherefore, since all
Approach of distant things, if pursued, ends in a conjoyning and centering in
the same; it is manifest that all distance in notion amongst Terms, ends in
their being the same in notion, that is, in an Identical Proposition; as also
that such Propositions are for the reason given the most evident that may be;
and so in both regards the very First Principles.

. 9. Farther, All Propositions which are capable of proof, or all Conclusions,
must have their Terms materially Identical; that is, what corresponds to both
their notions must be found in the same Thing, else they could not be True, nor
capable to be proved: wherefore the Terms in First Principles must be formally
such, nay the most formally that is possible; but nothing is or can be more
formally Identical than to have the Predicate and Subject every way the same;
such therefore the very First Principles ought necessarily to be.

. 10. There is also in Logic a way of arguing by bringing one to an Absurdity
or Contradiction. And this is performed two manner of ways. One, by forcing the
Defendant to contradict himself; The other, by obliging him to contradict the
nature of the Subject in question. The former of these is available as an
Argument ad hominem; but the latter attempt, if brought to effect, is a perfect
Conquest: And why, but because it puts the Defendant to violate the nature of
the Thing under debate; that is, to thwart this First Principle, The same is
the same with it self: for example, to make Quantity not to be Quantity, a Rule
not to be a Rule, Faith not to be Faith, as shall be shown hereafter more
clearly, when we come to see the use of the First Principles in particular
Instances.

. 11. Moreover, if it be well examined, 'twill be found that all Efficiency and
Passiveness, that is, all kind of Operation, is nothing but the existence of
such a Nature exerting or (as it were) imprinting it self upon the Subject in
which it works its Effect: For example, when a Brass Seal makes an Impression
upon soft Wax, no account can be given of this Effect (abstracting from Motion
which is caused by a Nature superior to Body) but only this, that the Agent
is of such a degree of Density or Hardness, as, if moved or applied to that
matter, is apt to alter the figure of its parts according to its own mould; and
the Patient of such a yielding nature in comparison of the other, as to receive
its Impression; and yet not to that degree Rare, as to lose it again by the
Action of the common Causes in Nature, till some more particular Agent comes to
efface it. It Is manifest then, that all Causality essentially depends on, and
is finally resolved into this Truth, that Things are such as they are, which is
their being (in part) what they are. All knowledge then of Cause and Effect,
and consequently all Demonstration is ultimately refunded, that is, primarily
built on those Propositions which express Things being what they are, that is,
into Identical Ones.

. 12. Lastly, He who is Essential Wisdom and Truth it self, has proposed to us
an Identical Proposition in those words [ I am what I am] which is the First
Increated Truth, as it is the first Created one, or the First Principle in
discoursing about Creatures as to their Natures or Ess^nces, that Every Thing
is what it is; which is therefore True because God is what He is, or because
Self-existence is Self-existence, as was explicated above,. 1. and 2. which I
hope Dr. T's Goodness will so much prevail above his Ignorance as not to judge
ridiculous, whatever he thinks of the first Created Truths which immediately
depend on the Other.

. 13. But why must First Principles be necessarily expressed with that most
perfectly-formal Identity? Or the Subject and Predicate be put in the self-same
words? Is it not enough the Sense be the same, as is found in Definitions, but
the Words must be the same also? Which bears a show of ridiculousness, and
seems to admit of no possibility of advance toward new Knowledges? Why cannot
then the Definition serve to principle all our Discourses about the Thing
defined, without recurring to such Propositions as appear little better than
fl^t and insignificant as to that purpose?

I answer: The Objection, in great part, demands what Use can be made of First
Principles; which shall be spoken to in the next Discourse. But that
Definitions are not the very Prime Verities of all, appears evidently already;
because those Propositions which express the Things Possibility to be defined,
must necessarily antecede the Definition.

And the same will be farther cleared by these following Considerations.

1. That Definitions are often liable to dispute, but Identical Propositions
never. I have heard a certain learned and ingenuous person disallow [ A
Rational Creature] to be a right definition of a Man, and discourse very
soberly how proud a thing Mankind was, to arrogate all the Reason to himself,
whereas diverse Birds and Beasts in their several spheres have as much or more
Reason than He. And yet I dare say the same Gentleman would heartily allow the
Truth of this Proposition [ A man is a man.] Nay, indeed all the Scepticks in
the world admit Identical Propositions to be True, yet the same men quarrel
every Definition extant. Since then it is directly against the nature of the
very first Principles to be dlsputable, it is evident that Definitions cannot be
the very First Principles of all.

2. First Principles ought to be Principia Intellectus and naturally ingrafted
in us, that so they may oblige all under forfeiture of their nature to
acquiesce to their verity; whereas Definitions are not such, but acquired by
Practical self-evidence* For example; by a long course of observation heedfu^ly
attending to the actions of men as men, and thence (by means of some First
Principle evidencing so constant a hitting in so many particulars to be beyond
Chance or Accident) gathering his primary and proper Operation, we come to know
the Definition of Man, none of which needs to know the Truth of this
nature-taught Proposition, [ A Man is a Man] or [ A Rational Creature is a
Rational Creature.] Moreover, Definitions generally need some skill of Art to
make them, and all Art presupposes some First Principles; whence it is
impossible Definitions should be the First Principles of all.

3. Experience teaches us that words being liable to Equivocation, where there
are fewer words there is less room for Equivocating; wherefore since First
Principles ought to be the c^earest, and consequently the most unequivocal that
can be imagined, Definitions, which explicate the notion in more words, afford
more room for Equivocation, and consequently are even in this regard, less fit
to be First Principles.

4. Lastly, Logical tricks of nicely distinguishing, sometimes elude the Truth
of a Proposition, at least darken it; from which Inconveniences First
Principles ought to be the most Free that may be: Now Definitions yielding more
room for Equivoca^ness, do by consequence give more occasion of distinguishing:
whereas Identical Propositions afford not the least: For example, this
Proposition, [ A Man is a Rational Creature] bears this distinction, A man is
rational in some things, as in discoursing those notions that concern Quantity,
but not in others, e. g. those which concern Being; or, Rational, that is
capable to discourse right the nature of some Bodies, but not of Spirits: Is it
not evident hence that this Definition of Man, is by this means rendered in
show ambiguous? And I wish there were not too many in the world who out of
their ignorance of the true Method to Science, think this distinction both
well-grounded and very pertinent. Now this being so, who sees not that the true
limits of the definition of Man, become doubtful by such kind of distinctions,
and consequently the sense of the Definition it self unknown; whereas nothing
of this can possibly happen in that Identical Proposition [A Man is a Man]
since whatever distinction affects the Predicate must also affect the Subject,
and so the Proposition remains still entirely Identical, and perfectly true,
and not in part only, as it happens in the other.

It Is concluded then from all imaginable considerations that can belong to this
peculiar matter, that the very First Principles neither are nor can be any
thing else but Identical Propositions.

14. As for their seeming ridiculous to some persons, the reason is, because
those men of mirth being led much by Fancy, and inured all their lives to
pretty plausibilities, and seldom or never reflecting on or discoursing orderly
from such Grounds, are hence apt to imagine that First Principles a^e Certain
great Rarities or Productions of some extraordinary height of Wit; when
therefore they come to hear Identical Propositions alleged for First
Principles, seeing their high expectations so strangely disappointed, they
hereupon grow pleasant at the defeat of their Fancy; never considering that,
because First Principles ground all possible discourse of what nature soever,
and therefore are common to all Mankind, even the rudest in the world, and
inbred in them, they must therefore be the farthest from being the effect of
Wit, and the most plain down right sayings that can be conceived: Whence they
are better learned from the Vulgar, than they are from great Scholars; and
therefore the most learned men that are, if they would go to work solidly,
ought, in such things as are the Results of pure Natural Knowledge, attend to
such as speak mere nature, rather than to those who mingle and perhaps corrupt
it with airy speculations which have not that firm Basis to ground their
Discourses. Now it is obvious to observe that the nature-instructed Vulgar are
apt to deliver themselves in such kind of plain Speeches, in due occasions, and
make use of them as Truths which fix their Judgments in an Unalterableness. For
example, if a man would force one of them to forgo what is very evident, he will
stick firmly to the point, and tell you soberly, that Truth is Truth, or that
he is sure a Spade is a Spade, or that he knows what he knows; or, if it be in a
point belonging to Justice, that, Right is Right; and brings in these as
Evidences from which he can never be driven: which signifies that such Truths
as these are the Principles which naturally determine and fix him in an
immovable adherence to the Point, as the ultimate resort and reason of his
persuasion; that is, they are to him First Principles. It Is observable also
that they are never more serious than when they are put to express themselves
in this positive kind of blunt manner; nor would any By-stander (perhaps not
Dr. T. himself, though he be the merriest man living when any talk is of
Principles and Demonstrations) fall a laughing at them as ridiculous for their
adhering finally to Identical Propositions: Which evidences that he has a
conceit that First Principles are some fine elaborate Inventions of Wit, and
that they are to tell a man something he knew not before; whereas they are such
Truths as no man can possibly be ignorant of; as appears in those in Euclid,
and other suchlike, which seem at first blush full as ridiculous as those he
so laughs at.

Lastly, It Is observable that those witty half-Speculaters who scorn to follow
Nature in their Grounds, when they come to lay any themselves, propose mere
Whimsies for First Principles; of which Dr. T. is a pleasant Instance, as shall
be seen hereafter.

DISCOURSE III.
That First Principles are Identical Propositions, proved by many Instances;
and their Right Use shown.

. 1. THus far we have discoursed the nature of First Principles from Logic and
Metaphysick, within whose Confines that Matter was placed: Which no Intelligent
Reader could expect to be less Speculatively delivered, considering the nature
of that Subject: For common Reason tells any competent Judge in such affairs,
that if any Sublunary Matter can require high Speculation, certainly a
Discourse which states the nature of the Supreme Verities must forcibly exact
it. Wherefore to make it more intelligible, I shall for my Readers sake do
three things: First instance in some particular Identical Propositions granted
by all the World to be First Principles in their respective Sciences. Next,
show the Use of these First Principles which my ignorant Adversary so miserably
mistakes: And now and then, by the way, apply them to the present Controversy
about Tradition.

. 2. As for the First, I showed Dr. T. (Letter of Thanks, p. 25.) an Example of
one First Principle granted to be such by all who treat of the nature of
Quantity, though he, out of a constancy to his (...) humor, never heeds to
take notice of it. It Is this, A Whole is more than a Part: Nor perhaps will so
profound a man at superficial Talk deny this to be a First Principle, in regard
the Subject and Predicate of that Proposition, by reason of the different
manner of expressing (only which he minds not the Sense) seem disparate in
their notion, and, so, not Identical or too closely connected, which he has a
most special Antipathy against in First Principles, as is seen by his impugning
it in mine, and will more amply appear when he comes to put his own. Nay, the
great difference in the sounds of the Subject and Predicate will make it to one
who looks not much farther, to bear the face of a certain kind of distance and
disagreement in sense between them, which will, no doubt, please him hugely.
Yet I must contest that that Proposition is Self-evident, and that its
Self-evidence consists in this, that its Subject and Predicate (considered
Logically and not Grammatically) are perfectly Identical, that is, to Dr. T.
are fully as Ridiculous as A Rule is a Rule, Faith is Faith: Which I thus show.
The Subject of that Proposition [ A Whole] is defined to be That which consists
of Parts; or (since a Thing is that of which it consists) it is equivalent in
sense is, in reality, [ A Whole is Parts.] Now the word [ Parts] being plural,
necessarily and formally imports more than one Part; wherefore this Proposition
[ A Whole is more than a Part] is perfectly the self same in sense with this, [
That which is more than one Part, is more than one Part:] which is directly
Identical.

. 3. Moreover, some late Philosophers build their Physics on this Principle,
Corpus est quantum, in which the Subject and Predicate differ indeed
Grammatically, one being Substantively, the other Adjectively expressed; but if
we rifle the words to clear the inward sense, (as is the duty of Scholars or
Philosophers) we shall find that since all the Essential difference we know
between a Body and a Spirit, is this, that this is Indivisible, the other
Divisible; as also that Quantity and Divisibility is the same notion, it will
appear evidently, that this Proposition [ Body is Quantitative] is, a^cording
to them, perfectly equivalent in sense to this, [ What is Divisible is
Divisible:] which is manifestly Identical.

. 4. Again, all the Learned World hitherto have held that we have Certain
Maxims ingrafted in us by Nature, I mean imbuing our Mind by the first
impressions on our Understanding, without our contributing to their generation
in the least, more than by having an Intelligent Nature passively receiving
those Impressions; and these they call Principia Intellectus, which generally
concern the nature of Being; that Conception being the most Luminous, and by
means of which striking the Eye of our Soul, all our Intellectual Sight is
produced: as will appear to any one who attentively considers that all our
Discourses consist of Judgments expressed by Propositions, and those essentially
depend on the notion of Being; wherefore, unless this be known antecedently,
it is impossible either to judge, think or discourse. Hence follows that the
First of our Knowledges is of the self-discovering nature or notion of Being;
and the most obvious knowledge of Being is this, that it formally excludes, or
is extremely opposite to, Not-Being, and therefore inconsistent with it in the
same Subject: which we use to express by this Proposition, [ Impossible est
idem esse and non esse] It Is impossible the same thing should be and not be.
This therefore has ever been deservedly held a First Principle in
Metaphysics, establishing all our Discourses that concern the actual Being of
Things, and grounding in a manner all Logic. And yet it is plain to the meanest
Speculater, that this Proposition is the self-same in sense with this, What is,
is: Which is most formally and supremely Identical: The impossibility mentioned
in the former lighting only on this, that actual Being and Not Being should
agree to the same Subject, or which is all one, that the Subject and Predicate
in this later Proposition should not be connected.

. 5. But, it may be the Principles of Mathematics will better relish to our
fastidious age, which neglecting to consider what it is that makes Geometry a
Science, think there is no Demonstration but in Lines and Numbers. To them then
let us go; and at first entrance into Euclid we are met with these famous and
useful Principles. Those which are Equal to the same, are Equal to one another.
If Equals be added to Equals, the Wholes are Equal. If Equals be taken away
from Equals, the Remainders are Equal. Those which are twice as big as the
same, are Equal. Those which are Halfs of the same, are Equal. Besides others
of the same strain; and amongst the rest, A Whole is greater than a Part of it
self, of which we lately discoursed. Now I contend that all these are in effect
Identical Propositions, and in the common sense of every Intelligent man,
amount merely to as much as this, Aequale est, aequale sibi, An Equal is equal
to it self: or else suppose it necessarily as the very First Principle upon
whose most evident Verity* theirs depends. For example, this Proposition, [ If
Equals be added to Equals, the Wholes are Equal] is clearly made up of the now
mentioned Identical Proposition thrice (as it were) repeated; and is plainly as
much as to say, The two supposed Equals are Equal to one another, the two
Equals added are Equal to one another, and so the two Wholes made up of both
those Equals, that is, the Equal Wholes are Equal to one another. And the same
may be said of all the rest of that kind. Which were it not that men expect
rigor of discourse in the Subject of Geometry, and have entertained a conceit
that it is not to be expected nor had in other matters, would look full as
Ridiculous by reason of their seemingly too great Plainness and Evidence, as a
Rule is a Rule, or Faith is Faith.

. 6 I come now to perform the second thing I promised, which is to show what
use is to be made of First Principles, and how. In which hard point my Friend
Dr. T. is at his wits end. And first he tells you soberly (Pref. p. 38.) if you
will take his word, that the mischief is, they are good for nothing; Which
were, I confess, a mischief with a witness; for without these, no man living
could either know, judge, or discourse.

. 7. Next, he quotes Aristotle against me, as disliking a Proposition of the
very same stamp with ^y First Principles; To which my answer is, (and I desire
it may serve for his objecting all other mock-Authorities of this nature) that,
though I value and honor Aristotle exceedingly, yet neither he nor any man
living taken as a Reasoner, or in things which are the Proper Object of Humane
Discourse, has any the least Authority over my Understanding, but by virtue of
the Reasons he produces: Let him then make use of Aristotle's Reasons (and the
like I say of School-Divines) against me as much as he will; since those, if
Convictive, may subdue my Understanding to assent* i^ I be Intelligent and
Candid; or else expose me to the Disesteem of Learned men, if I be either so
ignorant as not to understand their force, or so insincerely obstinate as not
to admit them though I see they conclude: Otherwise, to neglect to allege
their Reasons, and think to combat and overthrow me by objecting their bare
Sayings, is so senceless a conceit as only could enter into the head of such a
puny Logician. In a word, let him either prove this a necessary consequence,
Aristotle, School-Divines, or other Discoursers, say such a thing, ergo, it is
True; or else desist from such an insignificant method of confuting. Add, that
he puts me, by his indistinct citing the place, to find out one half line
perhaps in a large Treatise; otherwise I should not doubt to show that Great
Man not so opposite to my Doctrine as Dr. T. would persuade his Readers.

. 8. After this he assures us that by ten thousand of these Identical
Propositions, a man shall not be able to advance one step in knowledge because
they produce no Conclusion but themselves. By which he gives us very learnedly
to understand that he either never knew or else has quite forgot that there
ought to be two Prem^sses to infer a Conclusion, and three Terms in every
legitimate Syllogism, and not one Premiss, and one or at most two Terms only.
And lest you should think I abuse him in putting upon him such an absurdity as
never Junior Sophister yet was guilty of, he pursues the acknowledgement of it
home, and to convince me (forsooth) of the Foolery of these Principles, he will
needs try what can be done with them either in a Categorical or Hypothetical
Syllogism: thus; A Rule is a Rule, but Tradition is a Rule; Ergo Tradition is a
Rule. Again, If a Rule be a Rule, then a Rule is a Rule; but a Rule is a Rule,
Ergo. And when he has done, he asks if any man be the wiser for all this? I
answer, not a jot; but I know a certain person much foolisher for it. Yet he
says it may be Mr. S. may make better work with them, and manage them more
dexterously. And truly I hope so too; else he would deserve to be as ridiculous
as himself that managed them so childishly. In the mean time it is observable
what a Scholar-like way he takes to confute, and what a high conceit he has of
his Jests. Was Drollery ever till now held a Convictive, or a Jeer a
Demonstration? Alas poor Trifler!

. 9. To make way toward the declaring the proper use of First Painciples, I am
first to remove Dr. T.'s misconceit, and to instruct his ignorance that the
very First Principles or Identical Propositions cannot be the Premises in any
Syllogism. To do which he may please to know, or rather to reflect, that every
Legitimate Syllogism has three distinct Terms; of which, the Proposition which
is to be proved, or to be the Conclusion, affords us Two; the Third or Middle
Term is to be sought for, and taken from the nature of the Subject in hand, or
from what is intrinsecally or (at least) necessarily connected with it, in case
we would conclude the Thing Certain. This Middle Term (in that Figure which is
the only natural and proper one) joined with the Predicate of that Proposition
which was in question, or to be concluded, makes the Major; the same with the
Subject of the said Proposition, makes the Minor. Whence is seen that each
Proposition in a legitimate Syllogism has two Terms formally distinct that is
two, which are not formally the same, or Identical: and consequently that the
very First Principles can never be Premises in an exact Syllogism, speaking,
as he does, of those which are every way Identical.

. 10. To show then their Proper Use, I explain my self thus. All solid
Discourse concerning any Subject, ought to be grounded upon the nature of the
Thing under debate, and to endeavor all what may be to hold firmly to that
Nature: which if it does, it is rightly made and Demonstrative; if not, it is
absurd and Contradictory. Wherefore he who discourses right, guides himself all
along by the Thing's being such, (that is, by being what it is) which is rooted
in his Judgment, and keeps a steady eye upon that Point, lest in discourse he
deviate and swerve from its nature: On the other side, he who discourses ill,
violates the nature of the Thing, and runs into contradictions absurdities; and
what means violating the nature of the Thing, or speaking contradiction, but
the making the Thing not be what it is, and so falsifying by his discourse that
Principle which was diametrically opposite in this circumstance to the
Contradiction he sustained, which was that Things being what it is. For
example, Dr. T. puts Scripture's Letter to be a Rule of Faith, and yet unless
he will be strangely uncharitable, must grant (convinced by experience in the
Socinians and others) that many follow it to their power and yet judge not
right concerning what is True Faith, what not; which destroys the nature of a
Rule, or makes a Rule not to be a Rule, contrary to the very First Principle in
that affair: For he puts it to be a Rule ex supposit^one, and yet puts it to be
no Rule, because the Followers of it to their power are misled, which argues
(there being in this case no fault in Them) the want of a Regulative Virtue in
It, and that it is no Rule.

. 11. Hence is easily understood what use is to be made of the very First
Principles: viz. not to make that which is the First Principle in such an
affair one of the Premises in a Syllogism, much less to make that one single
Identical Proposition both the Premises (or two Propositions) as our shallow
Logician in his wild rant of Drollery would persuade the Reader. But the very
First Principles have a far more Sovereign Influence over the Discourse than
any of those Particular Propositions, decisively (as it were) abetting or
dis-approving the Whole. It Is therefore to stand fixed in the mind of the
Discourser, and be heedfully attended to, so to give a steadiness to all his
ratiocination. It Is its office to be the Test or Touchstone of Truth and
Falsehood, or a Rule which is a Measure of what is Right, what crooked, oblique,
or deviating from true nature. If in Dispute one hold firmly to that, it
authenticates his Discourse to be the solid Gold of Truth; If any plausible
Talk make a mock-show of Connection or Truth; it discovers the cheat, showing by
its own most Evident Connection the unconnectedness or looseness of the others
empty Babble, and demonstrates it to be the mere Dross of Falsehood, how fair
soever it appear to the Eye at first, and how prettily soever it be
superficially gilded with sophisticate Rhetoric or other artificial Tricks of
counterfeit Truth. It Is like an immovable Basis, that sustains all the
Superstructures of Truth; though it self rise not above its own firm level; or
like a Rock, which by its rigid hardness, dashes asunder into Contradiction and
Folly the ill-coherent and weak Productions of Witty Ignorance. No wonder then
Dr. T. abuses so the First Principles as good for nothing, for he perceives
them disposed to abuse him, by showing all his Discourses to be nothing but
well-clad Nonsense; and though (his way of Discourse or his Cause not bearing
it) he cannot work with them, yet if I be not much mistaken they will make work
with him ere it be long. But, to return to our Instances.

. 12. Faith, meaning by it a Believing upon Motives left by God in his Church,
to light Mankind to his Truth, as I expressed my self in my Preface to Faith
vindicated, and elsewhere, is an Assent Impossible to be False; and this is
found in its Definition as its Difference essentially distinguishing it from
Opinion, which is possible to be False, and is proved by more than forty
Demonstrations in Faith Vindicated, not one of which has yet been in the least
replied to: Wherefore, being a direct part of the Definition, it engages that
First Verity on which the Definition it self is grounded, that is, if Faith be
not Impossible to be False, Faith is not Faith: Wherefore Dr. T. who for all
his shuffling makes Faith (thus understood) possible to be False, is convinced
to clash with that self-evident Identical Proposition by making Faith to be not
Faith; and, if the pretended Demonstrations in Faith Vindicated, or any of them
stand, he and his Friend Dr. St. (if they truly say what they think) are as
certainly concluded to be none of the Faithful, as it is that Faith is Faith.

. 13. Also Tradition being a delivery of the Faith and Sense of immediate
Forefathers to their Children, or to those of the next Age, by Living Voice and
Practice, that is, by C^techising, Preaching, Conversing, Practicing, and all
the ways that can be possibly found in Education, it follows that if Mankind
cannot express what they have in their thoughts to others at long run (as we
use to say) so as to make Generality (at least the wisest) understand them, we
have lost Mankind; since to do this, requires little more than Eyes, Ears,
Power of Speaking and Common Sense: Wherefore let this way of Tradition be
followed, and it will convey the first-taught Faith, or the Doctrine of the
First Christians, that is, True Faith, to the end of the World: Therefore it
has in it all that belongs intrinsecally to the Rule of Faith; that is, if men
be not wanting to themselves, but follow it to their power, it will infallibly
derive down the First, that is, Right Faith: Since then every thing is what it
is, by its having such a nature in it, Tradition having in it the nature of a
Rule, is indeed a Rule: Wherefore he who denies that Tradition has in it the
nature of a Rule, denies by consequence that Mankind is Mankind; and he who
denies It, having in it all that is requisite to the nature of a Rule, to be a
Rule, denies by consequence a Rule to be a Rule.

. 14 My last Instance showing withal more amply the Use of First Principles,
shall be of that Identical Proposition which grounds the whole nature of
Discourse: and it is this, [ The same is the same with it self] Which is thus
made use of.

The Copula [ is] expresses the Identity or (as we may say) the sameness of the
Subject and Predicate which it connects, and it is the aim of Reason to prove
these two Terms identify'd in the Concsusion, or (which is all one) that that
Proposition we call the Conclusion is True. But how shall this be proved? A
Third Term is sought for, which is the same with those Two others, and thence
't^s evinced that those two are the same with one another in the Conclusion*
and why? Because otherwise that Third Term would not be the same with its own
self, or be what it is, if it were truly the same thing with two others, and
yet those two were not the same thing with one another; but it would have
Division in its very nature, or not be its self; being in that case distracted
into more essential natures, (that is, being Chimerical, and consequently two
Things) according to one of which, it is the same with one of those Terms;
according to the other, the same with the other: Which being impossible, in
regard every thing is precisely what it is, or the same with it self, it
follows likewise that it is impossible that a Conclusion thus deduced should not
be true; or, which is all one, that the Extremes of it should not be the
self-same, as far as concerns verifying or justifying the Truth of the
Propositions. For example, in this Syllogism: Virtue is laudable. Courtesy is
a Virtue. Therefore Courtesy is laudable.


The two first Propositions being true, and the Copula [ is] expressing
Identity of the Extremes, we see that Laudable and Courtesy must needs be the
same with Virtue; wherefore also, either they must forcibly be the same in the
Conclusion, or else Virtue must be not one but two; that is, must involve in
its self two dis-agreeing natures, according to one of which it is the same with
Laudable, and according to the other, with Courtesy; by which means Courtesy
and Laudable become not the same in the Conclusion. But it is impossible Virtue
should have Intrinsecal Disagreement or Division within its own self, or not be
the same with its own self; (or, which is all one, be not-it-self.) Wherefore
it is Impossible those two Terms truly expressed to be the same with Virtue in the
Premises, should not be the same with one another in the Conclusion; or, which
is all one, it is impossible that the Conclusion should not be True.

. 15. Hence is seen that the Light of Reason, or that Light by which we draw
new Knowledges out of foregoing ones, is that very Light which shines in th^s
self-evident Proposition, The same is the same with it self: Which would make
one think verily this Identical Proposition were neither Ridiculous nor good
for nothing; as also (which our Great Doctor will wonder at) that if the Terms
be freed from ambiguity, and a Middle Term be rightly chosen, a man who
understands Logic may come to be infallibly assured of his Conclusision; for
the same reason a Mathematician may be infallibly certain that omne Triangulum
habet tres angulos aequales duobus rectis; and upon this assuran^e given him by
these Ridiculous First Principles, as our Ridiculous Logician calls them, grow
so hard hearted in holding to his Conclusion thus demonstratively deduced, that
he will not forgo it, though two admirable Vndemonstrating DOCTORS OF NO
PRINCIPLES, Dr. St. and Dr. T. break Jest after Jest (which my Friend calls
here fair Admonitions.) upon Principles, Demonstration, Rule, etc. and upon me
for holding them; even so far as to make good Dr. T. quite despair of
convincing me, as he here soberly and sadly complains to his Reader, Pref. p. 3.

. 16. Lastly, Hence is seen in what way we make use of this First Principle,
The same is the same with it self; and the like is to be said of others of this
nature: to wit, thus; that, if the Discourse be so framed as necessarily to
engage the Verity of that First Principle, it must most inevitably and
infallibly be Certain and Demonstrative; but, if the Discourse clash with it
and thwart it, it is as Certainly Contradictory, Absurd, and False.

. 17. I foresee this First Principle now spoken of, which grounds all Reason,
will even for that regard incur Dr. T's high dis-favour as well as its Fellows:
(for a very small stock of Reason will serve to Set Up a Talking Divine, and
too much will quite Break him) and therefore I have a great desire to reconcile
them, by letting him see that himself through the goodness of Nature is forced
to guide himself by those First Principles, though he strive all he can to
pervert Nature, and slight them; nay, that himself must grant that Identical
Propositions deserve to be called and esteemed First Principles, after all this
ranting and swaggering noise against them. To do this* I will put them on his
side, hoping his own Interest, Passion and Partiality, to which his Reason
seems a sworn Slave, will invite him to see that Truth, which in other
circumstances he was not capable of. In his Rule of Faith, p. 183, 184. he
combats Sure footing, as making Moral Motives and Arguments necessarily
produce their Effect upon a free Agent, the Will of Man; and argues pretty well
against it (if he were not mistaken all the while) out of the nature of Man as
Free: and, certainly, he must see it is his own best and closest play to contend
that I subvert the nature of a Free Agent, as such, by my Discourse; and what
means this, but that my Discourse makes that which is Free to be Not-Free: and
is not this as plainly to say that I wrong that Principle, What Is free is free,
as man can speak? If he say It Is not: I ask him what First Truth or Principle I
wrong by making that which is Free to be Not Free? If I wrong no Principle, my
Discourse would be unblameable; if any, the Wit of man can assign none but that
Identical Proposition, What Is free is free; this and only this being formally
opposed to that other in which he must contend my Discourse is faulty, namely,
the sustaining that What is free is not free. Again, (as was said) a
Contradiction is the Chief of Falsehoods, and being faulty in point of Truth,
and all Fault or Defect being, as such, a Negative or Privative, its malice can
only be known by the Positive Good which it violates or excludes, that is, in
our case by the Opposite Truth which it destroys. But the proper Opposite to a
Contradiction is an Identical Proposition, as has been shown; also its proper
Opposite (it being a Chief Falsehood) is a Chief Truth or First Principle;
therefore not only all First Principles are Identical Propositions, but in
case those were not established first, Contradictions would be harmless
innocent Fools, hurting no Truth or Principle in the World; and even though
they be established, Dr. T. tells us very seriously, Pref. p. 38. They are good
for nothing; and so still he pleads for the Innocence of Contradictions, and
disgraces their Enemies, First Principles; one would guess he has far more of
those on his side than of these; as it will appear when his Answer to Sure
footing comes to be scanned, and particularly in that passage I lately cited;
where though it be the most plausible part of his Book, yet it shall be shown
partly hereafter in this Treatise, partly more in the next, that he mistakes
the natures of Necessity, Liberty, Will, and even Manhood; or else, when he
haps to hit right, mis-applies his Objections to the wrong parts of my
Discourse.

. 18. If after all this, Dr. T. cannot conceive that The First Principles are
Identical Propositions, let him imagine a man divested of the knowledge of all
Identical Propositions, and then let him tell me how or in virtue of what such
a man could either judge, know or discourse; or let him show me what could
h^nder such a Soul from taking direct Contradictions to be First Principles,
and adhering to them as such? Since on the one side, they are of a large
extent, as Principles use to be; and on the other side, he sees no Principle
they are opposite to, and so ought to take them for Tru^hs. When Dr. T. gives
the World ^at^sfaction in this point, I will follow his Nonsensical Admonition*
and renounce all Pr^nciples as far as God and Nature will give me leave; for in
that case Nonsense would be the best Sense, and Contradictions the perfectest
Truths: But till he does this, he must remain in his despair of convincing me,
I cannot for my heart help it.

. 19. I shall add one word more to the truly Learned Reader; Our imperfect
manner of knowing in rhis state, obliges us to detail, or, as it were, divide
the Object we would know into many abstracted, inadequate, or partial
Conceptions, which we use to rank orderly in the ten Predicaments, and then to
compound those single Conceptions into Propositions, and those into Discourses:
Whereas separated Substances when they know any Object neither compound nor
divide at all, but with one Intuitive View see the Whole to be as it is.
Wherefore there is nothing in all our knowledges that in the manner of it comes
so near their way of operating as our Act of knowing Identical Propositions. It
divides as little as is possible for our state; for it predicates the Whole of
the Whole; for which very reason it as little compounds again; and did not our
Condition here forcibly exact o^ us to frame a Proposition, or connect together
inadequate notions by a Copula when we would express a Truth, it would be a
kind of Intuitive seeing the Thing as it is; and so indeed after a sort it is,
but confused, (all Clearness here arising from a perfect distinguishing our
notions) yet it resembles not a little in its absolute Evidence, immovable
Firmness, and its nearest approach possible to Simple Intuition: Whence it
hints to a Soul de^irous of Truth, the glorious satisfaction it will enjoy,
when the Screen of our Body is taken away, to have at one Prospect all the
whole Creation and each single thing in it, presented to her ravished
Understanding, and seen to be what they are, with a far greater Evidence,
possessed and held with an incomparably greater Firmness, and penetrated by a
transcendently more excellent and Simple manner of knowing, than wh^t we now
experience here in those weak yet best resemblances, our knowledges of the
First Principles. And indeed '^is but fitting, that those supreme Knowledges,
which ground both our Definitions, the Matter, and all force of consequence,
the Form of our inferior way of Knowledge by Reasoning, should be nearest
allied to the manner of Knowing proper to those Higher sort of Intellectual
Creatures; that so, as the wisest order of the World requires, the Supremum
Infimi may touch or immediately confine upon that which is Infimum Supremi.

. 20. By this time I hope those Learned and Intelligent Persons to whom I
address this Discourse, will discern I had some Reason to hold Identical
Propositions to be First Principles. I beseech them to review all Dr. T. has
said against them either here or in any other place; and when they have
discovered it all to be mere empty Drollery, they will justly wonder at his
Confidence, that dare appear before Scholars in Print, and think to carry it
off with soppish Jests, as if his Readers had only Risibility in them, and no
Rationality. Yet in reliance on these unfailing Grounds, he ends with a
Declaration to all the World, That if there be no other Principles but such as
these, meaning Identical Propositions, he neither has any Principles, nor will
have any. An excellent Resolution, and hard to keep! Yet I Will wager ten to one
on his head that in despite of both Art and Nature he shall hold it as well as
any man living: and that when he comes to lay any Principles of his own, the
Terms shall be so far from Identical, that all the Wit of man shall not make
them hang together at all.

. 21. The Sum of th^s whole Discourse about Principles, is this: All Science a
Priori is thus originiz'd. The First Being is what He is; that is,
Self-Existence is Self-Existence, and so Essentially Unchangeable: Wherefore
the Essences of Things depending solely on the Relation they have to what is in
in GOD, that is, to what is GOD, are Unchangeable likewise, or are established
in their own Being, that is, fixed in their own particular and distinct Natures,
which we fitly express by Identical Propositions, affirming them to be what
they are. Hence they become capable of having the determinate bounds of their
natures described in certain Forms of Speech called Definitions; which are
nothing else but expressions of their Distinction from all other Things in the
World. The way to make these Definitions is twofold. One by collecting the
natural Sayings of the Generality of Mankind about that thing as such, and then
observing in what notion those several Sayings of theirs do center; the
distinct Expression of which must needs be the Definition. For they knowing
through Practical Self-evidence the distinction of one Thing from another by a
perpetual converse with them, have the right notion or nature of the Thing in
the^r Minds; and those Sayings genuinely delivered, are the Proper Effects of
that Notion, imprinted there by the teaching of Nature. The other way is, by
sorting all our Notions under certain distinct Heads, and then dividing the
highest or most General Notion in such a Head, by i^trinsecal differences, till
by descending they light on that difference which constitutes, and (joined with
the Genus which it divides) defines that Nature. The Definition had, that is, a
di^^inct Knowledge being gained of what it is in which any nature ag^ees with
others, and in what it differs from them, Reason has more room to stir her self
in, or more matter to work upon in order to bring things to a further
distinction and clearness: And first, by a due consideration and reflection,
Practical Self-evidence still assisting, (for the Greatest Men of Art must not
leave off being Children of Nature* nay perhaps it is their best Title) the
Proper Causes and Effects of such a nature begin to appear; and thence Middle
Terms for Demonstrative Syllogisms disclose themselves, and Science begins to
spread it self and advance. Or, if two Notions are to be shown connected, which
seemed remote, the Notions which directly compounded their Definitions are to
be resolved farther, and their resolution pursued, till something appears in
both of them which is formally Identical, that is, till some Identical
Proposition comes to be engaged. For example, if one would prove that Virtue is
Laudable, he will find that Laudable is deserving to be spoken well of, and
Practical Self-evidence as well as Reason telling us that, our Speech being
framed naturally to express our Thoughts, that thing deserves to be spoken well
of, which deserves to be thought well of; and that what is according to our
Right Nature, or True Reason, deserves to be judged Right or Good, that is,
thought well of; and withal, that Virtue is a Dispositi^n to act according to
Right Reason, it comes to appear that Virtue and Laudable have in the^r Notions
something that is formally Identical, and that this Proposition, [ Virtue is
Laudable] is as Certain as that what is according to Right Reason (or Humane
Nature) is according to Right Reason: which seen, the thing is concluded, and
all further disquisition surceases.

. 22. This is my method which I observe to my power, whenever I profess to
demonstrate: Only because we are not discoursing in severe Logical Form, I
endeavor to engage at the very First Identical Propositions, or the First
Principles, to avoid all possible cavil which uses to take occasion, from a
Definitions being too large or too narrow, to confound and obscure the
Discourse. Which being so, I challenge Dr. T. before our Peers, as he pretends
to be held a Scholar and an honest man, to declare why in his Preface, p. 26.
he tells his Readers, without any the least proof, that Certainly, the sacred
Names of Principles and Demonstration were never so profaned by any man before.
Let him, I say, state the Natures of Principles and Demonstration, and then
make out in what my way of discoursing wrongs either of them. This done, let
him show what his has in it elevating it beyond mere superficial Talk. Till he
does this, I accuse him of Affected Ignorance in Himself, and Unjust Calumny
toward Me; and that he stands hooting (or, as himself elsewhere called it,
whooping) aloof with Flams and Jeers* but dares not for his Credit come close
to the Point: as judging it his Interest and Safety to avoid by all means the
settling any Conclusive Method of Discoursing; lest his loose Drollery, which
now is the only Stickler, and domineers so briskly, come then to be quite out
of countenance, and hang its head very sorrily; being by that means discovered
to be perfectly Insignificant, and good for just nothing at all.

DISCOURSE IV.
How Dr. T. advances to prove a Deity, by denying the absolute Certainty of all
Sciences but Mathematics.

. 1. WE have seen how unfortunate Dr. T. has been in impugning my First
Principles and Method of Discoursing: It comes next to be examined how
successful he is in settling his own. But ere I come close to that matter, I
must say something to his Impertinent Drolleries, because he thinks them rare
things, and (as appears by his carriage all along) places most of his
confidence in those Trifles; nay, which in my mind is no very wise Project, he
would have his Readers think those Feathers weighty, because they are gay.
Besides, these are my only Confuters, and so it is in a manner my duty not to
neglect them.

. 2. He challenges me, p. 4. to have threatened never to leave following on my
blow, till I had either brought Dr. St. and Him to lay Principles that would
bear the Test, or it was evident to all the World they had none. And I conceive
I performed this in my Inferences at the end of Faith Vindicated, and had done
more but for certain Reasons which I gave in my Preface. But this was no such
great Threat: I knew them prone enough of their own Genius to do voluntarily
things of this nature; and now both of them have, like true Friends, conspired
to do me that favor of their own accord. For Dr. T. declares here to no fewer
than all the World, That he neither has any Principles, nor will have any, if
there be no other but Identical Propositions, as, speaking of First Principles,
I have proved there are not; and Dr. Still. has laid such Principles of late,
as would make any Understanding Man that reads them, swear he is as far from
having any as his Friend. Excellent ones indeed he puts at first, but the
mischief is, they make nothing at all for his purpose: Some fumbling
Propositions there are that make for his purpose, but the ill luck is, they are
so far from having the least semblance of Principles, that no wit of man shall
ever make them look like good Conclusions: And to put it to the trial, if out
of any Principle forelaid there, he can infer that main and in a manner only
Point, viz. That Scripture's Letter is the Rule of Faith, and put it in a
Conclusive Syllogism or two, I promise him upon the sight of it to become of
his persuasion. But my Friend tells me here, he perceives Great Minds are
merciful, and do sometimes content themselves to Threaten, when they could
Destroy: and, in return I tell him* I am sorry to find by these words, that a
certain Person not unknown to him, is far from having a GREAT MIND, who
immediately upon the publishing my Letter of thanks, fought to destroy me
without Threatening.

. 3. I charged him formerly, and now charge him again, to make the Rule of
Christian Faith, and consequently Faith it self, to be False; Also I charged
the same Position in equivalent Terms upon a Sermon of his, and that as to the
Chiefest and most Fundamental Point, the Tenet of a Deity: and still am ready
to maintain that Charge. But first it is observable that on this occasion my
Friend is grown much out of humor, and from the merry conceited* Vein of Wit
and Drollery, falls into downright Scolding: with -- He knew in his Conscience
-- he durst not cite, etc. -- notorious falsehood -- groundless Calumny -- he
durst not refer to the place, etc. -- This is the Man -- it would make any
other man sufficiently ashamed -- He may blush to acknowledge, etc. Why, what is
the matter? Surely there is something more than ordinary in the business, that
makes a man of mirth, of late so pleasant, on a sudden thus pettish. He says I
durst not cite the words of his Book or Sermon: How I Durst not! I will not be
so rude as to use Dr. T's words here, p. 35. Certainly one would think that
this man has either no eyes, or no forehead; but I must say that all who have
Eyes may see, and all who have any degree of Sincerity will acknowledge that I
did cite those words out of his Book in Faith Vindicated, p. 171. where I
fastened that Position on Him, Dr. St. his Abetter, and their Adherents. And,
as for the words of his Sermon, it was no Proper Place to cite or confute them
there: It was enough there to add, as I did, after my Charge, these words, [ as
may perhaps more particularly be shown hereafter] relating to a future
examination of it intended in another Treatise. I use not to confute Books in
Prefaces, as is the late mode of Answering: Witness Dr. Pierce against Mr.
Cressy, the Dissuader against the Discovery, and Dr. T. here against three of
mine; which, as his Friend says well, is like Rats gnawing the corners of
Books, or (as Dr. T. himself expresses it here) manfully nibbling.

. 4. But I may blush (he says) and what is the Crime? Why, to acknowledge that
ever I have read my Lord Falkland, Mr. Chillingworth, and Doctor Stillingfleet,
and have no better a style and way of reasoning; whom he praises for Persons of
admirable strength and clearness in their Writings. What would he have? I
freely confess, and ever did, that they are Persons of much Wit and a clear
Expression; yet I never understood till now that men used to read their Books
to learn a good style and methods of Discoursing. As for their admirable
strength, I could never find it. The strength of a Discourse, as I imagine,
consists in its Grounds, not in witty Plausibilities and and fine Language:
Though I know Dr. T. who seems never to have aimed at any higher pitch, thinks
verily such ingenious Knacks make a Discourse stronger than all the Principles
in the world. And for them all put together, if Dr. T. can show me any one
Principle in any of them, which they heartily stand to, able to put Christian
Faith beyond Possibility of Falsehood, I promise to yield all I have writ for
false, and accordingly renounce it.

. 5. As for their Clearness, and Dr. T's too, whom I rank with them in that
Quality, having really a disposition to do him all just honor he makes himself
capable to receive; I acknowledge it is found in them to a fair degree of
Excellence. But I must distinguish Clearness into two sorts: one that clears
their own thoughts by means of Language, the other that clears the Truth of the
Point in dispute, which is done by means of Principles. The former makes the
Reader understand Them, the latter makes him understand Truth. The one renders
it clear that they say thus* the other makes it clear that they say right when
they say thus. In the first sort of Clearness they have not many Fellows; In
the latter, they are like other Mortals, or rather indeed they are quite
destitute of it. For being utterly void of Grounds, they leave the Point unseen
to be true, that is, obscure, and far from Clear. And if Dr. T. thinks I wrong
them, I desire him to show me either in any of them, or in himself, any
Principle he can justly call theirs or his, and then go to work Logically, and
make out how and by virtue of what its Terms hang together; and if he can do
this, I shall acknowledge publicly my Error, and make them all honorable
satisfaction the very next Piece I print. In a word, they are pretty dextrous
at pulling down, or bringing all things to Incertainty, as becomes Men of Wit
and Fancy; (and what easier than to raise a thousand wild Objections at rovers,
without ever heeding the natures of the Things?) but a^ Building, which
requires a Judgment made steady by Grounds and Principles, they ever did, and
ever will, and so must all who follow their steps, fall infinitely short.

. 6. As for my style; I declare that I regard it no further than it serves to
express my thoughts; especially not intending to persuade the Vulgar
Rhetorically by advantage of Language, but to prove severely the point to
Scholars by the connectedness of my Sense. I am of St. Austin's mind, that, in
this circumstance, an Iron-Key is as good as a Golden one, where no more is
requisite, but aperire quod clausum erat, to open what was before concealed or
shut. In my younger years and spring time of my life. I applied my self much to
those flourishes of Poetry and Rhetoric; but I am now in my Autumn; and my
riper thoughts applying themselves to study Knowledge, the Flowers fell off,
when the Fruit-time was come. I endeavor, as far as I am able, to fill my mind
with grounded and sollid Reasons for the point in hand, and then let my Sense
give me my Style, and not frame my Sense to my Words, or make my Words supply
the want of Sense, as gay Discoursers use. Besides, no man's Attention is
infinite; and so, should I mind my Style too much, in all likelihood I should
mind Sense (which I a thousand times more value) less; and I take this to be
one Reason why Dr. T. (for otherwise the man has a very good wit) heeding his
Style and Words so extremely much, scarce attends at all to his Sense; or, (as
an Ingenious Person reading this Preface expressed it) had rather be guilty of
ten Errors than one Incongruity. Lastly, how does Dr. T. know my Style, were I
to make a Sermon? Does not every Orator know that the Style due to a Sermon
and a strict Discourse of close Reason, are the most different imaginable? I
will not say Dr. T. has no good Judgment in Words, for this would make him good
for little; but I must say he was very rash in concluding absolutely of my
Style from seeing it in one kind of matter only, and this the most Incompetent
of any in the world, to show what Language one is Master of.

Now to his Sermon; and let him remember it is himself forces me to lay open the
weakness of his Discourses by his frequent and scornful Provocations: Which I
was very loath to do in this Circumstance, lest it might wrong the Common Cause
of Christianity against Atheism. But I considered that, should Christian
Divines acquiesce and seem to consent by their Carriage that they judge such
quivering Grounds competent to build their Faith and the Tenet of a Deity upon,
it would be a far juster Scandal to Atheists, than it is to disclaim from them,
and avow in the name of the rest the absolute Certainty of those Maxims which
ground our Persuasions as Christians. Add, that it was my Duty to those who yet
are firmly persuaded of their Faith, not to permit them to slide into a less
hearty Conceit of it than the nature of Faith and the Obligations springing
from it, do require at their hands. These Considerations justifying me fully to
the World, and Dr. T's daring Provocations particularly to h^s Friends, I
resolved to answer his Challenge; though I foresee my Discovering the Weakness
of his Discourses upon this Subject, engages me to make better of my own in
conf^tation of that Irreligious Sect, of which I here acknowledge my self a
Debtor to my Readers, and shall perform that Obligation, as soon as I have done
with those Pretenders to Christianity who make Faith and its Grounds Uncertain.
^nward Ulcers are far more dangerous, and require speedier cure than those
which are without.

. 7. His intent in his First Sermon was to show the Unreasonableness of ATHEISM
upon this account, because it requires more Evidence for Things than they are
capable of. But let us Christians take heed that we give not scandal to
Atheists, and obstruct their Conversion by exacting of them what is opposite to
the true Nature God has given them, or Right Reason, and requiring of them
Impossibilities. And for this end, let us impartially consider what it is we
invite and persuade them to, viz. to Assent to the Existence of a Deity, and
other Points of Faith, as Certain Truths, nay lay down their l^ves, upon
occasion, to Attest they are such. And what is it to Assent? It Is to say
interiourly, or judge verily that the thing is so. And can a Motive or Reason
possible to be False, ever induce in true Reason such an Obligation, or work
rationally such an Effect? How should it be? Since in that case a man must on
the one side judge the thing Impossible to be False, because he is to assent to
it as a Truth; and yet must at the same t^me necessarily judge it Possible to
be False, because he sees the Motives he has offered him raise it no higher:
that is, he must hold both sides of the Contradiction, which is absolutely
impossible. Now true Evidence that the thing is so, takes away all possibility
of Falsehood, and so obliges to Assent; and if Dr. T. produces such proofs as
make the point truly Evident, an Atheist is unreasonable and obstinate if he do
not Assent to it: But, if by those words, Atheism is unreasonable because it
requires more Evidence than the things are capable of, he means that the Things
afford no true Evidence at all, and judges Atheists unreasonable for not
assenting without true Evidence because the Things afford none, he in effect
tells them they must forfeit their Manhood ere they can be Christians; than
which, nothing can more reflect on the Profession of Christianity, or be more
unworthy a Christian Divine to propose. Let us ^ee how far Dr. T. is blameable
in this Particular. He discourses thus; and since he so earnestly presses it,
we will take his words in order.

. 8. Aristotle (says he) has long since observed how unreasonable it is to
expect the same kind of Proof for every thing which we have for same things.
Aristotle said very well. For, speaking of Proofs in common and at large, those
we have for Success in our Exterior Actions, on the Hopes of which we proceed
to Act, are for the most Part but Probable: but this reaches not our present
business about a Deity, (in order to which this Preamble is framed) where
Exterior Acting will not serve the turn, but an Interior Act of Assenting to
the Existence of such a Sovereign Being is necessarily required: The Question
then is, Whether Aristotle did or could with any reason say that a Rational
Creature (that is, a Creature whose nature it is to deduce Conclusions by
Discourse from Premises, or build the certain Truth of Those, upon the certain
Truth of These) could be obliged, in true Reason, or acting according to Right
Nature, to assent, judge or conclude a Thing True, without such Motives or
Proofs which did conclude it True; or that, what concluded a Thing True, did
not also conclude it impossible to be otherwise, or to be False. It Is granted
then that in our Exterior Operations, exercised upon Particulars where
Contingency rules, we must rest contented with Probabilities of the Event, and
proceed to act upon them, the necessity of acting obliging us; for, should all
the world surcease from Action till they were assured of the good success of
it, all Commerce and Negotiation must be left off, nay all the means of Living
must be laid aside; but then we are not bound to assent or judge absolutely
that the thing will succeed well, because we have no Certain Grounds or
Conclusive Reasons for it, but only that it is best to act, though upon
Uncertain Grounds of the Success, for which assent also we have absolute
Evidence from the Necessity of act^ng now spoken of. Whereas, on the other
side, where the whole business of our Christian Life, (which, as such, is
spiritual) is to worship God in Spirit and Truth, or approach to him by
ascending from Virtue to Virtue, that is, from Faith to Hope, from Hope to
Charity, the Top of all Perfection; the whole interior Fabric is built on a
Firm Assent to the Truth of the Points which ground our Profession. Wherefore,
if the Foundation for this Assent be not well laid, all the Superstructures of
Religion are ruinous. Now Nature having framed things so, and the Maxims of our
Understanding giving it, that those who guide themselves by perfect Reason,
that is, the strongest and wisest Souls, are unapt to assent but upon Evidence,
(whereas the weaker sort (as experience teaches us) are apt to assent upon any
silly Probability) hence unless such men see Proofs absolutely concluding those
points True, they are unapt to be drawn to yield to them, and embrace them as
Certain Truths; especially, there being no necessity at all to assent as there
was to act outwardly, in regard Nature has furnished us with a Faculty of
Suspending, which nothing can subdue rationally (in such men at least) but True
Evidence had from the Object, working this clear sight in them either by it
self, or else by Effects or Causes necessarily connected with It. Other
Evidences I know none. It may be Dr. T. does. Let us see.

. 8. Mathematical things (says he) being of an abstracted nature, are only
capable of clear Demonstration: But Conclusions in Natural Philosophy are to be
proved by a sufficient Induction of Experiments: Things of a Moral Nature by
Moral Arguments, and matters of Fact by Credible Testimony. And though none of
these be strict Demonstration, yet have we an Undoubted Assurance of them, when
they are proved by the best Arguments that the nature and quality of the thing
will bear. This Discourse deserves deep Consideration. And first it would be
ask^ why Metaphysics are omitted here, which of all others ought to have been
mentioned, and that in the first place, since its proper Subject is those
Notions which concern Being, and to give Being or Create, is the Proper Effect
of Him who is Essential Being; whence it seems the Properest Science that is to
demonstrate a Deity, in case Metaphysical things be demonstrable; and that they
are such, Dr. T. himself cannot deny; for if (as he says here) things are
therefore demonstrable because they are of an abstracted nature, the Object of
Metaphysics, which is Being, is far more abstracted from matter and so from
Motion, and its necessary Concomitant Uncertainty or Contingency, than is
Quantity, the subject of Mathematics; for this primary Affection of Body is
the Ground and Proper Cause of of all Variation and Unsteadiness, since all
natural Motion or Mutation arises from Divisibility: Yet, because all Science
is taken from the Things as standing under our notion or Conception, and not
according as they exist in themselves, where thousands of Considerabilities are
confusedly jumbled into one Common Stock of Existence or one Thing; also
because we can abstract by our Consideration the notion or nature of Quantity,
nay consider the same Quantity merely as affecting Body, as it were, steadily,
or extending it, without considering the same Quantity as the Proper Cause or
Source of Motion; hence the Mathematics have Title to be truly and properly a
Science; for this Abstraction, or manner of being in our mind, frees the notion
or nature thus abstracted (that is, the thing, as thus conceived by us) from
Uncertainty, nay indeed fixes it in a kind of Immutability; whereas were it
considered as found in the World, there would be no firm Ground at all for any
Discourse. For example, perhaps by reason of the perpetual turmoil of things in
Nature, there is not to be found in the World any one Body either
mathematically Straight, Circular, or Triangular; yet because the nature of
Body conceived as in Rest bears it, and we can abstract from Motion, and so
consider quantitative Things according to what they can bear in themselves,
taken as not moving, or in Rest, therefore we can make such steady notions, and
when we have done discourse them, and ground a long train of new Conclusions
(which we call a particular Science) upon such a Nature thus conceived.

. 9. And for that reason I would gladly know why Ethics or Morality is not
equally demonstrable as Mathematics. For we can equally abstract those Moral
Notions of Virtues and Vices, and consider them apart, as we can do those
Mathematical ones of Lines and Numbers. I know it is grown a common humor in
the World, taken up I know not how, by course, and continued none knows why, to
think otherwise: But I must confess I never could discern any reason for it,
and shall be thankful to that man who can show me any that convinces. In the
mean time I give mine for the Affirmative; which is this, That the same reason
holds for Ethics as for Mathematics, since all the perquisits for
Demonstration are found in the one as in the other. To put it to the Test,
let us consider what Euclid does when he demonstrates, and by virtue of what: We
see he puts his Definitions and some common Maxims peculiar to that Subject,
and then by his Reason connecting the first Deductions with his Principles, and
the following Deductions with the foregoing on^^, weaves them into a Science.
And is it not evident that we can as well know what is meant by those words
which express Virtues and Vices, and so as well define them as we can those
other? Also that the Common Maxims of Morality are as self-evident to Humane
Nature as any First Principles in the World? I admire then what should hinder
Ethics to be as perfect a Science as the clearest piece of Mathematics, since
we can equally abstract the several notions handled in it from matter, equally
define them, and, consequently, assisted by Common Maxims equally-evident, with
equal clearness discourse them; which is all that is required.

. 10. If it be said that particular Moral Actions are liable to Contingency;
it is answered that this hinders not but the Speculative part of Morality is a
true Science: Even Mathematical Demonstrations, when reduced to practice, and
put in matter, are subject also to Contingency, as we experience daily in
Mechanics: and yet the Speculative part, which abstracts from matter, is never
the less Scientifical.

. 11. The greatest difficulty is in that Cardinal Virtue called Prudence; and I
confess that because the exercise of this Virtue is surrounded with an
incomprehensible number of Accidents, and waylaid, as it were, with all the
Ambushes and Stratagems of Fortune; and consequently to make its Success
Certain, we must be put to fathom the natures of many several things; nay more,
their Combinations or Joynt-actings with their several circumstances; and
especially of those things which are the Common Causes of the World, as the
influences of the Sun, Moon, and other Stars, (if they have any that is
considerable) and lastly of the Elements which it is impossible for our
short-sighted Knowledge to reach; hence Prudence, in its Execution, or put in
matter, is liable to more Contingency by far than any piece of the
Mathematics, where we have but one or two single notions or natures to grapple
with and weild; Yet notwithstanding all these difficulties, I must still
contest that the Maxims of Prudence, upon which its Dictamens are chiefly
grounded, are self-evident practically, and to the Learned Demonstrable, viz.
That we ought to sow and plant in their proper seasons, that it is best for
Merchants to hazard though they be insecure of the Event, and a thousand
suchlike.

. 12. I expect Dr. T. will object the fickle nature of the Will, which renders
all Contingent where this perpetually-changing Planet has any Influence. But
yet there is a way, for all that, to fix this volatile Mercurial Power, and make
it act with a constancy as great as any other thing in Nature. To conceive how
this may be effected, we are to consider that the Will too has a peculiar
nature of its own, which it can no more forgo than the most constant Piece
found in Nature can do Its: that is, The Will can no more leave off being a
Will, than a Rule can not-be a Rule, Faith not-be Faith, or any other of those
ridiculous Identical Propositions (as Dr. T. calls them) not be true. Now the
Will being a Power, and Powers taking their several Natures from their Objects,
or, as the Schools express it, being specified by them, and the Object of the
Will as distinguished from the Understanding, being Good, and this proposed to
It by that Knowing Power; that is, Good, (at least) appearing such; if it can
be made evident that such a thing can never appear a Good to the Subject thus
circumstanc'd, it is demonstrable the Will cannot will it, nay as evident as
it is that A Will is a Will.

. 13. To apply this to particulars: In case there be a Trade or Profession of
Merchants, and it be evident to all the Followers of that sole Employment, that
Themselves, Wives and Children must starve unless they venture to Sea, the
notventuring can never appear to them (thus circumstanc'd, that is, addicted to
that only way of Livelihood, as is supposed) a Good; and so it is demonstrable
that (abstracting from Madness or Exorbitant Passion, which is not our Case)
they can never will not-to-venture. Or if a great multitude of men have
embraced no Profession but that of the Law, and, as we'll suppose, have no
other Livelihood but That, so that it becomes evident it can never appear a
Good to them not to take Fees; it is as Certain they will not refuse them, as
it is that a Thing is it Self, or that a Will is a Will; because a Will is a
Power whose Essence it is to have such an Object as is appearingly Good.

. 14. To come closer to our purpose. Suppose Innumerable multitudes of Fathers
or Immediate Predecessors in any Age had an inclination to deceive their
Children or immediate Successors in the World, and consequently that the
Immediate End they proposed to themselves were to make them believe such Points
of Faith were received by them from Forefathers, which were indeed newly
invented; these men, I say, in case they must see it impossible to compass that
end, viz. to deceive the under-growing World in so open a matter of Fact, it
follows that ( End, Motive, and Good being the self-same thing in our case) it
must necessar^ly appear to them no Good, or want all power of moving them,
since a seen Impossibility can never be a Motive to one not Frantic: Wherefore
it is as Certain they cannot conspire to will eff^ctually in that circumstance,
nor consequently to do such an Action, as it is that the Will cannot will any
thing but an appearing Good, that is, as evident as it is that the Will is it
self. And this is the true force of my Argument as to that part of my proof, (
Sure footing p. 78.) however Dr. T. is pleased perpetually to disguise it, that
it may better become his necessary Drollery.

How then? Is not the Will Free? I reply, It is not free in this, nor is it at
the Will's pleasure to choose whether it will be its self or no: Whenever
therefore its Essence is engaged, those Acts are not Free; In all other Cases
where its Essence is not engaged, it is Free, provided there be on the Objects
side variety enough for Choice. Yet in those former Cases those Acts of the
Will are voluntary, because they are Hers; and more voluntary, because they are
more according to what is Essential to her, or to her very Nature.

. 15. As for Natural Conclusions being proved by a sufficient Induction of
Experiments, I must absolutely deny any Induction to be sufficient to beget new
Science, if it be understood of Experiments alone, without the assistance of
Common Maxims in that affair. And I would gladly be informed why Physics or
Natural Philosophy should be debarred the power of deducing its Conclusions
Scientifically, or, why the same reason holds not for its being a Science, as
does for the Mathematics and Morality. We can arrive to know the meanings of
those words which express Natural Notions, as Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness,
etc. Again, the Common Maxims belonging to Nature are full as Evident as any in
the Mathematics or Morals; as that a Dense or less Divisible Body pressed
against a more Divisible (or Rare) one will divide it, and such like. We can
consider too those Natural Notions abstractedly; and, so, define them, and
discourse them evidently, thus abstracted; which is all that is requisite to a
Science. It would be well considered then why we ought to relinquish that
Method, which is, confessedly, the road way to all Science in the Mathematics,
and take up, instead of it, this new and Contingent Way of Induction. The
Objections against this Discourse are the same which are made against
Morality's being a Science, to which I have lately spoken. But Dr. T. is
pardonable in this mistake, because he errs with a great multitude, and those
too very ingenious persons; who, unfortunately missing the Right Method to
Science, and having taken a prejudice against all Beginning a priori by way of
Principles, conceit Natural Knowledge only attainable by amassing together
great multitudes of Experiments. And as they who pursue that fruitless study of
the Philosophers Stone, light upon many pretty things by the way which
entertain and please their Fancies, and, by that means, decoy them forwards to
spend their Thoughts, their Money and Industry to little purpose: So they who
solely affect this Way of Experiments, hit upon many pleasant and delightful
Productions, useful indeed to some degree for Practical Men or Artificers; but
full as barren to create any new Science, as the other to make Gold. Whence,
though I dare not be so bold as to suggest my Advice, yet I crave leave humbly
to express my Wish, That those Excellent Wits would think fit maturely to
consider in the first place whether they be secure of their Method; which will
be best determined by looking into the nature of Humane Discourse when rightly
made; and discovering by what means it is effected when we conclude evidently
some new Truth in the Mathematics, or any other Science, and then considering
whether mere Induction have any such virtue. The Zeal I have that the precious
Thoughts and diligent Industry of such Ingenious Pursuers of Truth should not
miss their End, transports me a little unseasonably, and perhaps needlessly,
beyond my present Duty; for which yet I know their Candor such, that I shall
easily obtain their pardon.

. 16. It follows in Dr. T. Matters of Fact are to be proved by Credible
Testimony. But what I desire to know is, whether any Testimony is to be held
Credible for any thing, unless it either be, or at least be held, hic and nunc,
INFALLIBLE in that affair: For Credible signifies [ to be believed] and Belief
is a yielding over the Understanding to assent upon Authority, and all Assent
is a saying interiourly the Thing is: Now that any man can according to Maxims
of True Reason say interiorly, that is, judge or hold the Thing is, and yet at
the same time judge that the Persons on whose sole Authority that Assent is
built, are hic and nunc Fallible, that is, may perhaps be actually deceived,
and consequently that the Thing it self is possible not to be, is direct^y to
judge that a Thing may at once be, (since he assents it is) and yet possibly
not be, because the Authority upon which its being so as to my knowledge solely
depends, may possibly be in an Error, or deceived actually in that very
particular.

. 17. Again, by these words [ Matters of Fact are to be proved by Credible
Testimony] I suppose he means [ proved True] or, which is all one, Impossible
to be False: Now I would gladly know of Dr. T. whether a Testimony possible to
be deceived, or Fallible hic and nunc in such a business, is able to prove that
that very matter built only on such a Testimony, is Impossible to be False.
But if he means that matters of Fact are not provable to be True, but only to
be Probab^e or Likely-to-be True; then it is the Probability of those matters
which is concluded to be True, and not those matters themselves.

. 18. I wish I could see an Answer in a sober and candid Way to this or any
such Argument. The best I have had yet is given here (p. 16.) in these words,
All Humane Testimony is Fallible for this plain Reason, because all men are
Fallible. Good God! Is it possible there should be found among Mankind a Writer
so weak, as to put that for a plain Reason which is so plainly contrary to
common Sense? Is it so plain that all Mankind may be deceived in their
Sensations, on which kind of Knowledge Authority or Testimony is built? May all
the World be deceived in judging whether the Sun shined or no yesterday, or
that themselves live in such Towns, converse with Acquaintance, or lastly that
they live; since they may be equally deceived in their Experience of this, as
in their daily Sensations of familiar Objects? Yet Dr. T. hopes by virtue of
the plain Evidence of this one Paradox to overthrow the Certainty of Tradition;
nay the Certainty of all Natural Sciences to boot, for these according to him
are solely built upon Induction, which depends on Sensations; and These if we
may trust him, are all possible to be deceived.

. 19. And is not Faith it self by these Grounds left in the same pickle? Its
Rule, whether it be Tradition or Scriptures Letter, evidently depends upon
Humane Authority* and this, says he, is all Fallible, and what is built on a
Fallible Authority, (says Common Sense) may possibly be an Error, or False;
therefore it is most unavoidable from his Principles that all Faith may Possibly
be False; however the shame of owning so Unchristian and half-Atheistical a
Tenet, makes him very stiffly and angrily deny the Conclusion* but he shall
never show why it is not a most necessary and genuine Consequence from his
Position of all Humane Authority being Fallible. I expect that instead of a
direct Answer to the force of my Argument, he will tinkle a little Rhetoric
against my Conclusion, or start aside to a Logical Possibility that men may be
deceived, and affirm that it is not a Contradiction in Terms, and so may be
effected by the Divine Omnipotence. But that is not our point: We are
discoursing what will follow out of the ordinary Course of Causes; the Conduct
of which, is the work of the Worlds all-wise Governor; whence, if those
Portions of Nature or Mankind cannot be deceived without Miracle, and it is most
unbeseeming GOD to do a Miracle which reaches in a manner a whole Species, as
that no Fire in the World should burn, no Water wet; especially if it be most
absurd to conceive that GOD the Author of all Truth, nay Essential Truth it
self, should do such a stupendous and never-yet-heard-of Miracle to lead Men
into Error, as is our case; it is most manifestly consequent it cannot be
effected at all, that Mankind should be Fallible in Knowledges built on their
constant Sensations.

. 20. It follows. And, though none of these be strict Demonstration, yet have
we an undoubted Assurance of them when they are proved by the best Arguments
that the nature and quality of the Thing will bear. To this we will speak when
we come to examine his Firm Principle. He proceeds. None can demonstrate to me
that there is such an Island in America as Jamaica; yet upon the Testimony of
credible Persons, and Authors who have writ of it, I am as free from all doubt
concerning it, as from doubting of the clearest Mathematical Demonstration.
True; none can demonstrate there is either Jamaica or any such Place; Yet I see
not why they may not demonstrate the Knowledge of the Attesters from the
Visibility of the Object, and their Veracity from the Impossibility they should
all conspire to act or say so, without some appearing Good for their Object, or
intend to deceive in such a matter, and so circumstanc'd, when it is evidently
Impossible they should compass their intended end. As for his affirming that he
is as free from all doubt concerning it, as he is from doubting of the clearest
Mathematical Demonstration; I answer, that a man may (...) yet not hold the
Thing True, as shall presently be shown: And, if Dr. T. ple^se to look into his
own Thoughts, he shall find instilled through the goodness of Nature, by
Practical Self-evidence, more than a bare freedom from doubt, viz. such a firm
Assent and Adherence to it as a Certain Truth, that he would deem him a Madman
or a Deserter of Humane Nature, who could doubt of it and in a word, as firm an
Assent as to any Mathematical Demonstration; which why he should according to
Maxims of right Reason have, unless he had a Demonstration of it, or at least
saw it by Practical Self-evidence impossible that Authority should hic and nunc
be deceived, or conspire to deceive, and so held the Authority Infallible as to
this point, I expect his Logic should inform me.

. 21. We are now come to take a View of Dr. T's performances hitherto. He has
omitted the proper Science for his purpose, Metaphysics, (I suppose because it
sometimes uses those hard words, Potentiality and Actuality, which his delicate
Ears cannot brook) and has secluded Morality, Physics, and the Knowledge we
have of the Nature which grounds all Humane Authority and Christian Faith, from
being Sciences, allowing it only to the Mathematics; which would make one
verily think the World were perversely ordered, and odly disproportioned to the
nature and good of Mankind, for which we Christians agree it was created; that
greater Evidence and Certainty (and consequently Power to act aright) should be
found in those things which are of far less import, than in those which are of
a Concern incomparably higher. Yet it matters less (some may think) as long as
we are not bound to assent to any of those Conclusions in those respect^ve
Subjects, the absolute Certainty of which, Dr. T's Discourse calls into
question, or rather denies, whence, i^ we have in these, and such as these,
knowledge enough to determine us to act Exteriourly, it may seem to suffice.
But now, when We come to FAITH, where We are Obliged to Assent, or to hold
F^rmly, and verily judge the Thing True, and where Exterior Acting will not do
the Work, or carry a Soul to Bliss, but Interior Acts of a Firm Faith, a
Vigorous Hope built on that Faith, and an Ardent and Over-powering Love of
Unseen Goo^s springing out of both These, are Absolutely Necessary to Fit Us
for an Union with our Infinitely-Blissful Object; and the Strength of all
These, is Fundamentally built on the SECURENE^S of the Ground of Faith. In this
Case, I say, a Rational Considerer wou^d think it very requi^^^e that the
Reasons of so Hearty an Ass^nt (but especially for that most Fundamental Point
of the Existence of a Deity, it being of an infinitely-higher nature and
import) should be f^ll as Evident as the most Evident of those Inferior
Concerns, and in comparison Tr^fling Curiosities. And not that the World should
be managed on such a fashion as if Mankin^ were only made to study
Mathematics; since absolute Evidence, his best natural Perfection, is
according to Dr. T. only found in These. Whence we see that Mathematicians are
infinitely beholding to him, but Philosophers not at all, and I fear,
Christians, as little. Now these two points are, according to my way of
discoursing, for this very reason taken from the End and Use of Faith, and the
Obligation lying on us to hold and profess it True, Self-evident Practically to
the Generality of the Vulgar, and demonstrable to the Learned; Let us see what
strong Grounds of such an immovably-firm Assent Dr. T. will afford the World
for that first and most Fundamental Point of all Religion, the Tenet of a
Deity; of which if we cannot be assured, all else that belongs to Faith is not
worth heeding.

DISCOURSE V.
Dr. T's Firm Principle examined. Of Suspense and Assent. Of Great Likelihood,
Freedom from Actual Doubt, Fair Probabilities, and other Mock-Certainties.

. 1. HE introduces his Discourse thus: So that this is to be entertained as a
Firm Principle by all those who pretend to be Certain of any thing at all, that
when any thing is proved by as good Arguments as that thing is capable of, and
we have as great assurance that it is as we could possibly have supposing it
were, we ought not in reason to make any doubt of the Existence of that Thing.
This is Dr. T's FIRM PRINCIPLE, and it should be a kind of FIRST PRINCIPLE too,
being so universally necessary that without admitting this, no man can be
Certain of any Thing at all, nor any Thing at all be Certain to any man. You
see, Gentlemen, how much depends upon it, and I conceive you will easily
conclude it ought to be as Evident and as Firm as any First Principle extant;
since according to his way of Discourse, all Truths, even the most precious
Concerns in the world (particularly the possibility of proving a Deity) must
run its Fate, and be established or ruined by its standing or falling. Now my
Judgment of it is this, That it is the most ridiculous piece of Folly, and the
most pernicious abstract of pithy Nonsense that ever was laid down since
Mankind was Mankind, by any sober man, for such a Principle without which no
Certainty at all can be had, no not even that there is a God.

I charge it therefore with four Faults. First, that it is Unprov'd; next it is
Unevident of it self, and so no Principle; thirdly, that were it evident, it is
Impertinent to the end it is produced for; and lastly, it betrays all Religion
into the possibility of being a Lie, instead of establishing it.

. 2. And, first, it appears that he intends it as a Conclusion by his
introducing it with So that, etc. after his former Discourse: But as I have
already confuted That, so I discern not any title it has to be Sequel from
those Premises, in case they were True. For what a mad consequence is this,
Diverse things bear diverse kinds of Proofs, some weaker, some stronger,
therefore when we have the best the Object can afford us, we are to rest
satisfied the thing is? How, I say, does this follow, unless he had first ma^e
out, or at least suppos^d, that the least of those Proofs was satisfactory; or
that there is no Object in the world but is capable of yielding light enough to
satisfy; which Position every days experience convinces of Falsehood, Indeed,
if he meant by these words, that upon our seeing the Thing is capable of no
Conclusive Proof, it is wisdom in us to sit down satisfied that no more is to
be had, and so surcease our farther quest, I understand him very well; but that
I should be satisfied the thing is so, or acquiesce to its Truth, (as he must
mean to make it (...) for his purpose) not from the Conclusiveness of the
Grounds it stands under, or the prevalence of the Object upon my Understanding
subduing it to Assent, but because that Object is capable to bear no more, or
to discover it self no better to my sight, is in plain terms to say, that
because the Obj^ct affords me no certain light to know whether it be or no,
therefore I will hold my self well appay'd, and think it is Certain; or thus,
Though I see absolutely speaking it is Uncertain, yet as long as I see withal
the Object can bear no more, or cannot be made absolu^ely Certain, I will
therefore rest sat^sfy'd, or judge it is absolutely Certain. If this be not his
meaning, I desire himself to inform me better: It Is evident to me it can be no
other, if he mean anyth^ng at all. His Intent is to evince a Deity, and I
declare heartily I have that good opinion of him as to hope that, settled
perhaps in that Assent by Practical Self-evidence as are the Vulgar, and not by
Skill or Principles as Scholars are, (for his Speculation makes it absolutely
Uncertain) he judges it to be absolutely Certain: Either then he judges his
Motives he has to evince it, Conclusive or no; If Conclusive, there needs no
running about the Bush to tell us of several kinds of Proofs, or laying such
whimsical Principles, fit for nothing but to make the witty Atheist laugh at
Christianity* but it had been enough to stand to it heartily that the Thing
must be so, because the Arguments he brings conclude it to be so. But, in case
he feared his Motives were not absolutely Conclusive, or able to evince the
Truth of the Point, (and that this is his Sentiment appears by his blaming me
here, p. 20. for pretending to such to ground Faith) then indeed it was but
good Policy, or rather plain Necessity, to lay some Principles, by means of
which he might compound the business between the Object and the Understanding,
after the same manner (though this seems but an odd method of proving) as
Friends take up differences between good natured Creditors and the Debtor, when
he that owes is willi^^ to do his utmost, but yet is not solvent; and (...) was
said before) so to accord the business to avoid rigorous Disputes; that, though
the Understanding sees, absolutely speaking, the Thing is Uncertain, and more
Ligh^, if it could be had, is in reality due ere it can be satisfied of its
absolute Certainty; yet, because the Object is able to afford no more, it is
awarded by their Umpire Dr. T. that the kindhearted Understanding is to be
content to rest appay'd, and hold it notwithstanding to be absolutely Certain;
which is the same as to say, that though I do not see the Thing to be so, yet
because the thing it self cannot be seen to be so, I will fancy strongly or
judge I see it to be so. Let us parallel it by Analogy to our Corporal Sight,
and the Discourse stands thus: Though I see not the Wall to be white, because
it is so far distant, or the Air dusky, yet because I can see it no better, the
Wall thus circumstanc'd not being able to inform my Eye clearly; therefore
despairing of the Walls affording me any better sight of it self, I will piece
out that degree of obscurity in the Object, with a strong bending my Eyes till
I fancy verily I see it to be white; or rather, out of a civil compliance with
it is defect of visibleness, I will verily judge and conclude it to be indeed of
such a color; and then if any object folly to me for assenting upon infirm
Grounds, I will tell him he is ill-natured and unmerciful, the poor Wall has
done (alas) all it can, and who can in reason desire more?

. 3. I expect Dr. T. will pretend degrees of Intellectual Sight, and that by a
less degree of Evidence he sees the Thing to be, though it is not manifested to
him by the greatest; but it is impossible and even contradictory to Common Sense
to imagine that a Reason which fal's short of being (according to the Maxims of
Right Logic) absolutely Conclusive, should beget any true Evidence or
Intellectual Sight at all: if then he have no Conclusive Reason, he is
convinced to have no kind of Evidence: If he have, let him produce it and stand
by it; and not persist thus to wrong the most weighty and most excellent Cause
in the World, by advancing such R^diculous Principles which like gilded Babbles
look pretti^y at first, but if we come once to grasp them close, instead of
solidity and Firmness, which ought to be the Temper of Principles, they vanish
into perfect Nonsense and Contradiction; importing in effect, that though we
ought to hold the Absolute Certainty of the Thing (for, I suppose he would have
his Auditors hold so concerning a Deity) yet, because the Obj^ct admits no more
Certainty, we must fancy we have it without the Object: which amounts to this,
that we must necessarily hold a thing to be that which it is impossible it
should in those Circumstances be seen to be; that is, it must be held to be
that, (viz. absolutely Certain) which at the same time it is held Impossible it
should be. Is not this strange Logic!

. 4. This Firm Principle then is far from being proved. Perhaps, it can need
none, and so Dr. T. is excusable for not having proved it* nay more,
commendable; For, First Principles, even by their being First, are incapable of
proof, as himself says very well, (p. 38.) because there is nothing before them
to demonstrate or prove them by; and certainly, this Principle, if any has
title to be held one of the very First because (as Dr. T. says here) no man can
be certain of any thing at all, unless he entertains this as a Firm Principle.
Wherefore, because it cannot be proved or made Evident, and yet must be
Evident, it must be Self-evident; that is, its Terms must need nothing to
discover their necessary connection but Themselves, or the Knowledge of their
own Notions. To do Dr. T. right then, we will take its Terms asunder, and then
see what they have to say to one another. His Principle formed into a
Categorical Propositi^n, is this: Whatever thing is proved by as good Arguments
as it is capable of, and as well assured to us as it could possibly be,
supposing it were, -- is -- not to be doubted of in reason but that it is. Where
all before the Copula [ is] is the Subject of the Proposition; and all afte^ it
the Predicate. This known, that I may offer my Adversary fair play, I will
endeavor to clear his true meaning, lest cavilling at Equ^vocal words, I may
justly seem to baffle, as himself does constantly, when I ought to dispute. His
Pred^cate seems to me very clear and void of all amb^gu^ty: but these words in
the Subject as it is capable of] and [ as it could possibly be] may bear two
Senses; one that the thing is absolutely incapable in any circumstance to be
seen more evidently, or absolutely Impossible to be better assured to us; or
else that it is only ^ncapable or Impossible to be such hic and nunc, that is,
taking the Understanding and Object thus circumstanc'd, though, absolutely
speaking it could most perfectly be seen, and most absolutely assured to us:
Now it is evident from his Instance of Jamaica, and the End he designs by it.
viz. the knowledge of a Deity, that he takes the words [ capable] and [
possible] in this later sense; namely, for what is such (partly at least) from
the Circumstance, and not wholly from the Object it self absolutely considered
for it is manifest that Jamaica it self is more evidently known by them who live
in it than by us, and the Existence of the Deity more clearly seen and better
assured to those in Heaven, and in likelihood to some particular Saints on
Earth, especially illuminated, than it is to Us, or the Generality. This being
so, the true meaning of his Principle stands thus: Whatever thing is proved by
as good Arguments as (considering the circumstances of the Object and the
Understanding) it is capable of, and as well assured to us as (considering the
same circumstances) it could possibly be supposing it were -- is -- not to be
doubted of in reason but it is. And now I request Dr. T. to go to work like a
Scholar, and show me by what means one can possibly see these two Terms to be
the same, and so the Proposition to be True? Is it by means of their being
materially the same, or the same with a Third? Where is this Third Term to
prove it? And why does not he produce it? Or indeed how can this be pretended,
since, according to him, no man can be Certain of any thing at all, nor
consequently of the Connection of that Third Term with two others, unless this
Firm Principle be first admitted. Is it then by their being the same with one
another immediately, or of the same most formal notion? Dr. T. disavows it
absolutely, for then the Proposition were Identical, which he makes a public
Declaration to all the world he will have nothing to do with. Is one of the
Terms the Definition, or a direct part of the Definition of the other, that so
(at least) they may deserve to be held to some degree formally Identical,
though not most formally? Himself pretends it not; and did he pretend it,
'twill appear shortly how far they are from such a near Relation and Connection
to one another. Is there then any other way left for these Terms to cohere,
which is neither by themselves immediately, nor by a Third? Not all the wit of
man can invent or even imagine any other: It Is evident then they cohere not at
all, and so the Proposition is so far from being a First Principle, that it is
absolutely False.

. 5. This is farther demonstrated, because its Contradictory is True. For it is
plain to common Sense that many things proved by as good Arguments as (in these
circumstances) they are capable of, and as well assured to us as (in these
circumstances) they could possibly be, supposing they were, are yet, for all
that, liable to doubt: For some things are so removed from our knowledge that
we can have but very little Light concerning their Natures and Existence: Must
therefore every Reason in that case, how slight and trivial soever, be
necessarily judged sufficient to make the Thing be held undoubtedly True. Some
think they have probable Arguments that there are Men in the Moon, and in the
rest of the Stars; must they therefore upon some likely or seeming Reason judge
the thing is so, because it is not capable, considering our Circumstances, even
though it were, to be known better. There is some Probability the King of China
is now while I write, consulting about the affairs of his Empire, or else at a
Feast, or a Hunting, because Monarchs use such Employments and Entertainments,
and in these circumstances it is all the Light I can have concerning that point:
Is it therefore past doubt that it is so? Who sees not that witty men find
plausible Reasons for any thing, even though it be most foreign from our
Circumstances of knowing it certainly; and, so, in case it were, could give us
no mo^e light concerning it self; must it therefore be forthwith held
undoubtedly so? Suppose it were proposed to debate whether the Stars were even
or odd, and no better Argument could be found (as truly, though it be a
ridiculous one, it is hard to find a better) but only this, that Virgil says,
Numero Deus impare gaudet.

And therefore Odd Number is the best, and so fitting to be found in such vast
and Noble parts of the Universe as the Stars. Were it not a wise business now
upon so simple a Reason to judge that the Stars are undoubtedly Odd? Yet this
is perfectly agreeable to Dr. T's First Principle. This is all the Light the
Stars are capable to give us at this distance, and were they indeed Odd, yet we
could have no knowledge of them by any better Arguments than this; so that we
must either content our selves with this, or take nothing: wherefore says Dr.
T. unless you will deny a most Firm Principle, and by doing so be rendered
incapable of being Certain of any thing (too great a penalty one would think
for so small a fault!) the Thing must be concluded Certain, and Odd they shall
be.

. 6. Be it spoken then with honor to Dr. T. he is the first Author of this
All-ascertaining First Principle, which by the way, is a shrewd Argument it is
none, since Nature never instilled it into all Mankind) and of a new method to
arrive at Certainty of all things, so easy, so compendious, as the World never
heard the like; all, even the rudest may comprehend it, nay perhaps be as wise
as the wisest: For all can understand as much of the Object as in their
circumstances they can do, and the wisest can do no more; and this rare Method
requires no more but that the Object be known as well as it is capable to be
known in every ones circumstances, and that the Persons do not doubt of it;
which the rudest will do the least of all other; which done, they are according
to him Certain of it, and all is well.

. 7. This Principle is moreover utterly Impertinent to the End it is produced
for. To show which, we are to consider, that we are bound to Assent to the
Existence of a Deity, to hold it firmly as a Certain Truth, and die (if need
were) to attest it, and not barely not to make any doubt of it. To declare this
point more fully, and so manifest how far short Dr. T. falls, when he
undertakes to lay Principles, we are to reflect, that we have two Acts of our
Understanding, called Assent and Dis^^^sent, that is, an interior yielding or
denying a thing to be; between which is placed a kind of Neutral Act, which is
neither one nor the other, called Suspense. Now the two former of these consist
in an Indivisible, as do their Objects, is and is not, and so admit no
Latitude. But Suspense, even for that very Reason, admits of many degrees,
which I explain thus. If we consider it abstractedly from its differences, it is
a mere not yielding to Assent and Di^^ssent, and (if any where) it is found, or
at least conceiveable to be found in the very middle between those two Acts now
mentioned, without the least inclination to either of them; wherefore one of
its Differences is inclining toward Assent, and may perhaps not unfitly be
called Intellectual Hope; because, if the thing be our Concern, it is apt to
principle that disposition of the Will which we properly call by that name. The
other Difference is a dis^inclining to Assent, or an Inclining toward
Dis^^ssent, which it were not much amiss to term Intellectual Fear; because, if
we be concerned in the Being of that Thing, it is apt to excite in us that
Passion or disposition of the Will which is called by that name; whence it is
generally called Doubt, which includes some degree of Fear. These two
Differences have innumerable multitudes of other Differences or Degrees
comprised under them, according as the Probabilities (which here solely reign)
are apt to beget more or less Appearance of Likelihood that the Thing is; but
no Probability how high soever can in true Reason beget Assent, because the
highest Probability that is can only render the thing seen to be highly
probable to be, which is evidently a different effect from making it seen to be
absolutely, really, and indeed; since when I once see this by virtue of some
Conclusive (that is, more than probable) motive, I see it is Impossible hic and
nunc not to be, or impossible my Conclusion should be False; but I do not see
this when I have a very high Probability; Experience telling every man who is
meanly practiced in the World, that very high Probabilities often deceive us;
as when a Glass thrown against the Ground breaks no* when a House deemed very
strong falls down suddenly, and a thousand suchlike odd Contingencies. But
there needs no more to evince that all is to be called Suspense, till we arrive
at Assent, than to reflect that Suspense is relative to Assent, as appears by
the English phrase [ To suspend ones-Assent] intimating that as soon as Suspense
is taken away, immediately Assent follows; which devolves into this, that all
is Suspense till we come to Assent. Indeed, some things so very seldom happen,
as, that a House, seemingly firm, should fall, and such like rare Casualties,
that unattentive men are apt to assent absolutely upon such a very high
Probability, and even in the wis^st it seems to counterfeit a perfect Assent,
and to have no degree at all of Suspense in it; notwithstanding I absolutely
deny any truly-wise or rational man goes to work on that manner; but, by seeing
the Casualties to which our Uncertain state is exposed, and laying to heart the
sudden Chances that happen to others, which might have been his own case;
hereupon, not with a perpetual anxious doubt (the danger is too unl^ke^y to
require that) but with a prudent care, lest it should be his own Lot to be so
suddenly surpised, he endeavors to stand daily on his guard, and out of that
consideration, to keep a good Conscience and a Will resigned to Gods in all
things; which disposition evidently discovers some degree of Suspense. As for
careless and inconsiderate Livers, I doubt not but they often Assent absolutely
the world's their own, beyond reason, that is, out of mere passion and
precipitancy, till some imminent danger give a check to their blind Security;
but the Reward of their Unreasonableness and Rashness in assenting absolutely
without just ground, is this, that they have even from hence some less degree
of Concern to amend their lives; and, if they be overtaken with any sudden
disaster, less (if any) resignation to Gods holy disposition than they would
have had, had they kept awake that degree of Suspense in their minds which
Right Reason (the nature God had given them) required they should.

8. It Is time now to apply this discourse to Dr. T's Performances. It appears
hence that one may have no reason to doubt of a thing, and yet withal have no
reason in the world to assent firmly to it as a most Certain Truth, which only
is to his purpose: And this may be done two ways, either by perfectly
suspending and inclining to neither side; as we experience our Understanding
now bears it self in order to the Stars being Even or Odd: Or by strongly
hoping or inclining to Assent the Thing is True; as when we expect a Friend
such a time at London who never used to break his word; which expectation,
though one may have very great ground to hope will not deceive us, yet it were
a mad thing to assent to it as firmly as I do to my Faith, or that there is a
GOD. But what I most admire is, that Dr. T. can think an Actual not doubting,
or seeing no just cause to doubt, is a competent assurance of the Grounds for
Christian Faith, as he all over inculcates. For not to repeat over again what
has been lately proved, that a bare not doubting is not sufficient to make a
man a Christian^ it is evident first that Turks, Jews and Heathens, the
Generality at least, are fully persuaded what they hold is ^rue, and see no
just cause to doubt it; whence by this kind of arguing, if it be sufficient for
Christian Faith to have such Grounds as exclude Doubt in its Adherents,
Turcism, Judaism, and perhaps Paganism too, may claim to be true Religions by
the same Title; and, if the Certainty or Security of Christian Religion be no
more but a freedom from doubt, all those wicked Sects have good reason to be
held Certain too; and so both sides of the Contradiction may become Certain, by
which stratagem Dr. T. is as completely revenged of his Enemies, Identical
Propositions, as his own heart could wish, and rewards his dear Friends and
faithful Abetters, direct Contradictions, very honorably; advancing them to be
First Principles, and even as Certain as Faith it self. Secondly, Passion and
Vice can breed in a man a full persuasion that an Error is True, and such an
apprehension as shall take away all Actual Doubt; nay the more Passion a man is
in, and the more obstinate he is in that passion, the less still he doubts: so
that by Dr. T's Logic no man can tell whether Christianity be indeed
Rationally-wise or passionately-foolish, in ca^e the Test of its Certainty, or
the Adequate Effect of its Grounds be not a steady Assent that it is True; that
is, if the Motives to embrace it be not Conclusive of the Truth of its
Doctrine, but one^y Exclusive of Doubt. Thirdly, Ignorance and dull Rudene^s is
easily appay'd with any silly Reason and so a most excellent way to be void of
Actual Doubt, nay of all men in the world those who are perfectly ignorant see
the least cause of doubting, being least able to raise any; wherefore, if being
free from seeing any just cause of doubt, be the utmost Effect of Christian
Grounds, let all Christians be but grossly ignorant, and they shall immediately
without more ado become as Free from Actual Doubt as may be; and by that means
be the best Christians in the world; and, consequently, Ignorance be
fundamentally established by Dr. T. the Mother of all True Devotion. Fourthly,
Though out of a stupid carelessness men use to take many things for granted upon
slight Grounds while it is cheap to admit them, and no danger accrues upon the
owning them; yet experience teaches us, that when any great Inconvenience
presses, as the loss of Friends, Livelihood, or Life, Reason our true Nature,
teaches men to study their careless thoughts over again; by which means they
begin now to Doubt of that which before they took for granted, if they have not
Certain Motives to establish them in the Truth of what they profess, and to
ascertain to them some equivalent Good at least to what they are in danger to
forego. In which case I fear it will yield small strength to a man put in such
a strong Temptation, to find upon review of his Grounds, that they were only
able to make him let them pass for good ones, while the Concern was remoter and
less, but that notwithstanding all these, he sees they may perhaps be False,
and himself a great Fool for holding them True without Reasons convincing them
to be so; and consequently foolish (perhaps wicked to boot) for suffering so
deeply to attest them. If Dr. T. reply, That such men dying for what they
conceived Truth, meant well, and consequently acted virtuously; I must ask him
how he knows that, or can make them know it, unless he propose Motives to
conclude those Tenets True: For as Error is the Parent and Origin of all Vice,
so is Truth of all Virtue; nor is Virtue any thing but a Disposition of the
Will to follow Reason or Truth. Whence, if we cannot be ab^olutely Certain any
Tenet we follow is Truth, we cannot be absolutely-Certain any Action is
Virtuous; and it is not enough to make a man Virtuous to mean well in common, or
intend to do his Duty, and be only free from doubt all the while, unless they
have some substantial Truth to proceed upon, which renders their meaning and
particular Action Good as to the main, by directing it to that which is man's
true Happiness: For it is questionless that the Generality of the Heathens who
worshipped Juno, Venus, Vulcan, and the rest of that Rabble, meant well in
Common, were free from actual doubt, nay had Dr. T's Moral Certainty too, that
is* had a firm and undoubted Assent upon such Grounds as would fully satisfy a
Prudent man, for many of them were men of great Natural Prudence, and were
actually satisfied with the Motives they had for Polytheism; Lastly, they had
Dr. T's Firm Principle too on their side, for they had (as far as they could
discern) the Judgment of the whole World round about them, that is, as much as
the nature of the thing could give them, though it were; for had there been
indeed such Gods and Goddesses, yet, being in Heaven, they could have no more
light concerning them than by Authority of others (relating also, as doubtlesly
they did, many wonderful things conceived to be done by their means) and on the
other side they had all the Authority extant at that time for them; and what
doubts soever a few Speculative and Learned men raised concerning them, yet the
Generality, who were unacquainted with their thoughts, had no occasion to raise
any at all: These advantages I say, the Heathens had, parallel within a very
little, if not altogether, to Dr. T's Grounds and Principles; that is, able to
produce an equal Effect, viz. Not-doubting: Yet because all hapt to be a Lie
that they proceeded on, all their Religion for all this was wicked; and the the
most zealous Devotion to Dame Juno and the rest, nay dying for their sakes, was
notwithstanding their good meaning in common, Dr. T's Moral Certainty and Firm
Principle, a diabolical and mischievous Action, not a jot better, as to the
effect of gaining Heaven, than the making their Children pass through the Fire
to Moloch; perverting and destroying the Soul that performed it, nay died for
it; by addicting it to what was not its true last End or Eternal Good; and all
this because there wanted Truth at the bottom to render those Actions and
Sufferings Virtuous: Wherefore unless Dr. T. produces some immovable Grounds
to establish Christianity to be most certainly True, especially the Existence
of a Deity; which enfe^bled, all the rest falls down to the Ground, he can
never convince that either Acting or Suffering for it is a Virtue, any more
than it was in Heathenism when the same was done for their False Gods, and so
he can never with reason persuade his Auditory to it; but having once proved
that, it matters less whether all the Assenters penetrate the full force of the
motive or no; for if once it be put to be True, all Actions and Sufferings
proceeding from those Truths shall connaturally addict those Souls to their
True Last End, and dispose them for it, though their Understandings be never so
imperfect; and their good or well-meaning will certainly bring them to Heaven;
but it is because their Will and its Affections were Good; which they could not
be (as is proved) were they not built upon some Truth.

. 9. Again, Dr. T. discourses all along as if all were well when one is free
from all doubt; but I would desire his Friends seriously to ask him one
question, which is, whether, though his Grounds exclude all doubt from his mind
at present, yet he sees any certain Reason why he may not perhaps come to doubt
of all his Faith, and even of a Godhead too to morrow? If he says, He sees not
but he may, he must say withal, that he sees it not (and consequently holds it
not) to be True; for if he once saw it to be Truth, he could not hold it
possible ever to be doubted of with reason. If he affirms that he sees he can
never come with reason to doubt of it, then he sees his Grounds for holding it
cannot possibly be shown False, else it might both be doubted and (what is
more) denied, and if he hold his Grounds cannot possibly be made out to be
False, then he must say they are Impossible to be False, and if they be Humane
Authority, Infallible; which yet he stiffly denies. But the plain Truth is, he
holds not (by virtue of any Grounds he lays) his Faith to be True, but only a
plausible Likelihood; else Common Sense would force him to acknowledge and
stand to it, that the Grounds on which he builds his Assent are Impossible to
be False, and not to palliate his Uncertainty of it with such raw Principles
and petty Crafts to avoid an honest downright procedure* which is to say
plainly, My Grounds cannot fail of Concluding the Thing absolutely True, I will
justify them to be such, and here they are: But he is so far from this, that
the best word he affords them who do this right to Christianity, is to call
them vapouring and swaggering men, with all the disgraceful Ironies he can put
upon them.

. 10. By this time my last Charge that this Firm Principle of his betrays all
Religion into the Possibility (I might have said Likelihood) of being a Lie
instead of establishing it, is already made good, and needs only a short
Rehearsal. For, 1. He Asserts that we cannot be Certain of a Deity unless we
entertain his Firm Principle, which is so full stuffed with Nonsense and Folly,
that unles^ it be in Bedlam, I know no place in England where it is like to find
Entertainment. That the Evidence or Visibleness of an Object begets Certainty
in us, is that which the Light of Nature ever taught me and all Mankind
hitherto; but that the Obscurity of an Object, or its affording us no True
Evidence grounding our Absolute Certainty of it, nay that even its
Incapableness to afford us any in our Circumstances, and consequently our
Despair of seeing any such Evidence for it, should contribute to make us
Certain of it; nay more, that this must be entertained as a Firm Principle, and
which is yet more, be obtruded upon all Mankind under such an unmerciful
Penalty that unless they entertain this as honorably as a Firm Principle, not
any man shall be Certain of any thing, no not so much as that there is a God, is
such a super-transcendent Absurdity as surpasses all Belief, or even
Imagination: but a Rhetorician may say any thing, when talking pretty
Plausibilities is only in vogue, and a melodious Gingle to please the Ear, is
more modish than solid Reasons to satisfy the Understanding. Next, he vouches
not any Reason he brings to be absolutely Conclusive, and consequently owns not
any Point of Faith, no not the Existence of a Deity, to be absolutely Certain;
which not to assert, but (as has been shown from his Firm Principle)
equivalently to deny, even then when he is maintaining it, is an Intolerable
Prejudice to that Weighty and Excellent Cause he has undertaken, and, so, is
engaged to defend. 3. He waves the Conclusiveness of his Reasons that the Thing
is True, and contents himself that it keeps us free from actual doubt, which
reaches not Assent; for to doubt a thing is to incline to think it False; and
so, not to doubt, is barely not to incline to think it False, which is far
short of holding it True, and consequently from making a man a Christian.
Besides, our not doubting may be in many regards Faulty, and spring from
Surprise, Passion, and Ignorance, as well as from Ignorance (as has been
proved) but a good Reason cannot be faulty. Wherefore to relinquish the
patronage of the Goodness and Validity, that is, absolute Conclusiveness of
Christian Proofs (of which there are good store) for this point, defending
only their Plausibility, and instead of that victorious way of convincing the
Understanding into Assent, requiring only a feeble not doubting, is in plain
terms to betray his Cause, and tacitly (or rather, indeed, too openly) to
accuse Christianity of an Infirmity in its Grounds, as being incapable to
effect what they ought, a Firm Assent to the Points of Christian Doctrine as to
absolutely certain Truths. 4. By making our Certainty of it, or the adequate
effect of its Motives consist merely in our not doubting of it, he makes its
Effect, and consequently the Efficacy of those Motives themselves, no better
than those which Heathens, Turks and Heretics have; for these also exclude
Actual Doubt from the Minds of the Generality of these respective Sects: If he
says Christians have no just reason to doubt, I ask him how he will prove that
it must needs exclude all reason of Actual Doubt from the Minds even of the
wisest Christians, unless he can prove those Grounds cannot possibly be doubted
of with reason; for, otherwise, if those men may possibly doubt with reason,
it is ten to one they will do so actually at one time or other. He ought then to
say those Motives exclude all possible doubt, or are undoubtable of their own
nature, and so take it out of the Subjects strength or weakness, and put it
upon the Objects: But this he is loath to say, dreading the Consequence, which
is this, that he who affirms a Thing can never be possibly doubted of in true
reason, must affirm withal that he has Motives concluding it absolutely True,
that is, absolutely Impossible to be False, and, if it depends on Authority,
Infallible Testimony for it, which his superficial Reason, fully resolved
against First Principles or Identical Propositions, can never reach. It remains
then that he must hold to Actual Not-doubting on the Subjects side; that is, he
must say the Motives are only such as preserv^ prudent persons from doubt; and
then he must either make out that Christians have more Natural Prudence than
those in those other Sects, (Natural, I say, for all Motives Antecedent to
Faith, must be Objects of our Natural Parts or Endowments) or else confess that
he knows no difference between the Reasons for those other Sects and those for
Christianity, according to the Grounds delivered by him here. Both exclude
Actual Doubt in persons, as far as appears to us, equal in prudence as to other
things; neither of them exclude possible Rational Doubt; each one had as much
Evidence of their Deities they adored as they could have in their circumstances
supposing those Deities were, and no True or absolutely* Conclusive Evidence
appeared on either side; both had as good Proofs as the thing afforded
supposing it were, and such as excluded Doubting, therefore (according to Dr.
T's Doctrine) both had Certainty, and all is parallel: and so farewell
Christianity, Religion, and First Principles too, that is, farewell Common
Sense, and all possibility of knowing any thing. All Truth and Goodness must
needs go to wrack, when Principles naturally self-evident, and established by
GOD himself, the Founder of Nature, are relinquished, and others made up of
mere Fancy and Air are taken up in their stead.

. 10. I know Dr. T. will sweat and fume, and bestir all his knacks of Rhetoric
to avoid these Consequences of his Doctrine: I expect he will pelt me with
Ironies and bitter Jeers, cavil at unelegant words, tell me what some Divines
of ours say, and perhaps mistake them all the while, stoutly deny all my
Conclusions instead of answering my discourse, nay fall into another peevish
fit of the Spleen, and say I have no forehead for driving on his Principles to
such Conclusions as he (who was too busy at Words to mind or amend his
Reasons) never dreamed of. Therefore to defend my forehead, it were not amiss
to make use of some Phylacteries containing such expressions taken out of his
First Sermon as best discover to us his thoughts as to the Certainty and
Uncertainty of his Positive Proofs, and the Point it self as proved by them, I
mean the Existence of a Deity, or a Creation. Such as are Sermon. p. 19. A Being
supposed of Infinite Goodness, and Wisdom and Power, is a very LIKELY Cause of
these things. -- What more LIKELY to make this Vast World etc. -- What more
LIKELY to communicate Being -- What more LIKELY to contrive this admirable
Frame of the World -- This seems NO UNREASONABLE Account -- P. 21. The
Controversy between Us and this sort of Atheists, comes to this, Which is the
MORE CREDIBLE OPINION, That the World was never made, etc. or that there was
from all Eternity such a Being as we conceive GOD to be -- Now, COMPARING the
PROBABILITIES of things, that we may know ON WHICH SIDE THE ADVANTAGE LIES,
etc. -- P. 22. The Question whether the World was created or not, -- can only
be decided by TESTIMONY and PROBABILITIES of Reason; Testimony is the PRINCIPAL
Argument in a thing of this nature; and if FAIR PROBABILITIES of Reason concur
with it, etc. -- P. 29. The PROBABILITIES of REASON do all likewise FAVOR the
Beginning of the World. -- P. 32. Another PROBABILITY is, etc. -- P. 34. These
are the CHIEF PROBABILITIES on Our Side; which being taken together, and in
their united sense have A GREAT DEAL of CONVICTION in them.

. 11. Upon these Words and Expressions of his, I make these Reflections. 1. That
(as appears by his own stating the Point p. 21.) he makes it amount to the same
Question (as indeed it does) Whether there were a Creation, or a First Being
creating the World, whom we call GOD; so that all his Proofs are indifferently
to be taken, as aimed to evince one as well as the other. 2. That, this being
so, he stands not heartily to any one Argument he brings, as able to conclude
the Truth of a Deity's or Creator's Existence. 3. That his words which are
expressive of the Evidence of his G^ounds and the Certainty of the Point, (
viz. that there is a GOD) manifest too plainly that he judges (according to his
Speculative Thoughts at least) he has neither one nor the other. For, if it be
but Likely, though it be exceedingly such, yet (as common Experience teaches
us) it may notwithstanding be False: If the account he gives of a Deity
creating the World, be only no unreasonable one, this signifies only that it
has some Reason or other for it; and every man knows that seldom or never did
two Wits discourse contrary Positions, or Lawyers plead for contrary Causes, or
Preachers preach for contrary Opinions, but there was some Reasons produced by
them for either side; and, so, for any thing he has said, the Atheist may come
to give no unreasonable account too that there is no Deity, though it be
something less reasonable than that for a Deity. And if the Controversy
between Atheists and us be only this, Whether is the MORE CREDIBLE OPINION,
then the other Opinion, (viz. that there was no Creation, or is no GOD) is
yielded to be Credible too, though not SO Credible as that there is. Also, if
we ought to COMPARE the PROBABILITIES of things that we may know on which side
the ADVANTAGE LIES, it is intimated to us, and granted that it is Probable there
is no GOD, though it be more Probable there is; and while it is but Probable,
though it be very much more, yet it may very easily be False; as every days
experience teaches us in a thousand Instances, wherein our selves were mistaken
through the whole course of our lives; which commonly happened when the far
more probable side proved False, else we had not inclined to think it true, and
by that means been mistaken. Again, if the PROBABILITIES of Reason do but
FAVOR our side, it is a sign that the small strength they have when they do
their utmost, is not earnestly and heartily engaged neither in the Patronage of
our Cause, or in proving it probable there is a GOD; but only incline
favorably toward us rather than the other; Besides, those who are of moderate
tempers use to be favorable to every Body; and there is not in the whole World
such sweet, soft-natur'd, melting, pliable, tenderhearted, compassionate and
indulgent things as these same Probabilities: They are ever at hand to lend
their weak help to any body that wants a good Argument, and will fit any Cause
in the World, good or bad: Yet for all their kind and gentle behavior in
obliging none to assent to them, or say as they do, as your rude Demonstrations
use, I have notwithstanding a kind of prejudice against them; which is, that
they are False hearted, and use to play Jack-a-both-sides most egregiously; for
scarce was there ever any Tenet in the world so absurd, but, when not one good
Reason durst appear for it, this tatling Gossip, Dame Probability, would for
all that undertake it; and let her have but her neat Chambermaid Rhetoric to
trick her up with Laces, Spangles, Curles, Patches, and other such pretty
Baubles, she will dare to encounter with any Truth in the World, or maintain
the most absurd Paradox imaginable, as Dr. T. and his Friend well know, else
they would be out of heart ever to write more. And this is the Reason, I
conceive, why p. 22. he calls them FAIR; saying, If FAIR Probabilities of
Reason concur with Testimony; and no less than thrice in the same page he makes
mention of FAIR Proofs: He says not GOOD Proofs, or CONCLVSIVE that the Thing
is TRVE, or that there is a GOD; no, take heed of that; this would quite take
the business out of the hand of Probability, which a Rhetorical Divine ought
not to do; for nothing suits with Rhetorick's humor so well as Probabi^ity
does, and Demonstration cares not one straw for her: But he gives them their
just due, and calls them only Fair Proofs, and Fair Probabilities, that is,
Pretty, Plausible and Taking; and if they were not so of themselves, what is
there which a little daubing with Rhetorical Varnish will not make FAIR! But
the Upshot o^ Sum Total of his Proofs is the best sport, if it were not most
pernicious; it is this, That these Fair Probabilities taken together and in
their united force, have a great deal of Conviction in them. Which amounts to
this plain Confession, though couched in wary Terms, that there is not one good
Proof amongst them all, yet many bad ones put together will make a good one. I
know indeed that a concurrence of many Likelihoods renders a thing more
Probable, and encourages us to Outward Action; but to think that many
Probabilities will reach that Indivisible Point in which Truth, and
consequently our Assent to any thing as a Truth, is found, is quite to mistake
the nature of Truth and Assent too, which consist in Is or Is not; and since to
convince rationally is to conclude the thing is, I desire Dr. T's Logic to
inform the World how (since a Probable Proof is that which only concludes the
thing Probable, and consequently many probable ones are terminated in rendering
it MORE Probable) how, I say, many Proofs only Probable, can conclude the
thing to be MORE THAN PROBABLE, that is, to be CERTAINLY, or convince the
Understanding that it is; unless they happen to engage some Nature or other, and
consequent^y some Identical Proposition; which Dr. T. neither pretends, nor
goes about to show, but on the other side declares himself an utter Enemy to
such Principles, and consequently to such a way of Discourse.

. 12. In a word, Dr. T's Positive Proofs of a Godhead are reducible to these
two Heads, Humane Testimony and Probabilities of Reason, (as appears by his own
words Sermon. p. 22, 23.) and Testimony (which p. 22. he tells us is the
Principal Argument in a thing of this nature) he divides into Universal
Tradition and Written History: Now Written History is not therefore True
because it is writ, but depends upon Living Authority or Tradition to
authenticate it; and how ridiculous he would make the Certainty of Tradition,
even that which is confessedly grounded on the Sensations of great multitudes
which is vastly above this here spoken of, is seen in h^s Rule of Faith; and
here again he tells us, Pref. p. 16. All Humane Testimony is Fallible (and so
all built on it is possible to be False) for this plain reason, because all men
are Fallible: Wherefore, according to his Grounds, it is concluded there may
possibly be No GOD, for any thing Humane Testimony says to the Point; And it is
as evident from the very word, that Probabilities of Reason, though never such
Fair ones, conclude as little. Lastly, he tells us Sermon. p 22. that Fair
Probabilities of Reason concurring with Testimony, this Argument has all the
strength it can have: and thus Dr. T. instead of proving there is a GOD, has
endeavored to make out very learnedly that it may be there is no such Thing,
and that neither Reason nor Authority can evince the Truth of the Point.

. 13. I omit his abusing the word Testimony (which is built on Sensations) in
alleging it to prove a Creation, which neither was nor could be subject to the
Senses of the first Mankind, nor consequently could the persuasion of future
Deliverers and Writers have for its Source Attestation or Testimony: I omit
also his neg^ecting to make use of Testimony to prove Miracles, GOD's proper
Effect, which are subject to Sense, and which both Christians, Jews and
Heathens of all Nations and Times, both unanimously have and the first Seers
could properly attest. I suppose his Confidence in his Rhetoric made him choose
the worser Arguments to show how prettily he could make them look; or perhaps
the Genius of Things lie so, that the slightest Arguments most need, and so
best suit with Rhetorical Discoursers.

. 14. By this time I suppose Gentlemen, there will appear just reason for that
moderate and civil hint I gave Dr. T. in my Introduction to Faith Vindicated,
of the weakness of his Grounds, in these words: In which Sermon, under the
Title of the [Wisdom of being Religious] and a great many seeming shows, and I
heartily think very real Intentions of impugning Atheism, by an ill-principled
and (in that circumstance) imprudent and unnecessary Confession in equivalent
Terms of the possible Falsehood of Faith, nay even as to the Chiefest and most
Fundamental Point, the Tenet of a Deity, Religion receives a deep wound, and
Atheism an especial advantage, as may perhaps be more particularly shown
hereafter -- After which I give his Sermon all its due Commendations, and then
subjoyn, Only I could wish he had right Principles to ground his discourse;
without which he can never make a Controvertist, but must needs undermine the
solid Foundation of Christianity, if he undertake to meddle with the Grounds of
it, even while he goes about to defend it. These were my words then, and I am
sorry he would needs dare and provoke me to make them good. In which, if I have
justified my self too particularly, let him blame himself. All this while I
seriously declare that I am far from thinking that Dr. T. himself is not
assured that there is a GOD; and farther yet from imagining that already
holding one, he should hold it possible afterward GOD should cease to be;
which ridiculous folly (constant to his prevaricating humor) he puts upon me,
p. 8. What I affirm is, That his ill Principles do equivalently confess it
possible there neither is nor ever was a GOD; and this I have abundantly shown
out of his own words. Yet I doubt not but himself, through GOD's Goodness, has
by Practical Self-evidence (in the same manner the Vulgar, who are no
Speculaters or Scholars, also have it) absolute Certainty of the Existence of a
Deity, in despite of his weak Speculations; nay, that in this very Sermon he
has one or two Proofs which have in them the force of a Demonstration; though
his not understanding and so ill-managing of them, and then calling them
Probabilities, has endeavored, all that may be, to render them good for
nothing. I end with some of his own words, Pref. p. 37. That if Dr. T. did in
truth believe that the Existence of a Deity or a Creation, are (as he says,
Sermon. p.20.) so evident, that they can hardly be made plainer than they are of
themselves, he should by all means have let them alone; for they were in a very
good condition to shift for themselves; but his blind and Skeptical way of
proving them is enough to cast a mist about the clearest Truths in the world.
And I must take the liberty to admonish him that it lies not in the power of
all the Enemies of Christianity in the world to do it half that Mischief as one
Christian Divine may; who by his earnestness manifests a desire to do the best
he can; by the vogue he bears seems able to do the best that may be done; yet
produces not any one proof which he vouches to be absolutely conclusive of the
Truth either of Christianity, or a Deity, but rather by his carriage denies
there are any such, while he talks of Likelihood, Probability, more Credible
Opinion, Moral Certainty, and suchlike, whose very names ought not to be heard
or endured in a discourse aiming to settle the Grounds of Faith, or the Tenet
of a Deity. Let him consider that he must take his measure of the Certainty of
Grounds from the Object or Thing, not from our freedom from doubt, and
suchlike, for these may be light and silly, whereas the Grounds of Faith being
said by GOD, must necessarily be wise and solid; and, so, when looked into,
Absolutely-Conclusive of the thing. Let us then who hold a GOD, (leaving
Creatures to their weaknesses) vindicate our Maker from the scandalous
Imputation of governing Mankind tyrannically, by commanding us to assent that a
thing is, which at the same time we see may not be; so obliging us to hold
(contrary to the Light of Nature, and the very First Principles which Himself
had ingrafted in us) that what is, is at the same time possible not to be; and
to profess a point True, nay die to attest its Truth, which may perhaps be shown
False to morrow, nay which our selves see may be now False. He tells us here in
common p.90. and he tells us truly, that which way soever we turn our selves we
are incountred with Clear Evidences and sensible Demonstrations of a Deity: Why
does he then coming to make out that point, say, the nature of the thing will
not bear clear Demonstration, and that only Mathematical matters are capable
of it? Why pursues he not such Proofs as these, and makes them out, and stands
by them, and reduces them to First Principles, and so obliges Humane Nature to
assent to them under evident forfeiture of their Sincerity and even Manhood? Is
he afraid clear Evidences and sensible Demonstrations will not necessarily
conclude? Why does he put Suppositions that the thing were, and then argue thus
blindly, that since supposing it were it would give no more light of it self
than it does, therefore it is? Is there any necessity for such a ridiculous
perplexing and inconclusive method, when we may vouch we have Clear Evidences
and Demonstrations? Lastly, Why does he distrust the Objects strength, and
explain our Assurance of a Deity and Faith by Moral Certainty, or such as will
satisfy prudent men in humane Affairs, Probabilities amassed together, not
doubting, and other suchlike feeble diminutive expressions? Are not Clear
Evidences and Sensible Demonstrations (that is, Demonstrations a posteriori) in
point of Certainty incomparably beyond such quivering Grounds and such
dwindling Adhesions? I wish Dr. T. would take these things into his better
thoughts, and, at least by amending his Expressions and Reasons hereafter, make
some tolerable satisfaction for this intolerable Injury done to Faith and GOD's
Church.

DISCOURSE VI.
That Dr. T. makes all the Grounds of Christian Faith Possible to be False. Of
Infallibility, Demonstration, and Moral Certainty.

. 1. THus much to justify my first Charge that Dr. T. made that Fundamental
Tenet of a Deity; and consequently all Religion Possible to be False. My second
Charge is, that he particularly makes all Christian Faith possible to be false,
and it is found Faith Vindicated, p. 171. where I put down his own words which
concern that purpose; though he, who, presuming on the Partiality of his
Friends, takes the Liberty to say any thing which even Eyesight may Confute,
assures his Reader page 5. that I durst not Cite them. I laid my Charge in this
Tenor: It Is necessarily consequent from the foregoing Paragraphs, that, if I
have Discours't right in this small Treatise of mine, and have proved that
Faith, and consequently its Grounds, must be Impossible to be False, then Mr.
T.'s Confession, p. 118. (to which Mr. St.'s Doctrine is Consonant) that [It is
possible to be otherwise ( that is, to be False) that any Book is so Ancient as
it pretends to be, or that it was Written by him whose Name it bears, or that
this is the sense of such and such Passages in it] is a clear Conviction that
neither is the Book-Rule, he maintains the True Rule of Faith (. 3.) Nor have
he and his Friends True Faith, (. 4.) And consequently there being no other
Rule owned (taking away Private Spirit) but Tradition, that Tradition is the
only-True Rule of Faith, (. 6.) and so the main of Sure-Footing stands yet
firm. And, lastly, it is evinc't that his own Book which opposes it, opposes the
only-True, because the only Impossible-to-be-False, Ground of Faith; that is,
he is convinced in that Supposition to go about to undermine all Christian
Faith: Whence the Title of his Probable-natur'd Book (Rule of Faith) is
manifested to be an improper Nickname, and the Book it self, to merit no Reply.
You see here, Gentlemen, how great stress I lay upon Dr. T.'s confession, that
the Ground of his Faith (and consequently his Faith it self) is possible to be
False: And really, if he clears himself of it, I must acknowledge I suffer a
very great Defeat, because I so much Build upon it: If he does not, he is
utterly overthrown as to all intents and purposes, either of being a good
Writer, or a solid Christian Divine, and he will owe the World satisfaction for
the Injury done to Faith, and the Souls of those whom his Doctrine has
perverted, by turning their Faith which ought to be an Assent whose Grounds
(and consequently it self are Impossible to be an Error, or False, into
Opinion) whose Grounds (and, by consequence, it self) are possible to be such;
and, lastly, unless he Avoids or R^^ants this Error objected, all he has
Written (...) ^^nvinc't without any more ado, to be against ^ith and its true
Grounds; and so it will be quite overthrown in the Esteem of all those who have
the Nature of Faith writ in their hearts; and that it is Impossible an Act of
right Faith (that is, an Asse^^ built on those Grounds God has left in the
Church for Mankind to embrace Faith, and commanded them to believe upon those
Grounds, whether Scripture's Letter, or the Churches Voice) should be an Error,
or the Profession of it a Lie; which all sober Protestants, Presbyterians, nay
almost all Sects, except some few witty men, inclining much by reading such
Authors, to Skepticism; that is, inclining to be nothing at all (and perhaps
some Socinians) reject, abhominate, and hate with all their hearts. The Charge
is laid, and the Case is put, now let us come to the Trial: Which ere we do, I
desire those Readers who have Dr. T.'s Preface by them to read his 9 th. page,
or else his whole page 118. in his Rule of Faith, lest either of us may injure
him by a wrong Apprehension. I discourse thus,

* 2. First, it is Evident that he who makes the Ground and Rule of Faith
possible to be False* makes Faith it self such likewise; since nothing is or
can be stronger than the Grounds it stands on.

Next, the Rule of Faith to Dr. T. is the Scripture's Letter, and consequently
that what he conceives the Sense of the Scripture is God's Sense, or Faith.

Lastly, that in the place now Cited and Related by him, he speaks of the
Authority of the Book of Scripture, and of its Sense, as he acknowledges here,
page 15.

These things thus premised, I put him this Dil^mma. Either he holds what he
conceives to to be the Sense of Scripture (that is his Faith) True, or he does
not: If he holds it not to be True, then it is unavoidable he must hold it (at
least) possible to be False, if not actually such. But if he says he holds it
to be True, then since after he had spoke of the security he had, or had not of
the Book and Sense of Scripture, he immediately subjoyns these very words, It
is possible all this ^ay be otherwise: He as evidently says that what he
conceives the Book of Scripture* and Sense of such or such passages in it (that
is his Faith) is possible to be False, as it is that what is OTHERWISE THAN TRVE,
is False. I do not know how Dr. T. could possibly speak more plainly what I
charge him with, than he has done in those words, unless he should use the word
[ False] which too Candid and Rude expression, would expose him openly to the
dislike of all Sober m^n, and therefore he disguised it in its more moderate
Equivalent [ otherwise.] I say Equivalent: And, if it be not, I would gladly
know of him what the word [ otherwise] relates to: Human Language forbids that
any thing can be said to be otherwise unless it be otherwise than something. I
ask then otherwise than what does he mean, when, being in the Circumstance of
Discoursing, what security he had of the Antiquity, Writers, and Sense of
Scripture, he told us, It is possible to may be otherwise? Is it not as evident
as words can express, he must mean, It is possible the Book of Scripture is not
so anti^nt as the Apostles time: It is possible it was not Writ by the Apostles
and Evangelists: It is possible this is not the Sense of it in such passages as
concern Faith; for to these, and these only our Discourse, and the Nature and
Title of his Book determined it; which amounts to this, that none has absolute
Certainty of either Letter or Sense of Scripture, nor consequently of his
Faith, in case it be solely grounded upon that, as he professes. See Reader,
how all Truths even the most Sacred ones go to wrack, when men framed only for
fine Talk undertake to prove; and how parallel his defense of the Ground of all
Christian Faith is to that he gave us lately of the Existence of a Deity: He so
proved a God, that he granted it possible there might be none, and now he so
proves Scripture to be a Rule, that he grants it possible it may be no Rule,
since common Sense tells us that can never be an Intellectual Rule which
followed may lead into Error. By which we see Dr. T. needed here the Blessing
(as he calls it) of that Identical Proposition [ A Rule's a Rule] else he would
not write a Book to prove Scripture a Rule, and then ever and anon in
equivalent Language tell us it is none. I wish he would now and then reflect
upon such Evident Truths; and not out of an openly-declar'd Feud against those
First Principles fall thus perpetually into manifest Contradictions.

. 3. But how does Dr. T. clear himself of this Charge of mine, or how comes he
off from his own words? First, he again puts down those very words, which say
over and over what I charge upon him; and then asks very confidently where he
says any such thing? which is just as wise a craft as Children use when they
hoodwink themselves, and then tell the Bystanders they shall not see them.
Next, he tells us, that All, he says, is, that we are not Infallible in
judging of the Antiquity of a Book, or the sense of it, meaning that we cannot
demonstrate these things so, as to to show the contrary necessarily involves a
contradiction; but yet, etc. Is this all he says? What then is become of those
famous words, [ It is possible all this may be otherwise;] which were only
objected? But let us examine what he does acknowledge. Whether he be Infallibly
certain or no, it matters not: but it should be shown why, if Scripture be the
sole Ground of Faith, some at least in the World who are to Govern and Instruct
the Church should not be thus certain of both in case we be bound to assent,
and (as we questionless are) die to attest the Points of our Faith to be
absolutely-certain Truths. Again, if Dr. T. be not Infallibly certain of these
things, then let him say he is fallibly certain of it; which done, Nature will
show him how perfect Nonsense he speaks; whence the same Nature will tell him
with a little reflection, that, since the word Infallibly can with good sense be
joined with the word Certain, either it is adeqaate to that word, and extends
its sense as far as the others, and then there is no Certainty where there is
not Infallibility; or it does not extend as far as the word Certain; and then
we may be Certain of some things yet not-Infallibly Certain; which, since [
not-Infallibly] means [ Fallibly] signifies clearly we may be fallibly certain
of those things: But common sense teaches us how ridiculous it is to say, we are
fallibly certain of any thing. It Is most evident therefore and demonstrable,
that there is no Certainty but where there is Infallibility; and that we can
never be said to be truly Certain of any thing, till all circumstances
considered, we see our selves out of possibility of being deceived, hic and
nunc, in that very thing. Whence Dr. T. denying Infallible assurance of both
Letter and Sense of Scripture, is convinced to deny all true Certainty of
either, and so to render all Faith built upon it Uncertain, that is, possible
to be false; and, could he with sense take the other part of the distinction,
and say, he is fallibly certain of it, yet the guilt of the same Position will
still remain with him. This Logical Demonstration I produced in Faith
Vindicated, page 37. of which Dr, T. takes notice here page 17 thus: Mr. S. is
pl^as'd to say that Certainty and Infallibility are all one: concealing thus
from his Reader I had ever proved it (lest he should be obliged ^o speak to my
Proofs, which he neither likes nor uses) and bears himself as if I had only
said it: which supposed, then indeed his bare saying the contrary was a
competent Answer. This done, he confutes it manfully with telling his Readers,
I am the first man that ev^r said it, and that it is foolish. I beseech you,
Gentlemen, is it the fashion in the Univeesities to solve Arguments on this
manner? That is, to neglect the Premises, call the Conclusion foolish, and
think to overthrow the Reason in the Opinion of his Readers* because it is not
some hackney Argument, brought into play perhaps an hundred times over, and
ninety nine times answered, but now produced first? Certainly, one would think
in reason that what has been many times alleged should rather be slighted,
because it may have received already many Answers, and not such Pcoofs as first
appear, because it is certain they never yet had any at all, nor do I conceive
that the Noble and Learned Virtuosi of the ROYAL SOCIETY use to reject any
Production because the Author of it is the first that invented it; but, they
allow it Examination, and, if it hold the Trial, approve it, and commend the
Author.

. 4. I shall endeavor to give him another Argument of the Necessity of
admitting Infallibility, though I have good reason to fear he will afford it
again no other Answer but only this, that I am the first man that ever produced
it. It Is this. Taking the word [ False] or [ Falsus] subjectively, or as in the
Subject, that is, as making the Jugment False or Erroneous: it is a Participle
of the Verb [ Fallor] and signifies deceived actually, to which corresponds as
its proper Power [ Fallible] or, capable to be deceived: Now the contrary to [
False] thus understood, is True, taken also subjectively, or as making the
Judgment which in it is True or Un-erroneous in that its Act. Wherefore the
proper Power corresponding to that Act must necessarily be that which is
opposed to Fallible, that is [ Infallible.] Again, taking the word False
Objectively, or as found in the Proposition which is the Object or Cause of our
Judgment as it is false or actually deceived: Its proper Power corresponding to
it is [ Capable to deceive.] Wherefore, also, taking its Opposite [ Truth]
Objectively, or for the Object of our Judgment when it is True, the proper Power
corresponding to it must be Incapable to deceive. It Is concluded then from both
these Considerations, that we can neither affirm Points or Propositiont of
Faith (which are the Objects of such Acts) True, but we must affirm withal that
they are Incapable to make us judge erroneously while we assent to them; nor
that our Judgment or Act of Faith can be True or Un-erroneous, but we must be
Infallible in so judging. Thus far concerning the necessity of admitting
Infallibility, if we once put our Assents or Acts of Faith to be true
Judgments. From which it is a different Question to ask how we become thus
Infallible; only it is Evident, that, in case the former Proposition be put, (
viz, that we must affirm our Acts of Faith True,) Infallible we must be, or
Impossible to be in an Error when we make those Acts. But now, to this
Infallibility in those Acts God's Providence leads men diversely according to
their several degrees of Capacity: Those who are arrived to a great pitch of
Learning come to it by absolutely-concluding proofs, called Demonstrations,
that is, by penetrating the nature of the Authority on which it is built: and,
such men can make out clearly and distinctly to their own Thoughts the
Certainty of that Authority, by discoursing it to themselves and others; they
can resolve it into its Grounds, meet with and answer Objections, and in a
word, see themselves to be Infallibly Certain of it. In these men therefore,
though the Truth of their Tenet be indeed taken from the Object (as it is
always) yet the Clearness, Distinctness, and firm Strength of it springs from
the Perfection of their well-cultivated Understanding. Those who are of a weak
pitch are led to it by Practical Self-evidence of the nature of Authority, and
of the way in common by which they receive Faith; which dim, rude sight, even
in the simplest, serves to carry them on to act according to right nature when
they assent; but they cannot discourse their thoughts, nor resolve them into
Principles, nor answer Objections, nor see themselves clearly to be infallibly
Certain. Nay more, the greatest part of these, especially if very simple, do by
some lucky chance (or rather by a particular disposition of Gods good
Providence) light upon this right way, more than by any strength of their own
wit, looking into Grounds; but, being in it once, they find that which
satisfies them according to knowledges familiariz'd to them by converse with
the World, and which are of themselves, solid and satisfactory. In a word, it
became Gods goodness so to order things, that the Acts of all the Faithful
might be as much as was possible in men of every pitch and capacity, Rational
or Virtuous; whatever Contingency may happen in some particulars; Original Sin,
and by it, Passion, Ignorance, or Interest sometimes byassing them and making
them act with precipitancy. In which case whatever is good in those Acts of
Faith is refunded into God, the Author of every good Gift as its Original
Cause; what Defective, into the Limitedness and Imperfection of Creatures.

. 5. This Tenet of Infallibility which unprejudiced Nature teaches even the
rudest in things subject to Sense and common Reason, and Learned men in things
provable by exact Art, the Adversaries of true Certainty, our Scepticks in
Religion, endeavor to render ridiculous and cast a mist about it by the most
unreasonable pretense that ever was invented; which is, to affirm that a man
cannot be Infallible in one thing but he must be so in all. As if I could not
infallibly know what is done in my Chamber or practiced openly amongst those I
converse with, but I must be likewise infallible in knowing what is done in the
Moon. And Dr. T. is one of these; (for Contradiction is as natural to him, as
it is to a fish to swim): who tells us here page 19. That Omniscience within a
determinate Sphere, is an Infinite within a finite Sphere; as if it were very
evident that to know All in such a matter is to know Infinite, or all things in
the World; or so hard to comprehend that one may know all the money in ones
Purse without knowing all the money that is extant, or all the men in the room
without knowing all Mankind; I wish Dr. T. would show us why knowing all in
such a particular matter must needs argue an Infinite knowledge; or why the
knowing all things* [in a determinate Sphere] (which last words when he came to
answer, that is, break his Jests, our Prevaricator prudently omitted;) may not
consist with an ignorance of many things out of that Sphere: Must the word All
in such a matter needs signify Infinite? or did the commonest Reason ever thus
go wrack? I suppose my Friends resolute hazard against Identical Propositions
made him fall into this more than childish mistake: For this plain Truth,
What Is all but in one matter only, is, all but in one matter only, had
preserved him from this Nonsense; but he took this for his Ground to proceed
upon, that All in one matter only, (...) All in every matter, or, which is
more, is Infinite, and so still he continues most learnedly to lay
Contradictions for his First Principles, because their Interest, and his are
inseparably link^ against the Common Enemy, Identical Propositions* This I must
confess is a very smart and ing^nious kind of reasoning, and proper to Dr. T.
unless perhaps his sworn Brother at hating First Principles and Papists, put in
for a share; It appears by a certain Paper, called Dr. Stillingfleet against
Dr. Stillingfleet, he is a strong pretender, and will cry halfs. But it is time
now to return to examine his Answer.

6. It is not necessary indeed to Truth that every one should demonstrate a
thing so as to show that the contrary necessarily involves ^ Contradiction; for
the same thing may be known also through Practical Self-evidence to those who
cannot demonstrate* but yet the thing must be demonstrable, else it is not
Knowable or Ascertainable. For Demonstrable is a plain honest word, what game
soever Dr. T. and his Friend make at it, and imports no more abstracting from
subtle quirks, but only Capable to be known, or Intellectually seen by way of
Proof; whence, a Learned man who goes about to prove any thing by strength of
severe Reason, ought either to demonstrate it, or he falls short of his D^^y.
Once more I desire Dr. T. to take me right, and to reflect that when I say, The
Thing is Demonstrable, or pretend to demonstrate, I do not take the word
Demonstration with all those many subtleties and perquisits the Schools
require; I as little love niceties as any man living, and can as easily
dispense with them so the solid part be well provided for, and the Truth of the
Thing established, which if it be not done, I make account nothing is done, in
these cases in which Assent and dying to attest things to be Truths are
required. I only mean then by Demonstration such a Proof as is taken not from
any Exrinsecal consideration, as is Authority, which grounds Belief, but from
the intrinsecal Nature of the Thing or Subject in Dispute, and such a Proof as
necessarily concludes the Thing to be; which cannot be possibly done without
engaging finally some Identical Proposition, or that Things being what it is,
on which all is built. Now, this being evidently so, (and if it be not, let Dr.
T. show the contrary) I would ask our verbal Divine, why he ought not to
demonstrate, that is, prove by necessary concluding Argument both the Letter
and Sense of Scripture, if he would have men assent most firmly to Faith built
according to him solely* upon their Certainty? Is it not his intent in his
Discourses to Conclude* what he speaks of? How can he do this unless he shows
the Conclusion necessarily follows? Again, does he not intend to conclude it is
a Truth, that this is the Letter and Sense of Scripture? He must do so, or else
he can never pretend that Faith built upon it is Truth: And if he proves it
Tru^, must he not at the same time, prove it is Contradictory False: And is any
thing False but what says a Thing is so, when indeed it is not so; or is not so,
when indeed it is so: which is a direct Contradiction. Wherefore Dr. T. can
never Conclude a thing to be True, unless he brings a Proof necessarily
engaging the Nature of the Thing, that is unless (according to my sense of the
Word) he both Demonstrates, and also shows the contrary necessarily to involve
a Contradiction. Both these satisfactory Certainties, my Grounds attribute to
Scriptures Letter and Sense (See Sur^f* page 116, 117*) in points appertaining
to Faith, and he here denies both, page 10. whence is seen which of us two has
more real Honor and Respect for Scripture: He who makes neither its Letter or
Sense to have any Grounds able to ascertain them, that is, as to our purpose
makes them good for nothing, or I who grant and prove both.

. 7. I suppose Dr. T* will say again as he did in that point of a Deity, that
the nature of the Thing will not bear a Certainty of Scriptures Letter or
Sense, that so he may be true to his firm Principle, and make all Faith alike
uncertain. I answer, the more blame will fall to their share, who take away the
Certainty of that which is the first Principle in way of Authority, or, First
Authority, namely TRADITION, which, and only which can Authenticate Books;
and, the thing being of high Concern, Practically carry down the same Doctrine;
and so easily preserve the Book significative of the same Sense* No^ doubt I,
but it is demonstrable that the Practice of England, and the Concern of the
thing joined with the necessary Evidence of any Alteration in a matter daily so
nicely Canvast and continually Used, can and will with Infallible Certainty,
bring down the Letter of Magna Charta, the Statute Book, and some Acts of
Parliament, the self-same, from year to year, at least in matters of high
Consequence; and by means of the Sense, writ Traditionally in some men's hea^ts,
correct the Letter, if Printers or Copiers should mistake. If Dr. T. asks how I
prove it: I would tell him that the Nature of the Thing must make it Notorious,
if altered; be cause great multitudes are conversant in it, and it being
esteemed of a kind of Sacred Nature, weigh every tittle of it warily,
especially those passages that immediately touch some weighty Point; whence
should some whose Interest it is to alter it, go about such an Action, it cannot
appear a Good to the Generality, whose Concerns are highly violated by that
alteration, to conceal and permit the Letter to remain Uncorrected: and if it
could not appear a Good to the Generality to consent to alter it, nor become a
Motive to the rest to attempt a seen Impossiblity, neither one nor the other
could will to alter it, much less both conspire to do it; and should they
attempt it, their will must either have no Object and then it is a Power to
nothing (that is, no Power) or else act without an appearing Good* and, in both
cases the Will would be no Will. This short hint will let the Reader see the
Grounds I go upon: it is not now a proper place to pursue such Arguments close,
or press them home. I wish I might see some return of the like nature from our
two undemonstrating Adversaries, who think it their best play to laugh at
Principles and Demonstration, because they know in their Consciences they are
perfect Strangers to both.

8. Well: but though Dr. T. denies any Infallible Certainty of the Ground of
all Christian Faith, let us see at least what other Certainty he affords us.
And, at the first sight any honest man might safely swear it must be (if any) a
Fallible Certainty, that is, a very fair piece of Nonsense; for it is evident to
all Mankind (the Abhorrers of First Principles always excepted) that if any
Certainty be Infallible, and there be any other besides this, it must needs be
a Fallible one, since there can be no middle between Contradictaries: So that
Dr. T. is put to this hard choice, either to bring such a Certainty for the
Ground of all Christianity which is no Certainty, or else such an one as is
perfect Nonsense, if it be named by its proper Name. L^t's see what choice he
makes. We are not (says he) Infallibly Certain that any Book, etc. But yet
(observe now the Opposite kind of Certainty delivered here page 9.) We have a
firm Assurance concerning these matters, so as not to make the least doubt of
them. I marry, this is a rare Certainty indeed! We have not Infallible
Certainty (says Dr. T.) of either Letter or Sense of Scripture, but only such
an one as keeps us from making the least doubt of them. Now, since a very easy
reflection teaches us that we have no doubt of many things being True, nay more,
have strong Hopes they are True, and yet for all that, hold them
notwithstanding possible to be false; it is a strange Argument to prove he avows
not the possible Falsehood of Faith, to allege that he declared himself he had
only such an Assurance, as not at all to doubt it: For [ not to doubt] a thing
signifies no more, but [ not to incline to think it False] which a man may do,
and yet not at all hope, it is True; seeing he who suspends indifferently from
both sides, and inclines to neither, does not at all doubt a Thing, or fear
it is False, having no imaginable reason to ground the least degree of any such
Fear, more than he has to ground any Hope of its Truth. Again, those
Speculators who attend not to Principles are oftentimes in a perplexed case,
and through the Goodness of Nature, hold a thing absolutely True, while they
attend to such motives as connaturally breed that persuasion, which thing
notwithstanding coming to make it out as Scholars, and unable to perform it,
hereupon considered as Speculators they must hold possible to be False for any
thing they know: and this I conceive is Dr. T's condition. Regarding the nature
of Faith, and the common Conceit of Christianity, he cannot but see he must, if
he will be a Christian, profess Faith impossible to be False; and doublesly he
will avow it such as long as he speaks Nature, and avoids reflecting on his
Speculative Thoughts; but, coming once to consider the points of Faith, as
standing under such proofs as his Unskilful Art affords him, and conscious to
himself (as he needs must who sleights first Principles, and all Methods to
Knowledge) that he has never an Argument that is absolutely or truly
Conclusive, he is forced again, taking in these unlucky circumstances, to avow
Faiths Ground, and consequently its self to be Possible to be otherwise, or
False; being willing to lay the blame on the Grounds of Faith, and to say, they
cannot bear Absolutely-Conclusive Proofs, rather than on the defectiveness of
his own Skill; and to represent them as unworthy to have the name of stable
Grounds, rather than he will lose a tittle of the Fame of being an able Divine.
Yet I will not say, but the Christian in Dr. T. might overcome the Speculator,
at least balance him in an equal suspense, or beget in him a pretty good
conceit of Faith's Impossibility to be False; but then, when he once reflects
that this cannot be maintained without admitting Infallibility, which is the
word the abominable Papists use, nor made out without using First Principles,
or Identical Propositions (which that malignant Man I. S. pretends to build on)
immediately the bias prevails, and the Idea of Popery once stirred up (which
haunts his and his Friends fancy day and night in a thousand hideous shapes ^
he runs in a fright so far from Impossibility of Falsehood in Faith, that he
comes to a very easy Possibility of its being all a plain Imposture or Ly for
any thing he absolutely knows, since Grounds prevailing only to make him not
doub^ of it, can raise it no higher. Moreover, if this be a good Argument, [ I
declared my self so assured as not to make the least doubt of a thing,
therefore I could not avow it possible to be False] it must be allowed
Argumentative to say, I am so assured as not in the least to doubt of it,
therefore it is not possible to be False. Dull Universities! that had not the
wit to light all this while on Dr. T's Principles and way of arguing! They
ascertain all things at the first dash without more ado. I have a firm
Assurance so as not to doubt of the Grounds of Christian Faith, the Letter and
Sense of Scripture, therefore by this new Logic, they are concluded Certain
and Impossible to be False: In opposition to which, if you tell him the
firmness of a Rational Assent ought to be taken from Principles or the Object,
not from the Subject's firmly adhering to it, and admonish him that this later
sort of Firmness without the other signifies nothing but an Irrational
Resolution to hold a thing right or wrong, he cuts you off short, and blames
the Grounds of Christian Faith, telling you the nature of the Things will bear
no more. At which if your Reason repines, and begins to despair of
satisfaction, he tells you smartly that you contradict a First and Firm
Principle, that to have as much Assurance as the thing affords you, is to be
Certain of it. Prodigious folly! not to distinguish between these two most
evident Notions [ I am fully perswaded] and [ the Thing is certainly so.] And
alleging our not doubting or strong adhesion to a thing, for an competent
Explication of that Certainty which ought to be the greatest in the whole
world, since more Sacred Concerns than any the world can show are built upon
it; which adhesion also, as Nature teaches us, is very frequently an effect of
Passion: Common Experience manifesting it to be a fault annexed to the very
Nature of Man, that his U^derstanding is liable to be byast by his Will, where
his very Essence is not concerned, so as not to make the least doubt of, may
more, oftentimes to hold firmly whatever habitual Prejudice, Affection to
Friends, precipitate have, or fullen Ignorance has once addicted him to. All I
can imagine in Dr. T's behalf is this, that he must allege he conceives this
Assurance or Firm Adhesion is a proper Effect of the Object working it in his
Understanding, and that therefore he could not have this firm Assurance or
Adhesion to it unless the Thing were indeed such in it self. This every
Intelligent man sees is his only way to come off; but this he neither has
attempted to do, nor ever shall be in the least able to compass, till he
retract his costly anger against First Principles, his drollish Abuses against
Demonstration, his Accusing the things of Invisibleness instead of blaming his
own bad Eyes; and lastly, his miscalled Firm Principle, which makes all built
upon it, no better than empty Contradiction. Yet if he pleases to show us that
the Object does rationally assure him the thing is so, by affording such proofs
as of their own nature are able to make us assent firmly to it as a Truth, and
not only incline us toward it as a Likelihood, let him go to work Logically
(that being the proper Science in this case) and show us how, and by what
virtue any proof of his is able to effect this, and I promise him faithfully to
respect and treat him with a great deal of Honor, though his performance comes
off never so short. But I foresee three Insuperable difficulties lie in his
way; first, that he sees his Cause cannot bear it, for which he still blames
the Nature of the Thing. Next, that the deep Study, or the most Learned Science
of Elegant Expressions so totally possesses his Mind, it will not let Logic
have any part in his thought: And lastly, if it does, yet he may hap to meet
there with some unelegant Terms of Art which will quite fright him from his
business, and make him forswear the most evident Truths in the world.

9. But he has only skirmish'd hitherto, now ^he comes to close Dispute and
will prove that, take Faith how I will, he does not in these words avow the
possible falsehood of Faith, and, that he may not fail to hit right on my
meaning of the word Faith, he divides the Text, and gives us many Senses of
that word, and those as ridiculous as he could imagine, which would make the
unexamining Reader judge verily that I were out of my Wits to take the word [
Faith] in such absurd meanings, and then hold it Impossible to be False. This
done, he shows himself a most Victorious Conqueror and Confutes me powerfully
from page 10. to page 13. At least, would not Dr. T's. best Friend, so he were
but any thing Ingenuous, think he might safely swear that either he did not
know what I meant by the word [ Faith,] when I say Faith is impossible to be
False, or else heartily acknowledge that he is strangely Insincere to
counterfeit so many Imaginary Tenets, and then one by one confute them, Read
them here from the middle of page 10. to page 12. and then reflect on my words
found in my Introduction to Faith Vindicated, page 17* which are these:

To ask then if Faith can possibly be False, is to ask whether the Motives laid
by Gods Providence for Mankind, or his Church to embrace Christian Faith, must
be such as of their own Nature, cannot fail to conclude those Points True; and
to affirm that Faith is not possible to be False, is equivalently to assert
that those Motives, or the Rule of Faith, must be thus absolutely Conclusive,
Firm, and Immovable.

Hence is seen that I concern not my self in this Discourse with how perfectly,
or imperfectly, diverse Persons penetrate those Motives; or how they satisfy or
dissatisfie some particular Persons; since I only speak of the Nature of those
Motives in themselves, and as laid in second Causes by Gods Providence, to
light Mankind in their way to Faith: To which the dimness of Eyesight, neglect
to look at all, or looking the wrong way, even in many particular men, is
Extrinsecal and Contingent.

Observe, Gentlemen, what exquisite Care I took to declare my meaning so
perfectly, that the common regard to Readers, and his own Reputation, might
restrain Dr. T. from imposing wilfully a wrong sense, to which habitual fault I
knew he had otherwise most strong Inclinations: Observe next, that all his
confute is wholly built on this known mistake. Hence his objecting the weak
Understandings of some Believers; which is both forestal'd by the wo^ds now
cited, declaring that I only speak of the Motives to light Mankind or the
Church to Faith, and what they are of their own Nature, or in themselves, not
how perfectly or imperfectly others penetrate them; besides I put this very
Objection against my self ( Faith Vindicated, p. 164.) and answer it; which he,
never acknowledging it was mine, puts here as his own against me, without
taking the least notice of my Answer there given. The last meaning he gives of
the word [ Faith,] which is the Means and Motives to Faith, is nearest to mine:
But, because he leaves out the consideration of their being ordained by God for
his Church* as also of what they are in their own Nature, or by virtue of the
Object, and speaks of them only as in the worst Subject, viz. in weak Persons
which penetrate them very little, he misses wholly my Sense, and so impugns me
nor at all, but skirmishes with his own shadow. For* what kind of consequence
is this, St. Austin says, Some Persons are saved not by the quickness of their
Understandings, but by the Simplicity of their Belief: Therefore the Motives
laid by God for Mankind, or his Church to embrace Faith, are possible to be
False? As if the simplest could not, nay, were not most likely of all other to
believe upon weak and incompetent Motives, which therefore could never have
been laid by God for his Church to embrace her Faith upon: Or, as if the most
Simple that are, could not rationally believe the Church, and so become
Infallible in their Assents by adhering to her, though their weak
understandings do not penetrate or comprehend how the Church or themselves come
to be so; nay, perhaps have not a clear sight of what the word [ Infallible]
means, till some Discourse awaken the apprehension of it in them.

10. Having thus acted the Disputant, Exit Theologus, intrat Scu^ra; and page
13.14. plays the old Tricks of Legerdemain over again; that is, leaves out half
an Argument of mine, and play^ upon the other half, with all the disingenuous
craft, a wit bent that way could invent. In Faith Vindicated, page 89. and 90.
I discours't thus: The profound Mysteries of Faith will seem to a Heathen,
Impossible to be True, therefore the Motives must (at least seem Impossible to
be False, but Dr. T. confesses both Letter and Sense of Scripture (which are
his Rule of Faith) possible to be False; nor (it being an Object proportioned
to humane Reason) is there any thing to make it seem better than it is, that
is, to make it seem Impossible to be False; therefore, were there no better
Grounds than his, it would be against all Reason to believe. Having viewed my
Discourse, I desire the Reader to peruse the Answer here given by my Confuter:
He names the word Argument, says two pretty words upon it, that it is pleasant
and surprising; leaves out better half of it, conceals perfectly all that part
of it which concludes strongly against his own insufficient Grounds; catches at
a word, and would make my Discouse and Argument aim to prove Faith Impossible
to be False, because the Motives are only seemingly such. Whereas every Page in
that Book, and its whole Design shows I meant and proved them to be actually,
really and indeed such. Had I a mind to evade such petty Cavils, I could alledg
that both may seem Impossible to be False; yet one more seem so than the other:
But the Truth is, advancing to confute him, I argued ad hominem, and contended
that against a seeming Impossibility to be True, nothing but Motives seemingly
Impossible to be False, can with any show of Reason be held convictive; but he
had no Motives even seemingly Impossible to be False, but confessedly Possible
to be such, therefore they had no imaginable show of Convictiveness. I grant
then* it is a drawn Match (as he calls it) between equally-seeming
Impossibilities; and because it is so, therefore a seeming Impossibility to be
True, in the Object, is by much an overmatch to what is less than a seeming
Impossibility to be False in the Motives, or Grounds; but, both Letter and
Sense of Scripture, his Grounds of Faith, are confessedly possible to be
otherwise, that is, False, and so are less than seemingly (even to himself)
impossible to be False, therefore his Motives to believe are incomparably
overmatcht by the difficulty of the Mysteries to be believed, and so there
could be rationally, according to his Grounds, no Faith at all. This is my true
Argument, which perhaps might be surprising to him, which made him thus start
aside from putting or answering it, though we may perceive by his carriage he
esteems not it, and others such like, very pleasant. Indeed he still puts on a
pleasant Look when he should be Sober, and is ever most Merry when it becomes
him to be the most Serious; but this is long since understood to be a necessary
Policy, not a Genuine effect of Nature. He tells us that Transubstantiation is
evidently Impossible to be True: If so, then it implies some Contradiction;
which if he shows me in any thing held of Faith by Catholics in that Point, I
will become Dr. T's. Convert, and obedient Auditor. But, alas! How will he
prove any thing to be a Contradiction? Since those Faulty Propositions are (as
was proved Disc. 2.3.) therefore such, because they are Opposite to Identical
ones, or the First Principles, as has been proved. Seeing then Dr. T. has long
since renounced all those from being First Principles, for any thing I can
discern he must either hold there are no Contradictions at all, or else (which
comes to the same) hold that Contradictions are Truths.

. 11. But he goes forwards amain, in confuting a Point which no man living ever
maintained, viz. that every single Christian must be Infallible; that is (as
Dr. T. will needs take it*) must so penetrate his Grounds, and what relates to
them, as to see clearly he cannot be deceiv^d in judging his Grounds of Faith*
Conclusive* Whereas my Tenet is, that, let any man, though of the Acutest
Understanding and greatest Learning that may be, entertain any Tenet as Faith
o^ Revealed by God upon any other Motive than what God has lost to his Church;
this man, however thus Endowed, not only may, but in likelihood will be
deceived; not for want of Wit, but for want of Grounds ascertaining, and
infallibly engaging the Divine Revelation. On the other side let the Simplest
and Weakest Understanding that is, happen to embrace Faith upon the Motives
laid by God and left in his Church* he is Infallibly secure from being in an
Error, not through the strength of his Understanding perfectly discerning and
penetrating the Conclusive nature of his Grounds, but though the strength of
those Grounds themselves, or of the Causes laid by Gods Providence, to plant
and continue right Faith in the Church; by means of which what he has thus
(more by the peculiar disposition of God's gracious Providence, than any reach
of his own Wit or Judgment) fortunately embraced, is preserved impossible to
False, and consequently his Assent to it impossible to be an Error, because
the Churches Authority upon which he received it, is Infallible. And surely
it is but fitting that all who believe upon that Rule God has left and commanded
us to follow, should be thus secured from possibility of Mistake: for,
otherwise, since a Power is relative to its proper Act, what is possible to be
False may, actually be so, and so we might come to be led actually into Error
by obeying God's Commands, which is impossible. To apply th^s: If Dr. T.
therefore makes Scripture's Letter the Rule of Faith left by God for Mankind to
receive their Faith upon, and by doing so has commanded them to believe it, he
must either say that its Sense and Letter (taking them as he builds his Faith
on them) have no Possibility of Falsehood, or (besides the many absurdities
already mentioned) grant that our Allwise and Good God can possibly lead men
into actual Error, nay command them to profess and die for a Ly, than which
nothing can be imagined more blasphemous against Essential Truth and Goodness.

Farther I declare it is my Tenet, that notwithstanding this failure in some
particulars, yet I hold that the Generality of the Faithful are so familiarly
acquainted with the nature of Testifying. Authority, as to know grossly and
confusedly by means of Practical Self-evidence that it is a certain Rule to
proceed upon; and thence either discern themselves, if they be very prudential,
or else are capable to be made discern who proceed upon that Rule, who not:
Hence also I hold that Tradition or Testifying Authority is the best provision
that could be made for all Mankind to receive Faith upon, it being the most
familiarly and most obviously knowable and penetrable by all sorts that can be
imagined; and far more than Languages, Translations and Transcriptions, on
which the Letter-Rule depends. Lastly, I hold that what is thus practically
self-evident, that is, known in gross and confusedly by the Vulgar, is
demonstrable to the Learned, who scan with exact Art the nature of those Causes
which wrought constantly that certifying Effect in the Generality, and find out
according to what precisely they had that Certifying Virtue; which found, it
will be the proper Medium to demonstrate the Certainty of that Authority by.
This is my true Tenet, which my Prevaricating Adversary perpetually mistakes,
because he will do it, and he therefore will do it, because it must be done. In
mala causa (as St. Austin says) non possunt aliter.

12. He goes about to argue page 15. from the End of Faith, and alleges that a
freedom from seeing just cause of doubting the Authority and Sense of
Scripture, may make one believe, or really assent to the Doctrine of it, live
accordingly and be saved: By which I conceive he judges a Christians life
consists in moving ones Legs, Arms, or Hands; for it is enough to stir us up to
External Action that the motive be only Probable; but, if a Christian's life
be Spiritual, consisting in interior Acts of the Understanding and Will, as a
vigorous Hope, and a fervent Love of unseen and unconceiveable Goods, with
other Virtues subservient to these, and all these depend on Faith as their
Basis, and Faith depends for its Truth (which gives it all its efficacy) on
the Rule of Faith, I doubt it will scarce suffice to work these Effects
heartily, if Learned men speak out heartily, and tell the Christians they are
to govern, that, notwithstanding all they can discern, they cannot see,
absolutely speaking, that Christian Faith is a certain Truth, but only a high
likelihood, a more Credible Opinion, or a fair Probability. It must therefore
be beyond all these, and so impossible to be false. The main point then that
Dr. T. ever misses in is this, that he still omits to state what certainty is
due to Christian Faith, and its Grounds per se loquendo, or according to its
own Nature, and the interior Acts it must produce, and the difficulties it
must struggle through and overcome, even in the Wisest and most Rational
persons, who are to be satisfied of its verity, and so embrace it; and
considers it perpetually according to what per accidens, that is, not
Essentially belongs to it, but Accidentally may consist with it without utterly
destroying its Nature; that is, he considers it not as found in those Subjects
where it is in its true and perfect state, or freed from all alloy of
Irrationality, but as in those where it is found most defectively and
imperfectly, or, as it most deviates from its right nature. And this he is
forced to do, because he sees that, should he treat of it as it ought to be, or
according to what it would be by virtue of the Motives laid by the Giver of
every perfect Gift, to bring mankind to Faith, singly and solely considered,
without mingling the Imperfection of Creatures with his otherwise most powerful
and wise Efficiency, the Grounds of Christian Faith must be able to subdue to a
hearty Assent the most Learned and wisest portions of Mankind, which they could
never do while they are seen by them to be Possible to be False.

13. He argues that Infallibility is not necessary to the Nature of Faith,
because this admits of Degrees, that (being the highest degree of Assent) of
none: Besides, Infallibility is an absolute Impossibility of being deceived,
and there are no degrees in absolute Impossibilities. I answer: that, let a
thousand Intellectual Creatures, Angels or Men, know, and that Infallibly too,
the self-same-Object, yet they all know it in different degrees of perfection,
not by means of knowing more in the Object (for we will suppose it one single
point) but intensively, or better on the Subjects side; because of the
different perfection of their understanding Power penetrating more clearly the
self-same-Object. To conceive this better, let us reflect that the self-same
thing may be corporally seen by several men, and each infallibly know what it
is by means of that sight; yet because one of them has better Eyes than
another, one sees more clearly what it is, the other less. Also, the Blessed
Saints and Angels in Heaven differ from one another in glory, or, in greater
and lesser degrees of the blissful Vision; that is, one sees the Divine Essence
better, another not so well; yet the Object being one Indivisible formality,
one cannot see more than another; wherefore their great degree of Glory
consists in this, that one penetrates it better, and (as it were) sinks it
deeper in the knowing Power than another does; which springs out of the several
dispositions of the Subject, or the antecedent Love of God; which when it is
greater, it more intimately and closely applies the Divine Object to the
fervently^addicted Power. Again, on the Objects side there may be in some
senses several degrees even of Absolute Impossibilities. First, because of the
greater disproportion of the Object to the Power: As, put case it be Impossible
that twenty men should lift such a weight, it is good sense to say, if twenty
men cannot lift it, much less can two: or* if ten men cannot possibly resist
the force of five hundred, much less can they resist ten thousand of equal
strength. Next* because one of the Impossibles depends upon another; a^, if be
impossible the Conclusion should be False* it is more Impossible the Premises
should be so; and yet more that the very First Principles should: or thus, it is
Impossible 2 and 3 should not make ^* yet it is more impossible. God, who is
Self-existence should not be; because in these the later Impossibility which
depends on the forme^ is only Impossible by Consequence, (though still
absolutely such) that is, were not at all Impossible, if that which grounds it
were not so. Whence is seen, that unless Dr. T. will say that all Created
Understandings are of the self-same pitch of Excellence, he must say that, even
supposing ^he self-same Object or Motive apt to assure Infallibly, one may
better penetrate it, and so be more Infallibly Certain (on the Subjects side)
than another. And thus in the same Person his Faith may be come more Lively
than formerly, according as he renders it more Express to his Thoughts, and
better dinted or imprinted in them; which is done two manner of ways;
Habitually, by often thinking on the Points, which way is Proper to the Vulgar;
or Knowingly, by penetrating it is Grounds still better and better, and so
making those Judgments solider and firmer. It Is seen also that one Object maybe
justly said to be more Impossible to be false than another, because that other
is not at all such, but by virtue of it, and dependence on it, according to
that Axiom, Quod per se est tale, est magis tale, What is so of it self, is
more (or more perfectly) such than what is such by means of another; and with
good reason, for being impossible to be false solely by dependence on another,
it is consequently of it self possible to ^e false. Yet this Possibility can
never be reduced into Act, because that Object or Truth is never found
unconnected with that other on which it depends, but ever most intimately
united with it, and so engaging it is verity.

14. Page 18. Dr. T. endeavors to acquaint us with the Notion of Moral
Certainty, which I should be glad to learn, for I am not ashamed to own that I
never understood it perfectly in my life; Some mean one thing by it, another
means another thing, as their Fancy leads them; now I for my part declare that
I have no distinct notion or knowledge of any thing that I cannot define, nor
can I define that the limits or bounds of whose Nature I see not, nor, I am
confident, any man living. I wish Dr. T. better success. Moral Certainty (says
he) is sometimes taken for a high degree of Probability, which can only
produce a doubtful Assent. He means I suppose; such an Assent as is a Doubt or
Suspending of Assent* that is such an Assent as is no Assent; I wish Dr. T.
would go to School a while to honest Dame Nature, and learn his Ho^n-book of
First Principles, and not thus ever and anon commit such bangers. To doubt
signifies to fear a thing is not true, or not, not to dare to assent to it,
that is, not to assent, and so a doubtful Assent, is not Assenting Assent, that
is, an Assent which is not an Assent.

He proceeds, Yet it is also frequently used for a firm and undoubted Assent to
a thing upon such Grounds as are fit fully to satisfy a prudent man. Here are
many things worth remark if one had leisure: And first, what means an undoubted
Assent? It Is the Thing, properly speaking, is undoubted, or not-doubted of, and
not the Assent: But that is but a slip of word; I conceive by the word [ yet]
which introduces it, he means an undoubtful Assent (only he feared the
Inelegancy of the word) in opposition to the doubtful Assent here spoken of;
and, because* (speaking properly) the opposite to Doubt is Hope, an Vndoubtful
Assent means a Hopeful Assent; which, since Doubting speaks a Disinclining to
assent or judge the thing so, and Hoping an inclining to it, very fairly gives
us a second dish of an Assent which is no Assent; for Inclining only to be, is
not being such, and so Inclining to Assent, how strong soever it be, is in
reality no Assent. Well; Dr. T's resolution against Identical Propositions was
certainly the most fatal bolt that ever was shot, making him discourse like the
man that said he had three Lights in him, a great Light, a little Light, and no
Light at all. Next, I would know what grounds are fully fit to satisfy a
prudent man; One man likes some Grounds, others like others: A slight proof
from Scripture likes some man better than the Practice of the Church, the
Consent of Mankind, or the clearest Demonstration; another (I mean the Atheist)
likes a plausible Reason that suits with and takes fancy better than all of
them together: A third likes Nonsense prettily expressed better than the clearest
Truths unelegantly delivered. A fourth values nothing that is produced to
ground Assent but what, when examined, subsists by engaging First Principles,
and bears the Test of right Logic; My Friend on the other side bids defiance
to First Principles and Logic too, and is all for Likelihoods, more Credible
Proofs, Fair Probabilities, Doubtful or rather Hopeful Assents. Yet there want
note now in the world, esteemed sober Persons who judge all these to be Prudent
Men. Where then is this Prudent Man that we may take measure of his pitch, and
fit him with Grounds; for any thing yet appears it is as easy to fit the Moon
with a Coat. There are many prudent men among the Protestants who judge the
Scripture's Letter interpreted by private Wit is a competent Ground for Faith:
There are other prudent men among Catholics, who judge the Contrary. Nay more
there are questionless amongst Turks, and even Heathens diverse men of grert
Natural Prudence (and we can only mean such a Prudence antecedently to the
Illumination of Faith) and they too have Grounds fit fully to satisfy them,
for they do actually satisfy them, so that they see not the least Reason to
doubt of what they profess; and, so according to Dr. T's discourse these too
have moral Certainty of what they hold. Wherefore, unless we could state what is
meant by a prudent man, we can never come to understand what is meant by Dr.
T's moral Certainty, nor consequently when Faith is Certain, when not; nay,
which is worse, if moral Certainty be that which he appoints as sufficient for
Faith; and for any thing appears by his words, Turks, Heathens, and all
Heretics have the same (since they have such Grounds as do fully satisfy
prudent men) it will follow that they may have as good Grounds as Christians
have; at least, that no man can tell who have right Grounds of Faith, who not,
since this notion of [ what is fit fully to satisfy a Prudent man] has no
determinate limits to state the nature of this mock-Certainty. Besides, it is
common in the course of the world, and I have diverse times observed it my self*
that two persons may contest about some passage, even in humane affairs, as
when any thing is by a strange surprise, or forgetfulness, lost or to seek;
each of them may seriously protest they are morally Certain of it, each may
allege Reasons, they may be both prudent men too, and both be fully satisfied
with their Reasons, and yet the plain discovery of the thing may show
afterward that one of them proved to be in the wrong: Now, if this happen in a
Controversy (for example) between a prudent Socinian and a prudent Protestant,
how must it be decided? Both allege Scripture, each sees no Reason to doubt of
his own Interpretation, and both are fully satisfied, that is, both have Dr.
T's moral Certainty, and so both must be in the right, if his Grounds be in the
right; that is, both sides of the Contradiction must be True, if Dr. T's Faith
be True, built only on moral Certainty; which would utterly destroy his enemies
Identical Propositions. I would gladly know, at least, why these two equally
matched Moral Certainties shall not make a drawn battle of it, or how it shall
be determined on whose side the Certain Truth stands. I doubt it will be the
hardest task that ever was, for him to make it even morally Certain there is a
Trinity, for this cannot be done but by manifesting the Letter of Scripture,
bears no shadow of Reason on the Socinians side; otherwise that seeming Reason
may be a just cause for a Protestant to suspend, perhaps doubt of it, and so
not be morally-Certain.

15. The meaning then of these word [ Moral Certainty] being so Indeterminate*
that Dr. T. himself cannot tell what to make of it, no wonder our Divines
cannot agree about it. If he says he understands it very well, I desire to put
it to the Trial, by producing any one Proposition held by him to be but
morally-Certain, and show us Logically (Art being the Test of Nature) how or by
virtue of what it is Terms hang together, or to make out according to his own
notion of Moral Certainty, that not one Prudent man in the world does, or can
be dissatisfied with it. What I conceive is meant generally by Moral Certainty
is a high Probability or some great Likelihood, which being an insufficient
Ground for Faith (for we are to profess and die for the Truth of our Faith, and
not for its Likelihood only) ^ judge the name of it ought not to be heard when
we speak of the Certainty due to Faith and it^ Grounds, unless it be signified
at the same time that it is used Catachrestically or abusively to mean Absolute
Certainty.

. 16. I expect D. T. will, instead of making out the nature of this Chime^ical
Certainty, run to Instances; for example, that of our being morally certain of
the Sun's rising to morrow, and such like* But, first I contend he is not
Certain of this his own Instance: If he be, let him give his Grounds of
Certainty for it, and go about to prove or conclude the night before that it
will. I doubt much he will, when he comes to try it, find himself gravel'd, and
confess with me that it is only highly Likely. It Is well he did not live in
Joshuah's or Ezekiah's time, and tell them the day before that Moses his Law
was only as Certain as that the Sun would not stand still or go backwards the
next day; for, if so, I doubt much those who had heard and believed him, would
have taken a just scandal at their Faith, seeing Points held equally Certain as
it, prove actually False. Again, what more Certainty has he now of the Suns
rising again within 18 hours after his setting, than they in those days were
the day before that it would not go back, or stand still; and yet we see they
were not Certain of it, for we know they had been mistaken in it, and that
Judgment an Error. By which we see that D. T's moral Certainty means such a
Certainty which (as appeared by this Event) was Uncertain, or such a Certainty as
was Certain peradventure, Now this nonsense has no harm in it but that it is
opposite to an Identical Proposition [ What Is Certain is Certain] which weighs
not with Dr. T. who has renounced all First Principles. In a word* our B.
Savior has beforehand prevented all such Instances* by ^elling us that Heaven
and Earth shall fail, but his Words shall not fail: Intimating that the whole
Fabric of the World (much more some one great part of it) is tottering and
unstable in comparison of the unchangeable nature of Truth, and such all good
Christians are to profess their Faith, and be ready to die to attest it.

17. Having thus done more than Miracle, and established MORAL CERTAINTY which
were not its self were it not unestablisht, ^e procceeds ( p. 18.) to overthrow
Infallibility: alleging that the Understanding cannot be absolutely secured
from all possibility of mistake, but either by the perfection of its own nature
(which he thinks all Mankind but Mr. S. have hitherto granted that it could
not) or, by supernatural Assistance. I desire he would not stretch my Tenet
beyond the bounds my self give it: I never said that Human Understanding^ could
not possibly be mistaken in any thing at all, but only in Knowledges built on
Sensations, in Knowing the Truth of First Principles, in Knowing (while left to
Nature, till Speculation, for which they are too weak, put them into a puzzle)
by Practical Self-evidence confusedly and in common something belonging to some
natures daily converst with; and lastly, some Learned men in diverse deductions
of Evident Reason, for example, in diverse Propositions in Euclid. But, that
which our Subject restrains it to (being about the Infallible Conveyance down
of Faith) is the First of those, viz. Infallibility of our Sensations; for,
once putting this, Tradition is an Infallible Rule. Speaking then of this
(which is all my present purpose requires) I am so far from being the only man
who holds it, that Dr. T. (excepting Scepticks, if perhaps he be not one of
that Sect) is I think the only man that ever denied it* Are not both of us
infallibly certain that we Eat, Drink, Write, and Live; or did any but a madman
ever think seriously that sober Mankind (abstracting from Disease in some
particulars) might possibly be deceived in such Knowledges as these? Are not
our Senses contrived naturally, as apt to convey Impressions from the Objects
to the Knowing Power (I speak not of the different degrees of perfection
necessarily annexed to each, but as to the main so as to be sufficient for use
and needful Speculation) as any other Causes in Nature are to do their proper
Effects? Have they not also as little Contingency in them, and that Contingency
as easily discoverable by the Standard of circumstant Mankind with whom they
converse, as in I^terical Persons and such like? This being so, I affirm that
the Basis on which our Rule of Faith is built (viz. Natural Knowledges) is more
secure than any part of Nature; since naturally it is Impossible Mankind can err
in these; and, whereas we are not Certain but it may, in some Conjuncture,
become God's Infinite Wisdom and Goodness to exert his Divine Omnipotence, and
alter the course of Nature even in considerable portions of it, as in the
Instances given of the Sun's standing still and going back, the Universal
Deluge, and such like; yet in our case it is Impossible; beeaus^ the altering
Nature's course in such as these were directly to create False Judgments or
Error in Mankind; of which it is Impossible Essential Wisdom, Goodness, and
Truth, should be the Immediate and peculiar Cause. Naturally therefore it
cannot happen, nor yet Supernaturally; For though taking the proportion between
Gods Omnipotence, singly considered, and the Object, it is possible or within
the compass of Gods power to make all Mankind err; yet taking in his other
Attributes which determine his Omnipoence to do only what is Wise and Good, and
according to Truth, it cannot be God should either will or do it, and so it
cannot be effectively done at all.

. 18. He objects that the Church of Rome challenges Infallibility upon no other
account but that of Supernatural Assistance: I answer, the Church had her Rule
of Faith left to her hand by Jesus Christ who founded and constituted her, and
found it not out by Speculative Reason: Whence it is not the proper Concern of a
Church to discourse very particularly about the manner and nature of the Rule
of Faith, but of Speculative Divines who look into the natures of things, and
there find the Reasons of those Truths God has barely told us. Next, it is only
of Faith that Christ has promised to assist his Church, but whether
Supernaturally only, or also by Natural means is no where defined; my Tenet is
that he assists his Church both ways, as I at large defend in Surefooting, and
that the best strength of Nature and Grace are both of them exerted to their
utmost, to ascertain the Infallible Authority on whose Testimony we receive our
Faith: But, with this difference, that the Supernatural Assistance exceedingly
comforts Faith in those who are True Believers already; and the Natural
Assistance (as far as concerns the due Satisfaction of Reason) informs the
Understanding of those who yet discern no Supernat^rality at all in the Church,
and have nothing but their Natural Reason to guide themselves by: without which
I see not how either a Circle is avoidable, or rational Satisfaction to such
men possible: for were not a Natural Assistance admitted to introduce the
knowledge of the other, Supernaturals would be the way to Supernaturals, and
Faith the means to arrive at Faith, which would confound the Means with the
End. I wish Dr. T. would leave off this new way of confuting, by telling me
still I am the only man, or first man, that said (he should have said, proov'd)
such or such a thing; which cavil, if he answer not my Argument (as he seldom
thinks of that duty) signifies either nothing at all, or else a high
Commendation to me as improving Knowledge to some degree. But more of this
point when I come to defend my Method.

19. Hitherto then Dr. T. has given us no Absolute Certainty (either of the
Existence of a Deity, o^) of Christian Faith, as far as it depends on the
Letter of Scripture, but only such miscalled Certainty as means Uncertainty,
whence his pretended Certainty of its Sense falls to the Ground: But let us see
how he vindicates the Certainty of Faith (and himself not to hold it possible
to be false) by ascertaining at least the Sense of it, supposing the Letter
were right. He tells us page 20. That as for the Sense of Books it is plainly
impossible any thing should be delivered in such clear and Certain words as are
absolutely incapable of any other Sense: And what is the natural Sequel of this
applied to Scripture, but that it is plainly Impossible Faith, built on tha^
Sense, or rather which is that Sense, should not be possible to be False, and
consequently the Letter can never be a competent Rule of Faith: whereas in this
way of conveying i^ down by Living Voice and Practice of the Church, that is,
^y Cate^hizing* public Preaching* private Discoursing; and consonant Living,
it is made so manifest to the Generality what was held in each year
immemediately before; that no prejudice can make them all so mad as either to
mistake or misrepresent it; as it is, for Example in England, for the Generality
of Protestants to err, or impose this this year upon the Belief of England,
that last year they held and practiced Prayer for the Dead or assisting at the
Christian Sacrifice. By which 'twill be easily seen; whether of us two makes
better provision for the Certainty of Faith. He proceeds. Yet notwithstanding
this, the meaning of them may be so plain, as that any unprejudiced and
reasonable man may certainly understand them. Let him apply this to Scripture,
and the discourse stands thus, All men are unreasonable and prejudic't who take
not Scripture in my sense: If this be not the meaning of his words, let him
tell us by what other Maxims he guides himself in judging who are such* when he
tells us any unprejudic't and rersonable man may certainly understand the Sense
of Scripture. If he can assign no other reason of those men's Faultiness, but
their disagreeing with him in the meaning of Scripture, I doubt his Readers
will scarce believe him that all Socinians and other Sects, who differ from him
in main Points, are Passionate and Prejudic't. If an indifferent man stood by
while D. T. and a Socinian disputed, and heard one of them cite place after
place* compare one place to another, and use all the means he could to make out
the right sense of the words; and the other use the self-same Method, and yet
nothing concluded decisively (as it never was in this way of managing disputes)
I fear he would be little the nearer satisfaction and embracing Dr. T's. Tenet,
upon his saying that his Adversary was passionate and prejudic't. He parallels
the Certainty of Scripture Sense to that of Euclids Definitions and Axioms, in
the sense of which men are universally agreed* and think themselves undoubtedly
Certain of it, and yet the words in which they are expressed may possibly bear
another sense. He trifles; Let him show me the Generality of Scripturists as
unanimously agreeing in the sense of Scripture, as Geometricians do in those
Axioms and Definitions, or let him leave of bringing such disagreeing
Parallels, importing that there are not men of all Sides and Sects as willing
to see Truth in things belonging to their eternal Salvation, as to see the
Truth in Mathematics. How many Interpretations are there of [ This is my Body]
and of those many Texts which signify Christ to be true God: Both of main
Concern, the understanding them wrong, being on one side Idolatry, on the other
Blasphemy. Yet we have Eminent Learned men, Acute Wits, Excellent Linguists,
Good Logicians and Historians, and lastly, very great Scripturists who compare
also place to place; yet, all this notwithstanding, nothing is decided finally;
still they Debate, Write, Quote, Interpret, and will do, while this Method is
taken, to the Worlds End. Does Dr. T. find such a disagreement amongst men
Learned in the Mathematics, in the understanding the Axioms and Definitions of
Euclid? Add, that those men in other matters are not Passionate or Prejudic't,
but are held Pruden^ and Sober by great portions of Mankind, nor do they lose
their Repute amongst Indifferent Judges as renouncing their Manhood or
perfectly deserting Reason; that is, they are not held Madmen for not adhering
to such a determinate Sense of those places: which argues evidently, that they
renounce not Evidence; and that the Scriptures Letter, thus managed, is not apt
to ascertain them at all, and so no Rule. Yet he gives us one great Reason (as
he calls it) why men do not agree in the Sense of Scripture as well as in the
others, because their Interests, and Lusts, and Passions are more concerned. So
that according to Dr. T. a man who is to be guided by his Pastors and Teachers
cannot be Certain of the Sense of Scripture, nor consequently of Faith, unless
he can look into the hearts of men (which is proper to God alone) and discern
who are Passionate, prejudiced, Interessed, and Lustful. Again, this Reason is
found on either side to a great degree, for were not those Axioms and
Definitions so Evident that absurd men would incur the shame of Mankind to deny
them, there wants no temptation of Interest and passion to make Authors go
about to control and contradict the Writings of others to gain themselves
applause and credit. But, if this be one great Reason of disagreement in the
Sense of Scripture, I would gladly know, what are the other great Reasons. But
of these we hear nothing: and there is good Reason why; for since his one great
Reason is the ill-disposedness of the persons, the other great Reason must be
the defectiveness of the Thing, that is, the Inability of Scripture's Letter,
by reason of its Inevidence to private Understandings, to make them agree in
one Sense of it; which manifestly makes it unfit to be a Rule of Faith.

20. To Conclude, the Sum of Dr. T's. Vindication of himself from making
according to his Grounds, Faith possible to be False, amounts to this; He
produces words to disprove it, which manifoldly confess it; he endeavors all
along to show that Infallible Certainty cannot be had, of either Scripture's
Letter or Sense; that is, he grants, that the whole world may be deceived
(though all the Causes be put to secure them) in the Ground of Faith; or denies
that, absolutely speaking, Faith is Certainly-True. Again, loath to speak out
to that point heartily, he shuffles about, and puts upon his Adversary diverse
odd and ridiculous acceptions of the word [ Faith] omitting the right one,
which was given to his hand, Lastly, being to give account what kind of
Certainty he allowed to Faith, he gives such a Notion of it as signifies
nothing, and has all the Marks of Uncertainty imaginable; taking his measure of
Certainty, which ought to proceed from the Object, or Proof, from the Subject's
persuasion or adhesion to it; which common Experience testifies, may
indifferently be found in Truths and Falsehoods, and Common sense confutes;
Nature telling every man that my Assent is not therefore Certain, because I do
not doubt it, see not the least cause of doubt, am fully persuaded, and verily
think so; but because the Thing is seen indeed to be so, or because the Proof
is Conclusive. Either then let him bring such Proofs, and own and show them to
be such, or he leaves his Cause in the lurch, and his Credit (which he is here
defending) unclear'd; by yielding Faith possible to be absolutely False; that
is, for any thing any man living knows, actually such.

DISCOURSE VII.
In what manner Dr. T. replies to FAITH VINDICATED.

1. DR. T. has no Fellow, nor his way of Confute any parallel. Not to provoke
the peevishness of malice too far, and yet follow home my blow more fully, and
yet withal to uphold the Efficacy of Faith grounded on the just Conceit of its
Absolute Certainty; I writ a a Book, called Faith Vindicated, in behalf of
Christian Faith in Common, showing the absolute Certainty or Security from
Error of that kind of Assent, provided it be grounded on those Motives God had
left to settle his Church, and, by it, Mankind in Faith, as I declared my self
in my Introduction: It pretended Demonstration from the beginning to the end,
and had not one drollish or unsober expression in it: Take a Map of it in a few
words. I conceived my self debtor both Sapientibus and Insipientibus, and hence
the Concern being common to all Christians, amongst the rest to Speculative
Divines, I resolved to prove it by Arguments suitable to every Capacity. To the
more Intelligent, to the end of the Third Eviction: to the Middle or Prudential
sort, to the end of the Fifth^ and to them of the lowest Capacity in the last:
every one being enabled by Tradition or Education to comprehend what the common
Language and Practice of Christianity teaches them, as to Speechees and
Carriages appertaining to Faith. I begun (after I had put two Postulatum
granted by all Christians) with Logical Arguments; which I pursued at large,
because as it is a common Trick in Sophisters and half Logicians, to abuse that
Excellent Art to elude the clearest Evidendences, so it became a more necessary
Duty in me to prevent by the closest Proofs, fetched from almost all Heads
imaginable that belonged to that skill, any misusages of its Maxims to
patronize Falsehood. This could be no other than very Speculative, and
accordingly I declared in my Introduction, what my Reader was to expect, in
Discourses of that kind; nor will any man indu'd with common Sense wonder that
I should use Logical Expressions when I make Logical Discourses, or Terms of
Art when I speak to Scholars. These things reflected on, let us see now what a
dextrous way our Learned Confuter takes to answer that whole Book, (for he
manifests here an intention to give it no other) and to overthrow so many
Demonstrations.

2. His first way of Confute is, to pick out a leaf or two of the most
Speculative part of that Treatise, only intended for Scholars, and apply it to
the Understandings of those who are only Sermon-pitch: to whom, because such
Discourses are unsuitable, and withal too hard for him to answer, hence he very
politickly both gratifies the Fancies of those Readers, and avoids himself the
difficult task of answering the pressing Reason in it, by playing the Wit, when
'twas dangerous to act the Scholar, and making use of his constant Friend at a
dead lift, Drollery, in stead of relying on the Patronage of Reason, which (as
he experiences) so often betrays and exposes hss weakness. He runs on therefore
a whole leaf or two in this jovial Career ere he can recover himself, till even
his own Friends who are not aware of the necessity, admire at his endless
Raillery; and, true to his Method, neglects wholly the Sense, and excepts
mightily against five or six hard words; namely, potentiality, actuality,
actuation, determinative, supervene, and subsume; which, it seems puzzle him
exceedingly; for he professes to think them Mystical. He calls the Discourse
jargon, Foolish and Nonsense (which two last words he is ever most free of,
when his Reason is most at a loss.) He likens it to the Coptick and Slavonian
Language, talks of Astrology, Palmistry, Chemistry, and what not? and with such
kind of stuff confutes, it most unmercifully even to utter desolation.

. 3. In return to which kind of carriage, (though it deserves only contempt)
let us hear first how Dr. T. answers himself; who ( Sermon page 120.121.) very
zealously reprehends and preaches against this absurd Fault in himself, in
these words. Let none (says he) think the worse of Religion [or those Reasons
which oblige us to profess it is absolutely-True] because some are so bold, to
despise and deride. -- For, it is no disparagement to any person or thing to be
laughed at, but to deserve to be so. The most grave and serious matters in the
whole world are liable to be abused -- Nothing is so excellent, but a man may
fasten upon it something or other, belonging to it, whereby to traduce it. A
sharp wit may find something in the wisest man, whereby to expose him to the
contempt of Injudicious people. The gravest Book that ever was written, may be
made ridiculous by applying the sayings of it to a foolish purpose; For a j^st
may be obtruded upon any thing. And therefore no man ought to have the less
Reverence for the Principles of Religion [or those Reasons which oblige us to
hold and profess Faith absolutely-True] because idle and profane WITS
[nonplust Controvertists] can BREAK JESTS upon them. Nothing is so easy [Dr.
T. knows that by long and very useful Experience] as to take PARTICVLAR PHRASES
and EXPRESSIONS out of the best Book in the world; and to abuse them by forcing
an odd and ridiculous Sense upon them. But no wise man will think a good Book
FOOLISH for this Reason; but the MAN that abuses it. Nor will he esteem that to
which every thing is liable to be a JUST Exception against any thing. At this
rate ase must despise ALL things. But, surely, the better and shorter way is to
condemn THOSE who would bring any thing that is worthy into Contempt. Also in
his foregoing Sermon, page 86, 87. he gives good Doctrine to the same purpose;
but never intended to follow it himself. These things [whether Faith be
absolutely true or no] are of Infinite consequence to us, and therefore -- it is
not a matter to be slightly and superficially thought upon, much less (AS THE
WAY OF ATHEISTICAL MEN IS) to be PLAYED and IESTED withal. If any one shall turn
Religion (or a Discourse aiming to show it absolutely Certain) into Raillery,
and think to CONFVTE it by two or three BOLD JESTS, this man does not render
IT, but HIMSELF Ridiculous. Again, Though the Principles of Religion (or the
Proofs of Faith's absolute Certainty) were never so clear and evident, yet they
may be made RIDICVLOVS by VAIN and FROTHY MEN; as the gravest and wisest
personage in the world may be abused by being put into a Fools Coat, and the
most Noble and excellent Poem may be debased and made vile by being turned into
BVRLES QVE. Thus Dr, T. by Preaching what he never intended to Practice has
most amply laid open his own Folly, and hits himself still, while he aims at
the Atheist: and no wonder, for their Causes (as far as I impugn him here) are
not very wide of one another; since nothing approaches nearer to the denying
all Religion than to hold it all Uncertain. At least I would gladly know of him
in what his way of Discourse here against my Reasons for the Absolute Certainty
of Faith differs from that of Atheists against a Deity, and all Religion. The
Points to be considered by both of them are of a solid and concerning Nature,
and both handle them drollishly, and make Raillery supply the place of Reason.
Nor will it avail him to reply that my Proofs were not solid, and so oughr to
be confuted with mockery; For he ought first show by reason that they thus
highly misdeserve, and then employ his Talent of Irony upon them afterward;
and not make mere Irony supply the place of Reason. Besides, himself
acknowledges page 87. that, If the Principles of Religion were doubtful and
Uncertain, yet this concerns us so nearly that we ought to be serious in the
Examination of them. And, certainly, no judicious or good man will doubt, but
that it highly and nearly concerns all good Christians to know, whether their
Faith, the Substance of all their Hope, particularly the Existence of a Trinity
and Incarnation, the Points I mentioned, be absolutely Certain or not. I leave
it to the choice of Dr. T's Friends whether they will rather approve his
Doctrine in his Sermons, or his unconsonant Practice in this Preface. If the
former, they must condemn him out of his own mouth to be Foolish, Ridiculous,
and an Imitator of Atheists, and his way of writing Insignificant: But, if they
like the Later, then they must conclude his Sermons as equally blameworthy for
opposing so laudable a Practice. Unfortunate man, who very gravely takes Texts
against Scoffers, and makes Sermons upon them; and then behaves himself all
over so Scurrilously and Drollishly in his whole Preface to them, as levels
those very Sermons as directly against himself, as could possibly be contrived
or imagined: Which is in effect by his carriage, to tell the Atheist, that that
Scoffing and Drollish way of answering and managing Discourses about Religion,
which is so horrid sin in them because they are of the Ungodly and Wicked, is
notwithstanding none at all but a very great Virtue in the Saints and the
Godly; and in a particular manner Meritorious so it be practiced against those
Men of sin, the most abominable Papists.

. 4. Besides, as Dr. T. well observed when he was in a more sober humor, Every
thing, even the best, is liable to be abused and made ridiculous by drollish
Jests, and consequently this Method be so exactly observss when he is to
confute me, will (as he very well expresses it in his Pref. page 26) equally
serve to prove or confute any thing. To show the all-powerful strength and
virtue of it, let us imagine that Euclid, had been a Catholic, Dr. T. might
have preached ^ Sermon or two full of zeal against Witchcraft, and have produced
some Fair Probabilities to persuade the people that Mathematicians were all
mere Friar Bacons, and absolute Conjurers, because they use to draw Circles and
uncouth Figures which look like Magic (to second which Dr. St's. Book
concerning Images, would ( mutatis mutandi^) light very pat and home) and then
when he had done, writ a Preface to those Sermons against the Prince of
Conjurers, or the Beelzebub of those Incarnate Devils, Euclid; and confute him
on this manner. First he might pick out some Demonstrations of his in which
were five or six words harder than ordinary (at least too hard for the Vulgar,
though clear enough to the Learned men in that Art) as Isosceles,
Parallelograms, Parallelepipe, Cylinder, Diameter, Eicosaedron, and such like;
and when he had transcribed them into a Ridiculous Preface which he was sure no
good Mathematicians would ever care to read, but vulgar Souls would much
admire, and out of their hatred to these Popish Conjurers, cry up: He might
proceed to confute him on this manner. I have here (Reader) presented thee with
a discourse, which, if we may believe Euclid is mathematically demonstrable. A
rare sight indeed! Certainly, the sacred names of Principles and Demonstrations
were never so profaned by any man before. Might not any one write a Book of
such Jargon and call it Demonstration? -- If he intended this stuff for
satisfaction of the people (as it seemed by his writing it in Greek, the vulgar
Tongue, he did) he might as well have writ it in the Coptick or Sclavonian
Language. Yet I cannot deny but this is very suitable to the Principles of the
Roman Church, For why should not their Science as well as their Service be in
an unknown Tongue? -- Certainly his Talent does not lie for Science. -- Learned
men are less apt to admire Nonsense than the common people -- Neither Harphius,
nor Rusbrochius, (Dr. Faustus, Friar Bungy) nor the profound Mother Juliana (or
Mother Shipton) ever spoke any thing (charm) more senseless and obscure. -- He
has a style peculiarly fitted for Mysticks (Magic) For even in this parcel of
stuff there are five or six words (such as Isosceles, Patallelograms,
Parall^lepiped, Diameter, Cylinder, Eicasoedron) which if they were but well
mingled and discreetly ordered would half set up a man in that way; and ^nable
him to write as Mystical (Magical) a Discou^se as any man (or the Devil
himself) would wish. Thus, Reader, thou see how true* it is that Dr. T's.
method of Talking is none; since I dare undertake take that let him and his
Fellow-Conspirators, in malice against Catholics but resolve to Preach and
Write as earnestly that Mathematicians are Conjurers, as they do that
Catholics are Idolaters, (which, of the two, is the far easier to prove,) and
the Method he observes in this Preface of his, would equally serve to confute
Euclid as it does me. And the like force it would have against any Logical,
Metaphysical, Natural, Medicinal, Rhetorical, Poetical, or even Grammatical
Discourse: Each have their Terms of Art proper to themselves, which look odd
and uncouth to the Vulgar; and so are equally liable to be abused and rendered
ridiculous, to men whose practice is to read Sermons.

. 5. But can Dr. T. seriously think these words to be indeed so hard as he
pretends? The word [ Potential] was familiar to us both when we were in our
Accidence and talked of the Potential Mood; Also [ Actual] and determine are very
obvious; I suppose then it is their ending in those common Terminations [ ty] [
tion] and [ tiue] which makes potentiality, actuality, actuation, and
determinative so insuperably hard. As for Supervene and Subsume, it may justly
be wondered whether the difficulty lies in knowing what is the signification of
the Verbs Venio and Sumo* or the Prepositions Super and Sub. But he means they
are not trim and Elegant enough: Alas, good Gentleman! I doubt there are some
who complain of the Tenderness of their Ears, when the true Reason is the
Softness of their Heads. But enough of this.

. 6. Let us now proceed to examine the true force of one of these
Demonstrations which he most opposes with Drollery* we shall see that it was
both his concern to answer it, and withal Impossible he should, which joined,
no wonder he endeavored to evade thus, it being the best shift he had. All
Logicians know that the Respondent by bringing a pertinent distinction, evades
granting the whole Proposition and is lic^nc't to admit it but in part; that
is, indeed, to deny the former Proposition as it stood under an undistinguisht
manner of expression. Also, that amongst Human Notions some are more potential,
that is more General than others, and that those General Notions are divided or
distinguished into more particular ones by certain In^eriour notions Adjectively
expressed, called Differences. It Is Evident likewise that, since it is Impossible
there should be a House or a Man in Common, only Individuals can exist, that
is, only these have a Capacity or Power to Existence, and consequently that
Existence is related to them as their proper Act. All determining notions
therefore that can belong to any nature, or to that which has such a Nature in
it or the Thing, are presupposed to Existence, and so it can admit no further
Determination, or any Differences, and consequently, the Predecate [ Existent]
can never be pertinently distinguished; wherefore, it being Impossible to
distinguish the Copula, in case the Subject can be distinguished as little as
the other (which I there proved) it must follow that those Propositions which
have in them such a Predicate must be admitted in their whole Latitude* and
simply as the words lie. Seeing then Christians are bound to profess their
Faith True as to those Points of a Trinity (for example) or Incarnation, or
that a Trinity or Incarnation Exist, and the Predicate Existent, can bear no
Distinction dividing its simplest notion, such as are morally, hopefully, in
great Likelihood, or such dwindling kind of Skeptical or half-Atheistical
expressions, it follows that it must be affirmed and held that a Trinity, or
Incarnation absolutely is, and, consequently, that it is Impossible not to be;
whence follows that, it being Blasphemy to say that God has made a rational
Nature, or a Nature to assent upon motives, and then commanded it to be
not-rational, that is to assent beyond the Motive, whieh is (as to that degree
of Assent which is beyond) without a Motive, we must conclude that, however
Created understandings fall short in penetrating them, or Miscarry in
discoursing them, the Grounds of our holding thus, as laid by God, must be
absolutely Conclusive, or impossible not to conclude the thing is; and not only
morally Conclusive, morally Certain, great Likelihoods, Fair Probabilitys,
freeing only from Actual doubt, and such like. Wherefore if Dr. T. would
approve himself worthy to Write or Discourse concerning the Grounds of Faith,
he ought to profess and produce such, since nothing else reaches the nature of
Faith, or can rationally ground the the Obligation imposed by God himself, of
professing and holding that the Thing absolutely is: But he was conscious to
himself he had none such, or absolutely Conclusive, therefore he was forced to
play the Droll and mock at the close Reasons that would oblige him to it,
instead of answering them.

. 7. This is the Argument which our great Divine, who is still most merry when
he should be most serious, likens to Astrology, Palmistry and Chemistry; and
says that Arguments from these could not have been more ridiculous than to
argue that what is True, is Imprssible to be False from the Nature of Subject,
Predicate, and Copula: For (says he) be the Propositions True or False; these
are of the same Nature in both; that is, they are Subject, Predicate, and
Copula. Which learned Answer is built on two manifest Falsifications of that
whole Discourse. One that I am merely proving or concluding there, that what is
True is Impossible to be False; whereas my ultimate Intent in the former Proof
(as put down by himself here, page 24.) is to conclude it Impossible that THESE
Points of Faith should be False; that is, SVCH points as express only the An
est of a thing, and so have for their Predicate Existent, as I expressed my self
in that Argument. And my Conclusion of the 2 d. Proof is this as put down by
himself here, page 25. It Is impossible therefore that what is thus affirmed to
be True (that is in such words as can bear no pertinent distinction) should in
any regard be affirmed possible to be* False; the impossibility of
distinguishing the Predicate pertinent, ly, excluding here all possibility of
diverse respects. Is this barely to go about to prove that what is True is
Impossible to be False, or rather, that no different regards or respects can in
such Faith-propositions as these be made use of to elude or diminish the
granting their Entire Truth. The Proposition [ An Ethiopian is black] is but in
part True, because it can bear diverse respects or regards to distinguish it
pertinently; viz. according to his Teeth, and his Skin: But in those
Propositions which have [ Existent] for their predicate, no imaginable regards
can be found appliable to it, so to distinguish it pertinently. The next
Falsification of my Intention is to pretend that I argue barely out of the
nature of Subject, Copula, and Predicate, whereas by my whole Discourse, it is
most evident that I argue precisely from their being such Subjects and
Predicates, that is such as could bear no pertinent Distinction diminishing the
Integrity of their Truth. In a word, the Question was about the Truth, or which
is all one Impossibility of Falsehood in Faith-Propositions, and I was there
treating it Logically; I would gladly then have any sober and Intelligent man
inform me, why it was not as proper and pertinent for me to argue out of the
nature of Propositions (in which only Truth is found) and particularly out of
the nature of such Propositions, that is, those who have such Subjects and such
Predicates in them, as it is for a Mathematician writing a Discourse of
Trigonometry to argue out of the nature of such a kind of Angle, or a
Triangular Figure? Or why in so doing I can justly be thought to have deflected
from the Rules or Method of exactest Art.

. 8. In a word, had I in a Christian English Sermon stood very gravely
repeating Sixteen verses out of a Heathenish Latin Poet; or had I, after I had
so often mocked at others for bumbast Rhetoric, and so, indirectly extolled my
self for my smooth style, talked of persons of a PROFLIGATE TEMPER, as did Dr.
T. here, page 33. and page 163. Some idle Wit who had nothing else to do might
perhaps have taken just occasion to sport himself with my imperfection. But, to
mock at a Writer for using the Terms proper to the Art he is discoursing in,
seems to argue a very Profligate temper of Levity at least, that I may say no
worse.

. 9. Thus much for his first Answer to faith Vindicated, consisting wholly of
Drollery, Neglects and other worse Faults, His second is, that the main of that
Book being to prove that what is True is Impossible to be False, I oppose no
body that ^e knows of, in this matter. I answer, whoever pleases to run over
the several Heads from which I argue in Faith Vindicated, hinted briefly in the
Margent, will see that that which he pretends in a manner the only point, is
but once designedly made use of, and very rarely touched at in other places; and
that there are near forty Proofs of another nature, though sometimes (all
Truths being connected) they happen to be partly coincident into the same.
Sometimes also I suppose it, but it bears no show of reason that most of my
Book is spent in proving it. But is it so clear that I oppose no body he knows
of in proving that what is True, is Impossible to be False? Does not he know
one Dr. T.? That same person, I suppose, will tell us soberly that he can prove
his Faith True, relying on what he conceives to be the Letter and Sense of
Scripture, and yet, speaking of the Certainty he had of both these, he told us
expressly ( Rale of Faith, page 118.) All this may possibly be otherwise; that
is, that possibly he has neither right Letter nor right Sense of Scripture, and
consequently that what he affirms to be his Faith and True, is notwithstanding
Possible to be False. The same man being to vindicate himself in this Pref.
page 10. explained his meaning to be, that he could not demonstrate those
things so as to show that the Contrary necessarily involves a Contradiction:
Now, if he cannot prove that the Contrary to any thing involves a
Contradiction, he can never prove that contrary to be False (nothing being
False which clashes not by consequence at least with some First Principle, or
involves a Contradiction) and as long as he cannot prove it False, it is
possible to be True for any thing he knows; and, if the Contrary to Faith be
affirmed possible to be True, Faith it self must be possible to be False; and
yet, though his discourses make it Possible to be False, the obligation
incumbent on him as a Christian, forces him (...) affi^m that it is
notwithstanding True. So that the Goodness of Christianity joined with the
Badness of his Grounds, oblige him to grant equivalently, though he be warier
than to do it directly, that what is True is possible to be False.

. 10. Now, because it is against the very grain of Rational nature to admir of
such a palpable Contradiction, if the word Truth be rightly and properly
understood, hence I am Certain he and such as he are provided with a
d^stinction at the bottom of their hearts, and only hold that their Faith is
morally True, that is, some great Likelihood; or as True as many things are of
which we judge our selves morally Certain, and did not in the least doubt of
them, yet oftentimes, upon clearer Information, have found our selves deceived
in our Opinion of them, and the Thing to be False. And, that this is Dr. T's.
sentiment in this matter, appears farther (besides what has been now said)
from his owning such a moral Certainty only for the Grounds of his Faith as
frees one from doubt, from his feeble and dwindlings Expressions of his
Certainty of a Godhead; and, lastly, from his blaming me, page 29. for r^sting
contented with no less* Certain Grounds than such as are absolutely Conclusive
of the thing. And, how one who relies on his Speculative Proofs (for the
Renouncers of Tradition can have no claim to Practical Self-evidence) can be
thought to hold Faith absolutely True, and yet disclaim himself and blame in
others the pretending to such Motives as absolutely conclude or prove it to be
True, or how a man can with honesty affirm a thing is absolutely True, and yet
deny he is absolutely Certain of it, I must confess both passes my Imagination,
and I am confident every man's living who considers well what he says. It Is
Evident then from Dr. T's. whole Carriage in this business, that (unless
perhaps the natural force of Tradition work a Practical-self evidence in him of
those points in which they who hold to Tradition and He agree, which he is not
aware of) Dr. T. does not hold his Faith absolutely, but morally True, which is
a very strong piece of Nonsense, as was shown in Faith Vindicated, and will be
seen hereafter; and, therefore, it was but ^itting and necessary that I should
clear the word [ Truth] from a ridiculous Equivocation or impertinent
Distinction put upon it by such Skeptical pretenders to Christianity, and
manifest, that the word Truth in those Propositions which express the An est of
a thing, speaks Being, and so necessarily involves Impossibility of not being,
or Impossibility of Falsehood in its notion, or (which is all one materially,
though formally it is different,) that what is True must be Impossible to be
False.

. 11. Hence will appear the reason why I affirmed that discourse more than
Mathematically-demonstrative; because it was immediately built on that First
Principle in Metaphysics, It Is impossible the same thing should be and not be
at once: Which is Superior to and clearer than any Mathematical Principle,
since the verity of all the Maxims of This, depend on the Truth of the Other;
Or (to explain my self more fully) because it is entirely built on the notion or
nature of [ Being] which is more Evident than any Mathematical one: If he
denies it, he is desired to produce any Mathematical notion which is of equal
clearness; which done, a little reflection will teach him that that Mathematical
notion (whatever it is) can bear a Definition, that is, can be represented or
made clearer than it was while expressed by that single word defined; whereas the
notion of [ Being] cannot possibly bear any, but while we go about to explicate
it better, we are forced to put its own notion in its definition, and other
notions besides, less Evident than it self; and so, while we go about to
explicate it better we explain it worse; whence it will appear evidently by our
defeat when we attempt to clear it better, that it is the clearest notion that
is, or clearer than Mathematical ones; and, consequently, the discourses
grounded on the Nature of Being are more than Mathematically demonstrative. But
I pardon this mistake to Dr. T. whom I verily judge to be sincerely Ignorant in
such kind of speculations, and not affectedly only, as he discovers himself to
be in multitudes of others. Hence, by the way, is seen also how strangely the
World is mistaken in Metaphysics; esteeming that highest Science intolerably
obscure, and impenetrably difficult; whereas its Object being those notions
that concern Being, all its Obscurity and Hardness to one whom right Logic
has taught accurately to distinguish, and steadily to keep distinct his
notions, consist only in this that it is too Luminous and Intelligible; in the
same manner as the Sun is hard to be seen at Noonday; whence it happens that
because we are inured by custom to make Definitions or Explications of what we
are discoursing about, and here, the Subject not needing nor bearing it, we can
make none of [ Being] which is the Principal Object in that Science, hence,
being put out of our road, we are at a puzzle, and seem to have lost our way
through too much light. But it is time now to return to his Confutation of Faith
Vindicated.

. 12. His next Answer is, that in asserting Infallibility to be necessary to
the true nature of Faith, I have the Generality of my own Church my professed
Adversaries.. That is, Dr. T. will say any thing. Let him show me, I will not
say the Generality or any great number, but even any one particular Catholic
professing either that he relies not on the Church for his Faith, or that the
Church he relies on is not Infallible, and I here declare that he is no
Catholic, and doubt not but ^ll good Sons of the Church will join with me in
looking upon him as such. I hope those Readers who are Scholars will by the way
reflect how solid a Method Dr. T. still takes to confute my Discourse; which
is, to let all my Proofs or Premises alone untoucht, and fall to combat my
Conclusion with Extrinsecal Mediums. Next, he tells ^s the Church of Rome
pretends only to Infallibility founded on Christ's Promise to secure the Church
from Error by a Supernatural Assistance, which is evidently different from Mr.
S 's. Rational Infallibility of Tradition. In which discourse are almost as
many faults as words: For, 1. It supposes the Church excludes the concurrence
of natural means to her Infallibility, which he shall never show. Next, it
supposes I exclude Supernatural Assistance and admit only Natural; whereas I
expressly include and openly vouch it in Sure footing, from page 85. to page 93.
And 3 ly. He supposes that Supernatural and Rational are Inconsistent; whereas
in the place now cited, and never spoke to in his much applauded [ Rule of
Faith] I all a long prove the Supernatural means to be very Rational; and have
so good an Opinion of God's Government of the World as to make account that
Supernatural things, have far more excellent Reason for them than Natural ones;
and that God does not enviously hide from us the sight of those Reasons, but
permits and wills they should be seen and penetrated by those who are disposed
and capable by the antecedent Illumination of Faith assisted by other Natural
Knowledges to look into them.

. 13. After this he tells us, That the Divines of our Church (before this new
way was found out) did generally resolve Faith into the Infallible Testimony of
the Church* and this into our Saviors promise, and the Evidence of the ^rue
Church into motives only Prudential. So* that what he lately put upon our
Church, is now come to signify Divines of o^a Church; which gives us to
understand* Dr. T. makes account that Faith and School Divinity, Church and
Schools, Humane deduction and Divine Revelation, signify one and the same
thing. Next, he ^cquaints us, that this new way of ours was the old way, in
case the Divines did generally (before this new way was found out) resolve
Faith into the Infallible Testimony of the Church: For nothing is more Evident
than that all the late Explicaters of Tradition, make it the same with the
Attestation or Testimony of the Church. In that which follows I partly agree
with that other sort of Divines, partly I dissent from them. I agree with them
that our Savior promised Infallibility to his Church; as also that the
knowledge of this Promise, had by Faith, is an excellent satisfaction to those
who are already Faithful; but I say withal that, being a Point of Faith, it can
be no part of the Rule of Faith; for, so, the same thing would in the same
respect be before and after it self; as also, that for the same* Reason it can
have no force upon one not yet arrived at Faith (as the Rule of Faith ought to
have) because it is as yet unknown to him.

14. Again, I agree with them that there are and ought to be many several
Prudential Reasons, suited to men of several Capacities and Circumstances,
moving them to disquisition, and inclining them to embrace the right Faith and
join themselves to the true Church; but I say withal, that it is one thing to
move a man to enquire, and incline him to Assent; another thing to settle him
in a most firm Assent to such and such Points as absolutely Certain Truths,
which is requisite to Faith. Hereupon I affirm, that this later Effect cannot be
wrought rationally without Grounds truly Evident and absolutely Conclusive of
the thing, and Knowable either by Practical Self-evidence to men of all sorts,
or also to the Learned by a certainly concluding Proof, which I call a
Demonstration. I affirm moreover (with due respect to those Divines) that
Motives only Prudential seem improper to be named in this Case; and that they
must be Principia Sapientiae, and not Prudentiae, which can rationally make us
absolutely Certain of the being or not-being of any thing, that is, of its
Truth or Falsehood; the Object of Prudence being Agibilia, and not
Intelligibilia, as such; and its proper Exercise and Use being to determine a
man to act exteriorly, or to act thus in Circumstances, where Contingency and
hazard is found; and not to act interiorly, or meddle in the affair of
Intellectual Certainty or Truth, depending solely on the Principles of our
Understanding, which are Impossible to be False, and therefore placed beyond
all Contingency and Hazard. In a word, I shall not fear to be thought singular
in my Principles while I ground my self on the nature of Faith, which both all
Catholics and the Generality of those who are called Christians hold; and St.
Thomas of Aquin, the Prince of School-Divines asserts, as I showed Faith
Vindicated, page 130.

14. As for all Objections of this nature, once more I request Dr. T. to make
good this Consequence, that my Discourse cannot be true, unless all our Divines
(even of the same way in common) agree with me, and I promise him this done, to
reply distinctly to all his Extrinsecal and Impertinent Exceptions, which
(waving in the mean time my Premises) he so constantly lelevels against my
Conclusions. And, whereas he says, I cannot reasonably charge him with those
things till I have vindicated our own Divines; I desire him to consider, that I
could not, were I their Adversary, charge them, with what I can justly charge
him. They all to a man hold the Catholic Church, on which they rely,
Infallible, and hold this more firmly than they do any of their Speculations;
and, consequently, they hold their Faith Impossible to be False, and so
preserve the true Nature of Faith Inviolate: whereas, what he is to hold to
most firmly, according to his Principles, is his own private Interpretation of
Scripture, which he himself and all the world besides see and hold to be
Fallible; and so he must say, that all his Faith built upon it is possible to
be a Ly for any thing he knows; by which means he destroys the nature of
Faith; (as far as Gods Goodness will give him leave) in himself and others, and
corrupts it into Opinion. They produce Motives, which, though they call them
Prudential, are indeed some of them Demonstrative, and coincident in part with
Tradition; whereas Dr. T. has nothing at all in his Grounds (taking him as
opposing Catholics, or standing to his own Rule of Faith) which rightly
stated, has even the least show of Prudential to an unbyast man, much less of
Demonstrative: Lastly, were it a proper place to handle the point at large, it
were easy to show they differ only in a word, but Dr. T. errs in the whole
Thing; though indeed in most of our Divines here cited, he mistakes them, and
not they the main point, whatever he pretends; for, however they make
Prudential Motives sufficient to find the Church, yet not one of them but makes
the Authority of the Church when found (on which they ground their Faith) of
far greater weight than such an Evidence as does ordinarily satisfy prudent
men in humane affairs, since they all hold it Infallible, which is vastly more
than Dr. T. holds to ground his Faith.

15. His third Answer is, that this Principle of mine makes every true Believer
Infallible in matters of Faith, which (says he) is such a Paradox as I doubt
whether ever it entered into any other men's mind. Now this Charge of his,
joined with my true Tenet, that true Believers are those who rely on the
Motives or Means left by God in his Church to light mankind in their way to
Faith, signifies thus much, that it is a wonderful and strange Paradox, that
those that follow and rely on the Motives laid by Gods Providence to direct
them to Truth, should in so doing not possibly be led into Error; that is, it is
a most absurd Paradox to say, that Essential Truth should not be the Immediate
and Proper Cause of Falsehood. But he discourses still upon this point, as if I
had held that the Vulgar are preserved from possibility of Error (or are
Infallible) not through the Goodness of the Grounds left by God to preserve
them from Erring, but from the strength of their own Understanding; which I do
not remember, I ever thought or said, even of the most Learned. He asks, If
this be true, what need then of my Infallibility of Pope or Council? And I ask
him, what need Governors when people know their Duty, or Judges seeing the main
of the Common Law is Traditionary, and to men verst in such affairs, Self-known
practically? Let him but assure the world that no Upstart shall have an humor
to rebel and innovate, but that all Christians shall practice and hold to what
they know evidently was practiced and held by the immediately foregoing Church,
and I will assure him there will need no Infallible Desiner, not any at all, as
to such points. But Dr. T. discourses still as if there were no difference
between the rude dim degree of Knowledge in the Vulgar, and the accurate, exact
and oft-refl^cting Knowledge of those who by their great Learning, their
Education, their Posture and Office are particularly verst and most deeply
insighted into the affairs of Faith and all that belongs to the right
explaining or wording it: and thence declaring it authentickly; so to keep its
distinct Sense clear in the minds of the Faithful, which the Equivocating Witty
Heretic endeavors to render confused and obscure. I wish he would study our
Tenets a while, and understand them ere he undertakes to confute us. He is very
raw in things of this nature.

16. His next Error is worse than the former. He would fain persuade
Catholics if any would believe him, That my Principles do plainly exclude from
Salvation; at one blow Excommunicate and Unchristian all that do not believe
upon my Grounds. And nothing is easier than to prove it in his way. It Is but
mistaking again the Notion of School-Divines, for the Notion of Faithful, and
School for Church (as he did lately) and the deed is done immediately without
any more trouble, He is the happiest man in his First Principles and his Method
that I ever met with; the parts of the former need not hang together at all,
but are allowed to be Incoherent, and the later is a building upon false
pretenses and wrong Suppositions, and then what may not he prove, or what
Conquest cannot he obtain by such powerful Stratagems? He says he has proov'd
at large in the Answer to Sure-Footing, that the Council of Trent did not make
Oral Tradition the sole Rule of her Faith. Possibly I am not so lucky as to
light on this large Proof of his; all I can find with an ordinary search is
four or five lines Rule of Faith, page 280. where after a commonly-Objected and
often-answer'd Citation from the Council of Trent, declaring that Christian
Faith and Discipline are contained in written Books and unwritten Traditions,
and therefore that they receive and honor the Books of Scripture and also
Traditions with equal pious affection and reverence: He adds, which I
understand not how those do who set aside the Scripture, and make Tradition the
sole Rule of their Faith. Now, I had put this very Objection against my self,
Sure-f. page 346. and proceeded to clear it to the end of page 150.
particularly page 147.149. upon this Reason, because, taking the Scripture
interpreted by Tradition (as the Council expresses it self to do, and forbids
any man to interpret it otherwise) it has the full Authority of Gods Word, and
so equally to be reverenced. Whereas, taking it interpreted by private heads
(which only will serve Dr T's turn) it is nothing less; as not engaging the
Divine Authority at all. But now to the Notion of a Rule there is more
required, as Dr. T. himself grants, and contends it is found in Scripture, viz.
that it be so evident that every sensible may understand it, as to matters of
Faith, and this (building on the Council of Trents Authority and Judgment) I
deny to be found in the bare Letter of Scripture; and hence say it is no Rule: I
omit the repeating very many Arguments from the Council for that point, deduc't
from page 141. to page 146. never touched, nor so much as taken notice of in
that Mock-Answer of his.

16. But that he may not mistake me; I shall not stick to declare whom I
exclude from Salvation (at least from the way to it) whom not, and upon what
Grounds, speaking of the ordinary course of Gods Providence, as I declare my
self to do throughout this whole Treatise. I make account that perfect Charity
or Love of God above and in all things is the Immediate Disposition to Bliss,
or Vnitive of a Soul to God; Also, that this Virtue cannot with a due
heartiness be connaturally or rationally wrought in Souls, if the Tenet of a
Deity's Existence and of Christian Faith be held possible to be a Ly. Hence, I
am obliged by my Reason to hold that those who judge there are no
absolueely-Conclusive Reasons for the Existence of a Deity, nor for the Truth
of Christian Faith, are (as such) out of the Road of Salvation. On the other
side, those who hold the Church, the Pillar and Ground of the Truths they
profess, Infallible, and by Consequence their Faith Impossible to be False, as
all Catholics do, though, as Divines, they fail in making out how, and by what
particular means it comes to be Infallible; yet through the virtue of this firm
and steady Adhesion to such Principles as are, because they are Truths, apt to
beget solid and well-grounded (that is, indeed True) Virtues, such as are a
vigorous Hope, and a fervent and all-ovre-powering Charity; hence they possess
the Connatural Means, or are in the right way to Heaven. And, for this Reason I
esteem Dr. T's way of discoursing concerning a Deity and Faith in his Sermons
most pestilent and mischievous to Souls, as being apt of its own Nature to
incline them (if they have wit to discern its shallowness) first to a kind of
Skepticism in Religion, and at next to Carelessness, Irreligion and Atheism;
though truly I think it is not his Intention to do so, but that his shortness in
Understanding the Nature and Grounds of Christianity makes him conceit he does
excellently, even to admiration, all the while he commits such well-meaning
Follies. Nor do I think the Church of England will upon second thoughts think
fit to Patronize Principles so destructive to the Nature of Faith, found in the
breast of every Protestant I ever yet met with; who all with one mouth will own
that it is absolutely Impossible Christian Faith should be a Lie, and abhor the
contrary Position as wicked, and damnable. How Dr. T. may have seasoned some of
his own Auditors by preaching Controversy to them, which he extremely affects,
I cannot tell; it is according as they incline to believe him more than the
Generality of the Christian World, whose Sentiments he opposes in his
Discourses about the Ground of Faith.

DISCOURSE VIII.
With what Art Dr. T. answers my METHOD. A Present made to his Credulous
Friends, showing how solidly he confuted SVRE-FOOTING by readily granting the
main of the Book. What is meant by Tradition. That J. S. is not singular in his
way of discoursing of the Grounds of Faith.

1. HE makes a pass or two at my METHOD, and that I conceive must serve for an
Answer to it: for an Answer, I heard, was threatened would appear very shortly,
but this pleasant Preface was the only thing which appeared; and all that
appears like Answer in it, is that he would make it believed he ought not
answer at all. And this he does very neatly and like a Master: For, let no man
think I have a mean Opinion of Dr. T. but every one is not good at all things:
some are good at proving, some at disproving, some at shifting of the Question
without either proving or disproving; every one in his way; and in his way I
know no man living a greater Master, nor so great as the Dr. Two things he
does, and both of them strange ones: First, he affirms that Discourse is
founded on the self-evident Infallibility of ora^ Tradition: Next, that He has
sufficiently considered that point in the Answer to Surefooting. The first of
them would make the Reader apprehend I there supposed Oral Tradition
self-evidently Infallible, and then run on all the way upon that supposition;
which if it obtain belief (as from his Credit he hopes it may) since every
Scholar knows all Discourses must be founded either on first Principles, or at
least on such as are granted by those against whom we argue, he sees I must
needs be held the most ridiculous Discourser that ever spoke or writ, to build
a whole Treatise upon a Supposition unprov'd, and which begs the whole
Question. Now, whatever I concluded in that short Discourse, I deduced step by
step, and made the foregoing Proposition draw still after it by undeniable
Consequence the following one: He concealing all mention of Proof, or endeavor
of it, calls my Conclusions, Principles; and then who would think but that I
had laid them to build that Discourse upon them, and deserted my usual way of
beginning with the known Natures of the Things in hand, as I there did with
those of Rule and Faith, and from them proceeded minutely to whatever I
concluded. Had his Friend Dr. St. taken the same course, his Principles would
have evidently discovered their own weakness of themselves, and had excused
others the unnecessary trouble of answering them. Next, he makes me say, that
the Infallibility of this Rule is evident to common Sense; and says himself,
that the Foundation of this Method is the self-evident infallibility of Oral
Tradition: by which words an honest Reader would verily think I supposed it
gratis to be s^lf-evident to common Sense, and never troubled my self to prove
it; whereas, though I indeed hold it is practically self-evident (of which I
have elsewhere given account) yet I proceeded as if I did not, but proved * 8.
out of the Natures of Rule and Faith, that the Rule of Faith, whatever it be,
must be Infallible: 10. that therefore Scripture's Letter is not that Rule, and
11. that Tradition is. The Reader being thus questionless well disposed to
think it very unnecessary he should consider, as he calls it, or answer any
passage of a thing made up of unprov'd Principles, or built on an unprov'd
Supposition, he tells him farther, that he has sufficiently considered that
point in the Answer to Sure-footing; whence he is not concerned to take notice
of it at present. And so the business is done; for why should he take pains to
give answer to that which deserves none; or, if it did, is answered? This
Reason though, by the way, is a little open. For, in case I did bring any
Arguments in my Method to make good that Tradition is an Infallible Rule of
Faith, and this after I had seen, and perhaps sufficiently considered too, what
he replies to Surefooting; for any thing appears, I may either have amended the
Reasons given in Surefooting, or produced better in my Method; and so, whatever
he has said to Surefooting, it might have been proper to have considered, and
said something to the Method too; unless* he could say with truth that he had
already answered the very Reasons urged in It, which I do not remember he has,
nor am confident himself neither.

. 2. But yet; ^o instance in this one passage, how rare a piece his cry'd-up
Rule of Faith is, and how excellently it answers Surefooting, let us ^ little
reflect what this sufficient consideration of his ^mounts to: Surefooting was
divided into two parts, The first from the Properties of a Rule of Faith,
proved that Tradition was that Rule, and this was the business of that Book
from the beginning to page 57. and particularly of the 5 th Discourse, whose
Title was [ Of the Notion of Tradition, and that all the Properties of the Rule
of Faith do clearly agree to it.] The 2 d. part begins Discourse 6. and
endeavors to demonstrate the Indefectiveness of Tradition, or that it has
hitherto ever been followed. The Confutation of my first part ends in his Rule
of Faith, page 150* the Answer to my 2 d. begins page 151. or these two the
former was in a manner the whole concern of my Book* For if it were proved that
Tradition was the Rule of Faith, that is, the only Conveyer of Christ's Doctrine
hitherto, it must either be said by those against whom I argue, that it has
not been hitherto conveyed to us at all, and so that there are no Christians in
the world, which they will not say, or else that those who proceed upon
Tradition for their Rule are the right Christians. Whence the later part was
only ex abundanti; not of absolute necessity, especially in case I argued ad
hominem. This being so, let Dr. T's Friends and mine, when they hap to
discourse about us, please to send for his Book and mine, and with a^ equal
partiality distrusting us both, rely upon Sir Tho. Moors pair of honest
unbiased witnesses, Their own Eyes. They will find that his Rule of Faith
undertakes page 146. to answer my 5 th. Disc. which pretended to show that all
the properties of the Rule of Faith do clearly agree to Tradition, and thence
concluded Tradition The Rule of Faith, and accordingly quotes page, 41. where
that Discourse began in Surefooting, They will see the Title of his Sect. 6.
(which he uses to put in the Margin) is, That the Properties of a Rule of Faith
do not belong to Oral Tradition. Now I assigned seven such Properties Surefoot,
page 11, and 12. He was pleased to make but two, Part. 2. Sect. 1. Sufficiently
plain, and sufficiently certain. Coming then at the bottom of page 148. to
confute that whole Discourse, which was the most substantial part of my Book;
and contained the most pressing Arguments to my main purpose, he compleats his
answer to it in one single page, viz. 149. nay, in one piece of that Page. This
would seem strange, and something difficult, if any thing were so to Dr. T. and
his singular Method of answering Books. All, says he, that he pretends to
prove in this Discourse is, that, if this Rule has been followed and kept to
all along, the Christian Doctrine neither has nor can have received any change.
It Is all indeed I pretended, and all I desired to prove; for, certainly, if it
can preserve Christian Doctrine unchanged, it has in it the Nature of a Rule;
and what has in it the Nature of a Rule is, I conceive, a Rule, whether it have
been followed or not, which is a Question I had not then examined, but reserved
to my following Discourses. To this then after his sufficient consideration,
What says the Dr.? All this, says he, is readily granted him. For my part, I
have no reason to except against that answer; for all my Writing aims at is
that people should see the Truth and acknowledge it; and since he readily
grants all I pretend to prove, I were very unreasonable if I should not be
contented. Though, if I were disposed to be cross, this word readily is
something liable to exception. After he has employed a good part of his Book in
preparing to speak to the main Question, in dividing and subdividing, and
playing all the tricks which may make it look like an Answer; and when he comes
to the Question to grant it, because he could do no other, is indeed to grant
it, but not very readily. People will not think he was very ready to do that
which before he comes to he makes such a pother, and still hangs back, and
pretends to hold the contrary, even there where he grants it; as is seen in his
Title. But I am not so peevish, and so the Truth be agreed, mean not to fall
out about the words, let him use what he pleases in God's Name. Marry, I
suspect his Friends will not so easily be satisfied, and perhaps be apt to
think that this is a more speedy way of answering, than a good way of
confuting: for in truth, it is an odd way of showing, That the Properties of a
Rule of (...) do not belong to Oral Tradition, (which he undertook in his
Title) to grant, etc. that it can do what a Rule should do, that is, has all
the Properties of a Rule of Faith. All I have to complain of is, he recals his
grant, and will not stand to his word given publicly, and after sufficient
consideration; but after he has acknowledged the Truth, continues still to
contradict it, and bear others in hand that he has sufficiently answered what
he has plainly granted. This cross proceeding is a thing which as well as he
has deserved of Truth and me, I cannot approve, and I heartily wish for his own
and the worlds sake, he would stedily own, at least his own concessions. In the
mean time let us see, if the thing be not as plain as plain may be. In stead of
s^ven Properties proved in my Discourse to belong to Tradition, he puts two of
his own: First, that it be plain and intelligible, and this he grants here page
149. is found in Tradition. His Second is, that we must be sufficiently assured
That the Doctrine delivered down by Oral Tradition has received no corruption
or change in the conveyance: And here, he says, is the difficulty. Where, good
Dr? We are inquiring which is the Rule; must we before we can find it, be
assured of the Doctrine, when the Rule is the very thing which gives us this
assurance? If we must beforehand be assured of the Doctrine, we need a Rule no
more, for the business is done already; or, if we did, it is impossible to find
one; for Assurance of the Doctr^ne being the effect of the Rule, we make the
Rule the effect of this Assurance, and so can have no Assurance till we have a
Rule, and no Rule till we have this Assurance. This indeed is a D^fficulty, and
I think an Insuperable one: But all proceeds from his j^mbling two distinct
Questions, and confounding the First, which alone I treat, and he pretends to
answer there, namely, which is the Rule of Faith; with the other which I treat
afterward, and examine, Whether it have been always followed? For nothing can
be more plain, than that the two ways by which Christi^^ Doctrine may have
received corruption or change are these; either a defect of power, or aptitude
in the Rule to convey it, or defect of will in the Persons who were to have
been guided by it, and make use of the power it has. And it is no less plain,
that in case we be sufficiently assured that Tradition has power and is apt to
convey it uncorrupted down; we are sufficiently assured, that it has all that
is requisite to a Rule. And since Dr. T. grants it is plain and intelligible, he
must grant the Persons and not the Thing (or Tradition) is to blame if it have
not done what it is qualified to do. To have a will to follow Tradition is the
Property of the Persons (or good Christians) and not of the Thing they are to
follow, or of the Rule, which if it be plain, they might have followed it if
they would. A Sword is a Sword whether men cut with it or no; and a Pen is a
Pen though no man write with it. Distinguishing then the Properties of of a
Rule, from the properties of the Persons who are to use it, it is plain that his
Second Qualification sufficiently certain agrees no less to Tradition than his
First, sufficiently plain. For what can sufficiently certain signify more,
than that, in case it have been used, Christian Doctrine neither has nor can
have received any change. Both these he grants, and plainly and readily, and
these two are all himself requires. Wherefore it is as plain as can be, that
there is no difficulty about the point I there treated, Whether Tradition have
all the properties belonging to a Rule of Faith: and Dr. T. his difficulty is
this, Whether (...) have been followed, which belongs to the Persons who should
be guided by it, and is wholly extrinsecal to the Nature and Constitution of a
Rule.

. 3. The Dr. then had good Reason to say, her was not concerned to take notice
of this point, so when a thing is granted* there is in truth little more to be
said to it. I for my part find some difficulty how to reconcile his difficulty
and his ready grant, and make them hang together with Sense. The difficulty is,
says he, Whether we have sufficient assurance that the Doctrine delivered down
by Oral Tradition has received no corruption or change in its conveyance. He
puts it then delivered by Tradition, that is, he puts this Rule has been
followed; and before he says, that if this Rule has been followed, Christian
Doctrine neither has nor can have received any change; and then makes a
difficulty whether there have been a change, where there neither is nor can be
any. This I must confess is something difficult to apprehend. Otherwise there
is no difficulty at all in conceiving, that if there have been any change in
Christian Doctrine, this must have happened, not by defect of the Rule, which,
if followed, he says, leaves not so much as a possibility of it; but of the
Persons who were deficient in their Duty, and would not follow it. He may
perhaps say, that by Delivered down, he meant no more, but pretended to be
delivered down; but to omit that by delivered to mean not delivered, is
something uncouth; this is plainly to fasten the difficulty upon the Doctrine,
not the Rule, and ^o doubt whether it have been followed, not whether it be a
Rule. And so we have sufficient assurance, at least as far as the Dr. can give
it us, that Tradition is as well sufficiently certain as sufficiently plain,
since he assures us, that if it be followed, no change in the Doctrine either
is or can be: which being all the Certainty can possibly be expected from, or
desired in a Rule, his difficulty, such as it is, belongs to another place,
where it is expressly treated. And this is Dr. T's sufficient consideration of
the point.

. 4. What pretty fantastical things these words are, and how apt they are to
trapan a man who looks not narrowly into their Sense. One would have thought,
and I imagine the Dr. intended men should think that his [ sufficiently
consider'd] meant sufficiently confuted. When alas! they signify plainly and
readily granted. 'Twas a neat and a safe expression though; for had he said,
sufficiently answered, or confuted, or opposed so much as by a bare-denial, or
even attempted to do any of these; [ All this is readily granted,] would have
been a filthy stumbling block in his way. But those safe easy words [
sufficiently considered] are very choice, and may signify any thing, or
nothing, which you please; for one may sufficiently consider a thing in his
mind, and upon sufficient consideration find it best to let it alone, and say
never a syllable to it, or one may grant, or deny, or do any thing with it, and
these pliable words will fit whatever he does. Those who are a little straightened
and find ^mpartial Reason not so favorable to them as they wish, should by all
means learn this gentile insignificant way of Expression, which may happen to
do them more service than a great deal of crabbed knowledge, which is of a
stubborn nature, and does very well where Truth is of the party, but is quite
out and signifies nothing against it; whereas this, like those easy pliable
things, Probabilities (the matter which best fits this pliant manner of
expressing) is wonderful complaisant, and if you happen to change sides, will
be as serviceable to falsehood. And I would particularly commend this phrase [
sufficiently considered] for a pattern to those who study the Art, and need it.

. 5. People will not expect from me to give a Reason of this unexpected
kindness of the Dr. for they are sufficiently assured I am not of his Council.
But I think he granted no more than what he knew not how to deny. For, whoever
reads Suref. p. 48. and 55. will find the Self-evidence of Tradition so
explained, that, supposing it sufficiently plain and intelligible, which I
there proved, and he here grants, its Ruling power is as plainly made out as
this Identical Proposition, that the same is the same with it self: and
particularly in my Method, page 16. and 17. which kind of Propositions a man
may be angry at, but cannot so handsomely deny; for, if he could, I suppose he
rather would have done ^t, than yielded the very point in Controversy, and
which is besides so favorable to Catholics, and destructive to his Cause.
This possibly is the Cause of his Resentment against Identical Propositions, of
which he would ^evenge himself for the injury they have done him* and therefore
in his Prefac^ very politickly bids opens defiance to all the whole Tribe of
such ill-condition'd Principles. In the mean time, the beginning and end of
that sixth Section are very observable. The Title is, that the properties of a
Rule of Faith do not belong to Tradition; and this signifies, that it is not
the Rule of Faith: coming to make good this undertaking, he granted that it is
plain and intelligible; and can, if people stick to it, preserve Christian
Doctrine from change: and this signifies, that the properties of a Rule do
belong to it, and that it is the Rule. For I do not remember he ever pretended
there were two Rules of Faith; wherefore since Tradition has power to do what
a Rule should do, viz. preserve Faith uncorrupted and unchanged, Tradition
certainly is the Rule, and so he expressly calls it, p. 49. But that this Rule
has always been followed, etc. and may for any thing appears here, hold
perhaps, that Scripture is not the Rule. And yet all this while his Title is,
that Tradition had not the properties of a Rule, or is no Rule. But the
Conclusion is every jot as remarkable, for he had no sooner readily granted all
I pretended to prove, but he as readily diverts the Reader from reflecting upon
it, by these words: But that this Rule has always been followed, nay that it is
impossible there should have been any deviation from it (as he pretends) this
we deny, not only as untrue, but as one of the most absurd Propositions that
ever pretended to demonstrative evidence. Would any Reader suspect this serious
clutter of words should be both untrue, and nothing to purpose besides? For, it
plainly speaks of a Question, which is not the Question in that place. but
reserved for another, and which he should have let alone till its time come.
Yet I was to blame to say, it was nothing to purpose. For it is to great purpose;
and the Transition is so nimble and delicate, that the Reader ceases to reflect
upon the import of his concession, and begins to think me a man of confidence,
and strange confidence too, who can hold such palpable Nonsense. But pray where
did I ever pretend it is unpossible there should have been any deviation from
Tradition? Sure 'twas in my sleep, and the Dr. has taken me napping. Otherwise
as far as I am acquainted with my self, and mine own actions, I am so far from
having writ or said, or so much as thought that there never was nor could be
any deviation from it; that on the contrary I have always thought, and have
said and writ, that there have been many deviations from it, and as many as
there have been Heresies in God's Church. Nay, (as far as I remember) I have
not said so much, as that I had absolutely demonstrated there had or could be
no total defection from it. Indeed I endeavored to demonstrate there could
not, but I pretended no more but to endeavor it; and the Titles of the sixth
and eighth Discourse in Surefooting will bear me witness. But I know not under
what unlucky Planet the Dr. wrote this Discourse, where nothing will fadge and
every thing he says, proves against h^mself. This untrue and absurd Proposition
as he calls it, and as it is indeed, that it is impossible there should have
been any deviation from Tradition, implies at least thus much, that this
deviation is extrinsecal to the Nature of a Rule; for else Scripture could not
be said to be a Rule; from which it is plain that many both can and do deviate.
Wherefore the Proposition as absurd as it is not more absurd than it is to urge
it against Tradition; which, whatever become of the Proposition, is never a
whit less a Rule. And indeed the true difference, and true poin^ of
Controversy betwixt us stands thus: I say, and prove, and himself by granting
all my 5th. Discourse, and that Tradition is plain, grants, that Tradition is
so excellently qualified for a Rule, that let men but endeavor to follow it
still to their power, it will bring down the same uncorrupted Faith to the
Worlds end: whereas it is known and evident, that multitudes of men have
followed and do foll^^ Scripture to their power, and differ enormously in their
Tenets, and that as far as contradiction will let them go; as far as There is a
Trinity, and there is not a Trinity; Christ is God, and Christ is not God, than
which as none can be more wide, so, execepting the Tenet of the Deity it self,
none can be more Fundamental, or have greater influence upon Christian life.

6 Reflecting then that I never said or thought it was self-evident that
Tradition had always been followed, but only that it is of own nature (...)
evidently, infallible Rule, abstracting from being followed, his answer to my
Method is this: I have not spoken to the point before, and therefore am not
concerned to speak to it now, for why should people expect more from me here
than elsewhere? or rather, I have granted the point already, and therefore am
not concerned to say more to it. And I, for my part, think he is in the right;
and because it seems a little unreasonable to require the same thing should be
done twice, I think it best to leave him to his sufficient-consideration, and
go on to the next. Only, I desire the Reader to reflect, how empty a brag it is
in the Drs. how partial in their Friends to magnify this piece as Unanswerable.
Yet in one Sense it is such; for a Ready Grant of what is Evident Truth can never
be answered, or refuted.

7. His next Pretense is, that my METHOD excludes from Salvation the far
greatest part of our own Church. To which, though enough has been said
already, yet, because the clearing this will at once give account of what I
mean, when I affirm Faith must be known antecedently to Church, which bears a
show as if I held we are not to rely on the Church for our Faith: I shall be
something larger in declaring this Point. To perform which more satisfactorily,
I note, 1. That those who are actually from their Childhood in the Church,
have Faith instilled into them after a different manner from those who were
educated in another Profession, and after come to embrace the right Faith. The
form^^ are imbued after a natural way with the Churches Doctrine, and are
educated in a high Esteem and Veneration of the Church it self: Whereas the
Later are to acquire Faith by considering and looking into its Grounds; and are
educated rather in a hatred against the true Church than in any good opinion of
her. The former therefore have the full weight of the Churches Authority, both
as to Naturals and Supernaturals actually applied to them and working its
effect upon them; Practical self-evidence both of the Credit due to so Grave,
Learned, Ample and Sacred an Authority, as also of the Holiness, the Morality
or Agreeableness of her Doctrine to Right Reason (which they actually
experience) rendering in the mean time their Assent Connatural, that is,
Rational or Virtuous. The later Fancy nothing Supernatural in her, nor
experience the Goodness of her Doctrine, but have it represented to them as
Wicked and Abominable: In a word, the Former have both Faith and the Reasons
for it, practically instilled into them in a manner at the same time, and
growing together daily to new degrees of Perfection, whereas, the Later must
have Reasons antecedently to Faith, and apprehending as yet nothing
Supernatural in the Church, must begin with something Natural, or merely
Humane, which may be the Object of an unelevated Reason: and, withal, such as
may be of its own nature able to satisfy rationally that haesitation and
disquisitive doubt wherewith they are perple^^, and settle them in a firm
Belief. 2. My Discourse in that Treatise, (as appears by the Title) is intended
for those who are yet to arrive at satisfaction in Religion, that is, for those
who are not yet of the Church; and, so. I am to speak to their natural Reason,
by proposing something which is an Object proper and proportioned to it, and as
it were, leading them by the hand, step by step to the Church, though all the
while they walk upon their own Legs, and see with their own Eyes; that is,
proceed upon plain Maxims of Humane Reason every step they take. 3. Though I
use the Abstract word [ TRADITION] yet I conceive no wise man will imagine I
mean by it some Idea Platonica, or separated Formalility hovering in the Air
without any Subject, but that the Thing I indeed meant to signify by it, is
the Church, as DELIVERING or as Testifying, and, (taking it as applied to those
who are not yet capable to discern any Supernaturality in the Church) the
Natural or Humane Authority of the Church, or the Church Testifying she
received this Faith uninterruptedly from the beginning. So that Tradition
differs from Church, as a man considered precisely as speaking and acting,
differs from Himself considered and expressed as such a Person; which known by
Speech and Carriage, or by himself as speaking and acting, other considerations
also belonging to him, which before lay hid, and are involved, or (as the
Schools express it) confounded in the Subject (or Suppositum) become known
likewise. So the Churches Humane Testimony or Tradition, which (as was shown
Sure* f. p. 81, 82, 83.) is the greatest and most powerfully supported, even
naturally, of any in the World, is a proper and proportioned object to their
Reason who yet believe not the Church; but, it being known thence* that the
Body who proceeds on that Ground, possesses the first-deliver'd, that is, Right
Faith, and so is the true Church, immediately all those Prerogatives and
Supernatural Endowments apprehended by all who understand the nature of Faith
to spring out of it, or attend on it, are known to appertain, and to have ever
appertained to the True Church; and, amongst the rest, Goodness or Sanctity,
the proper Gift of the H. Ghost, with all the Means to it, which with an
incomparable Efficacy strengthens the Souls of the Faithful as to the Delivery
of Right Faith; whence she is justly held and believed by the new-converted
Faithful to be assisted by the H. Ghost; which, till some Motive merely Humane
had first introduced it into their Understandings, that this was the True
Church, they could not possibly apprehend.

. 8. In this way then of discoursing, the Church is still the only Ascertainer
of Faith, either taken in her whole Latitude, as in those who are already
Faithful; or considered in part only, that is, as delivering by way of
naturally Testifying, (which I here call Tradition) in order to those who are
yet to embrace Faith. Whence appears the perfect groundlesness of Dr. T's
Objection, and how he wholly misunderstands my Doctrine in this point, when he
says the Discourse in my Method does Unchristian the far greatest part of our
own Church. For first, he mistakes the Ground of Believing to those actually in
the Church, for that which is the Ground for those who are yet out of the
Church, to find which is the Church: Next, since all Believers actually in the
Church, even to a Man, rely on the Church both naturally and supernaturally
assisted, and I am diseoursing only about the Natural means for those who are
out of the Church to come to the Knowledge of it, his Discourse amounts to
this, that, because those who are yet coming to Faith, rely only on the Humane
Testimony of the Church, therefore they who are in the Church and rely upon the
Church both humanely and divinely assisted, are no Christians. In a word, this
way of Divinity or Resolution of Faith which I take, makes every man, both
those in the Church, and those out of it, rely on the Churches Authority or
Testimony diversely considered in order to their respective capacities, and so
still makes the Church THE PILLAR AND GROUND OF TRVTH, which all Catholics in
the World (not so much as any one School-Divine excepted) hold the securest way
that can be imagined; And should any one dislike it, I see not what he can with
any show pretend. He must allow some Natural Motive antecedent to Faith, and
what is known by means of it; that is, he must grant some Motive antecedent to
the Knowledge of Supernatural Assistance, and where he will find in the whole
World any such Motive stronger than is the Humane Authority of the Church as to
matters of Faith, I profess I know not, nor I am confident can any man living
imagine. If this then be, absolutely speaking, the securest way that is, it is
securer or firmer than is the way of proceeding upon Motives of Credibility,
and incomparably more secure than is that of resolving Faith into Motives only
Prudential. Though indeed, things rightly stated and understood, the Motives of
Credibility are some of them Coincident with Tradition, and the rest which can
lay just claim to Certainty depend on it, taken at large, as their Ground, as
has been proved in the Corollaries to Sure-footing.

It may be asked, Why, since Tradition and Church are one and the same Thing, I
did not choose to say, that the CHVRCH gives us Knowledge of the first delivered
Faith rather than that TRADITION does so, seeing none could have scrupled or
excepted against the former manner of Expression; whereas this gives occasion
of mis-apprehension to some unattentive Readers. I answer, I used on that
occasion the word [ Tradition] rather than the word [ Church] for the same
reason the Geometricians use the words Line or Surface, when they have a mind
to express Body as Long or Broad; for these are in reality the same thing with
Body; but, in regard Body is the Subject of many other Considerations as well
as these, and these speak Body precisely according to the Considerations of
Length and Breadth, to which only it was Intended to speak, hence it was
better both for Succinctness of Expression and Exactness of Science, which is
built on the perfect distinction of our Conceptions to use the Abstract or
Distinguishing words [ Line] and [ Surface] rather than the Concrete or
Confused word [ Body] which involves much more than the Discourser in that
circumstance intended to consider or speak to. Now this being the very method
observed in that Science which bears the name for the greatest Exactness in
Discourse, I much fear, the Objecters mistake proceeds from not reflecting that
whoever pretends to an Accurate and Connected way of Discourse, and rigorously
to conclude what he intends, must either follow that best of Methods, or he
falls short of his Duty, and wrongs his Cause.

. 9. To clear this a little better, and withal to apply it, I shall make choice
of another familiar Instance. We use to say in Common Speech that the
Countenance or Carriage of a Man makes known his Genius. Now all these three,
viz. Countenance, Carriage, and Genius, are in reality most evidently the same
Thing with the Man himself; only they differ from it in the manner of
Expression; the word Man nominating the Whole or Entire Thing which is the
Subject of all these and innumerable other Considerabilities, confusedly
implied in that word. The other three are more distinct indeed in their manner
of signifying, but they fall exceedingly short of the others vast extent, and
express Man but in part, or only a few Respects found in that Subject, whereof
some are less known, some more, and so a Means to know others. Whence it comes
to pass that Countenance signifying Man as Looking, or according to the outward
Appearance of that part in him called the Face; also Carriage signifying him as
bearing or demeaning himself; and, lastly, Genius, as having such a peculiarity
of Humor or Nature in him, hence these words, [ The Speech, Countenance, and
Carriage of a Man discover his Genius] amount to this, the Man according to his
Speech, Countenance, or Carriage, which are visible and more Intelligible
Considerations belonging to him, is a means to notify himself to us according
to something in him which is latent and less manifest, viz. his Genius. This I
say is the plain Sense of the other words, only this later manner of speaking
is prolix and troublesome, the other short and yet fully expressive of the
Speakers Intention. Again, the other manner of Expression is Proper and Apt,
whereas should one put it thus, [ The Man makes known the Man] besides the
confusedness of the expression, since Man signifies the whole Entire Thing
without distinguishing any particular Respects, it would make the whole (or the
self-same thing) abstracting from all different Respects to be before and
after, more known and less known than it sel^* which is a direct Contradiction.

. 10. Applying then this Discourse. The word Church being a Congregation of
Men, answers in its way of expressing to the word Man in the Example now given,
and involves confusedly in its notion innumerable Considerations belonging to
that Body; of which True Faith, which is, as it were, the Genius or Nature of
the True Church, is of it self latent, unknown, and far from self-discoverable.
Others, such as is the Humane Testimony of the Church, meant in those
Circumstances by the word [ Tradition] in regard it depends on Testifying
Authority, is more known, and being Oral and Practical, fitly corresponds to
Speech, Countenance, Carriage, and suchlike. It being known then by this means
that such a Body has in it the first-deliver'd, or True Faith, it is known
immediately that having in it the Genius or Nature of a True Church,'it is indeed
the True Church: Again, it being known likewise and conceived by all who
understand what is meant by that word, that True Faith is a firm Adhesion to
Christ's Doctrine, also it being apprehended by those against whom we dispute
(nay demonstrable out of the nature of that Doctrine) that it is a means to love
God above all things; hence it is justly concluded that there is in the
Generality, or in great Multitudes of this Body, a due love of Heaven called
Sanctity or Charity, which is the Gift peculiarly attributed to the H. Ghost;
and it being known and experienced by those already in the Church that this
Love of Heaven or Sanctity gives the Faithful a particular Strength and Power
to perform all good Duties, and this of preserving uncorrupted the delivered
Faith being one, and that a most concerning one, hence they come to know that
the Church is assisted by the H. Ghost, as in all other good Duties, so
especially in this, of delivering and continually proposing Right Faith: So
that (as Reason requires) by some Natural and therefore more easily-known
Assistances belonging to the Church, those out of her are brought to the
knowledge that she is Supernaturally assisted. This is the Method I take in
resolving Faith: If any man can show me any other that is either more solid,
more orderly, more connatural and agreeable to the nature of Faith, or more
honorable to Gods Church, I shall as willingly and easily quit it, as I now
out of long and serious consideration embrace and firmly adhere to it. But it
appears plain to me, that whoever contradicts this, especially as to that point
which occasioned this Discourse, must withal contradict a Maxim on which all
Science is principally built, namely, that The Definition is more known than
the Notion defined; which I take to be understood not only of the Whole
Definition, but of each single part of it; for if any one part be more obscure
than the thing defined, the whole Definition, as having that obscure part in
it, must necessarily be more obscure likewise. Wherefore the Definition of a
Church being Coetus Fidelium, etc. A Congregation of Faithful, etc. the notion
of Faithful (and consequently, of Faith) must either be more Known and Knowable
than that of Church, and consequently antecedent to it in right method of
Discourse, or the Definition would be obscurer than the Thing defined, which if
it be said, I must confess I know not to what end Definitions are, or why they
do not rather conduce to Ignorance than to Science. Add, that True Faith being
most Intrinsecal and Essential to a Church, it is by consequence a more forcible
and demonstrative Argument to convince inevitably that such a Body in which
it is found is the True Church, than is any Extrinsecal Mark whatsoever. And if
it be objected that Extrinsecal Marks are more easily Knowable, I doubt not but
in those who are led away by superficial Appearances there is some show of
Reason in this Objection, but I utterly deny that if we go to the bottom to
settle the Absolute Certainty of any of these Marks, any of them can be known
at all, much less more easily known, if the Certainty of Tradition in visible
and practical matters of Fact be questionable; and that neither Scripture,
Fathers, Councils, Histories, Monuments, or any thing else of that nature can
pretend to Absolute Certainty, if Tradition be Uncertain, or can pretend to be
known, unless Tradition be first- (that is, more-) known, as is shown
particularly in the Corollaries to Sure-footing.

. 11. Hence is seen that the word [ Tradition] is taken in a threefold sense;
For the Way of Tradition or Delivery taken at large; For the Humane or Natural
Authority of the Church, as delivering; And lastly, for its Divinely-assisted
or Supernatural Authority, called properly Christian. When it is taken in one
fence, when in another, the nature of the matter in hand and the concomitant
circumstances will evidently determine. Only we must note that these three
Notions are not adequately contradistinct, the later still including the
former, as Length, Breadth, and Depth do in Continued Quantity. For, The Humane
Authority of the Church includes Tradition taken at large, and adds to it the
best Assistances of Nature, as is shown Sure-f. p. 82, 83. The Supernatural
Authority includes all found in the other two, and adds to it the best
Assistances of Grace, as is particularly declared there from p. 84. to p. 93.
So that all the Perfection of Tradition that is imaginable is to be found in
that which we call Christian, or in the Testifying Authority of Christ's Church.

. 12. But because it is still D. T's best play to make use of Extrinsecal
Exceptions so to divert the Readers Eye, and avoid answering my Intrinsecal
Reasons taken from the nature of the Things, with which he is loath to grapple;
and since amongst the rest, he is very frequent at this Impertinent Topic of
my discoursing the Grounds of Faith after a different manner than other Divines
do, it were not amiss, omitting many pregnant Instances which might be
collected out of Dr. Stratford, the Learned Author of Protestancy without
Principles, and many others to the same purpose, to show how far he mistakes in
this point, by instancing in one Controvertist of eminent both Fame and
Learning as any in his time; one who writ before Rushworth's Dialogues
appeared, or perhaps were thought of, and so cannot be suspected a Follower of
that New Way, as Dr. T. call it: I mean Mr. Fisher. This able Controvertist, in
his Censure of Dr. White's Reply, p. 83, 84, maintains that UNWRITTEN (that is,
Oral and Practical) TRADITION is the PRIME GROUND OF FAITH, more Fundamental
than Scripture, and shows how his Adversary Mr. White the Minister grants in
effect the same. In his Answer to the nine Points, p. 27. he concludes strongly
that Scriptures are not the Prime Principles of Faith supposed before Faith,
which Infidels seeing to be True, resolve to believe the Mysteries of Faith,
but only are secondary Truths, dark and obscure in themselves, believed upon
the Prime Principles of Faith. Which words as amply and fully express that
Scripture is not the express Rule of Faith as can be imagined: For how should
that have in it self the nature of an Intellectual Rule, which in it self is
dark and obscure? Or how can that which is believed upon the Prime Principles
(that is, partly at least, upon the Ground or Rule of Faith, be any part of
that Rule; since what is believed is the Object of Faith, and so presupposes the
Rule of Faith. Also in the beginning of his Argument he makes the Prim^
Principles of Faith (or Unwritten Tradition as he elsewhere calls it, that is,
the same we mean by Oral and Practical) evident in it self. And p. 40. he puts
the Question between us and Protestants, to be what is the external Infallible
Ground unto which Divine Inspiration moves men to adhere, that they may be
settled in the true saving Faith. Where, first, besides Gods grace moving us to
every good Act, (which all Catholics hold to be necessary) there is requisite,
according to him, an External Infallible Ground; next, that without such a
Ground a man cannot be settled in true saving Faith. Again, p. 38* coming to
lay the ground of knowing any Doctrine to be Apostolical, he mentions none but
only Public Catholic Tradition taught unanimously and perpetually by
Pastors; which p. 37. he calls a Rule Infallible, and says that only Heretics
charge it to be Fallible; where also he explains the meaning of his Principle,
that [ The Apostolical Doctrine is the Catholick] after this manner, The
Doctrine which is delivered from the Apostles by the Tradition of whole
Christian Worlds of Fathers unto whole Christian Worlds of Children, etc. Of
this Tradition (which by the words now cited appears to be evidently the same I
defend) he affirms (p. 38.) that it is proved to be simply Infallible by the
very nature thereof; and quotes Suarez to say that it is the highest degree of
humane Certitude; of which it may simply (or absolutely) be said [Non posse
illi falsum subesse] that it is IMPOSSIBLE IT SHOULD BE FALSE. Can any thing be
produced more expressly abetting my way of Discoursing the Grounds of Faith?
Nothing certainly, unless it be that which immediately follows, containing the
reason why Tradition is by the very nature of it simply Infallible. For (says
he) Tradition being full Report about what was EVIDENT UNTO SENSE, to wit, what
Doctrines and Scriptures the Apostles publicly delivered unto the World, it is
IMPOSSIBLE it should be FALSE; Worlds of Men CANNOT be uniformly mistaken and
deceived about a matter Evident to Sense; and, not being deceived, being so
many in number, so divided in place, of so different affections and conditions,
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE they should so have agreed in their Tale, had they so
maliciously resolved to deceive the World. Observe here, 1. That he alleges
only Natural Motives, or speaks only of Tradition as it signifies the Humane
Authority of the Church, that is, as taken in the same sense wherein I took it
in my Method. 2. He goes about to show out of its very nature, (that is, to
demonstrate) it is absolutely Infallible. 3. He makes this Tradition or Humane
Authority of the Church an Infallible Deriver down or Ascertainer that what is
now held upon that tenure is the Apostles Doctrine, or the first-taught Faith;
which once known, those who are yet Unbelievers may infallibly know that Body
that proceeds upon it to possess the true Faith, and consequently infallibly
know the true Church; which being the very way I took in my Method, and other
T^eatises, it may hence be discerned with how little reason Dr. T. excepts
against it as so superlatively singular.

But to proceed. Hence p. 40. he avers that the proof of Tradition is so full
and sufficient that it convinces Infidels (that is, those who have only
natural Reason to guide themselves by.) For though (says he) they be blind not
to see the Doctrine of the Apostles to be Divine, yet are they not so void of
common sense, impudent and obstinate as to deny the Doctrine of Christian
Catholic Tradition to be truly Christian and Apostolical. And p. 41. The ONLY
MEANS whereby men succeeding the Apostles may know assuredly what Scriptures
and Doctrines they delivered to the Primitive Catholic Church, is the
Catholic Tradition by Worlds of Christian Fathers and Pastors, unto Worlds of
Christian Children and Faithful People: Which words as fully express that
Tradition is the ONLY or SOLE Rule of Faith as can be imagined. And whereas
some hold that an Inward working of God's Spirit supplies the Conclusiveness of
the Motive, this Learned Writer p. 46* on the contrary affirms, that Inward
Assurance without any EXTERNAL INFALLIBLE Ground to assure men of TRVTH, is
proper unto the Prophets and the first Publishers of Christian Religion. And,
lastly, (to omit others) p. 47. he discourses thus: If any object that the
Senses of men in this Search may be deceived through natural invincible
Fallibility of their Organs, and so no Ground of Faith that is altogether
Infallible: I answer, that Evidence had by Sense being but the private of one
man, is naturally and physically Infallible; but when the same is also Public
and Catholic* that is, when a whole World of men concur with him, then his
Evidence is ALTOGETHER INFALLIBLE. And now I would gladly know what there is in
any of my Books touching the Ground of Faith which is not either the self-same,
or else necessarily consequent or at least very consonant to what I have here
cited from this Judicious Author and Great Champion of Truth in his Days, whose
Coincidency with other Divines into the same manner of Explication, argues
strongly that it was only the same unanimous Notion and Conceit of Faith and
of true Catholic Grounds which could breed this conspiring into the same way
of discoursing, and almost the self-same words.

. 13. Hence is seen how justly D. T. when he wanted something else to say,
still taxed me with singularity in accepting of nothing but Infallibility built
on absolutely-conclusive Motives, with talking such Paradoxes as he doubts
whether ever they entered into any other man's mind; that all mankind excepting
J. S have hitherto granted that no Humane Understanding is secured from
possibility of Mistake from its own nature; that my Grounds exclude from
Salvation, and excommunicate the Generality of our own Church; that no man
before J. S. was so hardy as to maintain that the Testimony of Fallible men
(which word [ Fallible] is of his own adding, mine being of Mankind relying on
Sensations) is Infallible: that this is a new way, and twenty such
insignificant Cavils. But the thing which breeds his vexation is, that, as my
Reason inclines me, I join with those who are the most solid and Intelligent
Party of Divines, that is, indeed, I stick to, and pursue, and explain, and
endeavor to advance farther those Grounds which I see are built on the natures
of the Things. Would I only talk of Moral Certainty, Probabilities, and such
wise stuff, when I am settling Faith, I doubt not but he would like me
exceedingly; for then his own side might be probable too, which sandy
Foundation is enough for such a Mercurial Faith as nothing but Interest is apt
to fix.

DISCOURSE VIII.
In what manner Dr. T. Answers my Letter of Thanks. His Attempt to clear
Objected Faults by committing New Ones.

. 1. MY Confuter has at length done with my Faith Vindicated, and my Methed,
and has not he done well, think you, and approved himself an excellent
Confuter? He only broke his Jests upon every passage he took notice of in the
former, except one; without ever heeding or considering, much less attempting
to Answer any one single Reason of those many there alleged; and as for that
one passage in which he seemed serious, viz. how the Faithful are held by me
Infallible in their Faith, he quite mistook it throughout. Again, as for my
Method, he first gave a wrong Character of it, and next pretended it wholly to
rely upon a point which he had sufficiently considered, that is, which he had
readily granted, but offered not one syllable of Answer to any one Reason in It
neither. My Letter of Thanks is to be overthrown next; And, First, he says he
will wholly pass by the Passion of it; and I assure the Reader so he does the
Reason of it too, for he speaks not a word to any one piece of it. Next, he
complains of the ill-Language; which he says proceeded from a galled and
uneasy mind. He says partly true; For nothing can be more uneasy to me, than,
when I expected a Sober and Scholar-like Answer, to find only a
prettily-worded Fardle of Drollery and Insincerity. I wonder what galled him
when he lavished out so much ill-language in Answer to Sure footing. in which
Treatise there was not one passiona^e word, not one syllable of Irony, or any
thing in the least of an impertinent nature, but a serious pursu^t of the Point
by way of Reason from the beginning to the end. It seems, there being in it no
show of Passion, it was the Reason of it which galled and was so uneasy to
him. What need was there to fall into such down right Rudeness as to call a
Proposition of mine, for which I offered my Reasons, most impudent, (as did Dr.
T. Rule of Faith, p. 173.) and in forty other places to make the Droll supply
the Divine? Was it not enough to answer the Reasons, and let the World judge?
If he can show any such rude Language in my Letter of Thanks, I here blame my
self for it, though it be responsum non dictum. The worst word I use is
charging him with falsifying my words and sense; and it seems to me but hard
Law, if he may take the liberty to commit such Faults frequently, and I may not
so much as name his Faults, when it is my Duty as his Answerer to discover them.

. 2. He would clear himself of some Faults objected; to do which, he summons
together all his best Arts; First, he picks out generally what can best bear a
show of Reply. Next, he counterfeits a wrong Objection, and lastly, conceals in
what manner and for what Reasons it was pressed against him; and by this means he
hopes to escape blame.

. 3. First, he would justify himself for saying I went about to explain words,
because my self said I would examine well what is meant by them, which seems
equivalent to explaining them, but he conceals what kind of explications I
denied my self to mean, and what he unjustly imputed twice in one page, (p. 3.)
namely, Definitions; he conceals how he would needs make me intend to define,
and yet most disingenuously put down himself at the same time my very words in
which I disclaimed any pretense to define, but only to reflect on some
Attributes, Predicates or Properties of what was meant by those words, that is,
some pertinent and true Sayings concerning Rule and Faith; which though they in
part explicate them, which I never denied; yet they are far from looking like
those complete Explications called Definitions, or even like those less
artificial ones called Descriptions; or like those Explications industriously
compiled (which was the word I used) to adequate the entire notion of the word
under consideration. For example, Faith being there taken for Believing, I come
to discover it imports some kind of knowledge, and then argue from it as such,.
8. Again, I affirm,. 12. that the notion of the word Faith, bears that it is a
Perfection of the Soul, or a Virtue; and thence discourse from it as it imports
a Virtue. Also. 16. I affirm that Faith mainly conduces to Bliss or Salvation
etc. and thereupon frame such a Discourse as is apt to spring out of such a
Consideration. Now all these in part explicate the Thing, that is, disclose or
say some Truth that belongs to its nature; yet not one of those sayings looks
like an Explication of the word [ FAITH] for this speaks an Intireness and an
Adequateness to the notion explicated, which it is evident not one of these
particular Affirmations or Sayings have the least show of. He conceals also
what was a^ledg'd Letter of Thanks, p. 6. (for indeed 'twas not creditable that
candid Scholars should reflect on it) viz. that the word Faith being Equivocal,
and sometimes signifying Conscience, sometimes Fidelity or Honesty, etc. I was
necessarily to explain my self in what sense I understood it there, and to
declare that I took it for Belief, and accordingly said, Faith is the same with
Believing; which no sooner done, but my pleasant Confuter will needs have that
expressing or clearing its distinct sense in one single word to be a Definition
too, and plays upon it p. 3. with such affected Raillery as would make any
sober man, unacquainted with the Arts he uses to escape the duty of replying,
justly wonder. But I shall easily satisfy our Readers what is the true reason
of this Carriage: He thought it not fit to give one word of a sober and solid
Reply to any one of those many Reasons in that first discourse of mine (built
all upon those Affirmations or Predications now spoken of) though this be the
substantialest part of my Book, and the Foundation of the rest, on which I
ground the Properties of a Rule of Faith, importing its Absolute Certainty; but
neglecting all my Premises and Proofs he falls to deny my Conclusion, and talk
something against it in his own way. So that it is evident these Jests were to
divert the Reader from the Point, and, so, serve instead of a Confute to that
whole Discourse. A rare Method! signifying thus much, if candid^y and plain^y
laid open, and brought to Term^ of Reason; Because I can pretend any thing and
play upon it with Ironies prettily expressed, therefore (my kind unexamining
friends being inured to believe all I say to be Gospel) let my Adversary say
what he will, he shall never be held to discourse solidly. I charge him then
afresh with an affected Disingenuity, designed to palliate h^s ^eglect of
answering; and let him know that (as it is manifest out of my Book) I built not
there those seven Properties of the Rule of Faith, (^he Reasons for which he no
where refutes) on the Exactness, Intireness or Goodness of any
(falsely-pretended) Definition or Explication, but on the Truth of those
Propositions, or the Agreement of those Attributes or Properties to the
respective natures of Rule and Faith as their Subjects. Also he may please to
reflect that these being involved in the signification of those words, by
discovering and then dilating upon each of those singly, I declare by
consequence what is meant by those words as far as concerns my present purpose,
without compiling Explications, or framing Definitions, which only were the
Things I denied. Lastly, I charge this Insincerity far more home upon him now
than ever; that, whereas in my Letter of Thanks from p. 5. to p 9. I had at
large refuted these ridiculous Exceptions of his, he in this very place, where
he pretends to speak particularly to my Letter of Thanks, never takes notice of
any one word there alleged, but conceals all that had been produced to answer
those Exceptions, and bears himself as if no such Answers had been given. This
I must confess falls much short of either nibbling or gnawing; and I am forced
to declare that this constant carriage of his, discovering too openly a perfect
disregard of Truth, abates in me much of that respect which otherwise his good
Endowments would naturally give me.

. 4. His second Remembrance of my Letter of Thanks (for though he says here p.
32. he must not forget it, yet he ha^ been perfectly unmindful of it hitherto)
is, that I say, My Testimonies were not intended against the Protestants,
whereas my Book was writ against them, and I declared the design of my
Testimonies to be to second by Authority what I had before established by
Reason. All this is well, were there not (I fear) two mistakes in it. One, that
I writ that Book against Protestants particularly; whereas it equally oppugns
all that hold Christ and his Apostles to have taught true Doctrine, b^t deny
the Churches Living Voice and Practice to be the means of conveying it down
hitherto, of what denomination soever they be. His second Mistake is, his not
considering that the whole substance of a Book may be writ against such or such
a sort of men, and yet the whole way of managing it not be against or different
from them, but from some particular Divines; who (as I conceived) would better
relish my Reasons if they saw all the several Conclusions deduced from them
seconded by Authority: And this was the true Case. But Dr. T. is not to
understand this till he be willing to acknowledge the Distinction between the
Church and the Schools, which he is resolved he never will, lest it spoil his
writing Controversy.

. 5. But what I complain of is, That he objects I do this because I am
conscious of the weakness of those Testimonies: By which words his partial
Friends will easily conclude he had so weakened those Testimonies that I was
not able to uphold them; whereas Letter of Thanks from p. 106. to p. 122. I
very particularly replied to all he had alleged against them in his Rule of
Faith, and gave an account of his performances in these words, p. 120. This,
Sir, is the up^hot of your Skill in Note-Book Learning: The three first
Testimonies from Scripture you answered not, mistaking what they were brought
for; the fourth you omitted; you have given pitiful Answers to eight from the
Fathers, (as I there showed) and shuffled off nine more without Answer, etc.
Which Charge, as to every Branch of it, I there make good particularly and he
no where clears here, or attempts to clear, more than by barely saying that I
am conscious of the weakness of my Testimonies. I think it is best for me to
take the same Method, and say Dr. T. is conscious of the weakness of all he has
written, and so in a ^rice confute all he has writ; and with far better Reason
than he can pretend to; seeing any Feather will serve to sweep down such Cobweb
stuff as his Fair Probabilities. Now Gentlemen, did Dr. T. let his Readers
understand this Performance of mine, and this Neglect of his, it would not
appear his Answers to these Testimones had been so strong, that my self had any
cause to be conscious of their weakness, therefore (contrary to his promise)
they were to be quite forgotten: it was but fitting and needful* Well, there
have been perhaps many others equally-excellent in the Art of Memory, but,
certainly, in that ra^e and useful Art of Oblivion he bears away the Bell from
all Writers extant. By virtue of this, and the Assistance of that Fallacy in
Logic called non causa pro causa, he obtains all his imaginary Victories.

6. He comes next to clear himself of False Citations: and to let the Reader
see how little I am to be trusted, he will instance in two or three; and I
heartily desire I may be no otherwise trusted, than as it shall appear upon
severe examination of what we both allege, that he is culpable, and my self
Innocent. Now in culling out and managing his Instances, we may be sure he
favors himself as much as he can handsomely; the two first of them being
trifles in comparison of many others omitted; and neither of them* charged by
me as false Citations (whatever he pretends) meaning thereby adding,
diminishing, or altering the words of the Author. Also the very first of these
is the easiest to bear a tolerable explication of any one objected in the Book.
In examining which, I request our respective Friends to be severely impartial
and attentive to what was imputed by me, and what answered by him; in doing
which, Eyesight is to be their best Guide. And, If I have to any degree
wronged him, I shall not think it a jot prejudicial to my credit to declare
that upon second thoughts I ought to mitigate or retract my words, accordding
to the just degree the Truth of the thing shall require.

. 7. I charged him with a notorious abuse of the Preface to Rushworths
Dialogues, in citing the Author of it to say what he makes others say, and
condemns them for saying it. To go securely to work, we are to put down first
the words of the Prefacer, which are these: This Term [Moral Certainty] every
one explicated not alike, but some understood by it such a Certainty as makes
the Cause always work the same Effect, though it take not away the absolute
possibility of working otherways: others called that a Moral Certainty which,
etc. A third Explication of that word is, etc. Of these three (says the
Prefacer, who having related the opinions of others, now begins to speak his
own sense) the first ought absolutely to be reckoned in the degree of true
Certainty, and the Authors considered as mistaken in undervaluing it. Am not I
sure I shall never repeat in the same order all the words I have spoken this
last year? Yet these men will say I am only Morally* Certain. Now the Question
is* whether I did well or no, in blaming Dr. T. for imposing on the Prefacer to
say that what consists with possibility of working otherwise is true Certainty;
whereas that Author avows that to be true Certainty which [others said] took
not away the possibility of working otherwise. What I affirm is, that he
annexes no^ those words [ though it take not away the possibility of working
otherwise] to True Certainty, but only adds them as explicating the Conceit of
others; And that those words [ when the Cause always works the same Effect]
contain the just notion of what he allows there for True Certainty. Dr. T.
thinks the Contrary: and that he allows or approves that for True Certainty,
which did not take away the possibility of working otherwise. To state the Case
clearly, that we may see on whose side the fault lies, let us consider what was
imputed by me, what replied by him. My Charge is two fold; one blaming his
Manner of putting it directly upon the Prefacer, by leaving out the words [
Some understood, etc.] and so far is Evident. See the words of the Preface;
SOME UNDERSTOOD by Moral Certainty, etc. See Dr. T. Rule of Faith, p. 132 [
Lastly, Mr. Wh. does MOST EXPRESSLY contradict this Principle of M. S's in
these following passages. In his Preface to Mr. Rushworth HE SAYS that such a
Certainty as makes the Cause always work the same Effect, though it take not
away the absolute possibility of working otherwise ought absolutely to be
reckoned in the degree of true Certainty, and those Authors are mistaken who
undervalue it. Now, though, one who cites another ought to be allowed the
liberty of taking those words which express his Sentiments without putting them
always in the very method and posture in which they are found in the Author,
while there is no ambiguity or doubt of the Authors sense in that place; yet
where it is at least doubtful that the sense is otherwise, as is manifest to any
one who reads that Preface, which, as I alleged, though Dr. T. never takes
notice of it, was wholly intended to evince the Absolute Certainty of Faith,
it is not so fairly and clearly candid to introduce it as a most express saying
of an Author, and putting it directly upon him as his Saying, whereas there at
least needs a Discourse and the drawing some Consequences to prove it his Sense
and Doctrine, (as will appear shortly) and on the other side, it is opposite to
the whole strain and scope of the Treatise in which it is found: Thus far then I
conceive my self in rigorous Truth justifiable, namely for imputing to Dr. T.
that he left out the words [ Some understood] for he did so, and by so doing
put that saying directly upon the Prefacer himself, and expres^ not that
himself only gathered it by consequence from his words.

. 8. The chief and main part of the Charge is, That the imputed Tenet is not
the sense of the Prefacers words in that place; and since he does not directly
say it, but it is inferred only from his approving an others Tenet (either in
whole or in part) the Point is to be decided by such Reflections as give us best
Light of his Sense: In order to which, I allege, 1. That the whole Scope of
that Treatise is aimed to prove the quite contrary Position; which
Consideration being confessedly the best Interpreter of any Author, to neglect
that, and catch at any little semblance in two or three particular words, and
then force upon that Author a Tenet perfectly contrary to what his whole
Discourse is bent to prove, favors too strong of a Wit resolved to cavil. This
I objected in my Letter of Thanks, and this Dr. T. thought it his best play not
to take notice of here, for it was unanswerable, and too evidently concluded
him Injurious to the Prefacer. First, then, I desire the Reader to reflect that
there is not any show of relating the possibility there spoken of to the Divine
Omnipotence, but only to the natures of Second Causes* next, that since every
thing is what it is made to be, if those Causes can possibly work otherwise, the
thing may be otherwise: These due Reflections made and settled, to those who
have not leisure to read the whole Preface, I offer these particularities. P.
6. he blames* those who bring not an ABSOLUTE CERTAINTY, or COACTIVE of the
Understanding, and at the end of that. he presses those who say those (Moral)
Motives are such as all are obliged to yield to, to show how all can be bound
to believe that which they evidently see MAY BE FALSE. And, which is
remarkable, these Expressions are found in the. immediately before the Citation
D.T. so misrepresents, whence it is likely he could not but see and reflect on
them. Again, p. 10. Else you will be forced to say, that the very way God
Himself has shown to Heaven, MAY POSSIBLY lead to Hell. P. 13. The formal part
of our Action unless it carry EVIDENCE and Certainty with it, cannot be
ventured on without reproach. Now, as appears p. 12* he ayms this discourse at
Actions belonging to Faith, and answers, that is, opposes those who say the
Reason or Ground of our Action need be no more but a high Probability, or
Contingent, as a Thousand to One, etc. -- P. 14. This necessity binds God to
put an INEVITABLE CERTITUDE in the Motives of Faith. -- P. 16. There is NOTHING
advanced toward the TRUTH of the ASSENT* since this remains known, that the
Position MAY BE FALSE, etc. And, to omit others, p. 20. he puts the Question
whether a desultory Assent (which so agrees to this side, that the Believer
sees it FALLIBLE --) be sufficient for Christian Life and Action? -- and coming
in the next. to answer it, he calls this an INCERTITUDE, ( or defect of
Certitude) and declares that it makes a Religion either absolutely NONE, or not
a RATIONAL one, but a MERE FOLLY. These Citations duly reflected on, it will
appear very strange to any ingenuous man, that Dr. T. could easily imagine an
Author, never noted till now to be given to contradict himself, who so
expressly, in such and so many signal passages, and in the whole Tenor of that
Discourse, nay the very immediately foregoing. manifests himself to hold that
the Grounds of Faith cannot possibly lead men the wrong way, that they must be
Evident and Inevitably Certain, that, if it may be False, we cannot assent to
it at all as a Truth, that if the Believer sees it is Fallible, it is Irrational,
a mere Folly to hold it, or else destructive of Religion; It Is strange, I say,
to imagine that a Writer who is any thing in his wits, should put forth a
Treatise purpose^y to evince the Absolute Certainty or Impossibility of
Falsehood in the Grounds and Motives to Faith, and in it so often and so
particularly avow it, and yet in the same Treatise confess that what is possible
to be false is True Certainty, and, so, a competent Ground to establish Faith
on; that is, maintain the contrary Position to what he intended or pretended.

. 9. Having thus amply made good this part of my charge laid against Dr. T.
Letter of Thanks, p. 63. viz. That it is the plain tenor of the Prefacers
Discourse, and the whole scope of that Preface, to force the direct contrary
Position to what Dr. T. would so disingenuously have put upon him, of which he
here takes no notice, nor gives account why he hapt not to mind or regard that
best way of interpreting an Authors words, or not to see so many clear
Expressions against his Interest, rather than one obscure one seemingly for it,
we come next to consider the particular words in the place cited, and see wha^
strong temptation they could give Dr. T. to take him in a sense never intended,
notwithstanding so many pregnant Evidences to the Contrary.

. 10. The Prefacer said, that Some understood by Moral Certainty such a
Certainty as makes the Cause always work the same Effect, though it take not
away the Absolute Possibility of working otherways. He adds afterward, that
this ought absolutely to be reckoned in the degree of true Certainty, and the
Authors considered as mistaken in undervaluing it. And I must confess that to
one who lights by accident on this single passage, taken abstractedly from the
rest, and could reach no deeper than the Grammar or superficial placing of
words, it bears at first sight a show as if the Prefacer had approved that to
be a True Certainty, not only when the Cause always works the same Effect, (as
I take him to mean) but also when it takes not away the possibility of working
otherwise, (in which sense Dr. T. understands him.) But I must avow that it is
Impossible any rational deliberate man who endeavors to look into the sense
of words, can justly frame even hence any such imagination. For which I offer
these Reasons: 1. That though the distinct Limits of Moral Certainty be
unknown, yet in the general Conceit of those who use that word, particularly
those alluded to here, Moral Certain^y is that which consists with a
possibility of being otherwise; wherefore True Certainty which is here
counterpos'd to Moral, must be counterpos'd also to that which constitutes
Moral Certainty, namely, to a Possibility to be otherwise. 2. Since Absolute
Certainty is that kind of Certainty which is opposed to the Moral one, the True
Certainty here mentioned must mean the same with Absolute Certainty, which is
also avowed and requ^r'd by that Author. p. 6. now cited; But it is acknowledged
that Absolute Certainty excludes all possibility of Falsehood, therefore the
True Certainty allowed and approved here by the Prefacer, is that which has no
Possibility of being False. 3. These things being so, viz. Moral Certainty
being that which has annexed to it possibility of Falsehood, and Absolute or
True Certainty being confessedly inconsistent with it, it is unimaginable that
he who blame^ any man for mistaking or undervaluing a thing for Morally
Certain, should not also blame him for mistaking and undervaluing it as
possible to be False; since this is annexed in the conceit of those blameworthy
persons to Moral Certainty, as its proper Constitutive and Equivalent. Also
it is unconceiveable that he who approves a thing as Truly or Absolutely
Certain, should not also mean it Impossible to be False, this being the proper
Constitutive (and con^equently) Equivalent of True or Absolute Certainty. It Is
evident then that Authors sense can be no other than this, that when the Cause
always works the same Effect, it is True or Absolute Certainty, and not Moral
Certainty only, and consequently that it is Impossible to be false: and that,
those words which he added in their names, expressing it only Morally Certain
[though it take not away the absolute possibility of working otherways] are
utterly disapproved by him in his disapproving their calling it Moral
Certainty; which is of the self-same notion. My Charge then is justified to a
tittle, viz. that Dr. T. left out the words [ Some understood] and put upon the
Prefacer to say it most expressly, whereas the Sense he imposes is contrary to
express words of his in diverse places, nay to the whole intention and drift of
that Preface, and necessarily opposite to the sense of those words in that very
particular place he cites for it. This is manifestly Dr. T's Fault; mine, if
any, is this; that I might have mitigated the phrase, [ Notorious Abuse, etc]
and have been so wise as to consider that Dr. T. does not use to look so
narrowly into the Sense of words as I still expect from him, nor regards the
Antecedents or Consequents, as candid Adver^aries use, but contents himself
with the first countenance they bear, right or wrong, especially if it make for
his Interest; and hereupon I ought to have been more merciful to hab^tual
Imperfections. I have been larger in clearing th^s Point, because I hear his
Friends apprehend he has gained a notable advanta^e against me in this
particular, and I dare even submit it to their Judgment, if Friendship will
permit them to examine it with any degree of impartiality. I hope this will
serve for an Instance how Dr. T. still misunderstands our D^vi^es when he
objects them against me; as also how far I have been from imposing any thing
unjustly upon him in the least. God be praised, I do stand in need of such
petty Crafts.

. 11. In clearing himself of the next Fault objected, he is still himself, and
I wish he did not still grow worse and worse. The Fallacy ca^l'd non causa pro
causa, or pretending a wrong Reason, which runs through half his performances,
was never more needful than in this present conjuncture. I invite then even his
best Friend Dr. St. himself to judge of the case, and desire him, having first
read the p. 65. in my Letter of Thanks to determine the point in Controversy.
In that place I represented Dr. T. as quoting from Rushworths Dialogues, after
himself had preambled ( Rule of Faith, p. 144.) that probably it was prudent to
cast in a few good words concerning Scripture [for the Satisfaction of
Indifferent men who have been brought up in this verbal and apparent respect of
the Scriptures] and then adding as a kind of Comment upon those words, [ who it
SEEMS are not yet arrived to that degree of Catholic Piety and Fortitude as to
endure patiently the Word of God should be reviled or slighted.] Now this
Preamble, and Comment introduced by [ it seems] (that is, from those words he
had cited) did put upon that Author, and by him on Catholics, so unworthy and
Invidious a meaning, that it obliged me to put down the rest of the words
immediately following in the Dialogues, and omitted by Dr. T. that so I might
clear the sober meaning and intention of that Author from what he had so
unhandsomely imposed; and (not troubling my self to repeat over again what he
had newly said) I introduced them thus; Whereas in the place you cite he only
expresses [it would be a Satisfaction to indifferent men to see the Positions
one would induce them to embrace, maintainable by Scripture] Which done, I
added as the Result of my whole Charge, [ Which is so different from the
Invidious MEANING your malice puts upon it, and so innocent and inoffensive in
it self, that one would wonder with what Conscience you could thus WREST and
PERVERT it. Whence it is evident that my total Charge was of imp^sing an
Invidious MEANING, of Wresting and Perverting an innocent and inoffensive
meaning; that he only expressed (which words I immedia^ely subjoyned after the
Doctors Comment, and not after Rushworths words) it would be a Satisfaction,
etc. -- to see those Positions maintainable by Scripture; nor was there in the
whole Charge any Controversy about the right or wrong, perfectly or
imperfectly quoting the WORDS. This being evident, as it will be to any
ordinary Understanding that guides it self by Eyesight and Common Sense, let
us see what disingenuous ways Dr. T. uses to escape blame. 1. He never in the
least mentioned his imposing upon those words an Invidious Meaning, or of
wresting an innocent and unoffensive [Intention,] which was solely objected;
whence he is so far from clearing himself from the Fault imputed, that (out of
an over-tender kind-heartedness to his own Credit) he not so much as names it,
or takes notice of it. Next, instead of that, he substitutes a False Charge,
never dreamed on by any man but himself; namely, that I denied those Words [who
have been brought up in this verbal and apparent respect of Scripture] to be
found in Rushworth; whereas there is not a syllable to that purpose in my Book.
Thirdly, to give Countenance to this False Charge, those words of mine, [
whereas in the place you cite he only expresses] which in me were immediately
subjoyned to his Comment, and were evidently designed to restrain that Authors
words to a Sense different from what he had imposed, he here joins immediately
after the very Wo^ds themselves, though there were three or four lines between
one and the other. By this stratagem making the Reader apprehend the word [
onely] was exclusive or negative of more words found in Rushworth; whereas by
the who^e tenor of the Charge, by all the words which express it, and lastly,
by the placing those words, [ he only exprest] immediately after his
unhandsome Comment, it is most manifest they only excluded any Ground or
occasion of so strange a misconstruction, and aimed not in the least at denying
any other words, but only at clearing that this was that Authors sole
Intention. Yet in confidence of these blinding Crafts, and that his unexamining
Readers will believe all he says, he sounds the triumph of his own Victory in
this rude and confident manner, Certainly one would think that either this man
has no Eyes or no Forehead. I will not say as Dr. T. does here in a Sermon
preached against himself, p. 123. that a little wit, and a great deal of
ill nature will furnish a man for Satyr; only I must say that the tenth part
of this Rudeness in another (though justly occasioned too) would have been
called Passion and ill Language. But I see what is a most horrid Sin in the
abominable Papist, is still a great Virtue in the Saints. On this occasion
since he is so hot and Rustic, I must be serious with him, and demand of him
publicly in the face of the World Satisfaction for this Unjust Calumny; and,
that I may not be too rigorous with him, I will yield him innocent in all the
rest, if he clears himself of this one passage in which he counterfeits the
greatest Triumph and Victory; Of this Fault, I say, which he has newly
committed, even then when he went about to clear himsellf of a former.

. 12. His last Attempt is to give an account why he added that large senc'd
Monosyllable [ All] to my words, which is the only False Citation be has yet
offered to Examination; the former two not being objected as such, whatever he
pretends. Now the Advantage he gains by adding it, is manifestly this, that if
that word be added, and that I indeed say, The greatest Hopes and Fears are
strongly applied to the minds of ALL Christians, it would follow that no one
Christian in the world could apostatize, or be a bad man; which being the most
ridiculous position that ever was advanced, and confutable by every days
experience, his imposing this Tenet on me, by virtue of this Addition, i^ (as
he well expresses it, Sermon. p. 87.) putting me in a Fools Coat for every Body
to laugh at. I appealed ( Letter of Thanks, p. 66, 67.) to Eyesight, that no
such word was ever annexed to the words now cited, and thence charged him with
falsifying; He would clear himself, in doing which, he denies not that he added
the word All, (this was too evident to be cloak'd) but he gives his reason why
he added it, on this manner: He* alleges my words, that Christian Doctrine was
at first unanimously settled in the minds of the Faithful, etc. -- and firmly
believed by [all] those Faithful to be the way to Heaven. Therefore, infers
Dr. T. since in the pursuit of the D^scourse it is added, that the greatest
Hopes and Fears were strongly applied to the minds of the First Believers,
those First Believers must mean ALL those Faithful spoken of before, and the
same is to be said of the Christians in after Ages. This is the full force of
his Plea: My Reply is, That I had particular reason to add the word [ All] in
the former part, where I said that That Doctrine was firmly believed by ALL
those faithful, for they had not been Faithful had they not firmly believed it;
and yet had equal reason to omit it when I came to that passage, ( the greatest
motives were strongly aprly'd to the minds of the first Believers), because I
have learned of our B. Savior that many receive the word, that is believe and
gladly too, yet the thorny cares of this world (to which I add Passions and ill
Affections springing from Original Sin) choke the Divine Seed and hinder it
from fructifying; whereas, had it had the full and due effect which its nature
required, it had born Fruit abundantly, Now, since those Motives are of
themselves able to produce it in all, and oftentimes convert the most
indisposed, that is, the most wicked Sinners, I conceive this happens for want
of due Application making the Motives sink deep into the Understanding Power so
as to make it conceit them heartily (which vigorous Apprehension we use to call
Lively Faith) nothing else being required to any effect but the Agents Power
over the Patients indisposition, and a close Application of the Power to the
Matter it is to work upon: Which kind of Application being evidently not made to
All, there was no show of reason why I should put that word in that place, and
much less that Dr. T. should put it for me: I was forced indeed to name the
word Believers, because it was impossible to conceive that those Motives should
be strongly applied to the Minds of Jews or Heathens. Again, I was forced to
express it plurally, since no sober man can doubt but the doctrine of Faith
sunk deep into the hearts or wills of more than some one, and thence wrought in
them through Charity: but that I should mean by that word only plurally
expressed a Number of Believers, having those Motives strongly applied to them,
Equal to those who firmly believed or were Faithful, is unconceivable by any
man who looks into the sense of words; this being the same as to apprehend that
all who believe speculatively, lay to heart those Motives to good Life which
Faith teaches them; a thing our daily Experience confutes. Moreover, I
endeavored to prevent any such Apprehension in my very next words after my
Principles, which were these [ This put, it follows as certainly that a GREAT
NVMBER of the first Believers and after faithful would continue, etc. Now,
these words [ a Great number of the first Believers] having most evidently a
Partitive sense, that is, signifying only a Part or some of them, it might
seem strange to any Man that knows not Dr. T's might in such performances and
that nothing is Impossible for him to mistake, who will do it because he must
do it, that* he could interpret those very same words [ First Believers] to
mean all, not one excepted. It Is a trifling Evasion then to hope to come off by
saying as he does here p. 36. If it contradict what he says elsewhere it is no
new or strange thing; For this is not elsewhere or another place, but the same
place, and the very next words to my Principles (as is seen Sure^^. p. 60.) The
badness of which excuse shows he is inexcusable. But this is not all; that
discourse ends not there, but goes on at least two Leaves farther clearing that
very point; and in the process of it these words are found p. 63. To say it
preserves None good is to question Christ's wisdom, etc. A GREAT PART therefore
would be virtuous, etc. A BODY of Traditionary Christians would still be
continued, -- p. 64. All which ways and Objects thus easily and strongly
appliable were frequently and efficaciously applied by the Education of Parents
and the discipline and Economy of the Church, which brings those speculations
to practice, was ever, and must needs reach the GENERALITY, -- p. 65. must
still continue in SOME GREAT MVLTITVDE. All these expressions in the self-same
Discourse and on the self-same Subject, perfectly explicated my sense to be
that that Plural word ( Believers) did not reach all, not one excepted. This
then is Dr. T's habitual imperfection which runs through all his Mock-Answer to
Sure footing* He has no patience to take any entire Discourse of mine into his
Consideration, or grapple with the full import of it; but he catches at some
word at the beginning or by the way which seems easiest to be misinterpreted,
and whereas any candid man would guide himself by the annexed or concomitant
words, and the whole scope of the Discourse, Dr. T. is got beyond those
too-ingenuous considerations, and knowing very well, as he expressed it Sermon. p.
121. that nothing is so easy as to take particular Phrases and Expressions out
of the best Book in the world, and abuse them by forcing an odd and ridiculous
sense upon them, he exactly observes that method, and abuses some Expression or
word by forcing (in despite of all the concomitant circumstances conspiring to
rectify him) an odd and ridiculous sense upon it; and then lest those
rectifying passages annexed should rise up in judgment against him and accuse
him to the candid Reader of imposing a sense never intended by the Author it is
but accusing that Author of contradict^ng himself, and all is well. Thus he used
the Prefacer p. 30. me in this very place, in these words If it contradict what
he says elsewhere it is no new or strange thing; and Sure-footing in most of
those places which he wilfully misconstrued throughout his Rule of Faith. By
this rare Stratagem gaining two notable Advantages against any Author, whereas
not so much as one was offered; First, making him talk ridiculously; next,
making him contradict himself. Both of them built upon another of Dr. T's firm
Principles, which is this; No Author shall be allowed to interpret his own
meaning, but that shall be his sense which I please to put upon any particular
Expression of his; by adding words to it or otherwise glossing it as seems best
for my advantage; and if he offers to be so wary as to annex other words which
would interpret his meaning to be otherwise, he is a Fool and contradict
himself. Now, though this Principle which grounds this Procedure be an odd one,
yet Dr. T. holds faithfully to what he has once espoused, and were it now
seasonable, I durst undertake to reckon up twenty places in his Rule of Faith,
where he vaunts himself thus doubly victorious by making use of this one
Artifice.

. 13. But in case that plural word had seemed to him to infer an Universality,
why could he not content himself with giving his reason why it seemed to follow
thence? Had he done this none could have accused him of falsifying: for every
one has liberty to offer his conceit, and the reason why he judges so, without
meriting or incurring any harsher note than that of a mis-reasoner. Whereas
now, his carriage exposes him justly to these Exceptions. First, That he went
not about to infer or gather what he imposes, but ( Rule of Faith, p. 163.) he
makes me in express terms and directly say that greatest hopes and fears are
strongly applied to the minds of ALL Christians, whereas in my words put down
by himself, p. 162. no such thing as [ all] is found annexed to those words.
Next, that the word ( all) which he added, was put in the same Italick Letter
in an even tenor with those other words which were indeed mine; as may be seen
in the place now cited. Thirdly, that his whole Attempt in that place, is
merely to confute that word [ All] which himself had inserted, as may be seen
Letter of thanks p. 77. where I instanced in nine or ten places in which he
combated that single word of his own adding and nothing else* and (as I there
showed from p. 78. to p. 86.) went forwards to make out that pretense by
falsifying evidently my sense and sometimes my words too, in three or four
places more. Fourthly, That ( Rule of Faith, p. 165. l. 3.) he tells the Reader
I SAY EXPRESSLY, those Causes are put in ALL the Faithful actually causing: by
this means endeavoring to persuade the Reader it is not his own interpretation
or deduction from some words of mine, but my own express words; which is a most
express falsification. Lastly, he neglects to take notice of any of those words
which manifoldly and expressly showed my Tenet to be quite contrary to what he
imposed. This is my total charge against him; of which we hear very little or
rather nothing in this Preface where he goes about to clear it; only he says
that those First Believers to whom those Hopes and Fears were strongly applied,
must by the tenor of my words mean all the Faithful dispersed over several
parts of the world, and so all the Christians of that Age, and for the same
reason of the following ones; which is the very thing I deny, and have given
lately my reasons why they could not. Besides, every Scholar knows that Authors
first speak short and in common, and afterward, when they come to explain
themselves, more particularly; and had he been pleased to contain his rare gift
of misinterpreting till the very next line to my Principles, woven in the
tenor of the same Discourse, which he pretends to build his mistake upon, he
had found the express contrary to his Additional [ All] viz* ( A Great number
or Body of the first Believers and after-Faithful, the direct) sense of which
words is not all, but some only.

. 14. Again, what if I used the word Faithful first, and put to it the word
All, joined with such words as would ^ear that universal Expression, must it
needs follow that when I name the same word Plurally afterward, I must needs
mean all or the universality again, even though I join it this second time with
words of a quite different Sense? Imagine I had said, that All Historians write
of matters of Fact, and then had subjoined a little after that Historians write
of King Pepin, must I needs mean by Historians only plurally expressed when I
come to name them the second time, All Historians, no^ one excepted, write of
King Pepin? What Logic but Dr. T's, who defies all Principles, could ever
stumble upon such a Paradox*

. 15. To conclude this matter. All these particularities here related, being
well examined by Eyesight and weighed by Reason, it is impossible any Candid
Considerer, however he may favorably judge Dr. T. mistaken in words which at
first sight bore such a semblance to one who read but half the Discourse, can
for all that excuse him from great Rashness and strong Inclinations to draw
every thing in his Adversary to a sinister sense, and to take him up before he
is down. But I must farther say, that the Constancy he shows in this kind of
Carriage, and the Interest which evidently accrues by it to his Cause, and
himself as a Writer, (which is at once to make his Adversary talk like a Madman
and Self-Contradictor both, and divert the Readers Attention from the true
Point, and by that means avo^d the duty of Answering) discover too palpably
it is a willing and designed Mistake. What that signifies, let others judge,
without putting me still to name it. I am heartily weary of such Drudgery.

. 16. And so I take my leave of this pretty Preface, which has not one word of
Reason in it, but built on Mistake; nor one good Excuse for so many bad Faults^
But pretends to speak to three Treatises of mine, without taking notice
heartily of so much as one Argument in any of them, and is a mere Endeavor by
multitudes of impertinent and insignificant Scoffs to make some plausible show
of an Answer, for those merrily-conceited Readers to sport at, who fancy such
frothy Talk far above solid Reasoning. In which pleasant strain consists also
his Friend Dr. St's greatest Talent. Whence, the Comedian in their performances
supplies the Divine; and Plautus with his fellows is by far more propitious,
useful, and influential to their Imaginary Victories, than Aristotle, and all
the Learned Authors in the world who write Sense or Logic. And as these Comic
Controvertists affect the same Manner of writing which those Stagers did, so
their End and Aim is the same too, viz. not to propose any thing like exact
Knowledge to men truly Learned, but merely Populo ^t placerent quas fecissent
Fabulas.

The Conclusion.
Containing The AUTHOR'S REQUEST To the Knowing Candid WITS of This Nation.

THis being the Genius of my Adversary, such his Method of Answering my Books,
and yet his numerous Party hazarding to over-bear Reason with Noise, at least
in the Esteem of vulgar Scholars, making up the Generality; who are not able to
weigh either the Strength of the Arguments, or the Worth of the Authorities
engaged for either Party, but only to number them, or scan their Multitude; I
am forced to Appeal to You, our Learned Umpires, offering You these few
Proposals; with my humble Request, that, if You find them reasonable, and
agreeable to the Maxims of Learning, or the clearing of Truth, Mankinds best
Interest, You would be pleased in all handsome occasions to use your Power with
Dr. T. and his Friends, and solicit a due compliance with them.

1. That this Extrinsecal and Ignoble way of answering Arguments with
Persecution and Railing, may be left off; and that when the Reason too much
presses, it may not be held Supplemental to the Duty of Replying, to cry out
POPERY. Particularly, that they would please to consider how improper this
Carriage were on this occasion, in case it had been otherwise laudable in it
self* seeing the only Point maintained by me here, is this, That Christian
Faith is Absolutely or Truly Certain.

2. That when the Point depends entirely on Reason, and not on the (miscalled)
Authority of Speculaters, it may not be held a just Disproof of my Arguments to
allege the different Sentiment of some Speculative Divines; since that
Carriage supposes as its Maxim, the Truth of this Proposition [That cannot be
True which all School-Divines do not agree to.] Wherefore unless he first makes
out this to be a Truth to be proceeded and relied on, this way of arguing,
which takes up no small part of Dr. T's Controversial Writings, is convinced to
be al^^gether Impertinent,

3. That Dr. T. would himself please to follow that Doctrine which in his
Sermons he so often and so pressingly inculcates to others; and that, in handling
this grave and important Point, all Raillery, Drollery, Irony, Scoffs, Ieers,
rude and bitter Sarcasms, breaking of Jests, and suchlike Attempts of vain and
frothy Wit, or splendid Efforts of peevish Zeal, which so abound in his Rule of
Faith, and in a manner wholly compose this Preface, be totally superseded, and
only Serious Reason made use of. To oblige him to which Sober Demand, I
promise on my part, That, though these being here my only Confuters, I was
forced at present to give them sometimes their proper Answers by retorting now
and then his own Language, only better applied; yet in my future Writings I
shall seriously pursue the Proof of the Point, without minding at all his
Impertinencies; that is, I shall rigorously observe the same sober Strain,
which, as my own Inclinations lead me, I followed in Sure-footing, Faith
Vindicated, and my Method; till Dr. T. seeing it his Interest to avoid
Answering in a solid manner, or closing by way of rigorous Discourse with my
Arguments, thought it his best play to bring the Controversy (...) of the Way
of Reason into that of Burlesque. Also that all Childish Cavilling at
Inelegancies or hard Words, at want of Rhetoric in a circumstance where none
was intended or needful* at my being the first that said (he should have said
proved) this or that, be for the same Reason laid aside, as Things p^rfectly
Useless toward the Clearing of Truth. As likewise that it be not held and
imputed as Confidence, to maintain Faiths Absolute Certainty, or any Point
else, for which I offer my Reasons; nor to pretend to Self Evident Principles
and Absolutely-Conclusive Proofs or Demonstrations; whenas the Circumstance and
Matter to be proved, nay the very Name of a Scholar renders it shameful to
pretend or produce any thing of an Inferior Strength, in case I aimed at
winning others to assent to my sayings. But above all I request that none of
these trifling ways be made use of to supply the want of pertinent Reason, or
make up the Whole Confute, as is practiced throughout this Preface; but that
Reason, wherever it is found, may have its due and proper Return, Reason.

4. That, while he goes about to reply to my Arguments, he would please to use
my words, and not insert others of his own; and then combat them instead of me.
Or, if he undertakes to speak to my Reasons themselves, that he would take the
full import of them, and not still catch at and then play upon some word or two
which he can most easily seem to misunderstand, so to divert the Discourse. A
Method so constantly observed in his Reply to Sure-footing, where he made Witty
Dexterity still supply the place of Pertinent Solidity; that instead of [Rule
of Faith] it ought more justly have been entitled Sure-footing Travesty.

5. And since all Discourse is ineffectual which is not grounded on some
Certain Truth, and consequently not only he who settles or builds, but also he
who aims to overthrow, or the Objecter, must ground his Discourse on some
Certain Principle, if he intends to convince the others Tene^ of Falsehood,
that Dr. T. would therefore esteem it his Duty, even when he objects, to ground
his Opposition upon some Firm Principle. And since no pretended Principle can
be Firm, but by virtue of some First Principle, and that Dr. T. has disclaimed
here Identical Propositions to be such, it is requisite that he either confute
my Discourses produced in this Treatise proving First Principles to be of that
nature, and show some other way by which the Terms of those he assigns for such
do better cohere, or he is convinced to have none at all; and so all he writes
or discourses must be Groundless and Insignificant.

6. Thus much in common for the Manner of his Writing. As for his Matter, I
request he would not in the subject of this present Discourse, about the
Certainty of a Deity and Christian Faith, hover with ambiguous Glosses between
Certainty and Uncertainty, that is, between Is and Is not; but speak out
Categorically, and plainly declare whether he holds those Points absolutely
True; that is, whether they be absolutely True to us; or whether any man in the
world can with reason say he sees they are True, or has any Reason or Argument
to conclude them True* If not, then ^et him show how it is avoidable but all the
World must with Truth say, Both these may be False, for any thing they can
discern; than which, nothing sounds more horrid and blasphemous to a Christian
Ear. If he says there are such Reasons extant, but he has them not, then let
him leave off attempting to settle those Tenets, or writing on those Subjects,
since he confesses himself unqualify'd and unfurnished with means to manage
them. If he says there are such Proofs, and that he has them, let him produce
them* and stand by them, and not blame the nature of Things for bearing no
more, and others for saying they have more, and that the Things do bear more.
To express my self closer and more particularly; Let him speak out ingenuously
and heartily to these Queries, Whether be holds that God's Church, or any man
in the World, is furnished with better Grounds for the Tenet of a Deity or for
Christian Faith, or any stronger Reasons to prove these Points True, than those
in Joshua's and Hezekiah's time had or could have the day before, that the Sun
should not stand still or go back the next day; than that Person who threw a
Glass on the Ground which broke not, had or could have that it would not break;
^han the Inhabitants of diverse Houses had that they would not suddenly fall,
which yet did so; or, lastly* to use his own words, than those Reasons are
which satisfy Prudent Men in Humane Affairs, in which notwithstanding they
experience themselves often mistaken? If he say he has, let him produce them,
and heartily maintain them, and endeavor to make them out, and I shall
hereafter express as much Honor for him, as I have done here of Resentment and
Dislike, for advancing the contrary Position. But, if he profess he has no
better, or that (the nature of the thing not bearing it) there can no better be
given, then it is unavoidable, first, that the most Sacred Tenets of a Deity's
Existence, and all the Points of Christian Faith may be now actually False,
since Points which had Reasons for them of Equivalent strength did prove
actually such. Next, that no man in the world is (in true Speech) Certain there
is a God, or that the least word of Christian Religion is True; since it is
Nonsense to say any of those Persons (in those former Instances of equivalent
strength) were or could be truly Certain of Points which proved actually False,
and in which themselves were mistaken. In a word, I would have him without
disguise let the world know whether, as there was Contingency in those Causes,
and so the imagined or hoped Effects in the former Instances miscarried, and
proved otherwise than was expected, so there be not also Contingency in the
Motives for those two most Sacred Tenets, upon whose Certainty the Eternal Good
of Mankind depends, so as they may perhaps not conclude, and so both those
Tenets may perhaps be really and actually otherwise than we Christians now
hold. If he professes to embrace this wicked Tenet, (and his words are too
express for it ever to be denied, though upon second thoughts I hope they may
be retracted) he owes me an Answer to my Faith Vindicated, which hitherto he
has shuffled off without any at all, and to my Reasons alleged in this
Treatise for the same Point, FAITH's ABSOLUTE CERTAINTY.

Now, Gentlemen, since nothing conduces more to Knowledge in any kind, than
that the Matter of the Dispute be unambiguously stated, and clearly understood,
and that a solid Method be observed in the managing it, I become a humble
Petitioner to your Selves, as you tender that Excellent Concern of Mankind, and
that most Sacred One of Christianity, to use your best Interest with Dr. T.
that he would please to yield to these Duties here expressed; and I oblige my
self inviolably to observe the same Carriage toward him, which I here propose
and press he would use toward me; which if he refuse, I declare I shall leave
him to the Censure of all truly-Learned and Ingenuous Persons, however he
triumphs amongst Those who are great Admirers of Pretty Expressions; resting
assured that your selves will not only hold me Unblameable, but also highly
Commendable for no^ losing my precious time in reciprocating his trifling and
insignificant Drollery.

Your True Honourer and Humble Servant, J. S.

FINIS.
AMENDMENTS.
PAge 1. line 21. read that both first, p. 47. l. 3. self, possible to, p. 50.
l. 20. solid, p. 101. l. 6, 7. possible all this may, p. 115 l. 12, Judgment in
which it is, l. 25. can never, p. 118. l. 26. resolute hatred, p. 121. l. 23.
did equivalently, p. 124. l. 21. and 28. Speculaters, p. 127. l. 17. nay more,
p. 135. l. 7. to be, p. 139. l. 18. greater degree, p. 142. l. 2. is not true,
or not to dare, p. 146. l. 14. Chimerical, p 157. l. 16. Fourth Eviction* l.
18. of the Sixth, p. 162. l. 16. Sermons equally, p. 163. l 27. Parallelepiped,
p. 166. l. 30. Predicate, p. 176. l. ult. all good, p. 183. l. 28 sensible man
may, p. 184. l. 2. deduced there, p. 186. l. 12. of discoursing the, p. 199. l.
25. it is, is not more, p. 200. l. 16. of its own, p. 212. l. 24. not the Rule,
dele express, p. 218. DISCOURSE IX. p. 219* l 13, 14. Reason in it -- p 229. l.
28, 29. the Authors mistaken in undervaluing it, p. 234. l. 17. I do non stand.
p. 239. l. 5. applied, l. 6. I had.


