THE INTEREST OF SCOTLAND IN THREE ESSAYS VIZ.

I. Of the true Original and Indifferency of Church Government. II. Of the
Union of Scotland and England into one Monarchy. III. Of the present State of
Scotland.
Conamur tenues Grandia. Printed in the Year 1700.

TO THE Nobility and Gentry OF SCOTLAND
My Lords and Gentlemen,
A Man who makes the Public Concern his own, and an Author that Dedicats his
Works to any Society of People, the one must resolve to have the Sense of his
Duty for a reward: And the other, Men of all Characters for his Patrons.

But Men that live together in a regular Society, are very much deceived, when
they think it sufficient for their Happiness to scrape together plentiful
Estates: without concerning themselves how the public Business of their
Country is managed. For, how can they be secure, either in their Enjoyment, if
the Laws don't protect them? Or, how can they Hope for Good Laws, if they don't
concern themselves with that Assembly, which has the Legislative power?

Rome owes not her Greatness to her Founders, who were a parcel of People Born
and Nursed up in Murders and Plunderings, and trained in all sort of Villainies;
but to their Successors, who became Wise, Frugal, Just, and passionatly
studious of Virtue and Glory, till at last, they overtop'd in power all their
Neighbors. Nor could any thing have put a stop to their Empire, till private
Men did prefer their own gain to the Interest of the Public. Then was it,
that, in the time of the Emperor Tiberius, all ran headlong into Slavery; The
Consuls, the Senate, the Gentry: And the Nobler the Person was, the greater have
he made to ruin his Country.

My Lords,

You are Hereditary Members of Parliament, so that both your Titles of Honor
and your private Interests oblige your Lordships to be the Pillars and
Supporters of your Country: By managing all it is Concerns, without the least
bias, from that true Virtue which inspired some of your Forefathers to appear
Heroes for this Nation.

And you, Gentlemen, who are Members of Parliament, both your Duty to your
Country, to your Friends, and to your selves, will stare you in the Face, if
you do any thing against the Interest of any of them. And you that are not
Members of Parliament, how necessary is it, for the Security of your Lives,
Liberties and Properties, that good Laws be made, and every thing removed, that
may endanger them? Be therefore diligent, in putting the Members of Parliament
in mind of their Duty; and let the most sensible of you, who have Families and
Estates to care for, endeavor to fill the Places of the Representatives of
Parliament, when any are vacant, that by your Honesty and Wisdom, every
Misfortune may be avoided, that has threatened this Nation from Members, that
have neither Fortune nor Reputation to preserve.

Whilst the Parliament contains Men of Courage and Public Spirit, who can
neither be bought nor frighted, Matters cannot long proceed amiss: And it is
hardly conceivable, what Esteem is paid to Men of steady Principles, even by
their Enemies: their very Words and Actions are admired and followed, so long
as they live. Whereas busy Intriguers after Places and Pensions are
contemptible to the very Men, of whom they are the wretched Instruments to
enslave their Country.

Therefore, My Lords and Gentlemen, If these Essays can demonstrat any way the
Interest of this Nation, I will have my Design both in Writing and Dedicating
of them to you, on whom depends the greatest part of the Happiness of your
Country.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Yours, etc.

This Book being printed in haste, these Errors have escaped the Correction of
the Press, which the Reader is desired to mend with his Pen.

Page 8. line 8. for was, read were. p. 32. l. 8. f. Pedro. r. Pietro. p. 44.
l. 28. f. Unite. r. Act. p. 54. l. 17. f. have. r. has. p. 100. l. 9. f. part.
r. Party.

The Contents of the Essay upon the present State of Scotland.
The Introduction. Page 65 Section. I. Of the Education of Youth. Page 67 Sect.
II. Of the Commons. Page 73 Sect. III. Of the Clergy. Page 81 Sect. IV. Of the
Nobility and Gentry. Page 86 Sect. V. Of the King and Parliament. Page 89 Sect.
VI. That a mixed Government cannot increase in Wealth and Power, but by the
Honesty and Wisdom of it is Members of Parliament. Page 95 Sect. VII. What
Measures this present Parliament ought to take, for recovering the Abuses of
former Reigns, and putting this Nation into a constant Course of Thriving. Page
103
AN ESSAY CONCERNING The true Original and Indifferency OF Church Government.
ALL Christians are taught by Divine Revelation, that they are the Offspring
of one Man and one Woman; for whose sin being condemned to Ignorance, they are
prone to Vice, and subject to unruly Passions, which hurries them on in the
Commission of Evil, and causes Rapine and Violence to triumph in the World.

It was only a few of the first Ages, that retained any knowledge of God, and of
His Worship; all the rest being left to the Dictats of Nature, to provide what
they should find convenient for themselves: Till mutual fear of being oppressed
one by another did oblige them to unite into Communities. Then arose Command
and Obedience, which ever have been the support of all humane Affairs, the Bond
of all Society, and the Spirit of every Body Politic, which inables all it is
Members to live in Unity.

So long as the World was divided into petty Governments equal in strength
amongst themselves, the greatest Ambition of each Mortal, was the Interest of
that Society whereof he was a Member, so that Self-preservation had the same
force to keep him to his duty, that Religion has almost upon us at present.

But so soon as some of those Communities did contract a Friendship and
Assurance amongst themselves, perhaps some particular Member (whose ill Nature
and Ambition overreached the Wit of his Fellows) did engage them to league
together, and to assault their Neighboring Governments, compelling them one
after another to submit and trudge for their Maintenance, whilst they loitered
at home in ease and plenty: and from such oppressive means (we may suppose) did
spring the Assyrian Empire, (which is the first made mention of in History) the
Founder of which was Nimrod, who had the Art to cheat his Companions into a
Compliance with himself, for oppressing their Neighbors, and to get himself
chosen their Captain, that he might at last be able to buble them of their
Liberties, and to become their absolute Monarch. So Self-preservation, that
great Motive which kept his Forefathers in aw, being no longer in use to
preserve in order that new moudled Empire, there was a necessity of some Model
of Civil Government to make all its Members live regularly, and to follow the
different professions assigned them; that Corporations, Colleges, and every
Civil Community might have their use, and that the distinction of Absolute and
Subordinate Powers might come in fashion.

Nevertheless, this Empire had split in pieces in its very Infancy, (its People
being in Ease and Plenty, and its Soldiers left to follow the itch of their own
Inclinations) if there had not been some Men, by decay of Nature, perhaps
incapable of the Vices then in Vogue, which had the foresight to join
Priestcraft with their Civil Government; for Banishing from it (as much as
possible) both Mental and Corporal Vices, and for bringing People's Consciences
under Subjection; that they might the more nicely observe a strictness in
Morals. Then it was, that the Assyrian Monarchy had it is Church Government, as
well, as (in succeeding Ages) the Persian, Grecian, Roman, and and all other
Heathen Governments had their's: which have been composed of Persons of more
than vulgar Gapacities, capable to continue a probable History of a World to
come, to make acquaintance with its imaginary Inhabitants, and to become
Mediators betwixt them and their fellow Citizens, whom they always managed both
for the Glory of their Gods, and for their own private Advantage. Then was it
the Custom to Sacrifice, not only Beasts, but Men, Women, and Children, and to
impose all the Idolatry imaginable upon the World, by their Oracles; the Cheat
of which has been often discovered, as particularly, by Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria, who showed the Inhabitants of that Town, the hollow Statues into
which the Priests privately crept to give their Responses.

Of all the Pagan Church-Governments, we know most of that of the Romans.

Romnlus and his Sucessor Numa Pompilius being made sensible by their own
Experience, and that of their Neighbors, how great a Ligament of Government
political Religion was, took care to Institute several Orders of Priests, to
whom all their Subjects might pay Honor, and by whom they were to be
instructed, how to pray, what Sacrifices, what Vows, what Gifts would be
acceptable to the Gods; and in a word, in all the Ceremonies made use of in
Divine-Service.

The Pontifices of all the Priests, seems to have had the greatest share of
Church Government; for Cicero (in his Oration to them) tells them, that the
Honor and Safety of the Common Wealth, the Liberty of the People, the Houses
and Fortunes of the Citizens, and the very Gods themselves were all entrusted
to their Care, and depended wholly on their Wisdom and Management.

The Superintendent of the Pontifices, was one of the Most honorable Offices
in the Common Wealth; upon which account all the Emperors, for their own
Interest, and after the Example of Julius Caesar, either took the Name of
Pontisex Maximus, or actually discharged the Office themselves; and even the
Christian Emperors retained the Title, till Gratian refused it.

The Jews were the only People on Earth that had continued to them the
Knowledge of the true GOD, who was pleased to reveal his Will from time to time
to their Forefathers, commanding Moses his Servant to give them his Laws, and
to Model a Church Government, to the Members of which were to be committed the
Divine Oracles.

This was the State of the Jews, whilst the wise Governors of all othr
Nations, such as Solon, Lycurgus, and Numa Pompilius, were sensible of the use
of Religion; but were not able to become acquainted with the true God for want
of Revelation: So that their Opinions about His Will and Nature, and those of
all the Ancient Philosophers have been so many ridiculous Whimsies.

But no sooner did the Son of GOD appear, (who was the Original and Model of
all Perfection) than he was to be a Light to the whole World; and a great part
of the Jewish Laws was to lose their Authority. For he knowing the Will of God
his Father, better than Moses, was pleased to reveal to all Nations, that it
was no longer the design of God to make a distinction betwixt Jew and Gentile,
but that he would embrace every Nation, that would believe in him, and obey his
Laws. At Thirty years of Age he began to establish his most excellent Religion,
meeting with all the Opposition imaginable from the Jews, as an invader of
their Fundamental Laws; He was Persecuted, and followed all his life with
Assaults of Malice and Cruelty; His Credit was Slandered, his Doctrine
slighted; and at last he was put to Death with all sort of Torture and
Disgrace. His only Companions upon Earth was a parcel of poor People, whom he
called his Disciples, and to whom he taught a Doctrine, that called men from
their Lusts and Pleasures; that offered Violence to their Natural Inclinations;
That required the greatest strictness of Life; That revealed Truths above the
reach of Natural Comprehension, and that obliged Men to take up a Cross, to
follow the Example of a Crucified Savior, in expectation of an invisible World.

This Jesus then is of more value to us, than e're Moses was to the Jews; he
being our Lawgiver, our God and our Savior, who has given Laws to all those,
who will believe and acknowledge his Authority.

Our Savior, when he came into the World, as he was God, so was he Omniscient,
knew what Opposition his Doctrine would meet with, and with what Misfortunes
his Followers would be dogged. He came not to a particular People, as Moses did
to the Jews, of whose obedience he was assured; but he came to the People of
the habitable Earth, to teach them the way to Heaven by Repentance and Faith.
At his first Arrival he found no Church, but the Jewish, which was to evanish
at his Appearance: Therefore he laid the Foundation of one himself, by
Preaching and working Miracles, and by triumphing on the Cross over Ignorance
and Wickedness, which had ruled all the Heathens.

After his Ascension into Heaven, on the day of Pentecost, he sent down the
Holy Ghost upon his Apostles and Disciples, who were assembled at Jerusalem,
enduing them with the Gift of Tongues, and of working Miracles; Commissionating
them to propagat his Church and Kingdom, through the whole World: Which
accordingly they did, Preaching the Gospel first to the Jews, and then to the
Gentiles, many of them taking particular parts of the World, to make known the
Joyful News of Salvation. Thus St. Andrew Preached the Gospel in Scythia, St.
Bartholomew in India, St. Matthew in Parthia, and St. John in the lesser Asia:
They went from Town to Town, and from Village to Village, publishing the
Blessed News of Immortality, and constituting Bishops and Deacons, the first
Fruits of their Ministry, leaving them to govern, and to enlarge the particular
Churches, over which they had placed them. Tertullian says (de Praescrip.
advers. Haereti.) That Clemens was ordained Bishop of Rome by St. Peter, and
Polycarp Bishop of Smirna by St. John.

Now, Let us enquire, whether our Savior, or his Apostles after his Death,
left any distinct Scheme of Government, to be followed by all particular
Churches; which Scheme, if there be any, must be found in the Holy Scriptures,
or in the Writings of the Fathers, who succeeded immediately to the Apostles;
but if no Scheme of Church Covernment is to be found in either of them, it is
very surprising, that ever since the Reformation in this Island, there have
been two Parties which have set up for different Schemes of Church Government,
the one called Presbyterian, and the other Episcopal, and that either of them
has been so zealous for establishing its Government, that nothing will please
either of them, if its Government be not of Divine Institution; by which the
one Party can damn the other.

But upon what grounds either of them can call it is Church Government Jure
Divino, if it is not institute in every point by God, as the Jewish Government
was, I cannot comprehend.

For First, That Church Government which is from God, must be revealed by him
to his People some way or other; but no Scheme of Church Government has as yet
been revealed: Therefore all Church Government must be of Humane Institution.

That no Scheme of Church Government is yet revealed, is evident; because,
there is none in all the New Testament, unless we are persuaded, that when we
read the words Bishop, Deacon, Diaconess, we have found the very individual
Scheme of Government that was in use amongst the Apostles. For my part I
understand no more of their Church Government by reading these words, than one
can understand of the Civil Government of Scotland, if he heard only of a
President of Council, or of some Officers of State.

Secondly, If the Apostles had constitute a Church Government, after which we
were obliged to model one, as if it were immediately from God; surely we must
understand it in all its parts, otherwise we cannot follow it in all its Form;
but the Practice of the Apostles, in constituting their Church Government, is
but little known to us, therefore it is impossible for us to follow their
Practice, in forming a Church Government. Nor do we follow at present the
Practice of the Apostles, in as far as we know it, otherwise there should be no
Bishop by virtue of a Conge d'es lire, nor should the Presbyterian Government
want Diaconesses, and other Officers, which were in Use in the Primitive
Churches; because by the same Authority we either add or diminish from the
Practice of the Apostles in Church Government (if it be an Article of Faith) by
the same Authority we can change their Practice altogether.

Lastly, I cannot believe, that any particular Form of Church Government is
prescribed to all particular Churches, otherwise we may reasonably suppose,
that the Apostles, who have been at the pains to writ down all that is
necessary to be believed, would not have omitted to leave it to Posterity.

Seeing then that we have no Scheme of Church Government in the Scripture,
where must we go next to prove either the Episcopal or Presbyterian Government
to be of Divine Institution? I suppose it must be from the practice of the
Fathers of the first Centuries; but if they were Men like unto our selves,
capable of Error and Folly, I hope their practice will be of no more Authority,
than they had reason on their side.

That the Fathers of the first Centuries were Men fallible like unto our selves
may be proved by these two considerations.

First, They have erred in points of the greatest Consequence. Justin Mar: tyr
(the most ancient of all the Fathers, next to Clemens Romanus) was of Opinion,
that the Saints should Reign a Thousand Years in Jerusalem, before the
Resurrection should be accomplished: Which was the Opinion of the Chiliasts,
condemned by all the Orthodox. Ireneus mantained ( Iren. contra Hoer.) that our
Savior was above Forty Years when he suffered Death, contrary to what we are
taught by the Evangelists. Clemens Alexandrinus believed ( lib. 1. Strom.) that
the Angels fell in Love with the first Women, and that this Love transported
them so far, as to make them indiscreetly to discover unto them many secrets,
which they ought to have concealed. The reason, I suppose made honest Clemens
entertain such a Notion, was, that the Women in his days were more reserved in
discourse, than they are at present. Tertulian; against all Reason, ( lib. 1.
Adver. Marc. makes God subject to the same passions that we are subject to. And
Cyprian, who was Turtllian's admirer, has mantained many of his ridiculous
Opinions.

Secondly, they have been at great Variance amongst themselves, and mantained
different Opinions of great moment- Justin Martyr, and Ireoeneus promised us
the pleasures of a new Jerusalem upon Earth, for a Thousand Years, whilst
Dionisius Alexandrinus and St. Hierome laught't at them for fools.

But grant that we should follow the practice of the Fathers In
Church Government, let us see what we can learn from their Writings.

To persuade us that there were many Bishops in one Church, we have both the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures and of Clemens Romanus ( Epist. 1. ad Cor.)
Yet Ignatius Tertullian and Cyprian affirm, that there was and ought to be, but
one Bishop in a Church at a time. Now whether to believe these Fathers or the
Holy Scriptures, or to reconcile them both, by telling that the words Bishop
and Presbyter were used promiscuously, is left to the Discretion of every
disputing Divine.

A whole Church did meet together to manage their own Affairs, when the Schism
of Felicissimus was to be debated, it was to be done according to the Will of
the People, and by the consent of the Laity, as Cyprian witnesses in his 10
Epist. but either this was the Custom of all the particular Christian Churches,
or only that of Carthage; if it was the Universal Custom we don't know, and
that it was the practice of the Carthaginian Church, does not bind all other
Churches to follow it.

If Presbyters had not the same Inhaerent Right to perform all the
Ecclesiastical Offices, which the Bishops had, I don't understand why Cyprian
being Exiled Writes ( Epist. 5.) to his Clergy, exhorting and begging of them
to discharge their own and his Office too; that so nothing might be wanting
either to Discipline or Diligence. Nevertheless, according to the present
practice, where Episcopacy is in fashion, no body can ordain but a Bishop.

Presbyters were not Estential to the Constitution of a Church, for Tertullian
in his Exhort. ad Castitatcm, says, that where there are no Presbyters, the
Bishop alone Administers the two Sacraments, of the Lord's Supper and Baptism:
Yet how there can be a Bishop without Presbyters (if the word Bishop be taken
in the sense it is used now a days) must be the same thing as if a Man could
be called the Father of a Family, who had none.

When Cyprian makes an Apology to his Presbytery (or Commune Concilium as he
terms it) for ordaining Aurelins a Lector, without their consent; we don't
know whether it be out of Civility to them, or out of his duty, the words are,
Epst. 38. In ordinationibus clericis solemus vos ante consulere, and mores ac
merita singulorum communi consilio ponderare, etc. where the Word solemus may
be taken, as if in duty he ought to do so.

A Bishop was Elected both by the Clergy and Laity of his Parish, as we learn
from the Death of Bishop Anterus in whose place Falianus was Elected at Rome,
for, fayeth Eusebius, lib. 6. c. 28. All the People met together in the Church
to choose a Successor, proposing several illustrious and eminent Personages as
fit for Office, whilst not one so much as thought on Falianus then present,
till a Dove miraculously came and sat upon his head, in the same manner as the
Holy Ghost formerly descended on our Savior, and then all the People guided as
it were with one Divine Spirit, cried out with one Mind and Soul, that Falianus
was most worthy of the Bishopric, and so straightways taking him, they placed
him in the Episcopal Throne.

At present we know Bishops are chosen only by the Clergy, contrary to the
Practice of the Church of Rome, as we have seen in the Example of Falianus.

The People had power to depose their own Bishops, as the People of Spain did
Martiales and Basilides, and who had their Proceedings ratified by an African
Council assembled in the Year 258. Cyprian Epist. 68. But in what Cases, People
could depose a Bishop, is not determined by Antiquity.

In the Primitive times, every Christian was considered both as a Member of the
Universal Church, and as one of that particular Church where he lived; if
therefore he erred in any Article of Faith, he was judged guilty of Heresy:
And if he was at Variance with his Bishop, he was guilty only of Schism, and
consequently deserved either the Name of Heretic or Schismatic. Yet it is
clear, that at present one may be at Variance with his Bishop, without being
reputed Schismatic: For Example, if a particular Man in the Diocese of Tork
should have a personal prejudice against his Bishop, and would not Communicate
with him; although in the time of Cyprian, he would have been guilty of Schism,
had he been at Variance with his Bishop.

From this short account, and what more could be collected about the Practice
of the Fathers, from their Writings, in Church Government, we can learn nothing
but Titles, Names, and some general Rules observed in the Exercise of the
Governments of particular Churches, which made up the Universal Church;
therefore it must be an Error, to assert that either the Episcopal Government
in England, or the Presbyterian in Scotland, as they are now constitute, was in
fashion in the Primitive Ages.

What then in Reason ought to be affirmed for Truth about Church Government,
appears to be, That the Apostles, and those they appointed to preach the Law of
their Master, living in times when they had no Civil Government to protect
them, were persecuted and harrassed from place to place, having most of the
Magistrates and Philosophers to be their declared Enemies; therefore it was
their greatest business only to preach a Crucified Savior, who was risen from
Death and ascended up into Heaven, to be Mediator betwixt his Father and all
People that would follow the Laws of his Gospel; which Laws they taught to all
their Proselyts, which made up the Catholic Church. And that the Members of it
might be the better instructed in the Mysteries of their Religion, it was
necessary to have them erected into particular Churches or Societies, as the
Circumstances of the Times would allow: Which accordingly they did, and
regulated their outward Forms, that all things might be done in Order and
Decency. Hence arose the necessity of Church Officers to keep all things right,
and to put the Divine Laws in Execution.

The Bishop was the first Presbyter in Honor for his Apostolic Qualities
amongst other Presbyters, who were so many new Apostles to be sent abroad to
convert the Pagans, and to constitute new Churches, as they found Believers,
after what forms were most convenient. And by such means were Churches erected
at Jerusalem, Alexandria, Rome, Carthage, etc. Which Churches, so long as they
wanted the Protection of Civil Magistrates, so long did they keep a good
Correspondence amongst themselves, having frequent Meetings to suppress all
Heresies, which Meetings were called Councils.

Now, may we be of Opinion, That our Savior did forsee that the Christian
World would be divided into distinct secular Governments, and that each
Government would have the order kept amongst the Men set apart for Divine
Service, which was agreeable to it is Constitution. For tho particular Churches
might have different Governments; yet the Universal Church is no more
dismemb'red, than if a King who had different Countries in Subjection, could be
denied to be Master of them all; because that his Laws were put in Execution in
one of them, by a Viceroy; in another, by a few Noble Men; and in the Third, by
a parcel of Commons.

To strengthen this Opinion, we know, That no sooner the Roman Emperors and
their Subjects become Christians, but there was an Analogy betwixt their Civil
and Ecclesiastical Governments: For the whole Empire being divided into
Fourteen Diocesses, each of them comprehending several Provinces; and every
province several Cities: Every City, as it had a temporal Magistrate for
executing Justice, so was there also a Bishop, for Spiritual Order and
Government. Every Province, as it had a Proconsul, whose Seat was usually at
the Metropolis; So there was in the same City an Archbishop, or, Metropolitan.
In every Diocese there was a Vicarius, who dwelt in the principal City of the
Diocese, where all Imperial Edicts were published: There was also a Primat to
equal him, and to whom the Determination of all differences of the Clergy did
belong. And lastly, as the Fourteen Diocesses were ruled by four Praetorian
Prefects in civil Matters; so were they governed in Church Affairs by
Patriarchs, who were superior to Primats, by reason of the Dignity of these
Cities, where they had their Sees fixed, as at Rome, Constantinople,
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem. But to what hight Churchmen can improve
their Power, may be learned from the Patriarchs of Rome, who had once almost
enslaved the whole Christian world, by their Supremacy, Purgatory, Indulgences,
and Pardons, auricular Confessions and Caelibacy of the Clergy.

As there is a necessity of some Church Government to be in every
Commonwealth, that by its Discipline, its Members may be keep'd in duty, both
to God, and to their fellow Subjects; So every Church Government ought to
sympathize with that Civil Government it meets with, to make up one Christian
Society.

But to show what Church and Civil Governments agree best together, let us take
a short view of all them which are in use at present in the Christian world.

Tho Man has a Natural Inclination to Society, yet that which constitutes a
Body Politic, is Confederation and a Consent of Governors and Governed; from
which we have the different kinds of Civil Government, Monarchy, Aristocracy
and Democracy. And parallel to these, are three kinds of Church Government,
Hierarchy, Superintendency and Presbytrie.

Monarchy is a Government that is vested in one single Person, who is absolute,
and has a Right of constituting and giving Laws to all in general, and to each
in particular under his Dominion: To which agrees that Church Government
Hierarchy, composed of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. And of such two Governments
was constitute the Roman Empire, in the time of Constantine.

Aristocracy is the Government of a few of the greatest power, and conform to
it, is Superintendency: Which is a Church Government, where a parcel of Members
are all equal in power, and by the same are distinguished from the rest of the
Clergy.

Democracy is a Government, in which the whole Body of the People has some
share; and to this is consonant Presbytrie: Which is a Church Government, where
all the Clergy are equally concerned.

To none of the abovementioned kinds of Civil Government, does the Civil
Governments of Scotland and England belong; which being both of the same
Nature, I shall call them by one Name, a Limited Monarchical Government: Which
is a Government that is managed by one Man, according to the Laws of the Society
where he reigns, which Laws are made by him in Conjunction with his People. So
that he has his Prerogatives, and they their Properties; and such a Government
has the Advantage of all others which can degenerat into Tyrannies.

The Government of Scotland and England being a limited Monarchy, quite opposite
to an absolute one; It follows, that some other kind of Church Government must
be more agreeable to it than Hierarchy, which agrees only with an absolute
Monarchy. Because, the People having lodged so many Prerogatives with their
King, as the power of declaring War, of making Peace, of sending Ambassadors,
of making Leagues and Treaties, and of Levying of Men and Arms by Sea and Land;
if this King is ill-inclined, what wants he more but Money to change the very
foundamental Laws of his Government, and to make Parliaments altogether
useless? which cannot be raised from the Subject without their consent, or,
which is all one, without the consent of Parliament. Therefore the People ought
to take particular care in chooseing Men to be their Representatives in
Parliament, that they be Men of Honor and Probity, whom the Monarch can noways
influence to betray the Liberties of their Country. And surely it must succeed
the better with it, the fewer Members of Parliament depend upon the King.

What power the Kings of Great Britain have had to Cajol Bishops, being
constant Members of the Parliament, into a Compliance with their designs, the
History of Past-times must declare.

Constantine, as he was the first Christian Emperor, so had he a great respect
for the professors of that Religion. We read in his life, That he would not
only regal its Teachers at his own Table, but that he never went a Journey
without ome of them along with him, and that, at the Council of Nice, so great
was his Complaisance for Churchmen, that he refused to sit down in their
presence. The Clergy on the other hand being sensible of the Emperors
Kindness, continue with him the old Title of Pontifex Maximus, by virtue of
which, he had Right of Ecclesiastical Function: reserving for themselves all
the Ministerial Offices. So Constantine was Rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacer
dos.

A mutual good understanding was so cultivated amongst the succeeding Emperors
and the Clergy, that they had several Laws made in their savor, (as may be
seen in the Titles of the Codex de sacrosanctis Eccles: de Episc: andCler:)
till the Bishops of Rome, taking the opportunity of the Division of the Roman
Empire, being overrun by Barbarous Nations, and of the Ignorance of the times,
did set up for it themselves, under the Specious Title of Christ's Vicar And how
far they carried their Authoriy with Temporal Princes for some Ages, is evident
by the Insolence of Hildebrand; who rebelled against his lawful Emperor Henry
the fourth, depriving him of all that respect which was due unto him from a
Bishop of Rome.

It has been the Policy of the Papal Court, to keep the Clergy of every
Commonwealth in a certain Hierarchy; That it might the more conveniently
challenge a Supremacy over them; and to the end that they might depend
absolutely upon their Interest, for to oppose all Temporal Princes, who durst
do any thing in prejudice of the Holy See, by Excommunicating and depriving
them of the Allegiance of their Subjects.

In such a Condition was both the Clergy of England and Scotland, in the time
of King Henry the Eight of England. Who, being a wise Prince and disobliged by
the Pope in the Marriage of Anna Bullen, took the occasion of a Critical Minut
to throw off the Popes Supremacy over his Clergy, and to assert it for himself,
according to the Practice of the Kings of England. And finding that his Clergy
was satisfied with the change, he continued the Ancient Popish Hierarchy,
making the Bishops of his Kingdom capable of the greatest Civil Employments in
it.

If the Reformation had begun in Scotland with public Authority, as it did in
England, I doubt not but Episcopacy had been continued there, in place of that
Church Government introduced by Knox and others, after the Geneva Model.
Because Supreme Civil Powers know how much it is their Interest, to be of the
Clergies side: And that it is easier to have a few Church Men to manage, than a
Multitude. Of this King James is an Example, who was not only a great Favourer
of the Clergy, but thought it his Interest, so soon as he was sole Monarch of
this whole Island, to establish Episcopacy in Scotland, according to that
Maxim, No Bishop, No King.

Now let us see what great Feats Bishops have done, in the Management of the
British Affairs, and accordingly we should make our Judgment concerning the
Agreeableness of Episcopacy and our Government, which is a Limited Monarchy.

In the Reign of King James the First of Great Britain, there were Bishops, no
doubt, who complied with him in every Counsel, that was for the Dishonor of
his Crowns. For we find the Bishop of Lincoln, then Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, in his Sermon at King James his Funeral (either to flatter his
Successor, or, to impose upon the World) making a parallel betwixt him and King
Solomon, his Text being 1 King. 11.41, 42, 43. Now either that Bishop was
persuaded of the Verity of what he preached, or not; If he was persuaded, that
King James was the Solomon of his Age, then surely, he could not refuse to go
along with him in all his Counsels: And if he preached contrary to what was his
Opinion, then, he was capable at Command to be an Haickny Courtier.

In King Charles the First's time, it was Bishop Laud, and others, that
occasioned all the Misfortunes that befell that Prince, both unhappy in his
Council, and in his Opiniatritie.

In King Charles the Second's Reign, we never heard of any of his
Ecclesiastical Counselors, that e're Discourted themselves, for dissuading him
from his Effeminat Way of Living, or from following too much French Counsel. On
the contrary, we know, that nothing was more preached up, than Passive
Obedience, founded on the Prerogatives of the Kings of Israel, as if the Laws
of Moses had been calculat for our Kings: And, That nothing was more tickling
to the Bishops, than the Oppression of their Fellow Subjects of the
Presbyterian Persuasion.

In the time of the late King James, It is true, there were some Bishops in
England, who stood for their Religion, in Opposition of Popery; yet the World
knows, how well natured the Bishops of Scotland were upon that Point.

And in this present Reign, we all know, how that Bishops of England, did
concur to ratify Proclamations issued out against the Scots in the
West Indies, which were of a Nature, both below the Meekness of Christianity,
and the Generosity of the English Nation.

Wise Governments have always had a very mean Opinion of Church-Mens Politics,
as particularly that of Venice; for whenever any thing occurs of great Moment
there, to be debated in the Senate; before any Suffrage passes, they cause
Proclamation to be made for all Priests to retire.

It is likewise remarkable, That he who is called the Divine of the State, is
chosen commonly such an one, who is more Politician, than Bigot in Religion.
And of such a Character was Father Pedro Paulo, who wrote the History of the
Council of Trent.

Too much Learning or Wisdom seldom agree together; because, for the most part,
too Learned Men are mere Scholars, (and such were most of the Bishops of
England) which of all Men are the most dangerous when they espouse a Party:
For, both their Learning and Zeal can concur together, to make Black seem
White, or White Black, and to impose what Opinions they please upon the well
meaning People. Now when such Men are perpetual Members of Parliament, who have
Dependence upon a Limited Monarch, by virtue of a Conge d'es Lire, the Laick
Subjects cannot be circumspect enough about their Liberties.

Its known, that in the time of Popery, the Pride and Ambition of the Clergy
was a Curse to that Civil Government, where they had any meddling; carrying
themselves always Arbitrarly and Tyrannically, and committing the greatest
Solecisms in Politics. And we may observe for the most part, that the Clergy
of our Religion, who have concerned themselves with Worldly Affairs, have been
the greatest Promoters of Civil Distempers, that have shaken the Foundations
either of Church or State: And the very Trumpets which have sounded to Popular
Furies, Martial Alarms, and never better will befall Churchmen, when they act
without their own Sphere.

What should move the English to carress Churchmen for Counselors and Members
of Parliament, I cannot comprehend; for were their Bishops educat as the
Cardinals are, (who are better acquainted with this World, than that to come)
we might hope for as great an Essay of their Wit in State Affairs, as ever
Cardinal Richelieu, or, Cardinal Mazarine did show to the World. But on the
contrary, they know more of the World to come, and are educat altogether
according their Characters of Churchmen. Nor do I understand what is the
Reason, that there is so just a Proportion, betwixt the Living of a Nobleman,
and a Peasant, among the English Laics: And so great a Disproportion betwixt a
Bishop and a Twenty Pound Curat, among their Ecclesiastics For surely it is
unjust, that the Curat should be preaching the Gospel, and starving at the same
time: Whilst his Bishop is driving to Court with a Coach and six Horses, to
make an handsome Leg to his Temporal Lord.

I Will now protest, That the Liberty I take of writing after this manner, may
not give Offense to the Clergy of any Church; nor that I may meet with the
common Fate of Reconcilers, to have Blows for my Pains; being, I Am of no Party,
but a Lover of that Church Government, which sympathizes best with the Civil
Government it is joined with. So that, if I were Subject to an Absolute
Monarch, I should esteem Episcopacy as most agreeable to his Government; But
whilst I live in Scotland or England, I must love that Church Government, which
is least dangerous to the Peoples Liberties. I leave it therefore to the
Judgment of every Unbyassed Laick, to determine, if Presbytrie, or
Superintendency be not more convenient for the People of a Limited Monarchy,
than Episcopacy, as it is now established in England, and less capable to comply
with an Ambitious Prince, for the undermining the Fundamental Laws of his
Kingdom, after the Example of the Danish Clergy, which were the Instruments of
making their Kings Absolute, to the utter Ruin of all their Ancient Nobility.

I conclude with this following Character, which I wish every Churchman might
merit.

One who is delivered of the Prepossessions and Prejudices of Complexion,
Education and Implicit Authority, knowing that all Mankind are puzzled even in
the Search of the most obvious things. One, who can distinguish between the
true Articles of Faith, and the pitiful senseless Triffles of Swiming Brains.
One who knows, That the Love of God is not Fondness, nor his Justice Cruelty;
and that God acts not by mere Arbitrary Will, but by the Perfections of his own
Nature. One, who not forgetting to do Good Works, endeavors to go to Heaven
only by the Merits of Christ. One, whose Zeal never exceeds his Reason. One,
who abounds with Charity, Humility and Meekness. One, who purges Religion from
all Fantastic and Unintelligible Muming, and reduces it to its Native
Plainness and Simplicity. One, who understands himself, when he Prays or
Preaches. And lastly, One, who follows in Living, as near as possible, the
Practice of the Apostles.

Most happy would that People be, who lived with a Church Government, composed
of Members of the foresaid Character: For surely, Vice and Atheism would be
banished, nor could Priest-Crast, or Knavery, have any place amongst them.

AN ESSAY Concerning The UNION OF ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND Into one MONARCHY
OF Old, this Island of Great Britain was divided into several distinct
Governments, amongst which there have been many bloody and fatal struglings, in
Defense of their respective Interests and Liberties. And no doubt, but, until
this Day, it had continued a Theater of Cruelty and Barbarity, if all its
Inhabitants had not been United in Subjection, by the happy Succession of King
James the Sixth of Scotland, to the Crown of England in the year 1603.

King James, who did not always prefer the Interests of his Kingdoms to his own
private ends, never gave a greater Testimony of his Affection to them, than in
the year 1604; when he proposed to the English Parliament, an Union of the
Kingdoms of Scotland and England: Which Motion was at first embraced with the
general applause of both People, as the only Mean to extinguish the Memory of
all former Animosities.

To bring that Union to a good issue, the Parliaments of both Nations, at his
Majesty's desire, did nominat Commissioners to meet at Westminster, which
accordingly they did: and agreed on several Articles, to be presented to King
and Parliaments, for their Ratification. But in the year 1608, the English
Parliament would approve only the Article for abolishing all Hostile Laws, that
had been in use against either Nation, before King James his Arrival in England.

The Reason, I suppose, made England neglect that opportunity of Uniting with
Scotland, was, That either it was not sensible of the Advantages it might gain
by such an Union, (tho the judicious Lord Verulam did endeavor to demonstrat
them by his Grave Speech) or, That the Parliament of England did suspect their
new Monarch of having some other design, than the Interests of his Kingdoms by
that Union, of which he was the first proposer.

King Charles the first, who was brave, Magnificent, and but too constant in
adhering to ill Counsel, was most of his life so harrassed by his own Subjects,
that he never had time to think upon that Union, which his Father could not
finish: And Cromwell, who, after but chering of him, usurped his Power, never
thought any further of the Interest of Britain, but to gratify his own
Ambition.

King Charles the Second, after his Restoration to his Kingdoms, had all the
opportunity possible, that Ease and plenty could afford him, to promot their
mutual Happiness, did therefore propose an Union betwixt Scotland and England
in the Year 1670; and did nominat for that end, several Commissioners under his
great Seal, but all to no purpose; because, such an Union could not sympathize
with the Politics of these days, which were to divide, after such manner, the
People of the whole Island in Religion, and Interest, that by continually
playing one party against another, His Majesty might be in a Condition to sway
the Scepter in Peace, and to introduce into his Kingdoms any Religion suited
best with his Humor.

And for King James, he was so little inclined to promot an Union, that the
thoughts of another World did wholly extinguish any Concern he might have had,
for advancing the Interest of his Kingdoms in this.

His present Majesty has done many great Actions, both for the well fare of
his Kingdoms, and for his own Reputation; yet, there is nothing can contribute
more to the Glory of his Family, than Uniting the Kingdoms of England and
Scotland into one Monarchy: So that when he distributes Justice, (both their
Interests being the same) none of them will have reason to complain. He has
already several times recommended an Union to the English Parliament; but it
were to be wished that His Majesty would be pleased to ordain effectual Means
to be used for that end.

There Is an Union already betwixt both Nations in Language, Customs, Religion,
and in Subjection, which cannot last, unless both Governments be united into
one Body Politic. And to Consummat that, there must be a great Zeal and
Frankness in the Members of both Parliaments, That, all triffling and amusing
preliminary Articles being forgot, Commissioners may be deputed from them both,
Men of Honor and Probity, no Courtiers, but free of all prejudice against
either Nation, for the better adjusting the two following Articles.

The First is, That the Parliaments in Name of both Kingdoms, may consent to
join together for making up one Parliament of Great Britain.

The Second is, That for the taking away all difference about Place, that may
arise among the Nobility of both Kingdoms, let them be Marshalled
interchangeably; As for Example, First, The Eldest Duke of England, then the
Eldest Duke of Scotland, and so on, until the Nobility of the whole Island be
marked in one Catalogue, as Peers of the Kingdom of Great Britain.

If these two Articles can be agreed to, all danger of Uniting the two Kingdoms
will be over, and there is no doubt but that all useful Laws can be made
afterward without the least stop, that are requisite for supporting this new
molded Empire.

But before I proceed to show, what Laws would be useful; I must remove some
Objections, that the learned Sir George Mackenzie has made against the
Parliament of Scotland's having power to agree to the foresaid two Articles, in
his Observations upon King James his Act of Parliament concerning the Union;
and the Answers to his Objections may prevent the like, to be made against the
power of the Parliament of England in the same case, being both Parliaments of
England and Scotland, are of of the same Nature.

The first Argument is, That the Members of the Scots Parliament for Shires and
Burghs, are the same with us, That the Procuratores Universitatis are in the
Civil Law; But the Procuratores Universitatis could not alienat the Rights of
their Constituents, without a special Mandat for that effect ( l. 63. de pro:)
Neither can the Parliament of Scotland alter the Fundamentals of their
Constitution, without the Consent of their Constituents.

It Is answered, That the Members for Shires and Buroughs are not the same with
the Procuratores Universitatis; because, by virtue of their Commissions, they
have absolute power to Vote for every point, which they think can contribute to
the safety of the Nation: And they are bound only by Oath of Parliament, to Act
as Men of Conscience, and not as Men who have particular Instructions from
their Constituents. And it was by that power they altered their Primitive
Constitution, by Voting out a Third State of Parliament, in the beginning of
his present Majestys Reign. Much rather can they, in the Name of their
Constituents, agree with the Parliament of England, to the two foresaid
Articles, being they will contribute so much for their Advantage.

The second Argument is, That the Commissioners for Shires and Buroughs are
only empowered to represent their Constituents in the Parliament of Scotland;
but if the Parliament of Scotland be made a part of the Parliament of Great
Britain, the Parliament of Scotland can be said no longer to exist, and
consequently the Commissions of all its Members fall, till they be renewed,
empowering them to sit in the Parliament of Great Britain.

It Is Answered, That by the Answer to the first Argument, we see that the
Parliament of Scotland has an absolute power to agree to the foresaid
Articles, so that afterward they may ask new Commissions from their respective
Constituents, to Unite as Members of the Parliament of Great Britain. And when
both Nations are persuaded of the Advantages of an Union, there can be no
impediment to it.

The third Argument is, That the Union of Parliaments requires the full Assent
of the Members of both Parliaments; So that, if any Member dissent, The Union
of both Parliaments must stop: Because, the Power of making Laws, and the Right
to retain or resign Privileges, are two different things. The one is a a
Legislative Power, which is regulated by a Plurality of Voices: The other is
founded upon Dominion and Property, and is not subject to Suffrage, no more
than other Properties are.

It Is Answered to this last Argument, That it is granted, the Property of any
Member of a private Society cannot be taken away from him, without his Consent:
As witnesses the Civil Law, ( l. 28. ff. Com. Divid.) The Rules are, In re
pari, melior est Conditio prohibentis: And, In re communi, nemo Dominorum jure
quicquam facere potest, invito altero. But here is understood, not a private
Society, but a whole Kingdom; who being their own Masters, can dispose upon
themselves and Properties, as they find it convenient for their Interest: And
that Power is devolved upon their Representatives of Parliament.

Therefore if any small Number of People, or of Members of Parliament, oppose
so good a Design, as the Union of both Nations, either the Plurality of Voices
ought to determine them, according to the Fundamental Law of all Societies, or
they should be obliged to shift for other Societies of Men.

Now, supposing that the Parliaments of both Kingdoms are joined in one; and
that its Members are empowered to make Laws for the Preservation of this New
Government; Amongst many Laws that could be thought upon, these following seems
necessary.

First, That the Titles of both Kingdoms be changed into that of Great Britain.
2ly, That there be but one Imperial Crown. 3ly, That there be but one Set of
Crown-Officers. 4ly, That there be but one Great Seal. 5ly, That as both
Nations are one, so they may have both the same Privileges of Trade: And that
none of them be injured by this Law, let all Goods be taxed equally over the
whole Island. 6ly, That there be appointed, by the Parliament, a parcel of
Lawyers of both Nations, for compiling a Body of Civil Law, out of the Volumes
of the Municipal Laws of both Nations, and out of the Common Law, where they
are deficient: Which Body of Civil Law shall be ratified by King and
Parliament, to have the Force of all other Laws of both Nations. After which,
all other Law Books may be destroyed, according to the Example of the Emperor
Justinian, when the Body of Roman Law was finished. And until such time that a
Body of Law be compiled, each Kingdom may make use of its own Laws, without any
hinderance to an Union. For its known, that till this day, Languedock,
Provence, Britaignie and Normandy though they are parts of the same Kingdom, yet
their Laws are not of the same Coin. 7ly, Being all Church Government is
indifferent, (as I have endeavored to prove in the foregoing Essay) the King
and Parliament may model one, that will be the most consonant to their Civil
Government: To which, if any of the Clergy refuse to submit, let Swords be put
in their hands, to determine a Church Government among themselves; for the
Laics of this Island have drawn too much Blood already upon that Subject,
whilst the Clergy only have been amusing themselves with Disputes. If a
Church Government cannot be modelled that will please all Parties of Laics,
there needs be no Breach in the Union of Civil Government; Because, by a
Liberty of Conscience in Church Government, Church Affairs may be regulat
without the least Confusion. 8ly, Let there be appointed by King and
Parliament, a parcel of Divines and Lawyers, for collecting one Body of Canon
Law out of the Canons of Councils, the Opinions of the Fathers, and from the
Constitutions of both Churches of both Kingdoms, that were made since the
Reformation: Which Body of Canon Law shall be ratified by King and Parliament,
to have Force of all other Ecclesiastical Constitutions. 9thly, That Civil and
Criminal Judicatures be established over the whole Island, in places, where the
Parliament shall find convenient. 10thly, That there be Registers appointed in
different places of the Island, for obstructing all false Conveyances of
Estates Lastly, That the King have but one Privy Council, which for the more
Dispatch of Bufiness, can be divided into several standing Committees.
Now, before I show the Advantages both Nations will gain by an Union; I will
make this following Digression of their present States.

England abounds with Grains, Tin, Copper, Lead, Iron, Timber, and all
Creatures which furnishes the Commodities of Cloth, Stuffs, Hides, Butter,
Cheese, etc.

Scotland, being the most Northward part of the Island, cannot be expected to
make so pleasant a Prospect to the Eye, as England; Yet it has Sufficiency of
Grains, Flax, Wool, and vast number of Cattle, etc. It has likewise
innumerable Mines of Lead, Iron, etc.

Although the Nobility and Gentry of both Kingdoms are the same in Humor, and
Conduct of Living; yet there is a great Disparity between the Common People,
both as to Humor and Constitution of Body, by reason of their different way of
Feeding. The English is Self-conceited, Lovers of their Belly, and daring:
Whilst the Scots are patient, sober in Diet, and has something of a Timorous
Civility.

The Nature of the Civil Governments of both Kingdoms, is almost the same; each
of them having its Parliament, to protect its Liberties.

The Number of Persons that have Suffrage in the English Parliament, besides
twenty six Bishops, are either of Nobility or Commons.

The Nobility are
Dukes 17 Marquesses 3 Earls 72 Viscounts 8 Barons 65 Sum 165 The Commons are
Commissioners for forty Shires 80 For the twelve Counties of Wales 12 For
twenty five Cities 54 For the eight Cinque Ports 16 For the two Universities 04
For an hundred and eghty Burghs 332 And Burgesses for Wales 012 Sum 510

The Number of Persons that have Suffrage in the Scots Parliament, are either
Nobility or Commons.

The Nobility are
Dukes 4 Marquesses 4 Earls 67 Viscounts 20 Barons 45 Sum 140 The Commons are
Commissioners for Shires 89 For Cities and for Burrows 65 Sum 154

The Nobility of Scotland, not bearing a Proportion to the English Nobility,
conform to its Riches and Extent of Land, ought to be no Objection against an
Union of Parliaments; Because, the Nobility of the whole Island, becoming
Members of the same House, will all have the same Interest: And in a little
time, by Extinction of Families, Creation of New Ones, and by Change of Estates
from one place to another, will be so shuffled, that it will be hard to know,
Which is Which.

The number of the People of England, is calculat to be 5,500,000; and that of
the People of Scotland to be 800,000.

England at present is not above half Peopled, and, of any Country, it is in
the least danger to be overstock't with People by reason of its Situation and
goodness of Soil.

If Scotland were improved by Enclosing etc. it could entertain many more
People, than it can at present, and in a short time triple its Land-Rental.

England with Wales contains 40,000,000, of Acres. The fourth part of them are
Heath, Moors, Mountains, and Barren Ground.

Scotland with its Islands contains 24,000,000 Acres. Two Thirds of them are
Moors, Mountains, and Barren Land.

Having now done with this Digression, let us next see, what Advantages will
fall by an Union, first to England, secondly to Scotland, and thirdly, to both
in Common when United.

The Advantages that England would reap by an Union, are
FIrst, An Augmentation of People; for whatever People cannot find
Entertainment and Employment in Scotland, will choose rather to go further
South, and serve their own Country, than to Ramble abroad for a Livelihood: So
that the Number of People, which dies by Excess and Debauch in and about
London, or the Southern Provinces would be supplied. And how profitable the
Multitude of People is to a Country, that have Employment, and Entertainment
for them, is inexpressible; Because, it is the People, that by their Labor and
Industry, makes the Wealth and Power of every thriving Nation: Therefore, their
increase should be promoted by Wise Conduct and Good Counsel. 2ly, An
Augmentation of Riches; for England being the larger and better Kingdom, Scots
People would rather purchase Estates there, than in Scotland. In England would
be the Metropolis of the whole Island, the Meeting place of Parliament, and of
all the Chief Judicatures, through which the Treasure of the whole Body Politic
must Circulat, as Blood through the Heart of a Natural Body. 3ly, As Scotland
would Increase in Riches, it would be the more able for Taxes, and contributing
force both at Sea and Land; for the Sustenance of the whole Body Politic: And
consequently England would pay less and gain more than at present, when it is
obliged to support of it self, the whole Character of the King of
Great Britain. Lastly, England would be secure within it self, which can never
happen, so long as the Interests of England and Scotland are different. Nor is
it to be expected, That the Union of Crowns can always last in the State they
are in at present; Because, it makes too much for the Oppression of Scotland.
And if it falls out, that the two Kingdoms are brought into the same Condition,
that they were in, before King James his Succession to the Crown of England;
what can be hoped, but that all old Animosities will be renewed, to the mutual
ruin of both Parties? And even let us suppose, that as England is every way
Superior to Scotland, so it were able to reduce it as a conquered Province; yet
England shall never gain so much that way, as by a fair Union. For the Country
would be depopulat, rendered Inhabitable, and made a Prey to every Nation, that
would be at the pains to invade it. Besides, it would cost England a great
Expense of Blood and Treasure, to defeat so many Thousands of brave Men, that
would stand up for the Defense of their Country and Liberties; and the same
Army that had conquered them, perhaps may be induced at last, by an Ambitious
King, to turn their Swords against their own Countrymen: So that by the same
Army, the whole Island would hazard to undergo the same fate. We may therefore
with a Demonstration believe that the only safe way, for England to conquer
Scotland, is by a fair Union.
The Advantages, which Scotland will reap by an Union with England, are
FIRST, it is Trade will increase, having as free a Trade over the whole World,
as England. Which would enable it, not only to Contribute the more for the
Safety of the Public; but to improve all its Barren Ground, to the great
Satisfaction and profit of Land-proprietars. 2dly, Its Poor would no longer be
a Charge to the Nation; Because, they could be employed in Manufactories and
Fisheries. 3ly, The Highlanders could be brought to foresake their Ancient
Customs and Language, and to apply themselves to Virtue and Industry. Lastly,
Courtiers would no longer be a Grievance to the Nation; The Multitude of
Nobility to the Gentry: nor them all together to the poor Husband Man. Because,
the Interest of the English Court would be that of Scotland, the English and
Scots Commons could Balance the Nobility of the whole Island, and the increase
of Riches would hinder Estates from being often sold, and Rentals racked: So
that the poor Husbandman would be encouraged, to improve his Farm, by a long
Lease and easy Duty.
The Advantages that would accrue to the whole Island, supposing the Kingdoms
United, are
FIRST, It would be in a Capacity to keep the Dutch Low, by managing the
Herring, and all other Fisheries; that the British Subjects could undersel them
in all Foreign Mercats, and in time bring them to the same Submission in
Fishing, that they were in, about the beginning of the Reign of King James the
first, It would likewise be able to encourage all Linen Manufactories at home,
and put them in a Case of serving the whole Island: which would preserve a
great deal of Treasure in it, that is spent upon that Commodity, in Holland and
other Countries. Secondly, It would be in a Capacity to oppose it self to
France, in Defense either of it is own Interest, or of that of it is Allies;
without being in danger of any Domestic, Convulsions. All Europe is sensible
at present, how formidable France is to its Neighbors; for its extent of
Country, vastness of Treasure, number of Forces by Sea and Land, Bravery of
Officers, and for the Wisdom and steady Counsel of its State-Ministers: That if
ever Providence has ordained her the Empire of Europe, it must be shortly
after the Death of this King of Spain. For, according to a private Treaty with
its Neighbors, it will be put in peaceable Possession of as many Territories
of the Spanish Monarchy, as are able to command all the Mediterranean Trade;
and no doubt, but it will be at the pains to seize the rest of it, at its own
Convenience, and even Darien too, which was so much envyed, when in the
Possession of the Scots: The Right of which would belong to this whole Island,
were Scotland and England United. And how much it were for the Interest of
Great Britain, to be Master of that Isthmus, is obvious to every Coffee-house
Politician, in spite of all our more refined Wits.
To oppose the Union of England and Scotland, there are different Nations out
of different ends.

First, Most of our Popish Neighbors, out of this Maxim, That when People
differ in Interest, they will never trust other upon point of Feligion; being
obliged to transgress all its Rules by Treachery, Cruelty, and other unlawful
Means, in protecting, and advancing their worldly Interests. Now how much the
Church of Rome Glories in seeing the Protestants destroy one another, is best
known to themselves. Secondly, The Dutch will oppose it with all their Power
and Cunning, for preventing the strengthening of this whole Island, in Force and
Riches, by the ruining their Fisheries; which provides them with Seamen and
Money: and the undoing their Linen Manufactories at home.
The Dutch of all People understands their Interest the best, and stumble least
at any thing makes for their Public Good; otherwise, why would they have
attempted the whole Trade of the East Indies, by the Massacre of the English at
Amboina? Or the Dominion of the whole Seas, after that the Troubles of England
and Scotland had disabled King Charles the First from taking notice of it, and
that the English Government was shaken in pieces, after its Alteration?

Lastly, The French will oppose any Union betwixt England and Scotland, and
rather than it should succeed, will follow Cardinal Richelieu's Practice, in
corrupting Leading Men in both Nations, to foment Jealousies between them; or
in hireing some Mercenary English Poet or Historian, to represent Scotland,
with all the Rancour that ill Nature and Ignorance can inspire in them.

The French for many years have baulked nothing, that could raise their
Monarchy above the Powers of their Neighbors; and nothing has been more
formidable to their Designs, than the Joint Force of the Island of
Great Britain; when England alone had broke their Measures long e're now, and
brought them to Reason, if it had not had Diversion at Home, occasioned so
often by French Counsel. It Is long since Philip de Comenes said, That in his
time, all the King of England's Ministers, and great Persons, had Pensions of
France, and gave their Acquittances upon every Receipt, which were to be seen
in the Chamber of Paris.

I shall now end this short Essay, having no other Design by it, than the
Prosperity of Great Britain; and hopes, that some Judicious Unbyassed Persons
(as the Learned Doctor Davenam, who has writ so many good Books for the
Service of his Country) will be at the Pains, to handle this Subject in all
its Particulars: That all Doubts being removed from the People of both Nations,
there remain nothing to be done, but the Action of Uniting. And till they be
convinced of the absolute Necessity of it, my Wish is, That England be
outwitted in its Politics by all its Neighbors, and cheated by its
Statesmen, into a fond Belief of its own Abilities: And that Scotland continue
an oppressed Nation, by Courtiers and Publicans, and never have a
State-Council, but of Mock-Politicians and Enemies to their Country.

Vis Vnita Fortior.
AN ESSAY UPON THE PRESENT STATE OF SCOTLAND.
It Is observable, that there is a great Variety in Men, both as to their Bodies
and Souls, conform to the different Situation of the Countries they inhabit;
upon which account it is, that they differ so much in their Dispositions to
Courage, Justice, Temperance, Wit and Goodness. And their Souls are yet more
various than their Bodies, that there appears sometimes a greater difference
betwixt some Men and others, than betwixt some Men and Beasts. And as there is a
great Variety betwixt Men of different Clim's, in respect of their Souls and
Bodies, so is there a great Disparity amongst Apprehehensions and
Understandings of the People of the same Country, proportionable to their
Education; which is the Reason, that their Thoughts of things are not all of
the same Reach and Justness.

There Is no Society without its Members, amongst whom, as there is a
Sub-Ordination of Understandings, so there is a Sub-Ordination of Power and
Command, proportionable to the different Stations they hold in that Society,
whereof they are Members. And hence it is, That there are in every Kingdom (as
it is a Society) People of all Characters, which taken all together, make up
the Body Politic. Being then I Am to writ this Essay of the present State of
Scotland, I will give a short View, both of its People, and of their Affairs,
in the sollowing Sections.

SECTION. I. Of the Education of Youth.
AS the strongest Bodies owe their Vigor, in a great Measure, to the first
knitting of their Joints, and the most stately Trees are beholding to the hand
that first planted them in an agreeable Soil; So do Men owe, whatever Esteem
they acquire in this World to their Education: The Impressions of which are
strong, grow up with them from their Cradle, and accompany them to their very
Graves. Hence is it, That the most wise and understanding Lawgivers of
different Nations thought it their noblest Work, to prescribe Rules for the
early Institution of Youth.

The Number of Schools and Universities in Scotland, is enough to impose upon
the World, that there are used in them all the reasonable Means for instructing
of young People in Languages, Arts and Sciences; But when one comes to examine
the Methods and Formalities of Masters in Teaching, he will soon be undeceived.

To look into a Grammar School, one will find an Assembly of Boys of different
Capacities smuttering of Latin, one who has spent four Years at School,
another three, and a third more or less; yet there shall not be one of forty,
who has made the Proficiency in the Latin, that another Boy will do in any
Modern Language with half a Years teaching. Surely there must be some Reason
for this, that either proceeds from the Difficulty of that Language, or from
some other Cause. But that the Latin is attainable in a short time, we have the
Example of many young People, and likewise of Accursius, the Famous Lawyer, who
was forty Years old, when he first studied Latin: Nevertheless he has left
some Volumes to the World in that Language.

The Causes therefore of Childrens slow Progress in the Latin, to me seem to
be, First, The Formality and Affectedness of Parents putting their Children too
young to School, before they have the Sense or Patience to apply themselves,
or, without considering whether they design them for Employments that require
no Knowledge of Latin. Secondly, The wrong and pedantick Method Schoolmasters
take in teaching their Scholars; For how absurd is it, that they should teach
them Latin, in the same Tongue they do not understand? and after a very tedious
manner, charge their Memories with Rules and Precepts, which they no sooner
learn, than they forget.


Next, To examine the way of Teaching in our Colleges, we will find that young
Students bestow only half a year upon the Greek, (which is so useful a Language
to the Learned) and allow three years to learn Error and Nonsense. For in
place of Euclid's Elements, and a good System of Experimental Philosophy, they
study large Volumes of Logicks and Metaphyficks; which are fit only to
subtilize their Brains, being the true Cobweb-learning of this World, soon
wrought and soon forgot.

Seeing that the Education of Youth contributes so much to the making Men
capable, either to serve themselves, or their Country; The Commissioners,
appointed to visit Schools and Colleges, ought to take special Care both to
oblige Masters to practice good Methods in Teaching, and to encourage most the
learning of Mathematics, and parts of Experimental Philosophy: Because its
from them we have our Learned Physicians, Mechanics, Seamen and Engineers,
which are of more value to the Public, than thinking Men that are Learned only
in Triffles, and who choose the study of General Physics and Metaphysics for
Disput's sake.

It were for the Advantage of this Nation, That no Boys be put to learn Latin,
that are designed by their Parents or Friends, to be Merchants, Mechanics, or
Husbandmen; For how ridiculous is it, that they should consume so many years
in learning a Language (which is forgot in one year, if not practiced) and
neglect the study of their own Language, and other Modern Languages, Cyphering,
and a fair hand of Writ? which are useful to all Men according to their
respective Employments: And it is the great Happiness of every Society, that
each Member be dexterous in his own business and mind it only.

Cardinal du Peron was for suppressing in France many of its Universities;
because they gave too much Occasion and Temptation to all sorts of People to
become Smatterers of Learning. For though the knowledge of Letters is absolutely
necessary in a Commonwealth, yet they ought not to be prostitute to every Body
without Distinction; For, if all the Inhabitants of a State were Learned, Trade
would decay, Husbandry would no more be in fashion: And in their places would
succeed, Disobedience, much Pride and Presumption.

When we have so great a love here to the Civil Law, that every Gentleman that
has two Sons, is sure to design one to be a Lawyer from his very Cradle; I
wish therefore, That means were fallen on, to Erect Professions of it in all
our Universities: And that Encouragements were given to Learned Civilians, to
set up amongst us, which would keep in the Nation much Money. And Students,
that have no Inclination to Travel, may profit here as well as in Holland or
France, and preserve a third part, or half of their Patrimonies, they would
have spent abroad. Nor is there any hazard that such Professions, will
over-charge the Honorable Faculty of Lawyers, with too many Members; being
that humor of following the Law will grow, only as People find, that there is
more Business than Advoeats: Which, at present, is not the Misfortune of
Scotland.

The most reasonable way to provide a Fund for the Professors of Law, is out of
the Bishops Rents; so as there are four Universities in this Kingdom, there may
be a Profession of Civil Law at every one of them: Who ought to have a Salary
not under 200 lib Sterling: per annum, to make up their small Number of Scholars,
and to enable them to make their study their whole business. Were it not then
more for the Honor and Advantage of this Nation, that Bishops cents be so
applied, rather than in Pensions, and other unlawful ways? I refer it to the
wisdom of this Nation.

SECTION II. Of the Commons.
THe Commons of Scotland beat the greatest Bulk of the Body Politic, and it is
according to their Richness and Ease, that this Kingdom can either be called
Rich, Powerful, or Happy. To consider them, therefore, particularly, I will
divide them into Merchants, Mechanics, and Husbandmen.

Merchants, for the most part, apply themselves to their Business, in
proportion to the little Trade of this Country; but where there is one makes a
Fortune that way, there are three turn Bankrupts. The Reasons of which are,

First, Ever since we began to Traffic, few have applied themselves to Trade,
that are Men of Families and Fortunes. For if any Gentleman applies himself,
its some younger Brother, that has a Stock of 300, or 400, lib. sterling: which
he Employeth in bringing home Wines and other superfluous Commodities, that
exhaust the ready Money that's brought into the Kingdom by its Linen, Wool,
Lead, Fish, etc. Which Commodities, when sold, trust must given to the buyer of
them; and in stead of a ready Return to the Merchant of his stock and profit,
for buying new Commodities, he must confume them both in Expectation, by Eating
and Drinking. It were then advantageous for young Merchants, that they would
employ most of their Stocks in home-Manufactories and Fisheries, and in every
Commodity that can make the Export of this Kingdom considerable; So that Money
being kept at home, the return for their Effects will be more frequent. For in
every trading Nation, a Merchant of a small Stock grow's Rich, by frequent
buying of Goods, and receiving a quick return for them, when sold, either in
Credit, Goods, or ready Money.

Secondly, So soon as a Merchant has Scraped together a piece of Money,
perhaps to the value of 4000, or 5000 lib. Sterling: Instead of employing it for
promoting Trade, or by projecting any new thing, that may be serviceable to his
Country, and to the augmenting of his Stock, nothing will satisfy him, but the
laying of it out upon a Land Estate, for having the Honor to make his Son a
Lord, that is, an Idle Person, who can find out as many Methods in spending
his Fathers Money, as he had of gaining it.

Lastly, Our Gentlemen's Sons, who are bred Merchants, do not live frugally and
proportionably to their gain, after the example of the Dutch, to whom one Pence
saved is so much profit.

So many are the Abuses and Blunders that are committed in the Trade of this
Nation, by particular Men's prefering their Interests and Humors to the
Public Good; That to retrive them from that Vice, and to bring the Trade of
the Nation to any Proportion with that of our Neighbors, there remains but one
Expedient: That is, The erecting a Council of Trade, which may be of such a
Constitution, that by it is means, Manufactories and Fisheries may be
encouraged, our poor employed, The Exportation of Wool stoo'd, Lawsuits decided
summarly amongst Merchants, Interest of Money lowered, and the price of Grains
so regular, that the Poor be not sensible of their Dearness in bad years, nor
the Rich of their Cheapness in good ones. Therefore, it is inexpressible, how
much this Nation would be obliged to any person would contrive a good and
rational Schem of Constitution for such a Council; and to that Parliament that
would give it a Being.

But because such a Council cannot be established of a sudden, let all the
Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, in the mean time encourage Manufactories
and Trade by their Frugality and Industry, according to a Resolve, which was
lately invented by a parcel of good Countrymen; Because, People are more
Zealous in observing any thing, to which they personally Promise, and of whose
Reasonableness they are persuaded: Than they are of Sumptuary Laws, which
either they never hear of, or are suffered to forget, for fault of due
Execution.

Scotland, at present, ought to be considered as a Man that has spent most of
his Estate in Triffles and Idleness, and that has no other Means left him, but
Pinch and good Conduct, for the future.

The second kind of Commons to be considered are the Mechanics, which are Men
both capable of Invention and Application; therefore no doubt, did Trade
flourish, there would be no necessity of bringing home so many manufactured
things, as at present: And that every Scots-man might be furnished at home with
all sort of Household Furniture, all kind of Arms, and with every thing Humane
Ease or Fancy requires.

The third kind of Commons are the Husbandmen, which in my Opinion are the
most miserable of all our Commons; and I believe, we have learned that Method
of oppressing our Pesants, from the French, amongst many other of their good
Customs.

The reason of this Oppression proceeds from small Farms and high-valued
Duties. For the Poverty of this Nation, and the smalness of Trade does
occasion, That Land-Estates are frequently shifted from hand to hand, the
present Masters making all they can, so long as they keep Possession of them:
And are sure to rack every Tenent in his Duty, when they are disposed to sell
them, for drawing the greater Price from the Buyers. Who so soon as they are
Masters of their new Purchases, are not at the Pains to consider the Nature of
their Soils, whether they are capable to produce both their Duties and a
Livelihood to the Husbandmen; but go on after such a manner, that in few
Years, nothing will answer their Tenants Arrears, but the seizing of all they
have, and turning them a begging with a numerous Family. Which is an Injury not
only done to the poor Tenants, but to the People, who must provide for their
Sustenance by Charity.

As Husbandry is the greatest Riches of this State, so it ought to contribute
with all its power to maintain it, and provide, that all Laws made for it is
improvement, be put to due Execution.

It is therefore requisite, that there were appointed, by Act of Parliament,
some Judicious Gentlemen of every County, to be chosen annually by
Land-Proprietars of 40 Pounds Sterlin a Year, and above; who should have power
to decide all Controversies arising betwixt Master and Tenent, (for it is not
just, that the Master should be both Judge and Party, as it often happens in
Baron-Courts) and to inquire into the Rental of every Heritor: That so they may
provide, that no Farms be over-valued, according to the Caprice of the Master,
when he gives new Leases. And such an Inquisition would be no Imposition on
Gentlemen; because, they would be only hindered from abusing their own, to the
prejudice of the Public: According to that Maxim of Law, Reipublicoe interest,
ne quis re sua male utatur.

And it would be the Advantage of the Master, not only to set reasonable Duties
on his Farms, whereby the Husbandman may be both able and encouraged to improve
his Estate, by all kinds of Enclosure; but likewise, to parcel out his Estate
into as few Farms, as he can conveniently: For, if a Farm, that pays 20 Pounds
Sterlin a Year, has as great a Family to entertain, as a Farm that pays 40
Pounds Sterlin, surely, he that pays the 20 Pounds can never be in so good a
Case, either to pay his Master, or to cultivar his Farm, as he that pays the
40 Pounds, who has not only double his Profit, but likewise, as small a Family
to entertain.

A Gentleman then, that would take reasonable Methods to improve his
Land-Estate, ought never to heighten his Tenants, but proportionably to the
mprovement of their Farms: Which, in a few Years, could be so improved, that
the Rental of his Estate can be doubled, without Hazard of making any Beggars.

SECTION. III. Of the Clergy.
THe first Foundation of the Happiness of a State, is the Establishment of the
Reign of God, to whose immediate Servants (who are the Clegy) we owe all the
Honor and Respect, the Love of Religion can inspire into us; provided, they
are distinguishable from other People, by the Character of their Office, which
is composed of Christian Virtues: Such as Innocence of Life, Soundness of
Doctrine in things essential to Salvation, and Love and Charity to all Men. And
by these Virtues it was, that the first Preachers of the Gospel did gain Credit
to the Christian Religion, from the most obstinat Heathen Philosophers.

The most of the Clergy of Scotland are Men of mean Extraction, and owe to
their Education, their Opiniatritie in things indifferent. For what must be
expected from Men, that never read any Authors, but those that make for that
Party, their Fathers or Friends have designed them to follow, but that they
will Dispute for it, so long as conveniently they can? And when ever Reason
fails them, they will protect it with all the Passions and Impertinencies
imaginable. And hence is the Reason, that most part of the Divines, that are
educat in the Northern Universities, amongst the Northern Gentry, are inclined
to the Episcopal Government: Whilst, many of those, that are educat in the
Southern Universities, are inclined to the Presbyterian.

It Is strange that Men have been so extravagant, and made such Stirs in this
World, about the things of another, that instead of making us happy here, as
well as hereafter; by following the Fundamental Rule of Christian Religion, to
Love the Lord our God with all our Hearts, and our Neighbors as our Selves: We
have only practiced a Rule much contrary, to hate and destroy our Neighbor,
for Zeal to God's Worship. Which no doubt has given Occasion to Unthinking
Men, frequently to let pass for good Coin, this Saying; Fallere vis Plebem,
Finge Deum.

Was it not sufficient, That, by the Reformation, most of the People of this
Kingdom have been brought to the true Knowledge of the Christian Religion? What
then has occasioned the one half of the Reformed so to separat from the other,
in the mutual Duty of Love and Charity, which both the same Country and
Religion obliged them to observe? Or, why has this Disease of
Church Government so affected this Kingdom, as to destroy its natural Force, to
ruin all Prospect of Trade, to give so often Temptation to our Kings to
enchroach upon our Liberties, and to fill the Learned World, with many useless
Volumes and hundreds of ridiculous Pamphlets.

In Scotland, the Religion, before the Reformation, was that of Rome; the Care
and Pains of whose Priests were spent in enlarging their Wealth and Authority,
and not in informing the Minds of the People in Piety and Honesty.

That Religion was so adorned with Gaudy Ceremonies, that the Splendour and Pomp
of them served only to amuse the Minds of the Common People, who, like Men in
an Amazement or Wonder, could never recollect themselves, for examining which
was the true Religion.

Its Priests did challenge the Remission of Sins; and took the Liberty both to
number and to tax them; so that, if the Party Confessing was Rich, Paradise did
go at a great rate: And if the Party was Poor, the Priests did exercise their
Authority, with the greater Severity. It has been a great Advantage to the
Romish Clergy, that they had the Wit to invent the Mass; for, who can forbear
the paying a profound respect to them, that by a Whisper can produce so
Venerable a Victime? The number of the Sacraments was invented for Priests, to
squeeze the Pockets of the Laics, and Good Works to be a Spur, to excite their
Ambitious Piety to enrich the Church. Purgatory was invented to make separat
Souls a Merchandable Commodity, and the Invocation of Saints, to increase the
Authority of the Clergy, who, by their Suffrage, could advance any Body they
pleased, to the Court of Heaven.

But, at present, to give the Romish Hierarchy its due, since the Heat and
Defection of the first Reformers was over, it has so recollected the Remains
of its broken Forces, with Care and Industry, and managed its Affairs with so
much Subtility; that if the Reformed do not lay aside all their Trifling
Disputes about Church Government, etc. It may happen, that sometime or other,
(without a Miracle) they may lose their Ground, which they have maintained so
long with Expense of much Blood.

That the Kingdom may be the better served with Judicious and Learned
Ministers, it is necessary that, all small Salaries be Augmented, to preserve
them from the Tentation of Poverty; and that there may be Inspectors appointed
for all the Universities of this Nation, who shall have power to Nominat
Students to study Theology: And that none be admitted to follow the Ministry,
but those that are appointed by them. And by such a Method, this Church will
not have the Misfortune to be pestered with Blockheads, nor the Civil
Government to be deprived of good Men, whom Nature has ordained to be
Mechanics, or Husbandmen.

SECTION. IV. Of the Nobility and Gentry.
THe Nobility and Gentry are the best Blood and Spirits of any body Politic,
and ought to be respected as the preservers of its Life and Vigor. For, its
their duty to maintain Piety and Justice, to support their Country with their
Wealth and Sword, to protect the poor from the Insolence of Oppressors, and to
follow Virtue and Honor, as the only Badge capable to distinguish them from
the rest of their fellow Subjects.

The Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, have always had the Reputation of
brave Men, and good Scholars, nor ought it to be otherwise; seeing they have
all the Education this Country can afford, and the most of them have likewise
the advantage of Traveling abroad, to learn any thing that is capable to
improve their Knowledge in Men or Things. But now a days, for want of Business
to apply themselves, they either lose the fruits of their Education, by
Lawsuits, or by reading a Horace or Juvenal, or, by smothering them altogether
in a Bottle.

But how great an Obligation lies upon them to apply themselves, at present, to
support their poor Country, and to sacrifice to the Public Good all
Misunderstandings occasioned amongst them, either by Religion or Ambition,
appears from these following Considerations.

First, they ought to meddle with Church Government, no further than it affects
the Civil Government, or tends to give the Supreme Power an Opportunity to
encroach upon their Liberties: Therefore, they ought all to protect that Church
Government, which makes most for their secular Advantages, and encourages least
the Clergy in Luxury or Ambition. And of such Qualities is the Presbyterian
Church Government here established by Law. Secondly, The Nobility and Gentry
are the Springs and Wheels by which all the Affairs of this Nation move, and
without their Concurrence, no good or bad Law can be made, no King can encroach
upon the Privileges of the Subject; Nor no Revolution of Government can happen
to the Kingdom; Therefore they ought to let pass no Law in Parliament, which is
not for the Interest of their Country, nor quit any Privilege that may give
occasion to their Successors to Complain of their Folly, or Injustice; Nor
ought they to endeavor any Revolution of Government, which is not with a
Demonstration for their Countries benefit. Thirdly, They have most of all the
Treasure of this Kingdom amongst them; Therefore, it is their Duty to improve
their Estates by all the means, that Art or Industry can suggest unto them. And
to promot Trade, by encouraging Manufactories and Fisheries with their Money.
For, suppose a Gentleman has Five Hundred Pound Sterline free Rent per annum;
what is it, for him to employ a 1000 l. sterling: for a Stock in Trade? And so
proportionably to their Estates, may all Gentlemen employ Sums of Money.
Lastly, It Is their Motion and Example that influence all other People of a
meaner Character; So that it may be justly said, that all the Advantages, or
Misfortunes which have befallen this Kingdom, are to be Attribute to the
Conduct of its Nobility and Gentry. For had they always been of the same honest
principles, designing nothing but the public Good, how happy had this Nation
been long e're now? And how much regarded by all Europe?
SECTION. V. Of the King and Parliament.
AS every Natural Body is capable of certain intervals of Health and Sickness,
so every Body Politic, and each of them requires it is Physician to remove
every thing that is a let to the Operation of its Nature; with this Difference,
that a Natural Physician works both for a Livelihood to himself, and for
bringing his patient to the best habit of Body his Art is Capable whilst a
State Physician, in place of curing the Body politic, (of which he has the
Inspection and Management) forgets to keep to its Fundamental Laws, which are
the true Rules of Politics, and follows his own Ambition and Fancies: Which
either destroy it altogether by inward Convulsions, or change it is Nature so
far, that its hardly to be known for the same Body.

Every Body Politic has its different Physician, conform to the Nature of its
Constitution. An absolute Monarchy has its King, who is so much Master of his
Patient, that he can breath a Vein, when he finds it suits best with his
Inclinations. A limited Monarchy has its Parliament for Physician, whose chief
business is to preserve a Symmetrie betwixt the Body and Head, that neither of
them exceed its due bounds.

The Government of Scotland is a limited Monarchy, by the Conduct of whose
Parliament both King and Country can be happy. But, alas! how seldom does it
happen, that the Members of that August Assembly, who are Men of different
Educations, Tempers, Understandings, Offices, Employments, have all the same
end in their View? which ought to be the Common Good and Honor of this Nation.

In one Kings Reign we find the Parliament encroaching upon his prerogative,
and in the Reign of another, we see it so abject as to sacrifice to him their
Privileges: Examples of both are the Reigns of Charles the first and second.
For, what necessity was there, to drive so hard after the year 1638, that their
poor King became a Victime to his Enemies? Or to sink so far into Fondness,
that King Charles the second had in his power to encroach upon the Liberties of
this Nation to that ^^ght, that Oppression it self might have been palliat with
the jus Regium?

The unsteddy proceedings of Parliaments have given occasion to the greatest
Wits, to condemn every thing of mixed Governments, and to lay down rules for
bringing them under the absolute power of their Monarchs: which has been
practiced by most of the Princes of Europe, according to the different
Circumstances and Humors of their Subjects.

The Kings of France Lewis 13th. and 14th. after the Advice of Cardinal
Richelieu, did ruin first their Nobility and Gentry, by wheedling them into
posts of the Army, where they could squander away their Estates, to the end
that they might depend upon the Court for a Livelihood; and did so much harrass
the whole body of their People with Persecutions and Taxes, to make it for ever
incapable to strugle for Liberty.

The Kings of Sweden and Denmark secured first their Clergy, next the
Consciences of the Common People, and lastly did destroy most of the Ancient
Families of their Nobility and Gentry.

The many Popular Furies which have raged in this Island, have no doubt been
great Motives to our Kings, to approach as near our Privileges, as
conveniently they could. King James the First of Great Britain endeavored to
screw his Prerogative, as far as the People would suffer him; for he thought
nothing of Imprisoning Members of the English Parliament, or to issue out
Proclamations, prohibiting his Subjects to talk of State Affairs: Though in the
mean time, he was acting against the Interest of his Kingdoms. And the late
King James seems to have had a great Itch after an absolute Power, when his
introducing Popery was the principal Step could have been made for that end;
because of the Multitude of Churchmen, and the Decay of Trade, which for the
most part are unseparable from that Religion. But it would appear, that the
Reason our Kings have so often been baulked of their Designs to teach their
Subjects the Practical Rules of Passive Obedience, has been the want of Money,
and a powerful standing Army: Nevertheless they have attacqued us on our blind
side, which was to divide the People of this Kingdom amongst themselves, and
then to espouse a Party, which was sufficient to plunge any Country into the
greatest Misery, by leaving the Public Good neglected, and nothing to be
sought after, but Revenge and Interest.

King William came to this Island, when both its Affairs, and those of other
Princes of Europe did require him; then was it, that an Occasion offered it
self to the Scots, for putting their Country in a State of Thriving, and for
curing all the Defects of its Government; But Providence so ordered it, that
they were divided amongst themselves, and rendered incapable to unite in
Counsel for promoting the Public Good. They were therefore liable to be led
away, whether the greatest Faction pleased; which Faction divided in
Imagination the Spoil of their Country, and shared all Places of Public Trust
amongst one another, before ever they were determined to offer the Crown to his
present Majesty: Who is a Prince of an Illustrious Family, and merits to be
ranked among the greatest Men of his time. I hope therefore, whatever Historian
takes upon him, to celebrat and perpetuat to Posterity his Heroic Actions,
will do him Justice, by giving a true and genuine Account to the World, both of
his Virtues and Vices: That the one may serve to set off the other, as dark
Shadows do the best Pictures.

SECTION. VI. That a mixed Government cannot increase in Wealth and Power, but
by the Honesty and Wisdom of its Members of Parliament.
IF one were to play the Philosopher, he might, for Disput's sake, tell us,
That the Subjects of all Governments are equally happy, provided they be not
sensible of their present Misery; As for Example, that a French-Peasant, who
has coarse Bread to fill his Belly, and Canvas-Cloaths, and Wooden-Shoes to
protect him from bad Weather, is as much obliged to Fortune, as an English
Farmer, who can smoke his Pipe, and talk of Liberty and Property at random.

Yet if we lay aside the Theory, and consider the Practice of People, we will
read in all Histories, that every Nation of Europe, which at this day has no
Vestiges of its ancient Government, has strugled with its Kings for Liberty, to
the last Breath: An Instance of this are the French, who, ever since the Reign
of Lewis the 11th, have been attacqued in their Liberties, by succeeding Kings,
and could never be forced to succeumb, till the Reign of this present King: Who
has taken all Opportunities to execute Cardinal Richelieu's Political
Testament, by arming his Popish Subjects against those of the Reformed
Religion, by accustoming his Peasants to exorbitant Taxes and Poverty, and by
bringing the greatest of his Subjects to depend upon his Pleasure for a
Livelihood.

Is there any Man, that has the good luck to be born a Subject to a Limited
Monarch, who compares the Circumstances of one that lives under a Tyrant with
his own, but will bless his Stars, and acknowledge himself much happier in his
Practice of Liberty, than any Slave can can be in its Shadow or Theory?

All Governments, by the Corruption of their Parts, are liable to many
Convulsions, and even to be changed at last into Tyrannies, if the Nature of
their Constitutions do not guard against them.

We therefore, in Scotland, are obliged to our Forefathers, that have left us
a Government which is Limited Monarchy; and in which, the Prerogative of the
Prince, and the Liberty of the People are so well regulat, that there seems
nothing wanting, that may tend to the Happiness of either, but Honesty and
Wisdom in the Members of Parliament. For Rome was never enslaved by its
Princes, till the Senate delivered up its Privileges to Julius Caesar: Who was
then put in a Condition, to curb the Liberties of all the Unthinking People of
the Roman Empire, with Forms and Names in place of wholesome Laws.

I may say, with Regret, that it has been our Unhappiness, ever since the
Restoration of King Charles the Second, that our Liberties have been exposed,
by the Unlucky Division of our Parliaments into two Factions: Whereof the one
was called the Court-Faction, and the other, that of the Country.

The Court-Faction was a Party of Men, who, under Protence of Zeal to the
Service of their King, destroyed their Country; by corrupting Members of
Parliament, by dividing the Spoils of the Public Treasury amongst themselves
and Minions; and neglecting every thing that could promote the Trade of this
Nation, or provide a Livelihood to its Poor.

That Faction was composed of Men, who had different Motives to comply with
Dishonest Practices: One out of Simplicity and good Nature, hoping, that by
laying Taxes on his Country, he did his Majesty good Service. Another, out of
an Inclination he had to be a Knave: And a third, out of a Desire to gain Pelf,
thinking it time enough to serve the Public, when once he had served himself.

The Countrey-Faction was a parcel of Members of Parliament, who thought it
their Duty to keep the Legislative Power untainted, to be Jealous of the
Peoples Liberties and Rights, and to be careful for the Public Safety; by
watching over the Ministers of State, that they should not embezle the Public
Money, by employing it to corrupt Members of Parliament, or to maintain a
standing Army, to bully the People out of their Senses.

These Members, that made up that Party, have moved according to different
Principles; for one has acted out of pure and sincere Love to his Country,
another out of Hatred and Malice to Statesmen, and a third out of Design to
ruin the Government, in which he was not employed: Of what a Medley of Men
then, has that Countrey-Faction been composed? Nevertheless, People ought to
make no Distinction amongst them, so long as they all promote the Public
Interest; because they will have time enough to discern the Dregs of a Faction,
so soon as they separat from the pure Body.

Now after the Description of the foresaid Factions, Methinks, that it is the
Countrey-Faction, which ought to be carressed and esteemed by all their
Constituents, as Men that act both out of Conscience and Honor, knowing that
the Freedom and Wealth of every State go hand in hand together. And it has
been often seen amongst our Forefathers, that this Faction has maintained
both the Prerogative of their Kings, and the Liberties of their Country:
Whilst the Court part has found it convenient, to retire into the Shadows of
Oblivion.

It Is strange, that most of our Courtiers, for near these hundred Years, have
been so much in Love with their private Interest, and valued so little that of
the Public, that long ago, it has been a Problem in Scotland, whether
Parliaments were useful or not; because, the first thing proposed there, has
been always (next to Religion) a Subsidy for his Majesty: And which was both
proposed and granted in one day without the Members of Parliament taking the
Pains to examine, to what use it should be employed, or to calculat a just Sum
for the same use. And hence is the Reason, that Money given by Parliaments to
their Kings, has served only to be a Bait and Reward for Covetous Courtiers to
betray their Country, and for the Insolent Tacksmen, to oppress the Poor
People.

At this rate, I confess, Parliaments are mere empty shadows of Liberty. When a
Commissioner and Secretary could have asked His Majesty his Commands for
Scotland, and at the same time engaged so to secure the Major party of
Parliament with Places and Promises, that it would be always in a readiness to
Vote what ever way the Court pleased.

A mixed Government has the Advantage of all other Governments; For, if Members
of Parliament do but their Duty, it is impossible that ever it can hazard to be
brought under the Tyranny of its Monarch. But if the Members be debauched with
Principles of Self-interest, and suffer the Nations Treasure to be wasted,
Secretaries of State to undermine our Privileges, and Trade to be neglected; I
say, That such a mixed Government is a Tyranny established by our selves: And
that no King ought to be blamed for drawing us after him, with our own Fetters
of Slavery.

It Is therefore, that the principal points of the Duty of Members of Parliament
are,

First, That they be Men unbyassed, and incorrupt, presering the Safety and
Interest of the Country to any Self-love.

Secondly, That they endeavor to make good Laws that may both secure the
Subjects Property, and promot the public Good.

Thirdly, That they never grant a Subsidy, without knowing the Reason why, and
how it is to be applied for the Nations benefit.

Fourthly, That the succeeding Session of Parliament call to an exact account
the Managers of the Subsidies granted by the preceding Session; So that
Courtiers may be prevented from disposing upon Pensions at pleasure, and the
Publicans from imposing upon the Courtiers, by pretending that they are losers
in collecting of Taxes.

Fifthly, That they impeach every great Man, who dare pursue destructive
Measures, either against the Kings Honor, or the Countries Interest.

If these Maxims be steddily followed by our Parliaments, then will Scotland be
sensible, how necessary they are to promot every thing that tends to its
Safety, Honor, and increase of Wealth; and how many Advantages a mixed
Government has above that of an Absolute.

SECTION. VII. What Measures this present Parliament ought to take, for
recovering the Abuses of former Reigns, and putting this Nation into a constant
Course of Thriving.
WEre I skilful in making Panegyricks, I don't see how I could employ my Wit
and Talent better, than in praising those Members who in the last Session of
Parliament did begin to put a Stop to that Imprudent Method, we have always
had, of raising Taxes from the People; without considering the State of the
Nation, and whether or not it was in a Condition, by its Trade, to mantain as
many Pensioners and Forces, as it had done during the late War with France. I
wish therefore that all the Honorable Members may continue in the same good
Sentiments this ensueing Session, minding only their Countries Business, and
believing that to be the best way both to serve His Majesty and themselves.

It Is an hard Task for any knowing Physician to give a just Advice for
recovering any Patient that has been long Hectic; much more is it for any
private Man, to lay down an exact Method to a Parliament (whose Constitution
has been almost changed by the supine negligence of its Members) for putting it
self and succeeding Parliaments upon so good a Foot, that neither the too much
Complaisance for their Kings, nor the Treachery of any that is entrusted with
public Employments can be able to shake them.

However, being that every one is obliged in duty to contribute both in Advice,
and any other thing, to the support of that Society, whereof he is a Member: My
Advice then to the ensueing Session of Parliament is as follows.

First, That there be an Act for a Biennial Parliament, that may sit two Months
once in the two years, (without the Kings having power to Adjourn it for the
said two Months) and which in the beginning of the third year, shall be
dissolved: His Majesty at the same time, empowering all Counties and Buroughs,
to choose new Commissioners for the following Biennial Parliament. By such an
Act, Grievances will be redressed, and the Business of the Nation taken care
of; Because, every succeeding Parliament will cause the Acts of former
Parliaments to be put in Execution: Nor will it be worth the pains of
Statesmen and Courtiers to corrupt Members of Parliament, their power being
but of a small continuance, and Parliaments will also have the liberty to sit
and do Business, without the trouble of Being Adjourned from day to day. For in
my humble Opinion, if Parliaments cannot sit and do Business, I don't know for
what use they serve. Secondly, That there be an Act for a Habeas Corpus,
conceived much after the Tenor of that of the English. Which Act will first
encourage Men both to speak and Writ their Sentiments concerning the Interest
of the public, without being afraid of the Censure or Displeasure of Men in
power, for every body knows how much the Liberty of the Press does Contribute
for exposing the Truth, and giving political Spectacles to every Honest Man, by
which he can see the Corruptions of Statesmen and guard against their
supprises. And I may say that our Neighbor Nation owes the Preservation of its
privileges to the Liberty of the press; for how often had their unthinking
Members of Parliament been wheedled into a Compliance with their former Kings,
to destroy their Constituents Liberties, if they had not had the true
Representation of the Affairs of the Nation laid down before them by some
honest sensible Men? Which did serve as a Polestare to steer their Course by,
and to excite them to Diligence in their Duty. Secondly, A Habeas Corpus will
prevent Poples being punished above the Merit of their Crimes, and of this
Injustice the Emperors, Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, were sensible;
when in their Constitutions ( l. 5. Cod. de Custod: Rerum) it is ordained, that
those who were shut up in Prison be either convicted and punished in due time,
if Guilty, or Absolved, if Innocent. The Words of the Text are, De his quos
tenet carcer inclusos, id aperta definitione sanximus, ut aut convictos velox
paena subdueat, aut liberandos Custodia diuturna non maceret. Thirdly, That
there be an Act establishing a Council of Trade, the Nature of which I have
touched a little in the Section of the Commons; For, Trade is of so great
Moment to any Nation, which wishes to make a Figure amongst its Neighbors,
That, in a word, either it must understand it in all its Mazes, or must resolve
to follow the Old Patriarchs way of living, which is, to confine it self only
to what Nature requires. For which reason it is requisite, that there be a
Council of Trade, whose Business it should be to lay down good and rational
Measures for managing it, and for Curbing all the little tricks which
discourage People to Traffic. Fourthly, That the Army be reduced to as few as
are only necessary for putting the Laws in Execution, and for preserving Peace
at home; Because, every wise Nation, that has its freedom and a power to
observe the fundamental Laws of its Constitution, never keeps more Soldiers in
time of Peace than are sufficient to protect the Execution of of Justice. I am
sorry therefore, That we have neither Money to mantain so many brave Men that
are in our Troops, nor at present any advantageous service to employ them in;
which might make them useful to this Kingdom: Unless we had got a Right to part
of of the King of Spains Testament, which was lately made by the care of his
Neighbors. Fifthly, That a good Method be fallen on for regulating our
Militia, and a Fund provided for mantaining broken Officers, who may be useful
to Oversee them. For it were hard, that Gentlemen, who some time or other may
be capable to serve their Country, should be exposed to the Inconveniences of
Poverty. Sixthly, That all good Laws be made for encouraging Shipping, which
is, and ought to be both the Offensive and Defensive force of this Kingdom.
Seventhly, That there be an Act declaring, That no Pensioner shall be capable
to Vote in Parliament, or any body that has his immediate Livelihood from His
Majesty; Because, it is to be supposed, that all Pensioners will prefer the
Humor of their Benefactor, to the Interest of their Country. Eighthly, That a
new Committee of Parliament be appointed every half year, to supply the places
of Privy Counselors to his Majesty. And the Advantages of such an Act are
evident to every Body, that knows the Practices of a Privy Council composed of
Courtiers.
By these and such Acts, the Affairs of this Kingdom can be brought to so good
a State, that not only it may provide for it is own Safety and Treasure, but
likewise be in a Condition, either to separat from England, or to unite with
it: As the Wisdom of this Nation shall find it convenient.

That there is a Necessity for Scotland, either to unite with England, or
separat from it, is evident by the Experience of 97 years. In which time, this
loose and irregular Tie of the Crowns, in place of an Union of Hearts, Hands
and Civil Interest, has only given Occasion to ill disposed Persons in both
Kingdoms, to foment continual Jealousies and Animosities betwixt them: And to
the English, an Opportunity of crushing every thing, that can make for the
Interest of Scotland. Instances of which are innumerable, and some of them are
but too fresh in our Memories.

I have already showed the Advantages of an Union to both Kingdoms, in the
preceding Essay, and there is no Person more capable to bring that noble Work
to a happy issue, than his present Majesty; who, therefore, ought to be
Addressed for that end, by the Parliaments of both Nations, that they may have
the Liberty to sit at the same time, for adjusting all Matters that relate to
that important Affair.

But if the English continue to neglect, and delay to unite with Scotland upon
reasonable Terms, the Scots only Interest will be, to mind their own Business
for the future; so that whatever War may happen to England, let them ly aside,
preserving Peace both at Home and Abroad; and making the best Advantage they
can, either of their Neighbors Circumstances, or their own: Knowing, that though
his Britannick Majesty can declare War against any of his Neighboring Princes,
by virtue of his Prerogative, yet he cannot oblige his Scots Subjects to
furnish Money for carrying it on, unless they please, and find it for their
Interest. Which is impossible, so long as there is no greater Union betwixt
England and Scotland, than at present. For ever since our Kings Accession to
the Crown of England, the English have always used the Scots, as the Ape did
the Cat's Clutch, to pull the Chestnut out of the Fire.

Let us therefore apply our selves to Frugality and Honesty, and to every thing
that can put this Nation above the Contempt of its Neighbors. Let us
acknowledge King William for our Monarch; so long as he lives, and till the
Hour of his Death, let us never so much as talk of a Successor to him, nor
Cabal either for the Prince of Wales or Hannover. But may we for once mind our
selves, having already been too fond of procuring Kings to the English Throne,
who have only made use of us to serve their own ends.

At his present Majesty's Death, if there be no Successor, which is already
provided by Law, and if this Kingdom be not united with England; Experience
will teach us, how to dispose of our Government. And no doubt, but Scotland is
as able to subsist of it self, by the Industry and Wisdom of its People, as
well as many petty Governments in Europe.

I will now end, putting the present Members of Parliament in Mind, That seeing,
in all probability, his Majesty will not ratify that Resolve of Parliament
concerning Darien; without which, (according to my Opinion) there is none of his
Scots Subjects, that did contribute for that Expedition, but by Law may be
pursued as Pirates, or their Abettors: Or must accept of a Dishonorable
Remission. I say then, in the mean time, let the Members accept of all other
good Laws, his Majesty will be pleased to grant, and especially, the Act for a
Biennial Parliament; without which, I would not give a Farthing for a thousand
good Laws, because they will all be broke, for want of Execution. But never let
them give more Taxes, during his Majesty's Life, which are not for advancing
some Public Benefit to the Kingdom.

And by so doing, we will testify to all the World, that the Scots are not to
blame, for being branded with the Ignominious Crime of Piracy: Having had all
the Right, that the Law of Nations could give them, for taking Possession of
such a Place.

Being then, the Honor and Safety of this Ancient Kingdom, the Advantages that
may accresce to it for the future, and it is own present Happiness, do, in a
word, depend absolutely upon the steady and honest Conduct of the Members of
this Parliament; Let, therefore every Member, who shall prefer his private
Interest to that of the Public, be an Abomination to all Honest Scotsmen: Who,
I hope, shall have no more reason to complain to Providence in the Words of
Lucan, Faelix Roma quidem, Civesque habitura superbos:
Si Libertatis Superis tam Cura placeret,
Quam Vindicta placet --


FINIS.

