The Complete MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF THAT Notorious Impostor Will. Morrell,
alias Bowyer, alias Wickham, etc.

Who died at Mr. Cullen's the Bakers in the Strand, Jan. 3. 1691/2.

With Considerable Additions never before Published.

Aude aliquid Brevibus Gyaris and carcere dignum,
Sivis esse aliquid --
Licensed, April 14. 1694.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Roper and E. Wilkinson at the Black Boy over against
St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street, 1694.

TO Gabriel Balam, Esquire
SIR,
A Fair Name in the Frontispiece of a Book, is by long Custom reckoned as
Essential a part of it, as a Portico is of a Temple. And yet as Panegyricks are
their common Furniture, Dedication is the nicest part of Writing.

For though the Honest Poet, like the Faithful Painter, draws not beyond the
Life, it is still but a sort of Labor lost. For as Modesty is the Finishing
Stroke to the Complete Gentleman, That Patron that is the most worthy of
Praise, is the least fond of it.

And if we stretch into that nauseous Extreme of Flattery, the Panegyric is
turned into a Libel, by exposing what we pretend to praise.

It Is true, the Pretense of Dedications, is the borrowed Protection a piece of
Scribble receives from the Noble Patron, under whose Vmbrage it is ushered into
the World. When, alas, a great Patron is no more a Protection to a dull Book,
than a Cesar's Face to a leaden Shilling. Wit and Sense stand only upon their
own Legs, and go no farther than their own intrinsic Merit carries them. The
World, at least the Judicious part of it, is not to be so cheated. There Is no
passing off that false Coin for which every Man of Sense has both a Scales and
a Touchstone. Wit runs the Fate of Belteshazzar: The [Mene Tekel] is certainly
written over our Heads, if we are once weighed and found too Light.

But supposing some favored Author, cherished by the Smiles of a Noble or
Generous Patron, takes this occasion (for that is the fairest Dedicatory
pretext) of avowing his Gratitude to the whole World for such signal
Obligations; yet this public Acknowledgment of past Favors, looks very
suspiciously like a Design of drawing on of new ones too: So that to sum up the
Cause, the Brotherhood of the Quill, if they would fairly unmask, should
plainly tell the World, that there is a private Gratification goes along with
the public Acknowledgment. For Men make Dedications as Votaries make
Thanksgivings: The bent Knee is not wholly for Blessings received; but for some
little Continuation too of the kind descending Smiles.

And, 'Faith, now I am playing the Tell-troth, and making thus bold with the
Poetic Fraternity; this common Fault amongst them may well be excused: For to
Apologize for the Muses in their own Native Dialect, I need but quote a Stanza
in Gondibert.

O hireless Science; and of all alone
The Liberal! Meanly the rest each State
With Pension treats: But this depends of none;
Whose Worth they reverently forbear to rate.
If Poor Poetry is put to such hard Shifts (for maugre our Gondibert's fair
Flourish, that is the plain English) to be so wholly unprovided for, that the
Muses have neither Lands nor Livings annexed to their Foundation, but are
wholly supported by Goodness and Favor; whilst all other Studies, whether in
the Long or Black Robe, have their Preferments, as warm Gowns, soft Furs, fat
Glebes, and fruitful Crops, and what not: And Poetry, as much as it is charged
with Fiction, yet, like Truth, goes almost naked: Under these Melancholy
Circumstances it may well be permitted some Grains of Allowance, as an Unhappy
Dependant upon Courtesy.

But whilst I am thus plain in correcting Faults abroad, I ought to look at
home, as having a much weaker Plea for my own Dedication, when being so
altogether a Stranger to you, I dare be guilty of this Presumption. This indeed
I ought to have considered: But when I find the Ingenious every day making
their Court to you, and the more eminent Priests of Apollo, the more successful
and no less deservingly so, all assiduous Suitors to your Favor; so many fair
Examples are that Warrant for my Ambition, that I lay hold of any Occasion, tho
at a farther distance, of making one of the Train.

You have that Air of Sweetness and obliging Temper, a Conversation so
grateful, as renders you the Favorite even of Both Sexes.

But if I proceed to sum up your fair Character, I shall transgress the Laws I
have laid down, and offend that Modesty, as has an Ear too tender for that
Subject. Not to enlarge therefore upon your other Merits, it is sufficient, You
are so great a Cherisher of the Muses and the Stage, that that single Virtue
alone has encouraged me to the Confidence of this Address.

All I have truly to blush at, is the slenderness of the Present, this
inconsiderable Trifle I offer you. However, as the Crow presented to Caesar, be
pleased to give it the same favorable Acceptance, as indeed (like that poor
Crow) saluting you with the same [Hayle] only with more Zeal, and tend'ring you
the humble Obedience of

SIR, Your most Devoted Servant E. SETTLE.

THE Notorious Impostor: Or the History of the Life of Will. Morrell alias
Bowyer, etc.
THIS Famous Rover, from the Multitude of his Titles, to begin with his right
Name William Morrell, was by Profession a Chyrurgion; and more than twenty
Years ago, for many Years together, a Practitioner of good Credit in Banbury;
where his Industry honestly got him, by his Practice, a comfortable
Subsistence, with which he maintained himself, his Wife and Family very
handsomely, till about twenty Years ago he began to be very Lazy, and much
addicted to hanker after the Conversation of the Gentry thereabouts: And being
a Person very Facetious, and his Company not disacceptable, he screwed himself
into the Society of the best Quality round about, and would be a Month or two a
Guest at several Great Men's Houses: More particularly he some time since
insinuated himself into the Favor of a Worthy Gentleman near Banbury, viz.
Humphry Wickham of Swakely Esquire whose Person and Character he pretended to
represent, and in which Imposture he made his last Exit. His Original it was
very Obscure, and his first Start into the World, was in no higher a Post than
a Journeyman Shoemaker, in which Character he lived some considerable time at
Worcester, understanding so little of what he professed at Banbury, viz.
Chyrurgery, that he knew the Virtue of no other Plaster than his own Cobler's
Wax. From that Employment, he took a Frolic to Sea; from whence returned, he
came to Swakely, with the true Privilege of a Traveller, his Authority
unquestionable, he talked Miracles both of his Voyages and Adventures. For
Example, That he had made a Voyage to Constantinople and Barbados, (for East
and West were all one in his Geography;) and so amused the Country People with
his Rhodomontadoes, that they looked upon him as a Prodigy of a Man. His great
Art he professed was Chyrurgery, (the little he had of it being indeed gotten
on Shipboard,) and what with promised Wonders, and great Words, the common
Crutch of little Abilities, together with some Favors and Countenance received
from Captain Wickham, (a common Charity from so worthy a Gentleman,) which very
much heightened his Reception, he made shift to rub through the World.

But to begin our History in order: From his Conversing with Gentlemen and
Herding with Quality, Business began to fall off, his many Rambles from home
soon made his Practice flag; when the Glass and the Bottle came into play, the
Salvatory and Plaister-box went out: And his Patients could not well stay for
the Setting of a Broken Limb, or Tenting a Green Wound, till our Esculapius was
to be called, the Lord knows where, and found the Devil knows when. This Trade
continuing, the other fell to decay; till at last Poverty began to peep in at
his Window, and Duns to hover about his Door. In these little Exigencies and
Necessities (for the Gentleman's Tables abroad would not fill the Bellies at
home; nor would Hunting or Hawking pay Landlords Rent) his Wants put him upon
Shifts and Artifices for his Subsistence; and what with a Natural Wit, and a
pretty large Talent of Confidence, the pressing Hand of Fortune threw him upon
several Tricks and Frauds to hold his Head above-board. But not to trouble you
with any of his lesser Diminitive Exploits, the Infancy and Nonage of his
Activity, we do not think fit to treat you with these pe^tier Adventures, but
even set him out in one of his noblest Achievements, and paint our new Guzman
in some of his boldest and fairest Colors.

Accordingly he Equips himself with a Sturdy Young Country-Fellow, a Ralpho to
our Hudibras, and takes a Knight-Errantry one day to a Fair at Brayls in
Warwickshire, his Habit between a Grazier and a plain Country-Gentleman; where
Santering about with his Man Tom (for so his Squire was titled) at last spying
a Knot of good likely Kine (near a Score of them.) Ah Master, says Tom, what a
parcel of brave Cattle are these. Ay Tom, replies the Master, I am sorry I saw
them no sooner; these would do my business to a T; but as the Devil and ill
Luck would have it, I have laid out my whole Stock already, and so I Will even
set my Heart at Rest. The Country-Fellow, the Owner of the Cattle, seeing a
Gentleman of his honest Appearance surveying his Beasts, and hearing every word
that passed between the Man and Master, (for they took care to talk loud enough
to be heard) thought he had got a good Chapman, and desired the Gentleman to
draw nearer and handle the Cattle. Handle, answers Tom, what for? You know,
Sir, you have laid out all your Money already, and what should we handle Cattle
unless we had Cole to buy 'em: I confess they are for your Turn above any I
have zeen in the whole Vair; but that is nothing, the Money Master the Money.
The Money, replies the Countryman, Troth that shall make no Difference, nor
break Squares between us; if you and I can agree, the Cattle are at your
Service: I suppose you are some honest Gentleman hereabouts, and the Money will
do my work next Market Day. Pray what may I call your Name? My Name is Walters,
replies our Cattle-Merchant. Walters, Master, answers our Countryman, What any
Relation to his Worship the Noble Sir William Walters? Ay, Friend, a small
Relation, a Brother of his. A Brother of Sir William 's! Off goes the
Country-man's Bonnet at the next word, and a long Scrape made; for no Respect
was too great for a Brother to a Person of such eminent Quality. My Cattle,
Noble Squire, Ay with all my Heart. In short, after much ado, to make the
Countryman be covered before him, he fell to treat about the Price of the
Cattle, in which he bargained so warily, that they had almost parted for a
single Shilling in dispute between them. But at last the Bargain and Sale
concluded, Tom is commanded to drive home the Cattle, the Money to be paid next
Market Day, and the Countryman has the Honor to drink a Pot at parting with
his Worshipful Chapman our Sir William's Brother. This Feat performed, he takes
a walk round the Fair, and picks up a pretty Country Girl, a Masons Daughter at
a small Town about four Miles off, and gives her the common Country-Civility of
a Fair, viz. a Glass of White Wind and Sugar. During this Entertainment of our
Young Damsel, he is most desperately smitten with her Beauty, insomuch that our
Inamorato must wait upon her home to her Father's House, nothing but Death and
Despair attending if he cannot have that extraordinary Happiness. The Girl, who
by this time had learnt his Name and Quality, was not a little confounded at
the pressing Importunities of a Person of his Worth, to a poor Girl of her
little Capacity; and notwithstanding her modest Refusals, felt a secret Pride
from so kind an offer, and at last accepted of his Service home. No sooner was
she got safe handed home, and her Mother and Daddy were privately whispered
what Honor they received from such a Visitant; but the best the House could
afford was not good enough for him: After the courser Compliments of [ Lord,
Sir, such a Person of Quality under our poor Roof] and the like; the best
welcome that could be made him was not wanting: Nay, for what was deficient at
home, the whole Neighborhood was ransak'd to lend help toward the
Accommodation. Our new Lover, not to baulk a good Cause, openly professes no
less than honorable Matrimonial Affection to his dear Conqueror. Estate he
wants none, and Portion or Quality are below his Consideration, the
Satisfaction of Love is the only thing in the World he resolves to gratify.

The Father and Mother are much astonished at such an Addresser to their
Daughter, nor is the Daughter her self a little surpised at it, though of the
two her Wonder is the least; for her Sexes natural Frailty was so apt to make
her think it the pure Effect of her own sweet Face, that the Power of her
Charms, and the Quality of her Captive was not altogether (she fancied) so
extraordinary an Adventure. In fine, Our passionate Admirer pushes on his Suit
with all the Vigor and Application imaginable, and truly you may well conceive
so weak a Resistance could not well hold out long against so Puissant an
Assailer: The Siege is pressed home, and in three short Days the white Flag is
hung out, a Parley beat, Articles concluded, and the Fort surrendered. Our
Damsel, in short, commits Matrimony; and the whole Family is not a little
transported at such a Noble Alliance. Thus Wedded and Bedded, Our new Couple
are all Honey and Sweetness, and though Sir William Walter's House was not
above a dozen Miles from thence, his Adopted Brother all safe and secure,
sleeps in the soft Arms of his young Bride with all the Rapture of Pleasure and
Delight. After three Revelling Days were spent in Feasting and Joy, the
Father-in-Law and himself enter in a close Cabinet Consult about providing for
Family and Settlement. He tells the Old Man, that truly his Brother the Knight
will undoubtedly take no little Dudgeon at this Match, not that he cares a
Farthing for it. He has married the only Creature of the World he can Love, and
he is resolved to Cherish her accordingly. But however, to manage Affairs with
Discretion, he thinks it his best Prudence and Policy, to get his Trunks and
the Writings of his Estate safe out of his Brother's Hands, before he publishes
the Marriage. And for that purpose he has no better Way than for his Father-in
Law to help him to a small Cart and a couple of able Horses, and to drive to
his Brother's, and take up his Trunks, etc. And considering he had laid out all
his ready Money in Cattle at Brayle Fair, he desired the Favor to furnish him
with Ten Pounds, that he might not be unprovided with a little of the Ready
about him, in case of any Rupture between his Brother and himself, till he
could furnish himself better amongst his Tenants.

The Old Man very readily embraced this reasonable Proposition, and though
truly the Sum of Ten Pounds was above his Stock, nevertheless, living in Repute
amongst his Neighbors, through great Solicitation, some forty and some thirty
Shillings, and such like Sums, with much ado he raises the Ten Pounds desired;
and more and above he procures two very able Horses and a Cart to bring away
the Treasure aforesaid, etc.

By this time his Man Tom having Sold the Cattle, is come to wish his Noble
Master Joy of his fair Bride, and so the Master and Tom, attended by a Brother
of his Bride, an Honest Country Swain, who though so highly honored with his
new Affinity, is at present planted in no higher a Post than to be a Mate to
his Man Tom to drive the Cart, set forwards, etc.

The Brother-in-Law, Cheek by Jowl, with the Fore-Horse of his small Team,
drives on very merrily for about Nine of the Twelve Miles to Sir William's,
entertaining his Worshipful Relation with the very best Tune he could Whistle
all the Way they traveled.

But now within Three Miles of Home, our politic Bridegroom thinks it
advisable, that one of his Carters, the Brother, should make a Halt at an
Alehouse where they stopped, and the whole Management of the Cart and Horses
be entrusted with Tom, for fear the Sight of a Stranger to come to take up
Goods at his Brother's might give Occasion of Curiosity and Inquiry, whereas
Tom, an old Servant in the Family, with less Suspicion and Inspection might do
it.

These strong Reasons (or indeed weaker would have served turn) were
satisfactory enough, and so the Gentleman Equipping his Brother Clodpate with a
George to stay and Drink till they returned, the Master and Man fairly drive
on, for the remaining three Miles to bring off the Bag and Baggage, etc.

The Potent Sum of a whole Half Crown to be laid out in Ale, set in our Country
Youth to a hearty Carouse with the kind Hostess of the House, where the
Esquires Health was over and over remembered, not forgetting the Great Man at
the Great House about Three Miles off, where, as simple a Country Fellow as he
was, he expected one Day to be better acquainted.

But to draw this Adventure toward a Conclusion, our waiting Carter long
expecting the Return of the Brother, the Palfries and the Cargo,
notwithstanding the Strength of powerful Ale, and his Sweet Land-Ladies
diverting Company, began at last to be Impatient; sometimes he fancied the
Loading was too heavy for the Poor Beasts, and he thought it his best way to
walk out and see if he could meet them: But all Inquiry was in vain, Night at
last drew on, and the best Part of his Half-Crown melted down; at length,
though very Uneasy and Restless, he is persuaded by his kind Hostess to take a
hard Nap till Morning. The Cock was not so soon awake as he, for to tell Truth,
he never slept at all, though indeed he dreamt all Night, for he could not
think less, than that some Retainers of the Family had undoubtedly followed the
Cart, and murdered the Squire to run away with the Treasure; and what his poor
Sister would suffer to be a Widow so early, was little less than a Mortal
Apprehension. Thereupon very betimes in the Morning, he pads to Sir William's,
and very earnestly inquires what was become of the Squire, the Knights Brother.
Sir William's Brother, replied the Servants, we know none he has; it is true, he
had one some Years beyond Sea, but whether dead or alive, is more than any Man
upon English Ground ( God wott) can tell. How! No Brother-in-Law Squire! No Sir
William's Family! No Sister like to be a Lady, nor Brother a Gentleman! Nor no
Horses nor Cart neither! This staggering Account put him into so doleful a
Dumps, that he stood almost Thunderstruck. And truly the twelve Miles home
again, was so tedious a Journey, and the lamentable Narrative he must make 'em
at home, so killing a Fancy, that it was a great Mercy he did not make a Stay
upon some convenient Twig in some Hedge in the Road, rather than live to be the
Messenger of such a woeful sad Tale -- But ill News at last must out. The Bird
and the Beasts were all flown; the poor Bride sweetly brought to Bed, a Cart
and two Horses to pay for, a Son-in-Law to find when the Devil was blind, the
Daughter's sweet Play-thing lost, the Father and Mother dipped Ten whole Pounds
in Chalk, and the whole Family under the suffering of a whole Chamber Pot full
of Wailings and Tears for their Calamities and Misfortunes.

But to return to our Rover: By the Sale of Cart and Team, Ten Pound in Cole
the last Lump, and the Price of his Kine the other, his Pockets were pretty
well lined; and considering this Spot might soon grow too hot for him, he
thinks it wisest to shift the Scene, and thereupon dismissing, for some time,
his Man Tom, who had pretty well licked his Fingers in so profitable a Service,
our Grasier now transmogrifies into a Spark, and very sprucely rigged, takes a
Ramble Westward, where meeting with no Adventure worth recital, in some small
Time he gets to Ludlow. There taking up the first Night at an Inn, his Garb
(though unattended by Servants) soon made him good Reception; his first Inquiry
was to learn out the eminentest People in the Town, of which being readily
informed by the Drawers; he learnt, amongst other Relations, that there was a
Substantial Wealthy Tradesman, had two pretty Marriageable Daughters: Being
directed to the House, he addresses to the Father, telling him he was a
Barkshire Gentleman, and intending to make some small Abode in Ludlow, he did
not think fit to continue in a Public House, but would gladly gain Admission
to some Private Family. The Tradesman (whose Name we will not mention) being a
Widower, and taken with the manner of his Discourse, kindly invited him to his
own House, which our Traveling Gallant as kindly embracing, Accommodation was
made, and he was lodged that very Night at this Private Landlord's.

His Entrance here gave him the Opportunity of daily conversing with no mean
Wit and Charms in the two sweet Daughters of the Family; and our Gallant, very
apt to take fire at but a small matter of Beauty, especially with a Portion at
the Tail of it, felt no little Wamblings at the extraordinary Accomplishments
of the Elder, somewhat the sweeter Creature. But this new Adventure was not an
Enterprise so easy as the last; this Sire of some Fashion, was so far above
the Education and Extract of his former Father-in-Law, a Man of Mortar and
Trowel; and his Daughters of a Reach and understanding so much beyond the
other's humbler Capacity; that Measures must be quite altered here from those
that he took before. Accordingly, now his Discourse was always upon Foreign
Subjects, himself and his own Affairs the least Part of his Talk; and if any
inquisitive Question, either by Father or Daughters were made relating to his
Family or Concerns, he answered with that Modesty, and almost Silence to all
Demands of that Kind, that he left their Curiosity still in the Dark; and which
indeed was so much Heightning to the favorable Imaginations they had conceived
of him; that they doubted not in the least, but he was of eminent Quality; and
what any boasting Vanity would have made 'em rather suspect, his Modesty on the
contrary confirmed. 'Twas some few Days before they inquired his Name, for
which he had ready at his Tongues End, the Name of a very great Family in
Barkshire; but not descending to Particulars, the Remoteness of the Place did
not gain 'em much Intelligence of his Quality from only the bare Name. All this
while, at some little distance, he dropped a great many complaisant Words to the
elder Sister, which looked very much like Love, and which he indeed desired
should be so interpreted. In this Conversation, now of a Fort-nights
Continuance, he had rendered himself so acceptable to the whole Family, that a
great many favorable Thoughts on all sides inclined toward him. The Address
to the Daughter, at last looked a little more plain and barefaced, and at that
Time a Fair happening at Ludlow, where he had been diverting himself with
seeing of Fashions, he came home in much Concern, and some kind of Passion,
much greater than hitherto they had at any Time seen from him. Certainly there
is no Place in the World (says he passionately) so retired, but some Devil or
other will still find out and haunt me. The Oddness of this Expression invited
the elder Sister to ask him what he meant. Why truly, Madam, ( he replied) I
have been hunted from three or four Towns already, for in spite of all my
Resolutions of living incognito, some unlucky Person or other comes full in my
Mouth, and will betray me in spite of my Soul. This Answer did but heighten
her Curiosity, and having, as she thought, some little Interest in him as a
professed Servant of here is, she was a little the bolder in pressing the Question;
and therefore plainly asked him why he lived incognito, and what Accident had
now discovered him: To this at last, with a little more Frankness than he had
hitherto used, he replied, the Reason of his Ramble from his Family, with his
Living three or four Months past unknown to the whole World, was only to
prevent the Ruin of a Sister, who, like a foolish Girl, was in much Danger to
be undone by a Beggarly Match she was too fond of; and her Portion being in his
Hands, he had absented himself from his Home, lest the Softness of her Tears,
the Importunities of several Advocates in Behalf of this indigent Lover,
together with the Weakness of his own tender Heart, might at last be prevailed
upon to grant his Consent to what he knew would be his Shame and her Undoing.
And as Ill Luck would have it, he had unfortunately tumbled upon a Countryman
of his, now at the Fair, who would infallibly run open mouthed to his Sister
and his Family, and tell 'em all where he was. This Discovery gave a good
Occasion to the fair Examiner to be not only a Pleader for her own Sex in the
Person and Cause of his unknown Sister, but likewise to be a Champion for Love.
For now she plainly told him, that a great many Grains of Allowance were to be
made, where Hearts were inseparable. If this Lover of his Sisters was a Man of
Sense and Quality (as neither of those he could deny him) it was a little
barbarous in him to oppose the whole Repose and Contentment of so near a
Relation as a Sister, for so sordid a Consideration as a little Worldly
Interest. Besides, there was a Providence always attended Faith and Truth in
Love, and undoubtedly sooner or later would provide for their well-being, or
else enable 'em to bear a meaner Portion of Riches, which others perhaps might,
less contentedly, possess. This Argument was almost the daily Discourse, in
which she seemed to gain some little Ground, but not enough to persuade him to
the unreasonable Grant of his Sisters Desires.

About five Days after comes a Letter directed to him at Ludlow, with the Post
Mark upon it very authentically, which in a very legible Woman's Hand contained
these Words.

Dear Brother,
WHat unhappy Star am I born under, to suffer all this miserable Persecution?
Certainly, when my Father left me to your Disposal, and tied my Portion to your
liking of the Man that must marry me, surely he could never have died
reconciled to Heaven, could he have foreseen the Slavery he tied his poor Child
to, in putting me into the Power of so cruel a Brother. To run so many Months
from your House, your Family, nay, your Honor too, (for what must the
censuring World talk of you) and all to break a poor Sisters Heart. Oh
shameful! To hide your self from the World, and run from Mankind, only to shut
your Ears against Justice, and to be deaf to all Goodness and Humanity! Alas,
what Capital Crime have I committed, who only loved a Gentleman, in Birth and
Blood no ways my Inferior; and what if an unfortunate Younger Brother's slender
Patrimony of a Hundred a Year is not answerable to a Portion of Two thousand
Pounds. A wonderful Cause to make me the most unhappy Creature living, in
refusing me the only Blessing the World has to give. How many fair Steps to
Preferment and Honor lie in the way of so accomplished and so well-related a
Gentleman, notwithstanding his Elder Brother run away with the Estate; and what
good Fortune have I not to hope for, if your Barbarous Aversion did not
interpose between my Felicity and me. In short, resolve to return home, and be
kind to your Languishing and almost Despairing Sister, or else expect very
speedily to be visited by her at your Bedside in her Winding Sheet. For if
Ghosts can walk, and your Barbarity has sworn my Death, expect to be eternally
haunted, as you shall deserve from --

Your Distracted --


The next Post four or five Letters more came after him; one from his Bailiff,
to desire him for God's-sake to come home again; for the Devil a Farthing would
his Tenants pay till they saw their Landlord. A second from one of his Tenants,
complaining of his bad Crop, and the low Price of Corn; and that unless he
would bate him Twenty Pound a Year Rent, he could never hold his Farm;
earnestly desiring his Worship to come home, and take care of his poor Tenants,
etc. A third condoling his Misfortune in the loss of his Eldest Son, and
desiring to see his Sweet Worship's Face, that he might get him to put his
Second Boy's Life into his Copyhold; and others of the like Import.

These Letters our Spark left in his Closet Window; and one whole day going
abroad, by a pretended Negligence, he shot the Bolt of his Closet Lock out of
the Staple, and so left his Door a-jar, and his Letters exposed to any body
that would please to read 'em. This Stratagem succeeded to his Wish, for the
Daughter, whom I may now call his Mistress, knowing him safe abroad, had dropped
into his Chamber when the Maid was making the Bed, and finding the Closet Door
open, made bold to peep, and spying his Letters there, tips the wink upon the
Maid, whom she made of the Council, and read 'em all out. The Contents put her
mightily upon the gog; for certainly she concluded he must be a Man of a mighty
Estate, so many Tenants, and the Lord knows what; and if a Sister had Two
thousand Pounds, what must an Elder Brother possess. After she had conjured the
Maid to silence, she could not forbear running to her Father, and telling him
all she had discovered. The Father at first reprimanded her Curiosity, but
considering he had found out a Love Intreague between his Daughter and him, he
thought it no unwelcom discovery. At last looking very steadfastly upon his
Daughters Face, with a sort of a kind Fatherly Leer, he cried, Ah Child, would
he were a-bed with thee. How, Father, replied the Girl blushing. Nay, no harm
(quoth the Father) Chicken, that is all. Thou say he makes love to thee, and
troth I must own it no small part of my Ambition, to have a Person of his
Quality and Fortunes for a Son-in-Law. In short, The Father gave her very
seasonable Admonition; for having sounded her Inclinations, and found 'em to
his own wish, with a Fatherly Authority he commanded her, if his Addresses
hinted at Marriage, to make him all reasonable Advances that way.

Our Gallant found his Plot had taken; for he had critically observed in what
most particular manner and station, to a quarter of an Inch, he had laid his
Letters; and finding all of 'em displaced more or less from the exact point he
had left 'em, he plainly perceived they had all of 'em been read. Besides, in
compliance to her Father's Orders, and indeed a little to her own Inclinations,
he discovered her usual Coldness to him a little diminished, and her Aspect
more favorable, which plainly told him the Bait had taken. Whereupon one
Evening, finding her alone in her Garden, with a Confidence more than usual, he
plainly spoke home, telling her what an inestimable Blessing he should acquire
in possessing so much Sweetness for a Wife.

A long Courtship ensued, the Particulars too tedious, only the Girl was a
little more pliant than ordinary, but much doubting the Integrity of his
Protestations; alleging, it was very unlikely he would debase himself to marry
a Creature of her mean Fortune; for all she could at present challenge, except
what her Father might do for her after his decease, was only 100 l. left her in
her Father's hands by an Uncle deceased. Our Gallant presently, with much
disdain, seemed to slight all thoughts of her Fortune, for that, he thanked
Heaven, he wanted not; and truly her dear Person was the only consideration
that had fixed his Heart entirely her Captive. To bring him to the happy Point,
48 hours are not past, before he comes to reap the fair Fruit. The
Marriage-knot is tied, and the Nuptials consummated, and Joy and Felicity runs
high between them.

In this happy State, and uninterrupted Delights, they continued some days,
when of a sudden his old Servant Tom, booted and spurred, comes to Ludlow, and
now in a little higher Station than before, in the Garb and Figure of one of
his Bailiffs, he comes Post thus far; first, To tell him the Distraction of his
Family, occasioned by his absence: 2dly, The Lady his Sisters sudden departure,
God knows whither, for she went away by night, two days before he set out from
home, and has not been heard of since. And that a Letter was come from Bristol,
intimating that his Venture in Sherry was safely landed there, and that the
King's Customs came to 97 l. but his Correspondent at Bristol being lately
dead, the Custom was yet unsatisfied; and truly for his part none of the
Tenants would pay him one Groat till they saw their Landlord again, and
therefore he could not raise the Money to satisfy it. Our new Bridegroom
hearing all this, presently communicates the whole matter to his sweet
Bedfellow, desiring her to get her Father to accommodate him with that Sum; not
that he asked it as any part of her Uncle's Legacy, he scorned to be so
poor-spirited; no, he requested it as a Boon, and the Moneys should speedily be
repaid with Thanks: Which if he pleased to do for him, his Servant should fall
down the Severn, and take care of his Wines, of which his dear Father-in-Law
should have one Hogshead to drink to her Hans en Keldar. The Daughter was a
speedy and successful Embassadress, for the Money was presently laid him down in
Gold, for the more ease of his Servant's carriage of it. Tom had not been two
hours gone, but a Footboy in a very fine Livery brings him a Letter from his
Sister, signifying her extreme Concern for his deserting his Affairs and
Family, and that her Griefs and Disquiets had made her take a long Ramble to
see him once more. And that she was now at Hereford, not daring to approach any
nearer, till she had his gracious Warrant and Permission, which she humbly upon
her bended Knees entreated of him, with a great deal more passionate Courtship
to him upon that Subject. Upon perusal of this Letter he seemed to melt into a
great deal of good Nature and Compassion for his dear Sister, insomuch that a
Tear stood in his Eyes, which his sweet Bride very kindly drank in a Kiss. At
length launching out into a great many tender Expressions toward his Sister,
which Goodness his kind Bride much applauded and encouraged, throwing in many a
kind word in her Sisters behalf. At last the Brother concluded he would be so
civil to her, that since her extravagant Affection had brought her thus far to
visit him, he would return her the Favor of riding himself to Hereford to
fetch her, if his kind Father would procure him a Horse. Ay, with all his
Heart. Nay, both Father and Daughter proffered to take the same Journey with
him, to pay their Respects to the young Lady, and attend upon her as part of
her Train to Ludlow. No, by no means, replied our Spark, that was more than the
Rules of Honor would allow. For his Dear Bride, as his Wife, was a Person in
Quality above her, and whatever Kindnesses she pleased to show her, when at
Ludlow, was in her free Power; but this complaisance was too great a
Condescension, and consequently he begged her leave, that the Tenderness he had
of her Honor, might absolutely forbid her any such thought. And indeed his
Father's was much the same Condescension, which he must likewise no way suffer.

The Father and Daughter both silenced with this answer, acquiesced with his
Reasons, as being much a more experienced Master of Ceremonies than they could
pretend to; consenting to let him go alone, only attended by the Sisters Page;
in the mean while resolving to apply their officious Respects to this fair, tho
yet unknown Relation, another way, viz. in making a suitable Preparation for
her honorable Reception. But first a very stately Horse was borrowed, one that
a Colonel of the Guards had lately bid a lumping Sum for, with all
Accoutrements answerable. And at mounting, our Cavalier whispering in his
Father's Ear, and telling him he had been long from home, and not knowing
whether his remaining Stock might hold out to his present Occasions, he desired
-- The Father would not hear out the Speech, but running up stairs presently,
fetched down, and stole into his hand a silk Purse richly lined with Twenty
Broad Pieces.

Our Squire thus every way obliged, after his due Conges all made, bids them
all Farewell till to morrow, and so prances off. Here let us leave the Father
and Daughter as busy for the Credit of the Cause, as may be imagined, making
all suitable Provision for to morrow's Entertainment; the Kitchen, and Pantry,
the Bedchamber, and the Court-Cupboard, must all appear in Splendour
extraordinary.

And now to return to our Traveller: Heaven knows he had the Misfortune to miss
his way, for he never found Hereford nor Sister. His Barb too found another
Chapman than the Colonel of the Guards; for both Horse and Accoutrements all
embargo'd, and the dismounted Cavalier slipped into a Frize-Coat of his Man Tom's
providing, who waited his coming, the Master, Page, and Tom, in a small
prepared Vessel, trol'd down the Severn as fast as Tide and good Speed could
carry them.

As we thundered down the Severn, one of our Strollers being at present
useless, our Page (well rewarded for playing his part in the Farse) is dropped at
Worcester, from whence we continue our Voyage to Bristol. Arrived there pretty
late in a Summers Evening, it is not thought convenient to appear in any Dress
whatever had been seen before at Ludlow, nor indeed to expose his Face, lest
any Inquiry might be made there about him as a Sherry-Merchant; and so trunking
up all his best Raiment, he gets himself new rigged at a Salesman's in a
genteel Garb, but something modester than his Ludlow Bravery, and Tom and he
next Morning move off to Bath.

It fortunes here, that he Quarters at one of the great Inns, it being the
beginning of the Summer, just before Bath time, where was a brisk Daughter of
the House, about half way Stage between 20 and 30, and consequently much
inclinable Manwards. A Girl that had had the Honor of many a slap cross the
Mouth, and chuck under the Chin by Lords and Earls in her time, her Father's
honorable Guests at Bath-Season. Our most constant Lover of every new Face,
feels the old Itch again; business he finds will thicken upon him, and
therefore flushed with his late Successes, he resolves to throw out his winning
Hand as far as it will run.

But now to know what Portion this Damsel had, for without a Spill of
Yellow-boys, naked White and Red has but indifferent Charms with him. This
Intelligence was quickly made, without asking the question, for there was a
Jest in the Family of one of the Drawers being Suitor there, who belike wanted
a tite Sum of 80 l. to set up withal (a small Portion of hers formerly left her
by a Grandfather, and now at use.) This Drawer, forsooth, was a Rival, but not
an over-formidable one. For truly our Innkeepers Daughter had so often been
tickled with the Addresses of Quality, that ( Foh!) her Father's Drawer was
scarce worthy to hold up her Train; a Gentleman or nothing for her. Nay, if she
has not the Happiness to strike in for a Lease for Life at Bed and Board with
some honorable Person, rather than die in Ignorance, keep a stale Maidenhead,
and so lead Apes, she has long since resolved not to stand out at a lower Game,
and even admit a Tenant at Will to an Inmate of Fashion and Quality; and was
grossly suspected she had tried the Constitution of her Body, under a Load of
Honor long before her present Year of twenty five. But true or false, that is a
small Blot in her Scutchion.

Our Don John is absolutely captivated, and plies her home with all the
Rhetoric that Love can afford. Our Man Tom in the mean while but very
modestly, is whispering amongst his Mates, the lower Tire of the Family, the
Servants, what a Worthy Gentleman his Master is, being a Rich Norfolk Gentleman
(a pretty large Stride from Bathe) of 500 a Year. This Narrative passes pretty
well amongst the shallower Pates, the Chamberlain, the Tapster, the Hosler, and
the rest of the inferior Domestics; but our hard-faith'd young Mistress of the
House, whether bit before, or naturally not over-credulous, does as good as
declare, That her Principles are to look before she leaps. Our Norfolk Suitor
finds his Addresses very acceptable, but still with a Reserve, Provided he be
the Man he appears. He plainly sees, that the Girl, upon good Grounds is very
pliable, but she is a little past the Years of being dandled and kissed out of her
Reason: He or any Man else (any Tooth good Barber) with Honor and Estate may
go far with her; but Demonstration is the only Argument that must carry her
Cause. As many Years as she has lived (or at least past for) a Maid, she is not
so hard set, but she can tarry till Substantial Testimony (as far off as
Norfolk lies) can make out the Lands and Tenements, before she consents to an
Enclosure. Our Spark therefore put to his last Trumps, finds this last a
craggier and more difficult Enterprise than any he had ever yet encountered;
however, thinking it a very great Scandal to his Wit, to lie down before her,
and shamefully for want of Ammunition, be forced to raise the Siege, he sets
all his Brains at work for one last Mine to blow her up; or if that take not,
he is resolved to quit the Field. In a day or two after he begins to be
melancholy and indisposed; during this Fit, he is very cold in his Love, and
applies him to Religious Books, talks much of very odd Dreams he has had, till
at last he takes his Bed. Physicians are sent for, whether they found any real
Indications of Sickness or no, or acquiesced to his own Declaration of the
Pains he felt, no Medicinal Application was wanting. His Distemper increasing,
he desires a Man of Law to be sent for, accordingly a Scriv'ner of the Town is
called, who draws up his Will, in which he gives away about Three Thousand
Pounds in several Legacies, leaving his Nephew his full and sole Executor. The
Will is sealed up, and delivered to his Man Tom; and all the Cognizance taken
of his Mistress, is only 10 l. to buy her Mourning. Next a Man of God is sent
for, and all the necessary Preparations for a Man of another World are made.
His Conscience settled, and his Viaticum for his long Journey most devoutly
furnished. But it pleases Fate, or the Sick Man rather, in some few Days after,
to give some small Symptoms of Amendment, and to shorten the matter, in Eight
or Ten Days time he is pretty well recovered, and the next Talk is of fancying
his own Native Norfolk Air for perfecting his Health; all this while the young
Damsel, who, though not called to the Will-making, knew all the Contents of it,
and finding from all Hands, the great Uprightness and Devotion of her humble
Servant, could not fancy that so much Religion and Piety could be an Impostor,
and therefore she doubted not in the least, but the Estate in Norfolk was
unquestionable; and though indeed her Prudence would still incline her to a
full Inquiry and satisfactory Account, yet it is now too late, her cooling
Admirer talks of speeding to London; and though he professes he will leave his
Heart behind with her, She is afraid that new Faces and better Fortunes will
soon shake her hold there, and therefore taking her Pillow upon the Business,
she resolves not to slip so favorable an Opportunity, but to lay hold of the
Forelock, and take a good Offer whilst she may have it: For with all her
natural Pride, she considers her self but the Lees of a Tap; and it is not every
Rich Gudgeon will bite at a Bait so blown, and so stale.

Her departing Lover still pressing for his Journey, the good-natured Girl
watches the next amorous Sally of her Gallant, and takes him at his Word, and
without asking Advice, thinks her own Wit sufficient, and in two Days time
enters into for better, for worse. The Town-Bells soon rung All Joy; and the
bed Hogshead in Daddy's Cellar run Claret. His Honorable Guest and Son-in-Law
was the little Idol of all the Virgins of the Town, and the envied Preferment
of sweet Mrs. Betty had filled all Tongues; and scarce a Prayer offered up for
a Husband, but Mrs. Betty's Felicity was made the Pattern of their Devotion.

But now, as the Devil would have it, our dignified Bride is for having her
Dear Spouse, by all mean, doing her and her Father the Honor of staying out
the whole Bathe Season (now coming on) amongst 'em, and nothing can divert her
from that Resolution. This is a very unwelcom Proposal; for the Multitude of
Faces from all Quarters of the Kingdom, may not only be very dangerous to his
Circumstances, but likewise his Norfolk Abilities, long before that Time, may
be examined too narrowly; and therefore not being able to make any harsh
Refusal of his fair Bride's Request, lest it should look like Design, and to
marry a young Girl, and be ashamed of her Parentage, would appear so unkind,
that he has no Artifice to wean her from Bathe, and drill her out of Town, but
by pretending a small Relapse of his Indisposition, which he acted so well,
that he denied himself the very Pleasures of Love, and fell off from
Family Duties. This Curtain-Failure began to moderate her Passion for staying
an Bathe, for her tame Bedfellow still preaching up the Virtues of his own
Native Norfolk Air, his poor defeated Bride could not but have a Womanly
Longing for so necessary a Restorative, and thereupon for so important a
Medicine to her feeble Yoke-mate, she consented to go along with him.

All her fine Clothes were boxed up, together with several Bed and
Table-Linnen, etc. (for she had pretty good Movables, all the Legacies of
deceased Aunts and Grannies, and other good Kin) and all sent by her Man Tom to
the Carriers, and two Days after Places took in the flying Coach for their
speeding to London.

But one main thing was almost forgotten. She had called in her Portion, which
for a Guinies Gratification the Scriv'ner had ready at an Hours Warning, having
at that time some other Peoples Money by him undisposed, and hers being out
upon Mortgage, the Owners were very well pleased to make an Exchange upon the
same Security. This Money was not to be trusted by the Wagon, but to be
carried up with her in the Coach-Box, for which her Man Tom begged her
Acceptance of a little Gilt-leather'd Trunk that happened to be just small
enough to go into the Coach-Box. The Day of setting out being on the Morrow,
her thoughtful Spouse had nicely considered that the Coach would be in London
half a Day before the Carrier, which for some Reasons you will find in the Sequel
was not altogether for his Convenience, and therefore he made a shift to put
off the Journey till next Coach-Day.

Against that time the Gilt-leather'd Trunk, and the Key to it was delivered
her (though by the bye he had got two Keys) and the 80 l. some Broad Pieces, a
Caudle-Cup, half a dozen of Silver Spoons, and some other Toys were all stowed
in it; and the Kind Couple are trundling away for London, with the Man well
mounted riding by.

Now, as a Man of his Estate, he had freely given her all her own Portion, a
small Privy Purse to buy her Pins with, having Married her only for Beauty, and
much disdaining the Addition of so small a Sum to his plentiful Fortune. The
first Stage being done (for they had but one Night to lie by the Way) the small
Cabinet of Treasure was carefully taken out of the Coach, and lodged in a
Closet in the Chamber, and next Morning delivered to Tom to see safely laid in
the Coach-Box as before.

The next Night arriving both at London (whither Tom about Brentford was
commanded by his Master to speed a little before to prepare for their
Reception) a very fair Lodging near St. James' was ready to entertain her, but
no Tom had been there; and coming to open the Trunk, instead of the Gold and
Silver Entrails there was nothing but a Bag of Stones, and a Piece of a
Brickbat to supply their Places, enclosed in a few Rags that stuffed up the
Trunk. This amazing Sight threw the poor Lady into a most violent Distraction,
and 'twas very hard to hold her from falling into a Fit, her Husband seeming as
much amazed as her self, and joining in the Complaint as loud as she. But to
abate her Rage, he told her the wicked Rogue should not so escape, he had very
sufficient Security from able Friends for his honest and faithful Service, and
their Purses should make her Reparation, till when the Loss should be made up
out of his own Pocket. Nor would he sleep till he had made her some farther
Satisfaction, and therefore begged her Excuse but for one half Hour till he
took Coach, and made that Search and Quest that perhaps would bring her some
considerable Light into the Villainy. Her Zeal for her Loss never looked any
farther, and accordingly well pleased with the kind Motion, she took leave of
him for the half Hour aforesaid.

But, alas, a long half Hour, for half the Evening, nay the whole Night was
gone, and neither Man nor Master to be heard of. So Husband and Portion all
departed, she thought fit to secure her Goods and Clothes at the Carriers, but
the same Calamity attended there likewise, for Tom had been there too, and
swept all.

To describe the Distress and Anguish of our present Female-Sufferer, or either
of her two foregoing Sisters in Affliction, being a work beyond our power, we
shall even do as the Painter did of old, that is, draw a Vail before the Face
of Sorrow, the Lineaments of true Grief being above the Pen or Pencils Skill.

His continued good Luck at the Female Quarry succeeding so prosperously, he
has hardly snapt and gorged one, before he is for flying at a second.

Leaving therefore this last Wife to shift home, not only Penny-less, but
almost naked too, it being then in the gay time of Summer, he buys him a very
stately Gelding, and prances down to Slough near Windsor. There taking a
Genteel Lodging, and throwing off his old now Hackneyfied Disguise of the
Country Gentleman, he assumes the Character of a London Merchant; and though the
little distance of twenty Miles laid the Scene very nigh, and consequently (one
would think) exposed him to something more hazard than any of his former
remoter Pretensions, however he is so flusht with Success, and thereupon so
hardy an Enterprizer, that he reckons upon Fortune now entirely his own, as no
less than bound to his Cause, and her Smiles as secure, as himself her now
darling Favorite is fearless and undaunted.

His Tent therefore pitched at Slough for the best part of this Summers
Campaign, with sufficient of Gold, and what not, in his Pockets, he contracts
(amongst other Country-Acquaintance) a great Intimacy with the Minister there.
And at length praising the good Air of that Country, and the Sweetness he tastes
in the Conversation thereabouts, he desires the Parson (his now Intimate) to
inform him of some Purchase of fifty, sixty, or, rather than fail, seventy
Pound per annum somewhere near there; if a good House upon it so much the
better; otherwise it will put him to some few Hundreds extraordinary Expense.
If any such Purchase can be found, he shall be gratefully thankful to him: For
resolving to get him some Country Seat for a little Summers Retirement from his
Fatigue at London, he has not met that place in the World that pleases him
better. The Parson kindly replied, That truly he did not yet know of any such
Purchase, but he would make it his Business to inquire, and inform him
accordingly.

It falls out here that he insinuates into the Conversation of a
Country-Gentleman that had a very pretty Daughter, to whom he could give Five
hundred Pound Portion. Through his Acquaintance with the Father, he finds
Opportunity and Access to the Daughter, and in a little time professes
downright Love. Now besides a great deal of Wit and Sense in the Daughter, here
was a very Judicious and Sensible Man to her Father, and likewise a very
Ingenious young Gentleman her Brother, all three to be coped with; insomuch
that the highest of Prudence ought to be used to manage the Amuzement, and
fence off all Curiosity and Enquiry, which (considering how near London lay)
might dash the whole Plot. For that purpose he no sooner declares his Passion,
but at the same time he utterly abjures all Pretentions to a Farthing of
Portion, (if he may be so happy as to succeed in his Love) that truly his
Affairs and Circumstances are far above so poor a Thought. Whatever her
Father's Goodness did or might have intended for her, he is free to keep for
the bettering the Fortune of so hopeful an Heir of the Family as the young
Gentleman her Brother: It is enough that the Possession of her dear Person is
all his Ambition, and if after all his prosperous Ventures both at Sea and
Land, to Crown his Felicity he can but carry this last dear Prize, he has all
he wants in this World. Nor is Beauty the only Charm he finds in his dear
Mistress, her Virtue is her most captivating Perfection. Alas, if he had sought
either Face or Fortune, those were to have been found nearer home, and possibly
where he was better known, viz. in his walks upon the Exchange, and thereabouts
whatever personal Wants he had, however his other Qualifications would have
made him no hard Access to very considerable Fortunes. But as his Natural
Jealousy of Town-Beauties had all along made him somewhat colder in the choice
of a London Wife, he declares that the vanquishing of his Heart was reserved
only for some sweet Country Innocence, which truly he had never met with till
now.

This Declaration carries a very pleasing Face every way: Here the Daughter for
her part has the Heart of a Rich Merchant of such vast Estate, that her
inconsiderable Portion is not worth his Acceptance, and consequently if she can
like the Man, she has all the reason in the World to embrace the Addresses of
so qualified a Suitor. Here are Father and Son likewise under no occasion of
Complaint, for one is like to save Five hundred Pound by the Bargain, and the
other to get as much: And therefore it is a Match they ought not to oppose. And
to put all Suspicions out of their Head, what Reasons have they to mis-doubt
his being the Man he pretends, for he had then a pretty many Years upon his
Back, and therefore unlikely to commit so boyish a Folly, to take the Luggage
of a Wife with never a Groat with her, unless he had wherewithal of his own to
supply that Defect. Besides, here was all the Appearances possible both of
Honor and Honesty in his Daughters Inamorato, for more and above the daily
Management of his Discourse, and his prompt Answers and Insight to all Affairs
in the World, which discovered a Person certainly of public Business, his Port
and Figure he made amongst them, together with the Grandeur of his way of
Living, confirmed their entire Belief and Confidence. And to conclude all, who
could suspect a Counterfeit that would Cheat for nothing.

During his Courtship he presented his Mistress with a very Rich Gold Watch,
and as he gained ground not only upon her, but went a great stroke with the
Father and Son, who were mighty inclinable to the Match; at last he pushed
home, and gained the Consent of all Parties concerned. The Father and Son were
of Opinion that they should all go to London, and the Wedding and Bedding work
should be all done there at his own House in the City. With all his Heart,
replied the Spark, only one Inconvenience attended that Proposition: For it
would be impossible for him to Marry in London, without dragging a great deal
of Noise and Trouble at his Heels: For unless he would disoblige more than a
Hundred eminent Citizens, his particular Friends (which in Honor he could not
well do) he must be forced to make a public Wedding of it, and so draw on a
great deal of Ceremony and Hurry, which truly (might he be chuser) did not
agree with his Inclination. Nevertheless, if they so pleased, he was ready to
acquiesce to their absolute Commands. But otherwise, for prevention of all
that, if he might direct, he would desire to divide his Blessings between the
Country and City, viz. have the Happiness of Marrying her in the Morning at
Slough, and then have the Honor of their good Companies with him to London,
and there Bed her at his own House.

This appeared so highly reasonable, that three places are ordered to be taken
in the Windsor Coach to morrow for London, and the Marriage to be solemnized
early before the Coach sets out. And accordingly our Lovers, who wake with the
Lark, are the next Morning devoutly joined together. When the Nuptial Rites
were performed, and a small Collation prepared before setting out, he publicly
again declared his Protestations against all Pretenses to a Portion. However,
as he had now taken the dearest Creature in the World into his Arms without any
such Claim or Pretention, and the longest day of his Life he should maintain
her to the highest Dignity and Grandeur of a City Merchants Lady, as much as if
she had brought him Thousands of her own to do it with; yet as perhaps there
might be some Wedding-Garments, and other small matters wanting suitable to his
Bride, he durst not presume to make her any Present of that kind, lest possible
it might be some little Indignity and Reflection upon her own Honor in
accepting of any such offer; and therefore that part he left to her and her
Relations Pleasure and Discretion. He putting them in mind of that necessary
Point, appeared more like a piece of Gallantry than any thing else from him.
And thereupon both the Father and Bride take a whisper privately together, and
immediately the Closets and Cabinets were rumag'd, and near a hundred Guinea's
mustered up, and stowed in a small Casket to carry with her to London, to rig
her in all ample manner accordingly. As they merrily travel along, the Father,
Bride and Brother in the Coach, and the Bridegroom en Cavalier riding by,
taking a little start before 'em upon Hounslow-Heath, he comes back furiously
galloping to the Coach-side, and with much Concern bids 'em have a care, for he
was certain there were Highway-men before in the Road, and he much feared the
Coach would be robbed. This put the Travelers into some small fright, and all
of 'em (for the Coach was full) into a very great care how to preserve the
small Treasure they had about them. Nay Gentlemen, replies the Spark, for that
small matter I have about me, I fear not all the Thieves in Christendom to take
from me, for though I profess my self no Sword-man to Fight for it, yet, I
thank God, I have a Horse has such a pair of Hee^s, as I defy any Man in
England (especially upon this open Plain) to out-ride me. This Hint made the
poor Bride immediately request his securing some small things of hers, and
thereupon she gave him her little Casket, and her Gold Watch to carry for her,
withal desiring him to speed off the safest way he could, and tarry for the
Coach at the Red Lion in Brentford: Her prudent Example encouraged some other
Passengers in the Coach to desire him to do them the like Favor; one Lady in
the Coach desired him to secure a Diamond and a Gold Ring of hers, which she
took from her Finger; another Gentleman clapped a Purse of near twenty pieces of
Gold into his Silver Tobacco-box, and besought him to give it Sanctuary in his
Pocket to Brentford. In short, some other small matters were presently
entrusted to his Protection and Preservation; and so being desired to troop off
with all speed, and to meet them at the general Rendezvous aforesaid, our
Merchant puts Spurs to his Steed, and the Coach trundles leisurely after him.

At Brentford they arrive safely in some little time after, and making a halt
at the Red Lion, inquiry is made, if a Gentleman so mounted and so dressed was
there. No, answer was made, no such Man was there; but upon examining, the
Horse and the Rider they had described, that very Gentleman, about half an hour
ago, was seen to ride almost full speed through the Town toward London.

The Bridegroom so strangely out-riding his Stage, put the whole Company into
some little Consternation, but the Bride more especially, it being a matter of
no mean Surprise to her, to have a Bridegroom so unkind, or so Frolicksom at
least, to Ramble away from her on her very Wedding Day in so odd a manner. A
great many several Descants were made upon it by the whole Company; but as all
of them happened to be some small Neighbors to Slough, and had either
conversed with this Honorable Merchant during his abode there, or at least had
heard of his Fame, it was concluded of all Hands, 'twas only intended as a
Jest, and so they all moved on toward London, not doubting in the least but to
find it so.

When they arrived at London, the young Lady, as Guarrantee for her Bridegroom,
though she could not well invite them with convenience that Night, besought all
their good Companies to morrow at Dinner with her at her House in Lime-street,
there to call their Trustee to an account, and to laugh out an Afternoon with
her upon their Traveling Adventures.

Having thus dismissed their Fellow-Travellers, a Hackney-Coach is taken to
drive to Lime-street: When they came there, and such a Merchants House was
asked for, a Name very like it was found in that Precinct, but both the
Gentleman and House they inquired for, were utterly Strangers to all the
Inhabitants round, and neither that Night nor next whole day could give them
any Tale or Tidings of her new Husband. However in all this utter Darkness, as
she is left in Ignorance, she has the Comfort to be left in Innocence too, for
thanks to her kind Stars there was no Consummation in the case, as much a Wife
as she is, she is a Virgin-Bride at least; and as much cheated as they have all
been, our young Spouse has the Satisfaction of that single happy Escape to
counter-ballance all the rest of her Losses. What Reparation our fair Promiser
made to her Fellow Sufferers in the Coach, our Story mentions not, but the
Father, Son, and Bride, returning by weeping Cross, they found this Farewell
Epistle at their arrival at Slough.

My Sweet Bride,
AY too Sweet, God wot, to be so lost. Had we but consummated, my Chicken, had
I but got the Virgin-Toy signed and sealed, my Sweeting, it had been a Prize
worth all the other Treasure. But my hard Fate had otherwise decreed; and I
must even sit down by my losing Bargain. But my Dear, notwithstanding my abrupt
parting, prithee do not conceive hard Thoughts, nor fancy me a Masquerader; for
though my House is removed from Lime-street, upon my honest word I am a true
Merchant, and have hooked in my Venture. Pray Comfort your Condoling
Fellow-Travellers, and assure them their Movables I took into my Protection
are all very safe, and that I shall take all possible care in performing my
Trust in keeping them so. And now Child, if thy Defeat of a Bedfellow should
set thee a-gog for a new Husband, for thy Consolation let me tell thee, that I
am fairly drawn off to make room for a happier Successor; and at thy next
Prayers for a Man in thy Tables to fill up the Blot I leave open; thank Heaven
thou have escaped so well, for thou have received the first Mercy I ever showed
thy Sex before; and so dear Widowed Turtle Farewell.


This Adventure so luckily concluded, our Wife-Merchant takes a little
Recreation in London, and then tired with Ease and Idleness, he thinks it high
time to look out for new Game. His Rambles have hitherto mostly lain Westward,
and his Success he has gotten there, invites him to try his farther Fortune a
Field the same Road. Down therefore his Galloper and he set out, and meeting
nothing in the Way worthy his Achievement, he fixes at last at the Town of
Wells. Here he is a Country Gentleman again, his Name Bowyer, Brother to Sir
Charles Bowyer. This Town happily afforded a Boarding-School for young Girls,
where the Fair Recluses generally are not altogether Nuns Flesh, and where
notwithstanding the watchful Oversight of those Guardian Dragons the
Governesses and Super-Intendants, Love too often leaps the Pale, and many a
bold Jason very luckily moves off with a Golden Fleece.

At this Castle it is resolved our next Batteries shall be levelled; only all
the hardest Work here is, the making his Approaches. For that purpose he
inquires first, who and what the Fair Inhabitants are, and the like; where he
is soon informed of several considerable Fortunes amongst 'em; but most of 'em
either under Guardianship or Parents, and though allied to pretty considerable
Effects, the Lash is in Hucksters Hands. The carrying the Damsel, will not
finger the Gold, and our Business being only to snap and away, a lighter Cargo
than those unweildy Portions does our Jobb. And accordingly he discovers one
just sizable for his Turn. A Tradesman's Daughter, her small Portion about 150
l. and all in her own Hands, or at least in her own Power, her Parents and
Friends all dead, and therefore at her own Disposal, and likewise something of
the Elderliest for a School-miss, being indeed about 20 Years of Age.

It Is resolved then to fix here; and, for a handsome Initiation, his first
Attak is only from his Eyes; he sees her first at Church, where his whole
Devotion is so intent upon no other Object, that he gives her Occasion to
observe him. His Gentile Equipage, and, in a Stranger too, might very well draw
some Eyes in a Country Congregation; and this young Devotees were not so wholly
tied to her Prayer Book, but hers might rove a little: She no sooner saw him,
but she met a very Passionate and Long-wishing-Look returned her: If her
Curiosity peeped a second time, she found him in the same Posture, his Eye
never off of her. And this he continued Forenoon and Afternoon, in such a
manner, that it was impossible, even for Indifference it self, not to Remark
him.

Next Morning he makes some means to get the Company and Ear of one of the
Sub-Governants of the School, a Matronly kind of a Tutoress. He cannot tell
what Malleable Metal she is made of, and how far she may be tempted to betray a
little Trust. However he resolves to try. And if she be to be shaken, at least
he will use the most Persuasive Arguments to assail her.

Accordingly, having first begged the Favor of a full Hearing, he begins to lay
open his Case in manner following. First, he discovers his Birth and Quality, a
Brother to the Honorable Sir Charles Bowyer: Secondly, Though a younger
Brother, yet provided with a Plentiful Patrimony to keep up the Port of a
Gentleman. Then, that yesterday at Church, he had seen the only Sweetness upon
Earth that he could truly Love: That it was some Extraordinary Destiny that had
brought him thither, to lose his Heart to so Lovely a Creature: And then
telling his Name (which his Love had made him inquire into) the present Suit he
had, was, to obtain the Conversation of that Sweet Gentlewoman, that he might
have the favorable Opportunity of declaring his Passion to her; which Access,
understanding the Strictness of the Family in which she now lived, and under
what Confinement she lay, he had no Hopes of accomplishing, but through her
Means: And, that if she would vouchsafe to be the kind Instrument in gaining
him his Request, he should not only be bound to her the longest Day of his
Life, but likewise make her a Gratification suitable to so signal an
Obligation. The Gravity of our Tutoress seemed a little Surprised at this
Motion; but, before she could make any Reply, he continued his Supplication to
her; by telling her, That for Heavens sake she would believe his Intentions to
the young Lady were nothing but Honorable, that had his Designs been so
wicked, as to aim at, or overreach any young Fortune in the House, as such he
understood there were several there, he should be the greatest of Villains. But
that Love, and only Love, was his Design, was manifest in his Addresses to this
young Gentlewoman, who (as he was informed) was but a Tradesman's Daughter, of
little or no Fortune, or at least very inconsiderable to a Person of his
Circumstances and Birth; and therefore she had all the Reason in the World to
believe him a Person of Honor and Integrity; and 'twas as such he desired her
to serve him in the Request he had made her. She hearing him protest so
heartily, and profess so honorably, could not but be a little attentive to so
reasonable a Suit. But being her self a Woman of Principle, and naturally
faithful to her Trust, she could not forbear making him this Answer: Sir (says
she) you have the least Reason in the World to seek my Assistance in this
matter; for if you are that Lover, and that Gentleman you profess your self,
your Quality and Pretensions to this young Woman are sufficient to make your
own Way to her, without wanting my Help. What need has a Gentleman of your
Fortune and Honor to seek to a poor Servant, as I am, to introduce you so
meanly, as a private Suitor to this young Maid, when you have it in your own
Power to make a more Public Declaration of your Love; and undoubtedly, so
Qualified as you are, have all Encouragement to hope for Success? If you
please, therefore, I Will tell the Governess, and when she shall have examined
all things requisite to the Discharge of that honest Duty, as the Tuition and
Care she has undertaken shall require of her; she will be so far from opposing
your Access, that certainly you may expect all the fair Reception your Heart
can wish. This Answer being not the present Point we must gain, our Squire
(before prepared for a Reply) seemed extremely pleased with her for her
Fidelity. That truly she was highly to be commended for so Conscientious a
Scruple, as to the admitting of a Stranger, as he was, to any thing under her
Guardianship. And that truly the Advice she had given him, was but very
Reasonable; and that if he should make open Love to this young Gentlewoman, he
might possibly have Hopes of succeeding. And really it was the only Course he
would take, but for one only Obstacle, which was, that though indeed, as a
younger Brother, he had above 300 l. per annum already in good Land of
Inheritance, a Competence sufficient to maintain a Family indifferently well;
yet as he was next Brother, and indeed as the presumptive Heir to Sir Charles,
an unmarried Man of Thousands a year, and was at present transacting with him
about a considerable Addition to his Estate, and other very eminent Friendships
expected from him, he was under an invincible Necessity of making an Amor of
this kind, one of the greatest Secrets in the World, lest his marrying so
inconsiderably might lose him his Brother's Favor, and thereby defeat so
advantageous an Expectation. Not but he loved the young Creature enough to run
a thousand times greater Hazards for obtaining so sweet a Blessing: But
however, What Folly and Prodigality would it be, to expose so main a Part of
his Well-being to so dangerous a Venture, when there was so little Occasion for
it? For he, could he reach so great a Blessing, as to obtain her for his Bride,
yet it would be worth his while to make both his Woing and Marriage, for some
time, an absolute Secret, for so valuable a Consideration. And he that resolved
to enter into Matrimony, was, in all Duty, bound to take the best Measures to
make a Married Life comfortable, by making the best Provision to support it
with Credit and Reputation. And therefore 'twas, that he was forced to
supplicate her private Assistance in the Affair which she could not well blame,
under so important a Circumstance; and therefore stealing a Brace of Guinea's
into her Hand, he once more entreated her to gain him some Admittance to the
young Ladies Coversation, as silently as possibly her Goodness could contrive.
I cannot tell, whether the Arguments, or the Gold, or both together, prevailed,
but to shorten the Discourse, 'twas agreed that Evening, an Hour after Sunset,
that he should come to the Garden Back-Gate, which was accordingly done.

And not to tire the Reader with the Narration of the Wooing, let it suffice
that he obtained three or four private Meetings, and a little Courtship well
managed prevailed and conquered. By the Assistance of this Matronly Confident,
the Business is concluded, and the Girl steals out one Morning and Marries him.
He had not been long Married, but continuing the old Plea of Silence and
Secrecy so necessary on his Brother's account, he gets her to call in her
small Portion, for her own use, making it his free Wedding-Gift, all to be
disposed in buying her Clothes, and the like; and so makes all speed to London
with her. At London he provides her a very genteel Lodging, still leaving all
her Portion in her own Custody. He had not kept her Company two days in Town,
but he comes home in great haste and surprise, telling her that his Brother, by
some Accident or other, had heard of his Marriage. But as 'twas impossible he
should know what Woman he had Married, he had one favor to beg of her which
she must not deny him, which was, to pretend her self to be a young Devonshire
Lady of such a great Family, and such a Fortune: By this means he should win
his Brother's Heart, and hasten that additional Settlement, and the other
Favors he expected from him; and though indeed it was a little piece of Fraud,
which truly he was never guilty of before in all his whole Life; yet
considering the Advantage so Innocent a Deceit might gain them, he conjured her
by all their Loves to join with him in it, and carry on the Mask till he had
gained his Point. The poor Creature, soon persuaded, consents to his Request,
promising her acting the best part she could in the Disguise, since it was his
Pleasure and Command to have it so.

Having obtained her Concurrence in it, he tells her these Lodgings were too
mean for a Woman of her Birth, and therefore he would presently take her a fine
House at Greenwich four Miles out of Town, and have it furnished suitable to
his and her Quality.

At Greenwich a House is instantly provided; and what by the Pretentions of
this great Match, he strikes in with a confiding Upholster for a Rich Bed,
Tapestry Hangings, and very sumptuous Furniture in most ample manner. Nay, he
carries it on so far as to gain Credit for several Hogsheads of Wine, which
were likewise wafted down to Greenwich. The young Wife all this while seeing
him make such splendid Provision for her, never in the least suspected him for
less than high Quality, and indeed was utterly Ignorant that all this Gallantry
was taken up upon Trust, and mostly raised upon the noise of her vast
Devonshire Portion that was very speedily to pay for all.

After this Country House was thus Richly set out, pretending Business one
Morning early to London, he returns again between Ten and Eleven in great
haste, that truly he had occasion for about an Hundred Pound, and having laid
out more Cash than his Returns from his Estate in the Country could at present
supply him, he desired her to accommodate him with that Sum out of her Money,
which in a Fortnight at farthest should be made her up again. The poor Girl
very readily gave him the Keys of her Closet and her Cabinet, desiring him to
take what he wanted. Immediately he goes to the Treasury, and having not
leisure to stay to tell out the Sum, he took the whole Bag, which in Silver and
Gold was about 140 l. which he would tell over at London, and bring back the
Remainder, whither he desired her Company along which him in tbe Boat that staid
to carry him back. Yes, with all her heart, if he would please to stay till she
dressed her self, being then only in her Morning-Gown. No, by no means, he
replied, no matter for dressing her self, she was well enough dressed for that
little Company she should see to day. And so without farther Ceremony she trips
into the Boat with him, and so away to London.

When he came there, and had fixed her at her old Lodgings, he desired her to
have a little Patience till his return from Lombard Street, where he was going
to pay this Money: But before he went, giving her a kind Kiss or two: Lord, my
Dear (says he) this plain Wedding-Ring upon thy Finger is too poor for my Wife!
I am going to pay this Money to a Goldsmiths, and prithee give me thy Ring
along with me, and I Will put a Diamond into it.

The Ring, upon so good an Account, was presently delivered him, and a very low
Courtzy dropped him for the promised Diamond. Away goes Husband, Money, and Ring,
and the Wife staying with her old Landlady, waits for the return of her kind
Spouse: After a great deal of Patience pretty well tired, and many a Sigh to
pass away time, Evening at last draws on, and no Husband appears. To Greenwich
she dares not return, it is now too late at Night, and too dangerous traveling
so unseasonably. And so taking a soft Bed, but a hard Nights rest in Town, she
gets up early the next Morning for Greenwich, where instead of Husband or
House, she finds the Furniture, Bedding, nay the very Wine in the Cellar all
carried off; and so neither Husband, Money, nor Clothes, but the loose Undress
she had upon her Back; she is left to a whole Deluge of Lamentation, and the
King's Highway fair open for her to steer back to Wells, or what other
Hospitable Coast she could find in the wide World before her.

This Marriage-Trade thriving so well with him* he left it not off till he
arrived at the number of eighteen Wives; in which several various Cheats and
Disguises were practiced according to Time, Place and Circumstance. At
Kedderminster he passed for Sir Charles Bowyer's Brother again, and there
married an Inn-keeper's Daughter, from whom he hooked out several Pounds,
besides spunging upon her Father; where he continued a very considerable time,
and wrought himself into that entire Credit with his Father-in-Law, that when
some of his Neighbors made bold to ask him, How he could repose so much
Confidence in a mere Stranger; and after his Daughter had been so long married
to him, to make no Inquiry into him all this while? Inquiry! (he replied very
briskly) Trouble not your Heads about that Business; I am very well satisfied
in him, and know well enough what he is. His Wit and Breeding, and a hundred
other genteel Qualities, sufficiently assure me: Nay a Gentleman he must be
most certainly, for I have observed him, he will never Dine without a Bottle of
Wine.

In Holbourn he courted a Rich Vintner's Widow (but there he was a little
higher advanced into the Honorable Family of the Bowyers, for then he was Sir
Charles himself) and so far tickled her out of her small Reason, by the high
sound of a Ladyship, that the Wedding-cloaths were making. Nay he took her
along with him to a Goldsmiths in Cheap Side, to bespeak a very large quantity
of Plate, amounting to about 200 l. No sooner did he enter the Gold-smith's
Shop, but he kindly shook him by the Hand, and gave him so many familiar
How-do-yees, as if he had been his long and intimate Acquaintance; where
bespeaking so much Plate, and such a Coat of Arms to be engraved upon it, the
day was set when it was to be called for. Before that day he was to receive 600
l. from his Steward in the Country, which he had sent for up to pay for this
Plate, and other necessary Nuptial-Habiliments. But the day drawing on, a
Letter comes up by the Post from his Steward, intimating, That amongst all his
Tenants, he could at present raise but 150 of the 600 l. he desired, and truly
that small Pittance he did not think fit to return up, till he could make it a
larger Sum, etc. This Letter was received in his Mistresses presence, and the
Knight so enraged at his Steward's Neglect, that he fell into a very great
Passion to be so defeated of his Expectation, especially at so critical a
Juncture. The kind Widow seeing him so concerned, desired him not to be
troubled at it, for if his present Occasions required, she was very willing to
furnish him with it; and in fine, lent him 200 Guinea's to fetch home the
Plate. But neither was the Plate sent home, nor Knight or Guinea's ever seen
afterward. The Widow somewhat impatient, trips away to the Goldsmiths, to
inquire if he had been there, and being answered in the Negative, she asked him
if he were not acquainted with Sir Charles? What Sir Charles? Sir Charles
Bowyer that bespoke the Plate. Truly not he; for to his best knowledge, he
never saw him before that day. How, replies the Widow, never saw him before,
when he knew you so well, talked so familiarly with you, discoursed of so many
Affairs relating to your self, that I durst have sworn he had known you this
seven Years, and dealt in at least a thousand Pounds with you. Yes, replied the
Goldsmiths, all this familiarity he expressed, which as much surpised me as it
does you: But it was none of my business to inquire of a Customer how he came
so acquainted with my Concerns, or why he treated me so courteously at first
sight: He laid me down Earnest in part for my Plate, and if it is your pleasure
to pay me the remainder, the Plate is forthcoming. But when or where the
Gentleman can be found forthcoming, that you know better than I; for as I told
you, he is a Person I never saw before nor after.

To prosecute the full Relation of all his Wooings and Marriages, would be
dwelling too long upon one kind of Subject, and therefore not so divertising to
the Reader; for which Reason we have selected only these, as most entertaining
of all his Amors.

After he had accomplished near a Score of Marriages, he neatly counterfeited a
Bill for 700 l. drawn upon an eminent Citizen; and so well managed all Conduct
and Matters relating to it, that he received the Money. But what with his Wives,
and this last grand Cheat, he began to think little England would soon be too
hot for him. And therefore buying three very gallant Horses, and Equipage and
Accoutrements suitable, he got him cross the Herring-pond, and went a Volunteer
to the Duke of Monmouth, then before Mastricht: His business here was more
Flourish and Bravado, than any great Feats of War, any Martial Wonders he
intended to perform. In Flanders he made a pretty long Campaign, for he stirred
not from thence till all his Money was spent; and at length, when his dwindling
Stock was so small, that his very Horses Heads grew a little too big, for a new
Supply he converted them into ready Money; and when that last Stake was almost
run out, and he had just enough left to land him safe upon English Ground
again, he returned for London, and there setting in again at his old Play of
Wiving, he Wooes a Parson's Daughter of 500 l. Portion, and by virtue of the
great Name of Sir Charles Bowyer, and other winning Arts he used, he Married
her, and gained so far upon her Father, that he got One Hundred Pound in part
of the Five into his Clutches. But not satisfied with that Modicum, but
resolving to gripe the whole remainder too, he takes a House for her at
Hampstead, where he lived some time very kindly with her, still plying her
Father with all the softest and tenderest Management, to hook in the 400 l.

But here, as Fortune will not always Smile, a Turn of her Wheel gives him a
little stop to the Current of his Felicities: His Ludlow Wife had made no
little Outcry with her Wrongs, and amongst other Search and Inquiries comes up
to London, being the last place she has to make her Quest after this Impostor
and Monster, for those are the gentlest Names her Sufferings and Resentments
can give him. She has a great Opinion that Newgate or Newgate-Roll, or some
other such Chronicles of his Renown, will give her some light into his Life and
Fortune; and perhaps the Justice of Heaven afford her a fight of him at least,
if not a power to execute Heavens and her Just Vengeance on so egregious a
Reprobate.

Her Inn being at Holbourn-bridge, she lights into the Company of a good
Motherly Woman just come from Oxfordshire; the Sorrow in so young a Face, and
the swollen Eyes which were not yet dried, the Fountain being indeed
Inexhaustible, the Curiosity of the elder Traveller made bold to ask her the
cause of so doleful a Look, etc. The young one (who now had no Reserves)
plainly told her whole Sufferings: To which the Matron replied, Alas young
Woman, what are your Griefs to mine? I have been many Years the Wife of the
most Infamous Miscreant that the Earth ever bore; deserted and abandoned by the
wickedest of Men, after long Years of Honest and Loyal Fidelity to his Bed, and
exposed to Perish (which you, thanks to able Friends, need not fear) etc. with
a great deal more bitter Invectives against him. Till at last upon further
conferring of Notes, and describing of Characters and Persons, they came to
jump together, and found themselves both abused by the very same Monster, the
eldest being indeed his old Banbury Wife. What Amazement this Accident produced
may easily be conjectured, it will be enough to tell you, that the Anguish of
both their Souls, and the Bitterness of Gall on each side, made them Swear an
inviolable Friendship, determining to search (if possible) the whole World, to
hunt down this Devil. Accordingly they take a Lodging a little higher in
Holbourn, where making no secret of both their hard cases, they open their
whole Souls to their new Landlady, to engage her assistance in the Quarrel. The
Landlady, transported at both their Narrations, fell upon her Knees, and
blessed God he had sent them to her House, for this Lucifer they had described,
was certainly the very Man that next Week was to Marry her Daughter. This
Surprise put them all into new Confusion, and the Daughter being called to the
Council, it was evident that this very Fellow had made Love to the Daughter of
the House, the day of Marriage concluded, the Ring and Wedding-Cloaths
preparing, etc. This last Deliverance made the poor old Woman, and the Daughter
no less, melt into Tears at this happy Discovery.

Well, it is agreed between them all, that they shall not stir till he comes
thither, which will be in twenty four Hours at most; and all their united
Vengeance, Constables, Warrants, and what not, shall be prepared for his
Reception.

This Resolution was heartily fixed amongst them, only the Banbury Wife would
that Evening take a walk to a Cousins, a Citizen, where she had some important
Affairs, but nothing should stay her abroad above an Hour; she had not walked
half a Furlong, but Destiny, or some other ruling Power, threw her full in the
Mouth of her Husband; her Passion at sight of him rose so high, that at first
it could not find vent for words; which he perceiving, desired her to walk into
a Tavern which was just before them, and there recover her Confusion. You may
conceive she was very ready to accept the Invitation, her Stomach being so
full, that 'twas the only thing she wanted to have her full swing at him. The
Discourse of her part you may well guess at; but his Answer was so tender, and
his Confession so open, that at last she grew patient enough to hear him out.
He plainly told her all he had done, or at least the greatest part: That it was
only the Effects of his Wants and Necessities; that now he had raised enough to
re-establish him in the World; that the Hony-Moon of Love had been almost over
between them; and that if he had made any Lapse in Disloyalty to her
Marriage-Right, it was not Infidelity but Interest that had enforced him to
all. And so showing her handfuls of Gold and Silver, he humbly entreated a
Reconciliation betwixt them. Which good Words and Address at last so perfectly
obtained, that he persuaded her to send for all her Houshold-Goods, and to live
with him somewhere in the Liberties of Westminster, where disguising his Name,
and amending his Faults, he doubted not, through his Practice, to recover a
plentiful Being, and maintain her like a Woman.

The poor Creature, absolutely mollified, promises Fidelity to him; and never
returning to her new Lodging, takes him along with her, defeating the whole
Vengeance that Was hatching against him; and not stirring from him till all her
Goods were come up from Banbury, and a new House furnished with them. She had
not lived there three days, till finding a Gossiping Errand for her to keep her
from home a whole day, at her return at Night to Bed, she finds neither Husband
nor Goods, Bed to lie, or Stool to sit upon; the whole House being utterly
dismantled, and nothing but Nakedness and empty Walls to receive her.

This last Cruelty of her Barbarian, made her almost run stark Mad, and
returning to her Holbourn Lodging, to own her Frailty in believing an Infidel,
and the Just Judgment that had befaln her upon it, she found the poor Ludlow
Mourner departed; and all her Relief left, was to return to Banbury to live
upon the Alms of the Parish.

This Libertine Life of our Renegade, did not long continue, till found at last
by the Ludlow Wife he was thrown into Worcester Jail; from thence by Habeas
Corpus (at the Charge of a Parson in Southwark, whose Daughter he had likewise
married) removed to Newgate; and upon an Indictment of six Wives appearing
against him, being then Tried by the Name of Morrell alias Bowyer (a Name of a
worthy Person of Quality, for personating of whom he had stood in the Pillory)
he pleaded Guilty to those six and twelve more, and thereby received only the
Punishment of a Squeeze in the Fist. Nevertheless, the Judges were pleased so
far to commiserate the unhappy poor Women he had undone, but especially the
Parson's Daughter, that they gave her leave to lay an Action upon him of 5000
l. by virtue of which, being still detained a Prisoner, he removed himself to
the King's Bench: Here being kept within the Goal, he behaved himself so
winningly, that he gained some Favor with the then Marshal, and had now and
then the liberty to peep abroad. Improving and advancing in the farther good
Graces of the Marshal, he obtained at last that extraordinary Credit from him,
that himself and three or four more Prisoners, were one day permitted to take a
little Ramble to a Merrymaking, some little way out of Town; which lucky slip
of their Necks from the Collar, they took that wise care to make so good use
of, that neither our Sir Charles, nor his Fellow-Travellers, the Master or
Mates, ever returned again. This escape made such a Clamor, that 100 l. Reward
was set upon his Head, if to be caught in England. But this Pursuit soon
cooled, for upon the change of Marshal, which soon followed, the Cause dropped,
and he had full freedom to creep from his Covert, and turn Practitioner at his
old Craft again; his Deliverance being in a manner complete, and his 5000 l.
and the rest of his Load discharged.

After his Heels were at liberty, his Pocket run but low; and he was forced to
truckle to little Shifts, to put him in Stock again. His Pranks are scarce to
be numbered, nor dare we pretend to trace them successively; and therefore we
shall not tie our selves up to Time and Order.

For one of his common Feats, he got him a large Seal-Ring* and several other
Gold Rings, all variety, as Plain, Mourning, and Enameled, value together about
4 l. with these, by Confederacy, he would sham an Arrest upon himself by a
couple of Marshal's Men, and being hurried into some Alehouse, he would call
for the Landlord, pretend himself a Tradesman and Housekeeper as far as
Wapping, Stepney, or some such remote place; then opening his Grievance, that
he was Arrested for 40 or 50 s. and being too far from home to send for Money,
he desired the Landlord to carry his Rings to the next Goldsmiths, and see what
he valued them at: The Landlord returns with the Rings, and tells him, the
Goldsmiths would give him something above 3 l. for them: Upon this, he desires
the Landlord to pleasure him with 50 s. upon that Pledge, and he would come
himself, or send (by such a Token) the Money the next day, and redeem them. The
Landlord, ready to aid a Man in his Distress, in so reasonable a request, lends
the Money, whilst instead of the Gold Rings, he puts the Legerdemain, and leaves
him a set of Brass ones well Gilt, shaped, enameled, etc. to a tittle, in every
point resembling the true Rings; and worth about Half-a-Crown.

One Day about high Noon he came to the Poultry-Compter Gate, wanting a
Sergeant to execute an Attachment for him: So giving him his Instructions and
Fee, he desires him and his Yeoman to follow him to such an Alehouse in
Leaden-Hall-Street, where he would wait for them. To the Alehouse he goes, and
takes a Lower Room which looked into the Street, where calling for a Tankard of
Ale, and soon after spying the Bum and his Follower approaching, he whips out
of his Codpiece a Pewter Tankard, slaps the Drink into it, and returns the
Silver one into his Breeches. As soon as they entered, and asked him for the
Gentleman, he told them he would cross the Way, and see if he had dined yet,
and come over, and call them immediately to do their Office. Out he trips, and
there being a Thorough-fair over the Way, neatly conveighs himself off; till at
last, the Sergeant waiting beyond his Patience, calls for the Landlord, and
desires him to fill the Tankard again. Fill the Tankard (quoth the Host) what
Tankard! This is non of mine. My Tankard is a Silver one. How, a Silver Tankard
(replies our Man-catcher.) This was all the Tankard in the Room since he came
there. That wont serve turn: Their Comerogue and Confederate that had left
them, had a Tankard of him, price 6 l. 10 s. and Tankard, or so much Money must
be found before they parted. A great many hard Words rose on both sides; but in
fine, the Attacher himself was now under Attachment, and moved not off, till a
Reckoning of 6 l. an Angel, and some odd Pence, was discharged.

At Woolwich he pretended to be a Doctor of Physic, and professed an
infallible Remedy he had for the Gout. A Gentleman, an Inhabitant there, long
afflicted with that Distemper, retained him as his Physician: but his grand
Receipt requiring a Fortnights Preparation, he squeezes some Money out of him
for Materials to the Operation, and puts several Earthen Pots, with the
pretended Ingredients, for Fourteen Days under Ground, against which time the
expected Effects were to be produced. But it so unhappily fell out, that before
the Elixir came to perfection, he was arrested by the Name of Bowyer, and
thrown into the Marshalsea. The fourteen Days expired, and the Doctor in
Durance, the Patient made bold to dig for the Treasure, and examine the Pots;
where, to his great Satisfaction, in each Pot he found about half a dozen
straggling Maggots, which indeed was their whole Contents: But what Cures they
wrought our History mentions not.

Between five and six Years since, he tries one Touch more at Marrying, but
truly not so high a Flier as formerly, he contents himself to lay Siege to Nan,
the Cook-Maid at the Castle-Tavern at Fetter-lane end; and to attack her in no
less formidable a Figure than the old Sir Charles still. So Worshipful a
Matrimonial Suitor (you may imagine) tickled her not a little, for the Title of
a Ladyship could not but make a strange rumbling in a Kitchin-stuff-pot. The
poor Girl was soon inclinable to listen to such potent Love. Our Sir Charles
makes quick work on it; and though her kind Master and Mistress daily laughed at
her for fancying him in earnest with her. Our Lover was so well furnished with
Rhetoric to set her to rights again, and so absolutely persuaded her, that he
meant nothing more than to marry her, that at last she contrived to feign her
self Sick, whilst her Knight, under pretense of a Condoling Visit, was to steal
her down Stairs, and march off with her. This Plot taking effect, he kept her
our ten or twelve days; in which time he wheedled her out of all the Money she
could raise in the World, being about the Sum of Twelve Pounds: But when he had
drained all he could get from her, at last he began to grow so cold to her,
that he denied her one Morning a Pennyworth of Milk; which being no longer able
to bear, she returned to her Master with a very sad Heart, much wailing the
Barbarity she had received, and the Ruin she suffered. At the return of poor
Nancy, the Knight was flown; and though unsuspected before, now her Master and
Mistress with good Reason believed him a Cheat; and being concerned for
vindicating the Injuries of their Servant, they dogged him at last into
White-Friers; and fetching him out thence by a Constable and Warrant, he was
committed to Goal, tried for an Impostor, and stood in the Pillory before their
Door.

One very notorious Cheat was much in use with him within a Twelvemonth before
his Death: For instance, He comes one Morning to an eminent Tavern in Holbourn
near Hatton-Garden-end, his Habit a plain Countryman, with an Oyl-skin Hat, a
shabby Perriwig, a large Buff Belt round his Waste, a pair of Boots without
Tops, a Whip in his Hand, and a Hundred-Pound-Bag under his Arm: Here he
bargains for a Hogshead of Sack to be sent into the Country; whilst the
Carr-man is loading his Wine, he pretends very urgent Business he had to do
before the Carrier goes out of Town, insomuch that he cannot well stay and pay
for his Wine; for which reason he desires the Master to lay up his Bag of Money
for him, till he can call in the Afternoon and reckon with him; but first
taking out (for a blind) a handful of Money, between thirty or forty Shillings
for present occasion, he seals up the Bag again, and leaves the rest in the
Vintner's hands.

And now resolved to play the Good-husband, and do two Jobbs with one trouble,
whilst the Carr is loading, he goes to a Linnen-Drapers in Newgate-street,
where he buys a parcel of Linen near 30 l. and as the Carr-man comes bye, he
packs up the Linen, and mounts it into the Carr. Here pretending his old
haste, with another hundred Pound Load under his Arm, he plays the former
Prank, and gives the Draper the Bag too. Now no Countryman coming to reckon
(as promised) they both make bold the next day to unseal their Treasure, and
see what Security they had in their Custody; when to their great Surprise, they
found a parcel of new Halfpence stowed round the Bag, with a lesser Bag in the
belly on it, filled with Fragments of old Iron. This Prank was hitherto pretty
well carried, but Fortune of late Years a mere Jade to him, had a very unhappy
After-game to play him: For the Vintner and Draper happening to meet together,
to condole Losses and confer Notes, they chanced to remember, that one of the
Carr-man's Steeds was a remarkable pie-ball'd Horse. Hereupon making inquiry
amongst the Fraternity of Carr-men, by the Marks and Tokens of that Horse, they
found out the very Man that drove off the Chattels; who what by Threats and
other persuading Arguments, they prevailed to lead them at last to a House in
the Mint, where the Wine and the Drapery were both lodged. Here they made a
shift to recover the whole Prize, excepting about five Pounds worth already
embezell'd, being pretty well content to sit down by no greater loss.

In much the like manner, and much such a Habit, he came to a Cutlers in
Fleet Street, and leaving such another Bag there, under pretense of showing
some Swords to his Master at a Coffee-house hard by, he carried off three
silver Swords.

For the same Feat of Activity, he came to a Coffee-house adjacent to
Paternoster Row, where the Master of the House was a Tailor, whose Company and
Advice he entreated, desiring him to go along with him to some of the Mercers
in the Row, to look upon some rich Silks which he wanted, for a
Countty-Gentleman's (his Master) and a young Ladies Wedding-cloaths; the
Tailor, in kindness, handed him once or twice to several Shops: But one
Morning, leaving his Bag behind him at the Coffee-house, he went alone to a
Mercers, a corner Shop in the Row; where he cheapning some rich Stuffs,
flowered with Silver and Gold, a Haberdasher of Small Wares passing by, and
happening to set Eye upon our Chapman, made bold to lay hands upon him, and
carry him off to the Cock in Amen-corner; his Charge against him was, for
leaving him the Bag too for about thirty Pounds in small Wares. But noise and
crowd coming about him, fearing that other Complaints might appear against him,
and so load him heavier than possibly he might be able to stand under, our
Haberdasher wisely resolving to take care of no body but himself, danced him
from House to House, till his Country-Chapman could raise Effects to make him
Satisfaction; and so having, with much ado, hooked in his own Bet, he turned
him loose again, for the other open mouths against him, to take as fair a Hunt
for him as he had done. After this mortifying Adventure, whether out of a
Principle of Modesty, a Virtue not often in fashion with him, or some other
Forgetfulness, the Bag left in the Coffee-house was never called for from that
day to this; and keeping of it about three Months sealed, at last they ventured
to break it open, in which they found about six Shillings in new Halfpence,
and a lesser Bag filled with pieces of old Iron, a great deal of which, as
Memorials of his Renown, they have kept by them for Relics.

About the Year 1672. he pretended to a great Estate in Northamptonshire, and
carried it on so far, as to borrow four hundred Pounds upon the Mortgage of it,
of a Hampshire Gentleman. At Hannington likewise in Hampshire he married a
Ministers Daughter, and entered into Bond and Judgment of a Thousand Pound to
Jointure her in fifty Pound a Year, by which he got Two hundred and fifty Pound
out of her Father, as part of her Portion.

In Piccadilly, about five Years since, he went to a Horse-Coursers to buy a
Horse, and after he had bargained for, and bought him, he desired to back him
to try his Goings, and rode off with him before the Horse-Courser's Face, and
sold him in the Country for four Pounds.

But now to hand our great Master Actor off the Stage, we must bring him to his
Exit: Some few days before Christmas he came to one Mr. Cullin's a Baker in the
Strand to seek him a Lodging, his Habit but indifferent, and his Stock not
above Two Shillings, pretending himself to be a Person of Worth and Honor,
viz. Humphrey Wickham of Swakely in the County of Oxon Esquire a Person whose Name
and Reputation was well known to Mrs. Cullin, being born not far from him,
which contributed much to the swallowing of the Imposture. His Pretense for
leaving his Family in the Country, and living here Incognito, was occasioned
(he said) to avoid the Payment of 500 l. which he stood engaged for, and for
which the Principal had left him in the lurch; and which he had made a rash Vow
he would not pay.

Mr. Cullin's Family thus imposed upon, supplied all his Wants, and paid him
the due Respects to the Quality he personated, till falling Sick, on the 28th
of December he made a Will as follows.

His WILL.
IN the Name of God, Amen. I Humphrey Wickham of Swaclift in the County of
Oxon, Esquire being Sick and weak in Body, but of sound Mind and Memory, do make
this my last WILL and TESTAMENT, revoking all Wills by me formerly made: And as
touching such Worldly Estate as God has been pleased to bless me withal, I do
hereby give and bequeath the same in manner following.

Imprimis, I do give, devise, and bequeath, to my Kinsman William Wickham, of
Gazington in the County of Oxon, all that my Mansion House of Swaclift
aforesaid; and all the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments thereunto belonging,
to hold unto him the said William Wickham, and his Heirs for ever.

Item, I give and bequeath unto John Cullin, Son of Thomas Cullin, of the
Parish of St. Clement Danes, in the County of Middlesex, Baker, all that my
impropriated Parsonage of Sowgrate in the County of Northampton, with the
Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof.

Item, I give unto Anne Cullin, Sister of the said John Cullin, the Sum of Two
hundred and fifty Pounds.

Item, I give unto Thomas Cullin, Son of the said Thomas Cullin, the Sum of
Three hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Dorothy Halford of Halford, in the County of Warwick, the
Sum of Two hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Richard Davis, Son of William Davis, of the said Parish of
St. Clement Danes, the Sum of Four hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto William Davis, Son of the said William Davis, the Sum of Two
hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Anne Fowkes, for her Care and Diligence in looking after me
in my Sickness, the Sum of One hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Robert Croker, Son of William Croker of Sanford in the said
County of Oxon (being my God-son) the Sum of Five hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto the said William Croker the Sum of Five hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Robert Penniston, Son of Sir Thomas Penniston, and younger
Brother to Sir Farmalis Penniston of Cornhill, in the said County of Oxon, the
Sum of Three hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Mrs. Jane Penniston, Sister of the said Mr. Robert
Penniston, the Sum of Two hundred Pounds.

Item, I do hereby give, devise, and bequeath, all my Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, called by the name of Apple Tree Ducy, in Cropridee,
in the County of Northampton, unto John Brooking of Rashly, in the County of
Devon, Esquire and the said William Davis Sen. and Thomas Cullin Sen. and the
Survivor of them, and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them upon Trust and
Confidence. Nevertheless, that they the said John Brooking, William Davis, and
Thomas Cullin, shall sell and dispose of the same; and out of the Money thereby
raised, pay; or cause to be paid, the respective Legacies herein before
bequeathed unto the said Anne Cullin, Thomas Cullin Jun. Dorothy Halford,
Richard Davis, William Davis Jun. and Anne Fowkes. And whereas I have herein
before bequeathed unto my Kinsman William Wickham, and his Heirs, all my
Mansion House at Swaclift aforesaid, with the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments thereunto belonging; my true Will and Meaning is, That the same
Devise is upon this special Trust and Confidence, That the said William Wickham
shall pay, or cause to be paid, the several Legacies herein before bequeathed
unto the said Robert Croker and William Croker, Robert Penniston and Jane
Penniston; and also pay and discharge one Bond for the Principal Sum of Five
hundred Pounds, with Interest, which I became bound for with Thomas Walker, to
one Thomas Irons, any thing herein before contained, to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding; and also that he the said William Wickham, shall out
of his Legacy, and Lands, and Premises aforesaid, to him devised, pay, or cause
to be paid unto my Executors hereafter named, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds,
to be by them bestowed, distributed, or employed for the use and benefit of the
Poor of the Parish of Swaclift aforesaid, in such manner as they, or the major
part of them, shall think fit and convenient.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the said John Brooking out of the Moneys that
shall be raised of the Sale of the Lands and Tenements, called Apple Tree Ducy
aforesaid, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds: And all the rest and residue of the
Moneys that shall be thereby raised, I do hereby give and bequeath unto the
said William Davis Sen. and Thomas Cullin Sen. to be equally divided between
them and the Survivor of them.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Alice Cullin, Wife of the said Thomas Cullin
Sen. the Sum of Six hundred Pounds to her own proper Use and Disposal.

Item, I give and bequeath in like manner the Sum of Six hundred Pounds unto
Jane Davis, the Wife of the said William Davis.

Item, I give unto the said Robert Croker and William Croker, the Sum of Ten
Pounds a-piece to buy them Mourning; and also to each of them a Ring of Twelve
Shillings.

Item, I give unto Jane Croker and Mary Croker, and also to the said Robert
Penniston and Jane Penniston, and all other my Legatees herein before
mentioned, and to every of them, the Sum of Ten Pounds a-piece to buy them
Mourning, and a Ring of Twelve Shillings.

Item, Whereas I have the Sum of Seven hundred Pounds lying at Interest in the
hands of Mr. Ambrose Holbitch, in the name of Oliver Charles my Servant, I do
hereby give and bequeath the same to and amongst my Four Servants, Oliver
Charles, John Harber, Sarah Winn and Margery Smith, and the Survivor of them,
to be equally divided amongst them, share and share a-like.

Item, I give and bequeath my three Geldings, and all my Accoutrements
belonging to them, unto the said John Brooking, William Davis Sen. and Thomas
Cullin Sen. viz. my Bright Bay Gelding to the said Thomas Cullin, and my Black
Gelding to the said William Davis, and my Dapple-grey Gelding to the said John
Brooking. All the Arrears of Rent in my Tenants Hands at the time of my
Decease, I do hereby freely acquit and discharge. And all the rest and Residue
of my Personal Estate, not herein before devised, after my Debts, Legacies and
Funeral Expenses, paid and discharged, I do hereby give and bequeath unto my
said Kinsman William Wickham.

And, lastly, I do hereby nominate, constitute and appoint the said William
Wickham, John Brooking, William Davis Sen. and Thomas Cullin Sen. Executors of
this my Will; hereby revoking and making void all other, and former Will or
Wills by me made.

In Witness whereof I the said Humphrey Wickham have to this my last Will,
containing one side of a Sheet of Paper, and almost half the back thereof, set
my Hand and Seal this Twentieth day of December, Anno Dom. 1691.

Humphrey Wickham.
Signed, Sealed, Published and Declared in the presence of us, with the words
(William Wickham) being first interlined, Rob. Smith, Jo. Chapman, Rich.
Chapman, Mart. Pinckard.


I, the abovenamed Humphrey Wickham, having omitted out of my Will
abovementioned, the Disposition of my Estate in Huntingtonshire, do hereby
make this Addition to, and part of my said Will, in manner following: I give
and bequeath all my Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, called Pryor's Farm,
and all other my Estate in Holly-well and Needing-worth, unto the abovenamed
John Brooking, William Davis Sen. and Thomas Cullin Sen. and the Survivor of
them, and their Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivor of them, under this
special Trust and Confidence, that the said John Brooking, William Davis, and
Thomas Cullin, shall sell and dispose of the same; and out of the Moneys
thereby raised, pay, or cause to be paid, the respective Legacies hereafter
named, viz. I give and bequeath to Humphrey Longford the Sum of Six hundred
Pounds, and to his Sister Mary Longford the like Sum of Six hundred Pounds.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the said Thomas Cullin Sen. the further Sum of
Eight hundred Pounds; and all the Remainder of the Moneys thereby raised, I
give and bequeath unto the said William Davis Sen. and Jane his Wife, and the
Survivor of them.

Item, Whereas I have by Will abovesaid, given unto John Cullin, Son of the
said Thomas Cullin, the impropriated Parsonage of Sowgrave; my true meaning is,
That I do give and devise the same to the said John Cullin and his Heirs for
ever. In witness whereof, I the said Humphrey Wickham have to this Codicil
Addition, or further part of my said Will, set my Hand and Seal, this Twenty
eighth day of December, Anno Dom. 1691.

Humphrey Wickham.
Signed, Sealed, Published and Declared in the presence of us, Robert Smith,
John Chapman, Richard Chapman, Martin Pinkard. Probatum fuit, etc.


This stupendous Confidence of a dying Man is very amazing, nay he drove on
the Masquerade at that strange rate, that he may be truly said to have ended as
he began, having received the Blessed Sacrament, pretended the Settlement of
his Conscience, and making Peace with Heaven with that seeming Sincerity, as if
he had resolved to prevaricate with God with the same Assurance he had all
along done with Mankind. The Credulity of these deluded Persons, his Landlord
and the rest, is not much to be wondered at, when the last Gasps of Death could
carry so fair an Hypocrisy, and their Transports for his extravagant Legacies
bequeathed them, are rather to be pitied than ridiculed. And if they have been
faulty in any little Over-fondness of their imaginary good Fortune, the Jests
and Gibes they have received, have been their sufficient Punishment; besides
Mr. Cullin's being run out of above 30 l.

After his Death care was taken to provide him a Coffin of about 10 l. value,
and the Embalmers were paid for some of their Office of preserving him Sweet,
till Preparations for a solemn and sumptuous Funeral could be made, suitable to
the remains of the honorable Deceased. And this Letter was sent as follows.

SIR,
THESE serve to inform you, that Humphrey Wickham Esquire of Swaclift in the County
of Oxon, died this Morning at my House, where he has been about ten days: He
has made his Will, and you are one of his Executors with me and others: A very
great share of his Estate is given to you; therefore pray Sir speed to London,
that we may take care of his Funeral, and other matters necessary to be done
upon this occasion.

I think it may not be amiss that you keep this private, lest any thing may be
Purloined or Imbezelled by any of the Deceased's Servants, or any else at his
Seat at Swaclift, which is all given to you, some Legacies thereout to be paid:
I am, Sir, your Servant

Thomas Cullin.
London, January 3. 1691. From my House at the Wheat-sheaf near St. Clement 's
Church over against Arundel-street, Strand. To Mr. William Wickham of
Gazington, inquire at the Blew Boars Head in Oxon.

These following Lines were enclosed from the aforesaid Executors in the said
Letter, being left by the Deceased.
WHereas, I Humphrey Wickham Esquire in Company with my own Man John Harbert, and
John Austin Son of Nicholas Austin, did carry a black Hogs-skin Trunk, marked
with the Letters H.W. 1688.

Wherein are the Deeds of my Estate at Sowgrave and Apple Tree Ducy; these are
to desire you to deliver them to the Executors, signed with his own Name thus

Humphrey Wickham.


Memorandum, That there are two Mortgages in the hands of Austin, the one for
1400 l. and the other for 400 l. in the name of Oliver Charles, in the hands of
Mr. Ambrose Holbech.

In answer to this Letter came a Gentleman from Oxford to tell Mr. Cullin, that
the Christian-name of this Mr. Wickham of Gazington was mistaken, which gave
the first Alarm of an Imposture, otherwise Hearse and Mourning had been
provided to have carried him down to Swackley for his Interment there.

Mr. Cullin being not over-apt to believe himself cheated, but more to satisfy
the rest of the World, sent down a Messenger to Swackley, with fifteen
Shillings in his Pocket, mounted upon a poor Hackney, but ordered to return
upon the Bright Bay Gelding bequeathed him in his Will; being not convinced of
the Delusion till his Messenger's return, notwithstanding several Persons of
Reputation had declared him a Counterfeit; and Major Richardson and Mr. Compton
had both inspected the Corpse, and averred him to be the very Man formerly
judged for six Wives as before mentioned, and more than once their Prisoner in
Newgate.

The Messenger returning Tuesday the 12th of Jan. 1691. he brought a Compliment
to the Executors from Captain Wickham (who had treated the Messenger very
civilly) to this effect; That he gave them his hearty Thanks for their intended
Kindness to him; and if they would please to come to Swackley for a Month or
more, they should be very welcome, and have the use of all the Geldings, viz.
the Black, the Bright-Bay, the Dapple-Gray, though he could not well part with
them for good and all.

Upon this full Satisfaction received, about three the next Morning, with no
more than a Watchman and a Lanthorn, in a Coffin of four Shillings price, he
was laid in the Earth in a Nook of St. Clement's Churchyard.

The Nurse and Assistants that attended him in his Sickness now call to mind,
that they once or twice observed him to laugh to himself very pleasantly, which
they suppose proceeded from the pleasure he took in cheating the World he was
then just upon leaving.

To conclude with his Frauds and Impostures, (besides the grandest and boldest
of them all that he left the World in) he was charged with one Cheat after his
very Death. Amongst the numerous Visitants that came to see him that Week that
he lay above Ground, it happened that a Man and his Wife, living at
White-Chappel, pressing in amongst the Crowd of Gazers, immediately remembered
his Face; and seeing the Clothes there which he wore before he died, he
presently owned himself the Tailor that made them; and that they were not only
unpaid for still, but likewise he was cozened out of them by one of the lewdest
Shams that ever was put upon Man. Upon which he repeated the whole Story at
length, viz. That about Bartholomew-tide before, the now Deceased came over
Night, and took a pretty handsome Lodging at White-Chappel, pretending himself
newly come up by the Stage-Coach out of the Country, his Name Bowyer; and
desiring his Landlord to help him to a Tailor, 'twas his ill Luck to be the Man
that was sent for. When he came to him, he found him in a threadbare black
Coat, and very much in want of Repair. He had not talked with him long, before
he was desired to take measure of him; and whilst that was doing, up came a
Footman in a gentile Livery, and paying him much Respect and Reverence, told
him, That Sir John, his Master, desired his Company at Dinner. At Dinner!
(answers our threadbare Spark) No, 'Faith; he must excuse me: I am not in a
pickle (Pox of my Dog-Rogue) to stir out of doors. No, Sirrah; these Rags upon
my Arse are no Dress for Dining at Whitehall. And so, pray, go tell your
Master, that I am forced to keep my Chamber at present, for I have been robbed
since I saw him last Night. The Footboy presently asked him, By whom? By a
young Son of a Whore, a Footman of mine, the Devil go with him. And so
desiring the Boy to carry the whole Relation to his Master, he tells him very
formally. That sending his Boy last Night to the Carrier's for his Trunk, in
which were two Suits of Clothes, all his Linen and Point, and fifty Pieces of
Gold, the Rogue was run away with it: And though this old Suit upon his Back
served him well enough to come to Town in, Sir John must pardon him if he durst
not stir out till he was a little better rigged. The Footman making a long
Scrape, and departing with his Message, our Country-Squire gave a hundred hard
Names to this Run-a-way Man of his, threatening a great deal of Vengeance if
ever he caught him; for Hanging was too good for him. Whilst this Alarm held,
there came another Visitant to our Esquire, and told him, He hoped he had drawn
it up to his Liking: So the Man producing a Paper, the Esquire took it and read
it; which was a long Advertisement to be put into the Gazette, describing the
Marks of his Man, and five Pounds Reward to him that should apprehend him. So
having read it out, and approved of the wording of it, he put his Hand in his
Pocket, and gave the Fellow ten Shillings to pay for entering of it, giving him
a strict Charge to be sure of getting it into the next Gazette. After this, he
began to treat about his Clothes, which he desired might be neither Rich nor
Gaudy, for he was past those Vanities. The Tailor accordingly, by next day at
Noon, brings him his Clothes, his Bill between five and six Pounds, which truly
he must be forced to stay for till next Week; for the Villain and Thief his Man
had put him out of Money; but he had sent down last night by the Post for new
Supplies, and by the middle of next Week should be furnished, and pay him very
thankfully. The poor Tailor, not in the least doubting his Money, was very well
satisfied for he was sufficiently convinced that he was a Gentleman of Fashion,
and hoped to find a good Customer of him. But no sooner were the Accoutrements
upon his Back, and he had now liberty (no disgrace to his Gentility) to walk by
Daylight; his first Progress is down to Sir John's at Whitehall, who was
belike so fond of his Company, that he would never let him find the way home
again; for from that Hour, neither his White-chappel Landlord, nor Tailor,
could ever set Eye of him.

But to give him a little farther Visit at the Bakers (the Hospitable Roof
under which he finished his last Masterpiece) and lend the Reader some few
farther Observations upon what passed there, more and above his own Personal
Performance in that grand Masquerade of the pretended Captain Wickham, several
Accidents both before and after his Death contributed much to corroborate and
support the Impostor. To instance one remarkable one; his kind Landlord sending
for the worthy Dr. F -- to take care of him in his Sickness, he asked the
Doctor if he did not know him, or had never seen him before; which the Doctor
(as with good reason) not well recollecting, our Patient was pleased to
remember him, that he had the Honor to Dine with him such a Day, in such a
Year, when the Doctor was Mayor of Gloucester. Now it happening that that very
day the true Captain Wickham had really Dined with him at Gloucester: The
Doctor who was not much acquainted with the true Captain, and thereby not ready
to distinguish Faces, yet very well remembering such a worthy Gentleman one of
his Honorable Guests that day in his Majoralty, was very ready (upon so
convincing a Circumstance) to swallow the Juggle, and to acknowledge him the
Person he presented, which very much influenced the Credulity of the Family.

The Monday, the next day after his death, a Noble Peer, attended by several
Persons of Honor, came to see the Body, and was so satisfied in his being his
Country Neighbor, the true Captain Wickham, that he questioned the Family why
the Coroner did not sit upon him; upon which being answered, that such a
Physician took care of him, and that besides, the Honesty of the House in which
he died, gave no occasion for any such reflecting enquiry into his Death: His
Lordship was pleased to reply, That if he was not Murdered, he must certainly
die Mad, it being impossible that in his right Senses he should give such
extravagant Legacies to mere Strangers: Nor would his Lordship be satisfied,
till he consulted both his Bodily and Ghostly Physician, his Minister and the
Doctor, about his outward and inward Man, etc.

Another very confirming Credential happened, viz. A grave Citizen of London, a
near Neighbor to our Capital Cathedral, who likewise inspected the Corpse, was
pleased to say, he had fifty Guinea's in his Fob, and would make them an
Hundred with any Man, that it was Captain Wickham. Nay, Mr. T -- the Proctor
was so confident of his Integrity, that he deposited five Guinea's with the
Baker's Wife, to a Wager of five more, to buy him a Pair of Gold Fringe Gloves,
that he was the true Captain Wickham; and not only so, but made two Wagers more
with her, of two Guinea's each, upon the same Fund. Which Wagers she was so
unwilling to lay with him, as being her self so confident of his Truth, that
she gave them for lost; nor had been drawn into them, but by this Argument of
the Nurses, who told her, That if he was the true Wickham, nine Guinea's Loss
would be nothing out of their great Legacies; and if he was otherwise, the
winning of so many Guinea's would make some Help toward the Charges they had
been out upon him.

Besides all this, a great many Oxfordshire Gentlemen, that frequented Kn --
t's Coffee-house in Essex-Buildings, were so concerned at his Executor's
Happiness, that rather than the Baker should run away with so much of his
Estate, declared they were resolved to make a Parliament Business of it. So
many Affirmatives so strengthened the believing Baker, that he offered to give
his Maid fifty Pounds for her Hundred: To which she pertly answered, No, she
was not in so much haste to Compound at that Rate, she was as well able to
tarry for her Money, as he was for his. And talking of the poor Maid, one thing
must not be forgotten; the day before he died, he told her he had left her a
hundred Pounds to buy her a Husband, but have a care she did not Marry a Rogue
that should beat her, for if she did, he had that kindness for her, he was sure
it would disturb him in his Grave, and make him Walk when he was Dead.

But to return to his Death: When the Searchers came to do their necessary
Office, upon Inspection, they found some little extraordinary Mortification
upon some nameless Part about him, that put them upon the Smile. Their Respect
to the Worshipful Deceased, made them somewhat Modest in the Discovery; which
occasioned the Nurse to inquire into the cause of their Fleering, and asked
them plainly, If the Captain were under the Covenant of Circumcision? Yes
truly, they replied, some such kind of Corporal Defect they had found about
him. This put the Churchwarden into some Surprise, who, inclinable to fancy
better things of this Pious Benefactor defunct, would by no means believe
either Searchers or Nurse, 'till he played the Searcher too, and made a Peep
for his satisfaction. But, alas, he no sooner cast his Eye that way, but he
found our Batchellor Captain was in no danger of leading Apes: He discovered
him an old Soldier under Cupid's Banner; for by a sad Token he had been a loser
in the Wars: But Eighteen Wives might do much, and so the Wonder is not so
extraordinary.

By a Letter dated January the 21st 1691. from a credible Hand, we received a
short Relation of the Man Tom, the Famous Sancho Pancho to our deceased Don
Quixot, so often mentioned, and formerly so great a Sharer in his Master's
Adventures.

This Squire to our late Knight Errant, through his long Service now grown
Master of his Art, and consequently Setting up for himself, was then taken at
Putnam, near Godalming in Surrey, for running away with an Heiress of 150 l.
per annum. This wealthy Heiress he had married in very good Season, our
Bridegroom truly being not over-rich, (the common Fate of great Wits) for he
had hardly Money enough to pay for his Marriage. However, accepted for Richer,
or Poorer, he had Bedded her seven or eight Nights, and was so long pursued and
hunted from place to place, before her Relations could catch him, being taken
at last in Bed with her. The farther Particulars we are not yet informed.

Since the first Publication of our foregoing History of our Grand Guzman, we
have received some Comical Adventures, worth inserting in his Memoirs, which
though they now bring up the Rear of his Chronicle, however they were the very
first of all his Wedlock Feats, and which take as follows.
AS our Young Matchiavil was bred up a Brother of the Crispin-Fraternity, in
which he lived some Years a Journey-man to a Cord-wainer at Worcester, some
little Worldly Calamities, chiefly the Product of a natural Laziness,
unfortunately run him into Worcester-Goal, where he lay some Months, till
partly by Charity, and partly by the Mercy of his Creditors, who were softened
into a Composition of his Debts, at length he shook off his Stone-doublet. From
hence, his Reputation being a little sunk in that part of the World, he made
shift to pick up a small Load of St. Hugh's Bones, and so strol'd down the
Severn to Bristol; and after he had tired out his new Acquaintance there, and
made that Town too almost a little too Warm for him, he packed up his Awls, and
moved farther abroad. Our wandering Itinerant, not to mention his more
inconsiderable Rambles, comes at last to the Town of Petersfield within 17
Miles of Portsmouth; here (as in all places) being a Boon Pot-Companion, he
fell in at All-Fours with a Surgeons Prentice, who on his Master's Account had
some Business in that part of the Country; and with the good Fortune of a lucky
Hand, and some little help of a dextrous Cut and Shuffle, the kind
Devils-Books were so favorable to him, that our young Bone-setter lost all his
Money to him to the doleful tune of upwards of three Pounds: Nay, when his
losing Hand was in, his Plaister-box and Salvatory, pretty well furnished with
all Silver-tip'd Instruments, were staked and lost too. The poor young Fellow
was not a little mortified at this loss, but being a Man of some little
Fashion, he knew himself able, when he sent home, not above a dozen Miles off,
to his Friends, to have Money enough returned him to redeem his Implements, and
supply the Cash of his Masters he had thus unfortunately imbezel'd: Accordingly
he desires the Favor of Silence, and that he would let him have the kind
Equity of Redemption for his Plaister-box, upon honest Repayment of the Money
lost upon it. All this was readily agreed to, and a good hearty Oath, by way of
honorable Engagement, was thrown into the Bargain, that his Instruments should
be forthcoming upon the reasonable Terms aforesaid, and that he might hear of
him at Good Man such a one's, a Shoemaker in the Town, where he worked
Journey-work.

No sooner came our Fortunate Gamester home, but he surveyed his Prize, and
found it, as he thought, worth twice the Sum lost upon it; and therefore having
a long time been weary of his own Mechanic Occupation, a Mercurial Thought
comes into his Head of roving to Sea. Accordingly early the next Morning, he
sells his Hugh's Bones for a small matter of Silver to a Brother Crispiano, and
pretending to soot it up to London, he wheels round the Town, and marches
directly the clean contrary way, viz. to Portsmouth, resolving to prevent all
manner of Hunt after him from the young Esculapius for his Plaister-box in
Tribulation.

Here he lights into a Publick-house that generally entertained Seamen, the
Mistress of which was a Young Buxom Dame, not long, or rather too long, a
Widow: Here he soon found himself a Tar-mate that he made his Bedfellow, with
whom he quickly contracted a great Intimacy, and also gained some considerable
Light into Sea-Affairs. His Landlady, to give her her due, was a Pretty Handsome
Little Tight Woman; but what was her yet greater Charm, she was worth above a
hundred good Pounds. Here our Traveller, upon the Authority of the fair
Credentials in his Pocket, pretends himself a Surgeon to such a Ship that lay
out at Sea, and that his Chest of Medicines were coming down from London in
order to his Streights Voyage: Though the Instruments in the Pocket seemed some
small Testimonial of his Doctorships Capacity, yet the Breeches that held them,
and the rest of his outward Furniture (being indeed something Shabby and
Threadbare) did not altogether look like the Habilements of a Graduate
Medicinal Professor. And truly his good Hostess, from that slender outward
Appearance, was not apt to have overmuch Faith in the case. Besides he had
that cloudy Hand for a Learned Manual Operator, that she would sometimes
merrily Joak upon his not over-neat Palm for a Chyrurgion. But that Objection
was soon answered, and she was readily given to understand, that he professed
Chemistry as well as Surgery, and the making up of his own Medicines had a
little tinctured his Hands; and so the remains of the Cobler's-Wax were slur'd
off under a more honorable Pretention.

Our Brisk Youth now makes bold Suit to his Landlady, in no less Capacity than
an humble Servant of hers. The cunning Gypsy, not easily over-reached, and
besides not much taken with his Person, gave him but slender Reception: It Is
true he spent his Money briskly, and so far she could hear of that Ear, but was
somewhat Deaf on the other; for truly, as I said before, she wanted Faith.
However her Passionate Admirer was not wanting, not only in pushing on
heartily, but likewise in great Rodomontadoes of an Estate he had at Worcester
of 30 l. per annum Free-land, with twenty other high Romances. But all this
wrought but little upon his too Cold and too Coy Mistress; till at last by the
help of his Tarpawling Chambermate, whom he had made of his Party, a very
Comical Project was formed, to try what Titillation could best work upon her.

Our Sea-Friend therefore, an old Weather-beaten Tar, who had several times
lodged at this House, and by that means was very Intimate with the good Dame,
takes an occasion one Evening to drink a Pot and a Quartern with her privately,
to tell her something that very nearly concerned her. This private Interview
was no sooner obtained, but our Tar, with a very serious Face, began by the way
of a Counselor and Friend, to bid her have a care of his Bedfellow; not but
he loved him well enough as a Chamber-fellow, but not half so well as he loved
his good Landlady, whom he had known so many Years together, and received so
many Civilities from. In short, he had discovered that this Doctor made Love to
her, and he supposed to Marry her: But take heed what she does, for to his
certain knowledge, instead of a Man, he was rather a Monster. A Monster,
replied the Hostess somewhat amazed. Ay a Monster, for he was his Bedfellow,
and he could Swear what he had seen and known. Truly under the Rose, he was
such a Devil of a Fellow, that he was more a Horse than a Man: Nay, she might
do what she pleased; yet he was sure, that if he once came to lay her a-board,
a poor little Creature as she was, he would certainly tear her to pieces from
the very Stern to the Poop: For as he said before, Never was such a Monster of
a Man. The Good Dame mighty kindly thanked him for his Friendly Advice, and she
should take her Measures accordingly. In fine, a great deal of kind Caution he
gave her, and came so far to particulars, as almost to tell her the very
Dimensions, how many Half-crowns he could sweep off, etc.

The next Morning our young Doctor desired the Favor of a Mornings-Draught
with his Fair Landlady, which was readily granted; and when he came to drink to
her, he found the Bowl so extraordinary Spiced and Sugared, so much Sweeter
than usual, that he could not but make her a kind Salute.

In fine, both the Bowl and the fair Ganymede, the Hospitality and the Hostess,
all sweetened at a strange Rate; and our happy Inamorato had that Access to her
soft warm Lips, that he never bill'd half so close before. This kind Mornings
Entertainment was not concluded, till the Generous Widow proposes a Frolic
tomorrow Morning to Chichester, to visit some Relations there, in which she
desires the Honor of the Doctor's good Company. Our Spark received the
Invitation very thankfully, only he must deny himself that Happiness, by reason
he was at present (his Wardrobe being not yet arrived from London) in that
Dishabile^, that he should disgrace both her and her Friends by his too poor
outward Appearance. The Widow immediately excused that Want, by telling him
that Fault should be mended, the Town of Portsmouth should furnish him, etc.
The Spark replied very frankly, That truly till his Return from London, he was
not at present strong enough in Pocket for such a Purchase: The Generous Widow
bid him not trouble himself in that Point, for she would accommodate him, and
wait his time for his Repayment. And accordingly, that very Afternoon he was,
at the kind Widows own proper Charge, equipped Cap-a-pee with a new Suit, Hat,
and all other Accoutrements, to the Tune of upwards of 7 l. besides some very
fine Linen, Relics of her old Husbands: And the next Morning a Brace of very
fine Gallopers were provided, and our mounted Doctor, A-la-mode de Cavalier,
pranc'd with the gay Widow to Chichester.

When he came thither he was very courteously received by the Widows Relations,
being People of pretty good Fashion; where the Widow, a little profuse in her
new Gallant's Commendations, gave an extraordinary Character both of his
Quality, his Parts, his Profession, and what not. What a fair Estate he had at
Worcester, and what a fairer Name he had amongst the College of Physicians, and
the whole World that knew his Merit; which in respect to their Relation, much
heightened the Reception he found amongst them.

Matters going on thus swimmingly, and a great deal of Mirth passing of all
hands, the Doctor publicly avowed his Pretensions to the Widow, and the Widow
as frankly acknowledged the Honor he did her in his favorable Thoughts
toward her. To conclude, the Affair went on so briskly, that the Match, before
the whole Kindred, was struck up that very Night, and Execution resolved the
very next Morning, which was accordingly performed. But now by the bye, the
Reader is to consider how her Tarpawling's Advice had warned her of the Dangers
of Marrying this Monster of a Man, and that the least she must expect was to be
downright killed; nevertheless by a certain kind of Courage, natural to the
whole Sex, of running the Risk of that sweet sort of Martyrdom, she resolves to
venture her whole Mortality, and, in spite of Predictions, marry this
formidable Desperado.

Here let us slip over the Nuptial Ceremony, and bring her to the Grand Work
Consummation. When the brisk Bridegroom came to attack the Fort, and enter the
Breach of Love, the fair Bride, who had conceived most prodigious Imaginations
of the Assault, had her Expectations so far defeated, that instead of the
Monster, the Hercules, the Gigant, etc. she sound him but a mere Man: Nay, as
the malicious Devil of Love would have it, the Dimensions of her Felicity was
so far short, that what with Remembrance and Comparison, those unlucky
Critics, she found the Furniture of the whole new Magazine, not answerable
even to the poor Defunct in the Grave; the very Worms were now Feasting of that
more Substantial Quondam Dish, that it is not a small untowardly Reflection upon
her present slenderer Bill of Fare.

Not but to do our Bridegroom all Right and Justice, he behaved himself in all
Points as briskly as Manhood of between a Score and a half could perform; and
really there was no reasonable Objection to be made against him. However
Expectation had raped her into those Extravagant Notions and Phoenomena's, that
it is no little damp to her high Flights to be so frustrated and disappointed.

Our young Couple had not slept the first whole Night together, I mean as much
as a first Nights Sleep generally is, but the Bride before Morning was heard to
Sigh very often, which much surpised the Bridegroom, and made him a little
Inquisitive into the Occasion of so untuneable a Music for a Wedding-Night. To
which she made answer, She much feared that she should be a very Miserable
Woman, for truly she had made a Vow to her old Husband upon his Deathbed, to
Mourn a double Widowhood for him; and now so notoriously contrary to her
Promise, and all the Decensies of her Sex, to Marry in less than half a Year
after his Death, not one quarter of the Time engaged, was both that Shame and
Trouble to her, that she had just reason to dread some exemplary Vengeance from
Heaven; at least to be haunted by his Ghost, a due Punishment for so wicked a
Perjury. The Bridegroom gave her a great many mollifying Arguments in answer to
so ridiculous a Scruple of Conscience, but God-wot to little purpose, all her
Quondam Sweetness was perfectly sour'd to all Intents and Purposes. The
Good Man, the new Spouse, found her still more and more in her Melancholy
Dumps, especially after her return to Portsmouth, for to tell Truth 'twas one
of the shortest Hony-moons of Love that ever New-wedded Couple had. Amongst her
daily Invectives against her unhappy Marriage, the old Lodger the Tarpawling
took occasion to remind her of the fair Warning he had given her against
Marrying this Man. Ay, replied the Dame, you did advise me in the Devil's name,
a Pox of such Plaguey Counselors. For his part, like a Lying, Couzening,
Cheating Loon as he was, she turned him out of her Doors, and would suffer him
to lie no longer in her House.

The Husband, who* upon conferring Notes with his Tar-friend, and other
Remarks, guessed where the Shoe pinched, began to think upon raising a little
of the Rhino out of her, and therefore before he had been a Week married, a
Letter comes down from London to tell him, his Lodging in Town, by an
Accidental Fire, was burnt down, in which his Trunk, Clothes, Sea-Chest, and
every thing he had there were unhappily lost in the Flames. Upon this he made
strange Moan for Ten Pounds to recruit his Chest, otherwise his Voyage would be
lost, and to send home to Worcester for Money of his own, would be longer work
than the time he had on Shore would grant him. For which cause he must request
his Dear Wife to do that great Favor for him. She raise Ten Pound! God knows
where should she have it, she Swears it is twice as much as she is worth in the
whole World. Nay then, replied our young Doctor, it is but losing his Voyage,
and giving over all Sea-Affairs, he will even set up a Doctor in Portsmouth, his
Ability will find him Practice enough to live like a Gentleman, and so Live and
Dye in the Arms of his Dear Sweet Betty: And therefore he would immediately
write to his Friends at Worcester, that his Tenant might know his Resolution.

This last Proposal was worse than the Ten Pound Demand; for to live all days
of his Life with her, was so Mortal an Apprehension to her, that she had rather
pay twice that Sum to be rid of him; to Sea, to the Devil, any whither, so she
can but see his Backside, and Ten Pound well laid out. And accordingly, upon
second Thoughts, she told him, That truly that Town was over-stock'd with his
Profession already, and therefore rather than lose him his Employ, she would
try all her Friends to raise it; which was done the next day after: Whilst our
Operator, under Pretense of a Journey to London to new furnish his Labaratory,
lays in a Stock of Brandy, and other comfortable Importance, into a Merchants
Ship; and in no higher a Post than before the Mast, sets out a Voyage for
Venice.

Our young Traveller being thus set out with a fair Gale, and his Dear Turtle,
his Fair Spouses best Wishes, by the way of a Witches Prayer for his Good
Voyage and Safe Return: We have little of Moment through his Voyage, only that
he was very Bounteous to the Seamen, and doled his Brandy, and the rest of his
good Stowage amongst them, which excused him from the greatest part of his
Duty, they being all ready to serve him. More particularly he ingratiated with
the Surgeon of the Vessel, and gained some small Experience in Surgery, and
some little Insight into Physic. At his Arrival at Venice, by virtue of his
pretty decent Appearance in Habit, and some little matter of Money in his
Pocket, but chiefly by his natural Talent of Confidence, he set up for a Spark,
and gained an intimate Acquaintance with a young Venetian Merchant, who traded
with the English, and had a little smattering in the Tongue, enough to be
understood: With this young Merchant he went now and then to a Bona Roba, some
of the Fair Wantons of Venice. During which extraordinary Familiarity between
them, the Merchant was so Frank, as to unbosom some few of his Secrets to him;
one above the rest, That he had Debauched a young Girl of some considerable
Quality there, which had run away from her Relations: That it is true, her
Friends knew not who 'twas had Dishonored their Family: And that if by any
Accident it should be discovered, the least he must expect was to have his
Throat Cut, as the common Revenge of that Nation upon much lesser Injuries. Our
young Doctor seeming very much concerned for his Friends Danger, offered his
Service of a Projection that should make all Safe and Happy, which was, If he
thought fit, by a Plot that he would lay, to Marry this Unhappy Damsel to a
very Rich Venetian of his Acquaintance. The Merchant was highly pleased at such
a Proposal, if feasible, an Honorable Marriage being the only thing that would
salve and reconcile all. Accordingly upon a close Cabal between them, this
following Intreague was managed, to our Young Doctor's Immortal Reputation in
Politics.

He was mighty well acquainted with a Public Notary in Venice, a very Rich
Man, to whom he had often boasted of his great Medicinal Learning; and one day
he took an occasion to tell him, That he had the Honor to take care of a young
Merchant's Widow, at present desperately ill, who had thought sit to select him
for her Physician, before all the Best and Ablest of her own Country Doctors,
who had experienced all their best Skill in vain, and had given her over for
Lost. That notwithstanding this universal Despair of her Recovery, he had some
more than ordinary Hopes of performing Wonders that should Amaze the World. Not
but her Life was in the Hand of Heaven, and he durst absolutely warrant nothing
that was Mortal. Amongst the loud Encomiums of his own Skill, he sprinkled some
tender Expressions of Pity toward the Poor Young Lady, whose extraordinary
Beauty, as much as Sickness had defaced it, was no little Object of Admiration.
In two or three days after, this Young Lady takes occasion to make her Will,
and who should be sent for to do that Office but this Notary, as being partly
recommended to her by her Doctor. Our Man of Law, who from the Descriptions of
this Languishing Lady, had received a strange Impression of her extraordinary,
though yet unseen, Charms, was mightily pleased that this Opportunity should
give him a sight of that Prodigy of Beauty his Esculapian Friend had described.
Accordingly being conducted to a most magnificent stately House, he was ushered
through several most sumptuous Apartments to the Bedchamber of the Sick Lady,
so prodigiously richly furnished, as had almost amazed him, had not the fairer
Object before him, by a much greater Surprise, diverted that Poorer Thought,
and fixed his Wonder upon a nobler Contemplation.

But to bring him to do his Office, viz. Drawing up her Last Will and
Testament: After she had bequeathed her Soul to him that gave it, and her Body
to the Earth, from whence it came, a too Rich Legacy, God knows, for poor
Worms; for indeed what with her own Natural Sweetness, the Dress and Light she
appeared in, and withal the Prepossession of the Notary, that much heightened
her Charms, she seemed no little Miracle. But as I was saying, to come to her
Worldly Capacities, she bequeathed very large Sums of Wealth to several
Relations, insomuch that the Astonished Notary, now her absolute Captive, could
not but think that Heaven had done the highest Justice to so delicate a piece
of its own fairest Handiwork, in matching the Blessings of so many Charms, with
an equal Addition of Fortune: And that there wanted nothing from her kind
Stars, but the Restoration of her Sweet Health to complete the Smiles of
Providence; all but too justly due to so lovely a Sweetness, that so highly
deserved even the extraordinary Care of Heaven.

The transported young Scribe was extremely raped with the Wonders he had seen
in this bewitching Face; and truly by the Favor of his good Friend, our kind
Mr. Doctor, had the Happiness several times after to accompany him thither,
when called to visit his fair Patient, who in some little time after began to
be in a fair way of Recovery.

Our long-rob'd Inamorato, thus happily introduced, is not wanting to improve
so favorable an Opportunity, and continues his daily Visits to the fair Widow
still after her perfect Recovery, (for our Famous Operator has set her upon her
Legs again.) And though Accesses to the soft Sex in that Country are generally
not so easy as in our English Clime; Treaties of Love being there carried on
like Love it self, a little Blindfold; yet under the Notion of a Widow those
Concessions were granted, which from a Maiden Mistress, through strictness of
Custom, might have been denied him.

Our Law-Courtier (to bless his kind Stars) gains ground, makes a formidable
Attack, and is not very vigorously repulsed: For though there is no Virgin-wax
in the case, here is something as soft, and the Impression not over-difficult.
The fair adored makes him all the suitable Advances fit for a Woman of her
Quality and Figure: And her humble Servant, though perhaps as Zealous an
Idolater of a fair Portion, as of a fair Face; nevertheless makes no further
Inquiry into that Particular, but takes her Fortunes upon Trust, being as amply
satisfied of her Capacity that way, by virtue of the late large Will he had
made her, as his own Eyes had made him of her other more visible
Accomplishments.

Matters, in fine, are so handled, and the Siege so pushed on, that at last the
White Flag is hung out, and the Fort upon Articles of Discretion comes to
surrender; for truly the Widow not to be behind in Generosity, makes as little
Scrutiny into his Worldly Effects as he had done into hers; and consequently
without any Interrogatories upon that Subject, gives up the Cause; and
accordingly Hymen is celebrated between them, the transported Bridegroom not a
little charmed with his fair Prize.

It is not worth while to prosecute this part of our History any further, only
we must tell the Reader, that whatever lumping Prize the Bridegroom found, his
Anglican Doctorship, the kind Mediator made a good Bargain of it. For the
Generous Merchant, for his assistant part in putting off the abovenamed Fair,
but somewhat damaged Commodity, generously presented him with 200 Crowns,
besides a Cask of Rich Wine to cheer his Voyage for England.

Our Spark, thus nobly equipped, returned homewards, now no longer in the
Capacity of a private Seaman, but in a manner a Mate to the Master of the
Vessel; but especially with his Old Friend the Doctor of the Ship, for now
Medicine is his professed Study.

At his Arrival at England (though the Vessel was bound for London) it happened
they touched in their way at Portsmouth, till a fair Wind offered for the
Thames mouth. Here our flourishing Traveller resolves to make a Visit on shore
to his good Portsmouth Dame, poor Betty, he left behind him. But when she came
to set Eye upon his lovely Phiz, never was such a roaring Welcome made. The not
over-fond Spouse, during his more than six Months Absence, had unluckily
inquired news of him about Worcester, where she had discovered he had no more
of an Estate than he had in Transylvania; and was no more a Doctor than he was
a Major General. In short, his whole Pedigree, Extract and Occupation, were
fully discovered; and consequently not a few Civil Compliments of Rogue, Cheat,
Counterfeit and Impostor, were very heartily bestowed upon him: Nay, she could
hardly forbear telling him, that his pretended Estate was as wholly Imaginary,
as the Boasted Dimensions of his Manhood: He was all Forgery and Lies inside
and outside.

Our young Doctor, who expected no less than all this Fury, was beforehand
prepared for it, and received her with a Scorn as great on his side, as the
Rage was on hers; pulled out whole handfuls of Gold, to show her, that though
his Birth, it is true, had bestowed no Patrimonies upon him, his Wit and Sense
could make his own Fortune; and accordingly valued not that inconsiderable want
of Birthright. But to Sum up the whole Conference between them: The Dame was
for never seeing his Face more, and no Love lost on his side, he was as ready
to make a drawn Battle of it himself: However, if she would purchase a General
Release from all Pretensions to him, he demanded an Acknowledgment of Ten
Guinea's for the Signing and Sealing such a full Discharge: Which though 'twas
a little hard, she consented to pay down the Sum; and our young Doctor drew up
a Paper under the Penalty of a Thousand Pound, never to claim her as a Wife, or
give her any Trouble whatever; but to allow her free Liberty to dispose of her
self to any Man she should like better. No sooner was this formal Divorce
signed and sealed, and the Ten Guinea's paid upon the aforesaid Agreement, but
they fairly bid each other an eternal Adieu; the young Dame being so very Frank
with him, as to tell him, she had already had a better Man in her Tables since
he went away; and had some very fair Effects of it, being four Months gone with
Child by him, that being a particular piece of Justice she owed him before, for
the Impudent Cheat he had put upon her: So that a good Riddance on both sides.
Our Doctor returned for London, with his Pockets well lined, sets up for a
Town-Spark, and lets his Gold fly: Till at last, the Mine pretty well sunk, he
sets his Brains at work for a Recruit; and here he got Acquaintance with an
Innkeeper of Kingston upon Thames, a Person principled for his Purpose; and to
him he communicated a Design to get Money, which he readily embraced. The
Innkeeper, upon pretended Business, gets well mounted with a Hundred and fifty
Pounds in Money, and a Watch, Rings, and other Rich Movables worth 50 l. more;
and accordingly his Road lying upon Clapham-Common, he is there accosted in a
very Hostile manner, though by a not over-formidable Enemy, being our young
Doctor transformed to a Cavalier, who with the rough Compliment of Stand and
Deliver, disburthen'd him of his brace of Hundreds; for which a loud Hue and
Cry is immediately made, though with no great Design of taking the Thief. This
Project succeeded so well, that with a hardy Front, and a little natural
Assurance, our Innkeeper makes so bold with the Evangelists, as to Swear
heartily to the Robbery, and accordingly Sues the County, and recovers the
Money, which was very fairly and honestly Snack'd between them. With this last
Prize he thinks it high time to fly no longer at Rovers, but to take up and
settle: And accordingly carries himself, his Impudence, and Plaister-box, to
Banbury, and there sets up a Professed Chyrurgion, as the beginning of our
History has already set forth.

FINIS.

