THE Second Part OF THE Notorious Impostor, Completing the History of the
Life, Cheats, etc. of William Morrell, ALIAS BOWYER, Sometime of Banbury,
Surgeon.

Who lately personated Humphrey Wickham of Swackly, in the County of Oxon,
Esquire, at a Bakers House in the Strand, where he Died the third of Jan.
1691/2.

Together With some further passages Relating to his Sickness and Death not
before mentioned.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Mytre near Temple Bar, 1692.

To the Churchwarden and Overseer, Executors of the late Renowned Captain, etc.
GReat Names, and High Titles are always attended by a Train of Suitors and
Addressors; and therefore, worthy Sirs, when this Epistle Dedicatory comes to
Your Hands, pray do Your Selves and Us that Right, to accept it as no other
than a piece of Homage to the Executors of the late Honorable Captain. Great
Names did I say? Yes, Gentlemen Executors, Yours as Great as it is, is indeed
but a Name. And considering what it has cost you, give me leave to rebuke the
hard World you live in, for envying You even that poor Feather in Your Cap,
when You have almost paid as dear for the Honor, as the Court Fees for a
Baronet. Nay, to have a cautioning Epistle too from Swackly, with no less
Denunciation against You, than to command You to take Your High and Mighty Last
Will and Testament from off the Prerogative Roll, or to answer the Refusal in
Westminster Hall. Raze Your Records! Do they say! an Executorship no more than
an Olivers Knighthood. It Is a little of the severest, my Masters. Expunge Your
Title, and blot out Your Scutcheon, when it is all You have to show for Your
Money! However, since You have met such unkind Treatment from the rest of
Mankind, we are resolved to make You some little Reparation, viz. by prefixing
your Names to the History of our Deceased Hero, as a Monument to Your
Memories, which the rest of the malicious World denies You.

Nay Gentlemen, considering the severity of Your hard Fortune, pray excuse our
Zeal in giving You a little Advice how to retrieve Your Losses. Since you are
like to be such Sufferers by Your Executorships, e'ne recover all again by Your
Overseer and Church-Wardenship. Bring in Your next Parish Bill, charged with
such an overgrown Foundling laid at your Doors, and Attach the Money in Your
own Hands for Nursing it.

Your Humble, etc.

THE Second Part OF THE Notorious Impostor, etc.
THE general Reception the First Part of our Impostors Life has met, encourages
us to pursue the Subject, hoping that this further Narrative of his Adventures
will give the Reader no less Diversion. And that the Reader may be satisfied in
the Integrity and Truth of our History, we desire him to consider that he dyed
in the midway between fifty and sixty years, and having for a score of the last
of 'em, played at no other Game than cheating the World in all the Shapes and
Masks he could invent, we are so over furnished with matter of Fact, that we
have not the least need to load him with the least untruth; and therefore we
make this real Profession, that excepting a little Garniture, (that common
pardonable Liberty) the whole Feast we treat you with, has not one borrowed
Dish. Nay hundreds of his diminutive Frauds here in Town, as vulgar sharping
Tricks, we purposely omit, as too trivial and unworthy our Cognizance, and too
poor for your Entertainment.

And whereas his most notorious Delusions were his Marrying of so many Wives,
and the politic Artifices and Lures used by him to decoy those poor Creatures
into the Gripe of his Talons, were the grandest of his Rogueries, we have been
chiefly inquisitive into that particular walk of our Proteus, as the most
intriguing part of his Life, and indeed his Master piece of Projection, and
consequently the most divertive for your Reading.

In our first part we gave you at large three or four famous Amors of his, and
leaving off at his Innkeepers Daughter of Bathe, (where we frankly told you
that for want of farther Intelligence we over-leap'd some years) we think fit
to continue the prosecution of our History from the end of that Adventure, and
so fill up the vacancy occasioned by our then want of Information, with which
(from very good Authority and Credit) we have now better supplied our selves.

His continued good Luck at the Female Quarry succeeding so prosperously, he
has hardly snapt and gorged one, before he is for flying at a second.

Leaving therefore his last Wife (as before mentioned) the Innkeepers Daughter
to shift home, not only pennyless, but almost naked too, (as before at large)
it being then in the gay time of Summer, he buys him a very stately Gelding,
and prances down to Slough near Windsor. There taking a Genteel Lodging, and
throwing off his old now Hackney fied Disguise of the Country Gentleman, he
assumes the Character of a London Merchant; and though the little distance of
twenty Miles laid the Scene very nigh, and consequently (one would think)
exposed him to something more hazard than any of his former remoter
pretensions, however he is so flusht with success, and thereupon so hardy an
Enterprizer that he reckons upon Fortune, now entirely his own, as no less than
bound to his Cause, and her Smiles as secure, as himself her now darling
Favorite is fearless and undaunted.

His Tent therefore pitched at Slough for the best part of this Summers
Campaign, with sufficient of Gold, and what not, in his Pockets, he Contracts
(amongst other Country Acquaintance) a great intimacy with the Minister there.
And at length praising the good Air of that Country, and the sweetness he
tastes in the Conversation thereabouts, he desires the Parson (his now
Intimate) to inform him of some Purchase of fifty, sixty, or, rather than fail,
seventy pound per annum somewhere near there; if a good House upon it so much
the better; otherwise it will put him to some few hundreds extraordinary
Expense. If any such Purchase can be found, he shall be gratefully thankful to
him: For resolving to get him some Country Seat for a little Summers
Retirement from his Fatigue at London, he has not met that place in the World
that pleases him better. The Parson, kindly replied, That truly he did not yet
know of any such Purchase, but he would make it his Business to inquire, and
inform him accordingly.

It falls out here that he insinuates into the Conversation of a Country
Gentleman that had a very pretty Daughter, to whom he could give Five Hundred
Pound Portion. Through his Acquaintance with the Father he finds Opportunity
and Access to the Daughter, and in a little time professes downright Love. Now
besides a great deal of Wit and Sense in the Daughter, here was a very
Judicious and Sensible Man to her Father, and likewise a very Ingenious young
Gentleman her Brother, all three to be coped with; insomuch that the highest of
Prudence ought to be used to manage the Amuzement, and fence off all Curiosity
and Enquiry, which (considering how near London lay) might dash the whole Plot.
For that purpose he no sooner declares his Passion, but at the same time he
utterly abjures all pretensions to a Farthing of Portion, (if he may be so
happy as to succeed in his Love) that truly his Affairs and Circumstances are
far above so poor a Thought. Whatever her Fathers Goodness did or might have
intended for her, he is free to keep for the bettering the Fortune of so
hopeful an Heir of the Family as the young Gentleman her Brother: It is enough
that the possession of her dear Person is all his Ambition, and if after all
his prosperous Ventures both at Sea and Land, to Crown his Felicity he can but
carry this last dear Prize, he has all he wants in this World. Nor is Beauty
the only Charm he finds in his dear Mistress, her Virtue is her most
captivating Perfection. Alas, if he had sought either Face or Fortune, those
were to have been found nearer home, and possibly, where he was better known,
viz. in his walks upon the Exchange, and thereabouts, whatever personal wants
he had, however his other Qualifications would have made him no hard Access to
very considerable Fortunes. But as his Natural Jealousy of Town Beauties had
all along made him somewhat colder in the choice of a London Wife, he declares
that the vanquishing of his Heart was reserved only for some sweet Country
Innocence, which truly he had never met with till now.

This Declaration carries a very pleasing Face every way. Here, the Daughter
for her part has the Heart of a Rich Merchant of such vast Estate, that her
inconsiderable Portion is not worth his Acceptance, and consequently if she can
like the Man, she has all the Reason in the World to Embrace the Addresses of
so qualified a Suetor. Here are Father and Son likewise under no occasion of
complaint, for one is like to save Five Hundred Pound by the Bargain, and the
other to get as much. And therefore it is a Match they ought not to oppose. And
to put all suspicions out of their Head, what Reasons have they to mis-doubt
his being the Man he pretends, for he had then a pretty many years upon his
Back, and therefore unlikely to commit so boyish a folly to take the Luggage of
a Wife with never a Groat with her, unless he had wherewithal of his own, to
supply that Defect. Besides, here was all the Appearances possible both of
Honor and Honesty in his Daughters Inamorato, for more and above the daily
management of his Discourse, and his prompt Answers and Insight to all Affairs
in the World, which discovered a Person certainly of public Business, his Port
and Figure he made amongst them, together with the Grandeur of his way of
Living, confirmed their entire Belief and Confidence. And to conclude all, who
could suspect a Counterfeit that would Cheat for nothing.

During his Courtship he presented his Mistress with a very Rich Gold Watch,
and as he gained ground not only upon her, but went a great stroke with the
Father and Son, who were mighty inclineable to the Match; at last he pusht
home, and gained the Consent of all Parties concerned. The Father and Son were
of Opinion that they should all go to London, and the Wedding and Bedding work
should be all done there at his own House in the City. With all his Heart
replied the Spark, only one Inconvenience attended that Proposition. For it
would be impossible for him to Marry in London without dragging a great deal of
noise and trouble at his Heels. For unless he would disoblige more than a
Hundred Eminent Citizens, his particular Friends (which in Honor he could not
well do) he must be forced to make a public Wedding of it, and so draw on a
great deal of Ceremony and Hurry, which truly, (might he be chuser) did not
agree with his Inclination. Nevertheless, if they so pleased, he was ready to
acquiesce to their absolute Commands. But otherwise, for prevention of all
that, if he might direct, he would desire to divide his Blessings between the
Country and City, viz. have the happiness of Marrying her in the Morning at
Slough, and then have the Honor of their good Companies with him to London,
and there Bed her at his own House.

This appeared so highly reasonable, that three places are ordered to be taken
in the Windsor Coach to Morrow for London, and the Marriage to be Solemnized
Early before the Coach sets out. And accordingly our Lovers, who wake with the
Lark, are the next Morning devoutly joined together. When the Nuptial Rites
were performed, and a small Collation prepared before setting out, he publicly
again declared his Protestations against all pretenses to a Portion. However as
he had now taken the dearest Creature in the World into his Arms without any
such Claim or Pretension, and the longest day of his Life he should maintain
her to the highest Dignity and Grandeur of a City Merchants Lady, as much as if
she had brought him Thousands of her own to do it with, yet as perhaps there
might be some Wedding Garments, and other small matters wanting suitable to His
Bride, he durst not presume to make her any Present of that kind, lest possibly
it might be some little Indignity and Reflection upon Her own Honor in
accepting of any such offer; and therefore that part he left to her and her
Relations pleasure and discretion. His putting them in Mind of that necessary
point, appeared more like a piece of Gallantry than any thing else from him.
And thereupon both the Father and Bride take a whisper privately together, and
immediately the Closets and Cabinets were rumaged, and near a hundred Guineas
mustered up, and stowed in a small Casket to carry with her to London, to rig
her in all ample manner accordingly As they merrily Travel along, the Father,
Bride and Brother in the Coach, and the Bridegroom en cavalier Riding by,
taking a little start before 'em upon Hounslow-Heath, he comes back furiously
Galloping to the Coach side, and with much concern bids 'em have a care for he
was certain there were Highway-men before in the Road, and he much feared the
Coach would be Robbed. This put the Travelers into some small fright, and all
of them (for the Coach was full) into a very great Care how to preserve the small
Treasure they had about them. Nay Gentlemen, replies the Spark, for that small
matter I have about me, I fear not all the Thieves in Christendom to take from
me, for though I profess my self no Sword-man to Fight for it, yet I thank God,
I have a Horse has such a pair of Heels as I defy any Man in England
(especially upon this open Plain) to out-ride me. This Hint made the poor Bride
immediately Request his securing some small things of hers, and thereupon she
gave him her little Casket, and her Gold Watch to carry for her, withal
desiring him to speed off the fastest way he could, and tarry for the Coach at
the Red Lion in Brentford; Her prudent Example encouraged some other Passengers
in the Coach to desire him to do them the like Favor; one Lady in the Coach
desired him to secure a Diamond and a Gold Ring of hers, which she took from
her Finger; another Gentleman clapped a Purse of near twenty pieces of Gold into
his Silver Tobacco-box, and besought him to give it Sanctuary in his Pocket to
Brentford. In short, some other small matters were presently entrusted to his
Protection and Preservation; and so being desired to troop off with all speed,
and to meet 'em at the general Rendezvous aforesaid, our Merchant puts Spurs to
his Steed, and the Coach trundles leisurely after him.

At Brentford they arrive safely in some little time after, and making a halt
at the Red Lion, inquiry is made if a Gentleman so mounted, and so dressed was
there. No; answer was made, no such Man was there; but upon examining the Horse
and the Rider they had described, that very Gentleman, about half an hour ago
was seen to Ride almost full speed through the Town toward London.

The Bridegroom so strangely out riding his Stage, put the whole Company into
some little Consternation, but the Bride more especially, it being a matter of
no mean surprise to her to have a Bridegroom so unkind, or so frolicksome at
least, to Ramble away from her on her very Wedding Day in so odd a manner. A
great many several Discants were made upon it by the whole Company; but as all
of 'em happened to be some small Neighbors to Slough, and had either converst
with this Honorable Merchant during his Abode there, or at least had heard of
his Fame, it was concluded of all Hands 'twas only intended as a Jest, and so
they all moved on toward London, not doubting in the least but to find it so.

When they arrived at London, the young Lady as Guarrantee for her Bridegroom,
though she could not well invite 'em with Convenience that Night, besought all
their good Companies to Morrow at Dinner with her at her House in Limestreet,
there to call their Trustee to an Account, and to laugh out an Afternoon with
her upon their Traveling Adventures.

Having thus dismissed their Fellow Travelers; a Hackney Coach is taken to drive
to Lime-street. When they came there, and such a Merchants House was asked for,
a Name very like it was found in that Precinct, but both the Gentleman and
House they inquired for, were utterly Strangers to all the Inhabitants round,
and neither that Night nor next whole Day could give 'em any Tale or Tidings of
her new Husband. However in all this utter Darkness, as she is left in
Ignorance, she has the Comfort to be left in Innocence too, for thanks to her
kind Stars there was no Consummation in the Case, as much a Wise as she is, she
is a Virgin Bride at least, and as much cheated as they have all been, our
young Spouse has the satisfaction of that single happy Escape to counter
balance all the rest of her Losses. What Reparation our fair Promiser made to
her Fellow Sufferers in the Coach our Story mentions not, but the Father, Son,
and Bride returning by weeping Cross, they found this Farewell Epistle at their
Arrival at Slough.

My Sweet Bride,
AY too sweet, God wot, to be so lost. Had we but consummated, my Chicken, had
I but got the Virgin Toy, signed and sealed, my Sweeting, it had been a Prize
worth all the other Treasure. But my hard Fate had otherwise decreed: And I
must e'ne sit down by my losing Bargain. But my Dear, notwithstanding my abrupt
parting, prithee do not conceive hard Thoughts, nor fancy me a Masquerader; for
though my House is removed from Lime-street, upon my honest word I am a true
Merchant, and have hooked in my Venture. Pray Comfort your Condoling Fellow
Travelers, and assure 'em their Movables I took into my protection are all
very safe, and that I shall take all possible care in performing my Trust in
keeping 'em so. And now Child, if thy Defeat of a Bed fellow should set thee a
Gog for a new Husband, for thy Consolation let me tell thee that I am fairly
drawn off to make room for a happier Successor; and at thy next Prayers for a
Man in thy Tables to fill up the Blot I leave open; thank Heaven thou have
escaped so well, for thou have received the first Mercy I ever showed thy Sex
before; and so Dear Widdow'd Turtle, farewell


This Adventure so luckily concluded, our Wise-Merchant takes a little
Recreation in London, and then tired with Ease and Idleness, he thinks it high
time to look out for new Game. His Rambles have hitherto mostly lain Westward,
and the Success he has gotten there, invites him to try his farther Fortune a
Field the same Read. Down therefore his Galloper and he set out, and meeting
nothing in the way worthy his Achievement, he fixes at last at the Town of
Wells. Here he is a Country Gentleman again his Name Bowyer, Brother to Sir
Charles Bowyer. This Town happily afforded a Boarding School for young Girls,
where the Fair Recluses generally are not altogether Nuns Flesh, and where
notwithstanding the watchful Oversight of those Guardian Dragons the
Governesses and Super-Intendants, Love too often leaps the Pale, and many a
bold Jason very luckily moves off with a Golden Fleece.

At this Castle it is resolved our next Batteries shall be levelled; only all
the hardest work here is the making his Approaches. For that purpose he
inquires first, who and what the Fair Inhabitants are, and the like; where he
is soon informed of several considerable Fortunes amongst 'em; but most of 'em
either under Guardianship or Parents, and though allied to pretty considerable
Effects, the Lash is in Hucksters Hands. The carrying the Damsel, will not
finger the Gold, and our Business being only to snap and away, a lighter Cargo
than those unweildy Portions does our Job. And accordingly he discovers one
just sizable for his Turn. A Tradesman's Daughter, her small Portion about 180
l. and all in her own Hands, or at least in her own power, her Parents and
Friends all Dead, and therefore at her own disposal, and likewise something of
the Elderlyest for a School-miss, being indeed about 20 years of Age.

It Is resolved then to fix here; And, for a handsome Initiation, his first
Attacque is only from his Eyes; he sees her first at Church, where his whole
Devotion is so intent upon no other Object, that he gives her occasion to
observe him. His Gentile Equipage, and, in a Stranger too, might very well draw
some Eyes in a Country Congregation; and this young Devotees were not so
wholly tied to her Prayer Book, but hers might rove a little: she no sooner saw
him, but she met a very Passionate and Long wishing-Look returned her: if her
Curiosity peeped a second time, she found him in the same posture, his Eye
never off of her. And this he continued Forenoon and Afternoon, in such a
manner, that it was impossible, even for Indifference it self, not to Remark
him.

Next morning he makes some means to get the Company and Ear of one of the
Sub-Governants of the School, a Matronly kind of a Tutouress. He cannot tell
what Malleable Metal she is made of, and how far she may be tempted to betray a
little Trust. However he resolves to try. And if she be to be shaken, at least
he will use the most Persuasive Arguments to Assail her.

Accordingly, having first begged the Favor of a full Hearing, he begins to lay
open his Case in manner following. First, he discovers his Birth and Quality, a
Brother of the Honorable Sir Charles Bowyer. Secondly, Though a younger
Brother, yet provided with a Plentiful Patrimony to keep up the Port of a
Gentleman. Then, that yesterday at Church, he had seen the only Sweetness upon
Earth that he could truly Love: That it was some Extraordinary Destiny that had
brought him thither, to lose his Heart to so Lovely a Creature: and then
telling his Name (which his Love had made him inquire into) the present Suit he
had, was, to obtain the Conversation of that Sweet Gentlewoman, that he might
have the favorable opportunity of declaring his Passion to her; which Access,
understanding the strictness of the Family in which she now lived, and under
what Confinement she lay, he had no hopes of accomplishing, but through her
Means: and, that if she would vouchsafe to be the kind Instrument in gaining
him his Request, he should not only be bound to her the longest day of his
Life, but likewise make her a Gratification suitable to so signal an
Obligation. The Gravity of our Tutoress seemed a little Surprised at this
Motion; But, before she could make any Reply, he continued his Supplication to
her; By telling her, That for Heavens sake she would believe his Intentions to
the young Lady were nothing but Honorable, that had his Designs been so
wicked, as to aim at, or overreach any young Fortune in the House, as such he
understood there were several there, he should be the greatest of Villains.
But, that Love, and only Love, was his Design, was manifest in his Addresses
to this young Gentlewoman, who (as he was informed) was but a Tradesman's
Daughter, of little or no Fortun^ (...) of at least very inconsiderable to a
Person of his Circumstances and Birth; and therefore she had all the Reason in
the World to believe him a Person of Honor and Integrity; and 'twas as such he
desired her to serve him in the Request he had made her. She hearing him
protest so heartily, and profess so honorably, could not but be a little
attentive to so Reasonable a Suit. But being her self a Woman of Principle, and
naturally faithful to her Trust, she could not forbear making him this Answer:
Sir (says she) you have the least Reason in the World to seek my Assistance in
this matter; for if you are that Lover, and that Gentleman you profess your
self, your Quality and Pretensions to this young Woman are sufficient to make
your own way to her, without wanting my help. What need has a Gentleman of your
Fortune and Honor to seek to a poor Servant as I am to introduce you so
meanly, as a private Suitor to this young Maid, when you have it in your own
Power to make a more Public Declaration of your Love; and undoubtedly, so
Qualified as you are, have all Encouragement to hope for Success? If you please
therefore, I Will tell the Governess, and when she shall have examined all things
requisite to the discharge of that honest Duty as the Tuition and Care she has
undertaken shall require of her; she will be so far from opposing your Access,
that certainly you may expect all the fair Reception your own heart can wish.
This Answer being not the present point we must gain, our Squire (before
prepared for a Reply) seemed extremely pleased with her for her Fidelity. That
truly she was highly to be commended for so Conscientious a Scruple, as to the
admitting of a Stranger, as he was, to any thing under her Guardianship. And
that truly the Advice she had given him was but very Reasonable; And that if he
should make open Love to this young Gentlewoman, he might possibly have hopes
of succeeding. And really it was the only Course he would take, but for one
only Obstacle, which was, that though indeed, as a younger Brother, he had
above 300 l. per annum already in good Land of Inheritance, a Competence
sufficient to maintain a Family indifferently well; yet as he was next Brother,
and indeed as the presumptive Heir to Sir Charles, an unmarryed Man of
Thousands a year, and was at present transacting with him about a considerable
Addition to his Estate, and other very eminent Friendships expected from him,
he was under an invincible necessity of making an Amor of this kind, one of
the greatest Secrets in the World, lest his Marrying so inconsiderably might
lose him his Brother's Favor, and thereby defeat so advantageous an
Expectation. Not but he Loved the young Creature enough to run a thousand times
greater hazards for obtaining so sweet a Blessing: but, however, What Folly and
Prodigality would it be, to expose so main a part of his Well-being to so
dangerous a Venture, when there was so little occasion for it? For he, could he
reach so great a Blessing, as to obtain her for his Bride, yet it would be
worth his while to make both his Woing and Marriage, for some time, an absolute
Secret, for so valuable a Consideration. And he, that resolved to enter into
Matrimony, was, in all Duty, bound to take the best measures to make a Married
Life comfortable, by making the best provision to support it with Credit and
Reputation. And therefore 'twas, that he was forced to supplicate her private
Assistance in the Affair, which she could not well blame, under so important a
Circumstance; and therefore stealing a brace of Guineas into her Hand, he once
more entreated her to gain him some Admittance to the young Ladys conversation,
as silently as possibly her Goodness could contrive. I cannot tell, whether the
Arguments or the Gold, or both together prevailed, but to shorten the Discourse
'twas agreed that Evening in Hour after Sun set that he should come to the
Gard^n Back gate, which was accordingly done.

And not to tire the Reader with the Narration of the Wooing, let it suffice
that he obtained three or four private Meetings, and a little Courtship well
managed prevailed and conquered. By the Assistance of this Matronly Confident,
the Business is concluded, and the Girl steals out one Morning and Marries him.
He had not been long Married, but continuing the old plea of silence and
secresy so necessary on his Brothers Account, he gets her to call in her small
Portion, for her own use, making it his free Wedding Gift, all to be disposed
in buying her Clothes, and the like. And so makes all speed to London with her.
At London he provides her a very Genteel Lodging, still leaving all her Portion
in her own Custody. He had not kept her Company two days in Town, but he comes
home in great haste and surprise, telling her that his Brother by some Accident
or other had heard of his Marriage. But as 'twas impossible he should know what
Woman he had Married, he had one favor to beg of her which she must not deny
him, which was to pretend her self to be a young Devonshire Lady of such a
Great Family, and such a Fortune: By this means he should win his brothers
Heart, and hasten that additional settlement, and the other favors he expected
from him; and though indeed it was a little piece of Fraud, which truly he was
never guilty of before in all his whole Life, yet considering the Advantage so
innocent a Deceit might gain 'em, he conjured her by all their Loves to join
with him in it, and carry on the Mask till he had gained his point. The poor
Creature soon persuaded consents to his Req^est, promising her acting the best
part she could in the Disguise, since it was his Pleasure and Command to have
it so.

Having obtained her concurrence in it, he tells her these Lodgings were too
mean for a Woman of her Birth, and therefore he would presently take her a fine
House at Greenwich four Miles out of Town, and have it furnished suitable to his
and her Quality.

At Greenwich a House is instantly provided; and what by the pretensions of
this great Match, he strikes in with a confiding Upholster for a Rich Bed,
Tapestry Hangings, and very sumptuous Furniture in most ample manner. Nay, he
carries it on so far as to gain Credit for several Hogsheads of Wine, which
were likewise wafted down to Greenwich. The young Wife all this while seeing
him make such splendid Provision for her, never in the least suspected him for
less than high Quality, and indeed was utterly ignorant that all this Gallantry
was taken up upon Trust, and mostly raised upon the noise of her vast
Devonshire Portion that was very speedily to pay for all.

After this Country House was thus Richly set out, pretending Business one
Morning early to London, he returns again between Ten and Eleven in great
haste, that truly he had occasion for about an Hundred Pound, and having laid
out more Cash than his Returns from his Estate in the Country could at present
supply him, he desired her to accommodate him with that Sum out of her Money,
which in a Fortnight at farthest should be made her up again. The poor Girl
very readily gave him the Keys of her Closet and her Cabinet, desiring him to
take what he wanted. Immediately he goes to the Treasury, and having not
leisure to stay to tell out the Sum, he took the whole Bag, which in Silver and
Gold was about 140 l. which he would tell over at London, and bring back the
Remainder, whither he desired her Company along with him in the Boat that staid
to carry him back. Yes, with all her heart, if he would please to stay till she
dressed her self, being then only in her Morning gown. No, by no means, he
replied, no matter for dressing her self, she was well enough dressed for that
little Company she should see to day. And so without farther Ceremony she trips
into the Boat with him, and so away to London.

When he came there, and had fixed her at her Old Lodgings, he desired her to
have a little patience till his return from Lombard-strees, where he was going
to pay this Money: but before he went, giving her a kind Kiss or two. Lord, my
Dear (says he) this plain Wedding-Ring upon thy Finger is too poor for My Wife!
I am going to pay this Money to a Goldsmith, and prithee give me thy Ring along
with me, and I Will put a Diamond into it.

The Ring upon so good an Account was presently delivered him, and a very low
Courtzy dropped him for the promised Diamond. Away goes Husband, Money, and Ring,
and the Wife staying with her old Landlady, waits for the return of her kind
Spouse; After a great deal of patience pretty well tired, and many a sigh to
pass away time, Evening at last draws on, and no Husband appears. To Greenwich
she dares not return, it is now too late at night, and too dangerous traveling
so unseasonably. And so taking a soft Bed, but a hard Night's rest in Town, she
gets up early the next morning for Greenwich, where instead of Husband or
House, she finds the Furniture, Bedding, nay the very Wine in the Cellar all
carried off, and so neither Husband, Money, nor Clothes, but the loose Undress
she had upon her back; she is left to a whole Deluge of Lamentation, and the
King's Highway fair open for her to steer back to Wells, or what other
Hospitable Coast she could find in the wide World before her.

This Marriage-Trade thriving so well with him, he left it not off till he
arrived at the number of 18 Wives; in which several various Cheats and
Disguises were practiced according to Time, Place and Circumstance. At
Kedderminster he past for Sir Charles Bowyer's Brother again, and there married
an Inn-keeper's Daughter, from whom he hooked out several Pounds, besides
spunging upon her Father: where he continued a very considerable time; and
wrought himself into that entire Credit with his Father-in-law, that when some
of his Neighbors made bold to ask him, How he could repose so much Confidence
in a mere Stranger; and after his Daughter had been so long married to him, to
make no Inquiry into him all this while? Inquiry! (he replied very briskly)
trouble not your heads about that Business. I am very well satisfied in him,
and know well enough what he is. His Wit and Breeding, and a hundred other
genteel Qualities, sufficiently assure me: Nay a Gentleman he must be most
certainly, for I have observed him, he will never dine without a Bottle of Wine.

In Holbourn he courted a Rich Vintner's Widow (but there he was a little
higher advanced into the Honorable Family of the Bowyers, for then he was Sir
Charles himself) and so far tickled her out of her small Reason, by the high
sound of a Ladyship, that the Wedding-cloaths were making. Nay he took her
along with him to a Goldsmiths in Cheapside, to bespeak a very large quantity
of Plate, amounting to about 200 l. No sooner did he enter the Goldsmith's
Shop, but he kindly shook him by the hand, and gave him so many familiar
How-de-yees, as if he had been his long and intimate Acquaintance; where
bespeaking so much Plate, and such a Coat of Arms to be engraved upon it, the
day was set when it was to be called for. Before that day he was to receive 600
l. from his Steward in the Country, which he had sent for up to pay for this
Plate, and other necessary Nuptial Habilements. But the Day drawing on, a
Letter comes up by the Post from his Steward, intimating, That amongst all his
Tenants he could at present raise but 150 of the 600 l. he desired, and truly
that small Pittance he did not think sit to return up, till he could make it a
larger Sum, etc. This Letter was received in his Mistresses presence, and the
Knight so enraged at his Steward's neglect, that he sell into a very great
passion to be so defeated of his Expectation, especially at so critical a
Juncture. The kind Widow seeing him so concerned, desired him not to be
troubled at it, for if his present Occasions required, she was very willing to
furnish him with it; and in fine, lent him 200 Guinea's to setch home the
Plate. But neither was the Plate sent home, nor Knight or Guinea's ever seen
afterward. The Widow somewhat impatient, trips away to the Goldsmith to
inquire if he had been there, and being answered in the negative, she asked him
if he were not acquainted with Sir Charles? What Sir Charles? Sir Charles
Bowyer that bespoke the Plate. Truly not he; for to his best knowledge, he
never saw him before that day. How, replies the Widow, never saw him before,
when he knew you so well, talked so familiarly with you, discoursed of so many
Affairs relating to your self, that I durst have sworn he had known you this
seven years, and dealt in at least a thousand pounds with you. Yes, replied the
Goldsmith, all this familiarity he expressed, which as much surprised me as it
does you: But it was none of my business to inquire of a Customer how he came
so acquainted with my Concerns, or why he treated me so courteously at first
sight; He laid me down Earnest in part for my Plate, and if it is your pleasure
to pay me the remainder, the Plate is forth coming. But when, or where the
Gentleman can be found forth coming, that you know better than I: for as I told
you, he is a Person I never saw before, nor after.

To prosecute the full Relation of all his Wooings and Marriages, would be
dwelling too long upon one kind of Subject, and therefore not so divertising to
the Reader; for which Reason we have selected only these, and the others
recited in the First Part of our History, as most entertaining of all his
Amors.

After he had accomplished near a Score of Marriages, he neatly counterfeited a
Bill for 700 l. drawn upon an Eminent Citizen; and so well managed all Conduct
and Matters relating to it, that he received the Money. But what with his
Wives, and this last grand Cheat, he began to think little England would soon
be too hot for him. And therefore buying three very gallant Horses, and
Equipage and Accoutrements suitable, he got him cross the Herringpond, and went
a Volunteer to the Duke of Monmouth, then before Mastricht: His business here
was more Flourish and Bravado, than any great Feats of War, any Martial Wonders
he intended to perform. In Flanders he made a pretty long Campaign, for he
stirred not from thence till all his Money was spent; and at length, when his
dwindling stock was so small, that his very Horses heads grew a little too big,
for a new supply he converted 'em into ready Money; and when that last stake
was almost run out, and he had just enough left to Land him safe upon English
Ground again, he returned for London; and there setting in again at his old
play of Wiving, he Wooes a Parsons Daughter of 500 l. Portion, and by virtue of
the great Name of Sir Charles Bowyer, and other winning Arts he used, he
Married her, and gained so far upon her Father, that he got One Hundred pound
in part of the Five, into his clutches. But not satisfied with that modicum,
but resolving to gripe the whole remainder too, he takes a House for her at
Hampstead, where he lived some time very kindly with her, still plying her
Father with all the softest and tenderest management, to hook in the 400 l.

But here, as Fortune will not always smile, a turn of Fate falls somewhat hard
upon him; his Ludlow, and some other of his old Wives, had unhappily got him in
the Wind, and with a full Cry run him down, and Housed him in Newgate.

Here it was (as before mentioned in our first Part) that six of his Wives
appeared against him, and at his Trial he pleaded Guilty to those Six and
Twelve more. For which being Convicted, and the Law not reaching to his Life,
the Judges were pleased so far to commiserate the unhappy poor women he had
undone, but especially the Parson's Daughter, that they gave her leave to lay
an Action upon him of 5000 l. by virtue of which, being still detained a
Prisoner, he removed himself to the King's Bench; Here being kept within the
Goal, he behaved himself so winningly, that he gained some favor with the then
Marshal, and had now and then the liberty to peep abroad. Improving and
advancing in the farther good graces of the Marshal, he obtained at last that
extraordinary credit from him, that himself and Three or Four more Prisoners
were one day permitted to take a little Ramble to a merry-making, some little
way out of Town; which lucky slip of their Necks from the Collar, they took
that wise care to make so good use of, that neither our Sir Charles, nor his
fellow Travelers, the Master or Mates, ever returned again. This escape made
such a clamor, that 100 l. reward was set upon his head, if to be caught in
England. But this pursuit soon cooled; for upon the change of Marshal, which
soon followed, the Cause dropped, and he had full freedom to creep from his
Covert, and turn Practioner at his old Craft again; his deliverance being in a
manner complete, and his 5000 l. and the rest of his load discharged.

After his Heels were at liberty, his Pocket run but low; and he was forced to
truckle to little shifts to put him in stock again. His Pranks are scarce to be
numbered, nor dare we pretend to trace 'em successively; and therefore we shall
not tie our selves up to Time and Order.

For one of his common Feats, he got him a large Seal-Ring, and several other
Gold Rings, all variety, as Plain, Mourning, and Enameled, value together about
4 l. with these, by consederacy, he would sham an Arrest upon himself by a
couple of Marshal's Men, and being hurried into some Alchouse, he would call
for the Landlord, pretend himself a Tradesman, and Housekeeper as far as
Wapping, Stepney, or some such remote place; then opening his Grievance, that
he was Arrested for 40 or 50 s. and being too far from home to send for Money,
he desired the Landlord to carry his Rings to the next Goldsmith, and see what
he valued them at: The Landlord returns with the Rings, and tells him, the
Goldsmith would give something above 3 l. for them; upon this, he desires the
Landlord to pleasure him with 50 s. upon that pledge, and he would come himself
or send (by such a Token) the Money the next day, and redeem them. The Landlord
ready to aid a man in his distress, in so reasonable a request, Lends the
Money, whilst instead of the Gold Rings, he puts the Legerdemain, and leaves
him a set of Brass ones well Gilt, shaped, Enameled, etc. to a tittle, in every
point resembling the true Rings; and worth about Half-a-Crown.

One day about high noon he came to the Poultrey-Compter Gate, wanting a
Sergeant to execute an Attachment for him: so giving him his Instructions and
Fee, he desires him and his Yeoman to follow him to such an Alehouse in
Leaden-Hall-Street, where he would wait for 'em. To the Alehouse he goes, and
takes a Lower Room which looked into the Street, where calling for a Tankard of
Ale, and soon after spying the Bum and Follower approaching, he whips out of
his Codpiece a Pewter Tankard, slaps the Drink into it, and returns the Silver
one into his Breeches. As soon as they entered, and asked him for the
Gentleman, he told them he would cross the way, and see if he had dined yet,
and come over, and call 'em immediately to do their Office. Out he trips, and
there being a Thorough fair over the way, neatly conveighs himself off; till at
last, the Sergeant waiting beyond his patience, calls for the Landlord, and
desires him to fill the Tankard again. Fill the Tankard (quoth the Host) what
Tankard! This is none of mine. My Tankard's a Silver one. How, a Silver Tankard
(replies our Mancatcher.) This was all the Tankard in the Room since he came
there. That wont serve turn: Their Comerogue and Confederate that had left 'em,
had a Tankard of him, price 6 l. 10 s. and Tankard, or so much Money must be
found before they parted. A great many hard words rose on both sides; but in
fine, the Attacher himself was now under Attachment, and moved not off, till a
Reckoning of 6 l. an Angel, and some odd Pence, was discharged.

At Woolwich he pretended to be a Doctor of Physic, and professed an
infallible Remedy he had for the Gout. A Gentleman, an Inhabitant there, long
afflicted with that Distemper, retained him as his Physician: But his grand
Receipt requiring a Fortnights Preparation, he squeezes some Money out of him
for Materials to the Operation, and puts several Earthen Pots, with the
pretended Ingredients, for Fourteen Days under Ground, against which time the
expected Effects were to be produced. But it so unhappily fell out, that before
the Elixir came to perfection, he was arrested by the Name of Bowyer, and
thrown into the Marshalsea. The Fourteen Days expired, and the Doctor in
durance, the Patient made bold to dig for the Treasure, and examine the Pots;
where, to his great Satisfaction, in each Pot he found about half a dozen
straggling Maggots, which indeed was their whole Contents: But what Cures they
wrought, our History mentions not.

Between five and six Years since, he tries one Touch more at Marrying, but
truly not so high a Flier as formerly, he contents himself to lay Siege to Nan,
the Cook-Maid at the Castle-Tavern at Fetter-Lane End; and to attack her in no
less formidable a Figure than the old Sir Charles still. So Worshipful a
Matrimonial Suitor (you may imagine) tickled her not a little, for the Title of
a Ladyship could not but make a strange rumbling in a Kitchin-stuff-pot. The
poor Girl was soon inclinable to listen to such potent Love. Our Sir Charles
makes quick work on it; and though her kind Master and Mistress daily laughed at
her for fancying him in earnest with her, Our Lover was so well furnished with
Rhetoric to set her to Rights again, and so absolutely persuaded her that he
meant nothing more than to marry her, that at last she contrived to feign her
self sick, whilst her Knight, under pretense of a Condoling Visit, was to steal
her down Stairs, and march off with her. This Plot taking effect, he kept her
out ten or twelve Days; in which time he wheadled her out of all the Money she
could raise in the World, being about the Sum of Twelve Pounds: But when he
had drained all he could get from her, at last he began to grow so cold to her,
that he denied her one Morning a Pennyworth of Milk; which being no longer able
to bear, she returned to her Master with a very sad Heart, much wailing the
Barbarity she had received, and the Ruin she suffered. At the Return of poor
Nancy, the Knight was flown; and though unsuspected before, now her Master and
Mistress with good Reason believed him a Cheat; and being concerned for
vindicating the Injuries of their Servant, they dogged him at last into
White-Friars; and fetching him out thence by a Constable and Warrant, he was
committed to Jayl, tried for an Impostor, and stood in the Pillory before their
Door.

One very notorious Cheat, was much in use with him, within a 12 Month last
past. For instance, he comes one Morning to an eminent Tavern in Holborn near
Hatton Garden end, his Habit a plain Countryman, with a Oyl-skin Hat, a shabby
Perriwig, a large buff Belt round his Waste a pair of Boots without Tops, a
Whip in his hand, and a hundred Pound bag under his Arm: Here he bargains for a
Hogs head of Sack to be sent into the Country; whilst the Carman is loading his
Wine, he pretends very urgent Business he had to do, before the Carrier goes
out of Town; insomuch that he cannot well stay, and pay for his Wine; for which
reason, he desires the Master to lay up his bag of Money for him, till he can
call in the Afternoon, and reckon with him; but first taking out (for a blind)
a handful of Money, between thirty or forty Shillings for present occasion, he
seals up the Bag again, and leaves the rest in the Vintner's hands.

And now resolved to play the good husband, and do two Jobs with one trouble,
whilst the Car is loading, he goes to a Linnen-Drapers in Newgate-street, where
he buys a parcel of Linen near 30 l. and as the Carman comes by, he packs up
the Linen, and mounts it into the Car. Here pretending his old haste, with
another hundred pound Load under his Arm, he plays the former Prank, and gives
the Draper the Bag too. Now no Countryman coming to reckon (as promised) they
both make bold the next day to unseal their Treasure, and see what Security
they had in their custody; when to their great surprise, they found a parcel of
new Halfpence stowed round the Bag, with a lesser Bag in the belly on it,
filled with fragments of old Iron. This Prank was hitherto pretty well carried,
but Fortune of late Years a meet Jade to him, had a very unhappy After-game to
play him: For the Vintner and Draper happening to meet together, to condole
Losses and confer Notes, they chanced to remember; that one of the Carman's
Steeds, was a remarkable pie-ball'd Horse. Hereupon making inquiry amongst the
Fraternity of Carmen, by the Marks and Tokens of that Horse, they found out the
very Man that drove off the Chattels; who what by Threats and other persuading
Arguments, they prevailed to lead 'em at last to a House in the Mint, where the
Wine and the Drapery were both lodged. Here they made a shift to recover the
whole Prize, excepting about five Pounds worth already embezell'd, being pretty
well content to sit down by no greater loss.

In much the like manner, and much such a Habit, he came to a Cutlers in
Fleet Street, and leaving such another Bag there, under pretense of showing
some Swords to his Master at a Coffee-house hard by, he carried off three
silver Swords.

For the same Feat of activity, he came to a Coffee-house adjacent to Pater
Noster-Row, where the Master of the House was a Tailor, whose Company and
Advice he entreated, desiring him to go along with him to some of the Mercers
in the Row, to look upon some rich Silks which he wanted, for a country
Gentleman's (his Master) and a young Ladies Wedding clothes; the Tailor in
kindness, handed him once or twice to several Shops: But one Morning, leaving
his Bag behind him at the Coffee-house, he went alone to a Mercers, a corner
Shop in the Row; where he cheapning some rich Stuffs, flowr'd with Silver and
Gold, a Haberdasher of small Wares passing by, and happening to set Eye upon
our Chapman, made bold to lay hands upon him, and carry him off to the Cock in
Amen-corner; his Charge against him was, for leaving him the Bag too for about
thirty Pounds in small Wares. But noise and crowd coming about him, fearing
that other Complaints might appear against him, and so load him heavier than
possibly he might be able to stand under, our Haberdasher wisely resolving to
take care of no body but himself, danced him from house to house, till his
country Chapman could raise Effects to make him satisfaction; and so having
with much ado, hooked in his own Bet, he turned him loose again, for the other
open mouths against him, to take as fair a hunt for him, as he had done. After
this mortifying Adventure, whether out of a principle of Modesty, a Virtue not
often in fashion with him, or some other forgetfulness, the Bag left in the
Coffee-house was never called for from that day to this; and keeping of it
about three months sealed, at last they ventured to break it open, in which
they found about six Shillings in new Halfpence, and a lesser Bag filled with
pieces of old Iron, a great deal of which, as memorials of his Renown, they
have kept by 'em for Relics.

About the Year 1672. he pretended to a great Estate in Northamptonshire, and
carried it on so far, as to borrow four hundred Pounds upon the Mortgage of it,
of a Hampshire Gentleman. At Hannington likewise in Hampshire he married a
Ministers daughter, and entered into Bond and Judgment of a Thousand Pound to
Jointure her in fifty Pound a year, by which he got Two hundred and fifty
Pound, out of her Father, as part of her Portion.

In Piccadilly about three Years since, he went to a Horse-Coursers to buy a
Horse, and after he had bargained for, and bought him, he desired to back him
to try his Goings, and rode off with him, before the Horse-Courser's face, and
sold him in the Country for four Pounds.

To conclude with his Frauds and Impostures, (besides the grandest and boldest
of 'em all, That he left the World in,) he was charged with one Cheat after his
very Death. Amongst the numerous Visitants that came to see him that Week that
he lay above Ground, it happened that a Man and his Wife, living at
White-Chapel, pressing in amongst the Crowd of Gazers, immediately remembered
his Face; and seeing the Clothes there which he wore before he died, he
presently owned himself the Tailor that made 'em; and that they were not only
unpay'd for still, but likewise he was cozened out of 'em by one of the lewdest
Shams that ever was put upon Man. Upon which, he repeated the whole Story at
length, viz. That about Bartholomewtide last the now Deceased came over Night,
and took a pretty handsome Lodging at White-Chapel, pretending himself newly
come up by the Stage-Coach, out of the Country, his Name Bowyer; and desiring
his Landlord to help him to a Tailor, 'twas his ill Luck to be the Man that was
sent for. When he came to him, he found him in a threadbare black Coat, and
very much in want of Repair. He had not talked with him long, before he was
desired to take measure of him; and whilst that was doing, up came a Footman
in a gentile Livery, and paying him much Respect and Reverence, told him that
Sir John, his Master, desired his Company at Dinner. At Dinner! (answers our
threadbare Spark,) No, 'Faith; he must excuse me: I am not in a pickle (Pox of
my Dog-Rogue) to stir out of Doors. No, Sirrah; these Rags upon my Arse are no
Dress for Dining at White Hall. And so, pray, go tell your Master, that I am
forced to keep my Chamber at present, for I have been robbed since I saw him
last Night. The Foot boy presently asked him, By whom? By a young Son of a
Whore, a Footman of mine, the Devil go with him. And so desiring the Boy to
carry the whole Relation to his Master, he tells him very formally, That
sending his Boy last Night to the Carrier's for his Trunk, in which were two
Suits of Clothes, all his Linen and Point, and fifty Pieces of Gold, the Rogue
was run away with it: And though this old Suit upon his Back served him well
enough to come to Town in, Sir John must pardon him if he durst not stir out
till he was a little better rigged. The Footman making a long Scrape, and
departing with his Message, our Country-Squire gave a hundred hard Names to
this Runaway Man of his, threatening a great deal of Vengeance if ever he
caught him; for Hanging was too good for him. Whilst this Alarm held, there
came another Visitant to our Esquire, and told him, He hoped he had drawn it up
to his Liking. So the Man producing a Paper the Esquire took it, and read it;
which was a long Advertisement to be put into the Gazette, describing the Marks
of his Man, and five Pounds Reward to him that should apprehend him. So having
read it out, and approved of the wording of it, he put his Hand in his Pocket,
and gave the Fellow ten Shillings to pay for Entering of it, giving him a strict
Charge to be sure of getting it into the next Gazette. After this, he began to
treat about his Clothes, which he desired might be neither rich, nor gaudy; for
he was past those Vanities. The Tailor accordingly, by next Day at Noon, brings
him his Clothes, his Bill between five and six Pounds, which, truly, he must be
forced to stay for till next Week; for the Villain and Thief his Man, had put
him out of money; but he had sent down last night by the Post for new Supplies,
and by the middle of next Week, should be furnished, and pay him very
thankfully. The poor Tailor, not in the least doubting his money, was very well
satisfied, for he was sufficiently convinced, that he was a Gentleman of
Fashion, and hoped to find a good Customer of him. But no sooner were the
Accoutrements upon his Back, and he had now liberty (no disgrace to his
Gentility) to walk by Daylight; his first Progress is down to Sir John's at
Whitehall, who was belike, so fond of his Company, that he would never let him
find the way home again; for from that Hour, neither his White-chapel Landlord
nor Tailor, could ever set Eye of him.

And now to give him a little farther Visit at the Baker's (the Hospitable Roof
under which he finished his last Masterpiece) and lend the Reader some few
farther Observations than those our First Part has furnished; more and above
his own Personal performance in that grand Masquerade of the pretended Captain
Wickham, Several Accidents both before and after his Death contributed much to
corroborate and support the Impostor. To instance one remarkable one; his kind
Landlord sending for the worthy Dr. F -- to take care of him in his Sickness,
he asked the Doctor if he did not know him, or had never seen him before; which
the Doctor (as with good reason) not well recollecting, our Patient was pleased
to remember him, that he had the honor to Dine with him such a day, in such a
year, when the Doctor was Mayor of Gloucester. Now it happening that that very
day the true Captain Wickham had really Dined with him at Gloucester: the
Doctor who was not much acquainted with the true Captain, and thereby not ready
to Distinguish Faces, yet very well remembering such a worthy Gentleman one of
his Honorable Guests that day in his Majoralty, was very ready (upon so
convincing a Circumstance) to swallow the juggle, and to acknowledge him the
Person he presented, which very much influenced the Credulity of the Family.

The Monday, the next day after his death, a Noble P -- r attended by several
Persons of Honor, came to see the Body, and was so satisfied in his being his
Country Neighbor, the true Captain Wickham, that he questioned the Family why
the Coroner did not sit upon him; upon which being answered, that such a
Physician took care of him, and that besides, the honesty of the House in which
he dyed, gave no occasion for any such reflecting enquiry into his death; his
Lordship was pleased to reply, that if he was not Murdered, he must certainly
die Mad, it being impossible that in his right senses he should give such
extravagant Legacies to mere Strangers; nor would his Lordship be satisfied,
'till he consulted both his Bodily and Ghostly Physician, his Minister, and the
Doctor, about his outward and inward Man, etc. Another very confirming
Credential happened. viz. A grave Citizen of London, a near Neighbor to our
Capital Cathedral, who likewise inspected the Corpse, was pleased to say, he had
Fifty Guineas in his Fob, and would make them an Hundred, with any Man, that it
was Captain Wickam. Nay, Mr. T -- the Proctor was so confident of his
Integrity, that he deposited five Guineas with the Baker's Wife, to a Wager of
five more, to buy him a Pair of Gold Fringe Gloves, that he was the true
Captain Wickham; and not only so, but made two Wagers more with her, of two
Guineas each, upon the same Fund. Which Wagers she was so unwilling to lay with
him, as being her self so confident of his Truth; that she gave 'em for lost:
Nor had been drawn into 'em, but by this Argument of the Nurses, who told her,
that if he was the true Wickham, nine Guineas Loss would be nothing out of
their great Legaoies; and if he was otherwise, the winning of so many Guineas
would make some Help toward the Charges they had been out upon him.

Besides all this, a great many Oxfordshire Gentlemen that frequented Kn -- t's
Coffee-house in Essex Buildings, were so concerned at his Executors happiness;
that rather than the Baker should run away with so much of his Estate, declared
they were resolved to make a Parliament business of it. So many affirmatives,
so strengthened the believing Baker, that he offered to give his Maid fifty
Pounds for her Hundred; To which, she pertly answered, No, she was not in so
much haste, to compound at that Rate, she was as well able to carry for her
Money, as he was for his. And talking of the poor Maid, one thing must not be
forgotten; the day before he died, he told her, he had left her a hundred
Pounds to buy her a Husband, but have a care she did not Marry a Rogue that
should beat her, for if she did, he had that kindness for her, he was sure, it
would disturb him in his Grave, and make him Walk when he was dead.

But to return to his Death, when the Searchers came to do their necessary
Office; upon inspection, they found some little extraordinary Mortification
upon some nameless Part about him, that put 'em upon the Smile. Their Respect
to the Worshipful deceased, made 'em somewhat modest in the Discovery; which
occasioned the Nurse to inquire into the cause of their Fleering, and ask 'em
plainly, If the Captain were under the Covenant of Circumcision? Yes, truly,
they replied, some such kind of Corporal Defect they had found about him. This
put the Churchwarden into some Surprise, who, inclinable to fancy better
things of his pious Benefactor defunct, would by no means, believe either
Searchers or Nurse, 'till he played the Searcher too, and made a Peep for his
satisfaction. But, alas, he no sooner cast his Eye that way, but he found our
Bachelor Captain, was in no danger of leading Apes. He discovered him an old
Soldier under Cupid's Banner; for by a sad Token, he had been a loser in the
Wars: But Eighten Wives might do much, and so the Wonder is not so
extraordinary.

And now, Reader, having thus handed our great Master Actor to his last Exit
off the Stage, we shall only add a Fragment more to our History, by giving you
his first Entrance upon it too. His Original was very obscure, and his first
start into the World, was, in no higher a Post than a Journey man Shoemaker, in
which Character he lived some considerable time at Worcester, understanding so
little of what he professed at Banbury, viz. Surgery, that he knew the Virtue
of no other Plaster than his own Cobler's Wax. From that Employment, he took a
Frolic to Sea; from whence returned, he came to Swackly, with the true
Privilege of a Traveller, his Authority unquestionable, he talked Miracles both
of his Voyages and Adventures. For Example, That he had made a Voyage to
Constantinople and Barbados, (for East and West were all one in his
Geography;) and so amused the Country People with his Rhodomontades, that they
looked upon him as a Prodigy of a Man. His great Art he professed was
Surgery, (the little he had of it being indeed gotten on Shipboard;) and
what with promised Wonders, and great Words, the common Crutch of little
Abilities, together with some Favors and Countenance received from Captain
Wickham, (a common Charity from so worthy a Gentleman,) which very much
heightened his Reception, he set up for a Surgeon: In which Station we began
with him in our First Part, and there we leave him*

And here we assure our Reader, that all these several Relations we have here
made, are from as good and credible Authority as the best Information could
give us. Nay, we have had a very great part of 'em from the Persons own Mouths
that were the suffering Parties in our Narrative. And that we have wholly
endeavored to follow Truth, the Reader may be pretty sensible, by our staying
near a Fortnight for the Publication of it; the Enquiries into matter of Fact
being six times more work and trouble, than the Composing of our History either
was, or could be.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BY a Letter dated Junuary the 21st Instant, from a credible Hand, we have
received a short Relation of the Man Tom, the famous Sancho Pancho to our
deceased Don Quixot, so often mentioned in our First Part, and formerly so
great a Sharer in his Master's Adventures.

This Squire to our late Knight Errant, through his long Service now grown
Master of his Art, and consequently Setting up for himself, was then taken at
Putnam, near Godalming, in Surrey, for Running away with an Heiress of 150 l.
per Annum. This wealthy Heiress he had married in very good Season, our
Bridegroom truly being not over-rich, (the common Fate of great Wits,) for he
had hardly Money enough to pay for his Marriage. However, accepted for Richer,
or Poorer, he had Bedded her seven or eight Nights, and was so long pursued and
hunted from place to place, before her Relations could catch him, being taken
at last in Bed with her. The farther Particulars we are not yet informed.

FINIS

