depiction of torture Whilst famed Amboyna stands in Deathless story; A
Monument to the Batavian Glory; Oh dull mistaken Page; that poorly tells of
feebler Pagan cutthroat Infidells: Those Demi-furies, with their punjer fame
Veil to our Belgian more Immortal Nam^ Nor let us wonder, that ye Neth'rland
Pride Boasts it self nearer to the Devil allied It lies nigh'r Hell than all
ye World beside.


INSIGNIA BATAVIAE: OR, THE Dutch Trophies Displayed; Being Exact RELATIONS Of
the Unjust, Horrid, and most Barbarous Proceedings of the DUTCH Against the
ENGLISH IN THE East Indies.

Whereby is plainly Demonstrable what the English must expect from the
Hollanders, when at any Time or Place they become their Masters.

By ELKANAH SETTLE.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pyke in Pall Mall; And are to be Sold by the
Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1688.

To the Reader.
READER,
THE following Treatise of the DUTCH Cruelties in the Indies is here presented
to your View; like an old longfilenc'd Fiend, now raised ab Inferis, to walk
abroad again, and new terrify the Trembling World.

It Is an odd sort of Entertainment you are called to, to hear of so hideous a
Story over again: But New Generations are risen up; and perhaps, as there are a
sort of Men in all Ages, that will not believe there are (or can be) any such
things as Devils; This History therefore treads the Stage once more, to convert
a greater piece of Infidelity, viz. That there are (and can be) a more dreadful
sort of Compounds, than Those other more immediate Infernal Subjects of
Lucifer; viz. Devils in Flesh. And truly, this more than stupendous Piece of
Horror, had it lain silent even for more than Ages, (though from a
Resurrection, if possible, after a Thousand Years) it could not be forgotten.
The Marks of the Beast in it are only peculiar to it self; and to show Mankind
its more particular Characteristicks, I need but name its Nativity, and say,
It Is of the Holland-Breed.

There is a certain Bogg-Land in the World, which, by the Lowness of its
Situation, may justly claim the Honor of being the Sink of the Universe; And
truly, as it had the Credit of first Founding it Self upon Revolt and Rebellion
against its Natural Sovereign, and afterward setting up a Sanctuary for all
the Outlaws of the World to find Shelter and Protection in; possibly, if
Villainy, Treason, Infamy, Vagrance, and Pyracy, etc. had weight enough, like
other grosser Bodies, to move toward the Center, undoubtedly, in one universal
C(...) flux, they fell down, and Fixed and Incorporated Here.

The History has this Commendation, That the Subject Matter of it, is an
Original; and will continue so to the very Period of the Platonick-Circle,
unless the Same Hands attempt a Fellow to it. If Nero himself could revive
again, and set-up for a Saint, the Project would be only feazible here; for he
could not well pick-up a Convenienter Foyl to his whole Life, than this
History: An History so truly extraordinary Black, that it might serve for a
Shadow, even to set off the Coursest, rough-cast Pencil-Work of Butchery and
Massacre, that ever was daubed since the Creation.

The Unimitable Actors of this Tragedy, perhaps, studied the playing a Part so
deep, as if they had affected an Applause from the very Execration of
Posterity. The secret Spring that set this dismal Machine a-moving, was
Avarice. The English had gained a little Footing, and Trade amongst them; and
therefore, this False Plot, put upon them, was a Way-lay to ensnare them out of
their Lives, only to rob and riffle them of their Money. The National Dutch
Moloch, GOLD, required their Blood; and his burning Paws could not be
satisfied, but with this extraordinary unexampl'd Sacrifice.

Such were the Hogan-Engineers in this Celebrated Torture-work, and this Scene
their sometimes Masterpiece: And to come nearer even to our present Face of
Affairs in or toward England; possibly, this Original Amboyna-Accomplishment,
together with several later Additional New acquired Endowments, has Equipt them
out for the present Great Protestant intended Reformers of England; and really,
for our present Designed- Invasion, there needs such Principle to animate in
such a Cause.

And truly, let Religion, or whatever other Spetious Declaration be the
Masque, the present Invasion, duly examined, will be found resting upon the
very same Bottom, viz. INTEREST. Little Old England is that fat Spot of Ground,
so much a larger Golden Land of Promise, than that poorer inconsiderable
Factory of Amboyna; that, if possible, Greater Villainies, a more Impions Cause,
and Blacker Streams of Blood, shall not be wanting to carry it. But, perhaps,
the Work may be tougher, than their flattering Hopes have conceived it; When
the Edge of the English Swords; The Justice of their Cause; The Conduct of
their Martial Sovereign; Together, with the Favor of Providence, the Guardian
of the Throne, like the Angel's Flaming Sword at the Gate of Paradise, standing
drawn against them; Shall all join in our Defense.

True Relations of the Unjust, Cruel, and Barbarous Proceedings of the Dutch,
against the English in the East Indies.
AFter the fruitless Issue of two several Treaties; The First, Anno 1613. in
London; and the other, Anno 1615. at the Hague in Holland, touching the
differences between the English and Dutch, in the East Indies: At last, by a
Third Treaty, Anno 1619. in London, there was a full and solemn Composition
made of all the said Differences; and a fair Order set for the future
proceeding of the Supports of both Companies in the Indies, as well in the
course of their Trade and Commerce, as otherwise. Amongst sundry other points,
it was agreed, That in regard of the great Bloodshed and cost, pretended to be
bestowed by the Hollanders, in winning of the Trade of the Isles of the
Molluccos, Banda, and Amboyna, from the Spaniards and Portugals, and in
building of Forts for the continual securing of the same; the said Hollanders
therefore should enjoy two Third parts of that Trade, and the English the other
Third; and the charge of the Forts to be maintained by Taxes and Impositions,
to be levied upon the Merchandise. Wherefore, in consequence of this Agreement,
the English East India Company planted certain Factories for their share of
this Trade; some at the Molluccos, some at Banda, and some at Amboyna. Of the
Two former of these, there will be, at this present, small occasion to speak
further; but the last will prove the Scene of a sad Tragedy.

This Amboyna is an Island lying near Seran, of the circuit of Forty Leagues,
and gives Name also to some other small Islands adjacent. It bears Cloves;
for gathering, and buying in whereof, the English Company, for their part, had
planted Five several Factories; the head, and Rendevouz of all, at the Town of
Amboyna; and therein first Master George Muschamp, and afterward Master Gabriel
Towerson, their Agents; with directions over the smaller Factories at Hitto and
Larica, upon the same Island; and at Lobo and Cambello, upon a point of their
neighboring Island of Seran.

Upon these Islands of Amboyna, and the point of Seran, the Hollanders have
four Forts, the chief of all is at the said Town of Amboyna, and is very
strong, having four Points or Bulwarks, with their Curtains; and upon each of
these Points six great Pieces of Ordinance mounted, most of them of Brass. The
one side of this Castle is washed by the Sea, and the other is divided from the
Land with a Ditch of four or five fathom broad, very deep, and ever filled with
the Sea. The Garrison of this Castle consists of about 200 Dutch Soldiers,
and a Company of free Burgers: Besides these, there is always a matter of three
or four hundred Mardikers (for so they usually call the free Natives) in the
Town, ready to serve the Castle at an hours warning. There lie also in the Road
(for the most part) diverse good Ships of the Hollanders, as well for the guard
of the place by Sea, as for the occasions of Traffic: this being the chief
Rendezvous, as well for the Island of Banda, as for the rest of Amboyna. Here
the English lived; not in the Castle, but under the Protection thereof, in a
House of their own in the Town; holding themselves safe, as well in respect of
the Ancient Bonds of Amity between both Nations, as of the strict conjunction
made by the late Treaty beforementioned.

They continued here some Two Years, Conversing and Trading together with the
Hollanders, by virtue of the said Treaty. In which time, there fell out sundry
Differences and Debates between them: The English complaining that the
Hollanders did not only lavish away much Money in Building, and unnecessary
Expenses upon the Forts, and otherwise, and bring large and unreasonable
Reckonings thereof to the common Account, but also did, for their part, pay the
Garrisons with Victuals, and cloth of Coromondel, which they put off to the
Soldiers at three or four times the Value it cost them; yet would not allow the
English Companies part of the same Charge, but only in ready Money, thereby
drawing from the English (which ought to pay but one Third part) more than two
Thirds of the whole true charge. Hereupon, and upon the like occasions, grew
some Discontents and Disputes, and the Complaints were sent to Jaccatra, in the
Island of Java Major, to the Council of Defense of both Nations, there
Residing: who also, not agreeing upon the points in Difference, sent the same
hither over into Europe, to be decided by both Companies here; or, in default
of their Agreement, by the King's Majesty, and the Lords the States General,
according to an Article of the Treaty of the Year, 1619. on this behalf. In the
mean time, the Discontent between the English and Dutch, about these and other
Differences, continued, and daily increased; until at last there was a Sword
found to cut in sunder that knot at once, which the tedious Disputes of Amboyna
and Jaccatra could not untie: And this was used in manner as follows:

About the 11th. of February, 1622. Style veteri, a Japoner-Soldier of the
Dutch, in their Castle of Amboyna, walking in the Night upon the Wall, came to
the Sentinel (being a Hollander) and there, amongst other Talk, asked him some
questions, touching the strength of the Castle, and the People that were
therein. It is here to be noted, that those Japoners (of whom there is not
Thirty in all the Island) did, for the most part, serve the Dutch as Soldiers;
yet were not of their Trusty bands, always lodged in the Castle, but upon
occasion called out of the Town to assist in the Watch. This Japoner aforesaid,
was (for his said Conference with the Sentinel) apprehended upon suspicion of
Treason, and put to Torture: Whereby (as some of the Dutch affirmed) he was
brought to confess, That himself, and sundry others of his Contrymen there,
had contrived to take the Castle. Hereupon other Japoners were Examined and
Tortured, as also a Portugal, the Guardian of the Slaves under the Dutch.
During this Examination, which continued three or four days, some of the
Englishmen went to and from the Castle upon their business, saw the Prisoners,
heard of their Tortures, and of the Crime laid to their charge, but all this
while suspected not that this matter did any whit concern themselves, having
never had any conversation with the Japoners, nor with the Portugal aforesaid.
At the same time there was one Abel Price, Surgeon of the English, Abel
Price Examined,
Prisoner in the Castle, for offering, in his Drunkenness, to set a Dutch-Man's
House on Fire: This fellow the Dutch took, and showed him some of the Japoners,
whom they had first most grievously Tortured; and told him, They had confessed
the English to be of their confedracy for the taking the Castle; and that if he
would not confess the same, they would use him even as they had done these
Japoners, and worse also. Having given him the Torture, they soon made him
confess what ever they asked him. This was the 15th. of February, 1622. Stilo
veteri. Forthwith, about Nine of the clock the same Morning, they sent for
Captain Towerson, and the rest of the English that were in the Town, to come to
speak with the Governor in the Castle; they all went, save one that was left to
keep the House: Being come to the Governor, he told Captain Towerson, That
himself, and others of his Nation were accused of a conspiracy to surprise the
Castle; and therefore, until further Trial, were to remain Prisoners: They also
took him that was left at home in the House, and the Merchandise of the English
there, into their own custody, by Inventory; and seized all the Chests, Boxes,
Books, Writings, and other things out of the said House. Captain Towerson was
committed to his Chamber, with a Guard of Dutch Soldiers: Emanuel Thompson was
kept Prisoner in the Castle; the rest, viz. John Beomont, Edward Collins,
William Webber, Ephram Ramsey, Timothy Johnson, John Fardo, and Robert Brown
were sent. Aboard the Hollanders Ships, then Riding in Harbor, some to one
Ship, and some to another, and all made fast in irons. The same day also the
Governor sent to the Two other Factories in the same Island, to Apprehend the
rest of the English there: So that Samuel Colson, John Clark, George Sharrock,
that were found in the Factory at Hitto; and Edward Collins, William Webber,
and John Sadler at Larica, were all brought Prisoners to Amboyna, the 16th. of
February. Upon* which day also John Powl, John Wetheral, and Thomas Ladbrook,
were Apprehended at Cambello; and John Beomont, William Grigs, and Ephraim
Ramsey at Lobo, and brought in Irons to Amboyna the 20th. of the same Month. In
the mean time the Governor and Fiscal went to work with the Prisoners that were
already there: And first they sent for John Beomont and Timothy Johnson from
aboard the Unicorn; who being come into the Castle, Beomont was left with a
Guard in the Hall, and Johnson was taken into another Room; where, by and by,
Beomont heard him cry out very pitifully* then to be quiet a little while, and
then loud again. After taste of the Torture, Abel Price the Surgeon, that
first was Examined and Tortu^ed, (as aforesaid) was brought in to confront and
accuse him; but Johnson not yet confes^ing any thing, Price was quickly carried
out, and Johnson brought again to the Torture; where Beomont heard him sometime
cry aloud, then quiet again, then roar afresh. At last, after he had been an
hour in this second Examination, he was brought forth wailing and lamenting,
all wet, and cruelly burnt in diverse parts of his Body, and so laid aside in a
by place in the Hall, with a Soldier to watch him, that he should speak with no
body. Then was Emanuel Thompson brought to Examination; not Emanuel Thompson
Examined.
in the room where Johnson had been, but in another, something farther from the
Hall: yet Beomont being in the Hall, heard him roar most lamentably, and many
times. At last, after an hour and half spent in Torturing him, he was carried
away into another Room, another way, so that he came not by Beomont through the
Hall. Next was Beomont called in, and being demanded many things, all which he
denied with deep Oaths and Protestations, was made fast to be Tortured, a
cloth tied about his Neck, and two Men ready with their Jarrs of Water to be
poured on his Head: But yet, for this time, the Governor bad loose him, he
would spare him a day or two because he was an Old Man. This was all Saturdays
work, the fifteenth of February aforesaid.

Upon Sunday the 16th* of February, William Webber, Edward Collins, Ephraim
Ramsey, and Robert Brown, were fetched from aboard the Rotterdam to be Examined.
At the same time came Samuel Colson, William Grigs, and John Clark; George
Sharrock, and John Sadler, from Hitto and Larica, and were immediately, upon
their Arrival, brought into the Castle-Hall. Robert Brown, Tailor, was first
called in, and being Tormented with Water, confessed all in order as the Fiscal
asked him. Robert Brown Examined.


Then was Edward Collins called in, and told, That those that were formerly
Examined, had confessed him as accessory in Taking Edward Collins Examined.
the Castle: Which, when he denied with great Oaths and Execrations, they made
his Hands and Feet fast to the Rack, bound a cloth about his Throat, ready to
be put to the Torture of Water: Thus prepared, he prayed to be respited, and he
would confess all; being let down, he again Vowed and Protested his Innocence;
yet said, That because he knew that they would by Torture make him confess any
thing, though never so false, they would do him great favor to tell him what
they would have him say, and he would speak it to avoid the Torture: The Fiscal
hereupon said, What, do you Mock us? and bid, Up with him again, and so gave
him the Torment of Water; which he not long able to endure, prayed to be let
down again to his Confession: Then he devised a little with himself, and told
them, That about Two Months and an half before, himself, Thompson, Johnson,
Brown, and Fardo, had Plotted, with the help of the Japoners, to surprise the
Castle. Here he was Interrupted by the Fiscal, and asked, Whether Captain
Towerson were not of that Conspiracy? He answered, No. You lie, said the
Fiscal; Did not he call you all to him, and tell you, That those daily abuses
of the Dutch had caused him to thing of a Plot, and that he wanted nothing but
your consent and secrecy? Then said a Dutch Merchant, one John Joost, that
stood by* Did not you all Swear upon a Bible to be secret to him? Collins
answered with great Oaths, that he knew nothing of any such matter. Then they
bid make him fast again; whereupon he then said, All was true that they had
spoken. Then the Fiscal asked him, Whether the English in the rest of the
Factories were not consenting to this Plot? He answered, No. The Fiscal then
asked him, Whether the President of the English at Jaccatra, or Master Welden,
Agent in Banda, were not Plotters, or Privy to this business? Again, he
Answered, No. Then the Fiscal asked him, By what means the Japoners should have
executed their purpose: Whereat, when Collins stood staggering and devising of
some prob^ble Fiction, the Fiscal helped him, and said, Should not Two Japoners
have gone to each point of the Castle, and Two to the Governors Chamber Door,
and when the hurly-burly had been without, and the Governor coming to see what
was the matter, the Japoners to have Killed him* Here one that stood by, said
to the Fiscal, Do not tell him what he should say, but let him speak of
himself: Whereupon the Fiscal* without attending the Answer to his former
Question, asked, What the Japoners should have had for their Reward? He
answered, A Thousand Ryals a piece. Lastly, he asked him, When this Plot should
have been effected? Whereunto, although he answered him nothing (not knowing
what to dev(...) upon the sudden) yet he was dismissed, and very glad to come
clear of the Torture, though with certain belief that he should Dye for this
his Confession.

Next was Samuel Colson brought in, being newly Arrived from Hitto, as is
before cited; and was the same day brought Samuel Colson Examined.
to the Torture; who, for fear of the pain wherewith he saw Collins come out,
in such a case, that his Eyes were almost blown out of his Head, with the
Torment of Water, chose rather to confess all they asked him; and so was
quickly dismissed, coming out Weeping, Lamenting, and protesting his Innocence.

Then was John Clark, that came with Colson from Hitto, fetched in, an a little
after was heard (by the rest that were without John Clark Examined.
in the Hall) to cry out amain: They Tortured him with Water and Fire for the
space of Two hours. The manner of his Torture (as also of Johnsons and
Thompsons) was as follows: First, they hoised him up by the Hands, with a
Cord, on a large door, where they made him fast upon two Staples of Iron, fixed
on both sides at the top of the door Posts, haling his Hands one from the other
as wide as they could stretch: Being thus made fast, his Feet hung some two
Foot from the Ground, which also they stretched asunder as far as they could
retch, and so made them fast beneath, unto the door Trees, on each side: Then
they bound a cloth about his Neck and Face, so close that little or no Water
could go by: That done, they poured the Water softly upon his Head, until the
cloth was full up to the Mouth and Nostrils, and somewhat higher; so that he
could not draw Breath, but he must withal suck-in the Water: which being still
continued to be poured in softly, forced all his inward parts, came out of his
Nose, Ears, and Eyes, and often, as it were, stifling and choking him; at
length took away his Breath, and brought him to a Swoond or Fainting: Then they
quickly took him down, and made him Vomit up the Water. Being a little
recovered, they triced him up again, and poured in the Water as before, always
taking him down as he seemed to be stifled: In this manner they handled him
three or four several times with Water, till his Body was swollen twice or thrice
as big as before, his Cheeks like great Bladders, and his Eyes staring and
strutting out beyond his Forehead: yet all this he bare without confessing any
thing; insomuch that the Fiscal and Tormentors reviled him, saying, That he was
a Devil, and no Man; or surely was a Witch, at least had some Charm about him,
or was Enchanted, that he could bear so much. Wherefore they cut off his Hair
very short, as supposing he had some Witchcraft hidden therein. Afterward they
hoised him up as before, and then burnt him with lighted Candles in the bottom
of his Feet, until the Fat dropped out the Candles, yet then they applied fresh
Lights unto him. They burn him also under the Elbows, and in the Palms of the
Hands; likewise under the Arm pits, until his Inwards might evidently be seen.

At last, when they saw he could of himself make no handsome Confession, then
they led him along with Questions of Particular Circumstances, by themselves
framed. Being thus wearied and overcome by the torment, he answered, yea, to
whatsoever they asked: whereby they drew from him a body of a Confession to
this effect; to wit, That Captain Towerson had upon New-years-day last before,
sworn all the English at Amboyna to be secret and assistant to a plot that he
had projected, with the help of the Japoners, to surprise the Castle, and to
put the Governor and the rest of the Dutch to death.

Having thus martyred this poor man, they sent him out by four Blacks: who
carried him between them to a Dungeon where he lay five or six days, without
any Chyrurgion to dress him, until (his flesh being putrified) great Maggots
dropped and crept from him in a most loathsome and noisome manner. Thus they
finished their Sabbath days work; and it growing now dark, sent the rest of the
English (that came that day from Hitto, and till then attended in the Hall)
first to the Smiths-shop, where they were laden with Irons, and then to the
same loathsome Dungeon, where Clark and the rest were, accompanied with the poor
Japoners, lying in the putrefaction of their tortures.

The next morning being Monday the 17th. of February, Old style, William Griggs
and John Fardo, with certain Japoners, were brought into the place of
examination.

The Japoners were first cruelly tortured to accuse Griggs, which at William
Griggs examined. John Fardo examined.
last they did: and Griggs, to avoid the like torture, confessed all that the
Fiscal demanded. By and by the like also was done by John Fardo, and other
Japoners: but Fardo himself endured the torture of Water, and at last confessed
whatsoever the Fiscal asked him; and so was sent back to prison.

The same day also John Beomont was brought the second time to the John Beomont
examined.
Fiscals chamber; where one Captain Newport a Dutchman's son (born in England)
was used as an Interpreter. Will. Griggs was also brought in to accuse him; who
said, that when the consultation for taking of the Castle, was held, then he
(the said Beomont) was present. Beomont denied it with great earnestness and
deep Oaths. At last being triced up, and drenched with Water till his Inwards
were ready to crack, he answered affirmatively to all the Fiscals
Interrogatories: Yet as soon as he was let down, he clearly demonstrated to
Capt. Newport, and Johnson a Dutch Merchant, then also present, that these
things could not be so. Nevertheless he was forced to put his hand to his
confession, or else he must to the torture again, which to avoid, he
subscribed; and so had a great Iron Bolt and two Shackles riveted to his legs,
and then was carried back to prison.

After this, George Sharrock, Assistant at Hitto, was called in question;
George Sharrock examined.
who, seeing how grievously others were martyred, made his earnest prayer to
God (as since upon his Oath he has acknowledged) that he would suffer him to
make some such probable lies against himself, as the Dutch might believe, and
so he might escape the torment. Being brought to the Rack, the Water provided,
and the Candles lighted, he was by the Governor and Fiscal examined, and
charged with the Conspiracy. He fell upon his knees, and protested his
innocence. Then they commanded him to the Rack, and told him; Unless he would
confess, he should be tormented with Fire and Water to death, and then should
be drawn by the heels to the Gallows, and there handed up. He still persisting
in this his innocence, the Fiscal bad him be hoised up. Then he craved respite
a while, and told them, that he was at Hitto, and not in Amboyna, upon
New-years-day, when the consultation was pretended; neither had been there
since November before, as was well known to sundry of the Hollanders themselves
that resided there also with him. Hereupon, they commanded him again to the
Rack: but he craving respite as before, now told them, that he had many times
heard John Clark (who was with him at Hitto) say, That the Dutch had done them
many unsufferable wrongs, and that he would be revenged of them: to which end,
he had once broken with Captain Towerson of a brave Plot. At which word the
Fiscal and the rest were attentive, encouraging him to proceed. So he went on,
saying, That John Clark had entreated Captain Towerson, that he might go to
Maccasser, there to consult and advise with the Spaniards to come with Galleys,
and rob the small Factories of Amboyna and Seran, when no Ships were there.
Here they asked him, what Captain Towerson said to this. He answered, that
Captain Towerson was very much offended with Clark for the motion; and from
thenceforth could never abide him. Hereupon the Fiscal called him Rogue, and
said he prated all from the matter, and should go to the torture. He craved
favor again, and began another tale; to wit, that upon Twelfth-day then last
past, John Clark told him at Hitto, that there was a practice to take the
Castle of Amboyna; and asked him, whether he would consent thereunto. Whereupon
he demanded of Clark, whether Captain Towerson knew of any such business?
Which, Clark affirming; then he (the said Sharrock) said that he would do as
the rest did. Then the Fiscal asked him what time the Consultation was held? He
answered, In November last. The Fiscal said, that could not be: for the
Consultation was upon New-years-day. The Prisoner said as before in the
beginning, that he had not been in Amboyna since the first of December. till now
that he was brought thither. Why then, quoth the Fiscal, have you belied your
self? Whereto the Prisoner resolutely answered, that all that he had spoken
touching any Treason, was false and feigned, only to avoid torment. Then went
the Fiscal out into another room to the Governor, and anon returned, and sent
Sharrock unto the Prison again. The next day he was called again, and a Writing
presented him, wherein was framed a formal confession of his last conference
with Clark at Hitto, touching the Plot to take the Castle of Amboyna: which
being read over to him, the Fiscal asked him, whethere it were true, or no? He
answered, No. Why then, said the Fiscal, did you confess it? He answered, For
fear of Torment. The Fiscal and the rest in a great rage, told him he lied; his
mouth had spoken it, and it was true, and therefore he should subscribe it.
Which as soon as he had done, he fell presently into a great passion, charging
them bitterly to be guilty of the innocent blood of himself and the rest; which
they should look to answer for at the day of Judgment: withal he grapled with
the Fiscal, and would have stopped him from carrying in the confession to the
Governor, with whom he also craved to speak; but was instantly laid hold on,
and carried away to prison.

William Webber, being next examined, was told by the Fiscar, that William
Webber examined.
John Clark had confessed him to have been at Amboyna on Now years day, and
sworn to Captain Towerson' s plot, etc. All which he denied, alleging, he was
that day at Larica: yet being brought to the torture, he then confessed, he had
been at the consultation at Amboyna upon New Years day, with all the rest of
the circumstances in order as he was asked. He also further told them, he had
received a letter from John Clark; after which was a Postscript, excusing his
brief writing at that time, for that there was great business in hand. But one
Renier a Dutch Merchant, then standing by, told the Governor, that upon
New Years day, the time of this pretended consultation, Webber and he were
merry at Larica. So the Governor left him, and went out. But the Fiscal held
on upon the other point, touching the Postscript of Clark's Letter, urging him
to show the same. Which when he could not do, though often terrified with the
torture, he gave him respite; promising to save his life, if he would produce
that Letter.

Then was Captain Towerson brought to examination, and showed Gabriel Towerson
examined.
what others had confested of him. He deeply protesting his innocence, Samuel
Colson was brought to confront him: who being told, that unless he would now
make good his former confession against Captain Towerson, he should to the
Torture, coldly re-affirmed the same, and so was sent away. They also brought
William Grigs and John Fardo to justify their former confessions to his Face.
Captain Towerson seriously charged them, that as they would answer it at the
dreadful day of Judgment, they should speak nothing but the Truth. Both of them
instantly fell down upon their knees before him; praying him for Gods sake to
forgive them, and saying further openly before them all, that whatsoever they
had formerly confessed, was most false, and spoken only to avoid torment. With
that the Fiscal and the rest offered them again to the torture: which they
would not endure, but then affirmed their former confessions to by true.

When Colson (who had accused Captain Towerson before) was required to set his
hand to his confession, he asked the Fiscal, upon whose head he thought the sin
would lie; whether upon his that was constrained to confess what was false, or
upon the constrainers. The Fiscal after a little pause upon this question, went
in to the Governor then in another room; but anon returning, told Colson he
must subscribe it: which he did; yet withal made this protestation: Well,
quoth he, you make me to accuse my self and others of that which is as false as
God is true: for, God is my witness, I am as innocent as the Child newborn.

Thus have they examined all that belong to the English Company in the several
Factories of the Island of Amboyna.

The one and twentieth of February, they examined John Wetheral, Factor at
Cambello in the Island of Seran. He confessed, he was at Amboyna John Wetheral
examined.
upon New Years day: but for the consultation, whereof he was demanded, he said
he knew of no other but touching certain cloth of the English Company, that
lay in the Factories rotten and wormeaten, which they advised together how to
put off to the best avail of their Imployers. The Governor said, they
questioned him not about cloth, but about Treason: whereof when he had
protested his innocence, he was for that time dismissed. But the next day he
was sent for again, and Captain Towerson brought to confront and accuse him,
having before (it seems) confessed somewhat against him. But Mr. Towerson spoke
now these words only: Oh Mr. Wetheral, Mr. Wetheral, speak the truth, and
nothing but the truth, as God shall put into your heart. So Captain Towerson
was put out again, and Wetheral brought to the torture of water with great
threats; if water would not make him confess, fire should. He prayed them to
tell him what he should say, or to write down what they would, he would
subscribe it. They said, he needed no Tutor: they would make him confess of
himself. But when they had triced him up four several times, and saw he knew
not what to say, then they read him other men's confessions, and asked him from
point to point, as they had done others: and he still answered, Yea, to all.

Next was called in John Powl, Wetherals assistant at Cambello: but John Powl
examined.
he, proving that he was not at Amboyna since November (save now when he was
brought thither prisoner) and being spoken for by one John Joost, who had long
been well acquainted with him, was dismissed without torture.

Then was Thomas Ladbrook, servant to Wetheral and Powl at Cambello, Thomas
Ladbrook examined.
brought to be examined: but proving that he was at Cambello at the time of the
pretended consultation, and serving in such quality, as that he was never
acquainted with any of the Letters from the Agent of Amboyna, he was easily and
quickly dismissed.

Ephraim Ramsey was also examined upon the whole pretended Conspiracy, Ephraim
Ramsey examined.
and particularly questioned concerning Captain Welden the English Agent in
Banda, but denying all, and proving that he was not at Amboyna at
New-years-tide, being also spoken for by John Joost, was dismissed, after he
had hanged in the Rack a good while, with Irons upon his Legs, and the cloth
about his mouth.

Lastly, John Sadler, servant to William Griggs at Larica, was examined; John
Sadler examined.
and being found to have been absent from Amboyna at New Years tide, when Grigs
and others were there, was dismissed.

Thus have we all their Examinations, Tortures, and Confessions, being the work
of eight days, from the 15. to the 23. of February. After which was two days
respite before the Setence. John Powl, being himself acquitted, as before said,
went to the Prison to visit John Fardo, one of those that had accused Captain
Towerson. To him Fardo religiously protested his innocence; but especially his
sorrow for accusing Master Towerson: For, said he, the fear of death does
nothing dismay me; for, God (I trust) will be merciful to my Soul, according to
the innocence of my cause. The only matter that troubles me, is, that through
fear of Torment I have accused that honest and godly Man, Captain Towerson, who
(I think in my conscience) was so upright and honest toward all men, that he
harbored no ill will to any, much less would attempt any such business as he
is accused of. He further said, he would before his death receive the
Sacrament, in acknowledgement that he had accused Captain Towerson falsely and
wrongfully, only through fear of Torment.

The 25. of February, old style, all the Prisoners, as well the English, as the
Portugal and the Japoners, were brought into the great Hall of the Castle, and
there were solemnly condemned, except John Powl, Ephraim Ramsey, John Sadler,
and Thomas Ladbrook, formerly acquitted, as aforesaid.

Captain Towerson having been (during all his imprisonment) kept apart from the
rest, so that none of them could come to speak with him; writ much in his
Chamber (as some of the Dutch report,) but all was suppressed, save only a Bill
of Debt, which one Tho. Johnson, a free Burgher got of him by favor of his
Keepers for acknowledgment, that the English Company owed him a certain sum of
money. In the end of this Bill he writ these words: Firmed by the Firm of me
Gabriel Towerson, now appointed to die guiltless of any thing that can be
justly laid to my charge. God forgive them their guilt; and receive me to his
mercy. Amen. This Bill being brought to M. Welden the English Agent at Banda,
he paid the money, and received in the acknowledgment.

William Griggs (who had before accused Captain Towerson) writ these words
following in his Table Book: We, whose names are here specified; John Beomont
Merchant of Loho, William Griggs Merchant of Larica, Abel Price, Chyrurgion of
Amboyna. Robert Brown, Tailor, which do here lie Prisoners in the Ship
Rotterdam, being apprehended for conspiracy, for blowing up the Castle of
Amboyna: we being judged to death this 5. of March, Anno 1622 which we through
^orm^nt were constrained to speak that which we never meant, nor once imagined;
the which we take upon our deaths and salvation: they tortured us with that
extreme torment of Fire and Water, that flesh and blood could not endure: and
this we take upon our deaths, that they have put us to death guiltless of our
accusation. So therefore we desire, that they that shall understand this; that
our Imployers may understand these wrongs, and that your selves would have a
care to look to your selves: for their intent was to have brought you in also:
they asked concerning you; which if they had tortured us, we must have confessed
you also. And so farewell: Written in the dark.

This Table Book was afterward^ delivered to M. Welden aforementioned by one that
served the Dutch.

Samuel Colson also, another that accused Captain Towerson, writ as follows
in the waste leaves of a Book, wherein were bound together the Common Prayers,
the Psalms, and the Catechism.

In one Page thus: March 5. Stilo novo, being Sunday, aboard the Rotterdam,
lying in Irons.
UNderstand that I Samuel Colson, late Factor of Hitto, was apprehended for
suspicion of consperacy; and for any thing I know, must die for it: wherefore,
having no better means to make my innocence known, have writ this in this Book,
hoping some good Englishmen will see it. I do here upon my salvation, as I
hope by his death and passion to have redemption for my sins, that I am clear
of all such conspiracy; neither do I know any English man guilty thereof; nor
other creature in the World. As this is true: God bless me.

Sam. Colson.




On the other side, upon the first page of the Catechism, is thus written. IN
another leaf you shall understand more, which I have written in this Book.

Sam. Colson.




In the beginning of the Psalms and in the leaf so referred unto, is thus
written, viz THe Japoners were taken with some Villainy, and brought to
examination: being most tyrannuously tortured, were asked if the English had
any hand in their Plot. Which torture made them say, Yea. Then was Master
Tomson, M. Johnson, M. Collins, Jonn Clark brought to examination, and were
burned under the arms, armpits, the hands, and soles of the feet, with another
most miserable torment to drink Water; some of them almost tortured to death,
and were forced to confess that which they never knew, by reason of the torment
which flesh and blood is not able to endure. Then were the rest of the English
men called one by one (amongst which I was one) being wished to confess, or
else I must go to torment; withal caused M. Johnson, who was before tormented,
to witness against me, or else he should be tormented again; which rather than
he would endure, he said, What they would have, he would speak Then must I
confess that I never knew, or else to go to torment: which rather than I would
suffer, I did confess that, which (as I shall be saved before God Almighty) is
not true, being forced for fear of torment. Then did they make us witness
against Capt. Towerson, and at last made Capt. Towerson confess all, being for
fear of most cruel torment: for which we must all die. As I mean and hope to
have pardon for my sins. I know no more than the child unborn of this business.

Written with my own hand the first of March, Stilo novo. Sam. Colson.




Yet in another page were these words. I Was born in New Castle upon Tyne,
where I desire this Book may come, that my Friends may know of my Innocence.

Sam. Colson.




This Book he delivered to one that served the Hollanders, who sowed it up in
his Bed, and afterward, at his oppertunity delivered it to Mr. Weld^n before
named

All these said Writings are yet extant under the hands of the several parties,
well known to their Friends here in England.

The 26th of February, Stilo veteri, the Prisoners were all brought into the
great Hall of the Castle (except Captain Towerson and Emanuel Tomson) to be
prepared for death by the Ministers. The Japoners now all in general, as some
of them had done before in particular, cried cut unto the English saying; Oh
you English men, where did we ever in our lives eat with you, talk with you, or
(to our remembrance) see you? The English answered, Why then have you accused
us? The poor men, perceiving they were made believe each had accused others,
before they had so done indeed, showed them their tortured bodies, and said, If
a stone were thus burnt, would it not change his nature? how much more we that
are flesh and blood?

Whilst they were all in the Hall, Cap Towerson was brought up into the place
of Examination, and two great Jarrs of Water carried after him. What he there
did or suffered was unknown to the English without: but it seems they made
him then to underwrite his confession. After Supper John Powl, Ephraim Ramsey.
Th. Ladbrook, and John Sadler, who were found not guilty, as aforesaid, were
taken from the rest, and put into another room. By and by also were Samuel
Colson, and Edward Collins brought from the rest; into the room where Emanuel
Tomson lay: The Fiscal told them, it was the Governors mercy to save one of
them three: and it being indifferent to him which of them were the man, it was
his pleasure they should draw lots for it, which they did, and the free lot
fell to Edward Collins; who then was carried away to the Chamber, where John
Powl and the rest that were quit, lodged, and Samuel Colson back into the Hall.
Anon also John Beomont was brought out of the Hall into the Chamber, where John
Powl, and the rest of the acquitted persons were, and was told, that he was
beholding to Peter Johnson the Dutch Merchant of Lobo, and to the Secretary;
for they two had begged his Life.

So then there remained in the Hall ten of the English, for Captain Towerson
and Emanuel Tomson (as is said before) were kept in several rooms apart from
the rest. To these that remained in the Hall, came the Dutch Ministers, who
telling them how short a time they had to live, admonished and exhorted them to
make their true confessions: for it was a dangerous and desperate thing to
dissemble at such a time. The English still professed their innocence, and
prayed the Ministers that they might all receive the Sacraments, as a Seal of
the forgiveness of their Sins: and withal, thereby to confirm their last
profession of their Innocence. But this would by no means be granted. Whereupon
Samuel Colson said thus unto the Ministers; You manifest unto us the danger of
dissimulation in this case. But tell us, if we suffer guiltless, being
otherwise also true believers in Christ Jesus, What shall be our reward? The
Preacher answered, By how much the clearer you are, so much the more glorious
shall be your resurrection. With that word, Colson, started up, embraced the
Preacher, and gave him his Purse, with such money as he had in it, saying,
Domine, God bless you: tell the Governor, I freely forgive him; and I entreat
you, to exhort him to repent of his bloody tragidy, wrought upon us poor
innocent souls. Here all the rest of the English signified their consent to
this Speech. Then spoke John Fardo to the rest, in presence of the Ministers,
as follows, My Countrymen and Brethren, all that are here with me condemned
to die, I charge you all, as you will answer it at Gods judgment Seat, if any
of you be guilty of this matter, whereof we are condemned, discharge your
consciences, and confess the truth for satisfaction of the World. Hereupon
Samuel Colson spoke with a loud voice, saving, According to my Innocence in
this Treason, so Lord pardon all the rest of my sins: and if I be guilty
thereof more or less, let me never be partaker of thy heavenly joys. At which
words every one of the rest cried out, Amen for me, Amen for me, good Lord.
This done, each of them knowing whom he had accused, went one to another
begging forgiveness for their false accusation, being wrung from them by the
pains or fear of torture. And they all freely forgave one another: for none had
been so falsely accused, but he himself had accused another as falsely. In
particular, George Sharrock (who survived to relate this nights passage)
kneeled down to John Clark whom he had accused of the Tale at Hitto above
mentioned, and craved forgiveness or his hands. Clark freely forgave him,
saying; how should I look to be forgiven of God, if I should not forgive you,
having my self so falsely accused Captain Towerson, and others?

After this, they spent the rest of the doleful Night in Prayer, Singing of
Psalms, and Comforting one another; though the Dutch that guarded them, offered
them Wine, bidding them drink Lustick, and drive away the sorrow; according to
the Custom of their own Nation in the like case, but contrary to the nature of
the English.

Upon the morrow morning, being the execution day, the 2^. of February (Stilo
veteri) John Powel being freed (as is abo^^ recited) came into the Room where
the condemned Persons were, and found them at Prayer. They all requested him to
relate unto their Friends in England, the Innocence of their Cause, taking it
upon their deaths, that what they had confessed against themselves and others
touching this crime, was all false, and forced by fear of Torture.

The same Morning William Webber was called again into the Fiscals Room, and
there pressed to produce the Letter, which he had before confessed to have
received from John Clark, in the Postscript whereof some great business was
intimated. They promised him his Life, if he would deliver or produce them that
Letter: which although he did not, nor indeed could, yet at last they pardoned
him, and sent him to the rest that were saved, and Sharrock with him.

That morning Emanuel Tomson understanding that John Beomont was pardoned, made
means to have him come and speak with him; which with much ado he obtained.
Beomont found him sitting in a Chamber, all alone, in a most miserable fashion;
the wounds of his Torture bound up, but the matter and gore-blood issuing
through the Rollers. He took Mr. Beomont by the hand, and prayed him when he
came into England, to do his Duty to the Honorable Company his Masters, to Mr.
Robinson, and to his Brother Billingsley, and to certify them of his
Innocence, which (said he) you your self know well enough.

All things being prepared for the Execution, the Condemned were brought forth
of the Hall, along by the Chamber were the quit and pardoned were, who stood in
the door, to give and take the farewell of their Contrymen now going to
Execution. Staying a little for this purpose, they praye^ and charged those
that were saved, to bear witness to their Friends in England of their
Innocence, and that they died not Traitors, but so many innocents, merely
murdered by the Hollanders, whom they prayed God to forgive their
Blood-thirstiness, and to have Mercy upon their own Souls.

Being brought into the Yard, their Sentence was there read unto them from a
Gallery, and then they were thence carried unto the place of Execution,
together with nine Japons, and a Portugal; not the ordinary and short way, but
round about in a long Procession through the Town, the way guarded with five
Companies of Soldiers, Dutch and Amboyners, and thronged with the Natives of
the Island, that (upon the Summons given the day before by the sound of the
Drum) flocked together to behold this triumph of the Dutch over the English.
Samuel Colson had conceived a Prayer in Writing, in the end whereof he
protested his Innocence: which Prayer he read to his Fellows the Night before,
and now also at the place of Execution devoutly pronounced the same; then threw
away the Paper, which the Governor caused to be brought to him, and kept it.

Emanuel Tomson told the rest, he did not doubt but God would show some sign of
their Innoceny; and every one of the rest took it severally upon their death,
that they were utterly guiltless; and so one by one with great cheerfulness
suffered the fatal stroke.

The Portugal Prayed over his Beads very devoutly, and often kissed the Cross,
swearing thereupon, that he was utterly Innocent of this Treason: yet
confessed, that God had justly brought this punishment upon him, for that
having a Wife in his own Country, he had by the persuasion of the Dutch
Governor, taken another in that Country, his first being yet living.

The Japons likewise (according to their Religion) shut up their last Act with
the like profession of their Innocence. So there suffered Ten Englishmen, viz.
Captain Gabriel Towerson, the Agent of the English at Amboyna; Samuel Colson,
Factor at Hitto; Emanuel Tomson, Assistant at Amboyna; Timothy Johnson,
Assistant there also; John Wetheral, Factor at Cambello; John Clark, Assistant
at Hitto; William Griggs, Factor at Larica; John Fardo, Steward of the House;
Abel Price, Surgeon; and Robert Brown, Tailor.

The Portugal also suffered with them; his name was Augustine Perez; he was born
at Bengala.

The names of the Japoneses that suffered (if any be curious to know them) were
as follows:

Hititso, Born at Firando. Tsiosa, Born at Firando. Sinsa, Born at Firando.
Sidney Migiel, Born at Nagansacq Pedro Congie, Born at Nagansacq Thome Corea.
Born at Nagansacq Quiandayo, Native of Coraets. Tsabinda of Tsonketgo. Zanchoe
of Fisien.
Besides these, there were two other Japoneses, the one named Soysino, born at
Firando; and the other Sacoube, of the same place: The former of which being
Tortured, confessed both to have been privy to this pretended Treason, and to
have offered his service / unto the English to aid them in taking of the
Castle: and the latter confessed to have had knowledge of the Consultation of
the other Japons to this purpose. But neither of them was executed, nor so much
as condemned. The reason whereof was not known to the English that were saved.

They had prepared a Cloth of black Velvet for Captain Towerson's Body to fall
upon; which being stained and defaced with his blood, they afterward put to
the account of the English Company.

At the instant of the Execution, there arose a great darkness, with a sudden
and violent gust of wind and tempest, whereby two of the Dutch Ships riding in
the harbor, were driven from Anchor, and with great labor and difficulty
saved from the Rocks. Within a few days after one William Dunckin, who had
told the Governor, That Robert Brown the English Tailor, had a few Months
before told him, he hoped, that within six Months the English should have as
much to do in the Castle of Amboyna, as the Dutch: This fellow coming upon an
evening to the Grave where the English were buried, being all (save Captain
Towerson) in one Pit, fell down upon the Grave; and having lien there a while,
rose up again stark mad, and so continued two or three days together, and then
died. Forthwith also fell a new Sickness at Amboyna, which swept away about a
thousand People Dutch and Amboyners; in the space wherein, there usually died
not above thirty at other seasons: These signs were by the surviving English
referred to the confident prediction of Emanuel Tomson abovenamed, and were by
the Amboyners interpreted as a Token of the Wrath of God, for this barbarous
Tyranny of the Hollanders.

The next day after the execution, being the eight and twentieth of February,
Stilo veteri, was spent in Triumph, for the new General of the Dutch then
proclaimed, and in public rejoicing for the deliverance from this pretended
Treason. The day following, being the first of March, John Beomont, George
Sharrock, Edward Collins, and William VVebber, were brought to the Governor;
who told VVebber, Beomont, and Sharrock, that they were pardoned in honor of
the new General; and Collins, that he was to go to Jaccatra, there to stand to
the favor of the General. So the Governor made them drink Wine with him, and
courteously dismissed them: willing them to go and consult with the rest that
were saved, who were fit to be placed in the several Factories. Which done,
and their Opinions reported to the Governor, he accordingly commanded each to
his place, adding that he would thenceforth take upon him the Patronage and
Government of the Engglish Companies business. To which purpose he had within a
few days past, opened a Letter which came from the English President at
Jaccatra, directed to Captain Towerson; being as he said) the first English
letter that ever he intercepted; further saying, that he was glad that he found
by that Letter, that the English at Jaccatra were innocent touching this
business.

The Governor and Fiscal having thus made an end at Amboyna, dispatched
themselves for Banda, where they made very diligent enquiry against Captain
VVelden the English Agent there; yet found no color nor shadow of guilt to lay
hold on; but at last entertained him with courteous speeches, professing to be
very glad that they found him, as well as the English at Jaccatra, to be
without suspicion of this Treason (as they term it.) Captain VVelden perceiving
the disorder and confusion (...) ^^e English Companies affairs at Amboyna, by
means of this dealing of the Dutch; forthwith hired a Dutch Pinnace at Banda,
and passed to Amboyna; where instantly upon his arrival, he re called the
Companies servants, sent (as before) by the Dutch Governor to the upper
Factories.

Having enquired of them, and the rest that were left at Amboyna, of the whole
proceedings lately passed, he found by the constant and agreeing relation of
them all, that there was no such Treason of the English as was pretended: as
also understanding what strict command the governor had given to the surviving
English not once to talk or confer with the Country People concerning this
bloody business, although the said Country People every day reproached them
with Treason, and a bloody intention to have massacred the Natives, and to have
ripped up the bellies of women with Child, and such like stuff, wherewith the
Dutch have possesed the poor Vulgar, to make the English odious unto them. The
said M. VVelden therefore finding it to sort neither with the honor and profit
of the English Company, his Masters, to hold any longer residence in Amboyna,
he took the poor remnant of the English along with him, in the said hired
Pinnace for Jaccatra; whither the governor had sent John Beomont, and Edward
Collins before, as men condemned, and left to the mercy of the general.

When this heavy news of Amboyna came to Jaccatra, and the English there, the
President forthwith sent to the general of the Dutch, to know by what Authority
the governor of Amboyna had thus proceeded against the English, and how he and
the rest of the Dutch there at Jaccatra, did approve these proceedings. The
governor returned for answer, that, The Governor of Amboyna's Authority was
derived from that of the Lords States General of the United Neatherlands; under
whom he had lawful Jurisdiction both in criminal and civil causes, within the
destrict of Amboyna; further, that such proceedings was necessary against
Traitors, such as the English executed at Amboyna, might appear to be by their
own confessions: a Copy whereof he therewith sent to the English President; who
sent the same back to be Authentically certified, but received it not again.

Hitherto has been recited the bare and naked Narration of the Progress and
Passage of this Action, as it is taken out of the Depositions of six several
English Factors; whereof four were condemned, and the other two acquitted in
this process of Amboyna: all, since their return into England, examined upon
their Oaths in the Admiralty Court. The particular of Captain Towerson's, as
also of Emanuel Tomson's examination and answers, are not yet come to light, by
reason that these two were kept apart from all the rest, and each alone by
himself; nor any other of the English suffered to come to speak with them,
except only that short Farewell, which John Becmout took of Tomson the morning
before the execution before mentioned. The like obscurity is yet touching the
examinations and answers of diverse of the rest that are executed; being,
during their imprisonment, so strictly looked to, and warded by the Dutch, that
they might not talk together, nor mutually relate their miseries.

But because the Hollanders defend their own proceedings by the Confessions of
the parties executed, acknowledging severally under their hands, that they were
guilty of the pretended crime; it will not be amiss to recollect and recall unto
this place, as it were unto one sum and total, certain circumstances dispersed
in several parts of this Narration; whereby, as well the innocence of the
English, as the unlawful proceedings against them, may be manifested.

First therefore it is to be remembered, that the Japons were apprehended,
examined, and tortured three or four days, before the English were attached;
and the same as well of their apprehension, as torture, was rise and notorious
in the Town of Amboyna, and the parts adjoining. Tomson, in this interim, and
the very first day of the examination of the Japon, went to the Castle to ask
leave of the Governor to land some Rice, and brought back the news with him to
the English house of the cruel handling of these poor Japons. This had been
Item enough to the English, if they had been guilty, to shift for themselves:
whereto also they had ready means by the Curicurries or small Boats of the
Amboyners, which lie along the Strand in great number, wherewith they might
easily have transported themselves to Seran, to Bottoom, or to Maccassar, out
of the reach and Jurisdiction of the Dutch; but in that they fled not in this
Case it is a very strong presumption, that they were as little privy to any
Treason of their own, as suspicious of any treacherous train laid for their
bloods.

In the next place let it be considered, how impossible it was for the English
to atchieve this pretended Enterprise.

The Castle of Amboyna is of a very great strength (as is before declared) the
Garrison therein two or three hundred men, besides as many more of their free
Burgers in the Town. What their care and circumspection in all their Forts is,
may appear, not only by the quick Alarm they now took at the foolish question
of the poor Japan, made to the Sentinel above recited; but also by that which a
little before happened at Jaccatra, where one of their Soldiers was shot to
death for sleeping in the watch.

Durst ten English men (whereof not one a Soldier) attempt any thing upon such
a strength and vigilance? As for the assistance of the Japans, they were but
ten neither, and all unarmed as well as the English: For, as at the seizure of
the English house, all the provision therein found was but three Swords, two
Muskets, and a half a pound of Powder: so the Japans (except when they are in
service of the Castle, and there armed by the Dutch) are allowed to have no
Arms, but only a Catan, a kind of short Sword: and it is forbidden to all the
Dutch, upon great penalty, to sell any hand gun, powder or bullets to the
Japans or Amboyners. But let it be imagined, that these 20 persons English and
Japans, were so desperate as to adventure the exploit; how should they be able
to master the Dutch in the Castle, or to keep possession when they had gotten
it? what second had they? There was neither Ship nor Pinnace of the English in
the Harbor. All the rest of the Japans in the Island, were not twenty Persons,
and not one English more. The nearest of the rest of the English were at Banda,
forty Leagues from Amboyna; and those but nine persons, all afterward cleared
by the Governor, and Fiscal themselves from all suspicion of this pretended
crime, as were also the rest of the English at Jaccatra.

On the other side, besides the strength of the Castle and Town of Amboyna, the
Hollanders have three other strong Castles, well furnished with Soldiers in
the same Island, and at Cambello near adjoining. They had then also in the Rode
of Amboyna 8 Ships and Vessels, namely the Rotterdam of 1200 Tun, the Unicorn
of 300 Tun, the Free-mans Vessel of 100 Tun, the Calck, of 60 Tun, Captain
Gamals Junck of 40 ^un, the Flute of 300 Tun, the Amsterdam of 1400 Tun, and a
small Pinnace of about 60 Tun; and all these well furnished with Men and
Ammunition. It is true that the Stories do record sundry Valiant and hardy
enterprises of the English Nation, and Holland is Witness of some of them, yea,
has Reaped the Fruit of the English Resolution; yet no Story, no Legend
scarcely reporteh any such hardiness, either of the English or others, That so
few persons so naked of Provisions and Supplies, should undertake such an
Adventure upon a Counter-party, so well and abundantly fitted at all points.

But let it be further granted, that they might possibly have overcome all
these difficulties; yet to what end and purpose should they put themselves into
such a jeopardy? They knew well enough, that it was agreed between both
Companies at home, That the Forts in the Indies should remain respectively in
the hands of such, as had possession of the at the Date of the Treaty, Anno
1619. and that the same was ratified by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords States
General. They know likewise, and all the World takes knowledge of his Majesty's
Religious observation of Peace and Treaty with all his Neighbors, yea, with
all the World: what reward then could these English hope for, of this their
Valor and Danger? Certainly none other than that which is expressly provided by
the Treaty it self, that is, To be Punished as the Disturbers of the Common
Peace and Amity of both Nations.

But let these Englishmen have been as foolish in this Plot, as the Hollanders
will have them; Is it also to be imagined that they were so graceless, as when
they were Condemned, and seriously admonished by the Ministers to discharge
their Consciences, yet then to persist in their Dissimulation, being otherwise
of such Godly Behavior, as to spend the time in Prayer, singing of Psalms, and
spiritual comforting one another, which the Dutch would have have had them
bestow in drinking, to drive away their sorrow? Let Colsons question to the
Minister be considered: his and the rests offer and desire to receive the
Sacrament, in sign and token of their Innocence; their mutual asking
forgiveness for their like false accusations of one another forced by the
Torture; Tomsons last Farewell to Beomont; Colsons prayer, and his writing in
his Prayer Book; Fardo's Farewell to Powel; also his conjuring ^xhortation to
his Fellows, to discharge their Consciences, and all their Answers thereunto;
craving God's Mercy or Judgment, according to their Innocence in this cause;
their general and religious profession of their Innocence to their
Contrymen, at their ^ast parting with them; and finally, the sealing of this
Profession with their Last Breath and Blood, even in the very Article of death,
and in the stroke of execution. What horrible and unexampled dissimulation were
this? If some one or more of them had been so fearfully desperate, yet would
not there one amongst ten be found to think of the Judgment to come, whereunto
he was then instantly summone^ without Essoin, Bail, or Mainprise? What? had
they hope of reprieve and l^fe, if they kept their countenance to the last? Yet
what hope had Tomson and the rest, when Captain Towerson's head was off? Nay
what desire had Tomson and Clark to live, being so mangled and martyred by the
Torture? They were executed one by one and every one several took it upon his
death, that he was guiltless.

Now to blanch and smooth over all this rough and barbarous proceeding; it is
here given out, that the Governor and Fiscal found such evidence of the Plot,
and dealt so evenly in the process, that they spared not their own People,
having used some of their native Hollanders, partakers of this Treason, in the
same manner as they did the English. But this as well by the Relation here
truly and faithfully set down, grounded upon the sworn Testimouy of six
credible witnesses, as also by other sufficient reports of diverse (lately come
out of those parts) appears to be (...) mere tale, not once alleged by any
in the Indies in many months after the execution, but only invented and
dispersed here for a Faucus an^ a fair color upon the whole cause, and to make
the world believe, tha^ the ground of this barbarous and Tyrannous proceeding
was a true crime and not the unsatiable covetousness of the Hollanders, by this
cruel treachery to gain the sole Trade of the Molluccos, Banda and Amboyna,
which is already become the event of this Bloody Process.

To add hereunto by way of Aggravation, will be needless; the Fact is so ful^
of odious and barbarous Inhumanity, executed by Hollanders upon the English
Nation, in a place were both lived under Terms of Partnership and great Amity,
confirmed by a most solemn Treaty.

FINIS.

