THE SEVERAL TRIALS OF Sir HENRY SLINGSBY Knight. JOHN HEWET D. D. and JOHN
MORDANT Esquire FOR HIGH TREASON In WESTMINSTER HALL, Together with The Lord
President's Speech before the Sentence of Death was pronounced against the
before named Sir H. Slingsby and Dr. Hewet, being the 2. of June, 1658. At which
time the said Mr Mordant was by the Court acquitted.

As also the manner of their Execution on Tower Hill, the 8. of June following,
with the Substance of their SPEECHES on the Scaffold.

LONDON. Printed in the year, 1658.

The substance of what passed on Tuesday the 25. of May 1658. at the Trial of
Sir HENRY SLINGSBY Knight, in Westminster Hall, etc.
THe High Court being set, and the Names of the Commissioners being called, The
Sergeant at Arms was commanded to fetch the Prisoner to the Bar. Sir Henry
Slingsby was brought accordingly to the Bar. Then Proclamation made for
silence, and the Commission for Trial of the Prisoner read. Proclamation for
silence again was made, Then Mr. Attorney General Prideaux exhibited a Charge
of High Treason against Sir Henry Slingsby the Prisoner, which was read: the
substance of which Charge was as follows, viz.

THat the Town of Kingston upon Hull in the County of Kingston upon Hull in
England, on the 11, of October. 1656. and ever since unto the day of the
exhibiting of this Charge, was, and has been, and is yet a Town belonging to
this Commonwealth, where there is a Garrison, and a great part of the A^y and
Forces belonging to this common wealth: That Sir Henry Slingsby late of
Redhouse in the County of York Knight, ^nding and i^ending to imb^oil this
common wealth in intestine ^rs, the 30. of April last, and diverse times since
the 10. of October. 1656 and before the said 30. of April last, as a ^lse Traitor
and Enemy then and yet to his Highness Oliver Lord Protector of th^e Nations,
together wit^ one Robert Gardener and Edward Chapman; and with one William
Smith of the said county of York Gentlemen, and diverse others, did
traitorously, advisedly and maliciously combine together, and plot and contrive
to betray and yield up the said Garrison of Hull unto Charles Stuart eldest son
of the late King Charles, ^w an Enemy to this commonwealth.

That the said Sir Henry Slingsby by like traitorous combination, the said 30.
of April last, and diverse times after the said 10. October. 1656. did
traitorously and maliciously plot and contrive, and endeavor to stir up
mutinies within the said Garrison, to withdraw Ralph Waterhouse, John Overton,
Geo. Thompson etc. Officers of the same from their ob^dience to his Highness
Oliver Lord Protector.

That then and there, and at diverse other times as well before as after the
said 30. April (...), and after the said 10. October. 1656. ^e the said Sir H.
Slingsby did traitorously, advisedly and maliciously plot, contrive and
endeavor to stir and raise up Forces against Oliver Lord Protector, and
against the Government of this Commonwealth as the same is established, and to
alter the same.

That the said Sir Henry Slingsby did traitorously, etc. then and there
declare, publish and promote the said Charles Stuart to be king of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, and held
correspondence with him. All th^se things the said Sir Henry Slingsby, at
Kingston upon Hull aforesaid, did maliciously etc. carry on by conferring with
the said Officers how to eff^ the aforesaid Treason, and encouraging the said
officers thereunto. by promising to them and every of the^ rewards and sums
of mo^y ^o join with him in the Treason aforesaid, and by delivering to the
said Ralph Waterhouse, one of the Officers of the Garrison, a certain
Instrument under Seal, which the said Sir H. Slingsby said was from Charles
Stuart, and did purport to be a Commission from the said Charles Stuart, to him
the said R. Waterhouse to be Governor of the Castle. All which said Treasons
are contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided. With which Treasons
the said Attorney General, on behalf of the Lord Protector, etc. does charge
the said Sir H. Slingsby, and prays that the said Sir H. Sl. may be put to
answer thereto, averring that the said Sir H. Slingsby is the person by name
appointed by His Highness the Lord Protector to be tried and proceeded against.
Signed, May 25. 1658.

Edm. Prideaux.

Lord President. Thou here stand charged for High Treason; This Court
requires that thou give a positive answer, whether guilty or not guilty.


Sir H. Slingsby. I desire to have Counsel assigned me.


L. Pres. There is matter of Fact laid to your charge, which amounts to
Treason, and there is no Law allowed in matters of Fact.


Sir H. Sl. There is also matter of Law; and I desire to be tried by a Jury,
which is according to the Law of the Land.


L. Pres. We are all here your Jury as well as your Judges; we are the number
of two or three Juries, and your Jury is well known, for they are chosen by the
Parliament; you are to plead to your Indictment.


Sir H Sl. I desire to know whether there can be any conviction, unless it be
by confession?


L. Pres. If you had looked upon the Act of Parliament, that would have told
you; it speaks of examination of witnesses, it speaks of your confession, and
answer, and of your Default; and if you do not plead to it, will be very penal
to you.


Sir H. Sl. If it be by the Laws of the Land, that the Trial should be by a
Jury; I desire I may have that privilege.


L. Pres. Acts of Parliament make Justice and Law, they are both; they think
fit to change the custom of Trials that have been in former times, and all
persons must submit to it: And the Parliament has thought fit to make this
Court both Jury and Judges; and therefore I require that you answer, whether
Guilty or not Guilty.


Sir H. Sl. I desire that the Act of Parliament may be read,


L. Pres. You are before your Jury and Judges; Parliaments have great care of
the Rights of the people, and have appointed this Court, and His Highness has
appointed you to be tried by us, you ought therefore to plead to your
Indictment.


Sir H. Sl. The Law gives liberty in case of Juries to the Party accused, to
make his Exceptions against the Jury, which he cannot do here, where you are
both Judge and Jury.


L. Pres. If you have any particular Exception to any man, you may make it; you
were Sir of the Parliament when this Act was made


Sir H. Sl. I was a Prisoner at the same time.


L. Pres. Although a Prisoner, yet you are bound by Act of Parliament.


Mr Phelps. Clerk You have heard your Charge read, and Plea demanded; the Court
again requires of you, that you give a positive Answer, whether Guilty or not?


Sir H. Sl. I am (my Lord) of an opinion, (though you may account it a Paradox)
that I cannot trespass against your Laws, because I did not submit to them


L. Pres. All the People of England must submit to the Laws of England, to the
Authorities of England, all must submit to my Lord Protector and Acts of
Parliament: We sit here by Authority of his Highness, by a Commission under the
great Seal of England, and by Authority of Parliament, and you must submit to
our Authority.


Sir H. Sl. The Laws have been so uncertain with me, that I could not well know
them, and when I was a Prisoner I could not take notice of them, I could have
no benefit by your Laws, because that is no Law to me which does not give me
interest and property to what I have; It is the benefit of Laws, that they do
distinguish between meum and tuum; but when you take all from me, in my case it
is not so.


Mr Attor. Gen Prideaux. He may enjoy as much benefit by the Laws as any, if he
have not for feited it, and I desire he may be put to answer.


L. Pres. The Court again require you to plead to you Indictment.


Sir H. Sl. Not Guilty.


Mr Phelps. Your Plea then is, that you are not Guilty. To which, Sir H. S.
answered, Yes.


Mr Lichmore. Mr. Attorney General having exhibited a Charge of High Treason
against this Gentleman, Sir H. Sl. the Prisoner at the Bar; The Charge does set
forth, That the Town of Kingston upon Hull, October. 11. 1656. and ever since, to
the time of exhibiting of the Charge, was a Town of this Commonwealths; and
that within that Town, in all that time, there is, and has been a Garrison,
and part of the Army of this Commonwealth; and during that time Ralph
Waterhouse, John Overton, George Thompson, etc. were Officers of the Forces of
that Garrison. That Sir H. Slingsby, minding to imbroil the Commonwealth in
war, April 30. last, and diverse other times since, October. 10. 1656. as a false
Traitor and Enemy to His Highness the Lord Protector, did plot contrive and
endeavor to betray the said Town and Garrison to Charles Stuart, an Enemy to
this Commonwealth. It sets forth further, that Sir H. Slingsby, the time and
place aforesaid did contrive and endeavor to stir up mutinies among the
Soldiery of that Garrison, and to raise Forces against this Commonwealth; And
that he did Publish and Declare the said Charles Stuart to be King of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, etc. And has held Correspondence with him. And that he
delivered to the said Ralph Waterhouse a certain Instrument which he said was a
Commission from Charles Stuart: All which Treasons are contrary to the form and
effect of the Act of Parliament; and the Prisoner having pleaded Not Guilty,
which Plea is Recorded, we are ready to prove him Guilty, and ready to call our
witnesses.


Mr. Attor. Genesis You have heard the Charge and Plea, Not Guilty, it rests upon
us to prove it to you This Gentleman himself (I believe) when he has heard
them particularly opened, will be convinced that of these Acts he has been
Guilty. It would not have been expected from him to have tasted of the mercy of
this Court: For had he had justice done formerly, he had not been to have
answered this here. I do believe it was expected from those that did govern, to
have got him off by mercy, not to take him off by justice; but he cease not
to interpose on the behalf of Charles Stuart, and endeavored to bring him in
again, and had like to have withdrawn the faithful Officers of that Garrison
to betray their trust, if money would have done it, that was not wanting to be
offered; if preferment would have wrought upon them, that was proffered; if
hopes of higher preferment under Charles Stuart would ^ave wrought upon them,
it would have been done. But to our witnesses.

Ralph Waterhouse sworn.
Mr. Attor. Genesis What discourse had you with Sir H. Slingsby touching the
de^vering up of Hull?


Mr. Waterh I had several discourses with him. Particularly, about the latter
e^ of December last, being a hunting, Sir H. Slingsby's Son came to me in the
field, and told me his Father presented his service to me, and gave me a Book
which I looked on about an hour after, and found it was a Printed Book; at the
beginning was a paper thus written, Put this out with your finger, and then
tell me whether Rob. Gardener had not spoke to me to serve the King, etc.
presently after I acquainted Col Smith, who advised me to discover if I could
whether Sir H. Slingsby was carrying on any Plot. I went to Sir H. Slingsby,
and Sir H. S. took me to the window side, and hugged and embraced me; and asked
me if Robert Gardener had not spoke to me to serve the King: And then began
with a great many good words, and said that one (meaning His Highness) had put
a disrespect upon me, and if I would I might right my self, with many other
words; and promised me a sum of money to secure the South-house for the service
of the King. About a week after he sent the Book again, and in the same leaf
wrote a few lines more, which I also showed to Col Smith; he promised me 5000
l. in land or money here or elsewhere: I made many Queries, and told him I
thought it was to no purpose; he told me that if that House were secured, in a
little time he would bring an Army to besiege Hull, and then half our work
would be done. He after sent me another Paper which was to this purpose, that
if the Governor sought for him, he would give security for his peaceable
living; and said, if I would give him a Piece, he would make it twenty if he
did not procure me a Commission from C. Stuart within fourteen days; he said
further, that a great party were in engaged in Scotland. upon the second of
April he delivered to me a Commission, which he said was from the King, and the
Commission being read in Court, the said Mr. Waterhouse averred it to be the
same he received of Sir Henry Slingsby, and which ran thus,

C. R.

CHarles by the Grace of God (with the old usual Title, etc.) To our right
Trusty and Well-beloved Maj. Ralph Waterhouse; We do by these presents
constitute and appoint you to be Governor of the Castle and two Block-houses
near Hull, and to put such a Garrison of Horse and Foot therein, as you shall
judge necessary for the defense of the same; and to command the said Garrison
as Governor thereof, and to do all things necessary for the preservation of the
said place. Given at Bruges, March 12. 1657.

Sir H. Slingsby also said to me, that he had spoken with Capt. Overton, and
promised to furnish him with money to lay in provision, and engaged by a Bond
to repay such money, as I should lay out for the victualling of the Southhouse.
And also read a Letter from C. Stuart running thus, I can never be enough
sensible of your favors, etc. I demanded how the Army should come; he answered,
that the Duke of York had 7 or 8000 men, that the King of Spain would furnish
them if there was a place of security, and asking him what way of
correspondence he had with C. Stuart, he said he had a way of having
Commissions from C. Stuart which he would not discover. Here Sir. H. Slingsby
stood up and disowned any such expression.


Mr. At. Genesis What Officer were you Mr. Waterhouse?


Mr Waterh. I have the command of a Company, and of the South-Block-house.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Waterhouse, what Letter was that Sir H. Slingsby sent to his
Son?


Mr. Wat. The Contents were thus, That Harry would speak to the two men to be
very importunate with the Twelve.

Sir H. Slingsby promised so many men. That he offered Capt. Overton 20 l. to
raise Forty men.


Mr. At. Genesis How many men did he tell you should be at Paul near Hull?


Mr. Wat. 600 to march into Hull.


Mr. At. Genesis What men did he tell you Andrew would raise?


Mr. Wat. He said Andrew would raise 50 or 60 men when he pleased; and that
Capt Overton should have a deputation to command the Castle under me, he said
he had good hopes of Col. Smith, and that he had a Com^sion for him if he would
accept of it.


Sir H. Sl. This which is here spoken in seriousness, was then spoke in mirth,
a mere Discourse as those that are in good fellowship may have, and what I said
or did was but in jest.


L. Pres There ought to be no good fellowship in Treason.


Mr. Wat. I never visited him but by Col. Smiths Commission. Sir H. Slingsby
according to his Engagement upon receipt of a Piece gave me another Commission
running thus; Oliver Lord Protector, etc. took it again and burned it.


Mr. At. Genesis Sir Henry, was it you that filled up that blank Commission?


Sir. H. Sl. It is more then any man knows: But it is not the Commission I gave
Waterhouse which is dated 12 March, 1657.

Capt. John Overton sworn. Mr. Phelps, showed him the Commission dated 12.
March, 1657.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see that Commission delivered to Waterhouse by Sir H.
Slingsby?


Capt. Overton. Yes, I did, he delivered it to him in the Castle, about the
second of April last.


Sir H. Sl Mr. Overton, what date did that Commission which I then delivered,
bear.


Capt. Overt. This is the same Commission, and (having it in his hand) I here
see it is dated 12. March, 1657.


Sir H. Sl. I deny that the Commission I then delivered did bear that date.


Waterh. and Overton. My Lord, We are upon our Oaths.


C. Overt. I saw Sir H. give it to Major Waterhouse in his own Chamber in the
Castle of Hull, and Maj. W. bid me read it, which I did.


Sir H. Sl. Was that Commission which you read dated 12. March?

Cap. Overton reads the copy of it which he then wrote from the original, which
agreed with this.
Sir H. Sl. I deny that the Commission then delivered was of that date.


Waterh. and C. Over. Both deny the altering of the date.


Sir H Sl. Maj Waterhouse desired me to alter the date of the Commission, and I
scraped out April and the day, and put in March.

Capt. Overton Examined.
Mr. At Genesis What Treaty was between Sir H. and you at Hull? are you an Officer
there?


C. Ov. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis How long have you been an Officer there?


C. Ov. About ten years.


Mr At. Genesis What proceedings was there between Sir H. and you? What meetings
had you? etc. was he your prisoner?


C Ov. He was my Prisoner; The first time he spoke any thing to me was on 18
Febr. last, when he told me, he thought me the strictest man alive with
Prisoners, but n^w would believe the contrary; said, that I s^arched a man of
his for a Letter, but afterward to prevent me he gave his Letter in a Purse
with some money to his Landress who carried it into the Town, and sent it away,
and after that (he told me) I never found any Letter. I told him if he wanted
any thing necessary I would go to the Governor about it; he told me it was not
much for tha^, b^t that I might very much befriend him. He wrote to me, that a
Colonel (naming him) was engaged (...) from the King, asking whether I knew my
men were right for me, and particularized one Clark, I told him he was right he
asked me what I thought of 100 l. to give them, I told him they did not use to
have such great Gratuities. This was 18 Febr. 1657.

28. Febr He asked me where the Sallyport was, I told him it was twenty yards
from the Castle. He told me, some Prisoners not long ago intended to make an
escape that way, but were prevented, and asked me which way it entered into the
Castle, which way I could let in any men into the Castle, That I should not
want money; whether I could tell how to victual the Castle; he would be glad if
I could do it. He told me that the King kept his d^signs so close that none
knew of them, and that it was not known whether he wo^ land at Hull or
Scarborough.

3. March. He asked me whether I continued my Command, I told him I knew
nothing to the contrary, to which he showed much gladness; he told me Duke
Dassy was to bring a considerable party, but stai^ so long that the rest were
gone. 6. March he asked me what news, and said that Chapman had assured his Son
the Town was too strong for the Garrison, and asked me who I knew in the Town
to be right, I told him dw. Chapman was not for the S^ldiery.

March 14. I told him, that his old Master C. Stuart was about to set sail with
7 or 8000 men. He said, that the King was more private then to let any man know
his design: But asked me, whether I was ready to receive him? March. 23. Sir H.
Slingsby being below in our chamber, told me that I had a fit opportunity to
receive such men as might be right for me. I told him, I thought I could not
have half my number. He told me, he was glad I would serve the King; and said,
that if he had any favor from the King, I should not want any thing: He told
me he had assurance, that any that assisted the King, when he first came to
kiss his mother Earth, he would give them 4 or 5000 l. That he would furnish me
with money; And desired that I would not shoot any great Bullets at King
Charls's men when they were landing: And further told me, that if I would take
a Deputation to command under Major Waterhouse, he would procure it. On April
2. Sir H S. told Major Waterhouse that he had a Commission for him to be
Governor of Hull, and I saw him deliver a Parchment-Commission to Major
Waterhouse.


Mr. At. Genesis If Sir H. has any thing to object, he may.


Sir H. Sl. I see that I am trepan'd by these two fellows; They have said that
serously against me which was spoken in mirth between us; I never sought to
them, but they to me; the Commission was procured by no intercourse with any
persons beyond the Seas, but a blank which I had for four years together. Nor
had I any correspondence beyond Sea to carry on any design here.

Lieutenant George Thomson sworn. Being asked what Officer he was, he answered,
I am a Lieutenant to Major Waterhouse, I was desired to go and see Sir H
Slingsby 16 April, who told me That he had great confidence in me, I said to
him, why? ^e told me he thought I had good thoughts of the King; his Son told
me he heard the King was to come in, and to ^ring in a considerable Army, but
knew not when. Next day I went again to Sir H. and asked him if he would walk
on the Leads, which he did, and there I told him I had been pondering on the
words he last spoke to me, who then hugging me said, I have a great deal of
confidence in you, ther^ is a design in agitation to bring in the King with a
considerable Army, but he did not know how soon it would be, but (...) me I
should have notice of it, and said that the King had promised pardon to all
Officers but the Lord Protector and Lord Bradshaw.


Sir H Sl. I confess such like discourses; but --

Waterhouse spoke to me that I would speak to Thomson to try whether he would
be assistant, but I told him I would not, least he, should not accept it, and
then turn him out of his place. Waterhouse pressed me to go to Thomson, and M
Waterhouse invited us to his house to Dinner, after Dinner be spoke to Thomson
to go with me on the Leads to show me the Guns, we walked about, and came down
agains then said Waterhouse to me, did not you speak to Thomson? I said not:
you had a good opportunity, said he. At last Thomson came to me, and I had some
discourse with him about it.


L. Pres. Sir H. S. have you any thing else to say?


Sir H. Sl. No, my Lord.

Then Mr. Mr Sergeant Maynard summed up the Charge, Plea and Evidence, and
eloquently set forth the fullness and clearness of the Evidence with the
heynousness of the oftence, and demanded the Judgment of the Court.


Mr. At. Genesis I shall not trouble you with repetition, the matter being clearly
laid open; the place where this acting was, and where the design was laid, was,
I may safely say, the most considerable place in England for Charles Stuart's
design; a place strongly seated and situated and remote from this City, and
had he prevailed there, as he endeavored, it had not been peace with us that
now are here: And truly my Lord, I cannot but pity those Gentlemen that are
thus drawn into designs which I am confident will never take; and I am sor^y
that people should be so seduced as they are, for their seducers bring them to
the Gallows, and then laugh at them. And (my Lord) I pity this Gentleman
(pointing at Sir H.) that those gray hairs should thus go to the Grave; I have
no more to say, but crave the justice of this Court.

The Sergeant at Arms was commanded to take away the Prisoner.

Proclamation for adjournment of the Court into the Painted Chamber.

After a little private Debate in the Painted Chamber they adjourned till
Thursday next nine in the morning.

Thursday May 27. being appointed for the meeting of the same Court, about ten
of the Clock they accordingly met in the Painted Chamber Westminster; where
after about two hours private debate they adjourned till Tuesday next, the
first day of June.


The Substance of Doctor HEVVET's Trial On Tuesday the first day of June, 1658.
THE Sergeant at Arms being commanded by the Court to fetch the Prisoners to
the Bar, Dr. Hewet was brought to the Bar accordingly.

After Proclamation was made for silence, the Lord President asked Mr. Attorney
Genesis what he had to say against the Prisoner at the Bar. Mr. Attorney Genesis
thereupon exhibited an Impeachment of High Treason against the Prisoner, and
desired it might be read, and prayed that the Court will please to receive his
Answer thereunto. The Charge was read by Mr. Phelps the Clerk; the effect of
which was as follows, viz.

That John Hewet late of the Parish of Gregorie's in the City of London, Doctor
of Divinity, minding and intending to embroyl this Commonwealth in new and
intestine Wars, the 30. of April now last past, and at diverse times since the
10 of October, which was in the year of our Lord 1656. and before the said 30.
of April last past, as a false Traitor and Enemy to Oliver then and yet Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and to the said Commonwealth;
together with one Trelawney late of London Gent. Henry Bishop of Lewis in
Sussex Gent. and other their Accomplices at the Parish of Gregorie's aforesaid,
and at Lewis in Sussex, did traitorously, advisedly, and malicioufly plot,
contrive, and endeavor to stir up force, and levy war against the said Oliver
Lord Protector, and against the Government of this Commonwealth, as the same
is now established, and to subvert and alter the same. And did also then and
there, and at diverse other times and places, as well before as after the said
30. day of April now last past, and after the said 10. of October, 1656.
traitorously, advisedly, and maliciously declare, publish, and promote Charles
Stuart eldest Son to the late King Charles, to be King of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging: And did then and there
traitorously, advisedly, and maliciously hold intelligence and correspondence
with the said Charles Stuart. All which said Treasons he the said John Hewet at
the Parish of Gregorie's in the said City of London, and also at Lewis and
elsewhere, did traitorously, advisedly, and maliciously declare at the times
and places aforesaid, by conferring with John Stapley and Henry Mallory how to
effect the same; and by encouraging the said John Stapley and Henry Mallory
thereunto, and by delivering Commissions to them from the said Charles Stuart
concerning the levying War against the said Oliver Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, -- All which said Treasons are
contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided. With which said
Treasons committed and done, the said Attorney Genesis for and on the behalf of
his Highness the Lord Protector and the Commonwealth, does charge and Impeach
the said John Hewet; And for and on the behalf of the said Oliver Lord
Protector and the Commonwealth prays that the said John Hewet may be put to
Answer, that such Trial, Judgment, and Proceedings may be had against him as
to justice does appertain. And the said Attorney Genesis does aver that the said
John Hewet is the person by name appointed by his Highness the Lord Protector
to be examined and proceeded against according to the Act.

Dr. Hewet the Prisoner sitting covered whilst his Impeachment was reading,
the Lord President commanded his Hat to be taken off; which the Doctor obser^g
took it off himself. Then Mr. Phelps Clerk to the High Court addressed to the
Prisoner to this effect:

Mr. Phelps. John Hewet D. D. Thou stand here charged of High Treason: this
Court requires you to give your positive Answer, whether guilty or not guilty.


Dr. Hewet. My Lord, Is I have already misbehaved my self here, my error i^ the
more pardonable, because I have not had any Counsel; and I^ dare not pre^ to
have any knowledge in any faculty, especially in the Law: I never did change my
Cassock into a Jump; I am better acquainted with a Pulpit than a Bar; better
read in St. Austin than my Lord Coke, and in the Fathers, than Rastal 's
Reports, or Plowden 's Commentaries. In all my life I never studied any
Law-case till now; that Necessity that has no Law has made me thus far to
become a Lawyer, as to think to plead (not for my Livelihood, but) for my Life.
God forgive them that have occasioned this unusual and unaccustomed (...), that
has put me into such a Pulpit as I never saw before. And therefore (my Lord)
in as much as I have often heard that there are such niceties in the Law that a
man may be lost in the severity of it for a word spoken in mere simplicity, I
shall crave that there may be nothing taken, in prejudice to my innocence, from
words spoken in simplicity: And I hope you will please to grant me that.


Lord Presid. Dr. Hewet, I am sorry, truly, very sorry, to see such an one as
you in that place; but you are impeached of High Treason: All favor will be
shown you according to the rules of Justice. I think you desire Counsel.


Dr. Hewet. No (my Lord) it is first, that I, knowing nothing of the Law, may
have nothing (simply spoken) prejudice me: and that you will allow me Counsel.


L. Presid. The Court is Counsel for you, your business is to plead to the
Indictment; you are required by the Court to answer whether guilty or not
guilty.


Dr. H. My Lord, you sit there as Judge, I beseech you to let me know by what
Commission you sit th^re.


L. Pres. Dr. Hewet, we sit here by a Commission under the Great Seal of
England, in pursuance of an Act of Parliament; that is our Commission.


Dr. H. Pray give me the favor to have the Commission read, my Lord.


L. Pres. D. H. We know our own Authority, it is not usual to read Commissions
to Prisoners; the Laws of England and Acts of Parliament are to be submitted to.


Dr. H. I am not to own every person that will sit to judge me, therefore I
desire to know by what Commission you sit, and who are the Judges, and then I
shall say more.


L. Pres. Those that are to judge you are very well known, you consented your
self to the Judges, we are all chosen by Act of Parliament, the Parliament has
consented to it; we are chosen Judges, and are your Judges by Act of Parliament.


Dr. H. My L. I must know the persons, whether they be all here; I see but very
few.


L. Pres. Here be very many, and we have been all called this morning, as the
course is, and we sit now as your Judges.


Dr. H. Under favor, my Lord, as I remember, the Commission by the Act is
directed to 150. and there are the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, with
the Lords of his Highness Treasury, and all the Judges, and diverse other
persons are named in the Act of Parl. I do not see so many faces as are
mentioned in that Act.


L. Pres. Dr. Hewet, I must tell you the Quorum is any seventeen, or more of
them; if we are here seventeen, or more, we are a Quorum by that Commission: We
are here I believe forty or fifty.


Dr. H. My Lord, with submission, the case is true, in (...) the Commissioners
were but seventeen, and they all present, then they might hear and determine;
but if one were absent, they cannot my Lord as I conceive.


L. Pres. You are a person of parts; and therefore we may delight to hear you,
but we must keep our selves to the business of the Court: You are required by
the Court to answer the Impeachment.


Dr. H. My Lord, if you sit by the Act, sit according to the Act, and then I
shall submit. It was resolved by all the Judges of the Kings Bench in the 13.
of Eliz. in the Earl of Leicester 's Case, see Plowden fol. etc.


Mr. At. Genesis The Doctor did profess his ignoranc^ in the Laws, yet pretends
more knowledge than the Court: The Court are here, and know themselves lawfully
authorized to try you. Dr. Hewet, if you please to proceed to give your Answer
whether guilty or not, you will find the Justice of the Court to be according
to the Laws of England.


Dr. H. This learned Gent. I know his face, though not his name; he speaks
according to worth, but I cannot answer him according to Law, and therefore
still plead ignorance of the Law, but desire to be tried according to Law; and
I have given you a Law-president, if you will go against it, I shall say no
more.


Mr. At. G. This Gent. has it by Tradition, not by his own knowledge; but
the Case he mentions cannot parallel this: The Act of Parliament says, an
hundred and fifty, or any seventeen; here are three seventeens.


Mr. Sol. Ellis. I think the Commission is directed to your Lordships, or any
seventeen: [Which Commissioners, or any seventeen, etc.] The meaning whereof
is, that those seventeen, or more respectively, should hear, etc. There were
several Quorums for England, Scotland and Ireland: 17 for England, 13 for
Scotland, etc. That Case out of Plowden, differs clearly from this: For, if a
Commission be directed, and there be no Quorum, then the Commissioners must all
certify. We humbly conceive that if your Lordships be here seventeen, or more,
you are fully authorized to proceed.


Mr. At. G. In many Cases you have a Quorum of persons, such and such men:
It Is true, here is no Quorum of persons, but a Quorum of the number; and if
there be a Quorum of seventeen it is warrantable.


Dr. H. This learned Gent. he is better able to speak what is Law than I; but
under favor, and with submission, I do not think he may judge of the Laws, or
the other (that spoke his private conception) to interpret the meaning of the
Parliament. And (my Lord) if your Lordship please, I shall make this my humble
appeal to the learned Judges of the Law; That if they will say in this respect
that this is a lawful Judicature, I shall proceed.


L. Pres. You have heard the words of the Act of Parliament read, Authority is
given to the Commissioners, or any seventeen or more of them: Which said
Commissioners respectively; that is, for England seventeen, or more of them;
and you have heard the judgment of the Court upon that. That which you speak
of in relation to my Lord of Leicester's Case is true; if a Commission be
directed to Commissioners, and no Quorum appointed, then all must certify: But
by the Act of Parliament, and the Commission made in pursuance of it, the
Quorum is seventeen: But here are three Quorums.


Dr. H. My Lord, in as much as all the Commissioners are named in that Act, and
that Commission is according to the Act, they are all commissionated to sit,
and unless all sit the rest cannot try and examine, etc. And I shall refer it
to the Judges of the Laws.


L. Pres. We did not call our selves to be your Judges, by being named your
Judges by Act of Parliament, we have power to declare to you what the Law is by
that Act of Parliament, I have declared it.


Dr. H. My Lord, if the Quorum had been named, then it were somewhat: but it
being directed to, 17 or more, when more or 17 are Commissionated all ^ust sit;
I refer it again to the Judges of the Laws.


L. Pres. Dr. Hewet, what you say now, or what you say hereafter besides this,
you have time to speak to, as to matter of Law, after matter of fact has been
tried; if you plead to matter of fact, what you say to the Court as to matter
of Law, we shall be ready to hear it, apply your self to the Court in matter
of fact. The Court asks you whether guilty or not.


Dr. H. My Lord, I must first know whether the Court be a lawful Judicature
before I give imy defense.


L. Pres. Dr. Hewet, you have offered very much touching the jurisdiction of
the Court, in conclusion you must acquiesce; I must put you up to plead, you
know the danger if you do not plead being required; you stand mute and do not
plead, it is as equally dangerous to you as if you had confessed the crimes.


Dr. H. I am so highly sensible of the privileges of an Englishman, that both
for the satisfaction of my own conscience, and all persons, that I would not
willingly give up the liberties and privileges of any English freeman to any
body that demands it; I am very loath that there should be any just imputation
laid upon me, that I should seek a disturbance in point of selfe-interest to
divide my self from the Communion of those that are my fellow-freemen; and I
should, as I have always abhorred to be both a Schismatic from the Church, and
singular from the State. My Lord, I am so concerned for the privileges of an
English freeman, and public interest, that I should be loath to do any thing
toward the giving them up, that might make my heart ache. I shall desire it may
be determined by the Judges.


L. Presid. You speak of common friendship; what is common friendship, but to
be a friend to the public Government? if you have been a friend to the
Government and peace of this Nation, you need not fear to plead to the
Indictment: And therefore I require you to plead to it.


Dr. Hewet. When ever you shall come to a particular Examination of the
business, it will not appear that I have been an Enemy; I desire that whereas
there are many nic^ties in the Laws, I humbly crave the engagement of your
Honors, that there may not be any advantage taken.


Mr. At. G. God forbid.


Dr. H. My Lord, I think I have not spoken any thing unreasonably, or against
Law, and therefore humbly ^rave my former request.


Mr. At. G. If you please, the Dr. knows that there must be a Judgment in which
we m^st acquiesce: This is that Judicature that calls you before them; you sit
by the highest Authority of England, an Act of Parliament in the first place, a
Commission under the great Seal in the second place, and a Commission of his
Highness, against whom, of which the Doctor is one; I desire he may give an
Answer to the Impeachment, that being done, we shall have liberty on both sides
to speak to what is Justice, and Law, and Fact; if you are not guilty, be you
assured that this Court will not take your blood upon them, you have a very
fair Court.


Dr. H. This learned person speaks very fairly, It shall be far from me to
question any Act of a lawful Parliament; but under favor, as yet it does not
appear to me that you have by that Act by which you sit, power to hear and
determine concerning the matters of which I am charged; I refer it, and
appeal again and again ^o the learned Judges of the Laws, even his Highness
Judges.


L. Presid. and Dr. H. The Court has had much patience in hearing of you thus
long, you having not so much as owned their Authority; if you will not own us,
we will own you; therefore I require the Clerk to enter it, that we have
required you to plead.


Mr. Phelps Cl. John Hewet, you here stand charged of High Treason against his
Highness the Lord Protector, and the Commonwealth; the charge has been read
to you, the Court have demanded whether guilty or not guilty, they again demand
of you whether guilty or not guilty.


D. H. My Lord, I shall be very loath to do any thing to save my life, and
forfeit a good conscience: And I shall not for my private interest give up the
Privileges of those that are equal Freemen with my self: I am looked upon in a
double Capacity, as a Clergyman, and as a Common-wealths-man; I should be very
loath to be scandalous in either: And pray be pleased to do that justice to your
selves as to vi^dicate the legality of your Judicature, and then I Will proceed.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, you was pleased to tell the Doctor, that you will own him
when he does not own you, but, my Lord, his flying in your faces, and taxing
you thus is not to be endured; I wish he would have that consideration of
himself, that if he does not own: your Authority, you expect to be owned, and
by it he will be supposed to be guilty of all those Crimes that are laid to his
charge, and by not pleading he does confess them; that will be an high scandal
to Mr. Doctor; Therefore to vindicate your self, I desire you to answer.


Dr. H. This learned Gent. has urged it with a great deal of civility and
respect to me, which I must own and thankfully acknowledge; but (my Lord)
withal, I dare not for the saving of my self give up others, so many thousands
of others, by my Precedent, that might likewise be involved in the same
condition that I am in; therefore (my Lord) let it appear that it is a lawful
Judicature, and I have done.


Mr. At. G. I besee^ Mr. Doctor to consider his case, he is not brought as a
Champion for the people of England, as he stands charged he appears to you to
be contrary affected; I humbly beg that he would be pleased to plead, that so
his innocence may be cleared.


Dr. H. My Lord, I said before that I am no Lawyer, I understand nothing of it,
neither desire to be Judge in my own cause; but I do not desire likewise to be
judged by every person that would sit to judge me, neither would I give up that
right that belongs to an English man to every one that demands it, therefore I
desire you to grant this Petition, that you will make appear that you are a
lawful Judicature. I would rather die ten thousand times then I will be guilty
of giving up my fellow-freemens liberties and privileges.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, some of his own Co^t have acknowledged the like Authority
before him; but if Mr. Doctor be peremptory in this that he will not own your
Authority, and plead to his charge, I must do my duty, that is, humbly to pray
the Court, that if he refuse to answer, I must pray their Judgment, and
acquaint him with the words of the Act; which accordingly was read. So that, my
Lord, in default of Answer, if Mr. Doctor will not plead to this, my Lord I
must thereupon pray that you will proceed according to the Act, as in cases of
High Treason, which is very pen^l. I have no more to say.


Dr. H. My Lord, I suppose these learned Gent. who are so learned in the Laws
will be cautious in what they do against Law, and I hope they will remember
what condemnation and execution besell Trecilla in the 11 of Rich. 2. that
there did misadvise the King to do such and such things, that is much like to,
this Case of mine: And withal I hope they will remember what befell the Judges
in the Case of Shipmoney in the time of the late King, and therefore I hope
they will be cautious themselves in doing any thing that is contrary to Law.


L. Presid. Dr. H. you have heard the Clause of the Act of Parliament read to
you, whereby you may understand, either we must proceed upon your Answer, or
else to Judgment upon your refusal; if upon your answer you clear your
innocence, then those freemen that you speak of may faithfully embrace you; but
if you will not answer, we must proceed to Judgment; I am sorry for your Robe
sake, but if you will not answer, you cannot acquit your self, you thereby
confess it: therefore let me advise you for your Robe sake to follow the best
Counsel, that is, to put your self upon that which Prisoners must do: Answer to
it, guilty o^ not guilty.


Dr. H. My Lord, I hope it is not the sense of the whole Court that they should
proceed against me, either to sentence or any other way, till first they clear
themselves to me.


Mr. At. G. Pray who is the Judge? you must clear your self to him.


L. Pres^. If there be any here that are of another opinion, let him declare
himself: Dr. H. you lose your self mightily in saying this one thing so often,
and we lose our time; I require you again to plead.


Dr. H. My Lord, I cannot speak of that too often that is so dear and precious
to me and every person.


Mr. At. G. I can say no more but pray your justice.


L. Presid. Doctor Hewet, I am called upon by the Court, because of your
refusal to answer, but I pity you very much, and therefore desire once more the
patience and favor of the Court, that they would give you leave to answer;
therefore Mr. Doctor, that we may not record your standing mut^ and refusing to
answer, I shall once more in favor to you require you to answer. Clerk, stay
your hand a while.


Dr. H. My Lord, both the Court and all these persons will thus clear me to the
whole world, that I have referred my self and appealed to his Highness Judges
of the Law to resolve whether this be a lawful Judicature; this Appeal is
denied, therefore I must proceed to some other thing seeing you all deny me
that.


Mr. ^helpes Cl. J. Hewet D. D. you stand here charged on behalf of his Highness
the Lord Protector, of Treason against him and this Commonwealth, you have
heard the Charge, the Court has several times demanded your answer, and you
refuse; they the third time require your answer whether guilty or not guilty.


Dr. H. Pray my Lord is there any Indictment found against me by a Crand Jury,
by which I am to be tried? for by the fifth and sixth of Edward the sixth, all
Treasons are to be inquired into and presented by twelve men; the Commission by
which you sit does not declare any other way: I beseech you is there any other
Indictment?


L. Pres. You have a very great Grand Jury, forty persons, and we have power
upon a special Act of Parliament to give order for a Charge to be brought in
against you, and we have according to that power and Authority given order for
this Charge to be brought in against you, and you are to answer to it.


Dr. H. My Lord, with submission you are not a comp^tent Jury.


Mr. Attorney Genesis My Lord, now it is the second part to the same tune; I know
there are many others upon the same string when this is resolved; Sir, This is
the Grand Jury, the Petty Jury, and your Judge; they require you to give your
Answer, whether guilty or not guilty.


D. H. My Lord, this is likewise denied me, I now humbly crave a copy of my
Charge, time to answer to it, and Counsel assigned me.


L. Presid. For the copy of your Charge it was never granted to any Prisoner
indicted for High Treason; For Counsel, you are now upon matter of Fact,
whether guilty or not guilty.


Mr. At. G. I have a word to inform him, I would not press any thing against
him which in my Judgment I thought not legal, you have given him your
resolution as to the Jurisdiction, there is nothing now to say but guilty or
not guilty; he must bring himself to be a party or else nothing can be asked.


Dr. H. I think the Prisoner cannot be charged and tried on one and the same
day, no more than a man can be endicted and tried the same day, as in Calway's
Reports: and this was declared to be Law in the Case of the Portugal
Embassador's Brother.


Mr. At. G. You are not upon your Trial, you must plead and join issue, and
then we will consider whether we will try you now or no; Yet there is many a
man has been brought to prison the same day, found the same day, and tried the
same day.


Dr. H. I desire a copy of my charge, if not that, I desire time to speak, and
Council assigned me, which has been the course of former times; for Counsel
it has been usually allowed, as in the case of Humphry Stafford in the time of
Henry the 7. and in the case of Lilburn. Baron Nicholas, and Serje. Maynard
were of Counsel for Major Rolph, who endeavored to poison the late King: and
for matter of Law, it ought to be allowed, as in my Lord Cook -- and Dyer sixth
book of his Reports, 14 fol. is of the sam^ opinion: Arundell had Counsel
assigned him for murder, in matter of Law.


Sol. Ellis. For matter of fact It was never allowed; but if he plead, and if
any matter of Law do arise that is doubtful to the Court, then the Court if
they doubt of it, assign Counsel; but the prisoner must plead first to the
matter of fact. For a man to be accused the same day, and tried the same day,
is no new thing: For Counsel, if any thing arise in matter of Law then it may
be considered: The Portugal Embass. Brother came, and was accused and tried the
same day. We shall humbly pray that he may plead guilty or not guilty; if any
matter of Law arise your Lordships may do him justice.


Dr. H. My Lord, with submission, this learned Gent. has understood me but in
part; my request was for Counsel for matter of Law in general, as well as
particular for matter of fact. I humbly conceive that there are several Acts
of Parliament that do free me from this charge, and particularly the great
Charter of England; for which I humbly crave I may have Counsel assigned me.


L. Pres. You are now in generals, you speak of several Acts of Parliament, and
you would have Counsel to plead, Counsel was never allowed in this case upon
such a general desire; Many that stand about you may have a prejudice to you,
and think you are loath to plead; I have called upon you often: if we should
once record the refusal, it would be very penal. I would advise you to plead
to the Indictment.


D. H. My Lord, since you have denied me Counsel, I shall desire to speak
something in my own behalf.


Mr. At. G This is a very ill President to the justice of England; I suppose
that you will allow him all favor, but the justice of England must be preferred
against all persons whatsoever: The jurisdiction is settled to the satisfaction
of the Dr. himself; if he will bring himself a party and ask any thing of
you, that must be by pleading, till then ^e can ask nothing.


Dr. H. My Lord, the Judicature is not yet cleared to me, for the legality of
it, and if you please to give a little patience I shall give you the reasons
why.


Mr. At. G. I shall desire it may be no more thus.


Pre. I shall say no more to you, we must make our Authority appear to you
either by trying of you, or judging of you; will you be tried?


Dr. H. My Lord, the Charge depends upon an Act of Parliament which was made
about two years since, the Members of which Parliament were chosen by the
people, yet notwithstanding one hundred and fifty of them were not permitted to
sit --


Mr. At. G. My Lord we must not suffer this, pray if he will not be otherwise
satisfied I must require your strict justice. Your words they are seditious:
this shows the spirit of the man.


Dr. H. I hope you will have patience to hear me for vindication of my self,
and satisfaction of my own conscience and all persons whatever; and withal,
for the clearing of your selves that you do not bring blood upon your selves
by taking that power that is not justifiable --


Mr. At. G. Truly my Lord this is insufferable; Mr. Doctor has had as much
respect as ever any had. I have attended many, I never saw the like in my time;
you have had the patience to hear him oppose your selves, your Authority, your
persons, and to strike at the root of all. Mr. Doctor I would have you to carry
your self with more respect. This shows that much of what is charged against
him is true: If you will scorn the Court say it positively.


Dr. H. My Lord, I humbly submit my self to the Laws of the Land; I shall not
dispute Acts of Parliament, but I conceive (if you will please to give me a
little patience) an house of Commons is not of Authority enough --


L. Pres. Mr. Doctor pray remember that Text, He that seems to be Religious
and bridleth not his tongue, his Religion is vain. Will you plead or not?


Dr. H. My Lord, whilst I speak for the Laws of the Land this is not an evil
speech.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, if you please, I did receive your comands to prepare this
charge against this Doctor; in obedience to you I have done it, not willingly
against your person Mr. Doctor; I have some others to proceed against, if you
will please that Mr. Doctor may dispatch one way or other. I must pray your
final sentence if you do not plead immediately.


Dr. H. My Lord, what I petitioned for before I do again, that seeing you will
not please to give me leave to speak either as to the privileges of English
men, nor as to the Act, I desire time to speak to the Charge, and Counsel.


L. Pres. You have heard that I must require your answer; you must plead guilty
or not guilty.


Dr. H. Has your Lordship assigned me Counsel in matter of fact when matters
of L^w arise?


L. Pres. We shall then take consideration of it, now is not a time.


Dr. H. My Lord, I am in a great straight, I pray God assist me; and I here
appeal to Almighty God and to all the world, that I do against my soul and
conscionce nothing that shall be to the prejudice of the privileges of the
Laws of England; if there shall be any thing in these proceedings that shall be
to the disadvantage of others, my soul be clear of it, the guilt be upon
others; seeing I am necessitated upon this, and cannot have Counsel assigned
me for the judicature, for the legality of it, I refer^ing my self to the
Judges of the Land; I durst refer my self to his Highness^ own Council, that
if they will say that this particular that I have urged, that this is a lawful
judicature, I will go on.


L. Pres. I am required by the Court, before I ^nter your refus^ll I require
your answer.


Dr. H. I am in a great dispute, and I pray God direct me what to do in this
case, though I do not at all dispute my own innocence, which I hope I shall
clear, yet I could petition again (though I am tedious to you, yet I can never
importune enough) to take into your thoughts your selves and posterity and all
the people of England.


L. Pres. I shall desire, because you may see what I say comes from the Act of
Parliament, I shall desire the words may be read to him, what is to be done if
he refuse to answer.

Clerk read that clause. [And for examination of witnesses upon Oath (which the
said respective Commissioners are hereby authorized to administer) and
thereupon, or upon confession of the party, or in defau't of such answer, to
proceed to Conviction and final sentence, as in cases of High Treason, and
misprision of Treason, according to Justice and the merits of the cause; and
such final sentence to execute, or cause to be executed speedily and
impartially.]
Dr. H. My Lord, this is a printed paper which is called an Act of Parliament
--


L. Pres. I must take you off, you have been required to answer, often
required, and having refused, in the name of the Court I require the Clerk to
record it, and pray take away your prisoner.


Dr. H. My Lord --


Court. Take him away, take him away.


The Substance of Mr. MORDANT'S Trial On Tuesday the first day of June, 1658.
THE Sergeant at Arms was commanded to bring John Mordant Esquire to the Bar, who
was brought accordingly.

L. Pres. Mr. Attorney, What have you to say against the Prisoner at the Bar?


Mr. At. G. My Lord, I have prepared a Charge of High Treason against the
Gentleman at the Bar, which I desire may be read.

The substance of the Impeachment.
Mr. Phelps. John Mordant Esquire Stand at the Bar, and hear your Charge.

A Charge of High Treason against John Mordant of Clement D^es in the County of
Middls. Esquire as follows, viz.

That John Mordant late of the Parish of Clement Danes, in the said County of
Middls. Esquire minding and intending to embroil this Commonwealth in new and
intestine Wars and Seditions, on the 30. of April now last past, and at diverse
other days and times since the 10. of October. 1656. and before the said 30. of
April last, as a false Traitor and Enemy to Oliver, then and yet Lord Protector
of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions
thereto belonging, and to this Commonwealth; together with Henry Bishop late
of Parham in the County of Sussex Gent. Hartgil Baron, and Francis Mansel, and
diverse others their Accomplices at the Parish of Clement Danes aforesaid, and at
diverse other places, did traitorously, advisedly, and maliciously plot,
contrive, and endeavor to stir up and raise War against the said Oliver, then
and yet Lord Protector of this Commonwealth, and against the Government
thereof, as the same was established, and to alter and subvert the same: And
did also then and there, as well before as after the said 30. of April last
past, and after the the 10. of October. 1656. traitorously, advisedly, and
maliciously declare, publish, and promote Charles Stuart, eldest Son of the
late King Charles, to be King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. And did
then and there traitorously, advisedly, and maliciously hold intelligence and
corres^ondence with the said Charles Stuart. All which said Treason and
Treasons, he the said John Mordant the said 30. of April last, and other the
times and places aforesaid, and after the said 10. of October. 1656. at Clement
Danes, and other places, did traitorously declare by overt act, that is to say,
by conferring with J. Stapley Esquire and Henry Mallory, and others, how to effect
the same: And did then and there encourage the said J. Stapley and H. Mallory,
and others thereunto: And did deliver Commissions to several persons in the
name of, and as from the said Chapter S^uart, concerning the raising of Forces, and
levying War against the said Olive^, then and yet L. Prot. and against this
Commonwealth. All which said Treason and Treasons are contrary to the Statute
in that case made and provided. With which said Treason and Treasons, he the
said Attorney G. for and on the behalf of the said Oliver then and yet L. Pro.
and on behalf of the said Commonwealth, as aforesaid, does charge and impeach
the said J. Mordant. And the said At. Genesis prays, That he the said J.
Mordant may be put to answer: And that such Proceedings, Trial, and Judgment
may be had against the said Mordant as is agreeable to Law. And the said At.
Genesis does aver that the said J. Mordant is a person by name appointed by his
Highness and Council to be proceeded against.


Mr. I helps Cl. John Mordant Esquire Thou stand here charged with High Treason
against his Highness the L. Protector and the Commonwealth: You have heard the
Charge read; the Court demands your positive answer thereto, whether guilty or
not guilty.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, I desire I may hear the Commission read by which you sit.


L. Pres. You are impeached of High Treason: We require your Answer.


Mr. Mord. I desire the Commission may be read, and the Commissioners names.


L. Pres. You are to be tried by the Laws of England, Act of Parliament, and
Commission under the Great Seal of England, in pursuance of that Act.


Mr. Mord. I claim it as my right, I am ignorant in Law, I desire it may be
read.


L. Pres. It is not granted to any.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, will you take away that liberty that we shall not know by
what Commission we are tried, and who are our Judges? I desire I may not be
made the first president.


L. Pres. It is visible who are your Judges, they are named by Act of
Parliament: We are your Judges.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, if the Act specify any such thing that it may not be read,
I have done: I desire it may be read, that I may have a legal and just
proceeding.


L. Pres. The Act of Parliament does not require it.


Mr. Mord. The Act does not deny it.


L. Pres. You shall have all the privileges that may be; but you must first
plead.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, I demand this, to hear the Commission read.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, Pray let him know what is done, to warn him, lest he fall
into the same condemnation. There was one but a little before you that demanded
the same thing, and the Court has ruled it otherwise, and he has received his
Sentence. I tell you of it that you may beware, and know how to carry your
self. If Mr. Mordant will be pleased to answer whether or no guilty of those
Crimes, then he shall have a fair Trial, and full Examination: If otherwise,
the same Sentence must be required as before; that is, upon refusal, the
Judgment pronounced for High Treason.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, I humbly crave the Act may be read.


Mr. At. G. The Act is public; the Court are not to give you an account of
their authority, or the way of their proceedings; they require your Answer.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, shall I not know by what Law I am tried, nor by what Act,
nor by what Commission?


L. Pres. You seem to be a young Gentleman; I wish rather you would plead Not
guilty, or make an ingenuous Confession.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, This is the first time that I have been before any Court in
my life, I desire that my reason may be convinced; either assign me Counsel to
argue it with this learned Council, and if they convince my Counsel I shall
submit: or, if this Council will say, the Law does debar me the hearing of the
Commission and the Act read to me, I shall refer it to the Judges of the Law,
and by their opinions I will stand or fall.


Mr. At. G. My Lord President, You have offered that Gent. very seasonable
advice, I wish he may be capable of it: And, in these debates, I wish he does
not lose those advantages that are really intended for him. For the Court, it
is by Act of Parl. and no Judicature in Engl. can require any account of their
proceedings.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, Pray give me leave to ask this question, Whether there be
any president for this?


Mr. At. G. By way of advise I do acquaint you that there is no Judicature in
England superior to this, but the Parliament immediately; You are here
Impeached of a very high Crime, High Treason, it may be a strain of youth, the
first step to mercy is confession.


Mr. Mordant. My Lord, I have heard that the Judges of the Land are the best
and proper Expositors of the Law, and if they declare that this is the sense of
the Act, I Will submit to the Court; if the Court will allow me Counsel I shall
submit if my Counsel be convinced; I desire to hear the Commission read.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, this Gent. was a fellow-prisoner with one that went before
him, he walks after the same steps, I wish he may not run into the same Error;
these things were urged by Dr. Hewet, and the Court has ruled that their
Authority is sufficient, and therefore my Lord be pleased that this Gent. may
plead.


Mr. Mordant. I am overborn both for Jury and Counsel, I desire that my reason
may be convinced, if this Counsel will give it under their hands that this is
Law by the Act of 1656. if you will say under your hands that this is Law that
I must be excluded of Jury and Counsel, and that I must not know the Commission
by which I am tried, I will proceed.


L. Pres. I am afraid you have received ill advise from others, possibly you
know what is become of that Prisoner that spoke of Counsel; we cannot assign
you Counsel as to matter of Fact; the Law and Act of Parliament have made us
your Judges, and therefore you are to plead.


Mr. Mordant. My Lord, I desire that that Act may be read to know whether I am
to be excluded of Jury and Counsel; I re^erre it to this Counsel.


Mr. At. G. I doubt the Gent. is in jest, we are here to attend by command of
his Highness the L. Protector; these Gent. are all sworn by Act of Parliament:
it is a little slighting of the Court, to appeal from the Court to the Counsel;
but (my Lord) I beseech you he may forbear to say he is overborn. You shall
have Justice done if you will plead, if not there was a President but now; if
you please to put your self upon the Trial, you shall have a fair Trial.


Mr. Mordant. My Lord, convince me by this Act that I am to lose the right of
Jury; I have not heard any reason why I must love it.


Mr. At. G. I do tell you the Court has given Judgment just now in the like
case.


Mr. Mordant. I ask a President for this.


Mr. At. Genesis I tell you a President, Sir H. Slingsby and Dr. Hewet.


Mr. Mordant. Is it a good President? if any give an ill president, it is
reason I should debate it my self.


Mr. At. Genesis I humbly conceive that this Court is your Court, and you ought to
plead it.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, I desire I may be heard; the words are, that the respective
Commissioners, or the major part of them, are to meet, etc. I humbly conceive
without the whole I cannot be tried.


L. President. All this that you ask of us now we have declared this morning
already to one who was before you at the Bar; the Quorum of this Commission is
seventeen or any more of them: we must require you again to plead.


Mr. Mordant. My Lord, I desire a little patience, the number of the
Commissioners is seventeen, I conceive that must be very much strained i^
reason that they ^st try, because it relates to the respective Commissioners;
several persons were allowed Counsel, I humbly desire Counsel.


L. President. That is when there is matter of Law, you have alleged nothing,
you are now upon matter of Fact.


Mr. Mordant. My Lord, my Indictment is matter of Law, and upon that I may
sa^ly demand Counsel, I desire to have Counsel as to my Indictment.


L. President. Your reason and my reason and all reason must submit to the Law:
you are now upon matter of Fact, the single question is, guilty or not guilty.


Mr. At. Genesis My advise to you is, that you would put your self upon your Trial.


Mr. Mordant. I am not convinced at all, but forced upon it, and it is a hard
thing; it is reason that my reason should be convinced, if this Act does say in
any place that I must ^ose these privileges, or if the Judges will declare it
to be so, I will submit to it; if ^e Judges will declare that (...) must be
tried thus, God's will be done; I desire to stand n^ fall by the Laws.


Mr. Sol. Ellis. I will tel^ ^ou where his mistake is, he speaks of former
Trials, which we do not deny; but ^s Gent. will agree that it is in the power
of Parliaments, by Acts of Parliament to alter those Trials; we conceive that
this Act of Parliament has determined thi^ very question: for, my Lord, it is
that you shall examine upon oath, and thereup^ proceed to Conviction and final
sentence, not by Jury: And this Act of Parliament has entrusted you to be both
Judge and Jury; All Englishmen must submit to what the Parliament has done,
and the Parliament has determined this question that you have power to examine
upon Oath, and thereupon to proceed to conviction, etc. If a Jury was to do it,
you were not to proceed to Conviction; This Gent. says there is no President
for it, but we say it was the same in Queen Eliz. time; they proceeded to
Conviction and final sentence, when they proceeded against Duke Hamilton, Lord
Capel, and Holland; did not the Parliament approve of what they did in that
case as just, honorable and lawful? did not Duke Hamilton, did they not all
petition to the House? did not the Parliament order Execution upon some, and
cleared others? To say this is without president, when presidents are so
frequent, I wonder that should be said. To that point of a Jury, I must tell
this Gent. he speaks of a Jury, but has not put himself upon a Trial; after he
has pleaded not guilty, then it must be considered the manner of the
proceeding; but to come before he plead guilty or not guilty to desire a Jury,
this is a little to anticipate your judgment.


Mr. Mordant. I do not shun to be tried by the Act of Parliament, but refer
my self to the Judges, that those privileges of the Act may not be taken from
me,


Mr. At. G. The Parliament has thought sit to go this way, and it is not to be
disputed, they that live in this nation are not to dispute it: if that Gent.
will please to recollect himself, and not (my Lord) thus expostulate and
dispute with the Court of Justice, if he please to put himself upon a Trial, if
he thinks himself innocent, I think it is best; and if he refuse it, his
sentence is from himself.


Mr. Mordant. I do not (my Lord) dispute the power of the Court, but I desire
my reason may be convinced, and that I may have Counsel.


L. Pres. We are clearly of opinion, we have not power in this case to appoint
any other Jury, not to summon a Jury, we our selves have taken on oath; you
would do well to plead


Mr. Mordant. My Lord, I have but little to say, and that is, that as that
Gent. said, it was referred to the Court what Jury I shall have, I desire (my
Lord) to know whether the Court does intend to try me by a Jury.


Mr. Sol. Ellis. They do not.


Mr. Mordant. Is the Court Judge and Jury?


Mr. At. G. If you will deal ingenuously with the Court, I think that is best.


Mr. Mordant. Seeing I am here overuled, though not convinced in my reason, I
shall demur to the Court, and plead not Guilty. I desire a Copy of my
indictment, and time to plead.


L. Pres. It was never done; for any Indictment of High Treason was never
delivered to any Prisoner.


Mr. Mordant. I urge my Lord Cook for Authority, for a copy of my Indictment.


Mr. Phelph^s. John Mordant Esquire, you stand here charged of High Treason; to
this charge you plead not guilty, is this your Plea?


Mr. Mordant. Yes.


Mr. Mordant. I beg (my Lord) that my ignorance of the Laws may not prejudice
me, not understanding or knowing any thing of the Law; and this granted me, I
shall address to my justification.


Mr. At. G. Do you stand to your Plea not guilty?


Mr. Mordant. Yes.


Mr. Litchmore. My Lord, I shall shortly open the Impeachment; The Attorney
Genesis has exhibited a Charge of High Treason against John Mordant Esquire viz. That
he the said John Mordant intending to embroile this Nation in new and intestine
Wars the 30 of April last past, and at diverse times since the 10 October. 26
together with Henry Bishop, Hartgil Baron, etc. at the Parish of Clem. Danes in
the County of Middlesex, did traitorously, advisedly, and maliciously, plot,
contrive and endeavor, First, to stir and raise force, and levy war against
his Highness the Lord Protector, and the Commonwealth, to subvert and alter
the Government of the same. Secondly, That he did traitorously, advisedly, and
maliciously declare, publish and promote Charles Stuart to be King of England,
Scotland, and Ireland. Thirdly, That he did traitorously, advisedly and
maliciously hold intelligence and Correspondence with C. Stuart, and that he
did declare these Treasons by overt act, that is to say, by conferring with
John Stapley, and Henry Mallory how to effect the same, and did deliver several
Commissions from C. Stuart to several persons, and this contrary to the
Statute. To this charge of High Treason the Prisoner pleads not guilty; we are
ready (my Lord) to call our witnesses to prove him guilty of these several
Crimes; and with the leave of the Court, we shall call our witnesses,


Mr. At. G. I wish Mr. Mordant had done this before, and made himself capable
of more favor.

Mr. Mordant then desired to have Pen, Ink and Paper, which was granted him.
John Stapley and Anthony Stapley were then called. John Stapley sworn.
Mr. At. G. We produce this Gent. (I suppose he is well known to the Prisoner)
to prove the Charge; I desire he may declare what he knows.


Mr. At. G. What do you know concerning the discourses of Mr. Mordant with you,
touching the bringing in of Charles Stunrt?


John Stapley. I have been in Mr. Mordants company several times, and what I
can say will not be much; Mr. Mordant did once tell me there was such a design
as the bringing in of the King, and he did ask me if I did not know of such a
thing; I told him no; he was pleased to tell me somewhat of it: I asked him if
he was engaged in it; he told me he was not.


Mr. At. G. What did he tell you concerning his being entrusted by the King
therein?


John Stapley. He told me the King wrote to him, to speak to his friends that
they would be ready to assist him when he should come into England with force,
which he told me was with 7000 men; this was the chief of all.


Mr. At. G. Did he not say that he had Commissions from the King?


John Stapley. He did not tell me so, but I have heard him say others had had
Commissions, two other Gent. in Surrey.


Mr. At. G. Did he not encourage you thereto? what Arguments did he use?


John Stapley, He spoke to me of it several times.


Mr. At. G. After what manner?


J. Stapley. Only in commendation of the thing; I heard him say that if there
were a necessity, Surry folks would come into Sussex to assist them.


Mr. At. G. Who was present at any of these discourses?


J. Stapley. There was none but him and my self.


Mr. At. G. At what place, and at what time?


J. Stapley. Near his own house at several times; I have told you the main o^
the discourses.


Mr. Mordant. Mr. Stapley, about what time was this?


J. Stapley Above a year since.


Mr. Mordant. Mr. Stapley, at what place was the encouragement made?


Mr. Stap. I do not know what he means by Encouragement, he only told me of it.


Mr. Mordant. I desire to know when I told you that I had received a Letter to
encourage my friends from beyond Sea, and who was by.


Mr. Stap. There was no body by.


L. Pres. About what time did he tell you of this Letter?


Mr. Stap. About half a year since.


L. Pres. Who was by?


Mr. Stap. No body my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Ellis. Did he tell you it was the King that wrote to him, and
therefore it was just to assist him.


Mr. Stap. I think I heard him say so, I cannot take my Oath of it.


L. Pres. Did he tell you what considerable persons were concerned?


Mr. Stap. I have heard him speak of some persons that were engaged in this
design, Sir Fran. Vincent, and one Brown; he said that Sir Will. Waller spoke
to him to speak to me.


L. Pres. When?


Mr. Stap. Above a year since, it was since the Parliament.


Mr. Mordant. My Lord, I do not know Sir W. Waller.

Anthony Stapley sworn.
Mr. At. G. What discourse have you had with Mr. Mordant touching Charles
Stuart?


A. Stap. We were about a quarter of a year ago at the half moon Tavern in
Aldersgatestreet, at that time there was no discourse about the business at
all. After that he was speaking to me about the Times, losses of privileges,
great taxations, etc. wherein I agreed with him, and wished they might be
better. I asked him if there was any way to help it; he said yea, and said that
Charles Stuart was intending for England, and that would be a fair opportunity
to redress all grievances. At Birkshire house there he was pleased to enquire
concerning the affairs of Sussex, and in what preparation they were, in case
the King of Scots should land; I told him I did not know, I had not been in the
Country lately, I did believe that there would not be an apearance suitable to
his expectation: he told me something concerning Surry, that there was a
considerable strength there ready to assist us in Sussex, and join with us when
any such thing should happen; he did say that he had delivered out four
Commissions, three for horse, and one for foot, but to whom I know not, I dare
not swear it, but it is to the best of my remembrance.


Mr. At. G. What discourse past between you at the Half moon Tavern in
Aldersgate street about March last?


A. Stap. It was the day that the Cavalier party were to depart the City,
there was Captain Mallory, my self, and this Gentleman Mr. Mordant, and then
he spoke again concerning Sussex, that the King of Scots coming was suddenly
expected, and desire to know in what readiness we were; I told him I could not
tell, but I did believe that things would be in as great a forwardness as the
times would permit; It was agreed upon that some of our Country should meet
Mr. Mordant at Crawly in Surry upon the Tuesday following.


Mr. At. G. What was the end of your meeting?


A. Stap. It was to consider further how things might be carried on, as to the
business of Surry and Sussex, there was an expectation of the landing of
Charles Stuart, and he did say that he heard Charles Stuart was in a readiness;
Mr. Mallory, my self, and Mr. Mordant, were to meet further to debate of
things; I understood it was for the business of the King, but it was not
positively so expressed; he asked me how things went on in Sussex; I told him I
could not satisfy him: Therefore we told him there should some of our Country
meet him at Crawly to give him an account; he said there was a considerable
force, but I never heard him speak of any number of Horse or Foot in Surry.


Mr. Mord. Mr. Staply, I desire to know when I spoke to you of this.


A. Stap. My Lord, it was, I cannot tell the days, but it was suddenly after
the breaking up of the Parliament, all the discourses were since the breaking
up of the last Parliament.


Mr. Mord. I desire to know where I spoke this, and who was by.


A. Stap. As I take it the first discourse was at Long Acre, but no body by.


Mr. Mord. I desire to know the time when I met him at the Half moon Tavern.


A. Stap. It was the day set for the departing of the Cavalier party out of
Town.


Mr. Mord. I desire to know who was by.


A. Stap. Captain Mallory.


Mr. Mord. I desire to know whether I did meet at the place appointed.


A. Stap. My Brother and Mr. Mallory did not meet him, because my Brother was
sent for to Whitehall.


Mr. Mord. I desire to know the witnesses to all he says.


A. Stap. It was all private, only once at the Half moon Tavern with Captain
Mallory.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, there was mention made of one Captain Mallory whom we did
intend to have as a witness, he was committed upon this design, being privy to
it; It has so fallen out that he is lately escaped; I desire that Mr. Sergeant
or Arms, Major Ellison, Thomas Tatlock, and William Capput may be sworn.

All four sworn.
Mr. At. G. We do produce these witnesses for this end. Captain Mallory was a
prisoner, and we did intend to make use of him here, but it has so fallen out
that his guilty conscience has made him to fly; Ask these concerning his
being custody, and endeavor of escape.


Maj. Ellis. My Lord, Captain Mallory was in custody, and a guard constantly
set upon him, which guard was relieved every twenty four hours; the manner of
his escape I only had by relation, we have used all endeavors to have found
him since he is escaped, we did that night send presently to Southwark to Inns
there, and laid wait for him, and sent to Captain Mallory's Brother-in-Law,
where he formerly lay, examined him, but all in vain; where we had any
intimation of any relation of his, we did send to search for him.


Serj. Dan. My Lord, upon the twenty eigth of May last since the escape of Cap.
Mallory I received a warrant from the Council commanding me to use all
diligence for apprehending of Cap. Mallory; I have accordingly endeavored it,
not knowing his Relations, I did not speak to them: I have used all means I
could, but cannot find him.


Tho. Tatlock. My Lord, Cap. Mallory went away about nine a clock at night, he
went away in a black suit and cloak.


Will. Capput. All that I know (My Lord) is that Cap. Mallory was a prisoner,
and changed his habit and hair, went away and left money in the window to pay
for his lodging.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, the intention is to show you Cap. Mallory was a prisoner,
is escaped, and what means have been used for his apprehension; Officer pray
swear Mr. Scobell.

Mr. Scobel sworn.
Mr. At. G. My Lord, Mr. Scobell was one of the Justices of peace that took
Cap. Mallory's examination upon oath.


Mr. Scobell. My Lord, Cap. Mallory gave in information upon oath before my
Lord Gosse and my self upon the twenty first of April last, and upon his oath
did inform us, that about the beginning of March last Cap. An. Staply and
himself being at the Half moon Tavern, Joh. Mordant Esquire. being upon the
Exchange was sent for to Mr Staply, and that he came; Thereupon Mr. Staply
presented Cap. Mallory to Mr. Mordant as a Gentleman that was interested in
Charles Stuarts design, together with Mr. Staply that was his Brother; he said
that by that Brother he meant Joh. Staply Esquire. Thereupon he informed us that
Mr. Mordant did demand of Cap. Mallory in what readiness the Horse that were
to be raised in Sussex were: Mr. Mallory informed us that to that he returned
an answer, that they were not in so good a posture as he did believe Mr. Joh.
Staply had represented to Mr. Mordant, but doubted that it would fall much
short: Mallory told us that at that answer Mr. Mordant did much wonder, because
he said Charles Stuart the King was in a very good posture, and that there was
a daily expectation of his coming over with forces, and that thereupon Mr.
Mordant did desire that there might be a meeting in some convenient place
beeween him and Mr. Staply, and such others of that County of Sussex as should
be thought fit. My Lord, it was (he said) to this end that there they might
conferr together, and understand how the affairs stood in reference to the
Counties of Sussex and Surry, that they might the better assist each other in
the intended insurrection; he did inform us (my Lord) that accordingly it was
agreed there should be a meeting upon the Tuesday following at Crawly, and in
order thereunto he said that Mr. An. Staply and himself did speak with Mr.
Joh. Staply to have a meeting accordingly at Crawly upon the Tuesday following,
and they did agree to it: he said that they should meet with Mr. Mordant at
Crawly, but in the mean time Mr. Joh. Staply being sent for to Whitehall that
meeting was prevented. My Lord, this is all.


L. Pres. Mr. Mordant, would you ask Mr. Scobel any question?


M. Scobel. I suppose that Mr. Mordant's asking me any question will not
advantage him, or that my testimony is disadvantageous to him; for all that I
have spoke was the same that Mallory declared unto me and my Lord Gosse as
Justices of the peace.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, I neither know this Gentleman nor Mr. Mallory upon my oath.


Mr. At. G. Mr. An. Staply, were you with Cap. Mallory and Mr. Mordant at
dinner together at the Half moon?


Mr. A. Stap. My Lord, Cap. Mallory was once there, but not at dinner.


Mr. Sol. Ellis. The Attorney Geueral has exhibited a charge of High Treason
against the prisoner at the Bar, that was, to raise force against the
Government, and publish Charles Stuart to be King, and held correspondence with
him.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, you have heard the witnesses, the first Gentleman Mr. Joh.
Staply, he was pleased to urge against me, that I said Charles Stuart writ to
me to engage my friends, but said not that he saw the letter, or that any one
was by: he did not name the time or place but at random, but that I said so;
being asked about Commissions, he denies that I told him I either had
Commissions, or delivered any; he says I gave him encouragement to this
engagement, or what he calls it I know not, but, he does not say what kind of
encouragement it was: he does not say I promised him money, or preferment; he
says he heard I engaged two other Gentlemen, Sir Francis Vincent and Col.
Brown; he was asked, if any was by at these discourses, he said none was by: My
Lord this is a single evidence; he says it was a year or more since, he says I
said I was entrusted by Charles Stuart about the latter end of the last winter.
For Mr. An. Staply, he urges against me, that at his lodging I discoursed with
him, that the way to help us was to bring in Charles Stuart; he says that I
said in Surry was a considerable strength to join with Charles Stuart, which if
true might prove troublesome to me, but I have not been in Surry this year and
a half: he says, only to the best of his remembrance, I said I had three or
four Commissions, but he says it is to the best of his remembrance, but does
not say he saw the Commissions, and will not swear whether they were for Horse
or Foot: he says at the Half Moon I spoke with him and Mallory; who that is I
have already spoke to: he says I did not name the number of any forces that
were ready: he says that we agreed to meet on the Tuesday following at Crawly
with Mr. Mallory, but says that I was not there. My Lord, I do not know that
place, He says it is in our Country, but it is not: he says it was his Brother
Joh. Staply that was to meet me: he says it was not about any positive thing
why I was to meet there, but in general, to carry on things about the intended
design: he says not that I said it, but that I said I heard that Charles Stuart
would land with a considerable party: he says it was to debate things in
general, he said it was not said about Charles Stuart, that he was not
mentioned, but he supposed it to be so: he says positively that I never spoke
of any number of Horse or Foot, or any thing of that kind, I asked him when I
first spoke of this; he returned no time, would not say any positive time, but
said all was since the breaking up of the Parliament: I asked him who was by,
he said no body, all was private: he says the time when we were at the Half
moon was near the time that those that served the late King were banished; he
says positively I did not meet at the place appointed, and he gives the reason,
a very insufficient one, because his Brother was sent for up; that could not
hinder me: he waves his own meeting: he says all was private; I submit it all
to this honorable Court.


Mr. Sol. Ellis. The Charge is for levying of War to alter the Government, and
embroyle us again in a new War; to which he pleads not guilty: for the proof of
this we have offered to you witnesses; I shall take them in order as the
Gentleman did at the Bar. John Staply said Mr. Mordant said the King writ to
him to encourage and engage his friends to assist him at his coming; but says
not the time when this was done: he says he did not see the letter, but says
Mr. Mordant told him he had a letter, all the discourses (because he says there
was no time) it agrees that they were since the tenth of October 1656, and so
it is clear within this Act, and within your jurisdiction. Now see how it was
carried on; after he had told him this, how does he encourage him in his
telling him the justice of the cause; the persons engaged therein, and of Sir
William Waller. Then (My Lord) he told them if the Forces of Sussex were not
sufficient, that the Surry forces would come to assist them for the coming in
of Charles Stuar^: this both John and Anth^ny Staply. So that we conceive under
favor that Joh. Staply and An. Staply do agree in most of the circumstances.
An. Staply says that Mr. Mordant came to him, tells him there were great
grievances; I, says he, but how shall it be remedied? tells him that Charles
Stuart intended to come to England with a great force, which would redress
them: he asked him how the business was in Sussex; he said it was not in so
good a posture as he expected: he said that Surry forces should join with
Sussex. My Lord, I leave it nakedly to you, if you find this to be true, we
submit it to you, and Mr At. G. will pray what his place requires.


Mr. At G. You have heard the business, this Gentleman has interposed himself
where he was not called, it is a happiness this business was discovered: upon
this evidence: I leave it to your justice, and as you shall judge I shall say
more.


Mr. Mord. My Lord, I will speak to you very short, it is this; that to all
this though it be urged against me by the ablest men in the Land, yet there is
but one witness in a manner, and that differing in many circumstances -- Here
he was interrupted. My Lord, I leave it to you, I remit my life into your
hands, resting and believing your Lordsh^^^ will deal with me as one of this
Nation, an English Freeman. I leave it to you, and do submit.


L. Pres. Withdraw the (...).

Proclamation to adjourn into the Painted Chamber. After a little debate in the
Painted Chamber, they adjourned till the morrow the second of June.

2 June 1658. The Lords Comissioners met in the Painted Chamber about to in the
morning and there continued till about 4 a clock afternoon, and th^n adjourned
into Westminster Hall, where Proclamation being made, the names of the Lords
Commissioners being read,

Mr. Serj. was commanded to bring Dr. Hewet, Sir H. Slingsby and Mr. Mordant to
the Bar.

Proclamation for silence was made.


Mr. Phelps. Si. H. S. Stand at the Bar, and hear what the Court has to say
to you.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, as for Sir H. Slingsby and Mr. Mordant, you have heard the
impeachment read, and their Pleas; I have given in the evidence, I pray your
judgment as to them: as for the other, you have heard the impeachment, and no
defense; I pray your justice.


L. Pres. and Sir H. S. Knight, thou have been impeached on the behalf of the
Lord Protector and this Commonwealth of High Treason to which thou have
pleaded Not guilty, which the Court has taken into consideration; What have
thou to say further, why this Court should not proceed to Judgment?


S. H. Sl. My Lord, I humbly desire I may be tried by a Jury, for I must say
you are my Enemies, (pardon the expression;) if not so, why did you Sequester
me, and sell my whole estate? and why did you deny me the Act of Oblivion?
There is no man would willingly appeal to his adversaries; there are some
among you that have been instrumental in my Sequestration, and in the selling
of my Estate, for which they gave me no reason but this, that I would not
compound, when I thought not fit so to do, when there was no establishment or
settled peace; if I had compounded, I had not been sure whether I might not have
compoun^ed over again; my Estate has been Sequestered, and sold; now to be my
Judge and Jury. I humbly pray, being a Commoner, I may be tried by Commoners.


L. Pres. and S. H. Sl. I am not to hear you as to any of these things, (you
have pleaded already) this is not a time of pleading, but a time of judgment;
Therefore I must require your silence, and hear me a few words. S. H. Sl. I am
really, etc.

The Lord Presidents Speech.
SIr Henry Slingsby, I am really and truly afflicted for your sad condition,
but when I consider the nature of your Offense, with the circumstances and
aggravations of your Treason committed; when I consider your person; and that
such a person as you are, should be instrumental in so detestable a Conspiracy,
and when I think of that Judgment that must be given against you, methinks you
are one of the saddest Spectacles that ever I beheld in all my days, I beseech
God that you may seriously lay it to your heart, with sorrow and repentance,
and that you may be more sensible of what you have done, then of what you are
to suffer.

Sir, Was it not a great aggravation of the sins of the Egyptians, that when
God had declared himself by so many signs and wonders on the behalf of the
Israelites, that yet notwithstanding they would still pursue Moses and Israel?
was not this a great aggravation of their sin?

Who is so great a stranger in this Nation as to be ignorant what God has done
amongst us, by a series of wonderful Providence so many years together against
that very party who are still hatching of Treasons and Rebellions amongst us?
It grieves my very soul to think of it, that after so many signal Providence,
wherein God seems to declare himself (as it were by signs and wonders) that
your heart should be still hardened, I may say, more hardened then the very
hearts of the Egyptians, for they at length did not only see, but but confessed
that the Lord sought against them; but you, O that you would confess, and give
glory to God. You cannot choose but (...) that the Lord fights against you, that
the stars in their courses ^ght against you, and yet you will not see, you will
not confess, until destruction over-takes you. This is a sad lamentation, and I
beseech God that you may (...) consider it.

Sir, If the signal and the wonderful Providence or God will not deter you,
yet methinks National consi^rations should (...) you from such a Treason as
this is: Charles Stuart is in (...) with Spain against England, he is in
Confederacy with that great Popish int^t. Is it imaginable that an Englishman,
that a Protestant should a^st ^uch a (...) as this is, yet that which is not
imaginable in it (...), is h^ (...) and evidently proved ^ore us.

Sir H. Slingby, There are three witnesses, (...), or Waterhouse, Capt.
Overton, and Li^ut. Thompson; two of them full in evidence as to every Charge
against you, and three of them as to ^ome of the Charges; and besides your own
Confession at the Bar full in proof against you. Did it not clearly appear in
proof before us, that you promoted C. S^ to be King o^ England? Did it not
clearly appear before us, that you endeavored to betray the Garri^on of Hull
to C. Stuart? Did it not likewise clearly appear before us, that you
endeavored to withdraw the Officers and some of the Soldiers of that Garr^
from their o^edience to his Highness, and to make a mutiny in that Garri^on,
and all the circumstances did clearly appear? Was it not proved before us, that
you offered a Commi^on to Major Waterhouse, and promised him a Commi^on in the
^rst place, and a second to Capt. Overton, and a Deputation to the third? And
what you promised, did you not make it good? Did you not with your own hand
off^r a Commission sealed, and said it was from C. S. And did you not only
encourag^ him, by telling him that he was coming into England with a
considerable Force; but did you not pr^mise also, that upon his landing, 5000l.
should be paid to Maj. Waterhouse? All these things were clearly proved before
us.

Sir, What said you to this Proof? You confessed upon the matt^r a^l, in effect
all; but only some things you said by way o^ excuse, and I shall truly relate
them all. All you did, you told us was but in Jest. What (Sir) if tho^
discontented English that complied with Spain in Q. Eliz. days in 88. had said
they had been in ^st; what would you have thought of that, Sir? What if those
^uited Papists that would have blown up the Parliament House upon the 5. of
Nov^mb. with Barr^ls of Gunpowder, had said that they had brought in those
Barr^ls in Jest; what would you have thought of it? Sir, be not deceived; As a
man sows, so shall he reap: You have ^owed Treason and Reb^llion, and you are
now come to reap the fruit of it.

And Sir, you told me you did not own the Government, you were a Prisoner and
therefore could not be bound by the Laws of that Government. Sir, does not
every Englishman owe a natural Allegiance to the supreme Magistrate of England?
Is not every Englishman, whether in Prison, or out of Prison, bound by the Laws
of England? Sir, if you own not the Government of England, that is an offense
in it self, a great offense, and would you make an offense against the
Government to be an excuse, or justification for Treason?

The last thing you said was this, you told us you were Trepan'd into it, Sir,
did not you your self, of your self promise a Commis^on to Maj^r Waterhouse,
did you not o^ your self offer 5000 pound to be paid as soon as C S. Landed upon
English ground. I shall name those worthy Gentlemen for ho^ors sake to them,
that had a hand in this discovery It was that prudent and faithful Governor of
Hull. Col. Smith, that had a hand in it. There was those worthy and faithful
Commanders, who were here in Court, Maj. Waterhouse, Capt. Overton, and Lievt.
Thompson. Sir, these faithful and worthy Gentlemen have carried themselves in
this business, like the man of understanding, that Solomon speaks of.

I have done, only I would say one word to you, because I hear you are a
Protestant, I would only ask you this question, what think you, would have
become of the Protestant Interest, of the Protestants of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; If you had had your will, if Charles Stuart had come in; if you had ^ut
time (but the Lord knows you have not time) to look over the Records of
England, to look over the declarations of Parliament since 1640. if you could
remember it Sir, it would tell you what Family it was that betrayed the
Protestants in France, when Roch^l was taken; what Family it was that betrayed
the Protestants in Germany, and in the Palatinate, when a peace was made with
Spain without consent of Parliament. What could you think of that Family th^r
did tolerate Popery for a match with Spain? What then would that Family have
done, if it could have gained them England, Scotland and Ireland?

And now Sir, but one word more to you as you are an Englishman: I beseech you
consider what would have become of this Nation, if you had had your will; you
had brought a new Civil war upon England at the least. I cannot think of a New
Civil war upon England, but I think of desolation upon desolation to this poor
Nation, etc.

I have but one word to say to Dr. Hewet: And Sir, when I look upon you as a
Minister, I must confess I do not know how to speak to you, because it has
always been my way to speak to men of your Profession, to Ministers, I never
spoke to them but as a Child speaks to his Father: Such reverence and such
regard I bear to their Office. But to speak so to a Minister, as a Judge speaks
to a Traitor, I must confess I know not how to do it. But Sir, there must be
words spoken to you, though I do not speak them, and not only to you as a
Ttaytor, but a Traitor in the highest degree; not as a Traitor (as you are
entitled, for endeavoring to levy a new War, and to bring desolation and a War
in this Nation) but such an one as should rather die a Traitor then own the
Authority of the Nation. But Sir, I know not how to speak to you, and therefore
the ^ecord must speak to you; and I my self will not any further.

I have now a word to speak to you Mr. Mordant, God has appeared in Justice,
and God does appear in Mercy; as the Lord is just to them, so he is exceeding
merciful to you; and I may say to you, That God appears to you at this time, as
he speaks to sinners in Jesus Christ; for Sir, he does clear sinners in Christ
Jesus, even when they are guilty, and so God clears you: I will not say you
are guilty, but ask your own Conscience whether you are or no^. Sir bless God
as long as you live, and bless my Lord Protector, by whose authority you are
clered. Sir I speak no more, but I beseech you to speak to God.

And now let me add this word to those two Gentlemen. Sirs, when I have done
speaking, I shall never have done praying for you, as long as you are alive;
that is the last thing I must say to you: And now let the Judgment of the Court
be read.


Thereupon the Clerk read the Judgment and Sentence of the Court against Sir H.
Slinsby Kr. which was as follows.

THat the said Sir Henry Slingsby as a false Traitor to his said Highness the
Lord Protector, and this Commonwealth, shall be conveyed back again to the
Tower of London, and from thence through the middle of the City of London,
directly shall be drawn unto the Gallows of Tibourn, and upon the said Gallows
there shall be hanged, and being alive, shall be cut down to the ground, and
his Entrails taken out of his Belly, and he living, be burnt before him; and
that his Head shall be cut off, and that his Body shall be divided into Four
quarters, and that ^is Head and Quarers shall be placed where His Highness the
Lord Protector shall be pleased to ^ssign.

In the next place, the same Judgment and Sentence of the Court was read
against Dr. Hewet being ingrost in like manner.

This being done, the Judgment of the Court was declared concerning Mr.
Mordant, whis (in short) was, That upon consideration of the whole matter; in
reference to the Charge against him, and his Plea thereunto, They did adjudge
him, Not guilty. And so the Prisoners were dismissed.

Proclamation being made, the Court adjourned back to the Painted Chamber,
where they ordered the execution of the Sentence upon Sir Henry Slingsby and
Dr. Hewet, to be on Saturday next. And Warrants are issued out to the Sheriffs
of London to see execution done accordingly.

Then the Court adjourned it self till Thursday the Tenth instant.

Notwithstanding the former Sentence passed by the High Court, yet his Highness
being informed, that Dr. Hewet, prisoner in the Tower of London, who stand
attainted of High Treason, before the Commissioners appointed by Act of
Parliament, for levying War against his Highness and the Commonwealth, had
Judgment to be hanged, drawn and quartered at Tibourn this instant Saturday,
His Highness was graciously pleased, upon humble suit made, to reprieve him
till Tuesday the eighth insiant, at which time he is to be executed on
Tower-hil, by severing his Head from his Body; and His Highness pleasure is,
that the Judgment shall be remitted.

The like favor also was extended to Sir Henry Slingsby, who is to suffer the
same day, in the same place.

The manner of the Execution of Sir HENRY SLINGSBY on Tuesday the 8. of June,
1658. With the substance of his SPEECH before his Death.
ABout Eleven of the clock Sir Henry Slingsby was brought from the Tower to the
Scaffold on Tower Hill; whither being come, he fell upon his knees, and for a
short space prayed privately.

Then standing up, he did in a short Speech, and with a very low voice, address
himself to that noble Gentleman Mr. Sheriff Robinson, telling him that what he
had to say he would speak to him; which was to this purpose:

That he had received a Sentence to die, upon account of his endeavoring to
betray the Garrison of Hull: But said, All that he did in that business he was
drawn into by others.

That the Officers of that Garrison did believe he had some greater Design in
hand, and therefore they would needs pump him to the bottom: But what he spoke
to them in private was brought into evidence against him: He likewise said,
That he did no more than any person would have done that was so brought on.

That he had made many applications (by his Friends) for a Reprieve, but found
his Highness was inexorable.

He did confess that he did deliver a Commission (as it was charged against
him:) But said, that it was an old Commission, and what he meant was well known
to himself; but what construction others had made of it might appear by his
present condition.

He discovered little sense of forrow, or fear of Death; but said, He was ready
to submit, or words to like purpose.

Then he addressed himself to private prayer again; and kneeling down to the
Block he prayed privately for a short space: Then laid his head upon the Block,
and at the sign given, the Executioner severed his Head from his Body at one
Blow: And his Friends put his Body into a Coffin, and removed it into a close
Coach prepared near the place.

The manner of the Execution of John Hewet, D. D. on the same Scaffold, on
Tuesday the same 8. of June 1658. with the substance of his speech before his
Death.
AS soon as Sir Henry Slingsby's body was removed as is aforesaid, Dr. Hewet
was brought upon the Scaffold, whither being come (together with Dr. Wild, Dr.
Warm^stry, and another Divine) he fell upon his knees, and prayed privately for
the space of a quarter of an hour; After that he prayed audibly for a good
space.

After which prayer he addressed himself to the people in a speech which
continued above the space of an hour; the substance of which speech was as
follows.

That he was become a public Spectacle to Men and Angels, and that he hoped
the Omniscient God was then beholding him with much pity and compassion, the
rather because he came hither to bear witness to the truth, for which end he
came into the world, both as a common Christian and as a Minister, for which
dignity he blessed the name of God.

That it seemed strange to him that he pleading for the laws and customs of
the Land, should dye by those that should also stand for them.

That he had rather dye many Deaths then betray his fellow Freemen to the
inconveniences of a subjection to their wills that had condemned him to Death.

That although he had no knowledge of the Laws, yet he had instruction from
the learned in that faculty, and had accordingly urged several Cases, and that
he had made his appeal to the learned in the Law, to the Judges, and to his
Highness own Council.

That through his ignorance in the customs and formalities of Courts, he was
taken in 3. defaults, but that when he would have pleaded, and resolved so to
do, he was taken from the Bar.

That he did the next day petition the Court twice, subscribing his name
thereunto, to be admitted to plead; but the Title of the Court being mis-taken
in the one, and a word left out in the other, it was taken for an Affront or
Contempt to the Court, and that his answer was his sentence.

He prayed God to forgive those that adjudged him to dye, taking advantage of
his ignorance.

That at the beginning of his Trial there was a seeming consent that nothing
should be taken to his prejudice through his ignorance in the nicety of the
Law; but heartily prayed God to forgive (...) and desired that even those that
shed his blood might have the blood of Chri^ shed for them.

He acknowledged himself to be a (...) of the Holy (...) Church, which he said
was the Church of England, which Church he averred was for Doctrine and
Discipline, (till the l^ ^d r^ion) more divine and Apostolical then any other
doctrine or Church in the world.

He made confession of his faith negatively, and affirmatively; neg^tively that
he did abhor all Sects, Schisms, etc. in Religion: affirm^tively, that as he
did hold communion with, so he did love and honor all Christians, that loved
the same Lord Jesus in sincerity.

That he did hope for salvation through the merits of Christ Jesus only,
although unto faith good works are necessary, not meritorious.

Touching, the treasonable design wherewith he was charged, he said that he
hoped that his Conversation had been such that none would imagine he should
intermeddle in such an Action, and hoped that none were so uncharitable as to
believe he had knowledge of that design.

He declared a partic^ar abhorrency unto the firing of the City, professing
that if he had known of such a design he should have been the first discoverer.

That he never saw the Marquess of Ormond in his life. And touching the report
of his being at Bruges, etc. He averred that he had not been 60 miles out of
London these 3. years last past. That he knew the Names, but never saw the
faces of Barrow nor Bishop, persons with whom he was charged to hold
corespondency.

He remembered that his Highness told him he was like a flaming Torch in the
midst of a sheaf of Corn: but said it was very uncharitably done of them that
so irritated his Highness against him; but prayed the God of mercy to pardon
and forgive them all.

Thus (but more largely) having spoken to the people, he told them he would
after the manner of our Savior, (who when he was to be taken from his
Disciples, blessed them) pray for them, which he did accordingly for a good
space with much earne^nesse and piety.

After this, he joined in public prayer with Dr. Wild, and Dr. Warmestry, he
all the while lying flat upon his breast.

Then he addressed himself to private prayer, wherein he continued a certain
time.

After this he prepared himself for the Block, and with a black Ribbon bound
over his eyes, lying with his breast over the Block. He prayed again for a
short while. Then laid his neck upon the Block, and after some short and
private Ejaculations, the Executioner (having notice that he was ready) at one
blow severed his head from his body; which was also put into a Coffin, and
conveyed away by his friends.

The confluence of people of all sorts to behold these Executions was very
vast, the like to which has not been observed.

FINIS.

