WE do appoint Thomas Simmons and no other, to Print these our Informations,
Concerning the HORRID POPISH PLOT.

SIMEON WRIGHT. THOMAS LAVNDERS.
December the 29. 1680.
THE SEVERAL INFORMATIONS OF Mr. Simeon Wright, Thomas Launders AND Richard
Perkin.

Concerning the Horrid POPISH PLOT IN ENGLAND.

And the several ways that have been used to take off the KINGS Witnesses, and
to hinder the further discovery of it. The two former, being witnesses in the
Trial of the late Lord Stafford, their Informations were taken upon Oath by
Edmond Warcup, Esquire; One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for Middlesex
and Westminster, in December last 1680.

The latter was taken upon Oath by Sir Robert Atkyns, Knight. at the Assizes at
Stafford, 1679.

The whole Informations being nothing but matter of Fact.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Princes-Arms in Ludgate Street,
MDCLXXXI.

THE Publishers Preface TO THE READER.
IT is a Truth notoriously known to all considering Persons in this Nation,
that since the happy Discovery of the late Hellish and Damnable Popish Plot,
against the life and Government of His Majesty, and against our Protestant
Religion, and Liberties, and especially upon the Trials of several of the
Conspirators many deep Artifices have been used by the Plotters for defaming
the Kings Witnesses, and for invalidating of their Testimonies; for these ends
witnesses have been fetched from Saint Omers, and have appeared at several
Trials, but how ill they acted their parts, and how unworthy they were of the
names of Just and lawful Witnesses, all men know. Besides these we may
remember, Mr. READINGS, endeavoring to take off Mr. BEDLOE; and PRICE and
TASBOROUGHS Tampering with Mr. Dugdale, though all issued in their own shame;
and they all received their just demerits. Nor can the designs, of Knox,
Osborn, and Lane, to take off Doctor Oates's Evidence be obliterated, it is
well known how they also made use of Mr. Dangerfield, who, as himself
acknowledges, was engaged through the wicked and malicious instigation of the
Countess of Powis, the five Popish Lords in the Tower, and their Accomplices in
a horrid and damnable design of charging the Presbyterians with a pretended
Plot against the present Government and Religion by Law established. A very
fine trick to take the Odium of the Plot off from themselves; But it pleased
Almighty God out of his Infinite mercy to this Discoverer, and to many Innocent
Persons that were to be accused, yea to the whole Kingdom, to bring him to a
true sense of the guilt he had contracted, and to a Resolution to make a free
Discovery of whatever he had been Privy to, in this Design;

The Popish Cause still being exposed, by discovering the Artifices above, they
were put upno new contrivances to hide it, or blast the discovery of it,
several of which are in the following Informations fully laid open.

One Thing I dare not omit here, Viz. My own Observation all along in the
progress of this Matter, That since the first Discovery of this Plot, when ever
the Kings Evidence has seemed to be as it were at a Bay, as discouraged by the
Power or Policy of malevolent Persons, then by the Providence of the Most High
another Witness has risen up to retrieve and confirm what before seemed to be
at a loss: Thus after the endeavors to disparage and vilify Dr. Oats, in came
Mr. Bedloe, then Mr. Dugdale, to assert, and more fully to evince the Truth of
the Doctors Testimony, which was then and since, by many interested Persons
endeavored to be shaken. After this God raised up Mr. Praunce, who fully
discovered the Horrid and Bloody Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and
confirmed the Plot in several particulars, Viz. As to the designed Murder of
his Sacred Majesty, the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury, and others:
And since him a Cloud of Witnesses, to put the Plot past dispute, have
appeared, as Mr. Jenison, Mr. Smith, Mr. Bolron, Mr. Mowbray, Mr. Turbervil,
Seignior Francisco de Faria, and several others: And besides this Plot in
England, there has been another, altogether as cruel and bloody, carried on in
Ireland, which has been fully discovered by several Persons of good Credit, as
Mr. Hetherington, Mr. Macnemarra, Mr. Boork, Mr. Fitzgerald, Mr. Sampson, and
others.

But notwithstanding these great discoveries how many wilfully (or at least
pretendedly) shut their eyes, but tho they will not see (according to that
Scriptural Expression) yet in time, they shall see and shall be ashamed, for
the hand of God hitherto has been more then ordinarily seen in these matters.

The Reader has here before him a few of the very many Decrees of Popish
Adversaries against the Discoverers of their Plot. Enough to satisfy any
unprejudiced and unbiassed man of the Truth and reality of the Plot, ^ince such
ways as these, viz. Stabbing, Forswearing and Burning, were to be used to take
off those that revealed it.

The first Information you have before you is Mr. Wrights, who has fully
discovered, the several ways wherein he was instructed for the taking off Mr.
Dugdale, and having so great opportunities to have muthered him, his
Preservation is only to be ascribed to the wonderful mercy of God, and that
failing, his next work was to blast his Reputation, by Swearing Subornation of
perjury against him, but when this was to be done his Conscience misgave him,
and God at length brought him to discover the whole Intreague.

The second Information is that of Thomas Launder, who has also discovered the
several ways by which he was persuaded to take off Mr. Dugdale, and when it was
perceived that he was not a Tool for their purpose, then to sacrifice Mr.
Dugdale to their fury, the house in which he lay must be fired, in order to
destroy him, but herein also God wonderfully appeared for his Preservation.

That none of these Gracious Providence of the Almighty may be lost upon this
Kingdom, but all improved with wisdom to an humble acknowledgment and
thankful Obedience, ought to be the Prayer of every True Protestant.

The third contains a Horrid story of Romish Priests, and their followers
impiety, a story, the like (but among Papists) has not been heard of, no wonder
that a Dying Traitor may go out of the world with a Lie in his Mouth, since so
notorious falsehoods as these are allowed by their Priests themselves, since
such Truths, may be so solemnly denied, and that with such Horrid Imprecations,
and dreadful Oaths.

These Papers are published to the end that all such as are concerned for the
Welfare and Prosperity of their Religion and Country, may be the more fully
convinced, how much it is their interest, to endeavor for the future to
disappoint all the contrivances of this cruel Bloody Party, who are so active,
and so indefatigably industrious to promote their own Designs under the
pretense of Religion, this is the benefit, that is heartily wished may accrue,
by the Publishing of these Informations to all Englishmen, and to all the True
Lovers of the True Protestant Religion.

VALE.

THE INFORMATION OF Symeon Wright, BARBER CHIRVRGEON IN CHANCERY LANE IN
LONDON, Taken upon Oath this 17th. day of December, 1680. before me Edmond
Warcup Esquire; One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County and
City.
Mr. Plessington coming from beyond the Seas went into Staffordshire, and at
the Right Honorable Lady Gerards at Saudon, he became acquainted with a Sister
of mine, that then waited on the young Lord, by whose means, he came to the
knowledge of my Father and Mother, who then and still live at Stone in
Staffordshire; at his return to London he brought recommendations from them to
me, to my Masters a Barber and Periwig maker in Chancery Lane. This was the
beginning of our acquaintance, which was afterward improved to those wicked
ends, I am now about to relate.

This was about the year 1672 or 1673, and to the best of my memory he did then
belong to Lincoln's Inn, from thence he went to serve the Lady Marchioness of
Clinrickard in Covent Garden, and was from thence advanced to be the Lord
Bellasis his Steward, which place I suppose he still holds.

After the discovery of the Hellish and damnable Popish Plot I gave him a visit
in Germanstreet, and told him the talk of the Town about his Lord, whereupon he
replied, dear Child it is a false thing, and my Lord is as clear as the Child
unborn, and is with the King at New Market, and as great a Favorite as any one
whatever. It is well, said I, if it prove so, and he told me I need not fear it.

When strict enquiry was made after the Murderers of Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey,
Mr. Plessington was upon suspicion taken into the Custody of Mr. Wickham a
Messenger, and upon a Saturday Night came to the Ship Tavem without Temple Bar
with his Keeper, whether he sent for me, and when I came to him, after some
other discourse, told me his condition, and pulled out a small book with a lock
and key to it, which his keeper immediately searched, but upon perusal of it,
restored it to him again; then at his request I went to the Lord Marquis of
Winchesters to acquaint his Lordship with the greatness of his Charge, and to
beg his Lordships favor: his Lordship sent for me into his Bedchamber, and
asked me how Mr. Plessington did, and after I had delivered my Message, he bad
me remember his kind respects to Mr. Plessington, and tell him he did not think
it convenient so soon to move for his enlargment, but that it should not be
long before he should hear from him. It was upon the Lords day, that I waited
on the Marquis, and on the Tusday following he was discharged and came to
return me thanks for my care and pains, adding, that he would not be
ungrateful to me when occasion should serve. Whereupon I replied; Sir I am very
glad that you have so good a friend, meaning my Lord Marquis of Winchester, to
which he thus answered, Ah Child if you were in my condition, you would have as
good and better.

Upon the first rumor of Mr. Stephen Dugdales discovery Mr. Plessington was
very inquisitive whether I knew him, I told him yes very well; upon which, he
answered, that he was sorry that I knew such a base fellow or words to that
effect.

And after Mr. Dugdales coming to Town, he observing a great intimacy betwixt
us; Told me, that he would come oftener to see me, but that he did not care to
see Dugdale; and yet at the same time would express his desire to see him, but
would bid me take no notice of it to Dugdale, and was very frequently asking
questions concerning him, always speaking very scurrilously of him.

He told me he was very well satisfied of my truth and honesty, and that it
should not be long before I should know more of his mind, which discourse was
soon over.

Not long after he came to me again, and told me he wanted some secret
discourse with me, and thus went on. You are (said he) Dugdales Barber still;
yea (said I) I am; pray (said he) where do you trim him? I answered in my shop,
with three or four Soldiers about him. Do you, said he, never trim him
privately? I told him I never yet had, but was once asked by him to trim him at
his Chamber at the Cockpit. Well said he, if that fellow were aside it would
be well for him that did it, and he thought me a very fit man to be employed in
that affair, and went on making me very fair promises of great rewards, and at
length came to a sum certain, saying that If I would destroy him or blast his
Evidence, I should have seven hundred pounds paid me. And to confirm me that he
was real, he bid me make provision to have it secured to me, accordingly I
spoak to Mr. Reaves an Apothecary, and one Mr. Cross, at the Horshoo-Tavern,
both in Chancery Lane, about security for such a sum, Mr. Cross went twice
with me to speak with Mr. Plessington about one of the hundred pounds, but my
great necessity daily increasing upon me, I was the more inclined to attempt
Mr. Dugdales person, which accordingly I did, after this manner. Mr. Dugdale
being late one Evening at the Horseshoo-tavern in Chancery Lane, sent so me (as
he used frequently to do,) to accompany him home to his Lodging at the Cockpit,
and calling a Coach we two only went into it, this was an opportunity I had
expected, and accordingly had provided a Dagger, which cost me 3s. and 6d.
which I bought at a shop near Walling ford house; when we came into the Strand
near Summerset House, I sitting opposite to Mr. Dugdale in the Coach felt how
low his bodice came, that I might know were to stab him securely, but Mr.
Dugdale mistrusted me so far that he called to the Coachman to stop, but I
persuaded him on, but at Charing Cross, I again was attempting him, and he
again was calling to the Coachman to let him out* but I endeavored to
persuade him that I intended him no harm, yet he still so far mistrusted me,
that when we came to the Cook-pit, he immediately stepped out of the Coach, and
paid the Coach man, and gave him a 1 s. more then his pay to carry me back to
the Hors-shooe Tavern, I would have come out with a design to follow him,
pretending to return by water, but he would not admit of it, but would have the
Coachman carry me back. When I saw I had missed this opportunity of Murdering
him, I bid the Coachman take notice where I had left him well, fearing he might
be dispatched by some other hand, and that I should be questioned for it. The
Coach stood at the Sarazens head in Camomil-street near Bishops gate, this was
in the Month of July, 1679. Mr. Dugdale perceiving his person was attempted,
obscured himself for several days, and then his Enemies reported, that he was
run away from his Evidence, which Mr. Plessington understanding, he believed I
had given Mr. Dugdale his Pas-port for another world, and coming to me then at
the Horseshooe Tavern, he gave me thirty Guinnies; but Mr. Cross coming into
the room at that instant of his delivering them me, I immediately returned them
him again, not desiring any Eye witnesses of my receiving his gold, at which he
seemed to be very angry.

Some time after this some unexpected troubles overtaking me, I was for the
security of my person obliged to quit my Habitation, and the Night before I
went, I met with Mr. Plessington, near middle row in Holbourn, and told him I
feared I could not perform my promise to him, because I wanted money to carry
on the design, he desired me to be as true to him as he would be to me, and
then gave me three Guinnies, and ordered me to meet him the Monday following at
Billings-gate, this was in September 1679, but I failed then meeting him.

I then took a lodging in Wapping, unknown to Mr. Plessington, but he meeting
Mr. Leacroff of Walton in Stafford shire, my very good friend, enquired of him
where I was, and pretended that I had much damnified him, in not meeting him at
Billings-gate according to appointment, Mr. Leacroff told him that I was under
a Cloud, at which he seemed very sorry, and said, he might notwithstanding have
met me, for he knows I design him no hurt but should have met him for his
advantage.

After this he understanding that I was removed to a Cheesmonger in Ratcliff,
caused me frequently to visit him in the Tower, and if at any time I was
questioned whether I went, he ordered me to make use of my own Friends names in
the Tower, as Mr. Shenton in the Minte, Mr. Hubbard at Sir George Whartons, or
Mr. Spenser at Sir Jonas Moors, any of which names would have gained me
admittance.

At one of our meetings there, I told him that Mr. Dugdale had appointed me to
meet him on such a day (which day I then told him) at the Fleece Tavern at
Billings-gate, then he desired me to call of him, that day before I went to
Dugdale, which I did, and dined with him at his Lords Lodging in the Tower, it
was the day after His Grace the Duke of Monmouth returned from beyond the Seas
or thereabouts.

When we had dined Mr. Plessington conveyed me to an Alehouse in the Tower
near the Lieutenants House, the House had the Model of a ship or two hanging in
it. There came two or three Gentlemen with Mr. Plessington, who importuned me
to get Mr. Dugdale away from Billins-gate by water, designing to attempt him
upon the water, as I supposed. I told them I would go to him to the Fleece and
see what Company was with him, and if he were alone would acquaint them.
Accordingly I went, and found two persons with him, and a third came to him
whilst I was with him, but I had staid there longer than they expected, so that
when I returned back to the Dog, they were gone, and had taken with them my
Cane, which I left there.

The next day I went to Mr. Plessington for my Cane, who said to me we missed a
brave opportunity Yesterday, I replied, not as good as when I missed my design
upon him in the Strand, no said he, but have at the third time, and then he
seemed to suspect me for refusing the thirty Guinnies at the Horseshoo-tavern,
which I told him I did fearing Mr. Cross should discover something of our
design, hang him (said he) if he do, weel tell him another story.

I then asked him what I should say to persons that asked me how I came so soon
to want moneys, when I so lately had seven hundred pound to put out to use;
Pugh (said he) tell them that it was mine, and that I being (as you feared)
concerned in the Plot, you were to put it out in your name for my use, in which
I observed his directions.

But be sure said he, that you continue to blast Dugdale all you can, for we
can have no fitter person for the purpose than your self, but I will suddenly
be with you again, and contrive a way for you to do it more easily and
effectually.

Accordingly he came on a Saturday ni^ht and lay with me, an then told me that
I being a witness or Mr. Dugdale in the Trial of Price, might do them the
service they desired, by swearing that Mr. Dugdale proffered me I moneys,
maintenance, and protection as a Kings Evidence, if I would swear against Sir
James Symons, Mr. Gerard, and others, this I promised to do; but before the
trial having seriously considered what it was that I was about to do, my
purpose was altered, and therefore desired Mr. Plessington to put it off, and
told him I would be out of the way before I was subpaena'd, designing to go to
Chelmsford in Essex, but he would by no means consent to it, and so I was at
the trial of Anne Price and John Tasborough, but did not swear against Dugdale
as I had promised, and as they expected, at which I after perceived they were
much startled.

Soon after Mr. Plessington coming to me; told me that I had lost my self, and
that I was not the man he took me for, and after some other discourse, said
that if I would yield my self forsworn in what I had witnessed at the Trial, he
would get a Friend to speak to the Duke of York, and did not in the least
question but by his means to get me a Pardon for Perjury. And he then
instructed me to say that Mr. Dugdale threatened me (if I owned a word of our
meeting at Billings-gate, or of his promises to me) that he would bring two to
swear Treason against me and have me hanged, or at least such Crimes as should
cause me to be Pillored.

And at his instigation I did tell several in and about London, that Dugdale
was a Rogue, and that I would do his business for him 'ere long, that he had
made me forswear my self to do him a kindness, with more such notorious
falsehoods.

About four days after the Trial, I was upon suspicion apprehended for a
Priest, and carried before Sir William Waller, but was releast by the means of
a Letter from my Honored Friend, Sir Humphery Doleman, this was in February,
1679.

After this I began to stand firm to the Popish Interest, and was intended to
be a witness against Mr. Dugdale in the Trial of the Lord Aston and Sir James
Symons, this was in the beginning of the year, 1680.

That which confirmed me more to their Intrest was the misinformation I had
received by their means concerning Mr. Dugdale, viz. That he was the cause of
my being apprehended for a Priest, and that he designed mischief against me,
and that he had proffered ten pounds, to take me before the Lord Astons Trial;
with which I acquainted Sir Thomas Whitegrave, who bid me if any trouble of
that Nature came upon me, to send to Mr. Thomas Robinsons in Cursitors Alley,
where he and his Son Bromley lodged, and either of them would be my Bail. Sir
Thomas was subpaena'd as a witness for the Lord Aston, and was a witness for
the Lord Stafford, I therefore was forced frequently to shift my lodgings, and
was entertained at Major General Egertons, he being from home: within a short
time Mr. Germin Drayton, Butler both to Mr. Heningham and Sir James Symonds,
and one Samuel Holt a Black smith to the Lord Aston of Tixal, which Holt was
also a witness in the Lord Staffords trial, came to me frequently to the
Bull-tavern in Southampton street, Mr. Drayton oftener than the other, and did
interceed with me to write something that might blast Dugdale, which I did, and
he called for it at the time appointed.

Two or three days after Mr. Drayton told me that he must bring a Gentleman to
speak with me, but would not name him, accordingly the next day he called me,
and we went together to the Crown in Kings street in Blooms-bury, whether he
brought one Mr. Longner, reputed to be the Lord Staffords Solicitor, who thus
accosted me; that he was glad to see so honest a good face appear in their
cause, and that any one would take me for an honester man than ever Dugdale
was, adding that Sir James Symons was better able to perform than Dugdale was
to promise, and that I should not need to fear a gratuity; for they were the
strongest side. Upon this I replied, that I was I ready to serve them in such
ways, as they should propose to me, then they desired me to write a Paper to
Destroy Dugdales Evidence, I told them that I had already written one, yea said
Mr. Drayton, but this we now desire, is to satisfy Sir James Symonds, yet I
often denied them for that very reason, because I had before given them one,
but at last agreed to write a Paper in their method, and they were to pick
the best out of both for their purpose, which when done, I was to svvear to, I
cannot undertake to remember the very words of it, but they dictated to me,
and I wrote to this purpose.

Sir, I can, I bless GOD for it, with a safe Conscience swear, that Mr. Dugdale
did at a private meeting betwixt him and my self proffer me money and a
maintenance, and protection as one of the Kings Evidence, if I would stand by
and swear for him against Sir James Symons, and Mr. Gerard and others; this I
do neither for fear nor favor, nor in hopes of any future gratuity, as I hope
to be saved.

SIMEON WRIGHT.

This was by their direction, and then Mr. Drayton invited me to the
King's Bench Prison, whither I went, and after Dinner, Sir James Symonds sent
for me to him to Mr. Coolings, and when I came, told me he hoped I was sensible
how great his future gratitude should be, and that he hoped I would stand and
fall by them when occasion should serve, and that he was sorry that he had no
occasion for me at present, and then thrust twenty shillings into my hand.

Many other contrivances they had which I omit, because I would not be tedious,
but can easily prove this, and a great deal more. This paper before mentioned,
is the Paper that William Viscount Stafford produced in Court, upon his Trial.

They have another Paper of this nature; would they be so just to produce it,
which I delivered to Mr. Drayton, but I know not in whose hands it is now; Mr.
Henry Lee (Bailiff to Walter Heningham Esquire; who was accused to be one concerned
in this Hellish Popish Plot,) did frequently make it his business to revile and
asperse Mr. Dugdale, especially about the beginning of October last, to one Mr.
Moore, at the House of Thomas Aspery, of Aston, in Staffordshire, which Mr.
Moore then questioning him for, and asking his name, he replied his name was
Simeon Wright a Barber, in Chancery Lane; by which it is very plain, that he
was knowing to my being employed to ruin Mr. Dugdale, as aforesaid, as indeed
he was, and therefore made use of my Name to obscure his own.

They had within three Months last past, told me, that theirs is the strongest
side, and have given me severe charge to stand or fall with them, and not be
danted, from which encouragement, I did all that in me lay, to blast Mr.
Dugdale wherever I came; but it has pleased God to bring me to an
acknowledgment of the truth, partly by means of His Majesty's late
Proclamation, for the encouragment of witnesses, and partly by the good Advice
of several Friends, but especially my own Conscience prompting me to this
Declaration of the truth, for the clearing of the Innocent and exposing the
Guilty.

SIMEON WRIGHT.
Jurat' 17. December, 1680. Cor' me EDMOND WARCUP.
FINIS.
THE INFORMATION OF Thomas Lander OF Shutborrow in the County of Stafford,
Another of the Witnesses in the TRIAL OF The late Lord Stafford, As it was
taken upon Oath By Edmund Warcup, Esquire; one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of Middlesex, and City and Liberties of Westminster, on
the 24th day of December, 1680.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street, M DC
LXXXI.

THE INFORMATION OF Thomas Lander OF Shutborrow in the County of Stafford,
Taken upon Oath the 24th of December, 1680. before me Edmund Warcup, Esquire,
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, and
City and Liberties of Westminster, as follows; viz.
THIS Informant says, That having been employed as a Workman several times at
the House of my Lord Aston at Tixall in the County aforesaid, he was solicited
by Mr. Francis Hind, Steward to the Lord Aston, to become a Witness against
Stephen Dugdale, late Steward to the Lord Aston, any way to invalidate or take
off his Evidence in relation to the Popish Plot, and he served this Informant
with a Subpoenae to come up to London for that purpose, at the late intended
Trial of the said Lord Aston in June last past; but before his coming up, the
said Mr. Hind, Francis Aston, Son to the Lord Aston, and Thomas Sawyear,
Servant to the said Lord Aston, etc. sent for this Informant into a private
Room in the said Lord Aston's House; and there told him, That if he would swear
such things as should be dictated to him by the Persons aforesaid, to
invalidate or take off the said Dugdale's Evidence, he should have such a
Reward as should be to his own content, and not want for Money and Horse, as
might become a man of better Quality than himself. And this Informant agreeing
to their Proposals, came up to London accordingly.

They persuaded this Informant likewise to swear that Dugdale was a Cheating
Rogue, and had cheated this Informant and many more in the Country, whilst he
was the Lord Aston's Steward. To which this Informant answered he would, and
says that Hind told him, That if he would do according as they directed him,
that he should (besides the Rewards agreed upon) have his Charges born in
coming to Town, in staying here, and going down again. And likewise says, that
he was to swear that James Ansell, (being a Witness in some things relating to
the Discovery of the Plot) was a Perjured Rogue, and a Thief, and had perjured
himself several times; and all such other things as they should dictate to him
when he came up to London, in order to take off both their Evidence. And says
those that promised to make good his Reward for so doing, was Mr. Herbert
Aston, his Lordships Uncle, Francis Aston, Son to the Lord Aston, and Thomas
Sawyear, Servant to the said Lord Aston.

And this Informant says, That being in London, and my Lord Aston's Trial not
being come on, he received no more of his Reward but his bare Charges; however
they faithfully promised him when he had made good what he had promised them to
swear, he should have his full Reward made good to him.

And this Informant says, That in September last going up to my Lord Aston's
House, he was made very welcome, and after some time was asked by one of the
Servants of my Lord Aston's, where Mr. Dugdale lay; and this Informant told
him, at one Richard Perkins next House to his own in Shutborrow, about a Mile
distant from my Lord Aston's; the said Servant, after some discourse had with
this Informant, told him that he might do them good service, and have a good
Reward for his pains, if he could devise to set fire on the Room where Mr.
Dugdale lay, and burn him in his Bed. To which this Informant answered, that if
he should do so, he should burn his own House, and endanger the whole Town: To
which the Servant replied, that it were better that his House and the whole
Town were burnt, rather than he (meaning Mr. Dugdale) should escape, who was a
Rogue, and had betrayed his Lords Secrets, with several other Gentlemen; he at
the same time telling this Informant, that he should if he would undertake it)
be well rewarded to his own content; but perceiving this Informant not to be
very willing? told him he was a Coward, he would not undertake to do so good a
piece of service. The said Servant at the same time went to one Walter Moore*
another Servant of my Lord Aston's, who was to join with this Informant in the
said Fact; and this Informant going home, saw the said Walter Moore walking
about the said House that was so to be fired; and this Informant not being
willing that such a wicked Act should be done, acquainted one of his Neighbors
with it, and so a Watch was set to preserve the said House where Mr. Dugdale
lay, and all the Town, that night, and all the time after so long as Mr.
Dugdale stayed there: This Informant having likewise heard the said Moore say,
that Dugdale was a Rogue for having betrayed his Lords Secrets: And likewise
says, that when this informant was to be a Witness for the Lord Aston, one
Samuel Holt who was another Servant of my Lord Aston's, and also one Sawyear,
being Subpoena'd up as Witnesses for my Lord Aston; they told this Informant,
that Mr. Dugdale was a Perjured Rogue, for laying the Plot of the Presbyterians
upon the Papists, and if they or either of them could meet the said Mr. Dugdale
conveniently, they would do his business for him: And says, That the said Holt
had received a sum of Money for the said service, as likewise the said Walter
Moore.

And this Informant says, That all those things which were so by them, as
aforesaid, dictated to him, were altogether false, to any knowledge of this
Informant, in relation to the said Mr. Dugdale and the said Mr. James Ansell.
And says that several other Matters and Persons he knows of that were
concerned herein (this Informant being always made privy to most of their
Contrivances in this nature) that would almost hang them, which he is unwilling
to discover against them, for that they are related to him.

Thomas Lander.
Jurat. cor. me Edmond Warcup.
Dec. 25. 1680.
I Do appoint Tho. Simmons, and no other, to Print this my Information, Witness
my Hand,

Thomas Lander.

FINIS.

