Several Advertisements concerning the Services and Sufferings of Sir William
Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar, for the Crown of England.
SIr William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, having furnished the late King
CHARLES (of ever Blessed Memory) with diverse great sums of Money toward the
ordinary charge of the Crown, and other Supplies, upon emergent occasions
incumbent upon His said Majesty; more particularly for the Funeral of King
James, Relief of the Protestants in France, at Rochel, and the Isle of Ree,
Exhibitions to the Queen of Bohemia and her Children, Expeditions into Ireland,
and several Disbursements for Diamonds, and other Jewels of the Crown, etc. All
lent and advanced before the year 1640. upon several Assignments under the
Great Seal of England, on the four entire Subsidies granted in Parliament; The
Lord Wentworth's Collections of the Fines and Compositions out of Recusants
Estates in the Northern Counties, the Allom-Farm, and Sugar-Farm, etc.
Whereupon there remained 148216 l. sterling. unsatisfyed to the Estates of Courten
and Pyndar at the Kings most Happy Restoration, as by the Records in the
Exchequer appears: Although the greatest part of the said Moneys belonged to
Orphans and Widows, lent at Interest, to the said Sir William Courten, and Sir
Paul Pyndar.

Several Addresses were made to His Majesty in the year 1661. by the principal
Creditors, Humbly Praying, that the said Debt might be satisfied, either out of
the Arrears and Supers in the Receivers and Collectors hands, together with the
small Rents under xx s. per annum, within the Survey of the Exchequer; Or out
of the growing Fines and Compositions of Papists Convict: Or otherwise out of
the Improved Values of the First Fruits and Tenths of the Dignitaries of the
Church, and other Spiritual Promotions exceeding 100 l. per annum, upon
moderate Surveys as the Law directs.

These Proposals were thought by the Secretarys of State to be very Just and
Easy for his Majesty to pay such a Debt of the Crown, which in Honor and
Conscience He was obliged to do; Wherefore References were made thereupon to
the Lord High Treasurer; and from him, to the Barons of the Exchequer; And from
them, to the Auditors, of the Impressed Receivers, and Clerks of the Pipe, to
certify the State of the Accounts to the said Barons, who made several Reports
to the Lord Treasurer, with their Opinions concerning the Justice of the said
Debt; but nothing was effectually done for Relief of the said Creditors, who
had spent much Time and Moneys in soliciting after their Satisfaction.

Nevertheless the small Chauntrey Rents, and others, were Sold, to avoid the
charge of the Crown in collections, and the Papists indulged by Friends at
Court, from Paying any Fines or Compositions; And the Dignitaries of the
Church, with the rest of the Clergy excused from any new Surveys upon the
improved values of their Estates; upon a pretense of their sufferings; and that
the Bishops had been very instrumental in the Kings Restoration, so the Debt
still rests in Statu quo, only there is a Reference from His Majesty, dated
the 8th of May 1679. Depending before the Lords, Commissioners of the Treasury,
upon the Petition of Richard Powel Esquire and Nathaniel Hill Gent. concerning a
Grant for some satisfaction out of the Fines, Forfeitures, or Compositions of
Papists convict, on the behalf of themselves and the rest of the Creditors.

THat in contemplation of the particular Service of Sir Paul Pyndar, who had
out of his great zeal and Loyalty toward the preservation of the Royal Family,
sent several Sums of Money in Gold to Oxford, (by the Hands of Madam Iean
Whorewood, yet Living,) in the year 1644. For Transporting of His Majesty, when
he was Prince of Wales, and the late Queen His Mother, with their Servants and
Goods to Breast in France. His now Majesty was graciously pleased in the year
1664. to grant an Allowance of Sir Paul Pyndars proportion of Money, advanced
with his Partners, upon a contract for the Customs, in the year 1640. that was
not in^oyed; which said allowance by the said Grant, was to be paid upon an
Assignment and Tally struck upon the Farm, held by Sir John Wolstenholme, Sir
John ^haw, Sir Nicholas Crisp, and others, Anno 1667. but was post-poned, and
not paid (...) this day of advertisment, although it does not extend to half
the value of the ^old sent to Oxford as aforesaid; his now Majesty, and others
then present, ^ving lately owned the same.

THat Sir William Courten, at his own proper Costs and Charges, Discovered,
Planted and settled the Island of Barbados, in the beginning of the late Kings
Reign, without any Aid or A^^istance from the Crown; and being in the quiet
possession thereof, for the space of two years and upwards, having Peopled the
said Island with great numbers of English Men, Women and Children, besides
Indians there, in several Plantations, (as by the Cashiers and Accomptants of
Sir William Courten yet living appears,) James late Earl of Carlisle, under the
pretense of a Patent creating him Lord Proprietor of the Caribbee Islands,
entered upon the said Island of Barbados by force of Arms, and dispossessed the
said Sir William Courten, and his Heirs of their legal Right and Propriety, in
an Arbitrary and Tyrannical way; causing Sir William Tufton, and the Principal
Agents and Factors of Sir William Courten, some to be Shot to Death, and others
Banished, contrary to the Laws of God and Nations.

That in all revolutions of time and Government, the Heirs, Executors,
Administors, and Creditors of Sir William Courten and his Son, continually
Claymed and appealed for Justice and restitution in this Grand Case of Violence
and Oppression, some Persons endeavoring for quieting the possessions, to
annex the said Island to the Crown of England; by Act of Parliament, and others
to transfer the Legal Intrest of Sir William Courten, to some Foreign Prince
or State, in the time of the late Rebellion.

That upon the Kings Restoration to his Crown and Kingdoms, several Debates
arising, between the Lord Willoughby of Parham, (clayming a Lease under
Carlisle, the pretended Lord Proprietor,) and the Planters that by intrusion
had settled themselves upon the said Island, William Courten Esquire the
Grandchild, and Heir of Sir William Courten, together with Diverse of the
Principal Creditors of his Father and Grandfather, Humbly addressed themselves
to the King, by Petition; Praying that His Majesty would be graciously pleased,
to interpose by his Prerogative Royal, for their Protection and Relief. Soon
after His Majesty declared in Council, that he would not assume any benefit to
himself out of the Profits of the said Island, until such satisfaction should
be made to the Persons Legally Interessed, as shall consist with Equity, and
good Conscience. Notwithstanding the Four and half per Cent, granted by the
general Assembly of Intrudors, (out of all Merchandises exported,) to the Lord
Proprietor aforesaid, in lieu of the old Servile Rents upon every head, was
offered to be resigned to the King; which afterward was done to His Majesty as
Lord Proprietor; yet to this day, no Restitution or Reparation has been made,
either by the King, or the Planters, to the Heirs, or Executors, of Sir William
Courten, for the Right and Property in the Spoil; or the Original Costs and
Damages, of the first Discovering, Fortifying and Planting the said Island; but
the said Duty is let out to Farm to John Stroud Esquire and others for 6000 l. per
annum, which is applied to other uses, that naturally belongs to the Heirs and
Creditors of Sir William Courten.

THat several Spoils and Depredations being Committed by the chief Officers
belonging to the East India Company of the Netherlands, upon the Ships and
Factories of Sir William Courten, Sir Paul Pyndar, and their Partners in the
East-India's, a particular Agreement was made in a Treaty of Common Alliance
between the King of Great Britain, and the States General in the year 1662.
That entire satisfaction and reparation should be made in an amicable way, for
the two Ships named the Bona-Esperanza, and Henry Bona-Adventura, with their
Ladings, wrongfully Seized, and converted to the use of the said East India
Company; which was Earnestly Solicited at the Hague, and Amsterdam, two years
together, after the said Treaty; by Orders from the King and Council to Sir
George Downing, his Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary, who controverted all the
Points and answered all the Objections concerning the same, in Conferences with
the Deputies of the States General, and Mr. Peter Vandam, the Advocate of the
East India Company; Yet nothing could take Effect any further then an offer of
200000 Gilders, for all the said Spoils and Depredations.

That upon further application to his Majesty, the Debt and Damages for the
said Spoils and Depredations, were stated and ascertained upon His Majesty's
Command, by the Judge of the Admiralty; Whereupon an especial Grant, b^ Letters
Patents, passed the Great Seal of England, the 19th. of May 1665. to S^ Edmond
Turnor Knt. and George Carew Esquire their Executors, Administrators, an^ Assigns,
on the behalf of all Persons interessed, to Reprize and Recover t^^ said Debt
so Liquidated, amounting to the sum of 151612 l. With all Costs an^ Damages
incident to the recovery thereof. His Majesty Expressly declaring in the said
Letters Patents, that the said Grant should continue, and remain Effectual in
the Law, for that end and purpose; Notwithstanding any Alliance or
Correspondence whatsoever afterward to be made between the King, and the
States General.

The Proprietors and Creditors being numerous, and holding themselves to be
secured by the common Law of England, by Virtue of the said Grant, passing of
common Right; wherein they were vested with an Interest, coupled with an
Authority, to recover the said Debt, as the Law directs. Whereupon a third part
thereof was Assigned to John Brown Gent. and John Graham Esquire in the Month of
May 1666. under the same Conditions and Limitations, contained in the original
Grant, Enrolled in Chancery, with power to recover the same, for the benefit of
themselves, and diverse other Creditors, mentioned in a schedule thereunto
annexed, who delivered up their Bonds accordingly.

Thereupon several small Frigates were set forth in the year 1666. to Reprise
their proportionable share of the said Debt and Damages; but it being in time
of War, several common Claymers appeared, so most part of the Ships and
Goodstaken, were discharged by the Court of Admiralty, upon account of
Flemings, Hamburgers etc. And the rest would not satisfy the Incident Costs
and Expenses. Wherefore they desisted until a more seasonable opportunity in
time of Peace.

Then it happned in the Month of June 1667. that a Treaty of Peace and Common
Alliance was concluded at Breda, between the King and the States General;
wherein it was mentioned, that all Letters of Marque and Reprizals, ought to be
comprehended, and made void.

That in the year 1672. upon new Differences between the King and the States
General, the said Treaty at Breda was by His Majesty Declared Null and Void;
The Proprietors and Creditors then applied themselves to the King and Council,
in this singular Case of the said Ships, for further redress, (being the only
matter Liquidated and Established, under the Great Seal of England,) Whereupon
His Majesty also declared, that he would insist upon entire Satisfaction and
Reparation; and gave Instructions to his Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries
accordingly, reciting the Debt stated, and the Letters Patents aforesaid;
Affirming also, that in this case he would take care to Protect his Subjects in
their just Rights, as well as to assist them in the recovery thereof.

THat in the year 1673. A Peace and Common Alliance was concluded at London,
between the King and the States General, upon an agreement made (amongst other
things that 800000 Pattaccoons, should be paid to his Majesty, at four equal
payments, in four years; Leaving the Debt and Damages of the Bona-Esperanza,
and Henry Bona-Adventura, still open at large, without any mention thereof, in
the said Treaty (since violated by the Hollanders,) The Ministers of State,
forgetting the Honor and Interest of the King and Kingdom, Confirmed the
Treaty at Breda, (lately declared absolutely void) that was attended with the
Dishonorable circumststances of Chatham, where the Kings Ships were Burnt,
(during that Treaty) by an ungrateful People, that live upon the Spoils of all
Nations.

Then the Proprietors and Creditors concerned in the Loss and Damages of the
said Ships; caused new Addresses to be made at the Hague, Amsterdam, and
White Hall, with Protests, that if some considerable part of the Pattacoons
were not paid to the Proprietors and Creditors toward their satisfaction, then
should be necessitated suddenly to put the said Letters Patents in Execution
for Reprizals, according to the Laws and Statutes of England.

Yet nevertheless the first fourth part of the said Pattacoons, were presently
Assigned to Alderman Backwel for other Services, and the three remaining parts
to the Prince of Orange, (yet unsatisfied by the States) upon pretense of old
Debts due to his Father and Grandfather, from the late King of England; and no
part of the said Pattacoons for the Proprietors and Creditors, concerned in the
Bona-Esperanza; and Bona-Adventura, that had ushered in so many Millions of
Pounds Sterling, for His Majesty's service, and the good fortune of the said
Prince of Orange, by the Benefit and Advantage of all the English Blood and
Treasure spent in restoring him to the Honors, Profits, and Offices of his
Ancestors, as Statholder, etc.

THat in the Month of September 1676. The States of Holland were so
presumptious upon the request of Jacob Pergens of Amsterdam, (a free Denizen of
England,) to send their Express Order, in an Arbitrary way, to the ordinary
Courts of Justice in Amsterdam, and the Supreme Court of Iuditcture at the
Hague, where several Actions were depending, and ready for Sentences against
the said Jacob Pergens, and the Heirs, and Executors of Peter Boudaen, to stop
the course of Law and Equity, (against all Sense and Reason,) upon Civil
Contracts, Obligations, Bills of Exchange, and Merchants Accounts, for Goods
and Moneys trusted into their Hands by Sir William Courten, Sir Paul Pyndar,
and William Courten Esquire to the value of 134000 l. Sterling. Prohibiting the
Judges of the said respective Courts, from all further proceedings at Law, or
to give any Judgment in the said Causes, upon pretense that all particular and
Personal actions whatsoever, were discharged and released by the Treatyes
concluded at Breda, and at London, between the King and the States General.

The Persons interested and oppressed by such apparent breaches of the Laws, of
Common Amity and Alliance; First, appealed from the said Arbitrary Order, to
the States General; who answered, that they could not intermeddle therein, the
States of Holland being Sovereigns in their own Province.

In the Month of July 1677. the Proprietors and Creditors appealed up their
Petition to the King and Council, for relief against the States of Holland, by
Reprizals, if Justice could not be obtained, by his Majesty's Letters of
Recommendation to the said States; For which Letters they Humbly Prayed;
Whereupon two Orders of Council were made the 24 of July, that the Complainants
should be heard on the 10th. of October 1677. But to this day no Hearing, or
other Relief whatsoever, could be obtained.

About the Month of April 1680. The Creditors under Mr. Brownes Assignment,
upon the account of the Bona Esperanza; prepared to fit out three Ships under
the Command of Captain Compton Gwyther, and others, to put the said Letters of
Reprizals in Execution. Whereupon Several Orders from the Council Table, and
also from the Lords of the Admiralty, issued forth in an Arbitrary and
Extrajudicial way forceably to obstruct their due Proceedings, calling none of
the persons concerned, judicially before them, by Scire Facias, or any other
legal Process, to answer for themselves, or to show cause why they ought not to
have the benefit of the Law, or a compensation in lieu thereof. Wherefore to
prevent a failer of Justice, and to vindicate the said Cause from being made a
President of dangerous consequence to the Rights, Liberties and Properties of
the Subjects of England: The said Captain Gwyther, Commander of the Ship named
the George Bona-Adventura, being ready fitted and entered in the Admiralty,
proceeded upon his intended Voyage, others purposing to follow him, as Wind and
Weather shall serve, to bring home the Effects of the Bona Esperanza, under the
Protection of the Laws, toward the Relief of many hundred Families interessed
therein, that want their Bread, which is eaten by Strangers and others, that
live upon the Spoils and Ruins of so many Orphans and Widows, that cries aloud
to the Heavens for Justice and Restitution.

The Debts incumbent upon the Crown, -- 148216. The Debts upon the Bardaboes.
-- 065000. The Debts incumbent upon the East India Company of the Netherlands.
-- 151612. The Debts standing out upon Civil Actions in Holland and Zealand. --
134000.
Ius permaneat semper nec unquam mutatur. If any Person desires to be more
particularly informed in any of the said Cases, he may be satisfied in the
whole matters of Fact at large, in a Book Entitled, Fraud and Oppression,
Detected and Arraigned; at Mr. George Downs his Shop, at the three Flower de
Luces over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. And Mr. Samuel Carr
Bookseller, at the Kings Head in St. Paul's Church Yard.

Recollect. fideliter ex Originalibus,

per Georg: Carew Ar: Excudebat October. 21. 1680.


