A SUPPLEMENT TO THE NARRATIVE. In Reply to the Dullness and Malice Of two
pretended ANSWERS To that PAMPHLET.

Written by E. SETTLE.

Carmine dum tali Sylvas Animosque Ferarum
Threicius Vates and saxa sequentia traxit,
Ecce Nurus Ciconum -- Ovid. Metam.
LONDON; Printed, and Sold by Thomas Graves for the Author. 1683.

A Supplement, etc.
WEll, Lord have mercy upon us! What a crying Sin is turning Honest, and
telling Truth, to those Red-letter'd Saints the Whiggs? How many Rogues, Dogs,
Rascals and Villains, has poor Elkanah been called by them (for they rail as
loud as they pray) and all alas, not for Libelling the Brother of a King, (for
that was his Virtue) but for doing ill and being sorry for it. How many
Reprobates, Monsters, and what not, has his Apostasy from that Heavenly
Whig-gift of Lying and Scandal transformed him to: Whilst he raked up Dirt, and
Falsehood to throw in the Face of Princes, tho stolen from that sink of Forgery
the HISTORY OF THE BLACK BOX, what Honesty and Oracles hung upon his Lips; and
what an Angel of Light was such a Protestant Champion! But from that minute,
that accursed minute, that he speaks Truth, and owns and repents of that Malice
that animated him, tho into the very Unchristianity of Revenge, what a falling
Lucifer have they made him?

Besides, this is but the Crime of his Preface and Postscript; but oh for his
Narrative! his lewd, his filthy, his abominable Narrative. Reprobate of
Reprobates, and Monster of Monsters, having no fear of God before his Eyes, but
led by the Instigation of the Devil, he has dashed their dear, their darling,
their adored Dagon to pieces; and the disconsolate Saints want Power to join
the poor stumps of it together again.

But alas! where Reason cannot help them, Railing and Lying shall. And for an
Essay of that Nature, we meet a harmless sucking Devil of theirs coming abroad,
called REMARKS UPON E. SETTLES NARRATIVE, an Extraordinary piece for their
Dagons Justification, being all Billings-gate and no Argument from the
beginning to the end. That scurrilous senseless scribble that I should have
answered with Silence and Disdain, had not the Barbarous Impudence of some
intended personal Reflections in it, a Mass of as Brazen-faced Romance and
Forgery, as ever Ink and Letters brought forth, extorted this Vindication from
the Rancour of Abuse and Villainy. But truly there is a great deal of Cause for
it. For where any thing comes in Print a little too unanswerable for them, and
they cannot make their Attempt that way, the Authors Person must be attacqued,
and an Assault made upon his Reputation is their old practiced way, to baffle
that Reason they cannot otherwise overthrow; whilst they Write as they Preach
only to Ignorance and Fools, such as can be caught by Empty Noise, and Charmed
by Sounds.

But before I convince the World, how Notorious a Liar the Remarker is in those
Rascally stories laid at poor Elkanahs Door. I shall endeavor to answer some
few passages in his Book, which to the unwary at first sight may look a little
like sense, tho God wot, but a little indeed: He puts the Narrative writer this
Question. p. 11

Whether it were not more probable that the Papists a People of debaucht and
murderous Principles, that bear no Conscience toward Heretics, persecuted by
poenal Laws [not when the Plot was hatching sure] should be induced out o^
their Hatred of the Protestant Religion, and for the Advancement of there own,
to remove the Obstacles of their Freedom and Happiness by the Destruction of a
Heretic Prince; then that a few inconsiderable Persons without any Support or
Encouragement should dare to create such a Horrid and Bloody Plot of their own
Heads, and then venture their Lives by daring to justifye it to the Face of
King and Parliament. Now what a doubty Question has this Remarker made; and
what an OEdipus must he be that answers it?

That the Papists are those debaucht and Murderous Principled Men I
acknowledge; but that their Killing the King by those open daylight
Assassinations sworn in the Plot, could have been an Advancement of their
Religion, and a removing the Obstacles to their Freedom and Happiness I utterly
deny. For the barefaced shooting the King by Pickerings Gun, by such a hand,
at such a place, and in such a Manner, as attested by the Plot-swearers, had
been so remote a way from advancing either the Papists or their Religion, that
on the contrary it had been the direct means to have drawn down that Vengeance
upon their Heads, from the Hundred fold stronger Protestant hands in England,
as might have almost blotted them from the Face of the Earth. And as the
Narrative tells you, if that were the highest reach of an Intrigue of a Hundred
Years hatching, much good may do them with their Politics.

But had the Discoverers no Support nor Encouragement from making their
Discoveries, when from Infamy Jails and Beggary they stepped up to Ten Pounds a
week maintenance, and the honor of Whitehall Lodgings, Whitehall Guards to
attend them, with the Pomp of bended Knees and up lifted Eyes from the adoring
Crowd, and the continued Hosannas OF ALL HAYLE THE SAVIORS OF THE NATION. Was
it no Encouragement for such a poor Marshalsea Bird as Bedlox, newly releast
from feeding on the Basket, to leap at the Kings Proclamation of 500l for the
Discovery of Sir Edmond-bury Godfreys Murder? And tho several unhappy unforseen
discouragements have befaln them since; Yet, they are not so desperately
unfortunate yet, but they have some Friends left. The Reverend Dr. the despised
at the Profane: Whitehall, is still honored by the sanctified City
Brotherhood. A large House well furnished, with Servants, Attendants, and all
good things at Command, and all to the Son of a Weaver with not one farthing
worth of Patrimony or Preferment is a sign that Providence has not quite
forsaken him? It Is true his disheartened Plot has left him in a little
Wilderness at present. Yet let me tell you there is a sort of Birds of Prey, your
kind fat Amsterdam Buntings, that like Elisha's Ravens, take care to keep him
well fed still. And the true blew Protestant Guinneys collected and raised for
the late defeated City Feast, were yet very honorably disposed of, and the
rewarded Dr. had a round Lump of that corroborating Gold to enliven his
fainting Spirits, and strengthen his true Protestant Zeal. For I assure you
it is but necessary; for great and long Causes require often Feeing; the Clients
must be Bountiful to keep the Advocates safely retained. And tho some People
may lay Poverty to his charge: to confute that error, the Dr. I assure them,
does not pinch himself into a Jump for want of Cloth enough to make it up into
a Gown.

Besides why must it follow (suppose the Plot a piece of Subornation) that
those inconsiderable Persons should create it of their Own heads. What if the
Heads of some considerable TOWER Jail Birds should join with the Inconsiderable
Marshalsea Jail-Birds for the production of it. It Is not the first time that
Quality and Rascality have club'd together, and like the spurious Offspring of
Nilus, there goes some Sunbeam not all mud to make up the Monster.

Oh but the greatest and most damnable Crime in the Narrative is, it has
ridiculed the whole Popish Plot, and consequently affronted the King Lords and
Commons, that have so unanimously and so frequently asserted their Belief of
the Popish Plot.

Now to clear this Imputation from the Narrative and the Author, he hereby
declares, that no man in the World can pay a greater Reverence to the King, or
his Parliaments then himself: But in the height of all that Veneration due to
Heavens Vicegerent, both from a Subject and a Christian, I must say that the
King Lords and Commons together are but Men, and as such not Infallible. And
Inadvertency and Surprise may sometimes deceive both Kings and Potentates. The
King and his Parliament have declared there was a Plot against the Kings Life;
and yet they have decreed no penalty or punishment to him that says, that
Pickering was one of the worst Gunners in Christendom, and St. James's Park the
worst spot of Ground for such an Assassination. The Plot Discoverers have been
credited by the King and Parliament; and yet if any Man shall but ASSERT what
the Discoverers SWEAR, as sacred as their Testimony has been, the Law will lay
him by the heels for it. For he that shall aver that Wakeman was engaged to
Poison the King, or Kerney one of the four Ruffians was hired to stab him, is
liable to be punished for it; for they have stood Trial, and been acquitted by
LAW, and as such they have their Action against him that asperses, and traduces
the Innocent.

It Is true, I neither do, nor dare say that poor Pickering and Groves were
Innocent: and why because the Law has pronounced them Guilty. And yet I may
safely say that had they had the good Fortune to have lived a Year and a half
longer than they did, 'twas not impossible nor unlikely they might have dyed in
their Beds, for all their Screwed Guns or Silver Bullets. Besides without
Derogation to Kings or their great Councels, not only their Votes have been
several times Humane and Frail; but even their Deliberate Acts and Statutes
are not always Gospel? For Instance King Henry the 8th. and one of his
Parliaments made an Act that illegitimated both Mary and Elizabeth his
Daughters; and decreed a punishment for any Man that should but assert their
Right to the Crown, or so much as call them Legitimate [28th of Hen. 8th.]

And the same Henry and another of his Parliaments [35th of Hen. 8th.]
Legitimated them Both again, by Virtue of which Legitimation they both
successively wore the Crown of England. And all this Legally done by the King
and the great Council of the Nation. And yet in the Case of Legitimacy which
relates to their Birth and Blood, which is unchangeable, either the pro or the
con must be Erroneous. And what if in our case, in the same Nature, only vice
versa, the King Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament anno 78 and 79,
should have declared the Popish Plot sworn by Titus, Bedlows, Dugdale, France,
Dangerfield, Duffy, Murfey, Macnamar, Zeal, Lewis etc. was LEGITIMATE, and the
King Lords and Commons in another Parliament in 83, (or when His Majesty
pleases) should declare the aforesaid Plot to be ILLEGITIMATE, I know nothing
to the contrary but it lies in their Breasts and pleasures to do it.

But however Elkanahs Narrative has scurrilously and basely arraigned the
Justice, and Judges of the Nation: -- And why so! Is there one passage through
the whole Book that says or Hints that the Popish Conspirators had not their
Legal Trials; and tho amongst so many Hundred Treasonable Letters, Commissions
and what not, against them, their Accusers produced nothing but HEARTY SWEARING
for their Conviction, yet do not the Lord Chief J. at Whitebreads Trial say
that it is by the Oaths of two Witnesses that our Lives and Fortunes stand or
fall. And does the Narrative say or insinuate that they had not two or more
Witnesses whose Oaths condemned them; for which the Jury brought them in
Guilty, and the Judges according to their Duties condemned them as such; and
how then is the Justice or Judges of the Nation Impeached, when on the contrary
they were so far from dying unjustly, that they dyed even summo jure, by the
highest Justice in the Kingdom. Besides, suppose Pickering was never engaged to
Pistol the King, and has yet dyed for it: So I have heard of some People that
have been hanged in Chains for a Murder, when the supposed Murdered Person has
some Years after been found alive, and all this while the Judge and the
unfortunate Jury neither arraigned nor arraignable for their Sentence or
Execution.

Who then has the Narrative wronged, the Kings Evidence? No. That Is Impossible;
for to tell truth can wrong no body: and the Narrative is so far from belying
them, that it recites not one passage but is recorded from their own Oaths. And
why a Recital of what is sworn in the Plot should be a Burlesquing of the Plot
I cannot understand.

Oh but telling Truth, says the Proverb, may sometimes do harm; and in this
case the whole Book tho with never so much truth in it, tends to the lessening
the Discoverers Testimony and a Stifling the whole Popish Plot.

Now it is true indeed, why should Elkanah be such a Cudden as to endeavor the
Stifling of the Popish Plot, when it saves him the labor, and Stifles it self.
The Meteor wanted a Body to last, and so the short lived Exhalation has spent
it self, and is expired. But for my part I pay such a profound respect to the
Plot, that I heartily wish that it may have that pre-eminence above all Plots
whatsoever, as to be the ONLY more than Phoenix of the Kind, and be never
equalled from the beginning to the end of the World; and that it may find its
just Merit in deathless Records, I Would have it annexed to the History of AMBOYNA,
and when the Turk comes farther into Christendom, have it presented him to bind
up with the Alcoran. Besides, I solemnly avow the Plot was a good Plot,
especially whilst 'twas hot and fresh; and if it has been set by till it is cold
and stinks, it is no fault of mine. I acknowledge the Ingredients of the Plot
are Rarities in their kind; but if the Plotters and Discoverers between them,
have unfortunately made a Hotch Potch instead of an Oleo, and put them so
fulsomly together till they nauseate, can I help it. If the Swearers have
contradicted each others Testimony, and sometimes their own, is Elkanah to
answer for it. Besides as the Discoverers have sworn the Jesuits to be the
greatest ROGUES in the World through the whole Popish Plot, so Elkanahs
Narrative has proved them through the whole Plot to be the greatest IDIOTS in
the World. And pray what Indignity is it to the Honor of King Lords and
Commons, or scandal to the Justice of the Nation to add one blot more to the
Scutcheon of a Jesuit, and from a pack of Knaves to make them a pack of Fools
too. If this be a Crime, Heaven mend all.

I but Elkanah is criticizing upon Dr. Oats his Commissions, and the
Innumerable invisible Foreign Thousands all ready for Landing, upon the Kings
Murder.

However as Chimerical as Armies of Pilgrims may appear, and the rest of the
Popish Battalias designd for the Protestant Destruction, the Remarker gives you
an assurance, that all those Foreign Forces are plainly demonstrated from
Colemans Letters. What else means this signal passage, we have a mighty work
upon our hands, the subduing of a pestilent Heresy which has domineerd over
great part of the Northern world, a great while. There never was greater hopes
of success, since the Death of Queen Mary, Till these our days. But the
opposition we are like to meet with, is also like to be great, so that it
imports us to get all the Aid and Assistance we can. Now can I find nothing so
signal in this passage as so plainly to demonstrate the Popish forces, sworn
into the Plot. I declare I have read over Colemans papers, attentively, and
Time was if I could have found but the least hint of Popish Ruffians, Popish
Poisons, Popish Screwd Guns, or Popish Armies, either from Spain, France, Jago,
Messina, or any other Popish Country, in all his papers, the World should have
had it through both Ears. But since no such thing occurs in all his Letters,
give the Devil his due the Popedreaders of the World I am afraid, are mistaken
in that Garagantua of a Conspiratour Coleman. If this passage in his Letters,
to Father Le Chese, was for calling in of French Armies, how comes it we have
no answer in all Le Chese's Letters to Coleman relateing to Arms and Men, or
one proposition, how when or where his Master the King of France was to Land
them If this Aid and assistance was meant for Armies, and those to be Landed,
upon the King's being killed, how happens it, there is not some relation too in
the Letters to the Kings Death. These Conspirators wrote in Ciphers and
Characters, and therefore I know no reason they had, but they might Treat upon
that subject too upon occasion; especially when (if you will believe the Popish
Plot) they wrote so many hundred Treasonable Letters seen read and carried by
Oats, Bedlow, Dugdale etc. and so many of them in such downright plain English
Treason. I, but say those sort of People that see through Milstones; T's evident
that Coleman burnt all his Papers relateing to the more Dangerous part of the
Plot; for example we find his Correspendence ending in the Year 76, and that of
his two last Years 77 and 78 was never found to this day, In that no doubt we
should have had the 4 Irish Cut throats, Wakemans Poison, Connyers Dagger,
Blundels Fireballs, and all the Mystery of Pilgrims and Black Bills as
apparently made out, as Demonstration and Record could manifest. Now what a
sort of credulous Latitudinarians, can Fear, and Jealousy make men. Because the
Papers found in Colemans Closet were not evidential enough to prove the Kings
Murder and the Protestants Massacre, we must charge him with Crimes of which
there is not the least shadow to convict him of. For I appeal to any man of
common Sense; wheither if Coleman had continued his Correspondence for the 2
following Years, and it were true, that upon the breaking out of the Plot he
burnt those Letters relating to that Correspondence; how comes it upon his
searching his Closet for some Papers he did not burn All. He must needs be
sensible that those very Papers he left (to a Nation so Jealous of Popery as
England,) were enough to hang him, and as certainly Life's dear, the same
Preservation that had prompted him to burn the one, had infallibly instructed
him to burn the Other. No; as it is plain he was surpised, he had no time to
secure any of his Papers, and the want of the two last Years Correspondence, is
a more evident sign, that the Treaty was broken off, and that either the
subduing the Pestilent northern Heresy, was given over as a Work impossible; or
else that grand Intriguer Coleman had only dreind the French Confessors and
the rest of his Brethrens Pockets (for Money Money through all his Letters is the
great Burden of the song) and those wonderful Promises of converting of Nations
and subduing of Heresies, were all but Air and Rhodomontado; till the poor
cullyed Bigots at last had found out the Cheat, and so ended the Commerse.

But before I could finish my Observations on the Remarks a new Whig Champion
starts up with an other pamphlet called Reflections on Settles Narrative. For
that paw Book sets them all upon the Ferment, and Blood and Gall in the angry
Saints, let me tell you, boil high. And therefore if Rogue, Rascal, Villain,
Traitor, etc. fly at random, you must consider the Nature of the Beasts, and
therefore excuse whatever Grossness you meet, for the Sordidness of their
writings is so essential to their Constitutions, that they cannot possibly
auoy'd it.

These two dead doing Adversaryes being much of an equal Prowess and their
Arguments and Batteries much of the same strength, I shall not trouble my self
to make two distinct Replies to them, but give you my sense of their best,
though weak Arguments promiscuously as Discourse or Occasion shall offer. This
last Antagonist falls vehement foul too upon the Narrative for all the
Absurdityes; Incohecencyes, Clashing of Evidence, Contradictions,
Improbabilitys, and Impossibilitys found in the Popish Plot, and in page 7th
gives you this universal salvo for all the Blunders in the whole Discovery.

By Mr. Settles leave, Rome, in the several Attempts, it has made for the
Perversion Reduction and Apostasy of great Britain to the Popish Superstition
and Power, having been still frustrated, notwithstanding its Designs were
contrived with all the Art and skill that Humane Wit, and Devilish Policy
could suggest, and therefore having incurred the Just Resentment, and
Indignation of all those who have in detestation all its abominable practices;
I say, the Frequent Disappointments of their Projects may be reasonably
supposed to have made them use the Precaution that in case they should again
prove Abortive, and their Machinations be detected, that they might
nevertheless appear in such Lights as to seem improbable to the World, and
that, then let the Issue be what it will, it must turn to their Advantage;
since if the Plot had taken Effect, they had gained their main Point. But the
discovered, and disappointed, yet the puzling Circumstances, and the
Improbabilities of the means, as it might bring the Reality of it into
question, so it might also the Truth of its former Conspiracies, how manifest
soever. And they from thence have an occasion of retorting them as Contrivances
of their Enemies, and by that means purge themselves of the Scandal and Odium
which they had justly brought upon their Church by such unchristian-like, nay
inhumane Undertakings.

Well; never was Nonsense more Nonsensically Defended. How far fetched, and
Sophistical is this feeble Crutch to help out the Lameness and Inconsistencies
in the Plot. If the Reflecter had proved that the Plottets had amuzed their
Agents such as Bedlows Dugdule Oats etc. with Interlarding Shams with Truth to
invalidate and confound their Discoveries upon any Revolt from their cause, he
had done some thing. But that is apparently false, for they never Doubted their
Truth, for instead of having their great April Consult, Subscribed by so many
several Men's Hands, conveyed from Chamber to Chamber by any of their Head
Conspirators, the very Underling Oats has that great Trust Imposed in him, and
the Invincible Demonstration of the most monstrous Design against the Kings
Life, expressly in plain English, put into his Power. Besides all the
Treasonable Papers daily Trusted in Oats, Dugdale, and Bedlows Hands, upon the
least falsehood in the Messengers, had put them past all hopes of bringing the
Reality of their present or former Guilt and Treasons into Question. So that,
(tho truly I cannot make sense of what this huddle of words means,) if the Plot
be true, Rome was so far from being guilty of so much foresight as the
Reflecter gives it, that Precaution is the least Crime it has to answer for.

Thus far we have their Confirmation of Oats his Truth and Honor, and the
Reasonableness of the Plot in General; and now we shall give you their
particular comments, on the Narrative, at least those that so much as look like
Reflections, or Arguments against it.

The Reflecter very Heroically falls upon the First Line of the Narrative, viz.

Narrat. In the Year 78. it pleased those Powers that inspired them to raise up
Mr. Oats, Bedlows, Dugdale, Prance, etc.

Which says the Reflecter, I must own I do not understand. What does Mr. Settle
mean? that it pleased those Powers that inspired those Powers? That Is Grammar
indeed, but no sense; but there is neither Grammar nor sense in these words, as
Mr. Settle has set them down.

You see Reader, what an Adversary Settle is like to encounter by this first
Attaque he gives him. When a Schoolboy in the under Form at Westminster would
tell him that [THEM] only relates to Oats, Bedlow, Dugdale; and to have made it
that Nonsense the Reflecter intends it, viz. those powers that inspired those
powers, it must have been Those powers that inspired THEMSELVES. Just such
another remarkable correction he gives to Elkanahs false Grammar page 15. says
Elkanah, here the Reader is desired to take notice of the most matchless
Example in Mr. Bedlow that ere HE met with, to which replies the Reflecter
instead of [THEY have met with] if Mr. Settle will allow me to make it true
Grammar for him. Now unless a Fellow had studied to Print himself a Block-head,
nothing besides stupidity Incorrigible could have made [Reader] a plural
Number. This egregious stumble in the very first step into the Narrative, and
this strength of his Syntax is a little ominous, and he shows you what a
Grammarian he is, to let you expect what a Casuist you will find him too. And as
he says he understands no better, it is very likely he tells you true, by the
Cudgels he takes up; for indeed Men of understanding begin to quit the Whig
Cause so fast, that Grammar and Logic, and indeed Common sense will go a great
way amongst them.

But first for the Killing the King.

After the Reflecter has repeated the Narratives comical Description of
Pickcrings puissance in King Killing, he says, Now I appeal to Mankind if they
can find any thing of a jest in so sad and so serious a Theme, an Attempt the
most execrable that was ever hatched in Hell, the very thought whereof, tho
suppose it but a FICTION, capable of creating a Terror and Trembling in the
most unhumane Barbarians. This is the first, and last time he is in the Right.
Truly such a FICTION, the most execrable indeed that was ever hatched in Hell,
and the thought of so much Infernal Impudence and Diabolical Perjury that must
attend that FICTION on one side, and so much Innocent LOUD TONGUED Blood on the
other side, is enough indeed to create a Terror and Trembling in Barbarians and
Infidels.

But Settle tells you that the Looseness and Failure of Pickerings Gun in Oats
his Narrative was in January as Whitebread send word to St. Omers, but at
Pickerings Trial expressly in March, being asked.

Sir Chapter L. Do you know any thing of Pickerings doing Penance and for what!

Oats, Yes, my Lord, in the Month of March (for these Persons have followed the
King several Years) but he at THAT TIME had not looked to the Flint of his
Pistol, but it was loose, and he durst not venture to give Fire, he had a fair
opportunity and because he mist it through his own negligence he underwont
Penance, and had 20 strokes of Discipline. Upon this says Settle. Can any
thing be more strange than that Whitebread should send the St. Omers Fathers in
January a perfect Relation of a Crime not committed till the March following.
Now (hereupon says the Reflecter) I cannot for the heart of me see an Elliotism
in this whole matter; for might not Pickering commit the Crime in January or
before, and not suffer the penance till March following: For the Question is
only to the doing penance, and the Answer is in March.

Now observe the damnable Treacherous Eyesight of a Whig, that always sees too
little or too much. Oats swears that Pickering suffered penance in March
because he at THAT TIME had not looked to the Flint of his Pistol, and yet the
Reflecter spite of the heart of him cannot see but that very THAT TIME must be
January two Months before.

Just such another fault spite of the heart of him cannot the Remarker forbear
seeing too. says Settle. The Reader is humbly desired not to be puzzled to
imagine how Pickering should present a Gun (between a Pistol and Carbine,)
twice at the King, which one time for want of Prime, and another time (as
Bedlow swears) by being charged with all Bullets and no Powder would not go
off, and yet not be apprehended or so much as seen by any one of all the Kings
Attendance, and that too in so public a place as St. James's Park, a place
where there is not so much as a Bramble or Bryar, or any one Covert throughout
it enough to shroud a Pigmey, much less too Man-slayers, excepting the Osiers
within the Canal (but those are moated round, and therefore inaccessible.) To
which the Remarker by a certain old Game called cross purposes makes answer.
The Devil's in Settle for putting shams upon the World. In the first place the
Oath does not affirm that Pickering presented the Gun, but that finding the
defect of the Flint he deferd the Action till another time. Besides he forgets
that there was a very thick Grove at the end of the Pell-mell where His Majesty
might have made his unfortunate Approaches. And the Reflecter upon the same
passage wisely observes, the Traitor might sculk behind one of those great
Trees, between which, he might have used his Hat or Cloak or Twenty other
things, for the hindering a Discovery. But Settle with his Brambles and Briars
could not see Wood for Trees. That is to say, a Couple of fellows with each of
them a Screwd-Gun could shelter themselves in a Grove without one Branch of
Underwood, where the Trees stand three or four yards asunder, and the largest
of those Trees have public walks all round them, in a place too where no Man
is suffered to wander out of the common walk, but the very Centries shall call
him back. Oh but they concealed their Guns behind their Hats Cloaks or Twenty
other things. But surely when the Gun miscarryed once for want of powder in the
Barrel and another time in the Pan, Was the Gun under the Hat, or the Cloak; or
were the Silver Bullets to go through Hat Cloak Trees and all?

But now for the Massacre. The Discoverers give you an account of Commissions
given out, an Army to be raised; and Elkanahs Narrative makes it apparent, that
Army could consist of none but Papists, it being impossible as they had managed
it, to have drawn in any other Malcontents into the Conspiracy. Well, and
where is the wonder of all this says the Reflecter, Is it not possible to list a
Popish Army in a Protestant Country without being Discovered till they
themselves think convenient, being Tongue-tyed, awed, and spirited by
superstition. Oaths etc. All this granted, how will the Reflecter reconcile
that Concession of his p. 19th. in which he yields that there were some of the
Papists in the Old Kings Reign, (some Thousands he might have said) that
ventured their Lives Estates and Freedoms in the Royal Cause; for in the most
Barbarous Nations (continues he) there are some Persons found who are JUST,
UPRIGHT, HONEST and LOYAL. Now if this Popish Army was listed in England, as
the Discoverers Swear, the blow being ready for striking, I wonder how the
Conspirators did to single out and list only those Disloyal Papists fit for
their turn, and not unluckily communicate their intended Rebellion to so much
as one man of those Thousands of Just, Honest, Upright, and Loyal Men of that
Religion, that consequently with all those good Principles would not have
fordorn to have detected the Conspiracy. The Papists were not Gods, and it is
not a little miraculous that as but Men, they should have that assurance of all
the Hands and Hearts they trusted, as not to be mistaken even in one false
Brother through a whole Army. Besides the Reflecter is very unlucky in this
point, for as Elkanah affirms, and the Reflecter does not deny, that the
Papists by computation are not the 150th. part of the Nation, and therefore in
the Heretic Massacre one Man must have Killed near a Brace of Hundreds for his
share, if as there are so many Loyal Men amongst the Party that would have
stood Neuter at least, if not resisted them, the Reflecter has unfortunately
put them to the push of each man's Killing at least twice as many, and the
Possibility of all this, the Reflecter does not at all doubt, it being as
feazable an Archievement as the Knaves of Popeland ere contrived, or the Fools
of Whigland ere believed. Nay to make the Motions of the Jesuits a little more
wondrous, Bedlow Swears before the House of Lords, that the Papists had an Army
of Forty Thousand strong all ready to rise in London at 24 hours warning,
besides those that should have been posted at every Alehouse Door to have
Killed the Soldiers as they come out of their Quarters, and Lord Petre and
Powis were to have Marched with another English Army through Pembroke-shire: and
yet as the Devil and ill luck would have it, it is undeniably manifest that all
the Papists in England are so far from forming so many terrible Armies, that
they are not 40000 in all, Men, Women and Children through the whole Kingdom.
Yet all this we are obliged to believe as true as the Evangelists, and he that
dares deny it, flies in the face of Kings, Lords and Commons, and arraigns the
whole Justice of the Nation. Besides, to eternize the Memory of this glorious
Preserver of the Nation, tho it is notoriously known he died Raving, yet the true
blue Bristol Protestants could honor him with no less an Inscription on his
Hearse, than Testimonium quod vivens exhibuit, moriens constanter obfirmavit.


But now to leave Mr. Bedlows Armies, and take a view of Dugdales Plot-Forces;
the best Jest we have in all the Reflections, (for it is all but Farce) we meet
in the 11th. Page. Settle gives an account how preposterous, nay how impossible
an undertaking 'twas for the Papists to have laid the Kings Murder upon the
Presbyterians, (as Dugdale Swears) and to have engaged the Episcopal party in
the Massacre, upon the issue of Pickerings Gun, the said Pickering being too
shallow a Headpiece for so great a Masterpiece of Cheat and Villainy, as to lay
it on the Dissenters, and too known a Popish Face to pass for a Presbyterian.
To this the Reflecter answers (for there is nothing so Chimerical, but he finds
an expedient for) Seeing the Papists were ever hovering about the Kings Person;
upon the Blow given, might not they out of a pretended officious Zeal fall upon
the Assassinate, mangle him in such a manner as to render him altogether
unknown again, for the person he was, and then lay it at whose door they
pleased, either by real or forged words (forged words I understand not) that
execrable Murder, and upon this the Church of England- Men out of a just
Resentment and Indignation for the loss of their All in so Divinely good a
Prince, are reasonably to be supposed would revenge it with all the Heat, and
all the vigor imaginable.

Now one would think, we had had Popish Plots enough in all conscience; but
this subtle Reflecter has wonderfully detected one Popish Plot more, and Heaven
knows an Heroical one, being no less than a Plot of the great and mighty Popish
Nobles, against the poor little Popish Pickering. Lord! what will not Popery
do, and Reflections find out? But dear Mr. Little Plot, what if the Protestant
Nobility about the King, which I fancy are always much stronger than his Popish
Courtiers, had stopped these Lordly Popish Hands from Carbonading the poor
desperado, and preserved him for a Gibbet, and if they could not have stepped in
time enough to have prevented a Popish stab, yet at least have snatched his
Carcass from those bloody Popish Mince-meat-makers, and kept his Physnomy
unmangled to have discovered the Assassinate; in what a condition had this
Reflecters great and Lordly Plot been in, and Mr. Dugdales Presbyterian
Sham-Murder.

Nevertheless (says the Reflecter page 12th) Let Mr. Settle not think to render
the matter Improbable by hinting the Majority of the Protestants thoughout the
Kingdom, (though a 150 to one odds, and a great part even of that uery infinite
minority of Papists Just Upright Honest and Loyal Men) to surpass by much the
Papists seeing the Latter meant to decoy the Church of England Men into the
fact, which though they should not have effected, yet so unexpected a Surprise
upon People unprepared, and at Disseution and Distrust amongst themselves, by
Persons MARTIALIZ'D and used to Arms, as is well known the Papists had been,
and who for a long while before had been making all things ready for the well
Managing of their undertakings, they might well enough promise themselves
Success, each not needing to be an Almanzor or a Mars, or have the strength and
Soul of a Hercules.

Now hang me if I can find out how it is well known the Papists have been
Martializ'd and Used to Arms more then the rest of their Countrymen. I Am
Sensible, Heaven be praised, they have had no Opportunity, nor occasion to
improve their Martial Skill since the Kings Return, and if it consists in their
former Experience, to our Nations Eternal shame, we had too many Protestants,
(such as they were) that had as much Martial Learning at that time, though in a
worse cause, then the Papists. But, alas, the Refllecters meaning is, that they
have practiced Martial Discipline of a latter date, and in order to this great
Work in hand, like the 25000 Messina Soldiers have had their Rendezvous
INVISIBLE. The Reflecter we consider, writes to the Rabble, where nothing so
monstrous or Impossible but must pass current. How long was the Mobile possessed,
(nor are they yet undeceived) that the Papins had their places UNDERG ROUND to
Discipline whole Bodies of Men. Nor shall ye beat it out of the Heads of Ten
Thousand English Foot to this day, but that Mr. Choqueux's innocent Squibs, and
Rocket cases, desigped for his Master Prince Ruperts Divertisement, were
Fireballs, and Cartrages and other Romish Ammunition belonging to the great
Devil the Plot.

But all this while the Remarker and Reflecter never take care to answer that
part of the Narrative that demonstrates the Protestants Throats were to have
been cut by Spanish Armies, another while by French Armies, one time by English
Armies, and another by NO ARMIES at all. One while the Protestants Throats were
to have been ALL cut, another while but Half; one wh^le the Episcopals were to
join in the Massacre with the Papists to Murder the Fanatics, and another
while the Fanatics were to join with the Papists to Kill the Episcopals: and
all these irreconcilable contradictions expressly sworn to be the mature and
deliberate Results of the Conspirato^s. It Is true the Remarker, page 13. makes
a feeble Essay to adjust the different Tales from the Bewkblwers jarring
Testimonies, and tells you; Would we have had all the several Gangs and Clubs
of Plotters have jumpt in one and the same Sense and Opinion? where several
people are engaged, there will be several Sir POLITIC WOODBEE'S that will be
putting their Oars in the Boat where they are concerned; one will be proposing
this, and the other that, and many a Fools Bolt will be shot, and this discourse,
though never so simple is Treason, and fit to be known by way of circumstance.

And is the great and wonderful Popish Conspiracy, so dreadful as to require a
two and forty days raising the whole Militia of England, come at last to an
alarm but of so many Politic Woodbees? Is the Jesuits Treasou of a hundred
years hatching, and at last in the fatal 78. run up into Consults, Resolves,
and FINAL DECREES, dwindled into a Fools Bolt? Are their terrible Commissions
Sealed by Johannes Paulus d' Oliva, and his Substitute Whitebread, with the
whole Process of those Royal Conspirators the French and Spanish King's joining
in the confederacy; nay the very actual Landing of 25000, Messina Soldiers at
Carlingford Haven, such notorious matter of Fact, but mere Tittle Tattle? Were
the great and damnable Popish Generals immured in Tower Walls for this? Now
certainly what higher affront could this Impudent Remarker put upon the whole
NEMINE CONTRADICENTE of our late Parliaments, when by insinuating that the
Results of so many Popish Consults for the Subversion of our Religion, Lives,
and Liber^ies, and the engagement of such Princes and Potentates against us,
was only a simple discourse of so many Politic Woodbees, and consequently the
many Sacred and Anful Committees of Secrecy in all their indefatigable
Plot-mauling sat so long a Brooding only over a Nest E^g that was ADDLE.

But now whereas Elkanah the Impertinent Plot-thrasher, as the Remarker calls
him, has proved the work was to have been done by no Armies at all.: The
generous complaisant Remarker makes answer, Why truly had he had any thing else
in the World to do, he might have spared himself the labor, for so long as it
was to be done, the cheaper they did it, the less it would have cost 'em;
smartly replied, I prosess, and an Inference ^^ ingenious as deserves
Sugar-plumbs. Besides, what a pretty Turn of State is here made, Popery way to
pop into the Throne, like the Kings of Brentford out of the CLOUDS, without
either Noise or Tumult, and a Pox of all these unnecessary Tools called Armies
to introduce it. In my opinion these two Scriblers are a Brace of such dull
Rogues, and manage their Cause so Imp^tently, that the very answering of the
Impertinents, is enough to uauseate any Man of sense, if but to think what Dirt
and Rubbish he has to deal with.

However the Remarker wheels about age^, and to convince you there were Armies
in the case, says, That Ireland one of the Executed Jesuits, was of opinion
that there was no way to bring the business about, but by a considerable Force,
which he mustered up to fifty thousand, assirming a less number would not
suffice. Neither did Langhorne absolutely deny at his Trial the having of
Commissions, only he denied them to be seen upon his Desk. Was ever so much
Impudence not to be matched even in Eustace Commins, to obtrude that Confession
of Commissions and Armies upon those very men, that to the last gasp attested
their Innocence, even to the renouncing of God and Heaven, if they were Guilty,
and that too with a full and perfect Abjuration of all Dispensations or
Equivocations whatever.

But truly, continues the Remarker, he will not dispute the Case any farther
with E. Settle, for perhaps he might know more of the Plot than they that were
hanged for it. Not more my sweet friend, but possibly as much, and never the
worse Man for it, it being a knowledge, I assure you, that would neither burden
his Head nor his Heart.

From this we come to the Plot in Ireland.

Here the Remarker makes short work, and indeed as much as the Cause would
bear, and tells you, He Will say no more to it, but that if the King of Spain was
a Block-head in it, and the King of France a Lunatic, as the Irish Plot makes
them, they ought to come to E. Settle to learn Politics. And for his part
because Settles Romantic Objections depend upon, Plunkets Trial, upon which he
was condemnd, he shall not troubl^ himself to make any further defense for
Courts of Judicature. It Is true, the Reflecter is a little more Prolix upon this
business, but so abominably lewd is the ignorance or impudence of this
nameless Wretoh, that he doubts not but the Spanish King had 30 thousand
Pilgrims ready Mustered, and to be Landed at Bradlington (...), and Ten
thousand Flandrians at Hull, tho when he wanted Hands to save his own Kingdoms,
and another Army to join with the French King, tho to make his most mortal
Enemy King of Ireland; nay, tho not one of these Martial Pilgrims were ever
seen in the World from that day to this; yet all these Armies were raised, and
this stupendous Alliance of France and Spain was undeniable truth, and why, as
he says, because the Spanish King is Priest-ridden, and the Jesuits rule his
Ascendant; There he has hit it. Popery, Plot and Jesuits can do every thing;
Incorporate even Fire and Water, and make confederacies between the greatest
and most implacable of Enemies; nay, it can unman Kings, and make the Wise and
Politic French King be for bringing a Royal Navy into that very Port of
Ireland where a Fisherboat can scarce live, and Maugre that foolish obstacle
called impossibility; neither the King of France can forbear attempting all
this, nor the Reflecter believing it.

Nay the most Hellish, hideous Masterpiece of all Dr. Oats his Discovery, his
Information to the Parliament, that the French had already landed a great Army
of 25000. Messina Soldiers in Ireland, goes as inoffensively down with the
Reflecter, as the least puny exploit in the whole Plot. Nay to outdo the Doctor
a Bowshoot, the Doctor only brings them on, but let the Devil bring them off
again; but the Reflecter both lands and unlands them INVISIBLE. For page 14 he
says, why might not their designs be disappointed upon the discovery of the
Plots, and they RETIRE again, or forbear acting till better strengthened and
prepared for bringing their Designs about? That is, why may not a Body of no
less than 25000. men Land in a foreign Kingdom, and come, go, or stay from that
day to this, without so much as one Mothers Son of 25000 being seen by Human
Eye. Heaven! what a GORGE has the Reflecter to swallow such unprecedented
PLOT-ROMANCE, or what Impudence to vindicate such Execrable FORGERY? Quanta est
ficti Constantia Vultus.


The next thing we come to is Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Murder, and there the
Reflecter to vindicate Mr. Bedlows wonderful Refusal of 4000 l. to be one of
the six to Murder Sir Edmund, and afterward 2000 l. to be one with them to
carry off the Body, Makes answer that such is the generosity of some men's
tempers, how meanly soever born, that they cannot be bribed nor wrought into an
ill thing. [So generous a man was Bedlow, and so averse to any thing that is
ill, that only the greatest part of his Life was spent in Horsestealing,
Cheating and Pocketpicking,] or rather the providence of God who had otherwise
ordained, might make him make use of the Proposal of that very act to create a
reluctance in him, and to work him to a Discovery of that and the rest. This
last point indeed is unanswerable: but possibly, upon a review, His Discovery,
to give Providence no trouble in it, might come a shorter Journey than from
Heaven, only from the Prince of the Air by the way.

But Elkanah is a little Satirical on the strange and different account of the
whole continued contradiction in Bedlows and Prance's Testimony, Sir Edmund by
Bedlows Evidence being stifled with a Pillow in a lower Room of the great Court
in Somerset House, between four and five in the Afternoon; and the Murderers
Walsh Lephaire my Lord Bellasis 2 Gentlemen etc. but by Prance Evidence, he was
strangled with a twisted Handkerchief at 9 at Night, by the stablus in the
outward Court of Somerset House, by Green, Girald, Hill, Kelly, Berry and
Prance, etc. To reconcile with contradiction, the Reflecter tells you page
16th. that Miles Prance owns to have been present, and to have had a hand in
that Murder, Mr. Bedlow knows it only by a Relation, and by a Relation of a
thing which he had already refused to have a hand in, and at a time he was so
much suspected by that Party; as that they made him take the Sacrament twice a
day for fear he should reveal. Now he being a suspected Person, and knowing the
Murder to have been committed by Papists, they varyed in their Account of his
Death from the Truth, to baulk his Evidence in case he should fail them.

Now observe how Bedlow only swears to a Relation. In his Testimony before the
House of Lords he swears, that Walsh and Lephaire two Jesuits proffered him
4000 l. to be one of the 4 or 6 that were to Kill Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey, and
that upon his taking the Sacrament to do it, he should have the Money before
hand paid, where or to whom to himself or what Friend he thought fit: Thus far
Mr. Bedlows I hope was not suspected by them, neither was this only a Relation,
for he had the proffer of present payment; and of a swinging sum too; Besides
supposing that the concern of Walsh Lephaire, and his Cutthroats was only a
Sham, and that no such Persons were concerned in the Murder, put the
Supposition that Bedlow had accepted the Money and Sacrament, as it is
stupendous he did not, how must Walsh and Lephaire have excused this Sham?
must they have cried peccavi, and said Sir, we beg your pardon, we are
concerned in no such Murder, and tho we have given you the Sacrament and 4000
to no purpose in the World, we have no service to desire of you for it, it is an
inconsiderable trisling sum, and it burnt in our Pockets; and therefore much
good may do you with it. Also that very Night that Sir Edmund was carried out
from Sommerset-house, Bedlow swears, that at the hour of 9 he was showed the
Body, at which were present Walsh, Lephaire, my Lord Bellasis Gentleman, Mr.
Atkins, Mr. Pepys Clerk and one Irish Man more: here was he offered half the
4000 l. to be one with these very numerical Men to help to carry off the Body,
and this but two hours before it was carried forth. And yet these very Men it
seems were none of the Persons engaged, and upon Bedlows acceptance of the two
Thousand pound; they must have still excused themselves by saying, Sir we have
told you a notorious Lie, the Body is to be conveyed out by a pack of Mr.
Prances Friends, to whom we are wholly strangers, and altogether unconcerned
with. Nay and to make out the Oddness of this wondrous matter of Fact sworn by
Bedlows, we have Mr. Prances crew of Cutthroats Sir Edmonds REAL Murderers;
and those Cutthroats are expressly sworn by him to have had the keeping of the
Dead Body all along, and to have carried it up and down from Room to Room, upon
every Shadow of danger. Nay their fears and terror was so great, that on
Wednesday night being removing the Body back to the first Room it lay in, Mr.
Prance happening to come upon them at that instant they all ran away, and left
the Body in the Entry, till he called to them and made them come back again
etc. And yet but two hours before they carried out the Body, 'twas left in a
Room, exposed to the view of Bedlows, Lephaire and the rest of his Brethren to
the number of half a dozen Men all strangers to Prance, with neither Prance nor
one of his Comerades upon the Spot tho all so apprehensive of a discovery.

But next, says the Reflecter, Let us see Mr. Settles most remarkable
Observation, viz. That few or none of those numerous Letters and Packets, seen,
read, carried and intercepted by the several Discoverers should be couched in
Ciphers, seeing they contained no less than all the proposals for Regicides,
Massacres, Assassinations, and all the rest of their Villainies whatsoever. Now
might not all those Letters, (says the Reflecter) that had no Cipher be
conveyed by such hands and means as they might rely on for the safety of the
Delivery, and be couched in such Terms, tho not in Cipher, as to seem to an
unprepossess'd Reader to contain nothing but indifferent matters, tho they were
stuffed up with rank Treason?

Now nothing but Impudence unparalled would pretend to answer a Book at this
rate; Does not the Narrative in that very place prove all Dugdales Letters
received by him tho directed all to other men, to be all conveyed by the Common
Post, and that there was so far from any Caution used in the conveyance, that
he swears he broke them all open, to above a hundred in number, and those that
he could not hansomely s^al again, he threw by, and never delivered, and all
without the least Outery or Uproar from the Discoverers at the miscarriage,
though for the loss of Treason in Grain. Nay were not the contents of those
Letters of such a Treasonable nature, that Dugdale at Corkers Trial, swears he
received a Letter with [KILLING THE KING] in express words in it.

Just such another Reply the Reflecter makes to the Narratives other as
remarkable Observation, viz. why Coleman should spend so much labor and waste
paper in Ciphers and Characters, and Foreign Correspondence, sometimes pushing
on a TOLERATION, and otherwhile laboring for Prorogations and Dissolutions of
Parliament, upon their every least motion in disfavour of the Roman Catholics,
if at the same time they had that vaster Machine a working, that would have
Crowned their utmost wishes without it, when upon killing the King, and
murdering the Protestants, they had not only dissolved the Parliament, but
likewise involved the Members in the Common Ruin, and by the Entry of Popery by
the Sword they had put an end to the very Being and Constitution of
Parliaments. To which answers the Reflecter, Well, might not these Proroguings
and Toleration Projects be managed in the interim, in case an, Obstacle should
happen to the putting their main Plot in Execution. Does it not appear
throughout the whole course of the Conspiracy, that the Jesuits would leave no
stone unturned for the bringing about their ends, and play at small games
rather than stand out. A small game indeed, and the dullest Gamesters in
Christendom; for had the Papists intended such an Universal Massacre; in my
Judgment nothing so convenient for their purpose, as to have done it in the
very Sitting of a Parliament. How much more easy had it been out of Mr.
Bedlows three English Armies, to have planted some few Popish Champions at the
Parliament house Door, or the Parliament men's Lodgings, to have killed Them too
as well as the Soldiers as they came out; then to begin a Massacre in a
Prorogation time, when so many great Men as those of the two Houses, di^perst
most of them in their Country Seats, ^^ad had the opportunity to Arm both
themselves and Tenants, and encourage all those numerous Hands that would
immediately have laid down their Lives and Fortunes in such a Cause, and under
such Leaders, especially to make head against so hated a Party as the Papists,
and that too after no less than the Murder of the KING, and the approach of
their own threatened Destruction. Well! but Pickering and Coleman did not confer
notes, and his Gun with Bullets or no Bullets, Powder or no Powder, might have
killed the King, and not one s^llable of this convenience thought on.

And th^n for Mr. Oats not seizing any of those Letters, Pacquets, Memorials,
Proposal, and Comm^ssions that might have corroborated his Discovery; the
Reflecter answers, As some he had only the sight of, so it would be madness to
think he would take 'em away by force; as to those others he carried, he does
not say but that he was accompanied by some of the Conspiracy; or if he was
not, so manifest a proof of his Treachery, if one may call it so, to his party,
would cut off all means of his diving farther into their Resolutions; and yet
might be of little use, since perhaps he could not have PROVED THE HANDS. And
as for that courage of Mr. Oats which our Narrative Hero is pleased so to Droll
upon, it shows that Mr. Oats whole care was even AFTER the Discovery not to
give the Jesuits the least cause to suspect his being fallen off, that so by a
fair appearance he might insinuate and grow so well acquainted with the Results
of all their debates, even concerning the Discovery, as to reveal and prevent
any HASTY and FATAL Resolutions, they might have taken thereupon, etc.

Was ever such a Blind Excuse sound out for so damnable a piece of VILLAINY in
the Doctor, viz. That the Doctor should discover the Plot to the King on the
13th of August, and upon the Kings disbehef of it, return to the Jesuits to
trapan and betray 'em, and yet not so much as surprise one Treasonable consult
after it, nor seize one Paper of theirs, amongst so many trusted in his hands,
(and why? in the name of Dullness, possibly he could not have proved their
hands.) And that too not only for so eminent a service to the King, and three
Protestant Kingdoms; but likewise for his own Interest and Glory: when so plain
a proof of the Popish Plot, had for ever gained him the universal love of a
whole Protestant Kingdom, and consequently all the encouragement that he could
wish or ask. Whereas on the contrary, the lameness of his Narrative, and the
inconsistency of all his Evidence, has marked him like CAIN, and to all
impartial men of sense, has given him the brand both of Cain's GUILT and Cain's
INFAMY. Oh! but he staid for diving FARTHER into the Papists Resolutions says
the Reflections. Now what FARTHER treasonable Resolutions the Papists could
have after killing the King, and cutting all the Protestants Throats, and
setting up Popery as already designed, I profess I cannot comprehend; unless
they had had a mind to have used the King as unmercifully as they did Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, and have killed him twice over, stifled him with a Pillow
at the Banquetinghouse, and strangled him with a twisted Handkerchief at the
Stone-Gallery.

Well, but Mr. Oats his courage in trusting himself to come alone to
Whitebreads Chamber, after the receving three blows with a Cane from him, and a
Box on the Ear for his Discovery, and Dr. Tongue his Confederate no less than
being threatened to be murdered, might be to prevent the Papists hasty and fatal
resolutions taken thereupon. Nothing more likely sweet Mr. Impertinence: but
for a taste of Dr. Oats his prevention of the Papists fatal Resolutions, I Will
refer the Reader but to the LXVI. Paragraph in his Narrative.

Item, That on the 22th of August, Money was sent from the Society by a Servant
of theirs to supply the Expenses of the four Irish Ruffians abovementioned,
who were gotten to Winsor on the 21st at Night, and the sum so sent was Eighty
pound, which the Deponent saw told, and they were bidden not to be frequent in
one another Company, and always to profess but small acquaintance one with the
other, etc.

Now mark the UNEXAMPLED VILLAINY of the SAVIOR OF THE NATION he had discovered
the Plot (as his Preface tells you) on the 13th. of August, for the
Preservation of the King and the Protestant Religion, and yet after that very
day, after his Return and Conversion, from Treason and Plots to Honesty and
Loyalty, He is privy to four Bravoes, Men of Quality and Resolution, being from
the 21st of August to the 7th of September at Winsor, upon no less an
expedition than cutting the Kings Throat, without giving the King the least
notice or hint of his Danger. Well, let the Remarker and the Reflecter fall
down and Worship our Salamanca Deliverer; for hang me if I can. And tho some
Fools in the World are pleased to mistake him for a King-saving Mordecai; I
profess I think the Character of a Haman and his preferment too would much
better suit him.

I Am afraid, Reader, I have already tired you with a Subject I my self am
weary of, a Reply to two such ridiculous Adversaries, being a Quarrel not worth
engaging in, but only that the Whigs, right or wrong, are those Opiniated Fools
both of their Scriblers and their Cause, that to have kept silent had being
giving them an occasion of Triumph: and the necessity of allaying that Vanity
has given you this trouble. Thus far I have showed you the extent of their
little Reason, and now I care not if I give you the Latitude of their larger
CONSCIENCES. Amongst the numerous repeated Rasscals and Traitors they call me,
the Reflecter more particularly in (page the 1st) tells you that in my Epistle,
I have showed my self the greatest Villain that perhaps has been upon the face
of the Earth, in that spite and revenge, and those accumulated wrongs against
a Prince of such Honor and Virtue. But (page 2d) he proceeds, and says, when I
wrote the Popish Character, did not that sad Juncture threaten the Nation with
a direful Revolution, and what I now mask under my private Resentments and
Revenge, was it not making my Court to a party whom I considered as the Moneyd
part of the Nation, and ready inclined to reward and succor all those who had
sufficiency and probity. But now that the TIDE is turned, that all the Efforts
of ZEALOUS PATRIOTS for settling the Peace, and procuring the HAPPINESS of their
Country have been diverted, and that an Inundation of TORISME seems to threaten
the whole Land; is it not to be suspected that my Recantation and Repentance
are only to save my Bacon, etc. And again, page 4. When WHIGGISM and
PROTESTANTISM began to be a barrener soil than Pernassus, when all Evidence and
proceedings against Popery began to be discredited, and the Papists began to
appear again in such shoals, that the crafty Trimmers of the party thought it
prudence no longer to oppose the Torrent, then Sir Politic Elkanah thought fit
to wheel about.

Here do but mark the Cloven-foot of my Accuser, and see how impudently Vice
corrects Sin; For I desire but any honest unprejudiced Reader to scan but these
Lines, and find if they bear any other sense, then that the very King is here
maliciously and venomously accused for diverting the settlement of his Kingdoms
peace and happiness, and that by his Conduct of late years he has obstructed
that Zeal, and those very Patriots that were laboring to establish them, and
downright encouraged and promoted that INUNDATION that no less than THREATENS
the Land. And now as I am so over and over accused for ridiculing the Justice
of the Nation, how much more visibly does this Impudent Scribler arraign both
Judge and Jurors, and by the Evidence against Popery being so discredited
insinuate that Wak man, Corker, Kerney, and the rest acquitted by Law, had not
Justice; and that the Testimonies of their Accusers, though made up of nothing
but malice, scandal, Combination and Treachery, was Oracle and Gospel. Nay, he
strikes at the very Government it self, and by the Barrenness of the Protestant
Soil, and the Shoals and Torrents of Papists, would make the world believe that
the Church of England is undermining, and Rome a setting up. Now what this
nameless fellow is, that dares write this, I know not, but the Soul of a
Ferguzon could have said no more. And if a Man would learn who this Scribler
is, it is ten to one the unknown Authors name may never come to light, 'till we
see it in a Proclamation.

And now to show you that these two Authors, like the unclean Beasts in the
Ark, go paird, they are as well matched in their principles as Satan could wish.

For instance, the Remarker (page the 6th.) tells you, That I was the Author of
that damnable Lampoon called a Game at Cards, presented inconsiderately by
Joshuah Bows to Mr. Duboys, which brought him to the Pillory and Banishment:
and no doubt 'twas the hard Fate of my Friend that frighted me into my
Conversion.

And yet this very Remarker with all the Bitterness and Gall that Rage and
Malice can infuse, brands and stigmatizes my begging of pardon for all my
faults whatever, with no milder terms than a villainous Rascally Recantation, a
Recantation in the Devil's name, etc. And what is all this, put it together,
(supposing me the Author of that Damnable Libel,) but that I am a Villain, a
Rascal, a Devil for repenting and Recanting even from Crimes of so black a Dye,
from those very Lies and Libels, the dispersing but of which Imprisoned, Fined,
Pilloryed and Transported the very publisher, (much more the Author deserved.)
Good Heaven! How Black a Sin is Repentance in a true Blue Protestant: and how
heavy a Guilt is such a Recantation in the scales of a Remarkers Conscience?

But having started that unfortunate Fellow Bows his Case; I care not if I give
the World the odd but true story of his hard Fortune. The Man in the first
place, was one of the most vehement Whiggs in his little capacity that perhaps
was in England, and as little for Succession or Gospel in the Right Line, as
the Brotherhood could desire him; nay has as often and as devoutly paid his
Orizons and Adorations SO-HO- Wards, as any Man I know: Insomuch that whatever
his sufferings have been in their Cause, maugre his particular Resentments
against Mr. Duboys, the whole party are still his Demigods, (unless the
NEW MARKET EXPEDITION when it shall reach his ears may convert him.) This poor
Man having Poetry enough to reach to a Sonnet, or an Epithalamium, and being
likewise possibly one of the best Scribes in the Kingdom, in Gold, Silver,
Vermillion Letters, with Flowers, Birds, Beasts, and other ornamental
flourishes of the Pen, fit to please Women; he got his Bread by presenting
Ladies and Persons of Quality with gay Copies of Verses in this kind. But one
time above the rest, (as he did not always traffic in his own Manufacture) it
happened he picked up a Whiggish Lampoon, a little too rank as it fell out, of
which possibly twenty Copies had been dispersed without noise or danger at
Peter's and Dicks, and that quarter of the Town. These (as thinking them
acceptable) he sent to the worthy Mr. Duboys, and a day or two after, went to
ask if he had received them, in hopes of a gratuity of five or ten shillings
for them. But instead of that, he was immediately seized for a Jesuit. A new
Meal-tub Plot was discovered; Treasonable POPISH Papers were shamm'd into Mr.
Duboys his Hand, some say into his Sleeve, and others into his Pocket; and all
(God wot) to betray him, and bring him into a Plot. Besides a Copy or two of
his own harmless Rhimes, beautified with the forementioned Ornaments, and the
Verses Damnd unfortunately writ in Red Ink, designed for some City present,
were found about him: and those were no sooner spied, but all was confirmed:
The Conspiracy was made as apparent as the Sun: He was an Emissary from the
POPE, that is plain, for he had Papers found writ in BLOOD, and Contracts with
the DEVIL. This Alarm ran through the City immediately; Captain Toms Plot for
Burning of Rumps and Listing of Apprentices was not half so FORMIDABLE.

The poor Man used his utmost Endeavor to pacifye and convince his Accuser both
of his Innocence and his Principles: but Faith was strong, and Dudgeen was
high, and All would not do. The Papers were Popish, the Messenger Popish, the
Delivery Popish, and Plot Plot, nothing but Plot at the bottom of it; whilst
Truth and Sense were either not understood or not believed. And tho he made a
shift to get off at present by Bail, yet he was retaken again, stood thrice in
the Pillory, and though his Papers deserved all this, and worse; yet see the
Oddness of the Thing; to one half of the City he was himself viz. a rank Whig;
to the other, a notorious Priest and Jesuit: in one place his Papers were
Fanatic in another Popish; insomuch that he came to his Wooden Casement
unpittyed by All Men, and stood the Battery of Rotten Eggs; and other Flying
Artillery even from All Hands. Nay, the Delivery of his Lampoons came with such
a Plot Thunderclap upon the Brethren, that it has addled their understandings
ever since, and the rumbling of it is not out of their Heads yet. But alas,
Popery and Jesuits do all things; and poor little Joshuah by the true blew
Protestant Optics, like a Flea in a Magnifying-glass, was instantly
transformed into that Huge, Black Popish Devil, as nothing more terrible: Nay,
had this business happened in 79. I fancy the Lobby, and all the great
Buildings round it, would have been scarce able to have held it.

But to return from this Digression, nothing gives my Antagonists so great a
Disgust, as that my Aldersgate Street Patron should make some correction in the
Character of a Popish Successor, and for amendment bid the Author speak more
favorably of Rebellion, to which says the Reflecter, how can Mr. Settle think
to impose, and make the World believe that ever the Patron he mentions should
make such a blunder in Politics as to send this Worshipful Author a Message of
this Nature, and that too to a Poet and a professd one, People not much admired
in this Age for Continency, or Fidelity, etc.

That this very Patron did make this Correction, and in these very Words, the
Friend I entrusted to carry it to him is ready to Attest, (tho indeed he did
not then know the Author, for that I concealed till the Book was published) and
upon that very Correction of his, I altered the latter end of the Character and
wrote all those Paragraphs in it, against PASSIVE OBEDIENCE and in
Justification of taking up Arms against a Popish Successor, which when I had
finished I sent him the Copy again, and he approved of the Amendments. I know
not why the Adorers of that great Man should so extravagantly Deifye him, as to
make him guilty of no one humane failing, not one Lapsus Linguae in so many
Years of Gall and Bitterness. Surely one bold Word or two, might now and then
drop from so bold a Patriot, and so angry a state Pilot. I remember a good
Friend of mine. Mr. Coke Barrister, the Translator of Magna Charta, told me
that once upon discourse between him and the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of
Shaftesbury, he asked the said Noble Peer, why he advised the King to shut up
the Exchequer, to which the Worthy Earl made Answer to make him Odious to his
People. So that as I said before, a bold Word has now and then fallen from the
Lips of that true Protestant Oracle. Now, I hope my good Friend Mr. Coke has so
much Honor and Honesty as not to deny his own words: But if he wronged the
Honorable Lord in this story of him, it behooves him to do Justice to his
Memory, and publicly own his Repentance for so black an Aspersion against so
great a Personage. I, but I am a very Impudent Fellow says the Remarker, for
saving in my Preface that the Plot writ the Association, for (continues he) if
I mean the pretended Association 'twas a Bastard etc. Faith, I Will not say much
to that, but if 'twas a Bastard 'twas so much the nearer of Complexion to the
great Son of Thunder that was to head it. But says the Reflecter, Settle tells
us in his Preface, that he now dares look Sense and Quality in the Face,
intimating at the same time that it is what the Whigs dare not: whereas it is
well known, there be those who are called Whigs, who dare nose both Sense and
Quality, and defye the Courage as well as the Arts and Machinations of their
Enemies. Now if this Fellow would make his words true, he might do himself and
the Nation no small kindness, nay, instead of their nosing of Quality, could he
make them but Face Daylight, that WHIGGISM and TREASON might receive their
Reward, and the Ungratefullest of Subjects and most Unnatural of ^ons, the late
Head of a most Infamous Band of Ra^i^acs might be exposed to the Abhorring
World, and show the Misled and Deluded Rabble what IDOL it is they have so long
Adored.

These two Insipid Animals, after the greatest Efforts against my Narrative,
that two such Champions in such a Cause could make, being con^cious no doubt of
the weak Batteries they have raised against it, have endeavored to help out
their stingless Remarks, and Reflections, by blasting my Reputation by the most
Audacious Abominable Lies, that ever the Devil the Father of Lies could have
forged. An Instance of which we have in the 6th page of the Remarks as follows.

This is not the first Recantation that Settle has made sometimes out of fear
and sometimes out of necessity. He has twice given it under his hand, that his
Mother was a Whore; once to Mr. (...) as finding himself not prepared to dye.

Another time there was a certain Gentlewoman that he would have Married, but
she well understanding that four naked Legs in a Bed, are not sufficient to
maintain a Family, rejected his Suit, which so provoked his Lust of Revenge,
that he came and br^ke her Windows, resolving to set a Bowdy-house Mark on her
Lodgings. Presently the Gentlewoman complained of his ill Usage to a Friend,
who soon called the Valiant Window-breaker to an account, and gave him so
severe a Cane Correction, that Mr. Settle fell immediately into his never
failing way of Recantation, and amongst the rest of the Conditions proposed to
him, readily, patiently, and willingly condescended to acknowledge himself the
^^n of a Whore.

The first of ^^ese Villainous Forgeries is taken out of a certain inveterate
Filthy Libel against me, called the Character of a true Blue Protestant Poet,
where amongst the Impudent Lies and Detraction that fills that Paper, I was
accused of being the Author of a Scandalous Copy of Verses called the Sessions
of the Poets, an ill-natured scurrilous Lampoon, written some years since, and
now laid as believed at the Fathers Door, being Printed amongst the Lord Rs. --
Poems. Amongst the other Extravagancies in that Base and Malicious Libel
against me. It was said that I gave it under my Hand to Mr. O -- a Gentleman
highly wronged and affronted in that Paper of Verses, that I was the Author of
that Sessions of Poets, and that for which I was the Son of a Whore.

Which is so damnable a Falsehood, and so publicly known to be so too, that on
the quite contrary I disowned and abjured the writing so much as one Syllable
of it: and to vindicate my self from the scandal of such a Lampoon, at that
time so unjustly and so universally laid at my Door, and so much to my
disreputation, if to clear my self by no less a Potestation then that I was the
Son of a Whore if I wrote one word of it, when indeed I did not write one word
of it, be calling a Mothers Honesty into Question, let the World Judge.

But for the Gentlewoman, the Window breaking, and the Cane Correction story,
and the second part of Son of Whore, that, all such pure Invention, such
unparrallell'd Romance as was scarce ever matched. But to confute the Brazen
Impudence of this Villainous Libeller: I make this Challenge to the World if
ever I broke a Window in my whole Life, and as my good Fortune would have it,
was ever so much as in that Company that broke Windows, (as Debaucht as the
Remarks or Reflections have rendered me;) or if any Body can prove there is or
has been that Man in the World that ever corrected me as he calls it or struck
me with Cane Staff or Cudgel for above two Seven Years last past, (for my
Schoolboys days I Will not answer) I do here submit to own my self the burner of
London, the Murderer of Sir Edmond, or the greatest Criminal or Traitor in
Europe witness my hand,

Elkanah Settle.


Another as Lying a story I meet in the Reflections page 5th. Reflect: To show
you that Interest is the main Spring of this Man's Affections, that he hates and
Loves only according to its Dictates, that he squares Men's Virtues and Vices
according to its Measures, and can be fond of, and detest in a Moment the same
Persons sutably as they contribute to, and jump with his Designs. This Man
having a Book to present to one of his Patrons, he prevailed with his
Bookseller to go with it, dawbing this Patron to him at a high rate, extolling
his Wisdom, Benignity of Temper, and Generosity, etc. Whereupon the Bookseller
trooped with the offering to the Lord; but coming back with Disappointments in
his Countenance, and telling Mr. Settle that he had delivered his Book, but
that the Lord had returned no other thanks than what consisted in words, he
began to curse and damn the Sordidness of his Patron, wished he had been in
Hell, when the thought came into his Head of making him that Oblation, Vomiting
out all the Imprecations etc. until the Bookseller to direct this Torrent of
Rage, showed him some few Guinneys, which his Patron had sent him as a present:
and then to see the wonderful Effect, that that Metal has upon Mr. Settles
Intellectuals, he immediately saw that good Lord again through quite different
Optics, and found in him a 1000 more fine Qualities then he had ever done
before.

Just such another piece of Forgery is this with the former; and to prove so:
All the Books I ever wrote, except the Popish Character, were Printed by one
Bookseller, who is ready to make Oath, that there is not one Syllable of Truth
in all this story, and that he never delivered any such Book or Books for me,
or ever received Guinneys or Guinney for me from any Patron or Lord whatever.

But truly, of all Mankind I have the lest Reason to admire or complain at this
Usage, when I consider that nothing but Malice makes a Whig, and nothing but
Lies and Rancor are the Spawn of Malice. And when I reflect on my own past
Sins, I acknowledge I am but punished in my kind; and all this, and ten times
worse I have justly deserved; and tho with all the deepest sense and hum^^
Contrition for my Offenses, I shall never think I have made any part of an
Expiation till the whole Study of my Life and the Endeavors of my Pen are
entirely employed in the Service of those Royal Brothers, whose least Beam of
their so highly forfeited Mercy can never be recovered under a less Atonement
Sacrifice.

There is one Pen more drawn against me, called a Letter to E. Settle; Printed
by Not. Thompson. The Writer whereof has no Quarrel against my Narrative, but
the Author; and seems to suspect not only the Truth of my Penitence, but also
of my Confession, and that there still lies some undiscovered Anguis in Herba
in the Breast of so high an Offender. He very much doubts whether those Motives
expressed in my Preface were the true Incendiaries to so inveterate a Pen as
mine; and believing that an Author so eminently serviceable to those false
Patriots, that always make Religion and Liberty the specious pretenses to mask
the Blackest and Foulest Purposes, he seems to be very confident I must be
trusted in their Intrigues and Cabals: and thereupon has put me a whole Roll of
Quaraees to Answer. To which Book I can only make this short Reply. In that
Confession made in my Preface, I have given the World the whole Truth of my
Soul. And tho my unhappy Resentments for having a Play remanded to the Dukes
Theater, may appear a very idle Provocation for so implacable a spite and
revenge as mine; yet as that Command was occasionally the Ruin of my well
being in the World, the Circumstances of which are too tedious to recite, from
that very Cause (tho never so unjust and unchristian a one) I drew in that
Poison and Virulence against the Son of a King and a Martyr, the Greatest of
Heroes, and the best of Friends and Brothers. But as my soul, too much loaded
already, has no farther Sins to answer for; I am so wholly incapable of solving
this Gentleman's Queries; that Ignorance and Innocence is all the Plea I can
make, I being so far from a Confident, Caballer, or indeed Company-keeper with
those Antimonarchical Matchevils, that I can safely Swear, I never so much as
drank at the King's Head Club; excepting on a public Queen Elizabeth's Night:
Perhaps the Voluntary Tribute I brought them made me esteemd a Profitable
Servant enough, without exacting any farther Task from my Hands; or otherwise,
they might be those skillful Physiognomists that they could read Souls, and
found me so incapable even of a Thought against my King, that in Prudence and
Safety, they made their Machinations against the Crown, those Secrets that were
to be laid out of my reach; for I declare in the presence of God, I know no
more by them, then that the Bill of Exclusion, and the other Parliamentary
Projections for Liberty and Religion were the utmost end they drove at. And if
I have belyed my Conscience in this Protestation, and am any wise Guilty of
those Crimes, that the Letter-writer suspects, there is now that Justice
wakened, that would soon overtake me. For thanks be to Heaven, the Great
Mystery of Iniquity begins to be unfolded, and the detection of this last TRULY
Damnable and Hellish Plot, begins to set the Staggering World upright again: a
Plot not discovered by the Rakings of Jails, and Scumm of Mankind; but by
Clouds of Witnesss of Substance and Quality: A Plot, not universally denied
with Vows, Oaths, and Imprecations even at Gibbets and Death; but confessed in
Jails with Horror and Trembling. A Plot, that I hope will so fully restore
those Senses that Delusion and Frenzy have so long set a wandering, that Union
and Loyalty shall so perfectly Flourish again, till the Hearts of his People
and Parliaments so entirely return to the best of Men and Kings, that they
shall meet him with no less Caresses and Endearments then those at his
Restoration.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas Mr. Care in one of his Courants, has said that Mr. Cademan durst not
Print my Narrative till it had Mr. L'Estranges Blessing, these are to signifye
it is wholly False, for tho it is true, Mr. L'Estrange read some part of it, yet
on the other-side he advised and Councelled Mr. Cademan by no means to venture
to Print it.

FINIS.

