REMARKS ON Algernoon Sidney's PAPER, Delivered to the SHERRIFFS AT HIS
Execution.
THe great Aim of this Paper, like that of the late Lord Russel, is a continued
Justification of a dying Traytor's Innocence, a virulent and declamatory
Harangue against the Magistracy of the Nation, loaded with so much Obloquie and
Injustice, thrown upon the Court, the Judges, and the very Government it self;
that it is a perfect Appeal to the People to revenge his blood, and an open and
visible Exhortation to them to push them on to the finishing of that Work,
which himself died for, and which his own shortened thread did not hold out to
see accomplished; and all under a shadow of Truth, but an Intayling of his
Guilty Principles to Posterity.

But alas! his mighty Protestations of all Saint, and no Sinner, are so
aukwardly and so lewdly put together, that half an Eye of sense cannot but spy
through the Falsity of them. This Gentleman, however, is an Original of his
Kind; and if the Candidness and not the Inadvertency of the Author, be to be
thankt for it, has dealt more plainly with the World than his Predecessor
Russel; for instead of Prayers for the King, and the Prosperity of the Crown,
and a Detestation of Anarchy, he very ingenuously avoids so poor a Disguise,
and with a bar-fac'd Openness, avows his Republican Principles, and his utter
aversion to Monarchy.

To come to the Paper. The first material thing he tells us, is, That We live
in an Age, that makes Truth pass for Treason; which his Trial and Condemnation
he says sufficiently evidences. Tho truly his unhappy Paper has rather turned
the Tables, and proved Mr. Sidney has a greater Mind to make Treason pass for
Truth; a Truth too, so divine, that his very last Ejaculation is, His
glorifying of the Mercy of God, in permitting him to dye a Witness to. He goes
on and says,

West, Rumsey, and Keyling, who were brought to prove the Plot, said no more of
me, than that they knew me not; and some others equally unknown unto me, had
used my Name, and that of some others, to give a little Reputation unto their
Designs. The Lord Howard is too infamous by his Life, and the many Perjuries
not to be denied, or rather sworn by himself, to deserve mention; and being a
single Witness would be of no value, though he had been of unblemished Credit,
and had not seen and confessed that the Crimes committed by him would be
pardoned only by committing more; and even the Pardon promised could not be
obtained till the Drudgery of Swearing was over.

In the first place, under that Ignominious Reflection, Of giving Reputation to
their Designs; the Discovery of the whole Phanatical Plot is insinuated to be
all Juggle and Combination. Tho the World may take notice of a wonderful
Difference betwixt the Quality of these Discoverers, and those of the
Popish-Plot. Their Oats and Bedlows, though no better than the Rakings of
Jayls, and no higher than Companions for Valets, were nevertheless thought
worthy to be Secret-keepers, and Cabinet-Counsellors of Princes, and honored
with the universal Belief of a whole applauding Nation for Detection of a
hellish Plot, traced up to no less than a Conspiracy of 30000 Bloody-Pilgrims,
and as many formidable Black-Hills, like the head of Nilus up to the Mountains
of the Moon. Whereas, on the contrary, these last Witnesses were Men of
undisputed Reputation, Birth and Honor, Men so far from Oats his hopes of a
Parliamentary Donative of 30000 pound, that the Discovery was made without the
least prospect of a Reward. Besides, if these Witnesses were Villains, how
comes the Lord Howard to be the Only Evidence against Colonel Sidney, and
West, Rumsey, and Keyling to keep silent; when in the Case of Designs, as he
calls them, and that they had sworn without Fear, or Conscience; or had had but
half that Salamanca Courage that brought the Queen into the Poisoning the King,
no doubt these three Mutes had opened their Mouths too, and not left the
Colonel such a Loop-hole for Innocence, as a Pretense of a Single-Testimony.

But the Master-stroak of the Colonel's Pen against the Lord Howard, is one of
the most accurate pieces of Malice that the most studied Revenge could have
put together. But if the Lord Howard's Life be so infamous, the Colonel had
done well to have specifyed wherein. Almost the whole Life of that Lord, has
been notoriously known to have been spent in that very Old Cause* which the
Colonel Religiously, even to his Death, a^serts, styling himself no less than a
Witness of God's Truth; and consequently, arrogating a Crown of Martyrdom for
dying in. Was not Shaftsbury all along this Lord's Gamaliel? And has he not
lived a continually professed Enemy to these very Idols to whom this Gentleman
says, he died a Sacrifice. And if so, How can this Gentleman render his
Accuser's Life so Infamous, unless for those very Principles, which he proudly
boasts are the glory of his own. Besides, if his many Perjuries are so
undeniable, he had done well to have given some Particulars of them. I am
certain, the Violation of his Allegiance, in the days of the late Fanatical
Rebellion, is none of the Perjuries he intends to lay to his Charge; for then
he must make that the Lord Howard's Infamous Guilt, which he makes his own
highest Virtue and Honor. But if his Perjury consists in his late Discovery;
from that the very dying Criminals; nay, some of them against their wills, have
been his Compurgators. The very Lord Russel in all his Protestations of
Innocence in his last Speech confesses he had been at several Meetings where
they had discours't of seizing the King's Guards; and though he endeavors to
render it wholly a Discourse by Accident, yet as accidental as 'twas, it
brought the Lord Russel and the Duke of Monmouth on purpose to Shepherd's to
prevent the putting it in Execution, and persuade some violent Men from
attempting that which would undo them all.

This indeed is the Lord Howards Perjury which the dying Sidney quarrels with:
and to stigmatize him deeper yet, he very audaciously and Libellously affirms
that the Lord Howard had not only Seen but CONFESSED that the Crimes he had
committed would not be pardoned but for committing of greater; and even the
promised pardon not to be obtaind till the Drudgery of Swearing was over. It Is
not enough, it seems, as he says afterward, That the Bench was filled with
those that had been Blemishes to the Bar: And consequently the Judges
corrupted, and the Law perverted; yes and the Court, nay Government it self
rendered no less than Supporters of Popery, where he tells us He dies a
Sacrifice to Idols. But for the last most Diabolical Calumny from the blackest
Spirit of Fanaticisme, he insolently accuses the King himself of the most
wretched Subornation of Perjury, as if the Lord Howards Pardon had been only
obtained by the merit of Swearing Innocent Men out of their Lives.

Good God! to what Outrages can that sin of Witchcraft Rebellion inchant her
Proselites! It Is well he satisfies some part of our Astonishment, by owning as
he lived so he died a Votary to the good Old Cause. And for the Credit of his
40 years Apprentisship to it, he is grown so great a Master in the Craft of it,
that I assure you, he has shot at one Bolt a Blacker Aspersion against the
Honor of the Son, then all the united Tongues and accumulated Forgeries of so
many Years Triumphant Rebellion had Impudence to raise against his Father. But
if it were true, that the Ld. Howard had really Confessed that he could not
obtain a pardon for his Crimes, but by committing more. Why did not this
Guiltless, this Plotless Gentleman at his Trial, lay hold of so lucky an
Occasion, as the subpaening those People that heard him confess it, to averr
the Truth of such a Confession, A Confession, the Proof whereof would not only
have been a Confutation of the Credit of his Accuser, and consequently the
saving of his own Life; but likewise, an unanswerable Confirmation of that
Innocence, which, the whole party so indefatigably labor to uphold, and which,
the dying L. Russell so boldly asserted, though by equivocating even with
Heaven it self on the very Brink of Eternity, and adding at his last Gasp
Hipocrisy to Treason, a Crime as Capital at Gods Tribunal as the Other at Man's.

Well, but what signifies that? This dying speech was calculated for the
understanding of the Rabble; and Reason or Truth is no part of the Fuel, where
the Crowd is to be inflamed. Calumny sticks with them, though never so forged,
and Innocence (though but a mere sound) is substantial in a True Protestant.
The very Foundation of this Gentleman's Good Old Cause was all no more. The old
Kings Popery and Arbitrary Power were all rank Calumny and Lies, the Bugbears
of so many distracted Years and the Incentives of the most Bloody Civil War,
and three flourishing Kingdoms Ruin was all but Sound and Noise. And if Sham
and Imposture was the great Business of the Good Old Cause in her Minority, and
the Good Old Cause ex confesso has been this Gentleman's Saint from his Youth to
his very Death, I cannot comprehend why she should be more modest or her
Conscience straighter laced, in this present, 83, now she has gotten almost
half a Hundred Years upon her Back; and therefore this departing Gentleman,
from the Standart he dies under, gives us very shrewd Suspicions of the
Integrity of his Assertions.

But to return to the Paper. Why this Villainous Reflection against his Majesty,
for his Tardiness in granting the L. Howard a Converted Fanatics Pardon; when
his trusting or forgiving those sly and not easily reconciled Enemies is the
greatest Prudence of the Government; which fresh Example of his Majesty's late
too hasty Pardon sufficiently testifies: when the Young Absalon in his late
solemn and penitent Confession of his Conspiracy, with the humblest prostration
at the Feet of the King and Duke, made only a Politic Incursion into the Court
for the Prize and Booty of a Pardon, whilst the noblest Bounty and tenderest
Mercy from the best and most indulgent of Kings, was only returned with the
poorest of Artifices, and basest Ingratitude.

From this he comes to debate upon the Papers said, (as he calls it) to be
found in his Closet by the King's Officers; and complains highly of the
Injustice done; first, by laying the Guilt of a Paper to his Charge, only upon
the Similitude of a hand which may be counterfeit. But the main matter, (and
indeed a very great part of the whole Sheet is upon this string) is the
vindicating the Innocence of that Manuscript: and accordingly he sets down the
several Heads of the Discourse contained in it, as not at all guilty of the
least Treasonable Position; but on the contray, in his own Opinion, the highest
Arguments of Right-Reason: the whole Recital of which I shall not here trouble
my self with, as being too immaterial here, as indeed they are all mal a
propos, and impertinently urged there. For what signifies his recital of the
heads of a Treatise, in defense of the Innocence of the whole Pamphlet, without
mention of those particular Passages which the Jury adjudged Treasonable. If,
as by his own Confession, those Topics the Book treats upon, were harmless; it
does not at all follow, but dangerous and treasonable Methods may be laid down
in it; and that for the very obtaining even the fairest and most plausible
Ends. I shall only repeat two Paragraphs of them.

That the Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country was, That which the
Laws of that Country, made it to be.

That the Laws were to be observed, and the Oaths taken by them, having the
force of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be violated,
without danger of dissolving the whole Fabric.

Now, as blameless as this Discourse in his Thoughts may be, what does he infer
from the danger of, Dissolving the whole Fabric, upon the supreme Magistrates
violating of his Oath, but a license for the People to rebel, to cause this
Dissolution in revenge of that Violation. And then, if there can be that
Pretense, whatever, to empower them to make such a Dissolution, it necessarily
follows, thar the Sovereign Power is accountable to his Subjects for his Breach
of Trust, and consequently the old High Court of Justice, or any other shorter
cut to punish him, is the Right and Prerogative of the People. I shall not
enlarge upon the Confutation of that damnable Principle, it being the subject
of so many Pens already, and the very thought of it the abhorrence of every
good Man and true Christian. For though undoubtedly there is not, nor can be a
higher Obligation, on a Prince than to Rule by the Laws and defend the Rights
of his Subjects; yet upon the Breach of that Obligation, and the Invasion of
those Rights, the Tribunal of God is the only place, where he must answer for
it. Besides, if Monarchs were questionable, and consequently punishable by the
People, let them produce their Law for such questioning, or such a Punishment:
but if they can produce no such Law, it is very hard, methinks, that those
violent Magna Charta Blades, and Liberty and Property Men, that would rail
downright at the whipping but of a Beggar, unless the Letter of the Law brings
him to it, should notwithstanding, be for Judging, Condemning, nay, deposing a
Monarch without it.

But his greatest Grievance, and that which he calls the highest Extravigancy
of his Prosecutors, is, that the Contents of that Treatise should be
interpreted by them, as intended to stir up the People in Prosecution of the
Designs of the Conspiracy, when nothing of Particular application unto Time,
Place, or Persons could be found in it (as has ever been done by those who
endeavor to raise Insurrections) all was supplied by Innuendo's. Whatsoever is
said of the Expulsion of Tarquin: the Insurrection against Nero* the Slaughter
of Caligula and Domitian, the translation of the Crown of France from Meroveus
to Pepin; and from his Descendants unto Hugh Capet, and the like is applied by
Innuendo unto the King.

Now, why his Prosecutors should be arraigned in this Case, I cannot
understand; for if Treasonable Tenants were to be spread about in Pamphlets, to
possess the People with a hatred of Kings; they could have none but Fools or
Madmen for their Authors, that would send 'um into the World barefaced. The
most hardy of all Conspirators, those that daily trusted their Lives and
Fortunes in the hands of trusty Titus and Will Bedlow's in so many hundred
Plot-letters, durst hardly ever venture them abroad, without here and there a
Cipher at least, as 48 for the King, and Barley-broth for the Parliament. And
why so great a Treatise as this, designd no doubt for Publication should
foolishly lay the scene at White Hall, and not more wisely at Tarquin's, or
Nero's Court, I cannot apprehend. And if Treason under so transparent a Mask
might walk abroad unquestioned, and the Authors unpunisht, we might quickly see
Volumes of it.

But to sum all, he says, that he was long since told, that he must dye, or
the Plott must dye.

Now I suppose, none of his Prosecutors told him so; and if his own Party told
him it, it is very idly brought in here, as an Assertion of no Plot.

His following Objection against his Jury as being packt, is so unreasonable,
that it is not worth a reprehension, and the objected want of Freeholders for
Jurymen, a Constitution only intended to keep out Vagabonds from Juries, is so
idle in the Case of a London Jury; where the richest and substantialest
Citizens, nay, often the very Mayor and Sheriffs under that want, would be
incapable of being Jurors, that nothing can be more His other pretended
Injustice, in the denial of a Copy of his Indictment, or the reading the
Statute, I leave to the wisdom of the long Robe to decide.

But to sum all: He says, By these means I was brought to this place. The Lord
forgive those Practices and the Evils that threaten the Nation from them. The
Lord sanctify these my Sufferings unto me, and though I fall as a sacrifice to
Idols, suffer not Idolatry to be Establsht in the Land. Here the Lord Russell
is quite out-shot, for his Popery was but pouring in upon us, but here the
Banks are broken, and it is already overflowing whilst his being a sacrifice to
Idols, implies he falls by the hand of Rome, and so the King Government and
Judges, a^e all the hands and limbs of the Beast already: only he prays it may
never be Established. And what is all this, but that the Whore of Babylon has
invaded the Throne, and only wants the Ceremony of Installment and Coronation,
to confirm her Absolute Dominion.

Next he goes on. Bless thy People and save them, Defend thy own cause, and
those that defend it. Stir up such as are faint. Direct those that are willing.
Confirm those that waver. Give wisdom and Integrity to all. Order all things so
as may most redound to thy own Glory, etc. which a little more at length is,
Bless thy People and save them, viz. Thy chosen People, that set up Order by
Confusion, Religion by Schism, and Reformation by Desolation. Defend the Cause
of a Christian Rebellion against an Antichristian Monarchy. Stir up such as are
faint, and dare not hazard their Necks in so Illustrious a Cause. Direct those
that are willing to venture Souls and Bodies. Confirm those that waver betwixt
a scotch Covenant and an English Oath of Allegiance. Give wisdom to all
Republic Counsels, and Integrity to all faithful Associators, and order all
things so as may redound most to thy own Glory, when we shall Bind their Kings
in Chains and their Princes in Fetters of Iron. And that all this is the plain
and Genuine sense of his Prayer, the following Clause without Discant or
Addition will egregiously demonstrate: for he concludes, Grant that I may dye
glorifiing Thee for all thy Mercies, and that at the last, Thou have permitted
me to be singled out as a Witness of thy Truth; and even by the Confession of
my Opposers for that Old Cause in which I was from my Youth engaged, and for
which Thou have often and wonderfully declared thy self.

For my part, I can no way match this dying Gentleman, but in the Courage of
some of the old King's Regicides Executed at Charing Cross, Here the Good Old
Cause is expressly asserted, even on the Scaffold, nay, and made no less than
the very Shibboleth of GOD. The often and wonderful Successes of a once
prosperous Rebellion, and consequently Blood and Sacrilege, the destruction of
the Protestant-Church, and the solemn Murder of the best of Kings, made no less
than the Miraculous Work of the Almighty Hand, and the distinguishing
Declaration of Heaven it self. Insomuch, that there wanted only to this
farewell Paper and the Prodigy of Infatuations in this departing Enthusiast to
have made his Exit like a perfect second Harrison, to have had him bequeathed
the keeping of his Execution-Coat, as the other did his Velvet-Jump, for his
own wearing again after his Third-days Resurrection from the Grave.

This unhappy Paper of his, has truly showed, he dies with the sublimest
Transports, and boldest Resolution of a Pseudo-Protestant Soldier: but alas!
without the Conduct of a Machivilian. For this foolish piece of Scribble has
quite destroyed the very Foundation of the whole Party. With what a
full-mouthed Outcry did the whole Brotherhood abhor, so much as the
Imagination of a Commonwealth, or the least Thought against Monarchy. How
Capital was it, even during the Sessions of three or four Parliaments, to
pretend the least resemblance or tendency of Eighty and Eighty One to Forty,
and Forty one. Nay, did not the most violent of the Commons themselves, the
very loudest Beagles of Shaftsbury, totally run down all the old Sham-pretences
of Popery, and all Republic Machinations whatever. Yes, and did not the very
City it self in their memorable Petition to his Majesty, in express terms
renounce and abjure all Commonwealth Principles: and that very Abjuration
universally upheld all along to this day? But this unpolitick Gentleman has
very unfortunately pulled off the whole Vizard: has joined the pieces of the
Snake together again, and made the present true Protestant Zeal, as a Branch of
the Old Cause, no less than a continued Link of the old Chain of Rebellion:
nay, and not only avowed it his own Tenent alone, but offered up his Prayers
for the People, and the whole Faction under all Classes, the Faint, the
Willing, and the Wavering; and given them his own dying Benediction, no
otherwise than as the Disciples of the same Belial.

LONDON, Printed for W. C. and are to be sold by W. Davis in Amen-Corner. 1683.

FINIS.

