IN pursuance of an Order of the House of PEERS of the One and Thirtieth Day of
March, 1699, I do Appoint Jacob Tonson to Print the several Trials of Edward
Earl of Warwick and Holland, and Charles Lord Mohun; And do forbid any other
Person to Print the same.

SUMMERS C.

THE SEVERAL TRIALS OF EDWARD Earl of Warwick and Holland, AND Charles Lord
Mohun, BEFORE THE House of PEERS in Parliament, Upon the 28th and 29th Days of
March, 1699. For the Murder of Mr. Richard Coote;

The Right Honorable John Lord Summers Baron of Evesham, Lord High Chancellor
of ENGLAND, being LORD HIGH STEWARD upon that Occasion.

Published by Command of the House of PEERS.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Edward Jones, for Jacob Tonson, at Grays-Inn-Gate
next Gray's Inn Lane. MDCXCIX.

THE TRIAL OF EDWARD Earl of Warwick and Holland.
Die Martis 28 Martii, 1699.
ABout Eleven of the Clock the Lords came from their own House into the Court
Erected in Westminster Hall, for the Trials of Edward Earl of Warwick and
Holland, and Charles Lord Mohun, in the Manner following.

The Lord High Steward's Gentlemen Attendants, two and two.

The Clerks of the House of Lords, with the Two Clerks of the Crown in the
Courts of Chancery and King's Bench.

The Masters in Chancery, two and two.

Then the Judges.

The Peers Eldest Sons, and Peers Minors, two and two.

Four Sergeants at Arms with their Maces, two and two.

The Yeoman Usher of the House.

Then the Peers, two and two, beginning with the youngest Barons.

Then Four Sergeants at Arms, with their Maces.

Then one of the Heralds, attending in the Room of Garter, who by reason of his
Infirmity could not be present.

And the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, carrying the White Staff before the
Lord High Steward.

Then the Lord Chancellor, Lord High Steward of England, alone.

When the Lords were seated on their proper Benches, and the Lord High Steward
upon the Wooll-pack.

The Two Clerks of the Crown in the Courts of Chancery and King's Bench,
standing before the Clerks Table with their Faces toward the State.

The Clerk of the Crown in Chancery having His Majesty's Commission to the Lord
High Steward in his Hands, made three Reverences toward the Lord High Steward,
and the Clerk of the Crown in Chancery on his Knees presented the Commission to
the Lord High Steward, who delivered it to the Clerk of the Crown in the
King's Bench, (then likewise Kneeling before his Grace) in order to be Opened
and Read, and then the Two Clerks of the Crown making three Reverences, went
down to the Table; and the Clerk of the Crown in the Court of King's Bench
Commanded the Sergeant at Arms to make Proclamation of Silence, which he did in
this manner.

Sergeant at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, My Lord High Steward his Grace does
straightly Charge and Command all manner of Persons here present, to keep
Silence, and hear the King's Majesty's Commission to His Grace my Lord High
Steward of England directed, openly Read upon pain of Imprisonment.


Then the Lord High Steward stood up, and spoke to the Peers.

Lord High Steward. Your Lordships will be pleased to Stand up, and be
Uncovered, while the King's Commission is Reading.


All the Peers Stood up, and were Uncovered, while the Commission was Read.

Clerk of the Crown. GVlielmus Tertius Dei Gratia Angl. Scoc. Franc. and
Hibern. Rex Fidei Defensor etc. Praedilecto. and fideli Consiliar. nostro
Johanni Domino Summers Cancellar. nostro Angl. Sciatis quod Cum Edrus. Comes
Warwic. and Holland nuper de Paroch. Sci. Martini in Campis in Com. Middlesex.
and Carolus Dominus Mohun nuper de Paroch. praedict. in Com. praedict. coram
dilectis and fidelib. nostris Carolo Lee Milit. Samuel. Buck Willielmo Withers
and Francisco Tysson Armigeris and aliis sociis suis Justiciar. nostris ad
inquirend. per Sacramentum probor. and legalium hominum de Com. nostro
Middlesex. praedict. ac aliis viis modis and mediis quibus melius sciverint aut
poterint tam infra libertat. quam extra per quos rei veritas melius
sciripoterit and inquiri de quibuscunque proditionibus Misprisionibus
prodition. Insurrectionib. Rebellionib. Controfact. tonsur. lotur. falsis
fabricationib. and aliis falsitat. Monet. hujus Regni nostri Angl. and alior.
Regnor. sive Dominior. quorum cunque ac de quibuscunque Murdris Feloniis
Homicid. Interfectionibus Burglar. Raptib. Mulier. Congregationib. and
Conventicul. illicit. verbor. prolationib. Coadunationib. Misprisionib.
Confederationibus falsis Alleganciis Transgressionibus Riotis Routis
Retentionib. Escapiis Contempt. Falsitat. Negligentiis Concelament. Manutenent.
Oppressionibus Cambiparciis Deceptionib. and aliis Malefactis Offense. and
Injur. quibuscunque Necnon Accessar. eorundem infra Com. praedict. tam infra
libertat. quam extra per quoscunque and qualitercunque habit. fact. perpetrat.
sive commis. and per quos vel per quem cui vel quibus quando qualiter and
quomodo and de aliis Articul. and Circumstanc. praemiss. seu eor. alicujus vel
aliquor. qualitercunque concernen. before veritat. and ad easdem proditiones
and al. praemiss. audiend. and terminand. secundum legem and consuetud. Regni
nostri Angl. nuper assignat. de Felonia and Murdro per ipsos Edrum. Comitem
Warwic. and Holland and Carolum Dominum Mohun Commiss. and Perpetrat. per
sacrament. probor. and legal. hominum Com. nostri Middlesex. praedict.
Indictat. Existunt Nos considerantes quod Justitia est virtus excellens and
altissimo complacens Volentesque quod praedict. Edrus. Comes Warwic. and
Holland and Carolus Dominus Mohun de and pro Felonia and Murdro unde ipsi ut
praefertur Indictat. existunt. coram Nob. in presenti Parliament. nostro
secundum Leg. and consuetud. Regni nostri Angl. Audiantur Examinantur
sententientur and Adjudicentur Caeteraque omnia quae in hac part pertinent
debo. modo exerceantur and exequantur; Ac pro eo quod Officium Seneschalli
Angl. (cujus praesentia in hac part requiritur ut Accepimus jam vacat) Nos de
Fidelitate Prudentia provida Circumspectione and Industria vestris plurimum
confidentes Ordinavimus and Constituimus vos ex hac causa Seneschallum Angl. ad
Officium illud cum omnibus eidem Officio in hac part debit. and pertinen. (hac
vice) gerend. occupand. and exercend. Et ideo vob. Mandamus quod circa
praemiss. diligenter intendatis and ea omnia quae in hac part ad Officium.
Seneschal. Angl. pertinent and requiruntur (hac vice) faciatis exerceatis and
exequamini cum effectu. In Cujus rei Testimonium has literas nostras fieri
fecimus Patentes Test meipso. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quinto die Martii
Anno Regni nostri Vndecimo.


Per Ipsum Regem propria Manu Signat.

Sergeant at Arms. God Save the King.

Then the Herald and the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, after three
Reverences, Kneeling, presented the White Staff to his Grace, and his Grace
removed from the Woollpack to the Chair, which was placed upon an Ascent just
before the uppermost Step of the Throne, and seated himself in the Chair.


Clerk of the Crown. Serejant at Arms make Proclamation.


Sergeant at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, My Lord High Steward of England, his
Grace, does Straightly Charge and Command all manner of Persons here present,
to be Uncovered, upon Pain of Imprisonment.


Then the Judges and Masters in Chancery sat down in their Places upon the
Woollpack, uncovered.

Then the Clerk of the Crown Read the Return of the Certiorari in haec verba.

Gulielmus Tertius Dei Gratia. Angl. Scoc. Franc. and Hibern. Rex Fidei Defens.
etc. Justic. nostris. per Literas. nostras. Paten. confect. ad inquirend. per
Sacrm. probor. and legal. hom. Com. nostri. Midd. ac aliis viis mod. and med.
quibus melius sciverint aut poterint de quibuscunque prodic. mispris. prodic.
insurrection. Rebellion. controfact. tonsur. lotur. falsis fabricac. and aliis
falsitat. monet. hujus Regni Angl. and alior. Regnorum sive Dominiorum
quorumcunque ac de quibusounque murdris felon. homicid. interfection. burglar.
raptibus mulierum congregacon. and conventicul. illicit. verborum prolationibus
coadunat. misprision. confederat. falsis Alleganc. transgres. riot. rout.
retention. escapiis contempt. negligenc. concelament. manutenen. oppression.
deception. and aliis mulefactis offens. and injur. quibuscunque Necnon
accessariis eorundem infra Com. praedict. tam infra libertates quam extra per
quoscunque and qualitercunque habit. fact. perpetrat. sive commiss. ac de aliis
articulis and circumstanciis premiss. and eorum quodlibet seu eorum aliquod vel
aliqua qualitercunque concernen. before veritat. and ad easdem Prodition. and
al. praemiss. audiend. and terminand. Assign. Necnon Justic. nostris ad Gaol.
nostram de Newgate de prisonar. in ea existen. deliberand. Assign. and eorum
cuilibet Saltm. Volen. certis de causis omnia and singula Indictament. and
Inquisition. de quibuscunque felon. and murdris unde Edrus. Comes Warwic. and
Holland and Carolus Dominus Mohun and al. coram vobis Indictat. sunt Necnon
Record. conviction. Rici. French Rogeri James and Georgii Dockwra pro felon.
and homicid. unde Indictat. sunt Et superinde per quandam. Iur. Pry. inde
inter nos and prefat. Richardum French Rogerum James and Georgium Dockwra capt.
convict. exist. ut dicitur coram nobis and non alibi terminari vobis and
cuilibet vestrum mandamus quod omnia and singula in Jndictament. and Record.
Convict. praedict. cum omnibus ea tangen. quibuscunque nominibus iidem Edrus.
Comes Warwic. and Holland Carolus Dominus Mohun Richardus Rogerus and Georgius
nuncupentur in eisdem coram nobis sub sigillis vestris aut unius vestrum in
octab. sci. Hillarii ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Angl. mittat. seu unus vestrum
mittat una cum hoc brevi ut ulterius inde fieri fac. quod de jure ac secundum
legem and cons. regni nostri Angl. fore viderimus faciend. Test J. Holt Mil.
apud Westminster. xxviii die Novembris Anno regni nostri Decimo (...) per Cur. (...)
Astry

Ad instanc. prosecutor. quoad duos Def. and ad instanc. caeterorum Def. (...)
J. Holt.

Virtute cujus brevis mihi and aliis direct. Indictament. and Inquisition.
inframentionat. necnon Record. conviction. infranominat. Rici. French Rogeri
James and Georgii Dockwra pro felon. and homicid. unde Indictat. and superinde
per quandam Jur. pry. convict. exist. cum omnibus ea tangen. coram Dom. Rege
in quibusdam Sched. huic brevi annex. mitto pront interius praecipitur.

Respons. Fra. Child Mil. Major. Civit. Land. un. Justic. infrascript.

Midd. ss. Memorandum quod ad deliberation. Gaol. Domini Regis de Newgate tent.
pro Com. Middlesex. apud Justice-Hall in le Old Baily in Suburbiis Civit.
London. die veneris (scilt.) decimo tertio die Januarii Anno Regni Dom. nostri.
Gulielmi tertii Dei gra. nunc Regis Angl. etc. Decimo coram Fran. Child Mil.
Majore Civit. London. Edro. Ward Mil. Capital. Baron. Sccii. dict. Dom. Regis
Henrico Hatsell Milit. un Baron. Sccii. Dicti Domini Regis Thoma. Stamp Mil.
Edro. Clarke Mil. Aldris. dict. Civit. London Salathiel. Lovell Mil. servien.
dict. Dom. Regis ad legem ac Recordator. dict. Civit. London and aliis sociis
suis Justic. dict. Dom. Regis ad Gaol. ipsius Dom. Regis de Newgate praedict.
de prisonar. in eadem existen. deliband. assign. ven. hic in Cur. Carolus Lee
Mil. Samuel Buck Will. Withers and Fran. Tysson Ar. Justic. dict. Dom. Regis
per Literas patent. ipsius Dom. Regis eisdem Justic. praenoiat. and aliis ac
quibuscunque quatuor vel plur. eorum sub magno Sigillo dict. Dom. Regis Angl.
confect. ad inquirend. per Sacrament. probor. and legal. hom. de Com. Midd.
praed. ac aliis viis modis and mediis quibus melius sciverint aut poterint tam
infra libertat. quam. extra per quos rei veritas sciri poterit de quibuscunque
prodition. misprision. prodition. insurrection. rebellion. controfcur. tonsur.
lotur. falsis fabrication. and al falsitat. monetae hujus Regni dict. Dom.
Regis Angl. and al. Regnorum sive Domin. quorumcunque ac de quibuscunque
murdris felon. homicid. interfeccon. burglar. Rapt. mulier. congregac. and
conventicul. illicit. verborum prolation. Coadunac. misprision. Confederac.
falfis Alleganc. transgr. Riot. Rout. retention. escapiis contempt. negligenc.
concelamen. manutenen. oppression. Cambi-parciis Deception. and aliis Malefact.
and Offense. quibuscunque Nec non accessar. eorund. infra Com. pred. tam infra
libertat. praedict. quam extra per quoscunque and qualitercunque habit. fact.
perpetrat. sive commiss. ac de aliis articul. and Circumstanc. premissa and
eorum quodlibet seu eorum aliquod vel aliqua qualitercunque concernen. before
veritat. and ad easdem prodition. and al. premissa audiend. and terminand.
Secundum. legem and consuetud. hujus Regni dict. Dom. Regis Angl. Assign. and
per manus suas propr. deliberaver. hic in Cur. dict. Dom. Regis quoddam Record.
Indictament. coram eis and aliis sociis suis nuper praeantea presentat. and
capt. versus Edrum. Commit. Warwic. and Holland Carolum Dominum Mohun de
Oakehampton in Com. Devon. Ricum. French Rogerum James and Georgium Dockwra pro
murdro cujusdam Rici. Coote Ar. in forma juris terminand. etc. (eisdem Rico.
French Rogero James and Georgio Dockwra prisonar. in dict. Gaol. dict. Dom.
Regis de Newgate ex causa in eodem Indictament. content. adtunc. existen.)
Record. cujus quidem Indictament. patet in quibusdam Schedul. huic annex.

Midd. ss. Memorandum quod ad Sessionem de Oyer and Terminer Domini Regis tem.
pro Com. Middlesex. apud Hicks-hall in S. John-street in Com. praed. die
Mercurii fcil. seprimo die Decembris Anno Regni Domini nostri Gulielmi Tertii
Dei gratia nunc Regis Angliae etc. decimo coram Canolo Lee Mil. Samuele Buck,
Willielmo Withers. Francisco Tysson Armigeris and aliis Sociis suis Justic.
dict. Dom. Regis per Literas Paten. ipsius Dom. Regis eisdem Justic.
praenominat. and al. ac quibuscunque quatuor vel pluribus eorum sub magno
Sigillo dict. Domini Regis Angliae confect. ad inquirend. per sacrament.
probor. and legalium hom. Com. Middlesex. praed. ac aliis viis mod. and med.
quibus melius sciverint aut poterint tam infra libertat. quam extra per quos
rei veritas melius sciri poterit de quibuscunque prodition. misprision.
prodition. insurrection. rebellion. controfactur. tonsur. lotur. falsis
fabrication. and aliis falsitat. monet. hujus Regni dict. Dom. Regis Angl. and
al. Regnor. sive Dominior. quorumcunque ac de quibuscunque murdris felon.
homicid. interfection. burglar. rapt. Mulier. congregat. and conventicul.
illicit. verborum prolation. coadunat. misprision. confederat. falsis allegan.
transgr. riot. rout. retention. escapiis contempt. negligen. concelamen.
manutenen. oppression. cambipareiis deception. and aliis malefactis and
offensis quibuscunque necnon Accessar. eorundem infra Com. praed. tam infra
libertat. quam extra per quoscuiique and qualitercunque habit. fact. perpetrat.
sive commiss. ac de aliis articulis and cireumstantiis premissa and cor.
quodlibet vel aliqua qualitercunque concernen. before veritat. and ad easdem
prodition. and al. praemiss. audiend. and terminand. secund. legem and cons.
hujus Regni dicti Dom. Regis Angl. assign. per sacrm. Egidii Riddle, Richardi
Read, Roberti Leg, Josephi Partherich, Johannis Marriott, Jonathan Hall,
Nicolai Baker, Roberti Teague, Thomae Briggs, Willielmi Brace, Thomae Williams,
Georgii Bishopp, Thomae Hodges, Johannis Lynn, Samuelis Lee, Richardi Rogers,
Josephi Rogers, Johannis Cheney, Johannis Fowler, and Roberti Nicholson,
probor. and legalium hominum Com. praed. adtunc and ibidem jurat. and onerat.
ad inquirend. pro dicto Dom. Rege and corpore Com, praed. praesentat. existit
quoth. Billa Indictament. huic Schedul. annex. est vera.

Midd. ss. Jurator. pro Domino Rege super sacrum. suum praesentant quod
Edwardus Comes Warwic. and Holland. nuper de Paroch. S. Martini in campis in
Com. Middlesex. Corolus Dominus Mohun Baro Mohun de Oakehampton in Com. Devon
nuper de Paroch. praed. in Com. Middlesex. praed. Richardus French nuper de
Paroch. praed. in Com. Middlesex. praed. Genesis Rogerus James nuper de Paroch.
praed. in Com. Middlesex pred. Genesis and Georgius Dockwra nuper de Paroch.
praed. in Com. Middlesex. praed. Genesis Deum pre oculis suis non habentes sed
instigatione diabolica moti and seducti Tricesimo die Octobris Anno Regni
Domini Gulielmi tertii Dei gra. Angl. Scoc. Franc. and Hibern. Regis fidei
defens. etc. decimo vi and armis etc. apud paroch. praed. in Com. Middlesex.
praed. in and super quendam Richardum Coote Ar. in pace dei and dicti Domini
Regis ^unc adtunc and ibidem existen. felonice voluntary and ex malitiis suis
praecogitat. insult. fecer. and quoth. praed. Edwardus Comes Warwic. and Holland.
cum quodm. gladio. ( Anglice a Sword) de ferro and chalibe confect. valor.
quinque solidor. quem ipse idem Edwardus Comes Warwic. and Holland. in manu sua
dextra adtunc and ibidem extract, habuit and tenuit praefat. Richardum Coote in
and super sinistram partem pectoris ipsius Richardi Coote prope os Collar.
(Anglice the Collar Bone) ipsius Richardi Coote adtunc and ibidem felonice
voluntary and ex malitia sua praecogitat. percussit pupugit and inforavit
(Anglice did Strike Stab and Thrust in) dans eidem Richardo Coote adtunc and
ibidem cum gladio extract. praed. in and super dict. sinistram partem Pectoris
ipsius Rici. Coote prope Os Collar. (anglice the Collar Bone) ipsius Rici.
Coote unum vulnus mortal. (anglice one Mortal Wound) latitud. dimidii unius
pollicis and profunditat. quinque pollicium De quo quidem vuluere mortal. pred.
Ricus. Coote adtunc and ibm. instanter obiit Et quoth. pred. Carolus Dnus. Mohun
Ricus. French Rogerus James and Georgins Dockwra adtunc and ibm. felonice
voluntary and ex maliciis suis precogitat. fuer. presen. auxilian. abettan.
confortan. assisten. and manutenen. prefat. Edrum. Commit. Warwic. and Holland.
ad prefat. Ricum. Coote modo and forma pred. felonice volnntarie and ex maticia
sua precogitat. interficiend. and murdrand. Et sic Jur. pred. super sacrm. suum
pred. dic. quoth. pred. Edrus. Comes Warwici and Holland. Carolus Dnus. Mohun
Ricus. French Rogerus James and Georgius Dockwra prefat. Ricum. Coote modo and
forma pred. felonice voluntary and ex maliciis suis precogitat. interfecer.
and murdraver. Contra pacem dci. Domini Regis nunc Coron. and Dignitat. suas
etc.

Ricus. French 13 Januar. 98. pon. se Cul. de Felon. and Homicid. tant. Non
cul. de Murdro. Catalla nulla. Pet. Librum. Legit ut Clericus. Crematio
respectuatur qucusque etc. Rogerus James 13 Jan. 98. pon. se cul. de Felon. and
Homicid. tant. Non cul. de Murdro. Catalla nulla. Petit Librum. Legit ut
Clericus. Crematio respectuatur qucusque etc.
Billa vera.

Samuel Cowthorne de paroch. sci. Martini in Campis in Com. Midd. Yoman,
Willus. Cripps de paroch. pred. in Com. pred. Yoman,
Henricus Pomfret de paroch. pred. in Com. pred. Yoman,
Willus. Salmon de paroch. pred. in Com. pred. Chirurgus,
Robtus. Applegate de paroch. pred. in Com. pred. Yoman.
Jur. in Cur. Midd. ss. Memorand. quoth. ad Deliberation. Jail Dni. Regis de
Newgate tent. pro Com. Midd. apud Justice-Hall in le Old Bailey in Suburbiis
Civitat. London. die Mercurii Scilt. Septimo die Septembris Anno Regni Dni.
nri. Gulielmi tercii Dei gra. Angl. Scoc. Franc. and Hibnie. Regis Fidei
defens. etc. decimo coram Franco. Child Mil. Majore Civitat. London. Georgio
Treby Mil. Capital. Justic. dci Dni. Regis de Banco Littleton Powis Mil. uno
Baron. Sccii. dict. Dni. Regis Thoma Stamp Mil. Edro. Clarke Mil. Aldris. dict.
Civitat. London. Salathiel Lovell Mil. Servien. dci. Dni. Regis ad Legem ac
Recordatore dict. Civitat. London. and aliis Sociis suis Justic. dci. Dni.
Regis ad Gaolam ipsius Dni. Regis de Newgate pred. de Prisonar. in eadem
existen. deliberand. assign. ven. Robertus White genesis Coronator dci. Dni. Regis
infra Libertat. Decani and Capituli Ecclie. Collegiat. b^i. Petri Westminster.
Civitat. Burgi and Ville Westminster. in Com. Midd. pred. Et per manus suas proprias
deliberavit hic in Cur. quandam Inquisicon. de morte Rici. Coote Ar. coram co
nuper capt. in Cur. hic de Recordo in forma juris terminand. Que quidem
Inquisitio huic Schedule annex. est

pon. se

Civitas, Burgus and Villa. Westminster. in Com. Midd. ss. Inquisitio indentat. capt.
pro Dno. Rege apud paroch. sci. Martini in Campis infra Libertat. Decani and
Capitli. Ecclesie Collegiat. bti. Petri Westminster. Civitat. Burgi and Ville Westminster.
in Com. Midd. tricesimo die Octobris Anno Regni Dni. nri. Gulielmi tertii Dei
gra. Angl. Scoc. Franc. and Hibernie Regis Fidei defensoris etc. decimo Coram
Roberto White genesis Coronatore dci. Dni. Regis Libertat. pred. super visum
Corporis cujusdam Rici. Coote Ar. ibm. jacen. mort. per sacrm. Johis. Harris
Petri Solmon Rici. Newgent Willi. Friar Samuelis Thomson Jacobi Timberlick sen.
Jacobi Timberlick jun. Rici. Jackson Johis. Finch Samuelis Powell Samuelis
Dimont Robti. Giltrick Johis. Paulin Josephi Vernon Thome Smithson Andreae
Rogers and David Jones proborum and leglium. homin. Libertat. pred. jurat. and
onerat. ad inquirend pro dco. Deo. Rege quando qualiter and quomodo prefat.
Ricus. Coote ad mortem suam devenit dicunt super sacrm. suum pred. quoth. Edrus.
Comes Warwic. and Holland. nuper de paroch. sci. Martini in Campis infra
Libertat. pred. in Com. pred. Carolus Dnus. Mohun nuper de paroch. pred. infra
Libertat. pred in Com. pred. Ricus. French nuper de paroch. pred. infra
Libertat. pred. in Com. pred. genesis Rogerus James nuper de paroch. pred. infra
Libertat. pred. in Com. pred. genesis and Georgius Dockwra nuper de paroch. pred.
infra Libertat. pred. in Com. pred. genesis Deum prae oculis suis non heutes. sed
Instigatione diabolica moti and seducti dco. tricesimo die Octobris Anno decimo
supradicto vi and armis etc. apud paroch. pred. infra Libertat. pred. in Com.
pred. in and super prefat. Ricum. Coote in pace Dei and dci. Dni. Regis. nunc
adtunc and ibm existen. felonice voluntary and ex maliciis suis precogitat.
insult. fecer. and quoth. pred. Ricus French cum quodam Gladio (anglice a Rapier)
de ferro and chalibe confect. valoris quinque solid. quem ipse idem Ricus.
French in manu sua dextra adtunc and ibm. extract. huit. and tenuit prefat.
Ricum. Coote in and super sinistram partem Pectoris ipsius Rici. Coote prope Os
Collar. (anglice the Collar Bone) ipsius Rici Coote adtunc and ibm. felonice
voluntary and ex malicia sua precogitat. percussit and pupugit dans eidem
Rico. Coote adtunc and ibm. cum Gladio pred. extract. in and super pred.
sinistram partem pectoris ipsius Rici. Coote prope dict. Os Collar. ipsius
Rici. Coote unum vulnus mortale longitudinis dimid. unius Pollicis and
profunditatis quinque Pollicium de quo quidem vulnere mortali pred. Ricus.
Coote apud paroch. pred. infra Libertat. pred. in Com. pred. instanter obiit Et
quoth. predicti Edrus. Comes Warwic. and Holland. Carolus Daus. Mohun Rogerus
James and Georgius Dockwra adtunc and ibm. felonice voluntary and ex maticiis
suis precogitat. fuer. presents auxiliantes abettantes confortantes
assistentes and manutentes prefat. Ricum. French ad predictum Ricum. Coote in
forma pred. felonice voluntary and ex malicia sua precogitat. interficiend.
and murdrand. Et sic Jur. pred. dicunt super sacrm. suum pred. quod pred. Edrus
Comes Warwici and Holland. Carolus Duns. Mohun Ricus. French Rogerus James and
Georgius Dockwra prefat. Ricum. Coote modo and forma predict. felonice
voluntary and ex maliciis suis precogitat. interfecer. and murdraver. contra
pacem dci. Dni. Regis nunc Coron. and Dignitat. suas etc. Et ulterius Jur.
pred. dicunt super sacrum. suum pred. quoth. immediate post Feloniam and Murdrum
pred. per ipsos modo and forma pred. fact, and perpetrat. apud Paroch. pred.
infra Libertat. pred. in Com. pred. fugam. fecer. Quae bona and catalla terras
sive tenementa pred. Edrus. Comes Warwici and Holland Carolus Dnus. Mohun
Ricus. French Rogerus James and Georgius Dockwra tempore Felony and Murdri
predict. per ipsos modo and forma pred. fact. and perpetrat. sive aliquo
tempore postea usque diem Captionis hujus Inquisitionis habuerunt Jur. pred.
penitus ignorant. In cujus Rei Testimonium tam prefat. Coronator quam Jur.
pred. huic Inquisitioni Sigilla sua alternatim apposuerunt die anno and loco
primo supradcis.

Ricus. French 13 Jan. 98. pon. se cul. de felon. and homicidio tant. Non cul.
pro Murdro. Catal. nulla. Judicium super Indictamentum. Rogerus James 13 Jan.
98. pon. se cul. de felon. and homicid. tant. Non cul. pro Murdro. Catalla
nulla. Judicium super Indictamentum. Georgius Dockwra 13 Jan. 98. pon. se cul.
de felon. and homicid. tantum. Non cul. pro Murdro. Catalla nulla. Judicium
super Indictamentum.
Midd. ss. Memorandum quoth. ad Sessionem de Oyer and Terminer Domini Regis tent.
pro Com. Middlesex. apud Hicks-hall in S. John-street in Com. praed. dic
Mercurii scilt. septimo die Decembris Anno Regni Domini nostri Gulielmi Tertii
Dei gratia nunc Regis Angliae etc. decimo coram Carolo Lee Mil. Samuele Buck
Willielmo Withers Francisco Tysson Armigeris and aliis Sociis suis Justic.
dict. Dom. Regis per Literas Paten. ipsius Dom. Regis eisdem Justic.
praenominat. and al. ac quibuscunque quatuor vel pluribus little sub magno
Sigillo dict. Dui. Regis Angliae confect. ad Inquirend. per sacrm. probor. and
legalium hom. de Com. Middlesex. praed. ac aliis viis mod. and med. quibus
melius sciverint aut poterint tam infra Libertates quam extra per quos rei
veritas melius sciri poterint and inquiri de quibuscunque Prodition.
Misprision. Prodition. Insurrection. Rebellion. Controfactur. Tonsur. Lotur.
and falsis Fabrication. and aliis Falsitat. Monet. hujus Regni dict. Dom. Regis
Angliae and aliorum Regnorum sive Dominior. quorumcunque ac de quibuscunque
Murdris Feloniis Homicidiis Interfection. Burglar. Rapt. Mulier. congregat. and
conventicul. illicit. Verborum prolation. coadunat. Misprision. Confederat.
falsis Alleganc. Transgr. Riot. Rout. Retention. Escapiis Contempt. Negligen.
Concelamen. Manutenen. Oppressionibus Cambiparciis Deception. and aliis
Malefact is and Offensis quibuscunque necnon Accessar. eorundem infra Com.
pred. tam infra Libertat. quam extra per quoscunque and qualitercunque habit.
fact. perpetrat. sive commiss. Ac de aliis Articulis and Circumstantiis
premissa and eorum quodlibet seu eorum aliquod vel aliqua qualitercunque
concernen. before veritat. Et ad easdem Proditiones and alia Premissa audiend.
and terminand. sedm. Legem and Cons. hujus Regni dci. Dni. Regis Anglie assign:
per sacrm. Egidii Riddle Rici. Read Roberti Leg Josephi Partherich Johis.
Marriot Jonathan Hall Nicholai Barker Roberti Teague, Thome Briggs Willi Brace
Thome Williams Georgii Bishop Thome Hodges Johis. Lynn Samuelis Lee Rici.
Rogers Johis. Cheney Johis. Fowler and Roberti Nicholson proborum and legalium
Hominum Com. pred. and tunc and ibm. jurat. and onerat. ad inquirend. pro. dco.
Dno. Rege and corpore Com. pred. present at. existit quoth. Edrus. Comes Warwici
and Holland. nuper de Paroch. S. Martini in campis in Com. pred. Carolus Dnus.
Mohun Baro Mohun de Oakhampton in Com. Devon nuper de Paroch. pred. in Com.
Midd. pred. Ricus. French nuper de Paroch. pred. in Com. Midd. pred. genesis
Rogerus James nuper de paroch. pred. in Com. Midd. pred. genesis and Georgius
Dockwra nuper de paroch. pred. in Com. Midd. pred. genesis Deum pre oculis suis
non hentes. sed instigatione diabolica met. and seduct. 30 die Octobris Anno
Regni Gulielmi tertl^ Dei gratia Angl. Scoc. Franc. and Hibernie Regis fidei
defensoris etc. decimo vi and armis etc. apud paroch. pred. in Com. Midd. pred.
in and super quendam Ricum. Coote Ar. in pace Dei and dci. Dni. Regis nunc
adlunc and ibidem. existen. felonice voluntary and ex maliciis suis
precogitat. insult. s^cer. Et quoth. pred. Comes Warwici and Holland. cum quodam
Gladio (anglice a Sword) de serro and Chalibe confect. valoris quinque solid.
quem ipseidem Edrus. Comes Warwici and Holland, in manu sua dextra adtunc and
ibm. extract. huit and tenuit praefat. Ricum. Coote in and super sinistram
partem Pectoris ipsius Rici. Coote prope Os. Collar. (anglice the Collar Bone)
ipsius Rici. Coote adtunc and ibm. felonice voluntary and ex malicia sua
precogitat, percussit pupugit and inforavit (anglice, did strike, stab, and
thrust in.) Dans cidem Rico. Coote adtunc and ibm. cum Gladio extract. pred. in
and super dict. sinistram partem pectoris ipsius Rici. Coote prope Os Collar.
(anglice the Collar Bone) ipsius Rici. Coote unum Vulnus Mortale (anglice, one
Mortal Wound) latitudinis dimidii pollicis and profunditatis quinque pollicium
de quo quidem vulnere mortali pred. Ricus Cool adtunc and ibm. instanter obiit
Et quoth. pred. Corolus Dnus. Mohun Ricus. French Rogerus James and Georgius
Docwra adtunc and ibm. felonice voluntary and ex maliciis suis precogitat.
fuer. presents auxiliantes abettantes confortantes assistentes and
manutenentes prefat. Edrum. Comitem Warwici and Holland. ad prefat. Ricum.
Cool modo and forma pred. felonice voluntary and ex malicia sua precogitata
interficiend. and Murdrand. Et sic Jur. pred. super sacrm. suum pred. dicunt
quoth. predict. Edrus. Comes Warwici. and Holland. Carolus Dnus. Mohun Ricus
French Rogerus James and Georgius Dockwra prefat. Ricum. Coote modo and forma
pred. felonice voluntary and ex maliciis suis precogitatis interfecer. and
murdraverunt contra pacem dci. Dni. Regis nunc Coron. and Dignitat. suas etc.
Per quod Preceptum est Vic. Midd. quoth. non ommitteret etc. quin caperet
predictos Edrum. Comitem Warwici and Holland. Carolum Dnum. Mohum Ricum. French
Rogerum James and Georgium Dockwra ad respondend. etc. Quod quidem
Indictamentum prefat. Justic. dci. Dni. Regis (per deas. Literas paten. ipsius
Dni. Regis eisdem Justic. prenominat. and aliis ac quibuscunque quatuor vel
pluribus eorum sub magno Sigillo dci. Dni. Regis Anglie ut prefertur confect.)
postea scilt. ad Deliberationem Jail dci. Dni. Regis de Newgate tent. pro Com.
Midd. pred. apud Justice-Hall in le Old Bailey in Suburbiis Civitat. Land. dco.
die Mercurii seilt. septimo die ejusdem Mensis Decembris Anno Regni dci. Dni.
Regis nunc decimo supradicto coram Francisco Child Mil. Majore Civitat. London.
Georgio Treby Mil. Capital Justic. dci. Dni. Regis de Banco Littleton Powis
Mil. uno Baronum Sccii. dci. Dni. Regis Thoma Stamp Mil. Edro. Clarke Mil.
Aldris. dce. Civi^at. London. Salathiel Lovell Mil. Servien. dci. Dni. Regis ad
Legem ac Recordatore dce. Civitatis London. and aliis Sociis suis Justic. dci.
Dni. Regis ad Gaolam dci Dni Regis de Newgate pred. de Prisonar. in eadem
existen. deliberand. assign. per manus suas proprias deliberaverunt hic in Cur.
de Recordo in forma juris terminand. etc. Super quo postea scilt. ad
deliberationem Jail dci. Dni. Regis de Newgate pred. die Veneris scilt. 13 die
Jan. Anno. Regni dci. Dni. Regis nunc decimo supradicto coram Francisco Child
Mil. Majore Civitat. London. Edro. Ward Mil. Capital. Baron. Sccii. dci. Dni.
Regis Henrico Hatsall Mil. uno Baron. Sccii. dci. Dni. Regis Thoma Stamp Mil.
Edro. Clarke Mil. Aldris. dce. Civilat. London. Salathiel Lovell Mil. Servien.
dci. Dni. Regis ad Legem ac Recordatore dict. Civitat. London. and aliis Sociis
suis Justic. dci. Dni. Regis ad Gaolam ipsius Dni Regis de Newgate predict. de
Prisonar. in eadem existen. deliberand. assign. vener. predict. Ri^us. French
Rogerus James and Georgius Dockwra sub Custod. Willi. Goare Militis and Josephi
Smart Militis Vic. Com. pred. (in Custod. cujus ex causa pred. in Gaolam de
Newgate pred. preantea commissi fuer.) Ad Barram hic duct. in propriis personis
suis and statim de Premissis in Indictamento pred. superius specificat. eis
superius separatim imposit. separatim allocut. qualiter se velint inde
acquietari iidem Ricus. French Rogerus James and Georgius Dockwra separatim
dicunt quoth. ipsi non sunt inde Culpabiles nec aliquis little est inde Culpabilis
and inde de bono and malo separatim pon. se super Priam. etc. Jo. immediate
ven. inde Jura. coram prefat. Justic. dci. Dni. Regis ult. noiat. hic etc. Et
qui nec etc. Ad recogn. etc. Et Jur. Jure. ill. per prefat. Vic. ad hoc
impanellat. (seilt.) Chrus. Rednap, Thomas Moody, Thomas Dunck, Simo Smith
Johes. S^ith, Michael Miles, Thomas Rowell, Nathaniel Lee, Josephus Devenish,
Henricus Bradbury, Willus. Giles, and Johes. Burgoyne exacti vener. qui ad
veritat. de and super Premissis pred. dicend. electi triati and jurati dicunt
super sacrum. snnm quoth. pred. Ricus. French Rogerus James and Georgius Dockwra
sunt Culpabiles Et quilibet eorum est Culpabilis de Homicidio and felonica
Interfectione prefat. Rici. Coote in Indictamento pred. superius noiat. Et quoth.
iidem Ricus. French Rogerus James and Georgius Dockwra tempore Felony and
Homicidii pred. per ipsos Ricum. French Rogerum James and Georgium Dockwra in
forma pred. commiss. seu unquam postea non huer. nec aliquis eorum huit. nec
hent. nec aliquis eorum het. aliqua bona seu catalla terras sive tenementa ad
Noticiam Jur. pred. Sed. iidem Jur. ulterius dicunt super sacrum, suum pred.
quoth. pred. Ricus. French Rogerus James and Georgius Dockwra non sunt Culpabiles
nec eorum aliquis est Culpabilis de Murdro pred. in Indictamento pred. superius
specificat. eis superius separatim impoit. prout iidem Ricus. French Rogerus
James and Georgius Dockwra pro seipsis. superius plitando. allegaver. nec
seipos ea occone. unquam retraxer. nec eorum aliquis se ea occone. unquam
retraxit Super quo visis and per Cur. hic intellectis omnibus and singnlis
premissis Cons. est per Cur. hic quoth. pred. Ricus. French Rogerus James and
Georgius Dockwra quoad Murdrum pred. in Indictamento pred. superius spec. eis
superius separatim impoit. sint quiet. Et eant and quilibet eorum sit quiet.
and eat inde sine die etc. Et superinde statim separatim per Cur. hic quesit.
est de prefat. Rico. French Rogero James and Georgio Dockwra si quid pro se
habeant vel dicere sciant vel aliquis eorum aliquid pro se habeat vel dicere
sciat quare Cur. hic ad Judicium and executionem de eis and eorum quolibet
super Veredicto pred. quoad Homicidium and felonicam Interfectionem prefat.
Rici. Coote procedere non debet Qui separatim dicunt quoth. ipsi sunt Clerici Et
quilibet eorum est Clericus Et separatim petunt Beneficium Clericale eis and
cuilibet eorum in hac part allocari Et super hoc (tradito eisdem Rico. French
Rogero James and Georgio Dockwra separatim per Cur. hic Libro) iidem Ricus.
French Rogerus James and Georgius Dockwra separatim legunt ut Clerici and
quilibet eorum legit ut Clericus Sed quia Cur. dci. Dni. Regis hic and prefat.
Justic. dci. Dni. Regis ult. noiat. de Judicio suo de and super Premissis pred.
quoad Homicidium pred. and felonicam Interfectionem prefat. Rici. Coote
reddend. nondum advisantur Ideo dies inde dat. est prefat. Rico. French Rogero
James and Georgio Dockwra in statu quo nunc etc. usque prox. Gaote
deliberationem dci. Dni. Regis de Newgate pred. pro Com. Midd. pred. tenend. de
Judicio suo de and super Premssis illis audiend. etc. Eo quoth. prefat. Justic.
dci. Dni. Regis ult. noiat. and Cur. hic inde nondum etc.

Lord High Steward. Is it your Lordships Pleasure that the Judges may be
Covered?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


Then the Judges put on their Caps.

Clerk of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms make Proclamation.


Sergeant at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, Chief Governor of the Tower of Dondon,
bring forth the Body of Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, your Prisoner,
forthwith, on Pain and Peril will fall thereon.


Then the Earl of Warwick was brought to the Bar by the Deputy Governor of the
Tower of London, having the Ax carried before him by the Gentleman Jailer, who
stood with it at the Bar, on the Right Hand of the Prisoner, turning the Bdge
from him; The Prisoner at his Approach to the Bar making three Bows, one to his
Grace the Lord High Steward, the other to the Peers on each Hand; and his Grace
and the Peers returned the Salute.

Lord High Steward. My Lord of Warwick, your Lordship is brought before this
great Judicature, in order to your Trial. You stand Indicted by the Grand
Inquest for the County of Middlesex, as Guilty of the Murder of one of the
King's Subjects, for whose Blood Justice requires a strict Inquisition should
be made.

Your Lordship is called to Answer this Charge before the whole Body of the
House of Peers Assembled in Parliament. It is a great Misfortune to be Accused
of so Heinous an Offense, and it is an addition to that Misfortune, to be
brought to Answer as a Criminal before such an Assembly, in Defense of Your
Estate, your Life, and Honor. But it ought to be a support to your Mind,
sufficient to keep you from sinking under the Weight of such an Accusation,
that you are to be Tried before so Noble, Discerning, and Equal Judges, that
nothing but your own Guilt can hurt you. No Evidence will be received, but what
is Warranted by Law; No Weight will be laid upon the Evidence, but what is
agreeable to Justice; No Advantage will be taken of your Lordship's little
Experience in Proceedings of this Nature; Nor will it turn to your Prejudice,
that you have not the assistance of Council in your Defense as to the Fact,
(which cannot be allowed by Law) and their Lordships have already assigned you
Council, if any Matters of Law should arise.

Your Lordship throughout your whole Trial, may assuredly promise your self, to
find all the Candor and Compassion which is consistent with Impartial Justice;
beyond that nothing is to be expected: Their Lordships can never so far forget
themselves, as to depart from what is right, and to draw the guilt of Blood
upon their own Heads, but if your Lordship is Innocent you are safe.

My Lord, It will be requisite for you to recollect your self upon this
Occasion in the best manner you can. You ought to hear with Temper what the
King's Council have to say without interrupting them, and to hearken Carefully
to the Witnesses produced against you, that you may be ready to cross Examine
them if you find cause, and to make your Observations upon the Evidence when
the proper time comes for your Lordship to make your Defense; of which I will
not fail to give you Notice, and when that time does come your Lordship may be
assured, your self and your Witnesses will be heard with great Patience, and
Attention; and when my Lords have Heard and Considered the whole Matter, the
Judgment will unquestionably be according to the Rules of Justice, and such as
will become the Honor of this High Court.

Read the Indictment to my Lord.


Earl of Warwick. My Lord, I beg I may have the use of Pen, Ink, and Paper.


L. H. Steward. Will your Lordships please to allow my Lord Warwick Pen, Ink,
and Paper?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


L. H. Steward. Carry Pen, Ink, and Paper to my Lord; which was done by the
Clerk.


L. H. Steward. My Lord, your Lordship will do well to give Attention while the
Indictment is Read to you; Read it to my Lord in English.


Clerk of the Crown. YOur Lordship Stands Indicted by the Name of Edward Earl
of Warwick and Holland, late of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields in the
County of Middlesex, for that your Lordship, together with Charles Lord Mohun,
Baron Mohun of Oakehampton in the County of Devon, late of the Parish aforesaid
in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, Richard French, late of the Parish
aforesaid in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, Gent. and George Dockwra, late
of the Parish aforesaid in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, Gent. not having
the Fear of God before your Eyes, but being moved and seduced by the
Instigation of the Devil the 30th day of October, in the Tenth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord William the Third, by the Grace of God King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. with Force
and Arms, etc. at the Parish aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid,
in and upon one Richard Coote Esquire in the Peace of God, and of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, then and there being Felaniously, Voluntarily, and of
your Malice afore-thought, did make an Assault, and that your Lordship, the
said Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, with a certain Sword made of Iron and
Steel of the value of 5 s which you the said Edward Earl of Warwick and
Holland, in your Right Hand then and there had and held drawn, the aforesaid
Richard Coote in and upon the left part of the Breast of him the said Richard
Coote, near the Collar Bone of him the said Richard Coote, then and there
Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of your Malice afore-thought, did Strike, Stab,
and Thrust in, giving to the said Richard Coote, then and there with the Sword
drawn aforesaid, in and upon the left part of the Breast of him the said
Richard Coote, near the Collar Bone of him the said Richard Coote, one Mortal
Wound of the breadth of half an Inch, and of the depth of 5 Inches, of which
said Mortal Wound the aforesaid Richard Coote then and there instantly died;
And that the aforesaid Charles Lord Mohun, Richard French, Roger James, and
George Dockwra, then and there Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of their Malice
afore-thought, were present, aiding, abetting, comforting, assisting, and
maintaining you the said Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, the said Richard
Coote, in manner and form aforesaid, Feloniously, Wilfully, and of your Malice
afore-thought, to Kill and Murder, and so you the said Edward Earl of Warwick
and Holland, and the said Charles Lord Mohun, Richard French, Roger James, and
George Dockwra, the aforesaid Richard Coote, in manner and form aforesaid,
Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of your Malice afore-thought, did Kill and
Murder, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, His
Crown and Dignity, etc.

How say you Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, are you guilty of this Felony
and Murder whereof you stand Indicted, or not guilty?


Earl of Warwick. Not Guilty.


Clerk of the Crown. Culprit, How will your Lordship be Tried?


Earl of Warwick. By God and my Peers.


Clerk of the Crown. God send your Lordship good Deliverance.


Then at the Motion of some Lords who sat toward the upper end of the House,
and by reason of the distance could not distinctly hear the Clerk, the
Indictment was Read again, the Clerk standing near the upper end of the House.

Clerk of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms make an O Yes.


Sergeant at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, If any one will give Evidence on behalf
of our Sovereign Lord the King, against Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, of
the Felony and Murder whereof he stands, Indicted, let them come forth, and
they shall be heard, for now he stands at the Bar upon his Deliverance.


L. H. St. Will your Lordships give me Leave to go down to the Woolpack that I
may hear the better.


Lords. Ay, Ay.


Then his Grace removed to the Woollpack, and delivered the White Staff to be
held by the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, who during the whole Trial always
received and delivered back the White Staff upon his Knees.

L. H. St. Mr. Attorney, are you ready to proceed?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, my Lord.


L. H. St. Then begin Sir.


Mr. Serj. Wright. May it please your Lordships.


L. H. St. Pray, Mr. Sergeant, raise your Voice as much as possible you can,
that my Lords toward the upper end of the House may hear.


Mr. Serj. Wright. May it please your Lordships, this Noble Lord Edward Earl of
Warwick and Holland, the Prisoner at the Bar, stands Indicted for the Felonious
Killing and Murder of one Richard Coote Esquire and the Indictment sets forth, That
upon the 30th day of October, in the Tenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, at the
Parish of St. Martin in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, the Prisoner at
the Bar, the Earl of Warwick, together with Charles Lord Mohun Baron of
Oakehampton, Richard French, Roger James, and George Dockwra, Gent.
Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of their Malice afore-thought, did make an
Assault upon the said Richard Coote, in the Indictment named, and the
Indictment charge, that the Earl of Warwick, at the same time and place, with
a Sword, Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of his Malice afore-thought, did give
unto the said Richard Coote, in or upon the left part of the Breast of him the
said Richard Coote, near his Collar Bone, one Mortal Wound of the breadth of
half an inch, and of the depth of five Inches, of which said Wound the said
Richard Coote then and there instantly died; And the Indictment further
Charges, that the said Charles Lord Mohun, Richard French, Roger James, and
George Dockwra, the Earl of Warwick, to commit the Felony and Murder aforesaid,
were then and there aiding, assisting, comforting, and abetting; and so the
Jurors Charge, That he the said Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, Charles
Lord Mohun, Richard French, Roger James, and George Dockwra, the said Richard
Coote Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of their Malice afore-thought, at the
Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, did Kill and Murder, against the
Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity. To this Indictment
this Noble Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar, Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland,
has Pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Trial has put himself upon My Noble Lords
his Peers here present; We shall call our Evidence, and if we prove this Fact
for the King, we do not doubt but your Lordships will give such Judgment for
the same as shall be Just.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordships, I am of Council in this Cause for
the King against this Noble Lord Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland; The
Prisoner at the Bar, who stands Indicted by the Grand Jury of the County of
Middlesex, has been Arraigned, and is now to be Tried before your Lordships for
the Felonious Killing and Murdering of Mr. Coote; In the Indictment named, the
Evidence to make good this Charge against this Noble Lord, it comes to my turn
to open to your Lordships.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lords, the Case as to the Fact, according to my Instructions,
is this; Upon Saturday the 29th of October last, at night, my Lord of Warwick,
my Lord Mohun, Mr. French, Mr. Dockwra, and Mr. Coote, the unfortunate
Gentleman who was killed, met together at one Lockett's, who kept the Greyhound
Tavern in the Strand, and there they stayed till it was very late; About 12 of
the Clock at night, or thereabouts, a Messenger was sent by the Company to
fetch another Gentleman, Mr. James; and Mr. James coming to them, in what
Condition your Lordships will be told by the Witnesses; About One of the Clock
in the Morning, on Sunday the 30th of October, they all came down out of the
Room where they had been so late, to the Bar of the House, and there, as the
Witnesses will tell your Lordships, Swords were drawn, and Chairs were called
for, and Two Chairs which were nearest at hand came, and Two of the Company
went into those Chairs; who they were, and what past at that time, the
Witnesses will tell your Lordships; Those that got into those Chairs came out
again, and more Chairs were called for. But I must acquaint your Lordships,
that my Lord Mohun, when the Two Gentlemen that went into the Chairs ordered
the Chairmen to take them up, and carry them away, spoke to them to stop and go
no further, for there should be no Quarrelling that night, and that he would
send for the Guards and secure them; and after this they came out of the Chairs
again; It will appear there were Swords drawn amongst all of them, and some
Wounds given; More Chairs being called for, and brought, this Noble Lord that
is here at the Bar, my Lord of Warnick, my Lord Mohun, and the other Four
Gentlemen, went all into the Chairs, and gave the Chairmen Directions whither
they should carry them, at leastwise the foremost had Directions given them,
and the rest were to follow them; it was a very dark night, but at last they
came all to Leicester Square, and they were set down a little on this side the
Rails of the Square, and when the Chairmen had set them down they went away;
but immediately some of them heard my Lord of Warwick calling for a Chair
again, who came toward the Rails, and there they found Two of the Gentlemen
that had been carried in some of the other Chairs holding up Mr. Coote between
them, and would have had the Chairmen carried him away to a Chirurgeon's, but
they found he was dying, and so would not meddle with him; afterward my Lord
of Warwick and Mr. French were carried by Two of the Chairs to Mr. Annys, the
Surgeon at the Balneo in Long-acre, where Mr. French being wounded, was
taken care of, particularly by the Recommendation of my Lord of Warwick, and
the Master of the House was called up, it being very late; Mr. Coote's Sword
was brought to that place, but by whom it was brought we cannot exactly say,
while my Lord of Warwick and Capt. French were there, and my Lord of Warwick
had given Orders for the Denying of himself, and forbid the opening of the
Door. There came the other Two Gentlemen, Mr. James and Mr. Dockwra, and upon
their Knocking at the Door they were let in by my Lords Order, after he had
discovered who they were, looking through the Wicket. Mr. James had his Sword
drawn, but it was broken. My Lord of Warwick's Hand was slightly wounded, and
his Sword bloody up to the Hilt when he came in, as will be proved by the
Testimony of the Servants in the House. There was a Discourse between my Lord,
Mr. James, and Mr. Dockwra, about going into the Country, but before they went
the Swords were all called for to be brought to them, and upon inquiry there
was no Blood found upon Mr. Frenche's Sword, but a great deal upon my Lord of
Warwick's, of which great notice was taken at that time. Mr. Coote, who was
killed, had received one Wound in the left side of his Breast, half an Inch
wide, and five deep, near the Collar Bone; he had likewise another Wound upon
the left side of his Body; both which your Lordships will hear, in the Judgment
of the Surgeon, Mortal Wounds, and the Evidence will declare the Nature of them.

My Lords, The Evidence does chiefly consist of, and depend on Circumstances,
the Fact being done in the Night, and none but the Parties concerned being
present at it, we shall lay the Evidence before your Lordships as it is for
your Judgment, and call what Witnesses we have on the behalf of the King,
against this Noble Peer the Prisoner at the Bar, and take up your Lordships
time no further in opening; and we shall begin with Samuel Cawthorne; he is a
Drawer at the Tavern where those Lords and Gentlemen were together, and he will
give you an account of the time they came there, how long they staid, what
happened in the House during their being there, and what time they went away.


L. H. St. Give him his Oath.


Which the Clerk did. Mr. At. Genesis My Lords, I doubt the Witness is so far off,
that it will be difficult for him to hear the Questions that we are to ask him,
unless we could have him nearer to us.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney, My Lords seem to be of Opinion, that it will be more
for your advantage and theirs, that the Witnesses stand at the distance they
do, which will oblige you to raise your Voice so loud, that they may hear the
Witnesses and you too.


Mr. At. Genesis Is your Name Samuel Cawthorne?


Cawthorne. Yes my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Where do you live?


Cawthorne. With Mr. Lockett at Charing Cross.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you live with him at the Greyhound Tavern in the Strand the
latter end of October last?


Cawthorne. Yes I did.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, pray will you acquaint my Lords with the time when my Lord
of Warwick, my Lord Mohun and Mr. Coote were at that. House, how long they
stayed, what happened while they were there, and when they wont away.


Cawthorne. It was Saturday Night the 29th. of October last.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray tell my Lords the whole of your know ledge in the matter.


Cawthorne. There came my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, Capt. Coote, Capt.
French, and Capt. Dockwra the 29th. of October last in the Evening to my
Master's House at the Greyhound Tavern in the Strand.


Mr. At. Genesis How long were they there, and what time of Night came they in?


Cawthorne. About Eight a Clock at Night, my Lord Warwick, my Lord Mohun, Capt.
French, and Capt. Coote, came in.


Mr. At. Genesis What Day do you say it was?


Cawthorne. Saturday the Nine and twentieth Day of October last.


Mr. At. Genesis How long did they continue there?


Cawthorne. It was between One and Two the next Morning before they went away.


Mr. At. Genesis Was any body sent for to come to them there?


Cawthorne. Yes, Mr. James.


M. At. Genesis What time was that?


Cawthorne. About Twelve of the Clock.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he stay with them till they went away?


Cawthorne. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What did you observe past in the Company while they were there?


Cawthorne. I did not observe any thing of quarrel, nor so much as an angry
word amongst them, till they came down to the Bar and were going away; when
they came down to the Bar they ordered me to call them Chairs, or Coaches, and
there were no Coaches to be had, and so I went for Chairs, and two Chairs came,
for the Porter that went to call the Coaches was a great while before he came
back, and as I said, I going for Chairs, there came two, but that they said was
not enough, so more Chairs were called for, and at length there were more
Chairs gotten; in the first three Chairs, my Lord of Warwick. my Lord Mohun,
and Capt. Coote went away in; and my Lord of Warwick and my Lord Mohun bid the
Chair-men carry them home.


Mr. At. Genesis Were there then any other Chairs at the Door?


Cawthorne. There were two more Chairs at the Door, and another was called for.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you hear any Directions given where they should carry them?


Cawthorne. My Lord Warwick, and my Lord Mohun bid them carry them home.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you hear my Lord Warwick or my Lord Mohun particularly, and
which say whither they would be carried.


Cawthorne. I did hear my Lord Mohun say Captain Caote should go and lie with
him, or he would go and lie with Capt. Coote that Night, for there should be no
quarrelling.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they upon that go away?


Cawthorne. Mr. French and Mr. Coote were in Chairs before my Lord Mohun or my
Lord Warwick, or any of the rest.


Mr. At. Genesis What then happened upon their going into the Chairs?


Cawthorne. My Lord Mohun came out to them, and swore there should be no
Quarrel that Night, but he would send for the Guards and secure them.


Mr. At. Genesis What happened then?


Cawthorne. Upon that, both of them came out of their Chairs and came into the
House, and there they came to the Bar, three of them in the passage by the Bar,
and three of them behind that passage.


M. At. Genesis Pray will you tell what did really apass throughout the whole
Transaction, what was done after they came in again into the House.


Cawthorne. After that I was bid to call for Six Chairs, if I could get no
Coaches, and so I did, and when I had brought what Chairs I could get, and
returned to the Bar, I heard the Swords clash, when the Swords were drawn, I
cannot say, nor by whom, it might be, by all the six for ought I know, because
I was in the Street to call the Chairs, and when I came back to the House, I
was in hopes all had been quieted, for their Swords were putting up; And when
they went away in the Chairs, I did hope they went away friendly.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray how did they go away, who went together.?


Cawthorne. My Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Capt. Coote went in the
first three Chairs, them three together, and bid the Chair-men go home, the
sixth Chair was not then come.


Mr. At. Genesis When that Chair came pray what directions were given to it.


Cawthorne. I did not hear them give the Chairman any Directions at all.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know any thing more that was done after this time?


Cawthorne. No my Lord, not after they wentaway, after I returned with the
Chairs, it was in two Minutes time that they went away.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lords, I suppose he knows no more of the Matter.


L. H. St. Will you then ask him no more Questions, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lords, unless this Noble Lord shall ask him any Questions,
upon which we shall have occasion to examine him.


L. H. St. My Lord, Has your Lordship any Questions to ask this Witness, for
now is your time, the King;s Counsel having done Examining him.


E. of War. I desire to ask him whether I did not bid the Chair-men go home?


L. H. St. If your Lordship please to propose your Question to me, I will
require an Answer to it from the Witness, and it will be the better heard by my
Lords.


E. of War. My Lord, I desire to know of this Man, whether when I went away in
the Chair from his Masters House, I did not bid the Chair-men go home.


L. H. St. Witness, you hear my Lord's Question, What say you to it?


Cawthorne. Yes, my Lord of Warwick did bid the Chair-men go home.


E. of Warwick. Mr Lord, I have another Question to ask him, Whether he knows
of any Quarrel there was between me and Mr. Coote at that time, or any other
time, because we both used to frequent that House?


Cawthorne. No, my Lords, I never heard any angry words between my Lord Warwick
and Mr. Coote in my life.


Then the Lords toward the upper end of the House complaining that they did
not hear his Grace, the Lord High Steward was pleased to repeat the Question
thus:

L. H. Steward. When my Lord of Warwick bid the Chairmen go home, or at any
other time, did you observe that there had been any Quarrel between his
Lordship and Mr. Coote?


E. of Warw. My Lord, I desire he may be asked, since we both used that House,
Whether that night when I went away, or before or after, I had any Quarrel with
Mr. Coote?


L. H. St. The Question my Lord dosires you that are the Witness to answer, is,
Whether you did hear any Quarrelling or angry Words to pass between my Lord
Warwick and Mr. Coote that night before or after they came down, or when they
went away, or at any other time?


Cawthorne. No, my Lord, I never heard any angry Words pass between them then,
nor ever at any time before in all my life, but I always looked upon them to be
very good Friends.


E. of Warw. I desire he may be asked, Whether Mr. Coote did not come to that
House in my Company, and whether he did not frequently come to that House?


Cawthorne. Yes, they used to be there every day almost, and they came that
night together in Company.


E. of Warw. I desire he may be asked, Whether I have not been frequently in
his Company there?


Cawthorne. Yes, I say, very frequently, every day almost, sometimes twice a
day.


L. H. St. Would your Lordship ask him any other Question?


E. of Warw. My Lord, I desire he may be asked this Question, Whether he knows
of any particular Kindness between Mr. Coote and me?


L. H. St. Do you know of any particular Kindness between my Lord Warwick and
Mr. Coote the Gentleman that was killed?


Cawthorne. Yes, my Lord, there was always a great Kindnefs between them as I
observed it ever was so, and I never heard any angry* Words pass between them,
but they were very good Friends constantly; I waited upon them generally when
they were at my Master's House, which was every day almost.


E. of Warw. I desire to know of this Witness, Whether he does not remember, or
can name some particular Kindnesses that passed between Mr. Coote and me?


L. H. St. Can you specify any particular Instances of Kindness that passed
between my Lord Warwick and Mr. Coote?


Cawthorne. Yes, my Lord of Warwick used generally to pay the Reckoning for Mr.
Coote, and he did so at this time.


E. of Warw. My Lord, I desire he may be asked, between whom he apprehended the
Quarrel to be at this time.


L. H. St. You say, Friend, there were Swords drawn, and a Quarrelling at the
Bar; Can you tell between whom the Quarrel was?


Cawthorne. My Lord Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Captain Coote, were all on one
side, and the other three were on the other side.


E. of Warw. Who were the two Persons that it was apprehended the Quarrel was
between, I desire he may be asked.


L. H. St. You say, there were three on the one side, and three on the other,
pray between whom did you apprehend the Quarrel to be?


Cawthorne. I believe the Quarrel was between Mr. Coote and Mr. French.


E. of Warw. My Lord, I desire to know of this Witness, what Words he heard Mr.
Coote say, after he and Mr. French returned into the House and came out of the
Chairs.


L. H. St. What do you say to the Question my Lord proposes?


Cawthorue. I heard Mr. Coote say, He would Laugh when he pleased, and he would
Frown when he pleased, God damn him.


E. of Warw. My Lord, I desire to know who he thinks those Words were addressed
to.


L. H. St. To whom did Mr. Coote speak these words?


Cawthorne. Whether he spoke them particularly to Mr. French, or to the other
two Gentlemen who were on the other side of the Bar, I cannot directly tell.


E. of Warw. I desire to know of him, Whether Mr. Coote was not one of the
three that was on the other side of the Bar?


Cawthorne. Yes, my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Captain Coote, were of
the outside of the Bar.


E. of Warw. Was Captain Coote with me in the beginning of the night at that
House?


Cawthorne. Yes, he came at the beginning of the night with my Lord of Warwick.


E. of Peterb. My Lords, I desire to ask this Witness one Question?


L. H. St. I think it is proper my Lords, in Point of Method, to let both Sides
have done, before any Questions be asked by any of my Noble Lords.


E. of Peterb. I did apprehend my Lord of Warwick had done.


L. H. St. No, my Lord, not as yet; pray, my Lord Warwick, what other Questions
has your Lordship to ask of this Witness?


E. of Warw. My Lord, I desire he may be asked particularly this Question,
Whether he perceived any Quarrel particularly between me and Captain Coote when
we went out of the House?


L. H. St. You hear the Question, Did you perceive any Quarrel between my Lord
Warwick and Mr. Coote before they went out of the House?


Cawthorne. No, I did not, nor ever saw any Quarrel between them in my life.


E. of Warw. I desire to know who paid the Reckoning that night?


Cawthorne. The Reckoning was called for before I came in to take it; and though
I think my Lord of Warwick paid for Mr. Coote, yet I cannot so directly tell,
because it was collected before I came into the Room to receive it.


L. H. St. My Lord, have you any thing more to ask this Witness?


E. of Warw. No, my Lord, at present that I think of.


L. H. St. My Lord Peterborough, your Lordship desired to ask a Question, will
you please to propose it now.


E. of Peterb. My Lord, this Witness seems to take notice of two Sides, who
were on the one side, and who were on the other, and that Mr. Coote and my Lord
of Warwick were on one side; I desire to know one thing of him, What Reason he
had to apprehend that they two were of a side?


L. H. St. Friend, you hear that Noble Lord's Question; you seem to say, they
were three and three of a side, What Reason had you to apprehend, that my Lord
Warwick and Mr. Coote were of one side? You must explain to my Lords how you
come to make that Judgment, what Reason you had to think so.


Cawthorne. They three, my Lord Mohun, my Lord Warwick, and Mr. Coote, were on
the one side of the Bar; and Captain James, Captain French, and Captain Dockwra
were on the other side of the Bar.


L. H. St. So you said before; but the Question which my Noble Lord desires to
be satisfied in is this, How you come to speak as if there was a Quarrel
between three and three? What Reason had you to think, that three were on side,
and three on the other?


Cawthorne. Their Swords were all drawn, and they stood three on one side of
the Bar, and three on the other.


E. of Rochester. My Lords, I desire to ask this Witness one Question; I think
he told your Lordship at first, That he did not perceive any angry Words among
them; afterward he comes to talk of Swords drawn amongst them all, three on
the outside, and three on the inside of the Bar; I desire to know what was the
occasion of those Swords being drawn on the one side or the other?


Cawthorne. Whatsoever Quarrel there was, was amongst themselves above Stairs,
and I know no angry Words that passed between them when they came down to the
Bar.


L. H. St. See what you say? How consistent one part of it is with another! You
said at first, you did not hear of any angry Words that passed between them,
and yet you say, All their Swords were drawn, and three were on the one side
and three on the other: And when you were Examined upon the Motion of that
Noble Lord, what you meant by three on the one side, and three on the other,
you said, My Lord Mohun, my Lord Warwick, and Mr. Coote, were on the one side,
Mr. James, Mr. French, and Mr. Dockwra, were on the other side: How could there
be two sides, unless there was a Quarrel?


Cawthorne. I said, I did not hear any angry Words pass between them before
they came to the Bar, or while they were above Stairs, but there were three on
the one side of the Bar, and three on the other.


L. H. St. But you have not give a Satisfactory Answer to that Question which
the Noble Lord, my Lord Peterborough, asked you, What Reason you had to
apprehend, that the Noble Lord the Prisoner at the Bar and Captain Coote were
of a side?


Cawthorne. My Lord Mohun came to the Chair side when Captain Coote and Captain
French were got into the two first Chairs, and told Captain Coote, That there
should be no Quarrel that night, but that they three, my Lord Warwick; my Lord
Mohun, and he; should go home together; and I took them three to be of a side,
because they were on the outside of the Bar together, and when they all went
away, their three Chairs went away first all three together.


L. H. St. Is that all the Reason you can give why you say, They were three and
three of a side?


Cawthorne. Yes, my Lord, I did apprehend it so.


Mr. At. Genesis If my Noble Lords have done with their Questions, I desire to ask
this Witness another Question; My Lords, I think this Person says, That there
was a Quarrel at the Bar of the House, and Swords drawn, and as he apprehended,
three were on the one side, and three on the other; but if I take him right, I
do not see that he has given your Lordships any manner of Satisfaction, what
Reason he had to apprehend there were three and three of a side, or, which will
be very Material in this Case, if your Lordships can get to the Knowledge of
it, which three were on the one side, and which three were on the other, or
indeed whether there were three and three of a side, as your Lordships will
have Reason by and by to enquire a little further into that Matter: My Lords, I
desire he may be asked this plain Question, What Wo^^s or other Passages he did
perceive, that made him apprehend there was a Quarrel between them, and they
were three and three of a side?


Cawthorne. I apprehended it from the words that Mr. Coote said, That he would
Laugh when he pleased, and Frown when he pleased.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, my Lord, I desire he may be asked, Who those Words were
spoke to, and who they were applied to?


Cawthorne. They were spoke to Mr. James, Mr. French, and Mr. Dockwra, who were
withinside of the Bar.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he apply those Words to all those particular Persons?


Cawthorne. Yes, as I thought, for they Three were within the Bar, my Lord
Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Mr. Coote were without the Bar.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray my Lord, I desire he may be asked this Question, Was that
before the Swords were drawn, or afterward?


Cawthorne. It was before.


Mr. At. Genesis Then I desire he may be asked, Whether the Swords were drawn
upon those Words?


Cawthorne. No, my Lord, the time of drawing the Swords was when I went out to
call Chairs and Coaches; and I know not who drew the Swords first, or when they
were drawn, but when I came back I found them all drawn, and I heard them
Clashing.


Mr. At. Genesis Upon the Oath you have taken, Was those Words that you speak of
Mr. Coote's, That he would Laugh when he pleased, and Frown when he pleased,
before the Swords were drawn, or after the Svvords were drawn?


Cawthorne. Before the Swords were drawn; for I did not see the Swords drawn
till I came back.


L. H. St. Does either side desire to ask this Witness any Questions; if not,
then you may withdraw, and you may proceed, Mr. Attorney, to Examine some other
Witness.


Lord Wharton. My Lord, there was a Question asked at the Bar about the
hindering of the Quarrel, and my Lord Mohun's desire to part them, and make them
Friends, I desire the Witness before he goes away, may be asked what he knows
of that Matter.


L. H. St. It has been observed by my Lord that you said, when they came down
to the Bar, and the Quarrel happened, some body would have prevented it; pray
repeat that Matter again, Did you observe any of the Company were disposed to
take up the Quarrel, and make them Friends, and who they were?


Cawthorne. My L. Mohun and my L. Warwick said they would send for a File of
Musketeers, and my Lord Mohun did all he could to quiet and pacify them till
the Quarrel was over, and my Lord Mohun particularly had his Finger pricked
with endeavoring to Cross their Swords, and keeping them from Fighting, which
was all he got by it.


L. H. St. Do you know that of your own Knowledge?


Cawthorne. His Hand was bloody, and he said so at the Bar; but I was just
coming in again when I heard him say so, but I cannot say that I saw him hurt,
for I was without the House at the time when that was done.


L. Godolphin. My Lords, I desire to ask this Witness one Question; I observe
he has told my Lords there was not an angry Word passed between them before
they came down to the Bar, I would fain ask him this Question, Whether he was
in the room all the time till they did come down to the Bar.


Cawthorne. I received the Reckoning just before they came down to the Bar.


L. Godolphin. And I desire he may be asked, How long he stald in the Room when
he received the Reckoning.


Cawthorne. It was about two or three Minutes that I staid in the Room, and not
longer.


E. of Warw. My Lord this Witness that has been Examined, told you, That when
we first came down to the Bar there were two Chairs called for; and when they
came, Mr. Coote and the other Gentleman, Mr. French, went into the Chairs, and
afterward they came out again, and Mr. Coote said some Words; I desire the
Witness may be asked again, when it was Mr. Coote spoke those words, whether it
was before or after the time that he came out of the Chair, for I take it to be
very material.


Cawthorne. It was after Mr. Coote came out of the Chair, for the Chairmen
heard the Words, as I verily believe.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire he may be asked, Was there any reply made to
those words by any of those Persons he says he apprehends were on the other
side?


Cawthorne. No, not one Word that I know of.


E. of Warw. My Lord, I must beg the Favor to have the Question asked again of
him, Whether I did not at that time endeavor to prevent any Quarrelling, and
did not say I would call for the Guard if they did?


Cawthorne. Yes; My Lord of Warwick did say so, and so did my Lord Mohun; and
so I think did Mr. James.


L. H. St. How came you not to say so when you were asked that Question
particularly before? Then you said my Lord Mohun endeavored to prevent the
Quarrelling, and make them Friends.


Cawthorne. Yes, my Lord Warwick did so, and so did Mr. James.


L. H. St. I cannot tell whether any body else desires to ask him any Questions.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, he speaks of what this Noble Lord my Lord of Warwark
said; but he does not tell you the particular Expressions, nor the time when my
Lord said them.


L. H. St. You say my Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar, endeavored to pacify the
Quarrel between them; but you do not tell my Lords who the Quarrel was between,
nor when the Endeavor was made by my Lord Warwick to pacify it.


Cawthorne. My Lord of Warwick did say he would have the Guards sent for.


L. H. St. What time was that, before or after my Lord Mohun said so?


Cawthorne. Truly my Lord, I do not know but that it was at the same time.


L. H. St. Was it when the Swords were drawn, or before?


Cawthorne. They spoke it both before and after the Swords were drawn, as I
remember, for the Swords were not drawn while I was in the House, till I came
back.


L. H. St. Were the Swords drawn when my Lord Warwick spoke of sending for the
Guards?


Cawthorne. Surely my Lord it was before the Swords were drawn, when I was sent
for the Chairs.


L. H. St. You said there was no angry Words or Quarrel between them.


Cawthorne. Not above Stairs, my Lord; but I apprehended when they came down to
the Bar there were three on one side, and ^^ee on the other.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray my Lord, ^et him be asked this Question, Was it after they
were three on the one side, and three on the other that my Lord Mohun and my
Lord Warwick spoke those words?


Cawthorne. I apprehend the words were spoke by Mr. Coote, That he would Laugh
when he pleased, and Frown when he pleased, was before the Swords were drawn.


L. H. St. But that which my Lords desire to know is, What the time was when my
Lord Warwick and my Lord Mohun declared their desire to part them and make them
Friends; whether before or after the Swords drawn.


Cawthorne. Before and after, for I was absent when the Swords were drawn.


E. Rivers. He says, That after my Lord Mohun and my Lord Warwick threatened to
send for the Musketeers They promised to be quiet; I desire to know who he
means by They.


Cawthorne. Mr. James called to me and said, I need not go and call for the
Guards, for the Quarrel was over. There is one thing more that I forgot, my
Lord; After my Lord Mohun and my Lord Warwick were gone away in their Chairs,
and Mr. Coote, I heard Mr. Dockwra did say to Captain James and Captain French
they did not care a Farthing for them, they would Fight them at any time.


L. H. St. Who were together then?


Cawthorne. Captain James, Mr. French, and Mr. Dockwra, after my Lord Mohun and
my Lord Warwick were gone with Captain Coote.


L. H. St. Then Mr. French was with them, when Mr. Dockwra said so?


Cawthorne. Yes, my Lord.


L. Wharton. If I apprehend him aright as to what he says now, my Lord of
Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Captain Coote were gone away at that time.


Cawthorne. Yes, they were gone away in the three first Chairs, which my Lord
Mohun bid go home.


L. Wharton. Who does he say spoke those words?


L. H. St. You hear my Noble Lord's Question, Who spoke those words? Repeat
them again.


Cawthorne. When my Lord Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Captain Coote were gone, I
heard Mr. Dockwra say to Mr. French and Mr. James, we don't care a Farthing for
them, we will Fight them at any time.


Mr. At. Genesis I desire to know whether this Witness testified any thing of
this Matter when he was Examined before the Coroner?


Cawthorne. No, I forgot those words when I was Examined before the Coroner.


Mr. At. Genesis How soon after your Examination did you recollect your self as
to what you now speak?


Cawthorne. The next Day after.


Mr. At. Genesis I pray my Lords that he may be asked, Whether he did in general
give the same Evidence before the Coroner that he does now?


Cawthorne. Yes, as to all but only those words as to Mr. Dockwra's declaring
that he did not care a Farthing for them, they would Fight them at any time.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I beg he may be asked how long it was after the Fact
was done, that he was Examined before the Coroner.


Cawthorne. It was the next Day in the Afternoon.


Mr. At. Genesis Then I have this Question further to ask, if your Lordships
please, Was he at the Trial of Mr. Dockwra, Mr. James, and Mr. French?


Cawthorne. Yes, I was.


M. At. Genesis Did he then give any Evidence of those words of Mr. Dockwra's,
after when my Lord Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Captain Coote were gone?


Cawthorne. No, I did not.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lo^d, I have one Question to ask him then more, How he came
not to swear this Matter at that Trial.


Cawthorne. It was out of my Mind at that time, and I had like to have forgot
it now.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we have done with this Witness: Is it your Lordships
pleasure that we go on to call our other Witnesses?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


Mr. At. Genesis Then our next Witnesses, my Lords, will be the Chairmen that
Carried my Lord Mohun, my Lord of Warwick, and Captain Coote: We shall begin
with Thomas Brown and John Gibson, one of them carried Mr. Coote, the other my
Lord of Warwick.


Thomas Brown was Sworn. L. H. Stew. What Question do you ask this Witness, Mr.
Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis That he would acquaint your Lordships, whether he carried Mr.
Richard Coote, the Person that was slain, upon the 29th or 30th of October,
from the Greyhound Tavern in the Strand, and to what Place he carried him?


L. H. Stew. You hear the Question; pray speak so loud that my Lords may all
hear what you say.


Brown. My Lords, I was between the Hours of One and Two in the Morning, on
Sunday the 30th of October last, with my Fellow and our Chair, at the Buffer's
Head Tavern at Charing Cross, and I heard some People at Lockets at the
Greyhound in the Strand, calling Coach, Coach, a pretty while; but there were
no Coaches in the Street, nor that came to them; when they could not get
Coaches then they called out for Chairs, and we coming to the Door with our
Chair, there were four other Chairs there, and six Gentlemen stood in the
Passage, and then it was said, there was not Chairs enough, and there wanted
one more, and they stood Discoursing, and the first Man came into my Chair who
was Captain Coote, and my Lord of Warwick he got into another; when the Door of
the Chair was shut up, we asked them whither we should go, but my Lord Mohun
came and bid open the Chair again, and we did so, and he returned into the
House, and there was some Discourse between them standing at the Bar in the
Entry, Mr. Coote came out again and came into my Chair, and my Lord Mohun and
my Lord of Warwick went into two others; Mr. Coote bid me carry him into
Leicester-Fields, and to make all the haste I could; my Lord of Warwick and my
Lord Mohun being in the next Chairs, asked him, Whether are you a going, and
called out twice, and he said, To Leicester-Fields; Pray do not, says my L. of
Warwick, but come along with us, and let it alone till to morrow; but he bid us
go on, and as we were turning up St. Martin's- Lane by the Cross-Keys Tavern,
my Lord Mohun, and my Lord Warwick, called out to us to stop, and their Chairs
came up to the back Door of the Gross-Keys Tavern, and there all the three
Chairs were set on a-brest in St. Martin's-Lane, and while they were talking
together there came by three Chairs of the other side of the way, and Mr. Coote
bid us take up and make all the haste we could before them into
Leicester-Fields, so taking up the Chair again Mr. Coote bid us make haste, and
if we could go no faster he swore Damn him, he would run his Sword in one of
our Bodies: There were two Chairs before me, and my L. Mohun and my L. Warwick
followed in two Chairs after me; and when we came to the Corner of
Leicester-Fields at Green-street end, all the three Chairs were set down
a-brest again, and Mr. Coote put his Hand in his Pocket, and took out half a
Guinea to pay and said he had no Silver, and my Lord of Warwick spoke to my
Lord Mohun, who took out three Shillings out of his Pocket, who said there was
for my Lord Warwick, Captain Coote and himself; and when they were gone out I
took my Box and my Pipe, and filled my Pipe, and took the Lanthorn and lighted
it, and by that time I had lighted my Pipe I heard a calling out Chair, Chair,
again, toward the upper End of the Square, so I took my Ch^^, and there was
one of the Chairs that was not gone, and so we came up to the upper End of the
Fields, and they called to us to bring the Chairs over the Rails; we told them
we did not know how to do that, for we should not be able to get them back
again; at last we did get over the Rails, and made up close to the Place where
we heard the Noise, for we could see nothing, it being a very Dark Night, and
when we came up close to them, by our Lanthorn there were two Gentlemen holding
up Mr. Coote under their Arms, and crying out, My Dear Coote, my Dear Coote*


Mr. At. Genesis Pray who were those two Gentlemen?


Brown. I did not know them, one was in Red Clothes, and the other had Gold
Lace, and they would have had me have taken Mr. Coote into my Chair; but seeing
him bloody, and not able to help himself, I said I would not spoil my Chair,
and so would not meddle with him, but they said they would make me any
Satisfaction for my Chair, and desired me to take him in, but he gave himself a
spring from them, and we found he was too heavy for us to lift over the Rails,
and all we could do could not make him sit in the Chair, but the Chair was
broken with endeavoring to place him there; and they said, If we would carry
him to a Surgeon's, they would give us a Hundred Pound security; but we finding
it impossible the Watch was called for; but no body would come near, for they
said it was out of their Ward, and so they would not come anigh me; and I
stayed about half an Hour with my Chair broken, and afterward I was laid hold
upon, both I and my Partner, and we were kept till next Night Eleven a Clock;
and that is all the Satisfaction that I have had for my Chair and every thing.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, my Lord, I desire he may recollect himself; for we do
apprehend it is very Material who it was that Desired to take Mr. Coote into
the Chair.


Brown. I cannot tell who they were, it was so very Dark I could only see
their Clothes.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see the Earl of Warwick there.


Brown. No, Sir, he was not there, one of them I tell you had Officers Clothes
on, Red lined with Blue, and the other had Gold Lace on; there was no body
there that held him up but them two.


M. of Norm. He says he savv two Persons holding up Mr. Coote; it would be
very well to have that Matter very well fettled who those Two Persons
were, I desire to know how he is sure my Lord of Warwick was not one of
them two?


Brown. I know my Lord of Warwick very well, and I am sure he was neither
of the Two.


D. of Leeds. I would know what Light he had to discern it so well by, that
he can be sure my Lord of Warwick was not there; for he says, it was a very
Dark Night, and yet he describes the particular Persons that held Mr. Coote up.


Brown. Yes, my Lord, I am sure my Lord of Warwick was none of them.


D. of Leeds. How could you distinguish in so dark a night the Colors of
People's Clothes?


Brown. With the Candle that I had lighted in my Lanthorn.


D. of Leeds. He could not know any of the Persons unless he held a Lanthorn
to their Faces, or knevv them very well before.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, will your Lordship ask this Witness any Questions?


E. of Warwick. My Lord; I desire he may be asked, Whether I did not bid him
stop at St. Martins-Lane end, and do all that I could to hinder Mr. Coote from
going any further, but to go home?


Brown. The Earl of Warwick, and my Lord Mohun, as they turned up the Lane,
asked Mr. Coote, Whither he was going? and when he said to Leicesterfields,
they desired him to let it alone till to morrow; and my Lord Mohun said he
should go home with him; but the other bid us go on, and said he would not go
to his Lodgings, but, that they would make an end of it that night; Still they
called to him again, Dear Coote let us speak a Word with you, and as the Chairs
came to the Backdoor of the Cross-Keys Tavern, there they stood all of
abreast, and they both of them spoke to him, and stood a pretty while there,
and in the mean time 3 Chairs passed by on the other side, he Commanded us to
take up, and carry him away to Leicester-fields immediately, and overtake the
other Chairs, or he would run one of us into the Body.


L. H. St. Would your Lordship ask him any more Questions?


E. of Warrwick. No, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I observe, he says they Discoursed some time together
while they stopped in St. Martins-Lane, I desire that he may be asked, whether
he can toll what that Discourse was?


Brown. I could not well hear, they Whispered together, but I could hear my
Lord Mohun, and my Lord of Warwick, desire Capt. Coote to go home, and let the
Business alone till another time.


Mr. At. Genesis I desire he may Explain himself, what that Business was that they
would have put off till to morrow?


Brown. I know not what it was, I heard of no Anger betwixt them, but they
were as good Friends for any thing I know to the contrary, as ever they were in
their Lives, or as ever I see any Men.


L. Jeffereys. He says there were Two went into Chairs at the Door of the
House, and afterward went out again, and went into the House, and there was
Discourse at the Bar of the House, I would desire to know what that was?


Brown. I did not hear the Discourse that was in the House, I was at the Door
of the House.


Mr. At. Genesis Our next Witness is William Crippes.


Who was Sworn. L. H. St. What do you ask this Man, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray will you give my Lords here an Account who you carried to
Leicester-fields the 29th or 30th of October, and what happened in your
knowledge at that time?


Crippes. Capt. Coote was the first Man that went into the Chair when we came
to the Greyhound Tavern, afterward he came out again, and when we took him up
the second time he was the first Man that set out, and he bid us carry him to
Leicester-fields, and when we came to the Corner of St. Martins-Lane, we turned
up that way; and my Lord of Warwick, and my Lord Mohun, called to us, being in
Chairs behind, to know whither we were going, and desired to speak with Capt.
Coote, and he said he was going to Leicester-fields; and when they asked, what
to do? he said, To end the Business; They desired him to put it off till to
morrow; and while they were Discoursing about it in St. Martins-Lane, there
passed by other 3 Chairs, which when Capt. Coote saw, he bid us take up and
overtake them, and go faster, or he would run one of us into the Body; So we
went on, and at the lower end of Leicester-fields we set him down; and the
other Two Gentlemen, my Lord Warwick, and my Lord Mohun, were there set down,
and went Lovingly together, for any thing that I saw, up the Pavement of the
Square, toward the upper end; and in a little time we heard a Noise of Calling
for Chairs toward the upper end, and when we came there with the Chair, we
were bid to lift over the Chair within the Rails, and when we said it was hard
to be done, they insisted upon it, and we did come in, and when we came there
we saw Two Gentlemen holding up Capt. Coote, and would have had us taken him
into the Chair; We saw there was a great deal of Blood, but I never heard how
it came, and they would have had us carried him to a French Surgeon's, and
proffered any Money.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire to know, who they were that desired him to be
carried to the Surgeon?


L. H. St. You hear the Question, What say you?


Crippes. I cannot tell, my Lord, one of them had something of Lace upon him,
but it was so dark that I could hardly see my Hand, and therefore I cannot tell
who they were; and when there was an Objection made, that the Chairs would be
spoiled, they said we need not question our Chair, they would give us 100 l
Security to answer any Damages, if we would but carry him; so we endeavored to
put him into the Chair, but could not; and so we called out to the Watch, to
have had some help, but they said it was none of their Ward, and so they would
not come to us; so the Gentlemen went away; and we left them, and went and
called a Surgeon, who when he came said, he was a Dead Man, and we were
secured till the next day.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, my Lord, I desire he may be asked, Were there not other
Chairs in that place at that time?


Crippes. There was one in the Field besides, and no more that I could see,
they all went away but us Two.


Mr. At. Genesis What distance of time was there between their setting down in
Leicester-fields, and their Calling the Chairs again?


Crippes. Not a quarter of an hour.


Mr. At. Genesis What became of the 3 Chairs that passed by you in St.
Martins-Lane?


Crippes. They got before us, but what became of them afterward I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they come from the same place, the Tavern in the Strand that
you were at?


Crippes. Yes, I believe they did, my Lord, for Capt. Coote bid us follow them,
and threatened us if we did not make greater haste.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know my Lord of Warwick?


Crippes. Yes, he had Whitish Clothes on, and none but he had such Clothes on
as those were.


L. H. S. Will your Lordship ask this Witness any Questions?


E. of Warwick. My Lord, I desire he may be asked, Whether I did not bid him
stop? And, Whether I did not say, they should not go to Quarrel that night?


Crippes. Yes, both he and my Lord Mohun would not have had Captain Coote gone
any where, but home to his Lodgings.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire to know of him, directly and downright,
Whether my Lord of Warwick was not one of them that held him when he was within
the Rails in the Fields?


Crippes. No, he was not, he was neither of them, for the one of them was too
big for him, and the other was too little for my Lord Mohun?


Mr. At. Genesis Now we shall Call the Chairman that carried the Earl of Warwick
into Leicester-fields. James Crattle.


He was Sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Will you tell my Lords what you know of any Person
that you carried the 29th or 30th of October last from the Greyhound Tavern in
the Strand, and who it was, and whither you carried him?


Crattle. I was going along Charing Cross between One and two in the morning
the 20th of October last, and I heard a Chair called for at Lockets a^ the
Dog-Tavern, and thither I and my Partner went, and we took up the Gentleman,
and carried him to Leicester-fields.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was that Gentleman?


Crattle. It was my Lord of Warwick.


Mr. At. Genesis What time of night do you say it was?


Crattle. It was about One or two in the morning.


Mr. At. Genesis What day of the Week was it?


Crattle. It was Saturday night and Sunday morning.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither did you carry him?


Crattle. Into Greenstreet, toward the lower end of Leicester Square.


Mr. At. Genesis What Chairs were there more there?


Crattle. There was one that Capt. Coote was in, and another that my Lord Mohun
was in, and we w^nt away all together.


Mr. At. Genesis Were there no other Chairs?


Crattle. I did not know who went in the other Chairs, but there were 3 other
Chairs that passed by us at St. Martins-Lane, and we followed after them to
Leicester-fields.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what became of you after you had set down your Fare?


Crattle. We were Discharged and Paid, the other 3 went up toward my Lord of
Leicester's, but we were coming away, and in a little time we heard the Noise
of calling Chairs, Chairs, again, and there were Two Chairs did come up, Thomas
Browne's and ours; My Lord of Warwick called our Chair, and we took him into
it, and he bid us carry him to the Bagnic in Longacre, and when we came there
we knocked at the Door, and his Hand was bloody, and he asked us if we had any
Handkerchief to bind up his Hand.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any other Chairs at the Door of the Bagnio, at the same
time when you came there?


Crattle. Yes, there was another Chair there at the Door at the same time, and
we set down both together.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Whence came that Chair?


Crattle. Indeed I do not know.


Mr. At. Genesis Who were the Chairmen that carried that Chair?


Crattle. Indeed my Lord Mohun, and my Lord Warwick, were the only Persons that
I knew of all the Company.


Mr. At. Genesis What sort of Gentleman was the other that went out of the other
Chair into the House?


Crattle. He was a pretty tall Man; when he was in we went away; I only can say
I saw my Lord of Warwick go into the House.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you take any notice of any Sword that my Lord of Warwick had
in his Hand at that time?


Crattle. No, I cannot say I did take any notice of any Sword, only that there
was a Handkerchief desired.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Did you hear no Noise at all in the Field, till you heard
Chairs called for again?


Crattle. No, I cannot say I heard any Noise in the Field.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you apprehend there was any Fighting?


Crattle. No, I knevv nothing at all of it, but upon the calling of Chairs
again, and my Lord Warwick coming along, we tock him in, and he bid us go to
the Bagnio, and thither we went.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we have done with this Witness.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, will you ask this Witness any Questions?


E. of Warwick. No, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Then, my Lord, our next Witness is John Gibson, he was another
of those Chairmen that carried my Lord of Warwick to the Bagnio afterward.
Pray, Will you give my Lords an Account what you know, who you carried the
29th and 30th of October last, and vvhither you carried them?


He was Sworn. Gibson. My Lord, I was at Charing Cross with my Partner the 29th
of October last, at night, and about One or two a Clock in the morning Chairs
were called for to the Greyhound-Tavern in the Strand, and when we came there,
my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Mr. Coote, got into the 3 first Chairs,
and we got my Lord Warwick into our Chair, and when we had him there we were
bid to go toward Leicester-fields, as I apprehended, for thither the Chairs
that went first was to go, and indeed my Lord Mohun, and my Lord Warwick, did
call to stop at the end of St. Martins-Lane, and asked Mr. Coote whither he was
going? and he said he was going to make an end of the Business, and they said
it should not be to night, but presently after 3 other Chairs coming along, and
passing before us, the Chair that Capt. Coote was in was bid to go on, and we
were ordered to follow, which was done accordingly; Just at the Turning of
Greenstreet we set down our 3 Chairs, and having had 3 Shillings given us, we
were bid to go about our business; and, I think, just about the Turning of
Greenstreet end we stayed till there came another Chair again, and we and the
other Chair upon my Lord Warwick's coming into us, went away from thence, and
carried him to the Bagnio in Longacre.


Mr. At. Genesis You talk of another Chair, pray, Whose Chair was that?


Gibson. There was another Chair that was got there just before us, but indeed
I do not know whose it was, nor indeed can I say who it was that was in it,
but this I am sure we went to the same place, and we met and lit just at the
same time, and my Lord of Warwick asked for a Handkerchief to bind about his
Hand, which was bloody, which was given him.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you not know who was in the other Chair at that time?


Gibson. No, indeed, I did not know, I will assure you.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Did you not know where that other Chair took the other
Gentleman up?


Gibson. No, indeed Sir, I do not.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, What time of the Night was it?


Gibson. It was betvveen One and two of the Clock in the Morning.


Mr. At. Genesis You talk of his Hand being hurt, and that he called for a
Handkerchief, Did you see his Hand bleed? and, pray, in what nature was his
Wound?


Gibson. My Lord, all I can say is, there was Blood, and he vvanted a
Handkerchief, and had one, for he said his Hand was hurt, but in truth I did
not take any notice what that hurt was, I did not see it, if my Partner took
notice of it, so, but else I can say nothing to it, but the Handkerchief was
afterward asked again, and could not be had.


L. H. St. Would my Lord of Warwick ask this Witness any Questions?


E. of Warwick. No, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Then, my Lord, our next Witnesses are Robert, Applegate, and
Peter Catro, who will give your Lordship an Account who they carried at this
time.


L. H. St. Whom do you call first?


Mr. At. Genesis Robert Applegate.


Who was Sworn. L. H. St. What Questions do you ask him, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis I desire that he would acquaint your Lordship, what he knows of
what passed at the Greyhound-Tavern in the Strand the 29th of October last,
whom he carried, and whither he carried them?


Applegate. My Lord, about One or two a Clock in the morning, a Sunday morning,
the 29th or 30th of October last I was going home with my Partner and my Chair,
and I heard them calling at the Greyhound Tavern in the Strand, Mr. Lockett's,
for Coaches and Chairs, there was no Coach to be had that could be heard of,
but coming up to the Door they said they wanted 6 Chairs, and when we were
there at the Door, there came out first my Lord Warwick, Capt. Coote, and my
Lord Mohun, Capt. Coote got into the first Chair, and what Directions he gave
them I cannot tell; My Lord of Warwick got into the next, and into ours, which
was the third, my Lord Mohun came in, and bid us take him up and carry him
toward Westminster, and he ordered us to follow the Chairs before; Just as
they turned at St. Martins-Lane, my Lord Mohun called out, and desired to stop,
and at the Cross-Keys Tavern Back Door a^ the 3 Chairs came up together, and
then my Lord of Warwick, and Capt. Coote, and my Lord Mohun talked together,
and I could hear my Lord Mohun and my Lord of Warwick desire Capt. Coote to
defer it, and put it by till another day; what it was, indeed I cannot tell:
but while they were talking there, Three Chairs more came up on the other side
of the way, and Capt. Coote would needs go forward, and my Lord Mohun and my
Lord of Warwick went with him, and so they were all set down at the lower end
of Leicester-fields at Green-street end. But in truth I did not see where the
other Three Chairs set down those they carried.


Mr. At. Genesis What then happened afterward, Can you tell?


Appleby. I cannot tell whether I had Lighted my Pipe, or just Lighting it,
when I heard Chairs called again, upon which we run up with our Chair toward
the upper end of the Fields, and there I did see my Lord of Warwick within the
Rails, who bid us put over our Chair into the Fields, but we told him if we
did, we could not get it over again, and so we went with our Chair to the
corner of the Fields, and when we came there, there came out Capt. French,
who bid us open our Chair, and let him in, for he did believe he was a Dead
Man; and upon that we did take him in, and he bid us carry him with all the
speed we could to the Bagnio in Long-Acre, and my Lord of Warwick got into
another Chair behind, so went to Lang-Acre, and when we came to the Door of
the Bagnio, and Capt. French came out of the Chair, he was so vveak that he
fell down upon his Knees; and when he came out, I asked who should Pay me,
and desired to be Discharged, and the Earl of Warwick said, Damn ye, Call for
your Money to Morrow, so they both went in at the Bagnio Door together.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray who called for the Chair first, Capt. French, or my Lord of
Warwick in the Fields.


Applegate. I cannot tell, but when I brought up my Chair, I first savv my
Lord of Warwick, and he would have had me lifted the Chair over the Rails, and
I told him we could not get it over again, and so went up to the upper end of
the Fields.


Mr. At. Genesis If you first spoke with my Lord of Warwick, Why did you not
Carry my Lord of Warwick?


Applegate. Indeed I cannot tell, but I suppose it was because he did not come
so soon out of the Fields as Capt. French, or did not come the same way.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray do you remember any thing that happened just at their
carrying Capt. French away?


Applegate. Before he went into the Chair he stopped, and would have pulled off
his Clothes, but we would not let him.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see any Sword Capt. French had?


Applegate. I did see no Sword that I can say directly was a Svvord, but Capt.
French had something in his hand, but what it was I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis What was it that he said to you, when he first went into the
Chair?


Applegate. He desired to be carried to the Bagnio, for he said he believed he
was a dead Man.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Friend, recollect your self, if you heard him say any thing
at all when he first went into the Chair at the Greybound Tavern.?


Applegate. I did not hear him mention any thing at all,


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what did you hear my Lord of Warwick say at that time?


Applegate, Truly I cannot say I heard him mention any thing at all neither,
but I did hear my Lord Mohun say, when he could not prevail in St Martins-Lane
with Capt. Coote to go home, that if they did go he would go and see it.


Mr. At. Genesis If They did go, who did he mean by They?


Applegate. My Lord Warwick and Capt. Coote that were in the other Chairs,
there was no body else to speak to.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any talk of Fighting or Quarrelling?


Applegate. No indeed, I do not know of any difference there was betvveen
them.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, Will your Lordship ask this Witness any Questions?


E. of War. My Lord, I desire he may be asked, Whether I did not endeavor to
put off the going into Leicester Fields, and to have all things let alone till
to Morrow.


Applegate. My Lord, I cannot say any thing of that, but I did hear my Lord
Mohun beg heartily of Capt. Coote to go home, and le^t the business alone till
another time; and indeed I think I never heard a Man beg more hearty for an
Alms at a Door, than he did, that they might not go into the Fields then, but I
cannot say that I heard any thing that my Lord of Warwick said about it.


L. H. St. Will your Lordship ask him any other Questions?


E. of War. No my Lord.


L. H. St. Did my Lord Warwick express any Inclination to go on.


Applegate. Indeed I know not any thing one way nor other.


L. Jeffereys. My Lords, If I am not mistaken he did say, that he did not see
any thing of Inclination in my Lord of Warwick to go on; but I desire if your
Lordships please that he may be asked this Question, Whether he did see any
thing in my Lord of Warwick that showed any Inclination to the contrary.


Applegate. All that I can say is, I heard my Lord Mohun say, Pray let us go
home and lie all together, and let us put off this business to another time;
but indeed I do not remember that my Lord of Warwick said one word of going any
way backward or forward.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, who did my Lord Mohun speak these words to?


Applegate. My Lord Mohun spoke them to my Lord of Warwick and Capt. Coote both.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney, Who is your next Witness?


Mr. At. Genesis Peter Catro.


Who was Sworn. L. H. St. What do you ask him, Sir?


Mr. At. Genesis He was the other Chairman that carried my Lord Mohun, Pray will
you give my Lords an account what you know passed at the time when you carried
my Lord Mohun to Leicester-fields?


Catro. I and my Fellow carried my Lord Mohun from the Greyhound Tavern in the
Strand, till we came to the turning up of St. Martins-Lane, where my Lord Mohun
desired that our Three Chairs might stop, and that they might go down to
Westminster, and that my Lord Warwick and Capt. Coote would go thither, and he
would wait upon them to their Lodging; Capt. Coote made Answer again something,
but what I cannot tell, and his Chair went on, and my Lord Mohun did say, if
they went forward he would follow them, and see what would come of it.


Mr. At. Genesis What did you see happen while you were in St. Martins Lane?


Catro. There were other Three Chairs that went by while we stood at the
Cross-Keys Tavern Door, and Capt. Coote's Chair going forward, we followed and
went to the end of Leicester-fields at Green-street end, and there all Three
went out of their Chairs and walked up the paved Stones of the Square; my Lord
of Warwick asked my Lord Mohun if he had any Silver, and Three Shillings were
given for the Three Chairs, and they went from us, and bid us go about our
business, and in a little while after we heard a noise from the upper end of
the Fields calling Chairs again.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe any thing of Quarrel or Difference between them,
or any clashing of Swords.


Catro. Indeed I heard nothing of any Quarrel, for we were at the lower and of
the Square, at Green-street end, and when we heard them call for Chairs again;
we went up toward the upper end of the Fields, and when we came there we heard
one bid us bring up the Chair over the Rails.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was that?


Catro. Indeed my Lord I cannot tell, for I was behind the Chair, and could not
see who it was, but we saying that we could not get it over again if we did; we
went up to the upper end of the Fields, and there was Capt. French, I think it
was, for I did not perfectly see him, being at the hind-part of the Chair, and
we went on to the Bagnio in Long-Acre: and I did see my Lord Warwick come out
of his Chair at the Bagnio Door, for there they were set down,


Mr. At. Genesis You say you saw my Lord of Warwick at the Bagnio Door; Did you
see any Sword as my Lord of Warwick had, or Capt. French?


Catro. No, I did not see any Sword at all of either of them.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of Capt. French his declaring he was wounded.


Catro. I think it was either when he went into the Chair, or in Newport-street
end he called out to have the Chair opened, for says he I think I am a dead
Man, and would have pulled off his Clothes; and when we were at the Bagnio Door
we tarryed a pretty while till they got them up to let them in, and asking if
we should wait, my Lord of Warwick bid us come to that House to Morrow Morning
for our Money, and they went in together into the House, but I never heard any
one word of Quarrel or Dissatisfaction passed betweeen them.


Mr. At. Genesis This Witness speaks to the same purpose as the other did, and I
think we need not trouble your Lordship any further as to that.


L. H. St. Would my Lord Warwick ask him any Questions?


E. of War. No, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Then our next Witness is one John Palmer.


Who was Sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Pray will you give my Lords an Account who it was
you did carry in your Chair the 29th, or 30th. of October last, and whither you
carried him?


Palmer. About one a Clock in the Morning, the 30th of October, we were called
to the Greyhound Tavern in the Strand to Mr. Lockett's, and there we took up a
Gentleman, one Captain French.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither did you carry him?


Palmer. He bid us go to Leicester-fields.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he particularly say to you?


Palmer. There were three other Chairs that were just gone before from the same
Door, and he bid us get before all those Chairs, and just as we came to St.
Martins-lane end, we saw there were three other Chairs set down before us
over against the Cross-Keys Tavern Backdoor.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, what did you do then?


Palmer. So we went before according as we were bid unto Leicester-fields, and
at the upper-end of the Fields by Leioester-house we opened the Door, and
Captain French came out, and he gave us a Shilling, and we went away about our
Business.


Mr. At. Genesis Were there any more Chairs there that went with you?


Palmer. There were two more Chairs that set down two other Gentlemen by
Leicester-house, and we came away when we were paid; that is all I know.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see any other Chairs besides your three when you came
down again, or any other Gentlemen?


Palmer. We did see some Gentlemen walking up about the middle of the Square
when we came down, but we made what have we could away home, it being late, and
Sunday Morning.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe any Fighting when you were in the Field?


Palmer. I did not hear or discern any Fighting while I was there.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you hear of any Quarrel, or any thing betvveen any of them
and whom before?


Palmer. No, I did not know of any Quarrel, or hear of any thing at all I do
assure you.


Mr. At. Genesis All that he says then, my Lord, is, That he carried Capt. French
to the upper-end of Leicester-Fields, and there he left him.


L. H. St. Would my Lord Warwick ask this Witness any Questions?


E. of Warw. I desire he may be asked, Whether he knows who were in the Chairs
that were in St. Martins-Lane when they passed by?


L. H. St. You hear the Question, What say you to it?


Palmer. There were three Chairs, but who they were that were in them I cannot
tell directly but as they said when they set them down at Leicester-Fields they
were my Lord Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Mr. Coote.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was it that said so?


Palmer. Some of the other Chairmen when I came by.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney, Who is your next Witness?


Mr. At. Genesis We shall call next the Chairmen that carried Mr. Dockwra and Mr.
James: Call Jackson the Chairman.


Who was sworn. Mr. At. Genesis This Man carried Captain James: Pray acquaint my
Lords, Who you did take up at Lockett's in the Strand on the 29th or 30th of
October last, and vvhither you carried him?


Jackson. I carried Captain James from Lockett's in the Strand into
Leicesterfields.


Mr. At. Genesis How many Chairs were you that went?


Jackson. There were two more that went when I went, there were six in
all that took up Gentlemen there, and we were the last but one.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you tell who were in the other three first Chairs?


Jackson. I do not know who were in the other Chairs, but I heard my Lord
Mohun at the Door of the House desire, That the Business might be deferred till
to morrow Morning: There were six Gentlemen at the Door, but truly who they
all were I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis Who did my Lord Mohun speak that to?


Jackson. Indeed I do not know who he spoke it to.


Mr. At. Genesis What Answer was made to my Lord Mohun?


Jackson. Truly there was no Answer that I heard, but we all went away
soon after that, and we were bid to go to Leicester-fields to follow the other
Chairs, and when we came to the other end of Leicester-fields, we set down
Captain James by the Standard Tavern, and he gave us a Shilling and bid us go
our ways; so we went our way, and I heard nothing afterward but came away down
the Fields, and there were three Chairs that stood at the bottom of the Fields,
and we asked them, What they stayed there for? And they said, To sill a Pipe of
Tobacco: And presently after we heard Call Chairs again; but it was late, and
it was Sunday Morning, and my Partner said, Let us go away home and we did so,
we went directly home.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you carry no body back?


Jackson. No, we carried no body back.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we have done with this Witness, our next Witness is one
Richard Edwards, and he was one of the Chairmen that carried Mr. Dockwra.


He was sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Pray will you acquaint my Lords, Whether you
carried any body from Lockett's the 29th of October, and who it was, and
whither you ^arried him?


Edwards. I do not know who I carried, but they were calling Coaches at (...)
Greyhound Tavern in the Strand, and no Coaches coming, they called for Chairs
and so our Chair was brought up.


Mr. At. Genesis When you came there, who did you see there?


Edwards. Indeed I did not know my Lord of Warwick, nor my Lord Mohun, nor any
of them.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, what do you know? Tell my Lords what happened.


Edwards. When we were there, there went Two into two Chairs, and my Lord Mo^un
said, or another Gentleman, I cannot tell which, that the Chairs should not go
away, that they would kill any Man that should go away, and they went out of
the Chairs, and went into the House again.


Mr. At. Genesis And what happened after they went into the House again?


Edwards. After they went out of the Chairs into the House again, as I was
told, my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Mr. Coote, went into Three Chairs,
and went away from the Door, and there were three Chairs of us that went last.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither did you go with your Chair?


Edwards. We went to the Standard Tavern at the end of Leicester Fields, and
when we came to the Tavern Door, we asked him if we should knock at the Door,
he said no, but he gave us a Shilling and bid us go about our business, and so
we did, for we went sheer away to Charing Cross.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray can you tell who were in the other Chairs?


Edwards. Truly I cannot tell any Man that was in our three Chairs, for I was
the hind-Chairman, and did not know any of them.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire to know what he means by hin'd-Chairman.


Edwards. My Lord, Ours was the last Chair that went to Leicester Fields, and I
was behind the Chair, and never could see any of them, it being so very dark
after they took the Chairs, till we came to Charing Cross, at St. Martins-Lane,
and then I could not see who the particular Persons were that were in the
Chairs; nor indeed, whose the Chairs were that carried them.


Mr. At. Genesis What Hour was it?


Edwards It was very late, between One and Two in the Morning; it was past One
before we were called out.


Mr. At. Genesis You say you went to the upper end of Leicester-fields, with Two
other Chairs; Pray did you see any other Chairs afterward, and where?


Edwards. We saw three Chairs at the lower end of the Square, as we came down
by Green-street end, and we asked them, What they stayed there for, and they
said, to light a Pipe of Tobacco.


M. At. Genesis Pray, Who had been carried in those Chairs, Can you tell?


Edwards. I did not see them set down any Body, and I cannot tell who they
carried; and as for the Person that we carried, I did not so much as see him to
know him, nor know who he was, but we went away as soon as ever we were paid.


Mr. At. Genesis I have one Question more to ask you; You say, That my Lord of
Warwick at the Tavern Door bid you stay, and that none should go away, and
Swore he would run any Man through that should go away.


Edwards. It was my Lord Mohun; and then Two that had gone into the Chairs went
into the House again.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not you say, that there was some talk of going to Westminster?


Edwards. My Lord Mohun did talk of going to Westminster when they went into
the Chairs the Second time, and I think I heard Mr. Coote say he would make an
end of it then; and he would kill any Man that would not go forwards to
Leicester-Fields.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, will you ask this Witness any Questions?


E. of Warw. No, my Lord.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney, have you any more Evidence to call?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, the next piece of Evidence that we shall apply our
selves to, will be to what happened at the Bagnio in Long-Acre, after my Lord
Warwick and Captain French came there: And the Witness that we shall call is
Pomfret, and he is a Servant at the Bagnio in Long-Acre, and he will acquaint
your Lordships who came thither the 30th of October last, and what happened
there.


L. H. St. What is his Name?


Mr. At. Genesis Henry Pomfret.


L. H. St. Is he Svvorn?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, my Lord.


L. H. St. What is it that you Examine him about? What Questions do you ask him
Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis Who name to his Master's House; and at what time they came.


Pomfret. My Lord, on Sunday the 30th of October last, between Two and Three in
the Morning, there came to my Master's Door the Earl of War^ick, and knocked at
the Door, and there was Captain French with him; and when they were let in, my
Lord of Warwick told me that Capt. French was wounded, and he himself had a
Wound, and he desired that my Master might be called up for to Dress the
Wounds; especially, because Captain French was very much wounded, which
accordingly was done in about a quarter of an Hour after they were brought in.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he desire to be Concealed when he was come in?


L. H. St. Of whom do you speak, Mr. Anorney.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord of Warwick.


Pomfret. He did desire, that if any Body asked for him, it should be said he
was not there.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, in what Condition did my Lord of Warwick seem to be in at
that time.


Pomfret. He seemed to be very much concerned at that time, and his Right Hand,
in which he had his Sword, and which was drawn, was very much bloody.


Mr. At. Genesis Was the Sword bloody that he had in his Hand?


Pomfret. The Blade was bloody; but whether it was all over bloody I cannot
tell; there was besides some blood upon the Shell, it was very near all over
bloody, as I remember.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Friend, Consider what you Swore at the Coroner's Inquest
about the Blood upon the Sword.


Pomfret. Indeed I cannot say it was bloody all along the Blade; but there was
blood upon the Shell, and there was blood upon the Inside, it was so to the
best of my remembrance.


Mr. At. Genesis What Condition was Mr. French's Sword in.


Pomfret. He had a Drawn Sword in his Hand, but I did not perceive it had any
Blood upon it: it was a large blade.


Mr. At. Genesis How do you know what sort of Sword Mr. French's was, and in what
Condition it was?


Pomfret. He desired me to take Notice of it next Morning, and I did so, and
there was no Blood upon it.


Mr. At. Genesis How came you to be desired to take Notice of what passed there
about the Swords?


Pomfret. My Lord, there was three of them the next Day, and one it was said
was Mr. Coote's, and another of them was my Lord of Warwick's, which I do
believe was bloody from the Point upwards, very near, but I cannot direly say
but that was afterward.


Mr. At. Genesis Who brought in that Sword that you say was Mr. Coote's?


Pomfret. To the best of my Remembrance Captain Dockwra brought it in, it was
almost half an Hour after my Lord Warwick and Captain French came into the
House, when they came thither.


Mr. At. Genesis They, Who do you mean?


Pomfret. Captain James and he.


Mr. At. Genesis Were they let in presently?


Pomfret. No. My Lord of Warwick had desired that they might be private there;
but when they knocked at the Door, my Lord of Warwick desired to know who they
were; and when it was understood that they were Mr. James and Mr. Dockwra, they
were let in by my Lord's Order.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, which of all the Four brought in any Sword in a Scabbard?


Pomfret. It was Captain Dockwra.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, did they appear to be all of a Party?


Pomfret. They were glad to see one another; and they talked a pretty while
together, but indeed I cannot say I heard what they talked.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, do you remember my Lord of Warwick's Sword, and what there
was upon it?


Pomfret. It was a Steel Sword Water-Guilt, and as near as I can remember there
was Blood upon it for the most part from the Point upward.


Mr. At. Genesis And what did appear upon Mr. French's Sword?


Pomfret. There was Water and Dirt, but there was no Blood at all.


Mr. At. Genesis How long did they stay there?


Pomfret. They all continued about half an Hour, and then went away, all but
Mr. French, who staid there.


Mr. At. Genesis What then became of the others?


Pomfret. Mr. James, and Mr. Dockwra, and my Lord of Warwick, went away, and my
Lord of Warwick desired particularly, that we would all take care of Mr.
French, for he was his particular Friend, and Mr. French continued there till
Sunday about One of the Clock.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any Discourse at that time about Mr. Coote?


Pomfret. Not that I heard of, one Word.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any notice taken of any Quarrel that happened between
any Body, and who?


Pomfret. No, indeed, I did not hear them take notice of any Quarrel at all
between any Body.


Mr. At. Genesis You say Mr. French when he came into your House was wounded, and
there was Care particularly taken of him because he was wounded.


Pomfret. Yes, my Lord of Warwick desired to take Care of him.


Mr. At. Genesis Then pray, was there no Discourse how he came to be wounded?


Pomfret. Indeed I do not know how he came to be wounded; nor did I hear one
word of Discourse about it, indeed I cannot say any thing who wounded him.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray will you recollect you self, and tell my Lords what sort of
Handle had my Lord of Warwick's Sword when you saw it.


Pomfret. It had a Steel handle.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, can you tell whether the Shell was open or close?


Pomfret. I cannot tell justly; I saw it, and that was all.


Mr. At. Genesis If I apprehend you, you say my Lord had a Wound in his Hand.


Pomfret. Yes, my Lord, he had so.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, in what Hand was it that he was wounded?


Pomfret. To the best of my remembrance it was in his Right Hand.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray did there appear much blood there?


Pomfret. Yes, my Lord, indeed there did.


Mr. Serj. Wright. You talk of Mr. James and Mr. Dockwra's Swords, pray in what
Condition were they?


Pomfret. Mr. Dockwra's Sword by his side, and not drawn.


Mr. Serj. Wright. What did you observe of Captain James's Sword?


Pomfret. His Sword was Naked, and he had lost his Scabbard; but how that came
I cannot tell, and there was Dirt on one side of the Sword, and he said he had
left his Scabbard behind him.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any Blood upon his Sword?


Pomfret. No, there was no Blood that I did see upon it.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, did you see any Blood upon Mr. Dockwra's Sword?


Pomfret. No, indeed, I did not see Mr. Dockwra's Sword, it was in the Scabbard
by his side.


D. of Leeds. My Lords, There has been notice here taken of several Swords that
this Witness saw, and he takes so far notice of my Lord of Warwick's Sword,
that he tells you what sort of Hilt it had, and how it was bloody from the
Point to the Hilt; I desire he would give you an account of the Length and
Breadth of the other Men's Swords, Mr. French, Mr. James, and Mr. Dockwra.


L. H. St. You said just now, that you took notice of my Lord of Warwick's
Sword, that it was bloody from the Point to the Hilt, what sort of Sword was it?


Pomfret. It was a pretty broad Sword.


L. H. St. Did you take notice of the other Swords, what Breadth or Length they
were of?


Pomfret. No, my Lord, I did not.


Mr. At. Genesis Which was that Sword that was Dirty as you say?


Pomfret. That was Captain French's.


Mr. At. Genesis Was that a broad Sword or not?


Pomfret. No, it was not.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray was it over Night or next Morning that you saw the Swords?


Pomfret. It was in the Morning about Three a Clock.


Mr. At. Genesis What time did my Lord of Warwick, and Mr. James, and Mr. Dockwra
go away?


Pomfret. My Lord of Warwick and they were gone several hours before Mr.
French; and to the best of my Remembrance Mr. James broke his Sword upon the
Floor after he came in.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, what Swords were there in all that you saw there?


Pomfret. There was Captain French's, Captain James's, my Lord of Warwick's,
and one Mr. Coote's, as Mr. French said when it was brought in.


L. H. St. Have you done with this Witness, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, my Lord, we have.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, Will you ask him any Questions?


E. of Warwick. No, my Lord.


L. H. St. Then, Mr. Attorney, call your next Witness.


Mr. At. Genesis Our next Witness is Thomas Goodall, who is a Servant at the
Bagnio in Longacre, as well as this Man that was last.


He was Sworn. L. H. St. What Questions do you ask him, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire he would acquaint your Lordships, What time it
was my Lord of Warwick, and Capt. French, came to his Master's House?


Goodall. It was between One and two of the Clock in the morning.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire he would acquaint your Lordships what he saw
and knows, that passed at that time?


Goodall. All that I can say is, That I did see my Lord Warwick's Sword bloody,
and it was naked in his Hand, and I did see a Wound on his Hand; Indeed I did
not see him when he first came in, for he had been there a pretty while before
I savv him.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, in what Condition was my Lord when you savv him?


Goodall. He had his Svvord in one Hand, and it was bloody at the Blade, and
at the Hilt, but whether it was bloody all over indeed I did not take notice
of it, and so cannot give an account.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, What sort of Svvord was it?


Goodall. Indeed I cannot give an account what sort of Sword it was, but it was
either Steel or Silver Gilt, as I remember, but I did take notice that there
was Blood upon the Hilt, that is, upon the Shell.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it an open Shell, or a close one?


Goodall. I think it was a Close one.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Did my Lord of Warwick give any Order to be denied in the
House, or for any Concealment there?


Goodall. Indeed I did not hear of any Orders given for Concealing of any body
there, but my Lord walked up and down very much Concerned.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not Mr. French come in with him?


Goodall. I do believe he might, but I cannot say I saw him when he came in.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you tell when Mr. James and Mr. Dockwra came in, how long was
that after my Lord of Warwick was there, and Mr. French?


Goodall. To the best of my remembrance and knowledge, it was half an hour
after my Lord of Warwick and Mr. French came, that Mr. James and Mr. Dockwra
came, I am sure it was so before I saw them in the House, but indeed I cann^t
say directly when they came in, or when they went out.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Which Hand of my Lord of Warwick was it that was hurt, the
Right or the Left?


Goodall. Indeed I cannot positively say, but I think it was the Right Hand.


Mr. At. Genesis You talk of my Lord of Warwick's Sword, Did you take any notice
of Mr. French's Sword?


Goodall. No, indeed, I was busy about the Affairs of the House, I did see my
Lord of Warwick's Sword, but that was by chance, and it was bloody at the Hilt,
and upon the Blade, but whether it were all over bloody, indeed I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis I desire to ask him; Whether he can tell who brought in Mr.
Coote's Sword thither?


Goodall. Indeed I cannot.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney General, have you any more Questions to ask him?


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lord, not I.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, Will you ask him any Questions?


E. of Warwick. No, my Lord.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney, Who is your next Witness?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, our next Witness is Mrs. A. Goodall, this Man's Wife.


Who was Sworn. L. H. St. What Questions do you ask this Gentlewoman?


Mr. At. Genesis I desire that she would acquaint your Lordships, Whether she was
at the Bagnio in Longacre when my Lord of Warwick and Capt. French came in?


A. Goodall. I was there when my Lord of Warwick came in.


Mr. At. Genesis Was Capt. French with him?


A. Goodall. Yes, Capt. French was with him.


Mr. At. Genesis About what a Clock was it that they came there?


A. Goodall. It was about Two a Clock as near as I can remember.


Mr. At. Genesis In what Condition were they when they came in, pray?


A. Goodall. Mr. French was very much wounded.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, How was my Lord of Warwick?


A. Goodall. My Lord had his Sword in his Hand, and it was very bloody, both at
the Hilt, and upon the Blade.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe any Wound that my Lord had?


A. Goodall. I think, to the best of my remembrance, my Lord had his Hand
wrapped up in a Handkerchief, which was bloody, but I was busy up and down in
the House, and I cannot so well tell what Hand it was, I was indeed up and down
there while they were there.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know of any Orders that were given by my Lord of Warwick
to be Concealed while he was there?


A. Goodall. He did desire the Door might not be opened to any body that asked
for him, and that it might not be said that he was there; and when the other
Two Gentlemen came to the Door, he went to the Door himself, and when he saw
who they were, he ordered them to be let in.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the Occasion of his going to the Door himself?


A. Goodall. There was a Knocking at the Door, and he had a mind to know who it
was, and when it did appear it was Mr. J^mes and Mr. Dockwra, he himself
ordered them to be let in.


Mr. At. Genesis How came the Door to be open to them?


A. Goodall. Indeed I think he opened it himself.


Mr. At. Genesis How long was that after he and Capt. French came in?


A. Goodall. It was about half an hour.


Mr. At. Genesis When they first came in, What posture were they in, had they any
Svvords in their Hands?


A. Goodall. I did not positively take notice, whether they had any Svvords in
their Hands, nor what they had when they came in.


Mr. At. Genesis What became of them afterward?


A. Goodall. My Lord Warwick, Mr. James, and Mr. Dockwra, went away within a
little while, and my Lord of Warwick ordered particular Care to be taken of Mr.
French, as his Friend, and he was put to Bed after his Wounds were Dressed; but
I cannot tell what afterward became of my Lord Warwick, and the other
Gentlemen.


Mr. At. Genesis I think you were saying, that my Lord of Warwick was wounded in
the Hand, Which Hand was it?


A. Goodall. I cannot positively say whether it was the Right or the Left.


L. H. St. Will you who are of the King's Council ask this Witness any further
Questions?


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lord, we shall ask her no other Questions.


E. of Warwick. No, my Lord, nor I.


Mr. At. Genesis Then our next Witness is Henry Amy, who is a Surgeon, and lives
at the Bagnio in Longacre, and he will give your Lordship an Account what
passed within his Knowledge at this time within his House, and who came thither
Wounded, and what particular Care was ordered to be taken of Mr. French, and by
whom.


Mr. Amy was Sworn. Mr. At. Genesis I desire you will give an Account to my Lords
what happened at your House early in the morning the 30th of October last?


Amy. The 30th of October last, about Two of the Clock, I was knocked up out of
my Bed to Attend two Gentlemen, my Lord Warwick and Capt. French, who came then
into my House.


Mr. At. Genesis In what Condition were they?


Amy. They were both Wounded, Mr. French very much, and my Lord of Warwick in
his Hand.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see any Swords?


Amy. Yes, they had both Swords in their Hands, and my Lord of Warwick's Sword
was very bloody.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, Sir, when they came into your House, What Directions was
given by my Lord Warwick?


Amy. He gave Directions, if any body should ask for him, they should say he
was not there.


Mr. At. Genesis Did any body come and ask for him?


Amy. While we were taking Care of Mr. French, and Dressing his Wound, there
were some Persons came and knocked at the Door, and my Lord of Warwick did
Order, that no body should be let in; but he himself went to the Door, and when
he found that it was Mr. Dockwra and Mr. James, my Lord Warwick ordered, that
they should be let in.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Tell my Lords what followed after that?


Amy. After we had Dressed Mr. French --


Mr. At. Genesis By the way, Was there any particular Directions, and by whom, to
take Care of Mr. French?


Amy. Yes, my Lord Warwick desired me to take Care of him, as his Particular
Friend.


Mr. At. Genesis Well then, after you had Dressed Mr. Frenche's Wound, what
happened?


Amy. I Dressed my Lord Warwick's Wound.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Whereabouts was my Lord of Warwick's Wound?


Amy. It was near the first Joint of his Forefinger.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, How long did they stay there?


Amy. After Mr. Dockwra and Mr. James came in, and my Lord's Hand was Dressed,
they stayed a little while, and they Three went away?


Mr. At. Genesis What was said when they went away?


Amy. My Lord of Warwick desired to have great Care taken of Mr. French; and
they said, Now let us go away, and they went away.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, What time did they stay in your House?


Amy. When they went away, I think it was about half an hour after they first
came in.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you take notice of no Sword but my Lord of Warwick's?


Amy. No, not then.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you afterward?


Amy. Afterward, in the morning, Mr. French called for his Sword, and I looked
upon it.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, in what Condition was his Sword, was it bloody?


Amy. It was without Blood, only a little Dirty.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Did you observe that they talked of any Quarrel that had
been betvveen Capt. French and my Lord, when they came in?


Amy. No.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you ask them any Questions about it, the one or the other of
them?


Amy. No, I did not.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you hear them say how they came by their Wounds?


Amy. No, I did not.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you hear them talk of any body being killed, particularly Mr.
Coote.


Amy. I did not know of any body being killed till next day.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you take any notice of James's and Dockwra's Swords?


Amy. Truly I took no notice of any Swords, but my Lord Warwick's; while my
Lord Warwick was there in the House, but the next Morning Mr. French gave me
his Sword, and there was another Sword there, which Mr. French told me was
Capt. Coote's Sword.


Mr. At. Genesis When was that, How long after my Lord of Warwick, and James, and
Dockwra were gone away.


Amy. It was some Hours after.


Mr. At. Genesis When did you hear of Mr. Coote's being killed?


Amy. About Nine a Clock next Morning I heard of Mr. Coote's being killed.


Mr. At. Genesis Whom did you hear it from?


Amy. From Pomfret my Servant.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you hear no Discourse between my Lord of Warwick, Capt.
French, Mr. James, and Mr. Dockwra about it?


Amy. No. I did not.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they not talk ^ow those Wounds came they had, nor did not you
ask who gave them?


Amy. No, I did ask no question of either of them; and in Half an Hour after
they came in, my Lord of Warwick and the other Two Gentlemen went away.


Mr. At. Genesis When they left French there, What Orders were left about him?


Amy. Only to take care of him, my Lord of Warwick desired that.


Mr. At. Genesis What Reason did my Lord give for that?


Amy. I heard nothing of Reason, only that he was his particular Friend.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you hear them talk any thing wither they would go, when they
went away.


Amy. I did hear some talk about going into the Country.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was it that said that?


Amy. My Lord of Warwick, when they were going away said, Let us go into the
Country.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know whither they went, when they went away from your
House?


Amy. No, indeed I did not.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we have done with him.


L. H. St. My Lord, Warwick, Will your Lordship ask this Withess any Questions?


E. of War. I desire to have him asked whether I was not wounded in the Hand.


Amy. His Hand was very bloody, the Handkerchief that was about it was wet with
the Blood.


E. of War. I desire to ask him when it was that he saw Capt. French's Sword?


Amy. It was not before the Morning; it was about Nine a Clock as I remember.


M. of Norm. Before this Witness goes away, I desire he may be asked one
Question, whether he can tell the size of Mr. French's Sword.


L. H. St. Here is a Noble Lord that desires to know if you can tell about
Capt. French's Sword, what sort of Sword it was.


Amy. As to the Blade, it was a middle sized Sword.


M. of Norm. Was it a broad Blade or no?


Amy. No, my Lord, it was not a broad Blade.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney, Who is your next Witness?


Mr. At. Genesis Capt. Loftus Duckingfield.


Who was Sworn. Mr. At. Genesis This Gentleman will acquaint your Lordships what
Discourse past between these Gentlemen the next Day; pray Sir, acquaint my
Lords what you heard about Mr. Coote's Death, and when, and where.


Capt. Duckingfield. Early in the Morning I was told of this Accident.


Mr. At. Genesis By whom?


Capt. Duck. One of the Company, I cannot tell who, I think they were all
together then, my Lord of Warwick, Capt. James, Capt. Dockwra, and no body else.


Mr. At. Genesis What was their Discourse?


Capt. Duck. They said they believed Capt. Coote was killed.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they tell you by whom?


Capt. Duck. By Mr. French, every body did say he was his Adversary.


Mr. At. Genesis What Account was given of the Action?


Capt. Duck. They said it was done in the dark, and Capt. French was his
Adversary.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any notice taken of any Duel?


Capt. Duck. Yes there were, betvveen those Two, and the other Persons on
both sides; and it was said my Lord of Warwick was Friend to Mr. Coote and my
Lord Mohun.


Mr. At. Genesis Who were on the other side?


Capt. Duck. Mr. Dockwra and Mr. James.


Mr. At. Genesis Were there any Discourse who actually fought?


Capt. Duck. It was said, that Capt. French fought with Capt. Coote, as they
believed, and Mr. James with my Lord of Warwick.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see my Lord of Warwick's Sword?


Capt. Duck. Some time of the Day I did, but I cannot tell whether it was in
the Morning, or no.


Mr. At. Genesis In what condition was it, Was it bloody, or not!


Capt. Duck. It was a Stoc^ Sword.


Mr. At. Genesis How long did they stay with you?


Capt. Duck. About Half an Hour.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they come publicly?


Capt. Duck. We went away in a Hackney Coach together.


Mr. At. Genesis ^ray what Discourse were there about consulting to go into the
Country together?


Capt. Duck. That might be Discoursed but by whom I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis Did my Lord of Warwick talk of going into the Country?


Capt. Duck. Whether the Company talked of it, or my Lord of Warwick in
particular, and the rest assented to it, I cannot well tell.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither did they go?


Capt. Duck. I cannot directly tell.


Mr. At. Genesis What time of the Day was it?


Capt. Duck. It was about Six of the Clock.


Mr. At. Genesis Cannot you tell wither they went?


Capt. Duck. Capt. James and Capt. Dockwra went to the Sh^p and Cas^le in
Cornhill about Five a Clock or Six, as near as I can remember.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you tell what time my Lord of Warwick, went away.?


Capt. Duck. No, I cannot tell what time he went away, not directly.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you tell of any Agreement amongst them, whither they were to
go?


Capt. Duck. No, I cannot.


Mr. At. Genesis What Discourse or Concern did you observe past between them
concerning Capt. Coote?


Capt. Duck. My Lord of Warwick showed a great deal of Concern for his Friend
Mr. Coote.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you any notice of Mr. Coote's Death amongst you?


Capt. Duck. We had notice before we went away, but I cannot tell whether it
was before my Lord of Warwick was gone.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it after the Discourse of going into the Country, or before?


Capt. Duck. Indeed I cannot directly say when it was.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what reason was there for their going into the Country
before he was dead?


Capt. Duck. They believed he was dead.


Mr. At. Genesis Cannot you tell the reason why they would go into the Country?


Capt. Duck. No indeed, I cannot tell the reason.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe my Lord of Warwick's Sword? Was there any Blood
upon it?


Capt. Duck. I cannot say his Sword was bloody at the point; the whole Blade
and Shell was bloody, to the best of my remembrance.


Mr. At. Genesis What sort of Sword was it?


Capt. Duck. It was a pretty broad Blade, a hollow Blade, and a hollow open
Shell.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any Discourse concerning Capt. French?


Capt. Duck. Yes, they thought he was very ill wounded.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any, and what Discourse who should give my Lord of
Warwick his Wound?


Capt. Duck. It was said, they believed Capt. James gave my Lord his wound.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray was there any Blood upon Mr. James's Sword, or was he
wounded?


Capt. Duck. I saw no wound upon Capt. James, that I know of.


L. H. St. Do you believe that my Lord Warwick's Sword was bloodied with the
hurt of his own Hand, or any otherwise?


Capt. Duck. I cannot tell, it was a Cut Shell, and the outside bloody as well
as the in.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, Will your Lordship ask this Witness any Questions?


E. of War, No, my Lord.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney, if you have any other Witnesses, pray call them.


Another Witness was produced, that belonged to the Ship and Castle in
Cornhill. Mr. At. Genesis This Man will give you an Account what past at his House
at that time, and between whom; Pray will you tell my Lords who was at your
House the 30th. of October last, and what past there then.


Witness. My Lord of Warwick, Capt. James and Capt. Dockwra, and when my Lord
of Warwick came in, I thought my Lord was in a very great Concern, and called
for Pen, Ink and Paper, and I feared there was some quarrel in hand, but they
said no, the Quarrel was over, and says, my Lord of Warwick, I am afraid poor
Coote is killed.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe any desire to be private?


Witness. No indeed, I cannot tell that.


Mr. At. Genesis How long did they continue there?


Witness. About 6 a Clock my Lord of Warwick and Capt. James, and Capt.
Dockwra, and Capt. Ducking field went away.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you tell who went with my Lord Warwick?


Witness. No indeed, I cannot tell who went with my Lord Warwick; there came in
a Gentleman in Black, whom I knew to be my Lord of Warwick's Steward, and he
came and spoke some words to my Lord of Warwick, about a quarter of an Hour
after they came in, and then they went away, for after that I did not hear any
farther Discourse.


Mr. At. Genesis What became of the rest of the Company?


Witness. They went away; I do not know what became of them, nor whether they
went; some of them went in and out of one Room into another several times, two
or three times, and came out again.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we have done with this Witness.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, will you ask him any Questions?


E. of Warw. No, my Lord.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney, who is your next Witness?


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Salmon the Surgeon, who by the Coroner's Order searched
the Wound.


Who was Sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Sir, was you ordered by the Coroner to view
the Body of Mr. Coote?


Salm. Yes, I was ordered by the Coroner to inspect the Body of Captain Coote,
and to give the Jury an account of the nature of the Wounds.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray upon the view of the Body, what Wounds had he?


Salm. There was two Wounds; one on the Breast near the Collar-bone running
downwards very deep.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what part of the Breast was it, and how deep was it?


Salm. It was on the left part of the Breast near the Collar-bone, and it
penetrated four or five Inches.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you guess at what sort of Sword it was that made the Wound?


Salm. No indeed, Sir, I cannot.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it a broad Sword, or a little Sword?


Salm. The Orifice was about the length of half an Inch, and about the depth of
five Inches.


Mr. At. Genesis Was that made with a broad Sword, or with a narrow Sword?


Salm. Indeed I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis You say he had another Wound; where was that?


Salm. That was on his left Side too, near unto the short Ribs, under the last
Rib, which was about the length of an Inch, and of the depth of six Inches, and
it run through the Diaphragma.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you take one of those Wounds, or both of them to be mortal?


Salm. I did look upon either of them to be mortal, and to be the occasion of
his death.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you tell whether they were both made with one and the same
Sword?


Salm. Indeed I cannot tell that, whether they were made with one Sword, or two.


Mr. At. Genesis Cannot you tell how they appeared to be? I suppose you probed
them.


Salm. Yes, I probed them both; one was quite through the Diaphragma.


Mr. At. Genesis What time was it that you viewed the Body by the Order of the
Coroner?


Salm. I saw the Body at Seven a Clock on Sunday night.


Mr. At. Genesis If my Lord of Warwick desire to ask him any Questions, he may.


E. of Warw. My Lord, I desire to ask him, whether any of the Wounds were large
enough to be made by a Sword run up to the Hilt?


Salm. No, my Lord, sure that they were not.


E. of Warw. My Lord, I desire to know of him, whether both those Wounds were
given before or behind?


Salm. I can only tell you the length and depth by following of the Probe; the
one was downwards, and the other upwards.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you suppose both those Wounds were given when the Person was
standing backward or forward?


Salm. It Is impossible to tell how they were given, because of the variety of
the Postures of the Body in the diverse Capacities thereby of receiving the
Wounds?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray can you tell whether they were given by one and the same
Sword or no?


Salm. Indeed I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know any thing to the contrary?


Salm. I cannot say any thing for it, or against it.


E. of Kingston. My Lords, this Witness, if I apprehend him right, says, the
Wound on his Side was a large Wound.


Salm. Yes, a very large Wound, of the length of about three quarters of an
Inch at the Orifice, and five or six Inches deep.


E. of Kingston. I desire he may tell whether that Wound could be given by any
other than a broad Sword.


Salm. I cannot tell that.


E. of Rochester. Indeed, my Lords, I would have him asked this Question again;
I know not whether he can answer it or no; but I cannot but think it is proper
to have some account of this matter. In all Enquiries before the Coroner, there
is a Judgment to be made of the Nature of the Wound, in order to form the
Indictments, and that the Jury may know with what sort of Weapon it was made;
and it is his Profession, as a Surgeon, to know such matters.


L. H. St. Mr. Salmon, you hear what is required of you by my Noble Lords, and
the Observation which is made. You are the Surgeon sent for by the Coroner,
on purpose to inspect this Body; and when you did so, it was incumbent upon you
to consider and give information, as well with what sort of Instrument the
Wound was given, as the length and depth of the Wound, that the Jury might
consider upon all the Circumstances of the Occasion, and Manner of the Party's
Death: And my Lords would know whether by the Orifices of the Wounds when you
inspected them, you can make a Judgment if they were made by several Swords, or
the same Sword.


Salm. I cannot say that I saw any difference between the Orifices, as to the
nature of the Instrument they were given with, nor whether they were made by
one and the same Sword or no, only the one Orifice was bigger than the other;
that of the Side was bigger than that at the Collar-bone.


L. H. St. Then so far we have light (if I apprehend you rightly) the Orifice
of the upper Wound was not near so wide as that of the lower; but it seems to
be much in one of your Profession not to be able to judge whether the Wounds
were given with the same sort of Sword, when there was such a difference in the
Orifice.


Salm. That below was a deeper Wound; and there was a considerable difference
between the largeness of the one and the other.


Ld. Audley. My Lords, I desire he may tell your Lordships how far backward the
Wound in the Side lay.


Salm. It was directly on the left Side, immediately under the two last Ribs,
and past through the Diaphragma.


M. of Normanby. Pray, my Lords, let him point with his Finger whereabouts it
was.


L. H. St. My Lords would have you show them with your Finger whereabouts it
was.


Which he did. E. of Warw. It is a very material Question for me that he should
answer, whether he did believe that one and the same Sword might not give both
Wounds?


Salm. I cannot say any thing of it one way or other; but one Wound went much
further than the other, because it was in a fleshy part; and in such a case,
the further a Sword goes in, it makes the Wound larger.


Mr. At. Genesis Then our next Witness is Stephen Turner, who was Mr Coote's Man,
and he will give you an account what Sword his Master had, and where he found
it.


He was Sworn, (...) Sword was shown him. Turn. This was my Master's Sword Mr.
Coote's, and I never saw it after he went out in the morning till I saw it in
the hands of the Constable, and afterward before the Coroner.


Mr. At. Genesis What time did you hear of your Master's death?


Turn. It was about nine a Clock next morning that I heard he was dead.


Mr. At. Genesis Where was your Master's Body?


Turn. It was in St. Martins-Lane.


E. of Tanckerville. I would desire he might be asked one Question, whether his
Master used his left Hand or his right?


Turn. I do believe he was a right-handed Man; I did never see him Fence. It
was on the Sunday morning that I went to the Round-house, where I found my
Master dead.


E. of Warw. I desire he may be asked whether he has not observed a particular
Kindness and Friendship between his Master and me?


Turn. Yes, my Lord; I have several times waited upon my Master, when my Lord
and he was together, and they were always very civil and kind one to another,
and I never heard one Word of any Unkindness between them.


E. of Warw. Whether he knows of any Quarrel that was between us?


Turn. No, I never did.


E. of Warw. I desire he may be asked, whether he did not use to lie at my
Lodgings sometimes?


L. H. St. You hear my Lord's Question; what say you, did your Master use to
lie at my Lord of Warwick's Lodgings at any time?


Turn. Yes, very often.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray call Pomfret again, and let him see the Sword.


Then he came in, and two Swords were shown him. Mr. At. Genesis I desire he may
acquaint your Lordships what he knows of those two Swords.


Pomf. These two Swords were brought in by some of the Company that came to my
Master's House, and when they were shown to Capt. French in the morning, he
owned this to be his, and the other to be Mr. Coote's; and he desired that
notice might be taken that his Sword was dirty, but not bloody, and there was
some Blood upon the other.


Mr. At. Genesis Who brought in Mr. Coote's Sword?


Pomf. Indeed I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis Then our last piece of Evidence, my Lord, will be that of Mr.
White the Coroner.


Who was Sworn. L. H. St. What do you ask him, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis From whom had he these Swords?


The Swords were shown him. White. May it please your Grace, these Swords were
delivered to me by the Constable.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire he may be asked, whether upon his view of the
Body he looked upon the Wounds, and whether he did apprehend they were given by
one and the same Sword?


White. May it please your Grace, when I had Sworn my Inquest, I sent for the
Surgeon that was here before, and gave him order to probe the Wounds, that
the Jury might know the nature of them, in order to the drawing up the
Inquisition, and I did expressly ask him, Whether he found any such distinction
between them, that they were given by one and the same Weapon, or different
Weapons? He said as he says now, That he could not tell whether the Wounds were
given by two Swords, or by one; but he did apprehend there was a great
difference between them, and so did I; but generally the Orifice of a Wound
does close up when the Body is Gold; one of the Wounds were nearer the left
Side than the other, to the best of my remembrance it was almost behind him.


Mr. At. Genesis We have done with our Evidence, until we hear what my Lord of
Warwick says to it.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, will you ask this Witness any questions?


E. of War. No my Lord.


L. H. St. Make Proclamation for Silence.


Cl. of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Ser. at Arms. O yes, O yes, O yes. His Grace, my Lord High-Steward of England
does Strictly Charge and Command all manner of Persons here present, to keep
Silence, upon pain of Imprisonment.


L. H. St. My Lord of Warwick, the Kings Council have made an end of giving
Evidence for the King; now is the proper time for you to enter upon your
Defense.


E. of Warw. May it please your Grace, and you my Noble Lords, my Peers.

I stand here before Your Lordships accused of the Murder of Mr. Coote, of
which I am so Innocent, that I came and voluntarily Surrendered my self so soon
as I heard your Lordships might be at leisure to Try me; and had sooner done
it, but that the King was not then here, nor your Lordships Sitting, and had no
mind to undergo a long Confinement; and now I think I might well Submit it to
your Lordships Judgment, even on the Evidence has been offered against me,
whether there has been any thing proved of Malice Prepense, or my being any
Actor therein, so as to adjudge me Guilty: And I think I may with humble
Submission to your Lordships say, that my Innocence appears even from several
of the Witnesses who have been examined against me, which I will not trouble
your Lordships to Repeat, but submit to your Memory and Observation.

But my Lords, the Safety of my Life does not so much concern me in this Case,
as the vindication of my Honor and Reputation, from the false Reflections to
which the Prosecutor has endeavored to expose me, and I shall therefore beg
your Lordships patience to give a fair and full account of this matter; In
which the Duty I owe to your Lordships, and to Justice in general, and the
right I owe to my own Cause in particular, do so oblige me, that I will not in
the least prevaricate, neither will I conceal or deny any thing that is true.

My Lords, I must confess I was there when this unfortunate Accident happened,
which must be a great misfortune in any Case, but was more so to me in this,
because Mr. Coote was my particular Friend, and I did all I could to hinder it,
as your Lordships may observe by the whole proceedings.

It was on the Saturday Night when my Lord Mohun and I, and several other
Gentlemen met at Locket's where the same Company used often to meet, and in
some time after several of us had been there, Mr. Coote came unexpectedly, and
for some time he and we were very Friendly, and in good Humor, as we used to
be with each other: But then there happened some reflecting Expressions from
Mr. Coote to Mr. French, who thereupon called for the Reckoning; and it being
paid, we lest the upper Room, and I proposed to send three Bottles of Wine to
my own Lodging, and to carry him thither to prevent the Quarrel. But while the
Company stopped to call for a Glass of Ale at the Bar below. Mr. Coote (whose
unfortunate Humor was sometime to be Quarrelsome) did again provoke Mr. French
to such degree that they there drew their Swords, but we then prevented them of
doing any mischief; then Mr. Coote still insisting to Quarrel further with Mr.
French, my Lord Mobun and I proposed to send for the Guards to prevent them:
But they had got Chairs to go toward Licester-Fields, and my Lord Mohun and I
as Friends to Mr. Coote, and intending to prevent any hurt to him, did follow
him in two other Chairs, and as he was going up St. Martins-Lane stopped him,
and I extremely there pressed him to return and be Friends with Mr. French, or
at least defer it, for that the Night was very Dark and Wet; and while we were
so persuading of him, Mr. French in one Chair, and Mr. James and Mr. Dockwray
in two other Chairs past by us, (which we ghess'd to be them) on which Mr.
Coote made his Chairmen take him up again, and because the Chairmen would not
follow Mr. French faster, threatened to prick him behind, and when we were got
to Green-street, and got out of our Chairs, Mr. Coote offered half a Guinea to
be changed to pay for all our three Chairs, but they not having Change, he
desired Lord Mohun to pay the three Shillings which he did. And in a few
Minutes after, Mr. Coote and Mr. French Engaged in the Fields, whither I went
for the Assistance and in Defense of Mr. Coote, and received a very ill Wound
in my right Hand; and there this fatal Accident befell Mr. Coote from Mr.
French, whom Mr. Coote had dangerously Wounded, and I must account it a great
unhappiness to us all who were there: But so far was I from encouraging of it,
that I will prove to your Lordships that I did my utmost endeavors to prevent
it; so far from any design upon him, that I exposed my own Life to save his; so
far from prepense Malicethat I will by many Witnesses of good Quality and
Credit prove to your Lordships a constant good and uninterrupted Friendship,
from the first of our acquaintance to the time of his death; which will appear
by many Instances of my frequent Company, and Correspondence with him, often
lending him Money, and paying his reckonigns, and about two Months before his
death lent him an hundred Guineas toward buying him an Ensign's Place in the
Guards, and often, and even two Nights before this, he Lodged with me, and that
very Night I paid his reckoning.

And when I have proved these things, and answered what has been said about the
Sword, and what other objections they have made, I doubt not but that I shall
be acquitted to the entire satisfaction of your Lordships, and all the World
that hear it.

Before I go upon my Evidence, I will crave leave further to observe to your
Lordships that at the Old Bailey when I was absent, Mr. French, James and
Dockwray have been all Tried on the same Indictment now before your Lordships,
and it was then opened and attempted as now it is, to prove it upon me also;
and by most of them the same Witnesses who have now appeared; and they were
thereupon Convicted only of Manslaughter, which could not have been, If I had
been guilty of Murder. And on that Trial it plainly appeared that Mr. French
was the Person with whom he quarrelled, and who killed him. And now I will call
my Witnesses.


L. H. St. Will your Lordship please to go on to call your Witnesses, for the
Proof of what you have said; that is the Method, and then you are to make such
Observations as you please.


E. of Warw. My first Witness is Capt. Edmond Keeting, who was with me at
Locket's, but went away before Capt. Coote or any of them came, and he will
tell you I was with him a while.


Then Capt. Keeting stood up. L. H. St. Capt Keeting, you are not upon your
Oath because the Law will not allow it. In Cases of this Nature the Witnesses
for the Prisoner are not to be upon Oath, but you are to Consider that you
speak in God's presence, who does require the Truth should be testified in all
Causes before Courts of judicature, and their Lordships do expect that in what
Evidence you give here, you should speak with the same regard to truth as if
you were upon Oath; you hear to what it is my Lord Warwick desires to have you
examined, what say you to it?


Capt. Keeling. My Lord, I will tell your Lordship all the matter I know of it,
I met with my Lord of Warwick that Evening at Toms Coffee house, and we
continued there till about Eight at Night, I went away to see for a Gentleman
that owed me Money, and afterward I went to Locket's, and while I was there,
the Drawer came up and told me my Lord of Warwick desired to speak with me, and
when he came up into the Room, he said he was to meet with my Lord Mohun there
and Captain Coote, and he asked me if I knew where Capt. French and Capt. James
were, I told him I Dined with Capt. Coote at Shuttleworth's, and in a while
after Capt. Coote came in, and about an Hour and an half I think, I continued
there, and Captain French came in; Captain Dockwra and we drank together for an
Hour and an half, and they admired about 10 a Clock that my Lord Mohun was not
come, and I paid my Reckoning not being very well, and away I went home, Mr.
James came in just before I went away, but there was no Quarrelling, nor any
thing like before I went away.


E. of War. My Lord, I desire he may be asked, Whether we did not usually meet
there as Friends, especially Captain Coote and I?


Capt. Keeting. Captain Coote and my Lord of Warwick used to be almost every
Day together at that Place.


E. of War. Pray did he ever know or observe any Difference or Quarrel between
Captain Coote and me?


Capt. Keeting. No, my Lord, I never saw any thing but the greatest Friendship
between my Lord of Warwick and Captain Coote that could be, I was with them and
saw them together almost every day.


L. H. St. Have you any thing further to Examine this Witness to?


E. of War. No, my Lord, I have no other Question to ask him.


L. H. St. Who is your next Witness, my Lord?


E. of War. My Lord, I suppose I shall not need to trouble you to Examine the
Chairmen over again; Your Lordships have heard what they can say, I desire
Colonel Stanhope may be called.


Who it seems stood by the Chair of State, and it was some while before he
could get round to come to the Place where the Witnesses were to stand.

L. H. St. While this Witness gets round, if your Lordship has any other
Witness ready to stand up, pray let him be called.


E. of War. To prove the Kindness between Captain Coote and me, I desire
Colonel Blisset may be called.


Who stood up. L. H. St. What is it your Lordship asks this Witness, or calls
him to?


E. of War. To testify what he knows of any Kindness or Unkindness between
Captain Coote and me; whether he had not been often in our Company?


L. H. St. Have you been often in Company with my Lord Warwick and Captain
Coote?


Col. Blisset. Yes, my Lord, I was very well acquainted with both of them for a
Twelve Month past before this Accident, and I have often been in their Company,
and I always observed that there was a great deal of Friendship and Kindness
between them.


E. of War. My Lord, I desire he may tell any particular Instance that he knows
or can remember.


Col. Blisset. I remember when Captain Coote had his Commission in the Regiment
of Guards, he was complaining of the Streightness of his Circumstances; he was
to pay for his Commission 400 Guineas, and said he had but 300 for to pay for
it, and my Lord of Warwick did then say to him, Do not trouble your self about
that; or let not that disturb you, for I Will take care you shall have 100
Guineas, and he said he would give Order to his Steward to pay him so much, and
I was told afterward that he did so.


E. of Warw. I desire he may tell if he knows of any other particular Instances
of my Friendship to Mr. Coote.


Col. Blisset. Once when he was arrested by his Tailor for 13 l my Lord lent
him five Guineas, and used very frequently to pay his Reckoning for him.


E. of Warw. I desire he may tell if he knows any thing else; and whether he
has not layn at my Lodgings, and particularly but some small time before this
Accident happened.


Col. Blisset. About ten Days before this unhappy Accident happened, I was at
my Lord of Warwick's Lodgings, and when I came there I found Captain Coote
there a Dressing himself; and I asked him how that came to pass, and he told me
they had been up Late together, and that he had sent home for his Men to dress
himself there; upon which I did observe that they had been a Rambling together
over Night, and there were a very great Familiarity between them.


E. of Warw. Did you observe any Quarrel between us?


Col. Blisset. No; None at all; I never knew of any Quarrel between my Lord of
Warwick and Captain Coote, but I observed there was a particular Kindness
between them, and a great deal of Friendship I know my Lord of Warwick showed
to him, in Paying of Reckonings for him, and Lending him Money when he wanted.


E. of Warw. My Lord, I desire he may be asked, whether he does not know that
Captain Coote was straightened for Money.


Col. Blisset. I did hear Captain Coote say, that he had not received any thing
from his Father for 13 Months, and his Father was angry with him, and would not
send him any supply, because he would not consent to cut off the Intail, and
settle Two or Three hundred Pounds upon a Whore he had.


M. At. Genesis Pray Sir will you consider with your self, and though you are not
upon your Oath, answer the Questions truly, for you are obliged to speak the
Truth though you are not Sworn, when ever you come to give your Testimony in a
Court of Judicature; Pray acquaint my Noble Lords here, whether you did never
hear my Lord Warwick complain of Captain Coote.


Col. Blisset. No, I never did hear him complain of him.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you never hear the least Word of any Quarrel between them?


Col. Blisset. No, indeed, I did never hear of any Quarrel between them.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you never hear of any Unkindness at all?


Col. Blisset. No indeed, my Lord, not I; I never so much as heard of the least
Unkindness whatsoever.


L. H. St. Well then, my Lord, who do you call next?


E. of Warw. Now Colonel Stanhope is here, I desire he may be asked the same
Question, whether he does not know the particular Friendship that was between
Captain Coote and me, and what Instances he can give of it?


L. H. St. You are to consider, Sir, though you are not upon your Oath, you are
in a great Court, and under no less strict Obligation to testify the Truth and
nothing but the Truth; You hear what my Noble Lord asks you?


Colonel Stanhope. My Lord, I have known my Lord Warwick and Captain Coote for
about a Twelve Month, and I did perceive that they did always profess a great
Kindness for one another.


E. of Warw. I desire to know of him, whether he observed any Particular
Friendship between Captain Coote and me, much about the time of this Business.


Col. Stanhope. About 8 or 10 Days before this unhappy Accident, I went to wait
upon my Lord of Warwick twice at his Lodgings; once I found Captain Coote
there, one of them was in Bed, and the other was Drossing of himself; I thought
they were very good Friends that were so Familiar, and I had good reason to
think so, because of that familiarity; both the times that I was there when I
found them together, was within eight Days before the Accident happened.


E. of Warw. The next Witness I shall call will be Mr. Disney.


Mr. At. Genesis But before Colonel Stanhope goes, I desire to ask him this
Question, Whether he did never hear or know of any Unkindness between my Lord
of Warwick and Captain Coote?


Col. Stanhope. No, indeed I did not, I always thought them to be very good
Friends.


L. H. St. Will your Lordship go on to your next Witness?


E. of Warw. Yes, my Lord, there he is, Mr. Disney; I desire he may be asked
what he knows of any Expressions of Kindness and Friendship between me and
Captain Coote.


Mr. Disney. About the time that Captain Coote was to have his Commission in
the Guards, my Lord of Warwick received a Letter from him, wherein he desired
him to lend him the 100 Guineas, according to his offer, for he had but 300 by
him, and he said his Father was unkind to him, and he could have no Money from
him, and he would be honest to him and pay it again as soon as he could; my
Lord sent for his Steward, and ordered him to provide 100 Guineas for Captain
Coote while I was there; and all the times that ever I saw them together, which
was very frequent, there was the greatest Kindness between them that could be;
and several times I have seen my Lord of Warwick pay Captain Coote's Reckoning
for him, and lent him Money when he wanted Money.


Mr. At. Genesis I desire to ask you, Sir, this Question, though you are not upon
Oath, yet you are obliged to speak the Truth in a Court of Justice as much as
if you were upon Oath; Did you not know or hear any thing of a Misunderstanding
or Quarrel about the time that this business happened?


Mr. Disney. No indeed; I was with them together but the Day before, and
frequently, and I heard nothing of any Unkindness between them in my Life, nor
never knew of any Quarrel between them, or any reason for it.


L. H. St. My Lord, who is it you call next?


E. of Warw. Colonel Whiteman.


Who stood up. L. H. St. What do you call this Gentleman for?


E. of Warw. It is to the same Effect, to acquaint your Lordships with what he
knows of the Conversation between Captain Coote and me.


Col. Whiteman. My Lord, I know my Lord of Warwick and Captain Coote were
constant Companions together, they Dined together almost every Day for half a
Years time almost; and as to this time, when this Business had happened, I went
to my Lord of Warwick, being sent for by him, and found him at a Private
Lodging, where he expressed a great deal of Concern for the Death of his dear
Friend Mr. Coote, and he showed me the Wound he had received in his Hand, and
he desired he might be private, and he told me he believed People would make
worse of it then it was, because he did not appear; but he did but intend to
keep himself out of the way till he could be Tried, and I took what care I
could to get him a Convenience to go to France.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, what reason did he give for his going away?


Col. Whiteman. The King being at that time out of England, and so the
Parliament not Sitting, he said he did not love Confinement, and had rather be
in France till the Parliament should meet and he might have a fair Trial, which
he thought he should best have in this House.


Mr. At. Genesis But pray, Sir, Consider, You are bound to tell Truth and the
whole Truth in such a Case as this: Are you sure there was no Unkindness or
Quarrel between my Lord Warwick, and Captain Coote about this time.


Col. Whiteman. Not I never knew of any Quarrel or ^^^^dness between them in
all my Life.


L. H. St. My, Lord, have you any more Witnesses?


E. of Warw. I have a great many Witnesses more to the same Purpose, but I
think I need not trouble your Lordship with them, only I would call a Person
that has been mentioned, that is my Steward.


L. H. St. What is his Name?


E. of War. Edmund Raymund.


Who stood up. L. H. St. What Questions do you ask him?


E. of War. I desire he may tell what he knows of any Friendship between
Captain Coote and me, and what particular Instances he can give of it.


Raymond. My Lord, I know that my Lord sent for me, and said Captain Coote had
occasion for 100 Guineas to pay for a Commission in the Guards, which he had
not Money to make up, and I know that they were constant Companions every day,
did Eat together, and often did Lie together, and I did provide the 100 Guineas
for him, and I always did observe that there was a very Great Friendship
between them.


E. of War. My Lord, the next Witness I shall call will be Mr. French, who I
hope, having been Tried and had his Clergy allowed him, will be a good Witness,
I should be sorry to Interpose any thing that would be a hindrance to your
Lordships giving Judgment in this Cause presently; he is able to give your
Lordships an Account of the whole Matter, and though, I hope, I have no need of
calling him as a Witness, yet I humbly offer it to your Lordships.


L. H. St. What say the Council on the other side?


E. of War. My Lord, I do not insist upon it, I think I have no need of it?


L. H. St. Your Lordship must judge for your self how far it is for your
advantage, to desire that this Matter should be Debated.


E. of War. I do not desire to take up your Lordships time, though I am very
well advised, that he is a good Witness in Law.


E. of Roch. I apprehended it the Duty of a King's Council to make Objection
against any Witness that should be produced by the Prisoner; I am loath to give
your Lordships any unnecessary Trouble, yet I own, that I am not satisfied that
a Witness should be Offered and Rejected, though the Objection be not made and
argued by my Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar: If a Witness be offered, and they
think they have an Objection against him, if they do insist upon it it will
occasion a Debate, and then we must Adjourn into the House of Lords.


L. H. S. It is not insisted upon by my Lord, as I apprehend. My Lord of
Warwick, Have you any other Witness you would have called?


E. of War. I desire to ask Mrs. Amy a Question or two.


Then she stood up. L. H. St. What does your Lordship ask her?


E. of War. What she remembers passed at her House about my Sword, or any thing.


Mrs. Amy. My Lord, when I came into the Room where my Lord of Warwick and
Captain French were, in our House, I stood by Captain French while his Wounds
was dressing, and I saw my Lord of Warwick's Sword, and looked upon it, and the
Hilt and all the Shell was full of Blood, and it run down to the Bottom of the
Sword Blade.


E. of War. I desire she may be asked, how soon that was after my coming in?


Mrs. Amy. It was in a quarter of an Hour after my Lord came in.


E. of War. I desire she may speak what sort of Sword it was at the Hilt,
whether it were Open or Close?


Mrs. Amy. Indeed, I cannot say; but the Hilt was full of Blood, the Shell of
it, and it run down to the Bottom of the Blade.


L. H. St. Has your Lordship done?


E. of Warwick. My Lord, I would only take notice that the Three Gentlemen that
were on the other side, were Tried at the Old Bailey, and found Guilty only of
Manslaughter; but now I being on his side, and not having any Malice to him,
but always a great deal of Friendship, I submit it to your Lordships, whether I
can be thought any ways Guilty of his Death; and I humbly hope your Lordships
will hear my Council, if you make any Doubt of that.


L. H. St. What is it your Lordship would have Council heard to?


E. of War. To this Case, my Lord, Whether there being Six Persons, Three of a
side, one is killed, and I being Engaged on the side of him that was killed,
the Three of the other side have been Tried for the death of that Man; whether
I, who was of his side be equally Guilty with them, who were on the other side,
especially, I engaging particularly with another of the Three, that were of the
other side: That Question I desire my Counsel may Argue, whether I be equally
Guilty with them that were on the other side, and who, notwithstanding Death
happened in the Case, yet were found Guilty only of Manslaughter.


L. Godolphin. My Lords, it has been moved by my Noble Lord at the Bar, that
his Counsel should be heard about Mr. French's being Witness, whether he should
be a Witness or no; I think it would be much for the clearing of the Fact one
way or other, if the Evidence of that Witness could be heard; but whether he
can be heard, or not, according to Law, is a Question that must be debated
amongst your Lordships, after your Lordships have heard the Council on both
sides, and perhaps, the Opinion of the Judges upon their Arguments; and
therefore I think we must Adjourn, to Consider whether this Matter shall be
Argued or no?


L. H. St. What say you to this Matter, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lords, I should agree with the Motion that is made, if there
were any thing insisted upon by the Prisoner at the Bar, that would bear a
Question or Argument; but my Lord of Warwick himself has waved the Objection,
and so I think there is no need for any Argument on our side.


L. Godol. I would agree with the Motion that was made for Adjourning, in order
to Debate, but I desire to be thus understood, if he thinks it for his
advantage, that this Witness should be heard for him, which he knows best,
whether it be or be not; then I do suppose your Lordships will Adjourn, to
Consider of it in your own House amongst your selves; it will not be proper to
enter into the Debate here, nor there neither, till you know what Objection the
Council for the King make against this Man's being an Evidence, and therefore
we would know, it is fit to be known, whether my Lord's waving, or not
insisting upon this Man's Testimony, be free and voluntary, and absolve, or
whether it be only in respect to the trouble it may put the House to for the
Debate.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, some of my Noble Lords observe you have desired Mr.
French should be examined, and that your Council may be heard to that point,
Whether he be by Law a Witness, or not; several of my Lords think it
reasonable, Council should be heard, whether he be a Witness or not; or at
least that that Question should be considered amongst themselves, if insisted
upon; therefore your Lordship is to Declare, whether you do insist upon it, or
desire to wave it.


E. of Warw. I wholly submit my self to your Lordships, but as I am advised by
my Council, I hope he is a good Witness, and I desire my Council may be heard
to that point.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lords, in truth I acknowledge, according to the method of Law,
the Objection ought to come of our side, but I think we have very good reason
to oppose, that Gentleman being a Witness in this Case, even upon that
Objection which my Lord has made himself upon the Consideration, that he has
been found Guilty of Manslaughter, for the Death of this very Person. It is
true, upon his Prayer, Clergy was allowed him, but the burning of the Hand was
respited, and he was not Burnt in the Hand, and he is not Pardoned; and how far
he can be a Witness in this Case, is the Objection; If a Man Convicted of
Felony, that is within Clergy, Prays his Clergy, and it is allowed him, but he
is not Burnt in the Hand, nor Pardoned, we apprehend he is no Witness; and that
is the Objection we make against his Testimony to your Lordships.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, you hear what is said by way of Objection against
this Man's being a Witness. What say you to it?


E. of Warwick. For matter of Law, my Lords, I am not capable of speaking to
it, but I desire my Council may.


L. H. St. That which Mr. Attorney proposes by way of Objection is Matter of
Fact, and the Matter of Law does not arise till the Fact be settled, which must
fall within your Lordships own Knowledge, who produce him as a Witness, and
therefore you must Answer to that Fact your self.


E. of Warwick. I desire to know of your Lordships if a Man be Convicted of
Felony, that is within Clergies, and Prays his Clergy, and it is allowed him,
but the Burning of the Hand is respited, and there is a Warrant for his Pardon;
whether he cannot be a good Witness, that his Clergy was allowed, and the
Burning of the Hand respited; I have the Record here to show.


L. H. St. My Lords, my Noble Lord at the Bar, insisting upon a Warrant for a
Pardon, I must acquaint you with something that has happened during your
Lordships Sitting here this day; Since I came hither a Privy Seal was delivered
to me, in order to pass a Pardon for the Burning in the Hand of Mr. French for
the Manslaughter, for which he was Convicted at the Old Baily; so far I can
acquaint your Lordships as to Matter of Fact.


E. of Warwick. My Lord, I am advised by my Council, that he is a good Witness
without a Pardon, or without Burning in the Hand.


L. H. St. What say you Mr. Attorney, to the Law? now you understand what the
Fact truly is.


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, my Lord and I do apprehend, with submission to your
Lordship's Judgment; That a Man Convicted of Felony, though he Prays his Clergy,
and has it allowed him, but is not Burnt in the Hand, nor has any Pardon, can
be no Witness.


L. H. St. That is the Case upon which you are to form your Objections; Here is
a Man produced as a Witness, who has been Convicted of Felony, within the
Benefit of Clergy, has craved his Clergy, has had it allowed, but has not
been Burnt in the Hand, nor Pardoned.


Mr. At. Genesis Then my Lords, with Humble submission upon the Matter of Fact so
stated, I make this Objection, That he is no Witness in point of Law; He has
been Convicted in one Respect, for the very Offense for which the Noble Lord
the Prisoner at the Bar stands Indicted: though not in the same Degree as the
Indictment sets it forth, yet it is for the same Fact. Upon this Indictment Mr.
French was Indicted at the Sessions at the Old Baily, and there he was found
Guilty of Manslaughter, upon which he Prayed the Benefit of his Clergy, which
was allowed him, but he was not Burnt in the Hand; thus stands the Case in
Fact. Now, my Lords, the allowance of Clergy of it self, does not discharge
the Party from the Offense, so far as to set him Rectus in Curia, and make him
in all Respects a Person fit to have the benefit and privileges of a Probus
and Legalis Homo, till he has past through those Methods of setting himself
Right in the Eye of the Law, that the Law has prescribed, and in order to set
this matter in its true Light before your Lordships, it will be necessary for
me to open to your Lordships, as far as I can, the Nature of this Benefit of
Clergy, and what advantage did accrue to the Party, by having that Benefit
allowed him, and likewise what Benefit he had by the Act that Enacted the
Burning in the Hand, which was the Statute of 4. Hen. 7. And by that Act the
Burning in the Hand was to be of no more effect, but only to show that he had
had his Clergy allowed him; that unless he were within Orders, he should have
it no more than once. Before that Act of Parliament, a Person might have had
the Benefit of Clergy several times, but that Act limits it as to time, that
it shall be but once: and therefore in order to the having of it known, whether
a Man once had his Clergy allowed him, that did not produce his Orders, that
Act provides there shall be a mark set upon him at the time of the allowance of
this Clergy, as a Token that it was allowed him, and he was never to have it
allowed afterward, but even at that time he was to be delivered over to the
Ordinary to make his Purgation: but since that Act several Statutes have been
made about this Matter, I shall mention one that relates to your Lordships, and
that is the Statute of Edward the 6th, which indeed does Enact, That in Case
where a Peer is Convicted of Felony within the Benefit of Clergy, he shall be
Discharged without being Burnt in the Hand, but then, and thus the Law stood
till the Statute of 18 Eliz. Cap. 7. by which it is Enacted, That after the
Burning in the Hand the Prisoner shall not be delivered to the Ordinary, but he
shall be discharged; by virtue of which Act, after Burning in the Hand, the
Prisoner has made full Satisfaction to the Law, without that sort of Purgation
which was before requisite to be made, but till he be Burnt in the Hand, or has
his Pardon, he is not to be Discharged; it may be he may be Bailed out by the
Judge, in order to get a Pardon, but still he remains in statu quo, as to his
being a Witness, or any thing of that nature; his Credit is gone till it be
restored by the King's Pardon, or his undergoing the Punishment that the Law
requires; and no Man would say, that where one lies under a Conviction of
Felony undischarged by Burning in the Hand, or Pardon, that he can be a
Witness; he remains just as he was before, the Conviction remains upon him,
which disabled him to be a Witness; and that we submit to your Lordships as the
Case of this Person Capt. French.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lords, if your Lordships please to spare me one Word of the
same side; sure at Common Law there would be no difficulty at all, that a
Person Convicted of Felony within the benefit of Clergy, unpardoned, and
undischarged, could be no Witness; and since those several Statutes that have
been mentioned by Mr. Attorney, unless there be an actual Burning in the Hand,
or a Pardon for that Burning in the Hand, sure it cannot be pretended, that one
Convicted of Felony can be admitted as a Witness; If my Lord of Warwick does
insist upon his Evidence a Matter of Right, we for the King do insist upon it,
that there is no Right at all in the Case; for French must be taken to be one
Convicted of Felony, and not discharged without either Burning in the Hand, or
Pardon, and then we are sure it cannot be pretended in Law that he can be a
Witness.


L. H. St. My Lords, the King's Council have Stated their Objection, what is
your pleasure to have done in it?


E. of Rivers. I suppose, my Lords, that it will be necessary to hear what
Answer my Lord of Warwick gives to this Objection.


L. H. St. Is it your Lordships pleasure then, that the Council assigned for my
Lord Warwick be heard what they have to say to this Matter?


Lords. Ay, Ay, Ay.


Then Sir Thomas Powis came to the Bar, and stood by the Earl of Warwick, and
spoke thus.

Sir T. Powis. May it please your Lordships, I am by the Order of this
Honorable House Assigned of Council for this Noble Lord at the Bar, in Point
of Law; and, my Lords, as to the present Question that has been spoken to by
the King's Council, I am a little surprised to hear it should be wondered at,
that my Lord of Warwick should insist upon it, that this Gentleman should be
Examined for him as a Witness, because, with humble Submission to your
Lordships, I think the Authorities of Law will make for the Opinion on the
other side. Mr. Attorney General says true, the first Statute that was made for
Burning in the Hand, was that in 4 Hen. 7. before that time the Benefit of
Clergy, even for Murder, was used to be allowed upon the Prayer of the Party,
and he was thereupon delivered over to the Ordinary to make his Purgation, and
that not only once, but toties quoties, let him demand it as often as he would,
and as often as he offended it was allowed: This was thought such a Privilege
as ought to be restrained; that Statute of the 4th of Hen. 7. takes notice that
an ill use was made of it, and therefore does ordain, That it should be allowed
no more then once, unless to Persons within Orders* And as a Means to know,
whether it had been before allowed, or not, the Act does direct, that the Party
Convicted shall be Burnt in the Hand, that is all the Act does appoint, it does
no otherwise alter the Case; it does not impose it upon the Party as a
Punishment for the Offense, but only as a Mark of Distinction, that if ever he
came again before the Court, and being Convicted of the like Offense, should
pray the Benefit of Clergy, then upon Inspection it might be known whether
before he had been allowed his Clergy or not; and so stood the Law without
alteration as to the manner of delivery of the Criminal over to the Ordinary to
make his Purgation, with which the Temporal Law in the manner of doing thereof
did not intermeddle; and therein consisted, with respect to this Matter, the
Benefit of Clergy. Afterward, by the Statute of Edward the 6th, the Peers
were exempted from the Burning in the Hand; and then comes the Act that we rely
upon, which is, that of the 18 Eliz. that takes notice of the former Act of 4
Hen. 7. which only ordered the Burning of the Hand for the purposes aforesaid,
but left the Party to be delivered over to the Ordinary to make his Purgation;
which was found to be a Matter attended with many Abuses, and upon the
Reformation thought fit to be abolished, and taken away, because it was only an
outward appearance and show of Purgation, and was often the occasion of very
great Perjuries, therefore it is taken totally away, and by this Act the Party
shall have the Benefit of Clergy without making Purgation, as fully as if he
had actually made it. But say they, There is still left something that the Law
requires, which is, That he should be first Burnt in the Hand, and if he be not
Burnt in the Hand, or at least Pardoned, he is not in that Condition, that the
Law calls for in such a Case, to set him Rectus in Curia; If he be Burnt in the
Hand, or Pardoned by the King, they agree on the other side, that he may be a
very good Witness. My Lords, that Act of Parliament of Queen Eliz. does empower
the Court that Tries the Criminal, and before whom he is Convicted, not only to
Burn him in the Hand, pursuant to the Act of Hen. 7. but also to detain him in
Prison for a year after; but yet I think that does not signify any thing one
way or other, to restore him, or not restore him to his Credit, for I think the
Burning in the Hand, which is a Mark of Infamy, was never intended as a Means,
any more than Imprisonment for a year of Restoring a Man to his Credit; it was
only to show he had his Clergy once, and should have it no more; The allowance
of Clergy by the Statute of Eliz. operates as a Pardon, only says the
Statute, he shall not be delivered out of Prison before he is Burnt in the
Hand, according to the Statute of Hen. 7. No body can say, that the continuing
in Prison for a year, which the Court may order, though Burnt in the Hand,
would, as to restoring of Credit, have operated one way or other: but that we
insist upon is, That the allowance of Clergy sets him right in Court, since
Purgation is abolished, and is the same thing as if he had undergone the
Ceremonial parts of a formal Purgation. It is the allowance of Clergy that
makes the alteration or operation in this Case, by virtue of this last Act of
the 18th of Eliz. for we take it, that he is to have the same Benefit of his
Clergy as is if he had been delivered to the Ordinary, and Purgation had been
made; and now the allowance of Clergy by this Act, gives the same benefit to
the Party, as Purgation would have done before the Act, and he is in the same
State and Condition as he would have been in Case of a Purgation, or of a
Pardon by the King. The Authorities are all with us, there is a Case that is
very well known among the Men of the Law in the Fourth Report of My Lord Cook,
Holcroft's Case, who was Indicted and Convicted of Manslaughter, and he prayed
the Benefit of his Clergy; The Judges thought fit to respite their Judgment
therein, but his Prayer was entered upon Record; And then an Appeal being
brought against him, it came to be a Question, how far he had had his Clergy,
for by the Stat. of the 3d of H. 7. an Appeal will lie notwithstanding a
Conviction, if the Party have not had his Clergy; and in this Case it was
adjudged, that the Party having prayed his Clergy, he should have the same
benefit as if the Court had ordered every thing to be actually Executed, which
ought thereupon to be done; and surely then it can be no Question, whether a
Man shall be a Witness or no, who has had his Clergy allowed. It is so entered
upon Record, that the Book was administered to him, and that he read as a Clerk,
for the Party has done as much as he can; prayed the Benefit of his Clergy,
and had it allowed, and so it is entered upon Record. The Respiting of the
Burning of the Hand till the King's Pardon be obtained, shall not sure put him
in a worse Condition than he would have been, if he had actually been Burnt in
the Hand. My Lords, I have in my Hand a Book which is of very great Esteem, and
that is, The Reports of My Lord Chief Justice Hobbart, wherein he declares his
Opinion in this Point, and for whose Opinion every one of our Gown ever have
testified a very great Veneration and Respect; The Case is that of Searle and
Williams, wherein my Lord Hobbart has spoken so fully to this Matter, that I
think it ought to put an end to the Question: He says, the Stat. of Eliz.
appointing the Burning in the Hand without Purgation, does operate as a Statute
Pardon to all intents and purposes, and the Party having now the Benefit of his
Clergy allowed, is in all respects in the same Condition as if he had been
acquitted: That is the Opinion that he holds throughout that Case: I need not
trouble your Lordships with Reading all the particular Words that he uses, but
only those which relate to the thing now in Question. Immediately before your
Lordships he delivers his Opinion, That whosoever speaks Words of Accusation,
reflecting upon a Man for any Offense for which he was Indicted and Convicted,
and had had his Clergy allowed, an Action lies as if he had been totally
acquitted from it; It Is not the Burning in the Hand, but the Allowance of
Clergy, that sets him right in his Credit in the Eye of the Law, and he is
thereby in the same Condition, in that respect, that he would have been, if he
never had had any Conviction upon him. Toward the end of the Case his very
Words are these, Though the Statute says, after Burning in the Hand, according
to the Statute in that behalf made, he shall be discharged, and there is no
Burning in the Hand, that makes nothing, for though it be a Case where the Hand
ought to be Burnt, yet it is not so essential but a Man may have the Benefit of
the Stat. though he be not Burnt; the King may pardon the Burning, for the
Burning even in an Appeal is no part of the Judgment, nor so much as in the
Nature of Punishment, but rather a Mark to notify that he may have his Clergy
but once; These are his very Words in this Case, so that the Statute of Queen
Eliz. does abolish Purgation, but gives the Party all the Benefit thereof, as
if he had gone through it, and instead of delivering the Party to the Ordinary
to make his Purgation, it says, he shall be delivered out of Prison; but lest
it might seem to Repeal the Statute of Hen. 7. as to Burning in the Hand, it
adds, being Burnt in the Hand according to the Statute in that behalf provided;
By the Statute of Hen. 7th, he was first to be Burnt in the Hand, and then
delivered to the Ordinary to make his Purgation; but by the Statute of Eliz. he
is first Pardoned his Crime by being allowed the Benefit of his Clergy,
without making his Purgation, and afterward to be Burnt in the Hand before he
be delivered out of Prison; so that the Burning in the Hand is only a Condition
precedent to his getting out of Prison, not to his being restored to his
Credit; The King may Pardon the Burning in the Hand undoubtedly, and he has
gone a great way in this Case, for he has given a Pardon as far as the Privy
Seal, and that is sufficient to show his Gracious Intention of Pardoning it
throughout, and if there be need, we hope it may pass yet forward: What we
insist on is not only the Opinion of my Lord Chief Justice Hobbart, but he is
followed therein by the Opinion of a Man of very great Authority, one no less
Eminent than he in his Profession, and that is my Lord Chief Justice Hale, in a
Book of his that is Entitled, His Pleas of the Crown, which is but an
Abridgment of what he intended upon that Subject under the Title of Clergy;
when he comes to treat of the Consequences of the allowance of Clergy, and what
the several Effects of Clergy allowed shall be, he says it gives him a Capacity
to purchase Goods, and retain the Profits of his Lands, and restores him to his
Credit, according to the Case I have mentioned before in Hobbart of Searle and
Williams; for that Case is particularly in that Book mentioned and referred to:
Therefore I hope your Lordships will make no difficulty of Hearing this
Witness; for we think the having his Clergy allowed him, is that which restores
him to his Credit. If they have any other Objections against him, I hope we
shall hear it from the King's Council: But if this be stood upon in point of
Law as an Objection, That though Clergy was allowed, he was not Burnt in the
Hand, nor pardoned; I would have observed to your Lordships, That my Lord High
Steward has told you it is so far gone toward the Pardon, that the King has
shown his Intention to pardon by the Privy Seal; and we hope your Lordships
will not let this Noble Lord at the Bar suffer any Prejudice by the not
perfecting of the Pardon by actual passing of the Great Seal.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney General, what say you to the Matters which have been
urged?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we have stated our Objection; we think there is nothing
given as an Answer to it, and we submit it to your Lordship's Judgment.


Marq. of Hallifax. My Lords, I desire that the Question that is to be decided
before your Lordships, may be settled truly what it is.


L. H. St. If there be Six in Company, and one of them is killed, the other
Five are afterward indicted, and Three are Tried, and found Guilty of
Manslaughter, and upon their Prayers have their Clergy allowed, and the Burning
in the Hand is respited, but not pardoned; Whether any of the Three can be a
Witness upon the Trial of either the other Two.


Sir T. Powis. My Lords, with Submission, though he were convicted of the
Felony, yet upon Prayer of his Clergy, that being allowed him, That restores
him to all the Capacities, we say, that he had before the Conviction, and
particularly to his Credit; and for that we submit our solves to your Lordships
Judgment.


Marq. of Hallifax. I suppose your Lordships will have the Opinion of the
Judges upon this Point, and that must be in the presence of the Prisoner.


L. H. St. It must certainly be in the presence of the Prisoner, if you ask the
Judges Opinions.


Marq. of Hallifax. But in these Cases, my Lords, it is usual to hear the
King's Council to make a Reply: I desire to hear what they would say to what
has been offered by the Council for the Noble Lord the Prisoner at the Bar.


Mr. Serj. Wright. My Lords, I did apprehend that the very stating of the
Objection would have set this matter in its true light: For the first place, it
is agreed on all hands, That this Mr. French, that is desired to be a Witness,
does stand convicted of Felony; and by the Law of England, while that
Conviction remains upon him, till he be either purged or pardoned, he cannot be
a Witness: By the Conviction his Credit is lost; and till he be restored to his
first Condition, he stands not so clear in the Eye of the Law that he can be an
Evidence. The Council for the Prisoner have objected, That if he either be
pardoned, or Clergy allowed, he is put in the same Condition as if he had been
acquitted.

My Lords, I must admit a Pardon restores to Credit; and I must likewise admit,
That allowance of the Benefit of Clergy, and Burning in the Hand upon it,
amounts in Law to a Pardon, or is equivalent to a Pardon in this matter: But
the Fact here is not so; for here is neither actual Pardon, nor-any Burning in
the Hand: The Benefit of Clergy was prayed, and allowed; but that alone is not
sufficient; there must be an actual Burning in the Hand, or a Pardon of that
Burning in the Hand, otherwise it cannot be a Satisfaction in Law, such as
should put him in the same Condition as if he were acquitted. Your Lordships
have heard what was said by his Grace my Lord High Steward, That as to the
Burning in the Hand, the King has been pleased to proceed so far as to grant a
Privy Seal for the Pardon of the Burning in the Hand: But your Lordships very
well know, and it cannot be insisted on to the contrary, by the Council on the
other side, That it is no Pardon until it be past under the Great Seal of
England: So that here is no actual Pardon; nor is the bare allowance of Clergy,
without Burning in the Hand, equivalent to a Pardon. My Lords, it must be
agreed, That at the Common Law, Persons that were convicted of Felony, were not
restored to their Credit merely by allowing the Benefit of Clergy to them;
there was something further to be done to regain Credit; the Party convicted
must undergo another Trial before the Ordinary, which was commonly called
Purgation; when any Man was convicted of Felony, he was upon his Prayer of the
Benefit of Clergy to have it allowed to him, and if he could Read as a Clerk,
his Life was saved. He was not discharged of the Felony, and therefore was
delivered over to the Ordinary to be kept in Prison until he had, by a sort of
Trial before the Ordinary, made his Innocence appear, and purged himself of the
Fact charged upon him; and if he could not make his Purgation, he was to lie
perpetually in Prison; and notwithstanding the allowance of Clergy, and
delivery over to the Ordinary, yet was not the Credit restored, nor his former
Capacities; he was not a legal Witness until he had purged himself of the
Crime: It was the clearing themselves of the Guilt, that restored such Persons
to their Reputation and Credit, not the bare allowance of Clergy: Some
Criminals were delivered to the Ordinary generally, those might make their
Purgation; others were specially delivered, or delivered with a special Charge
to the Ordinary, not to admit them to Purgation, Absque purgatione facienda:
These latter could never be restored to Credit, except by the King's Pardon;
for the Liberty of Purgation, which was the means of regaining their Credit was
taken from them; their Guilt occasioned their loss of Credit; taking away that
Guilt does consequentially restore Credit again; and this Benefit of Clergy was
to be allowed as often as any Man had occasion for it.

Thus the matter of Benefit of Clergy stood in Common Law, in respect of
Purgation and restoring of Credit, till the Stature of 18 Eliz. c. 7. which was
cited on the other side by Sir Thomas Powis; by which Statute Purgation is
absolutely taken away, and set aside: And the Party being Burnt in the Hand,
according to the Statute of 4 H. 7. is appointed by this Statute, 18 Eliz. to
be discharged, and not to be delivered over to the Ordinary, as was before that
time used. The delivering over to the Ordinary was in order to Purgation, and
that by the last Statute is quite taken away, and the Party is to have the same
Benefit by the having the Benefit of his Clergy and Burning in the Hand, as if
he had made his Purgation; he shall be discharged: It is not his Reading as a
Clerk, and that pronounced by the Ordinary, that gives him the Benefit of a
Discharge, as if he had been pr^^^^ of the Crime; but there must be the Burning
in the Hand, that is the very Terms of the Statute upon which he is to be
discharged; that must actually be done before he can be put into the same
Condition that he was in before the Conviction, and consequently make him
capable of being a Witness. As for the Case of Searle and Williams that was
cited by Sir Thomas Powis, that Case does not oppose in this matter; there it
was not needful to Burn the Person convicted; he was a Clerk in Holy Orders,
and by Law exempt from Burning in the Hand; so it was not needful to Burn him,
the Statute of 18 Eliz. not requiring any Person to be Burned in the Hand that
were not so liable before then. The most that is said in that Case by the Chief
Justice Hobbart is, That in case where the Hand ought to be Burnt, it is not
essential; but the Party may have the Benefit of the Statute, i. e. be
discharged without Burning, and the King may pardon the Burning; and no doubt
if the King pardons the Burning, it is as good and effectual as if the Hand had
been actually Burnt. The King might par^^n the whole, and consequently any
part; the Pardon of the Punishment supplies the Effect of it; no question but a
Pardon may supply the want of Burning in the Hand. Chief Justice Hales in his
Book of Plea^ of the Crown, Fol. 240 which I have here, says expressly, That
Burning in the Hand is now, since the Statute, 18 Eliz. the Consequent upon the
allowance of Clergy, which has this Effect* First, it enables the Judges to
deliver him. Secondly, ^e resto^^^ him to former Capacities. Thirdly, It
restores him to his Credit, and so it puts him in the same Condition as if he
were acquitted. What is it that has this effect? Though Allowance of Clergy, and
Burning in the Hands: There is not (...) be an Allowance of Clergy till all be
done which is required by Law: The Law requires that the Party be Burnt in the
Hand, or that the King do (...) the Burning in the Hand before the Party be
discharged; and, with humble Submission, it was never yet pretended, that any
Person could have the full Advantage of the Benefit of Clergy, since the
Statute of 4 H. 7. till he was Burnt in the Hand, or the Burning in the Hand
was pardoned. Now, my Lords, to apply this to the (...) in Question, it is on
all Hands admitted, That Mr. French was convicted of Felony and Manslaughter,
and is neither Burnt in the Hand, nor pardoned, but he has prayed (...) Benefit
of the Clergy, and has had the Book given to (...) to try if he can Read, and
he certified he can Read; this is all that is done* I think it cannot be
pretended he ought to be discharged until he is Burned in the Hand, or that
Burning pardoned, as the Act requires; and if the Reading as a Clerk without
Burning in the Hand, or pardon of it, be not sufficient in Law to entitle him
(...) discharged. Why should it be sufficient to restore his Credit? (...)
whole together works the Discharge, and restores the Party. In the Case of
Buroughs and (...) that has been cited, there a Man was convicted of
Manslaughter, and prayed his Clergy; the Court did not allow his Clergy, but
did advise upon it. This was held sufficient to ^^r an Appeal; for if Clergy
had been allowed, it had clearly been a good Bar; and the Act of the Court in
Advising upon the Peayer, and not allowing Clergy where it ought to be, shall
not prejudice the Party convicted, but he shall be in the same state as if the
Clergy had been actually allowed: But that has no likeness to the Case now
before your Lordships; for here it is not pretended that Mr. Frenth ever
desured to be Burnt in the Hand, but that was respited in favor to him, which
was done with intention, (...) to get the King's Pardon for the Burning of the
Hand, which is nor yet obtained, and consequently I take it he is not entitled
to that Benefit which the (...) would give him, if he was either Pardoned or
Burned in the Hand; he is not (...) of the Conviction, and therefore I think he
ought not to be (...).


(...) What is the Resolution your Lordships please to take upon this matter?
Is it your Lordships pleasure to have the Opinion of my Lords the Judges, who
(...) present, upon this Point.


(...) Ay ay, by all means have the Judges Opinions.


(...) Two things have been mentioned at the Bar, which, I think, ought to be
laid out of the Question.

The Con^^^^^tion of a Peer, with respect to Burning in the Hand.

I suppose (...) (I am sure it ought not to be) insinuated, that, if any of
your Lordships Degr^^ (...) have the Misfortune to fall into (...) the like
Condition as the Gentleman now produ^^^ (...) to be once (...) of a Clergyable
Felony, there could be any (...) such Peer, as (...) without his having been
Burnt in the (...). Certainly, there could (...) Statute of 1 E. 6. exempts the
Peers (...), and vir^^lly (...) ^^tute of 4 H. 7. as to so much. (...) Statute
of 18 Eliz. (...) Hand only, According to the Statute in that behalf (before)
(...) no Statute Then, or Now, in force to subject Peers to such (...) in such
ease, upon the Allowing the Benefit of the said Statute (...) 6. (which is as
much as Clergy without Reading or Burning) freed from (...) and other Penalties
of the Felony, as much as Commons are by having Clergy formally allowed and
being Burnt.

2. Here has been mention of a Pardon of the Burning this Gentleman in the
Hand; and, it seems, the Proceeding has been so far as to Pass the Privy Seal.
I do not question the King's Pardoning of the Burning's being as offectual as
the Party's undergoing it. But, I say, Here is no Pardon (though Great
Preparation for one) For, the Sign Manual, the Signs, the Privy Seal, are but
Warrants in such Cases, and Countermandable. But, it is the Great Seal that
speaks the King's Last and Irrevocable Intent, and Passes the Pardon (or other
like thing) to be Granted. And That has not been obtained Here.

Now the Question is cleared, I take it to be this; Whether this Commoner being
Convicted of Felony, and having his Clergy Allowed, but being Unburnt and
Unpardoned, shall be Received and Allowed to be a Witness.

I am of Opinion he ought Not.

For (whatever Quality or Credit he might Personally be of,) he is, by Being
and Remaining a Felon-Convict, Rendered Infamous in the Eye of the Law. Upon
the Conviction, he Lost, by the Intendment of Law, That Credit which is
necessary to a Witness. And is not Restored to it by the bare Allowing of
Clergy: But, is in the state as a Felon-Convict would have been, before
Purgation, at Common Law.

Clergy or (more properly called) Benefit of Clergy, is an Ancient Privilege,
whereby a Clerk charged with Felony was Dismissed from the Temporal Judge, and
Delivered in Custody to his Ordinary, Before whom he was to Purge himself, if
he could, of the Offense; And if he failed in his Purgation, he was to Remain
in the Ordinary's Prison.

I mean Generally. And I think it not proper to this Occasion, to Discourse of
the Special Cases wherein the Delivery to the Ordinary was absque Purgatione.

This Privilege took its Root originally from a Constitution of the Pope,
exempting the Persons of the Clergy from the Secular Jurisdiction. This the
Canon Law is full in. But, That Law was not thoroughly Received Here in England.
And This Matter was Molded, Ordered, and Altered by our Common and Statute Law.

For Instance. The Canon Law gives the Privilege only to Men in Holy Orders:
Our Law, in favor to Learning, and the Desire of the English Bishops, extended
it to Lay-Clerks, as an Old Statute calls them, i. e. any Layman, that, by
Reason of his Ability to Read, was (other Circumstances concurring) in a
Possibility of being made a Priest. On the other side; That Law would not
suffer the Clergy to be Tried before Secular Judges: But, Ours has, for
several hundred Years, subjected them to such Trial.

But, the Common Law was ever clear in this, That when a Man was Convicted of
Felony, though, by the Allowing of Clergy, his Life, Land, and Blond were
saved, yet, That Conviction laid him under diverse Penalties and Forfeitures,
some Absolute, others Limited and Determinable.

He forfeited all his Goods and Chattels, which he had at the time of his
Conviction, Absolutely; not to be Restored by Purgation or Pardon.

He also forfeited and lost, 1. His Liberty, being to continue a Prisoner. 2.
His Capacity of Purchasing most Goods or Chattels, and of Taking and Retaining
the Issues and Profits of his Freehold Land to his own Use. 3. His Credit, so
as not to be a Witness, Juror, (...) Three Penalties he Romained till his
Purgation. But, by that, they were D^t^r^^ined. As soon as he had made his
Purgation, he was Restore^ to his Liberty, Capacities, and Credit.

Purgation was the Convict's clearing himself of the C^ime, by his own Oath,
and the Oaths or Verdict of an Inquest of Twelve Clerks (as Compurgators.) The
Proceeding was Before the Ordinary. And, for the manner of it, Old Books speak
of their making Proclamation for Persons to come in against his Purgation, and
of their enquiring into his Life, Conversation, and Fame, and of other
Formalities. In all which, several Statutes say, there were great Abuses. But
it is certain, that, upon his Acquittal, the Ordinary pronounced him Innocent,
and absolved from Infamy. And thereupon he was Discharged from the
Imprisonment, Incapacities, and Discredit Incident to the ^elony.

The Statute, 4 H. 7. brings in a new thing, Appointing that every Person
Convict of Felony, should be marked in the Hand by the Jailer in open Court,
Before he should be Delivered to the Ordinary. And This, was partly that they
might taste of Corporal Punishment; But, principally to notify that they had
had their Clergy. For, the same Statute, taking notice that Men were emboldened
to Commit Murder, Rape, Robbery, and other Felonies, because they had the
Benefit of Clergy toties quoties, Ordains that no person, who was once admitted
to that Benefit, should ever have it again for a following Offense, unless he
were within Orders and produced his Letters of his Orders, or a Certificate of
them.

For this Act, Perkin Warbeck in his Declaration against H. 7. Brands him as an
execrable Breaker of the Liberties and Franchises of holy Church.

Then comes the Stat. 18 El. C. 7. which, for so much as Concerns this
Question, I desire to Read. It is in these Words.

For the Avoiding of sundry Perjuries and other Abuses in and about the
Purgation of Clerks Convict, delivered to the Ordinaries, Be it Enacted that
every Person which shall be Admitted and Allowed to have the Benefit or
Privilege of his Clergy, shall not thereupon be Delivered to the Ordinary as
has been accustomed, But After such Clergy allowed, and Burning in the Hand
according to the Statute in that behalf provided [meaning that of 4 H. 7. shall
forthwith be Enlarged and Delivered out of Prison by the Justices before whom
such Clergy shall be Granted, that Cause notwithstanding.

Then there follows a Proviso to this effect.

Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted that the Justices before whom any
such Allowance of Clergy shall be had, may for the further Correction of such
Persons, Detain and Keep them in Prison for such Convenient time as the same
Justices in their Discretions shall think Convenient, so as the same do not
exceed one Years Imprisonment.

This Statute refers to That of H. 7. and follows the Order of it. As That
appointed that the Convict should be Burnt before he should be delivered to the
Ordinary to have the Benefit of Purgation. So This of 18. El. Appomts that he
shall be Burnt before he shall be Discharged by the Justices, and have the
Benefit thereby Intended (instead of Purgation.)

The Council for the Noble Lord at the Bar say, that the Allowance of Clergy by
Virtue of this Act, freeth this Man, and makes him Rectus in Curia, as if he
had made his Purgation; and that by this Statute he is first pardoned his
Crime, by being Allowed the Benefit of Clergy, without making his Purgation;
and afterward to be Burnt in the Hand before he be delivered out of Prison,
and so the Burning is a Condition precedent to his Getting out of Prison, not
to his being Restored to his Credit.

But I am to seek for any Ground for this Notion in this Statute. It does not
Require Clergy to be Allowed, nor Give any new Virtue or Operation to it, when
Allowed. It supposes such a thing to be by Virtue of the Common Law: But there
it leaves it, if there be nothing more done. It is one Clause consisting of two
Parts; 1. Negative; He that is Allowed his Clergy, shall not be Delivered to
the Ordinary. 2. Affirmative; But after that, and Burning in the Hand shall be
Delivered by the Justices.

Now, If it had stopped at the first Part, it had been so far from Pardoning or
Restoring any Clerk Convict, that it had put all into the same Condition that
those were, who were without, Purgation viz. to be perpetually Imprisoned, and
Infamous. Indeed, it had not been Reasonable to take away such a Privilege from
the Subjects, without some Recompense, and therefore it did not stop there: But
proceeds to the 2d. Part, and Provides that those who before were Delivered to,
and by the Ordinary, shall now be Delivered by the Justices. But withal, it
Declares when, and upon what Terms, viz. After Clergy Allowed, and Burning in
the Hand. And This is a Satisfaction to be given to the Law, before they shall
have the Benefit of it.

I Agree if this Convict had made that Satisfaction to the Law, he might have
been a Witness; for, in that Case, he would have been freed from his Discredit
by Virtue of the last Words of the said Cause. It Is true, the Words are only
[shall forthwith be Enlarged and Delivered out of Prison by the Justices] which
Literally Import nothing but Restoring his Liberty. But, under this prime
Instance, are Implied and Intended all other particulars which a Convict might
be Discharged of by means of Purgation. It was never the Intent of the Statute
merely to set him at Large, and leave him a Felon Convict. But when it is said
Delivered, it is meant Delivered Free, freed from all Incident further Penalties,
as he might have been if Delivered upon Purgation. This is a Reasonable
Construction: to a Man that observes the Opposition in the Words, the Sense
will appear to be as if the Lawmakers had said, that instead of being
Discharged a Culpa et poena by the Ordinary, upon a tedious proceeding to
Purgation, he shall now be so Discharged by the Justices, forthwith.

And this also is necessary to Vindicate the Justice of this Law; for, since it
takes from him the means he had of Regaining his Credit, it is but just it
should Restore it to him by this Way.

It Is Objected, that it may as well be said that he shall not be Restored to
Credit till he have suffered Imprisonment, not exceeding a Year, as that he
shall not be Restored till Burnt. But, That receives an easy answer; for, if
it were for it would not Avail this Person. But, I take it to be otherwise. A
Convict is Discharged from Imprisonment and all other Penalties incident to the
Conviction, forthwith upon his Burning in the Hand. But if there be a
Commitment made by Virtue of the Proviso, it is a Collateral and a new thing,
and the Party is not then in Prison by Virtue of his Conviction, but by afresh
express Order of the Judges, made upon the heinousness of the Circumstances
appearing on the Evidence. They may, and generally do, forbear to Commit at
all. And when they do, it may be for a Month or two, at their Discretion. The
Proviso calls it a further Correction.

As to the manner in which this Statute works this full Discharge, it has been
Disputed whether it be by Supply of Purgation, or rather by a kind of
Statute-pardon. But, I think, that by force of the Statute the Party is Purged
and freed of the Felony, and all Penalties incident to it in nature of a Pardon.

In what manner soever the Statute works it, it is manifest that it does it not
But upon a Condition precedent, viz. After Clergy allowed, and burning in the
Hand. Now, this Person has his Clergy allowed, but is not Burnt in the Hand,
(not has any Pardon for it.) And therefore is not yet Entitled to the Benefit
of this Statute. My Lords Council say he is, because he has his Clergy
allowed. But, That is claiming the Advantage upon the performing of one Part of
a joint Condition, which ought not to be had but upon performing Both. They
might as well have pretended to it before the performance of either; The
Statute says, after Both Clergy and Burning. They say also, that this Burning
is no part of the Judgment, as has been held in the Case of an Appeal. Be it
so. But, I say, it is a part of the Condition in this Statute.

There is no Case in our Books against this Opinion. (But, on the Contrary,
there are Authorities for it.)

Holcrofts Case is in no sort applicable (...) this Case; as was truly observed
by the Kings Sergeant.

The Opinion of my L. C. J. Hobart in Searl and Williams Case, rightly
Considered, Confirms this. I have borrowed the Book from the Gent. at the Bar,
and Read it. He says expressly that where a Convict is Liable to be Burnt in
the Hand, he is not Discharged and Restored without it; because the Statute
says After Burning. But from thenceforth the Statute frees him from all further
Punishment. But, he says, that where he is not Liable to Burning, he shall
have the same Benefit immediately upon the Allowance of Clergy only. So it was
in the Case before him; which was that of a Clerk in Orders: for, Searl was a
Clergyman. Parson of Heydon German in Essex, and Convicted of Manslaughter. So
it is, he says, in Case where the King pardons the Burning. And the last Words
in the Case clearly show his meaning, viz. where the Statute says, After
Burning, it Imports where Burning ought to be etc.

To me the Law is evident. A Peer shall have this Benefit without either Clergy
or Burning. A Clerk in Orders, upon Clergy alone without Burning. A Lay-Clerk,
not without Both.

As I Remember, there has been but one Authority more mentioned, and that is
of my L. C. J. Hale, in his Summary of the Pleas of the Crown. I have Got
hither that Book Also. To my understanding, He plainly Declares the same
Opinion; and Cites the beforementioned Case of Searl for Proof of it. His
Words (so far as they Relate to this matter) are These;

What the effect of Clergy allowed?

In Ancient time the Consequent was Delivery to the Ordinary, either to make
Purgation, or Absque Purgatione, as the Case Required.

But by Stat. 18 El. C. 7. Now only Burnt in the Hand, which has these effects,

1. It enables the Judges to Deliver him out of Prison.

2. It Gives him a Capacity to Purchase Goods, Foxley's Case, 5 Rep.
and Retain the Profits of his Lands.

3. It Restores him to his Credit. Hob. Seals Case.

The Word [which] used Here (whatever else it Do, or Do not Refer to) does
containly Refer to the next Antecedent, that is, Burning in the Hand. and the
Two Books which this most Learned Judge Cites, are full Authorities that it is
This Burning which enables the Court to Deliver him, and that That Delivering
which is then Due to him is, by good Construction, in lieu of a Pardon, which
Restores him to his said Capacity and Credit.

To Conclude; The Candition Precedent, upon which the Restitution of this
Person's Credit Depends, is not Performed (by his undergoing the said
Punishment) nor Discharged (by the Kings Pardoning it;) and therefore he is not
a Legal Witness.


E. of Rochest. If the rest of my Lords the Judges be of the same Opinion, so;
and I hope you will not oblige them to deliver their Opinions at large to take
up your Lordships time with Arguments of any length, for the Matter has been, I
think, sufficiently debated.


L^. Chapter Baron. My Lords, I am of the same Opinion.


Mr. Justice Nevill. And so am I.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, Have you any thing more to say to this Question?


E. of Warw. No, my Lord.


L. H. St. Then what is your Lordship's Pleasure? Is this Man to be admitted a
Witness, or not?


Lords. No, no; we think by Law he cannot be a Witness.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, my Lords are of Opinion, That this Person cannot be
admitted as a Witness for you.


E. of Warw. My Lords, I submit to your Lordships Judgment in the Matter.


E. of Nottingh. My Lords, I am very glad your Lordships have had this Matter
debated by the Council, that so it might be settled: All my Lords the Judges
that are here, it seems, are of Opinion, that this Man can be no Witness, and
therefore his Testimony must be rejected. But there is another Proposal that I
have to make to your Lordships, of a Point that I think ought to be considered
of: My Noble Lord at the Bar did suppose that he had proved before your
Lordships, that he went into the Field not to fight on the side of the Party
that was killed, but on the other side; and indeed that he went not to fight,
but to prevent a Quarrel, and thereupon he did start a Question, Whether it
should not be a Presumption in Point of Fact and Law, that he, being on the
side of the Party that was killed, should not be reputed Innocent of his Death?
Now I confess, upon the starting of this Objection, I doubted of it, Whether if
any one were present at the killing of a Man, where several People were engaged
in fighting, on what side soever such a Person were, either on the side of the
Party that was killed, or on the other side, yet whatsoever Crime^ it was in
those that killed him it was the same Crime in those that were present at the
Action. My Lord of Warwick did desire, that his Council might be heard upon
that Point, if there be any Question with your Lordships in that Case, and my
Lord desires his Council may be heard to that Matter; it may occasion a Matter
of Debate, which cannot be in this place openly, but must be between your
Lordships among your selves: Indeed I think it reasonable, that Council should
be heard upon the Case.


L. H. St. My Lords, I think you are not arrived at that Question yet; you are
not to take for granted any part of the Fact, but are to debate among your
selves, after the Proof is over, what that Proof do amount to.


E. of Roch. Indeed, my Lords, I hope you will not suppose any thing, and so
take it for granted, that may occasion any Debate, because that is not to be
done here in this place, but we must adjourn to another place for it: The bare
putting of a Case by a Prisoner at the Bar, does not make that to be the Case
truly in Point of Fact; for as far as I heard and understood the Noble Lord's
Proposal at the Bar, what he desired to have his Council heard to was, That he
being one of Six that went into the Field, but going with a Design to part
them, and not with any intention to promote the Quarrel ch^^ld not be in equal
degree of Guilt with those that were on the other side, who kille^ the Party:
But now, my Lords, I take it, it is far from being granted o^ the other side
that that is the State of the Fact; nay, my Lord himself owns that he was in
the Field, and that he was engaged in the Combat with Mr. James, and then the
Question must the that is to be debated, Whether a Party that is concerned in a
Quarrel where a Person is killed, is in equal degree guilty with those that
were on the other side against the Person that was killed? And then the
Question would be far different from what it would be otherwise, and as his
Lordship did propose it; and if there be a Doubt in Matter of Fact, That ought
to be settled here in this place, that afterward it may be considered in
another.


E. of Nottingh. My Lords, I cannot but agree with that Noble lord, that the
Matter of Fact ought to be settled, and then if any Debate arises thereupon,
your Lordships are to return to your own House, and there to debate what is
your Judgment upon that Matter of Fact: But whatsoever Motion is made by the
Noble Lord at the Bar, wherein he desires to have his Council heard; that I
suppose may be considered here; and this Point having been starred by my Noble
Lord at the Bar as a Point of Law and not of Fact, I desire to remind him of
it, to know whether he does insist upon it; if he does not move to have the
Matter argued, then there is an end.


L. H. St. My Lords, I do not think you will hear Council upon a Matter of
Fact, and therefore it is not ripe (till the Fact be settled) for you to hear
Council.


E. of Warw. My Lords, I humbly pray, That you will hear my Council as to that
Point.


L. H. St. My Lord, this is a Matter of Fact indetermin'd, and not a Matter of
Law: What Opinion their Lordships will be of when they have considered the
Proofs as to the Fact, is one Step; when that is over, it will be the proper
time, if any Doubt be remaining with their Lordships in Point of Law, to hear
Council, but upon bare Matter of Fact Council is not to be allowed.


E. of Roch. My Lords, if there be any Debate among the Lords, Whether it be a
Matter of Fact, or a Matter of Law, we must go up to our own House; but upon
any Point of Law where Council is to be heard, it must be in this Place in the
Presence of the Prisoner, and afterward your Lordships will Debate it among
your selves.


E. of Nottingh. I hope, my Lords, the Council would not state the Case
otherwise than as it is really in Point of Fact; nor can this Noble Lord hope,
that any thing will make an Impression upon my Lords, but what from the Fact
rightly stated, but what is supported from the Evidence; and that which my Lord
proposes, is to have his Council heard to a Matter of Law, which your Lordships
will be Judges of after you have heard it, whether there be any weight in that
which he supposes to be his Case, That a Person assisting in a Combat on the
side of him that is killed, is in equal degreee of Guilt with them that are on
the other side; That possibly, if the Fact be agreed, may be a Point sit to
hear Council to, before your Lordships go to Debate it amongst your selves.


D. of Devon. If I am not mistaken, my Lord of Warwick owns his being one of
them that fought, for he has offered Witnesses to prove, That he received a
Wound in his Hand by fighting: If my Lord of Warwick thinks, that there is a
difference between his being on Mr. Coote's side, and theirs that were on the
other side, he would have his Council heard, how far it will difference his
Guilt and the Nature of the Crime from what it was with them on the other side,
I cannot think that can be to any great purpose to have that Argued, but if
your Lordships please, you may hear his Council what they have to say to that
Matter, but otherwise I cannot think, but that his Lordship will acknowledge
that the Matter of Fact, that he was engaged in the Quarrel.


E. of Peterb. My Lords, I desire, if this be a Point, that my Lords Council
should be heard to that; it should be stated as a Point of Law, and then your
Pordships will consider of it.


L. H. St. As well as I could apprehend it, as it was offered by my Lord
Warwick, this was what he desired to have his Council heard to: Tho the Persons
engaged in the Quarrel on the opposite Party to Mr. Coote have been tried, and
found guilty of Manslaughter, yet he is not in equal degree of Guilt with them,
he being engaged on Mr. Coote's side, and therefore his Lordship's Case differs
from theirs who fought against Mr. Coote. This Point he would have Argued by
his Council before your Lordships, as a Matter of Law founded upon the Fact;
now the Fact of the Case must arise from the Evidence as it has been given,
which has not yet been debated or settled by your Lordships, and till that be
agreed to be the Case, no Question of Law does properly arise.


D. of Leeds. My Lords, if possible I would put this Matter into its true
Method, for indeed I think we have been all this while out of the way. The
Noble Lord at the Bar has desired to have his Council heard, this House has
allowed him Council in Matters of Law, I would desire that the Council would
state the Case so to your Lordships, that it may appear to be a Case fit to be
Argued, that so it may receive your Lordship's Judgment thereupon. My Lord's
own bare proposing of such a thing, will not be enough to incline your
Lordships to be of Opinion, perhaps, one way or other; but I would pray your
Lordships, That you would direct the Council that are assigned for my Noble
Lord at the Bar, to propose that to your Lordships as a Point of Law that he
ought to insist upon; I think it is apparent to every body, that no Point of
Law can arise but upon Matter of Fact, which is agreed to be Proved in any
Case; now the Proofs of the Fact we have heard; now that which I would propose
to your Lordships is; That instead of Hearing his Council to Argue in Point of
Fact what is not yet agreed upon to be the Fact, they should state such a Point
of Law as they would Argue upon; and then whether you would think it a Point of
Law, or not a Point of Law, we must go into another place, where it may be
debated, whether it be such a Point of Law as that Council should be heard to
it.


E. of Peterb. My Lords, I hope you will forgive me for interposing in this
Matter, but that which I have to say to it is this, I am far from giving any
Opinion as yet, as to the matter of Fact, whether my Lord of Warwick was Mr.
Coote's Friend or his Enemy; I know it is not a proper place for that Matter to
be debated in, but my Noble Lord at the Bar desires to have his Council heard,
as upon that Point, as if the Fact were agreed, Truly till the Fact be agreed,
I question whether we can give any Judgment or Opinion one way or other: if I
observed aright, the Evidence for the King aimed at somewhat else; I shall not
say what my Opinion now is, till we come to debate it among our selves; but
here is a desire of having Council heard, but there is no Question of Law
stated, but it depends upon a matter of Fact, which is not yet determined by
your Lordships, before whom the Consideration of both Fact and Law does lie,
Whether a Person that is engaged on the side of the Party that is killed in a
Quarrel, where several Persons on both sides are concerned, be as much guilty
as those that are concerned on the other side.


M. of Norm. My Lords, I do suppose that you may hear the Council to state the
Question, without your determining any thing upon it, as to your Opinion one
way or other; for your hearing of Council is only in order to prepare your
Lordships for the Debate among your selves. If there remains any doubt with
you, it seems my Noble Lord at the Bar has proposed that his Council should be
heard; If the Council will state the Point to be Argued upon, your Lordships
may here consider, whether it be such a one as it is fit to hear Council to,
then no doubt you will hear Council to it. This I suppose you will hear from
them, or otherwise your Lordships will not think fit to give your selves the
trouble to go and Debate that which is no settled Question to be Debated of.


E. of Roch. My Lords, I am afraid of necessity you must Adjourn to your own
House, for I find my Lords are here Arguing one with another; some are of
Opinion that the Council should state the Question, that they should he Heard
upon; others of my Lords are of Opinion, that it is only a matter of Fact, not
a Matter of Law, upon which Council should be Heard; then it must be Debated
between your Lordships, which is not proper for to do here, therefore I would
Humbly move your Lordships, that you would Adjourn to your own House.


E. of Pet. I suppose your Lordships will be pleased to enquire of the Council,
whether they do insist upon this Point, or no.


L. H. St. My Lord Warwick, if your Lordship insist that your Council should be
heard upon the Point which you have offered, it seems there is such a
difference of Opinion among my Lords, that for the Debating of what shall be
done in the Case, my Lords must Adjourn; but if you do not insist upon it, they
will go on in the ordinary Method, to consider of the Evidence that has been
given, after it is summed up on both sides; for if you have no more Evidence to
offer, you are to make your Observations upon the Evidence that has been given.


E. of War. My Lords, I submit it upon the whole Matter to your Lordships,
whether my Council can be heard, or not, to that Point; How far I being of Mr.
Coote's side, can be guilty of his Death.


L. H. St. That is a matter of Fact which is not yet Determined, and therefore
the Question which you suppose to arise upon it, is not yet ripe to be
Resolved. If you have no other Witnesses to produce, that which remains, for I
think I may properly acquaint you with the Methods of Proceeding, is that you
are now on your part to sum up the Evidence that has been given, which is your
own work, as not being allowed Council as to Matter of Fact; you are at liberty
to make such observations as you may think for your Advantage upon the
Evidence, and so to close your Defense.


E. of War. My Lord, I submit it upon the whole Matter to your Lordships.


L. H. St. Mr. Attorney General, my Lord Warwick submits the Matter, as it has
been proved, to their Lordships, without any summing up of the Evidence; you
who are of the King's Council, if you think fit, will Sum up the Evidence on
yours, in order to their Lordships Consideration of it: This you know is the
time for doing it. Make Proclamation for Silence.


Cl. of the Cr. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Serg. (...). O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, My Lord High Steward of England, his Grace
does ^^taitly Charge and Command all manner of Persons here present, to keep
silence, upon pain of Imprisonment.


L. H. St. Gentlemen, you that are of the King's Council, now is your time to
Sum up the Evidence for the King.


Then Mr. Sollioiton^ begun to Sum up the Evidence, but his Voice was so low,
that he (...) not be heard by the Lords that sat at the upper end of the
House.

D. of Leeds. My Lords, I think it of so great importance to have a true State
of the Fact and Evidence laid before us, and that we may hear what the King's
Council do say at the summing up of the Evidence, that if my Lords be of my
Opinion, we shall be very defective to know what Judgment we give when we come
to give Judgment, unless we are thoroughly appriged of the Matter of Fact and
the Proofs: I confess I am going to move, that which is a Thing according to
the Orders of the House, much without the Rules of the House. That the Council
should be heard in any other Place but where they are, at the Bar of the House;
This is contrary indeed, I acknowledge, to the Orders of the House, and so my
Motion is irregular; but yet, in order to our Satisfaction, that we might be
enabled to hear what the King's Council do say to us, especially in Summing up
the Evidence, I cannot but offer this to your Lordships; for we can no more
hear the Council here, than if we were quite out of the House: Whether
therefore your Lordships will please to order, that any Person that has a
stronger Voice should Sum up the Evidence; Or whether you will dispense with
the Orders of the House so far, as that Mr. Solicitor may come to the Clerk's
Table, or some other Place within the House, that he may come to the all, I
must submit it to your Lordships. It would be a great Satisfaction for us to
hear him, in order to our Judgment; but I acknowledge in this I do make an
irregular Motion, as to the Orders that are usually observed by your Lordships:
But I know not how to help it, in regard without hearing, it is impossible for
us to form our Judgment.


E. of Roch. My Lords, I have a very great respect for every Motion that that
Noble Lord who spoke last does make, and I am of his Opinion, That it will
mightily tend to the Satisfaction of my Lords who are to give their Judgment in
this Case, to hear both the Evidence and the Council, and what Observations are
made on both sides; and that it is a great Disadvantage that the Council should
have so low a Voice, that all my Lords should not be able to hear him: but yet
I hope that may be remedied some other way then what is proposed by that Noble
Lord; for if what he desire^ were done, it will be obvious that in point of
President many Inconveniences will incur upon breaking the Orders of the
House, to comply with a Motion which is acknowledged by the Noble Lord himself,
to be irregular; for it would be impossible to hear any body, if it be
permitted to make such a great Noise without; and it is that which renders the
Difficulty of hearing the greater. If that were quieted, your Lordships might
hear this Gentleman as well as those of the other Council: Or if this
Gentleman's Voice will not so well reach your Hearing, then there are other
Gentlemen of the King's Council that have stronger Voices; and if any of them
would Sum up the Evidence, I believe it would be better heard, and consequently
better apprehended by your Lordships, for I had rather any Expedient should be
found out to comply with the Orders of the House, and preserve them, than that
any irregular Thing should be done for the breaking the Orders of the House,
upon any Account whatsoever.


L. H. St. Make another Proclamation for Silence.


Cl. of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Serj. at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes! My Lord High-Steward of England his Grace
does straightly Charge and Command all manner of Persons here present to keep
Silence, upon pain of Imprisonment.


E. of Bridgewater. Truly, my Lords, The Noise about the Court is so great,
that we who sit much nearer to the Bar, than the Noble Lord who made the Motion
for the removal of the Council into another Place, cannot hear Mr. Solicitor
what he says, and therefore I think some of the Guard should be sent out to
clear all the Passages about the Court, that there may be no Noise, for it is
the Noise of the People without, that makes it so difficult to hear the King's
Council.


L. H. St. Let some of the Guard without take care that there be not that Noise
made; and whosoever does make a Noise, let him be taken into Custody.


Then another Proclamation was made for Silence; upon which there was a greater
Quietness in the Hall.

L. H. St. Mr. Solicitor, There is hopes now since there is not so great Noise
as there was, that you may be heard by my Lords: You must use the best
Endeavors you can, that you may be heard.


E. of Roch. If that Gentleman cannot speak out so well that he can be heard,
those of the King's Council that have better Voices, must Sum up the Evidence.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I speak as loud as I can.


E. of Roch. There are others of the King's Council, pray let them do it then;
Mr. Attorney, he being nearer and within the Bar.


L. H. St. I know not whether Mr. Attorney be prepared for the Summing up of
the Evidence, because he Examined the Witnesses, and the King's Council usually
allot to themselves the particular Parts, which they intend to take.


E. of Roch. Then let Mr. Solicitor go on.


Mr. Sol. Genesis I would shortly observe to your Lordships, what Evidence has
been given to you on behalf of the King in this Case, against that Noble Lord
the Prisoner at the Bar, for the Offense for which he stands Indicted. The
first Witness that was produced was the Drawer at the Greyhound Tavern in the
Strand, where this Quarrel, that was the occasion of the Death of this Person
that was slain, happn'd; and he tells you that that night there was at his
Master's House my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, Capt. French, Capt. Coote the
Person that was killed, and Mr. Dockwra, and after they had been there some
time that other Person that was the Sixth concerned in the Scuffle, Mr. James,
was sent for, and he came in when it was pretty late; there they continued till
One or two a Clock, and then they came down to the Bar, and Order was given for
to call Coaches; but it being so late, and Sunday morning, they could not find
Coaches, and then there was Orders for the getting of Chairs; when some Chairs
were brought, Mr. Coote and Mr. French went into two of the Chairs, but my Lord
Mohun interposed, and said there should be nothing done that night, and that if
they went away he would call for a File of Musketeers from the Guard, and
secure them, and thereupon they came out of the Chairs, and went into the
House, and there was the Noise of Swords clashing heard at the Bar; Capt. Coote
said he would Laugh when he pleased, and Frown when he pleased, and they
parted; Three were on one side, and three on the other of the Bar, my Lord of
Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Capt. Coote, were on one side; Capt. French, Capt.
James, and Mr. Dockwra, were on the other side: Indeed he says my Lord Mohun
and my Lord Warwick did what they could to pacify them, and threatened to send
for the Guards, but away they went. The next Witness was Thomas Brown, and he
was the Chairman that carried Mr. Coote, and he says, That there was an
Endeavor by my Lord of Warwick, and my Lord Mohun, to put off the Business at
that time, and that they did what they could to have put it off and that even
after they were in their Chairs, when they were turned up St. Martins-Lane,
there they stopped at the Back Door of the Cross-Keys Tavern, and that while they
stood there with their Three Chairs, Three other Chairs came by, and then Capt.
Coo^e ^id them put up, and follow after those Chairs as fast as they could to
Leicester-fields.

The next Witness is William Crippes, who was the other Chairman that carried
Capt. Coote, and he gives your Lordships much the same Account that Brown gave
before, and his Evidence was just to the same purpose, That my Lord of Warwick
and my Lord Mohun endeavored to pacific the Matter, and that there should be
an end of the Business for that night, and let it alone till another time, and
that my Lord Mohun threatened to send for the Guards, and secure them, and would
have had them gone home, that is, Mr. Coote either with him to his Lodging, or
he would go to Mr. Coot's, but he could not prevail: Then my Lord Mohun said,
If he would go on, his Lordship would go and see an end of the Business.

The next Witness was one Crattle, who was one of the Chairmen that carried my
Lord of Warwick, and he says, That my Lord Mohun and my Lord of Warwick did
endeavor what they could to put off the Matter till the next morning, but that
they could not prevail; That afterward, when he carried my Lord from
Leicester-fields to the Bagnio, my Lord borrowed a Handkerchief of him to wrap
his Hand in, for he said he was wounded, but by whom that Wound was given does
not appear, nor how he came by that Wound any otherways then as his Lordship
himself says, that it was given him by Mr. James.

The next was the other Chairman that carried my Lord of Warwick, which was
John Gibson, and his Testimony need not be repeated, because it did not differ
from the others. The next Witness was Robert Applegate, who was the Chairman
that carried my Lord Mohun, and he says, That there was an Endeavor used by my
Lord upon his setting down in St. Martins-Lane, to quiet Capt. Coote, and
prevent any Quarrel at that time, but he says, when they would go on, my Lord
Mohun said he would go and see the end of it, and thereupon they went on
toward Leicester-fields to the end of Greenstreet, which is at the lower end
of the Square.

The next Witness was Palmer, who was one of the Chairmen that carried Mr.
French to the Bagnio in Longacre, and he tells your Lordships what happened
upon his carrying of him thither, how immediately after his coming there my
Lord of Warwick came thither, and they knocked at the Door the same time, and
that Capt. French was very much wounded, and they went into the House together,
and that French would have had them pull off his Clothes to see his Wounds, for
he believed he was a dead Man.

The next Witness was the Chairman which carried Mr. James, and he only tells
your Lordships, That he carried a Gentleman into Leicester-fields, that my Lord
Mohun endeavored to have put off the Business for that night, but who the
Person was that he carried, he cannot so well tell, nor give an account of; but
when he had set him down at the further end of the Square, there he left him,
and he knows no farther.

Then there was the Surgeon at the Bagnio in Longacre, who gives your Lordships
an account, That about Two of the Clock in the morning on the Sunday, my Lord
of Warwick and Capt. French came in there, Capt. French was wounded in the
Body, and my Lord Warwick was wounded in the Hand, and my Lord Warwick did take
extraordinary Care of Capt. French, and would not have the Door opened to any
body, nor his Lordship known to be there; That afterward Capt. James and Mr.
Dockwra came to the Door, and my Lord came to the Door himself, and when he saw
who they were, he ordered them to be let in, and that there was a Discourse
about going into the Country, and that there was a fear that Coote was killed.
This is the Effect of the Testimony both of the Surgeon and his Servants, and
(...) be observed; That when Capt. French came in, his Sword was nor bloody,
but my Lord of Warwicks Sword was bloody almost all over, and that was (...) of
the next day, and there are several Witnesses both Men and Women of (...) House
that give your Lordships an account much to the same purpose; Then (...) was
Capt. Duckinfield, who says, That my Lord Warwick came to his Lodgings, and
they went in a Coach together to the Tavern in Cornbill, and then there was a
Discourse of going into the Country, and my Lord said* That he was afraid his
Friend Mr. Coote was killed, but they had no absolute New of his being killed
at that time, for it should seem my Lord of Warwick forsook the Field as (...)
as the Fatal Stroke was given, which by whom given it was, is left to your
Lordship's Consideration; Indeed it is pretended by my Lord, that the Wound
that he had in his Hand was given him by Mr. James, but nothing of that is made
apparent to your Lordships upon the Proofs.

Then we came to give your Lordships an account of the nature of the Wounds
that Mr. Coote had in his Body, and for that we produced both the Surgeon that
did probe the Wounds by the Order of the Coroner, and the Coroner himself;
Indeed we could not get a positive answer from either the Surgeon or the
Coroner, whether the Wounds were given by one and the same Sword, or by
different Swords, but then your Lordships have the Testimony of Mr. Turner, who
was Capt. Coote's Servant, and who knows his Master's Sword, and it has been
shown to him; and he says that is his Master's Sword that he went out with, and
it can be easily judged whether he could give himself those Wounds by that
Sword.

And your Lordships have likewise had brought before you another Sword, which
was left at the Bagnio in Longacre, that was Capt. French's, that had no Blood
at all upon it, but my Lord of Warwick's, (...) by all the Evidence, had a
great deal of Blood upon it.

Then came the Witnesses for the Prisoner at the Bar, this Noble Lord, my Lord
Warwick, and the Sum of the Testimonies that they have given is of a great deal
of Kindness between my Lord Warwick and Capt. Coote; That my Lord lent him a
Hundred Guinea's to purchase his Commission in the Guards, and he had but Three
of Four hundred Guinea's which was necessary to make the Purchase, and there
are several of them that do Testify, that they always looked upon Capt. Coote
and my Lord of Warwick to he very good Friends, and that there never was any
Quarrel between them; and that is the Sum of what the Evidence on that side did
Testify. And this my Lords, I take to be the Sum of the Evidence that has been
given on either side, and when I have laid it thus before your Lordships, I
must submit it to your Lordships Judgment what Opinion you will be of upon the
whole Matter; only there is this one Observation that I would make to your
Lordships upon this Evidence, That there is not one Witness that has given you
an Account satisfactory by whose Hand these Wounds were given to Mr. Coote; and
therefore, tho it is apparent my Lord of Warwick was in the place, where the
Mortal Wound was given, yet by whose Hand it was given is not known; until that
can be known every Person that was there must remain under the Imputation of
the same Guilt, as having a Hand, and contributing to his Death: it is certain,
and cannot be denied, that this Noble Lord, my Lord at the Bar, was in the
Field, wherein there was actual Fighting; for he does not deny it himself, but
says, that he was engaged particularly with Capt. James, when Capt. Coote was
engaged with Capt. French, between whom, as it is alleged, the Quarrel was;
but that is no way in Point of Fact made appear to your Lordships, and there
being such Suspicions and Circumstances of the Blood upon my Lord of Warwick's
Sword, and the great Concern that he was in when he came to the Bagnio, and
desiring to be concealed, and that no body should know that he was there, and
the Care he took of Mr. French, who is the pretended Person that did the Fact,
is that which is to be submitted to your Lordships; and it is to be observed,
that Mr. French's Sword was not Bloody, but only Dirty, but my Lord of
Warwick's Sword was very Bloody from the Hilt to the Point, and he was in a
great Consternation when he came into the House.

There is likewise a Circumstance which your Lordships will please to observe,
that even Mr. Coote's Sword was brought into the House by some of the Company
that were there, and whatsoever this Noble Lord pretends of his Friendship to
Mr. Coote, yet, it seems by his Care that he took of Capt. French, he had as
much Friendship for him.

There is another Circumstance that has been Testified, which it will be fit
for your Lordships to take into Consideration, and make some Observation of;
That is the nature of the Wound; It seems he had two Wounds, one on the left
side of the Breast, near the Collar Bone, and that was downward, and yet his
Man, that was here produced as a Witness, does Testify, that he was one that
used his Right Hand, and then it is a wonder that he should receive such a sort
of a Wound in that part; and the other Wound was on the left side too, but it
was upward, and how that could be given by one that was a Right Handed Man, is
certainly a very great Wonder; and the Wounds being both given upon the same
side, it cannot but be concluded, that they were given by one and the same
Sword.

Another Circumstance which relates to my Lord of Warwick is, that when he came
into the Bagnio after the Fact was over, he would have himself denied to be
there, and went to the Door when James and Dockwra came in, and his declaring
his desire of going into the Country; These, we say, are Circumstances that do
induce a Doubt, That my Lord of Warwick had a Concern upon him of great Guilt
of having a Hand in this Man's Death: It is indeed pretended by my Lord of
Warwick, That Mr. Coote was a Person that my Lord of Warwick had a Kindness
for, but it is plain by the Evidence, that he left him dead in the Field, and
did not take any Care of him, but took a great deal of Care of Capt. French,
who, it is pretended, was the Person that fought with Coote, when he came to
the Bagnio, and there is nothing of Kindness at this time pretended, nor any
thing of a Defense to this Matter offered by my Lord of Warwick, but only what
the Chairmen say, that he endeavored to put it off to another time. These, my
Lords, are all the Observations that I shall make upon the Evidence in this
Case; How far this Evidence, upon Consideration, will weigh with your
Lordships, I must submit it to you. If my Lord of Warwick did do the Fact, as
these Circumstances, we think, may incline your Lordships to believe he did, it
will surely he Murder; but how far the Evidence comes up to the Proof of that,
we must humbly submit to your Lordships, who are the Judges of it; and we leave
it entirely to your Consideration upon what you have heard.


L. H. St. Then it seems you have done on all sides.


Council. Yes, my Lords.


Lords. Then Adjourn, Adjourn.


L. H. St. Is it your Lordship's pleasure to Adjourn into the House of Lords?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


L. H. St. This House is Adjourned into the House of Lords.


Then the Lords went back to their own House in the same Order they came into
the Court in Westminster Hall, and Debated the Matter among themselves, what
Judgment to give upon the Evidence that had been heard, and in about Two Hours
time they returned again into the Court, erected upon the Scaffold in
Westminster Hall; and after they were Seated in their Places, the Lord High
Steward being Seated in his Chair before the Throne, spoke to the Lords thus;

L. H. St. Will your Lordships proceed to give your Judgment?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


L. H. St. Your Lordships will give me leave, as I ask your Lordships your
several Opinions, to take so much time as to write down the Opinion of every
Lord.


Lords, Ay, Ay.


Then the Lord High Steward asked this Question of every one of the Lords there
present, beginning with the Puisne Baron, which was the Lord Bernard.

L. H. St. My Lord Bernard, Is Edward Earl of Warwick Guilty of the Felony and
Murder whereof he stands Indicted, or Not Guilty?


The Lord Bernard stood up in his Place uncovered, and laying his Right Hand
upon his Breast, Pronounced his Judgment thus,

L. Bernard. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


The same Question was asked severally of all the Lords, who in the same Form
delivered their Opinions, as follows,

L. Haversham, Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Herbert of Cherbury, Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon
my Honor.


L. Weston. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Ashburnham. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


L. Cholmley. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Jeffreys. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Godolphin. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Guilford. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Oselstone. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Osborne. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Craven. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Cornwallis. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


L. Granville. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Berkly. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Laxington. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Reckingham. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


L. Lucas. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Culpeper. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Vanghan. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Byron. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Jerm^n. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Leigh. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Raby. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Howard of Escrick. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon
my Honor.


L. ^^velace. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Hunsdon. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. North and Gray. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


L. Wharton. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Eure. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Willoughby of Parham, Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter,
upon my Honor.


L. Dadley. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Ferres. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Willoughby of Eresby, Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter,
upon my Honor.


L. Audley. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. Abergaveny. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Viscount Lonsdale, Is Edward Earl of Warwick Guilty,
etc.


L. Viscount Longaville. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon
my Honor.


L. Viscount Townsend. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon
my Honor.


L. H. Steward. The Earl of Grantham, Is Edward Earl of Warwick Guilty, etc.


E. of Grantham. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Albemarle. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Tankerville. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Warrington. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Scarborough. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Torrington. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Marlborough. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Mountague. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Portland. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Nochester. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Nottingham. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Yarmouth: Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Radnor. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


E. of Macclesfield. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Feversham. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Burlington. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Carlisle. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Bath. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


E. of Anglesey. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Essex. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


E. of Scarsdale. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Thanet. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


E. of Chesterfield. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Carnarvan. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Kingston. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Winchelsea. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Stamford. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Peterborow. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. Rivers. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


E. of Manchester. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Denbigh. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Leicester. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Bridgwater. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Dorset and Middlesex. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter,
upon my Honor.


E. of Suffolk. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Huntington. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


E. of Darby. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


E. of Kent. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


E. of Oxford. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. High Steward. My Lord Great Chamberlain, Is Edward Earl of Warwick Guilty,
etc.


E. of Lindsey. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Marquis of Normanby, Is Edward Earl of Warwick Guilty,
etc.


L. Marquis of Normanby. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon
my Honor.


L. Marquis of Hallifax. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon
my Honor.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Duke of Newcastle, Is Edward Earl of Warwick Guilty,
etc.


D. of Newcastle. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


D. of Scomberg. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


D. of St. Albans. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


D. of Northumberland. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon
my Honor.


D. of Ormond. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


D. of Southampton. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


D. of Richmond. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


D. of Somerset. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


D. of Devonshire. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my
Honor.


L. High Steward. My Lord President, Is Edward Earl of Warwick Guilty, etc.


D. of Leeds. Not Guilty of Murder, but Guilty of Manslaughter, upon my Honor.


L. High Steward. My Judgment is, That my Lord of Warwick is not Guilty of the
Murder, but i^ Guilty of Manslanghter, upon my Honor.


Then the Lord High-Steward reckoned up the Number of the Peers that were there
present, and the Opinions that were given, and afterward acquainted their
Lordships with the Resolution that they came to, in this manner.

L. H. St. My Lords, Your Lordships are Ninety three in Number here present,
and you have all acquitted my Lord of Warwick of the Murder whereof he stands
Indicted, but you are of Opinion, that he is Guilty of Manslaughter; Is it your
Pleasure, that he should be called to the Ba^, and acquainted with your
Lordships Judgment?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


Cl. of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Serj. at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes! Chief Governor of the Tower of London,
bring forth the Body of your Prisoner Edward Earl of Warwick forthwith, upon
Pain and Peril will fall thereon.


Then the Earl of Warwick was brought to the Bar. L. H. St. My Lord of Warwick,
your Lordship has been Arraigned upon an Indictment for the Killing Mr. Coote,
you have pleaded Not-Guilty, and put your self upon your Trial by your Peers
here present; my Lords have heard the Evidence given both against you and for
you, and have considered of it, and are come to a Resolution, and their
Judgment is, That your Lordship is not Guilty of the Murder whereof you stand
Indicted, but that you are Guilty of Manslaughter; What has your Lordship to
say, why Judgment of Death should not be pronounced against you according to
the Law?


E. of Warw. My Lords, I desire that the Benefit of my Peerage may be allowed
me, according to the Statute of Edward the Sixth.


L. H. St. My Lord, your Lordship has demanded the Benefit of your Peerage upon
the Statute of Edward the 6th, and you must have it by Law; but I am directed
by their Lordships to acquaint you, That you cannot have the Benefit of that
Statute twice, therefore I am likewise directed by their Lordships to say, That
they hope you will take a more than ordinary Care of your Behavior for the
future, that so you may never hereafter fall into such unfortunate
Citcumstances as you have been now under; my Lords hope this will be so
sensible a Warning, that nothing of this kind will ever happen to you again;
your Lordship is now to be Discharged.


L. H. St. Is it your Lordships pleasure to adjourn to the House of Lords?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


L. H. St. This House is Adjourned to the House of Lords^


Then the Lords went in Procession, in the same Order that they came into the
Court.

FINIS.
THE TRIAL OF Charles Lord Mohun.
Die Mercurii 29 Martii, 1699.
ABout One of the Clock, the Lords came in the same Order as the day before to
the Trial of the Earl of Warwick, into the Court erected in Westminster Hall.

Clerk of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Sergeant at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, My Lord High Steward, his Grace, does
Strictly Charge and Command all manner of Persons here present, to keep Silence
upon Pain of Imprisonment.


Serj. at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, All manner of Persons who are obliged to
give their Attendance here this day, before his Grace, my Lord High Steward of
England, let them give their Attendance forthwith.


Cl. of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation again.


Serj. at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, His Grace my Lord High Steward of England
does Straightly Charge and Command all manner of Persons here present to be
Uncovered.


Cl. of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation again.


Serj. at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, Chief Governor of the Tower of London,
bring forth the Body of your Prisoner Charles Lord Mohun forthwith, upon Pain
and Peril will fall thereon.


Then my Lord Mohun was brought to the Bar.

Lord High Steward. My Lord Mohun, your Lordship is now brought upon your Trial
for the Murder of Mr. Coot, for which you stand Indicted by the Grand Jury for
the County of Middlesex. The King, who knows that Justice is one of the Pillars
which supports a Throne, will have a strict Account taken of the Blood of any
of his Subjects, without Respect to the Quality of the Slain, or of the Person
who stands Charged with his Death. There is not one of the Noble Peers here
present, who are to be your Tryers, but does heartily wish your Lordship
Innocent; But, on the other side, if you should appear to be Guilty upon the
Evidence, you ought not to hope that any Consideration of Relation, Friendship,
or Pity, will prevail against Justice. And therefore since in your present
Condition every thing that is valuable in this World is at stake, it will be
highly necessary for your Lordship to recollect your self, and to have your
best Thoughts about you. Facts of this Nature are frequently attended with such
unhappy Circumstances, that a Noble Person may be justly covered with Shame to
have Faults and Weaknesses exposed to such an Assembly as this, although he be not
Conscious to himself of the Guilt of Blood: But your Lordship ought not to be
so far discomposed with any Thoughts of this Kind, as to neglect your Defense
against this heavy Accusation of Murder. In order to this, it is necessary for
your Lordship to hear with Temper what will be said against you, and by no
Means to Interrupt the Council or Witnesses. I will take Care to give your
Lordship notice when the proper time comes for you to make your Observations
upon the Evidence, to Examine your Witnesses, and to say what you think proper
for your own Defense; And when my Lords have heard, and fully and maturely
Considered the whole Matter, their Lordships will give such a Judgment as the
Law and Justice require.


L. H. St. Read the Indictment to my Lord.


Clerk of the Crown. CHarles Lord Mohun, your Lordship Stands Indicted in the
County of Middlesex, by the Name of Charles Lord Mohun of Oakehampton in the
County of Devon, late of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields in the County
of Middlesex, together with Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, late of the
same Parish and County, Richard French, late of the same Parish and County,
Gent. Roger James, late of the same Parish and County, Gent. and George
Dockwra, late of the same Parish and County, Gent. not having the Fear of God
before your Eyes, but being moved and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil
the 30th day of October, in the Tenth Year of the Reign of our Soverein Lord
that now is, William the Third, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. with Force and Arms,
etc. at the Parish aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, in and upon
one Richard Coote Esquire in the Peace of God, and of our said Sovereign Lord the
King that now is, then and there being Feloniously, Wilfully, and of your
Malice afore-thought, did make an Assault, and that the aforesaid Edward Earl
of Warwick and Holland, with a certain Sword made of Iron and Steel of the
value of 5 s which he the said Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, in his Right
Hand then and there had and held drawn, the aforesaid Richard Coote in and upon
the left part of the Breast of him the said Richard Coote, near the Collar Bone
of him the said Richad Coote, then and there Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of
his Malice afore-thought, did Strike, Stab, and Thrust in, giving to the said
Richard Coote, then and there with the drawn Sword aforesaid, in and upon the
left part of the Breast of him the said Richard Coote, near the Collar Bone of
him the said Richard Coote, one Mortal Wound of the breadth of half an Inch,
and of the depth of 5 Inches, of which said Mortal Wound he the aforesaid
Richard Coote then and there instantly died; And that you the said Lord Mohun,
together with the said Richard French, Roger James, and George Dockwra, then
and there Feloniously, Wilfully, and of your Malice afore-thought, were
present, aiding, abetting, comforting, assisting, and maintaining the said
Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, the said Richard Coote, in manner and form
aforesaid, Feloniously, Wilfully, and of his Malice afore-thought, to Kill and
Murder, and so the said Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, and you the said
Charles Lord Mohun, Richard French, Roger James, and George Dockwra, the
aforesaid Richard Coote, in manner and form aforesaid, Feloniously, Wilfully,
and of your Malice afore-thought, did Kill and Murder, against the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, His Crown and Dignity. How say you,
Charles Lord Mohun, are you Guilty of this Felony and Murder, whereof you stand
Indicted, or Not Guilty?


Lord Mohun. Not Guilty.


Cl. of the Crown. Culprit, How will you be Tried?


L. Mohun. By God and my Peers.


Cl. of the Crown. God send your Lordship good Deliverance.


Cl. of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Serj. at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, All manner of Persons that will give
Evidence on behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, against Charles Lord Mohun,
the Prisoner at the Bar, let them come forth and give their Evidence, for now
he stands at the Bar for his Deliverance.


L. Mohun. My Lords, I desire I may have the Benefit of Pen, Ink, and Paper.


L. H. St. Your Lordships are pleased to permit my Lord Mohun to have Pen, Ink,
and Paper?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


Pen Ink, and Paper were carried to my Lord, by one of the Clerks of the House.

Mr. Cooper. May it please your Lordships, my Lord Mohun, the Prisoner at the
Bar, stands Indicted by the Grand Jury of the County of Middlesex before
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer in that County; and the Indictment sets
forth, That Edward Earl of Warwick and Holland, Charles Lord Mohun, Baron Mohun
of Okehampton in the County of Devon, Richard French, Roger James, and George
Dockwra, the 30th of October, in the Tenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, with
Force and Arms, at the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields, in the County of
Middlesex, upon one Richard Coote Esquire Feloniously, Wilfully, and of their
Malice afore-thought, did make an Assault, and that the said Edward Earl of
Warwick and Holland, with a drawn Sword then in his Right Hand, the said
Richard Coote, upon the left part of his Breast near the Collar Bone, did
Strike, Stab, and Thrust, giving him thereby a Mortal Wound of the breadth of
half an Inch, and the depth of 5 Inches, of which Wound he instantly died; That
my Lord Mohun, Mr. French, Mr. James, and Mr. Dockwra, Feloniously, Wilfully,
and of their Malice afore-thought, were present, aiding, and abetting my Lord
of Warwick and Holland, the said Richard Coote, in manner aforesaid, to Kill
and Murder; And then concludes, so that the Earl of Warwick and Holland, the
said Lord Mohun, Richard French, Roger James, and George Dockwra, the said
Richard Coote, in manner and form aforesaid, Feloniously, Wilfully, and of
their Malice afore-thought, did Kill and Murder, against the Peace of the King,
his Crown and Dignity. To this Indictment my Lord Mohun has pleaded Not Guilty,
and for his Trial has put himself upon God and your Lordships, his Peers. We
shall call our Witnesses, and produce what Evidence we have to give to prove my
Lord Mohun Guilty, and so submit it to you.


Mr. Attor. Genesis My Lords, This Noble Lord, my Lord Mohun, the Prisoner at the
Bar, stands Indicted for the Death of Mr. Coote, one of the King's Subjects, as
your Lordships have heard in the Case that was before you yesterday, to which
Indictment he had Pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Trial has put himself upon my
Lords who are his Peers; I shall very shortly open the Substance of the
Evidence that we shall offer for the King against my Lord, the Prisoner at the
Bar; We shall produce Evidence to prove, That at the time laid in the
Indictment, the 29th of October at night, and the next morning, which was
Sunday, my Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar, and my Lord of Warwick, (who has been
found Guilty of Manslaughter upon this Indictment before your Lordships) and
those other Persons that are named in the Indictment, Capt. French, Capt.
James, and Mr. Dockwra, and the Gentleman that was killed, happened to be at
the Greyhound Tavern in the Strand, which was then kept by Mr. Lockett, and
continued there a great part of the night, indeed till the next morning, about
One or two of the Clock in the morning; There was my Lord of Warwick, my Lord
Mohun, Capt. French, Capt. Coote, and Mr. Dockwra, but very late in the night
the other Gentleman, Mr. James, was sent for; A Messenger was sent particularly
to have him come to them; There they continued Drinking till about One or two
of the Clock in the morning, then Coaches were sent for; then the Drawer of the
House will acquaint your Lordships, that he went for them, and could not get
any at that time, being a very dark night; and when there could be no Coaches
had, then there were Chairs called for, and the Drawer went to call Chairs;
and, as we shall make it appear to your Lordships, when the Drawer came back,
there did appear to be a Quarrel among them, for there was clashing of Swords,
and they seemed to be divided into Two Parties, on the one side were my Lord of
Warwick, my Lord Mohun, the Prisoner at the Bar, and Mr. Coote; On the other
side were Capt. French, Capt. James, and Mr. Dockwra; and first there were two
Chairs came to the Door, into which Mr. French and Mr. Coote went, and when
they were in the Chairs my Lord Mohun came out, and said he would kill any of
the Chairmen that went away, and so they put up again, and the Gentlemen came
out, and came into the House, but afterward Mr. Coote went into the first
Chair, and my Lord of Warwick into the next, and my Lord Mohun into the third,
and then they went away; and the other Three Gentlemen went into the other
three Chairs, and followed them. Your Lordships will hear whither they were all
carried; When they came to the End of St. Martins-Lane in the Strand, my Lord
Mohun would indeed have endeavored to have persuaded Mr. Coote in particular
to have gone home for that night, and let the Business alone till another time,
but Mr. Coote would go on; and while the 3 Chairs that carried my Lord of
Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Mr. Coote to St. Martins-Lane End, which were the 3
first Chairs that went away from Lockett's, the other 3 Chairs that went after
them overtook them, and then by Mr. Coote's Command, the Chairmen that carried
him went forward toward Leicester-fields, and then this Noble Lord, my Lord
Mohun, did say If you do go on, I will go and see the End of it, and ordered
the Chairmen that carried him to go after those Chairs in which my Lord of
Warwick and Mr. Coote went, and accordingly they did go till they came to the
hither end of the Square in Leicester-fields near Greenstreet End, where my
Lord Mohun got out of his Chair, paid for all the 3 Chairs 3 s But we shall not
be able to give to your Lordships an Account particularly as to my Lord Mohun,
what he did afterward, but we shall call our Witnesses to prove what we have
opened, and when our Witnesses are heard, we shall leave the Matter to your
Lordships Judgment.


Samuel Cawthorne, which was the Drawer at the Tavern at Lockett's, was Sworn,
and gave his Evidence to the same Effect that he did the day before.

Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Will you acquaint my Lords who were at your House the 29th
and 30th of October last, Saturday night and Sunday morning?


Sam. Cawthorne. There were my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, Capt. Coote,
Capt. French, Mr. Dockwra, and Mr. James.


Mr. At. Genesis How long did they continue there?


Cawthorne. Till between One and two of the Clock in the Morning.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Will you acquaint my Lords what happened at your Master's
House at that time; you remember what Evidence you gave yesterday; Tell the
whole Matter again, because it relates to another Noble Lord that is now at the
Bar.


Cawthorne. The Reckoning was called for about that time, and I went up and
took the Reckoning, and all the Gentlemen came down to the Bar, and Coaches
were sent for; I went for them, but no Coaches could be had; Then Chairs were
sent for, and I called for Chairs, and there came Two Chairs to the Door, and
into those Two Chairs went Capt. Coote, and Capt. French, and my Lord Mohun and
my Lord of Warwick endeavored to quiet them, and to put off the Business till
another day, and thereupon they came out of the Chairs, and came into the House
again; My Lord Mohun did desire there might be no Quarrel, and would have Mr.
Coote go home with him to his Lodgings at Westminster, or he would go with Mr.
Coote, and said there should be no Quarrel that night: There were then 3 of
them of one side of the Bar, and 3 of the other side, and their Swords were all
drawn: My Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Mr. Coote, were of one side, and
Capt. French, Capt. James, and Mr. Dockwra, were of the other side; I was
without the House when their Swords were first drawn, but I heard my Lord Mohun
say, I have got a cut Finger by endeavoring to part them, and at first when
the Chairs came on, my Lord Mohun said, If they did Quarrel he would send to
the Guards for a File of Musketeers, and secure them, so that he did what he
could to prevent any Quarrel at all; and when he had received the Wound in his
Hand, I helped him to a Napkin to wrap his Hand in upon the Bleeding of it;
Then my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Capt. Coote, went away in 3 Chairs,
and my Lord Mohun gave Order to go down to Westminster; and there were 3 Chairs
called for by the other 3 Persons, two did come, and Capt. French and Capt.
James went away in them, and the 6th not being come, they stayed till it did
come, and then they 3 went away too; The Chairs were all ordered to go home
with them; My Lord of Warwick, and my Lord Mohun, gave Order to their Chairs to
keep close with Mr. Coote; and the other 3 Chairs immediately followed.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Will you consider, and recollect with your self, Was Mr.
James there at first?


Cawthorne. No, I was sent for him about Ten a Clock at night, and there he
continued with them till they went all away in the 6 Chairs, and he was almost
Fuddled when he came in.


Mr. At. Genesis When James came in, Was his Sword drawn?


Cawthorne. His Sword was in the Scabbard, but the Scabbard was broken, and he
took and broke his Sword stamping upon it.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, can you tell, you being up and down in the Room, what was
the occasion of the Quarrel?


Cawthorne. Indeed I cannot tell, but some Words past when they were below
stairs by the Bar from Capt. French, That he would Laugh when he pleased, and
Frown when he pleased; and Mr. Dockwra did say, That they would fight them
whenever they pleased when they went away, but I did not observe that there
was any Quarrel between them while they were above, nor any Swords drawn till
after I came from calling the Chairs.


Mr. At. Genesis Were all the Swords drawn at once?


Cawthorne. They were all drawn when I came in from calling for the Coaches and
the Chairs, and 3 were within the Bar, and 3 were without; They were putting up
their Swords when I came in again; Indeed I do not know any thing of the
Quarrel.


L. H. St. My Lord Mohun, Will you ask this Witness any Questions?


L. Mohun. Indeed I think I need not ask him any Question, but yet, if your
Lordships please, I would ask him this, Whether directly or indirectly I was
any ways concerned in the Quarrel? Or, Whether I did not endeavor all that
ever I could to quiet 'em.


Cawthorne. Yes, indeed, my Lord Mohun did endeavor all that ever he could to
prevent any Quarrel at that time.


L. Mohun. Did I say any thing tending to the promoting of a Quarrel or
Fighting among them?


Cawthorne. No, my Lord Mohun did not promote any thing of the Quarrel between
'em, but he did say 2 or 3 times that he would send for the Guards to secure
them, and keep them from Fighting, both at the Door of the House, and at the
Bar, and ask't for a Napkin to wrap up his Hand in for the Wound which he said
he got in endeavoring to quiet and part them, and prevent their fighting.


L. Mohun. That is all that I would ask him, whether I did not endeavor all I
could to prevent any Quarrelling or Fighting at that time.


Cawthorne. Yes, indeed, my Lord did so.


L. H. St. He has said so already, my Lord, and therefore there does not need
any further Examination of him to that Point: If both sides have done with this
Witness, let him go down.


Which he did. L. H. St. Then Mr. Attorney, Who is your next Witness?


Mr. At. Genesis Our next Witness is Thomas Brown, who was one of the Chairmen
that carried Mr. Coote into Leicester-fields.


Then he was Sworn. L. H. St. What is the Question you would ask him, Mr.
Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lords, I desire he may be Ask't and Examined, and acquaint
your Lordships, who it was that he carried from Lo (...)'s the 29th of October
last to Leicester-fields, and what time it was of the night?


Brown. I carried Mr. Coote in my Chair.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither were you directed to carry him?


Brown. To Leicester-fields.


M. At. Genesis What time of night was it?


Brown. It was 3 quarters past One, as near as I could guess.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, What other Chairs were there that went along with you?


Brown. There were Two other Chairs.


Mr. At. Genesis Who were in those Chairs, pray?


Brown. There were my Lord of Warwick in one, and my Lord Mohun in the other.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you 3 go away from Lockett's together?


Brown. Yes, we did, and when we were bid to take up, we went to the end of
St. Martins-Lane, and turning up at the end of St. Martins-Lane, there my Lord
of Warwick and my Lord Mohun called out to Capt. Coote to stay, and to turn
down to go to Westminster, but Mr. Coote would turn up the Lane, and my Lord of
Warwick and my Lord Mohun made a stop at the Back Door of the Cross-Keys
Tavern, and both of them persuaded Mr. Coote to put it off till the next
morning, but he would not, he said he would make an end of it that night.


M. At. Genesis Pray, recollect your self, Did they name among them what their
Business was that they would make an end of?


Brown. No, they did not.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was it that stopped at St. Martins-Lane End?


Brown. When we were turning up at St. Martins-Lane End, my Lord of Warwick
and my Lord Mohun called out to stop, and ask't Mr. Coote whither he was going,
and when he said to Leicester-fields, my Lord Mohun called out to us to set
down, which we did, at the Back Door of the Cross-Keys Tavern; They did both of
'em, my Lord Warwick, and my Lord Mohun, persuade Mr. Coote to go home to
Westminster, and not to end the Business that night, but he would go on, and
while we were there, there went 3 other Chairs up St. Martins-Lane on the other
side of the way, then Mr. Coote, who was in our Chair, bid us take up, and
follow those Chairs into the Fields, and Swore Dam him he would run his Sword
into one of us, if we did not make haste, and overtake those other Chairs, and
go before them; I think his Words were, Damn me, I Will run my Sword in your
Breech, if you don't make haste, and get before that other Chair.


Mr. At. Genesis You say then, they went all away together up to Leicester-fields.


Brown. Yes, they did so?


L. Mohun. I desire he may be ask't, whether I did not desire him to go home
with me to my Lodging at Westminster.


Brown. Yes, you did, and begged of him as if it had been for an Alms, That he
would put it off for that night; but when the other Chairs past by us at
Charing Cross in St. Martins-Lane, he would have the Chair taken up, and us to
make what haste we could to get before 'em thither, or else he Swore Damn him
he would run his Sword into one of us, if we did not make haste to get to
Leicester-fields before the other Chairs that went up the other side of the way.


Mr. At. Genesis When the other Chairs were past by, and you went away to
Leicester-fields, pray tell my Lords what happn'd then?


Brown. We went away to Leicester-fields, and when we came to Greenstreet End,
and were entering upon the Square upon the broad Stones, Mr. Coote called out to
us, and bid us to set him down, and so did the other 2 Chairs, and when he put
his Hand in his Pocket to discharge us, my Lord of Warwick put his Hand in his
Pocket to pay the 3 Chairs, and Mr. Coote offered Half a Guinea to Discharge
the Chairs, and my Lord Mohun did produce 3 s and with it discharged all the 3
Chairs, and they all 3 walked away together forward upon the Broad Stones on
the Right Hand side of the way; It was so dark a night, I could not see half a
dozen yards from me; It was the darkest night, I think, that ever I saw in all
my Life, and therefore I cannot tell what became of them after they went out of
the Chairs.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Did you see my Lord Mohun afterward.


Brown. No, I did never see my Lord Mohun afterward till now here at the Bar.


Mr. At. Genesis You say it was so dark, that you could not see 3 yards from you,
pray, What did happen afterward when you were in the Field?


Brown. A little while after we had set down these Gentlemen, I filled my Pipe
out of my Box, and before I could light it, I heard a Calling Chairs, Chairs,
and I went up toward the end of the Square, where the Noise was, and when I
came there they would have had me lift the Chair over the Rails, and I told
them, if I did I could not lift it over again; but they would needs have me
lift it over, and I did so, and by the light of the Lanthorn I saw Capt. French
and Capt. James holding up Capt. Coote, and they did desire me to take him into
our Chair, but he was in such a Condition that I could not get him into the
Chair; It was before I could well light my Pipe the Chairs were called.


Mr. At. Genesis Who did call, can you tell?


Brown. No, indeed I cannot tell who did call Chairs, but it was a Voice from
the upper end of the Fields, and we lifted our Chair over the Rails into the
Fields, and there were two Gentlemen holding up another Man; I have heard it
said it was Capt. French and Capt. James, and they cried out, Dear Coote, Dear
Coote, and would have had him gotten into the Chair, but we could not; and my
Lord of Warwick did then say, If any damage did come to the Chair, tho it were
100 l we should be satisfied the damage; but we were not able to get him into
the Chair, and so there we left him.


Mr. At. Genesis You say you see Two Gentlemen holding up Mr. Coote, and 'twas a
very dark night, How could you tell who those Gentlemen were?


Brown. I could not see any thing of 'em till we came up with the Candle close
to 'em.


Mr. At. Genesis And what did they say when you came up close to the Chair?


Brown. They offered me 100 l Satisfaction for any Damage to my Chair; but
they could not get him in, for he was at that time dead, I believe, for we went
to hale him up, and to get him into the Chair, but we could not do it.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you tell who the Two Persons were that held him up?


Brown. No, but by the description of the Persons they had such Clothes on as
that they must be Capt. French and Capt. James, but indeed I cannot Swear
directly who they were that were there, nor who they were that called for
Chairs at the upper end of the Field; but when our Chairs was lifted over again
over the Rails, and we came to the Corner to see who should be taken in, there
came one to us who bid us carry him to the Bagnio in Longacre, and thither we
did go accordingly.


(...) you tell who the Persons were that held up the (...) would have to be
got into the Chair?

(...)

(...) can you describe 'em so as to know 'em, whether (...) those two
Gentlemen?

(...) and my Lord Mohun were not there, I Am sure, for I (...) with them
before; and when I came up (...) was one of them was ^igger than my (...) and
the ^lder of them had other sort (...) that time, as we could see when we (...)

(...) any lights of the Lamps, that are usually in the (...) Square*

(...) very dark Night, and we (...) that I am sure of, and there was nobody
else that (...) the Field, (...) two Gentlemen, (...) we had brought up before
to the Square, and (...) Lord Mohun at the bottom of the (...) tell (...) but
(...) therefore they would not come. (...) coming up, and that we could not
(...) over the Rails again, and (...)

(...) and that is, how far the (...) that is (...) and, to the place (...)
again, at the upper end of the P^^^^, where ^e (...) holding up Mr. Coote, and
endeavoring to get him (...)

(...) as near as (...)

(...) means fifty Yards from the upper (...) Fields?

(...)

(...) at the very (...)

(...) of St. (...)

(...) in (...)?

(...) other Chairs (...) of my (...) could (...) light (...) calling for (...)
up our Chair (...) you, two Gentlemen holding up (...) my dear Coote*

(...) it was that called for the Chairs the (...)

(...) would (...) bring our Chair over (...) and when we came up to 'em, I saw
only (...) they were particularly, till we (...) their Clo^^^s, by the Light of
the Candle (...) us put Mr. Coote into our Chair, (...) would have had us carry
him away; (...) not besides lift him over (...) have any satisfaction for
damage (...) went to heave him (...) did all we could to have got him into the
(...) we lifted the Chair over the Rails again; and when we came to the corner
of the Rails, at the way that goes to Long-acre, there we took up a Gentleman
whom we carried to the Bagnio; in the Long-acre we called out to the Watch, but
they said it was not within their Ward, and they would not come.

Mr. Attorney General. Can you tell who were the Persons that were at the upper
end of the Fields?


Brown. No, indeed, I cannot tell who they were.


Mr. Attorney General. Was my Lord Mohun ^ and my Lord, Warwick the two?


Brown. No, my Lord Mohun was not there, no^ my Lord Warwick; I know them so
well, that it could not be them; one of the Gentlemen was bigger than my Lord
of Warwick, and the other of them had (...) Clothes than my Lord Mohun.


Mr. Attorney General. Was that the way they walked up, when they came out of
the Chairs, that led to that end of the Fields where you found. Mr. Coote
wounded?


Brown. Yes, it was.


Mr. Attorney General. My Lords, this is but the Repetition of the Evidence
that he gave to your Lordships yesterday.


Lord High Steward. If you have done with this Witness, my Lord Mohun may ask
him any Questions.


Lord Mohun. I desire to have him asked, how far is the place where he carried
the Chair at first into Leicester-fields, from the place where they put over
the Chair within the Rails, and would have taken in Mr. Coore?


Brown. It is about fifty Yards, as near as I can g^^ss.


Lord Mohun. I desire to know of him, whether the place where we were set down,
that came in the first three Chairs, from Locket's into Leicester-fields, to
the place where he found Mr. Coote supported by the two Gentlemen, be not from
one end of the Fields to the other?


Brown. The place where we let down Captain Coote, is at the lower end of
Green-street, and the place where we found him Wounded, was at the upper end by
Leicester-bouse.


Lord High Steward. I think it is understood, that Green-street, which comes
out of St. Martins-lane, is at one end of Leicester-square; and Leicester-house
is at the other End.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray where was it that you saw the two Gentlemen hold up
Captain Coote, and cry out, My dear Coote, My dear Coote?


Brown. It was on one side of the Gross way, that leads out of the Fields
toward Newport-street, and by Leicester-house.


Mr. Attorney General. But you say, three Chairs did go up toward the upper
end of the Fields?


Brown. Yes, they did so; but our three Chairs that came away first from the
Grayhound-Tavern, set down at Green-street end, and the three Gentlemen that
came in our Chairs went up the Pails to 'em; but whither they went I cannot
tell, but soon after we heard calling for Chairs again, and so we went up,
where we found the two Gentlemen holding up Captain Coote, and saying, My dear
Coote, My dear Coote.


Mr. Attorney General. But when you were called the second time, that is into
the Fields, where was the place you say that you found them in?


Brown. It was within the Rails, one side of the Cross-way toward
Leicesterhouse.


Lord Mohun. Pray was that the direct way that I went from the place tha^^ was
set down, that is the lower end of Green-street; to the place that they
afterward went to, which was the Bagnio in Long-acre?


Brown. When Captain Coote, and my Lord Mohun were set down, and walked away
upon the paved Stones of the Square, to the place where I found the two
Gentlemen holding up Captain Coote, was the quite contrary way from the end of
Green-street to the Standard-Tavern.


Lord High Steward. Who is your next Witness, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. Attorney General. The next Witness that we call, is Robert Applegate.


Who was Sworn.

Lord High Steward. What do you ask this Witness?


Mr. Attorney General. My Lords, this is the Chairman that carried my Lord
Mohun to Leicester-fields from Locket's; he will give your Lordships an Account
when he carried him, who he carried, and what hapened afterward, which is all
but to the same purpose with the Evidence that he gave yesterday. But pray who
was that whom you carried on the thirtieth of October last to Leicesterfields?


Applegate. I carried my Lord Mohun from Locket's, at the Grayhound-Tavern in
the Strand to Leicester-fields.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray how many Chairs were there of you that went away
together?


Applegate. There were three of us that went away together, one carried my Lord
Warwick, we my Lord Mohun, and the third carried Captain Coote which was the
first Chair that went away.


Mr. Attorney General. Whither did you go?


Applegate. We went to the corner of St. Martins-lane^


Mr. Attorney General. Who do you say were in the other two Chairs?


Applegate. My Lord of Warwick, and my Lord Mohun.


Mr. Attorney General. When they came out first, what orders or directions were
given?


Applegate. My Lord Mohun said, that he and my Lord of Warwick, and Captain
Coote, would go all three together down to Westminster, and there they would
all lie together, or be together that Night.


Mr. Attorney General. What Answer was given to what my Lord Mohun said?


Applegate. Indeed I do not remember any Answer that was given at all; but
after that my Lord Mohun went into the Chair, and ordered us to follow down the
other two Chairs toward Westminster, and we put up the Chair and came away;
and when we came to St. Martins-lane end, the Chair that carried Captain Coote
turned up the Lane, and we being ordered to follow the other Chairs, went up
the Lane too; but my Lord Mohun perceiving that they were not going down to
Westminster, called out to stop, just when we were entered into St.
Martins-lane, over against the back Door of the Cross-keystavern, and made the
other Chairs to stand, and all the three Chairs were set a-brest before that
place, and my Lord Mohun asked Captain Coote whither he was going? and he
answered to Leicester-fields; he b^g'd of him, as one would beg for an Alms,
that he would not go that Night, for the Business could not be done that Night,
and it were better to put it off 'till the next Morning.


Mr. Attorney General. Did they name what the business was that was to be done?


Applegate. No, but my Lord Mohun did say, 'twas impossible to be done that
Night.


Mr. Attorney General. Well, and what happened afterward, while you were in
that place?


Applegate. While we were there, three other Chairs past by us, on the other
side of the way, and going forward up the Street; Captain Coote ordered their
Chairs to follow, and so we did to Green-street end, and there we set 'em down.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray can you remember what was said by my Lord Mohun at
the time when the other Chairs past by?


Applegate. He was then desiring and begging of Captain Coote to go home to
Westminster, telling him that it could not be done that Night, but it must be
deferred till the next Morning; but Captain Coote said he would not delay it
till the next Morning, but he would go to Leicester-fields that Night, and all
three Chairs were ordered to go forward, and we did go on forward to
Leicester-fields; my Lord Mohun, indeed, did beg and desire as hear^ily as, I
say, a Man for an Alms, that they would let it alone for that Night; but
Captain Coote would not, and ordered his Chair to go forwards.


Mr. Attorney General. You say my Lord Mohun begged as heartily as if it were
for an Alms to defer it for that Night?


Applegate. Yes, he did so; so that I do really think that he was not concerned
in the matter.


Mr. Attorney General. If he were so earnest to defer and put of the business,
how came you to carry him thither that Night? What Expressions did he use,
particularly in St. Martins-Lane, after the other Chairs were past by?


Applegate. He said, If you must go, I Will go with you and see it; and he bid us
take up and follow the other Chairs wherein Captain Coote and my Lord Warwick
were; and we did go.


Mr. Attorney General. And where did you set my Lord Mohun down?


Applegate. At the hither end of Leicester-square, at the corner of
Green-street, the lower corner of the paved Stones, going up to Leicester-house.


Mr. Attorney General. What became of the three Gentlemen that you set down at
the end of Green-street?


Applegate. They went all three together up the Stone pavement, toward the
upper end of the Square, toward the Standard-Tavern, I think.


Mr. Attorney General. Did they go together, or did they go asunder?


Applegate. They went together, I think, I did not see them part one from
another.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray did you see my Lord Mohun afterward.


Applegate. No, I did not.


Mr. Attorney General. What became of you afterward?


Applegate. I staid a little at the lower end of the Square to take a Pipe of
Tobacco, and when I had filled my Pipe, I heard calling, Chairs, Chairs again,
at the upper end of the Square; and when we brought up our Chair to the upper
end of the Fields, the first Man that I did see was my Lord of Warwick, who
would have had us put over our Chair within the Rails; but we told him, we
could not get it over again if any one was put in it; but if they would come
out into the Square, there we were ready to carry 'em any where; and when we
came to the upper end of the Square, there was Captain French, and we took him
into the Chair, and he bid us carry him to the Bagnio in the Long-acre; and at
Newport-street end he would have had us stop and pull off his Clothes, for he
believed he was a dead Man.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray who did you see there at the upper end of Leicester
Fields?


Applegate. No body, indeed, but my Lord of Warwick, and Mr. French.


Mr. Attorney General. Nobody but them two?


Applegate. No, no body but them two.


Mr. Attorney General. Where do you say that was, that the calling for Chairs
was, and where you brought your Chair?


Appelegate. It was just at the upper end of Leicester-fields, by
Leicester-house, and by the Standard-Tavern.


Mr. Attorney General. Who was it that you there took up?


Applegate. It was Captain French.


Mr. Attorney General. Whither then did you carry him?


Applegate. We were ordered to go to the Bagnio in Long-acre; and thither we,
and another Chair that carried my Lord Warwick, did go; and when we came there,
we did knock a good while before we could get any body up; and when they were
let in, we came away, and were bid to call for our Fare the next Morning.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray where was it that you took up Captain French?


Applegate. It was at the upper end of all Leicester-fields.


Mr. Attorney General. And you went away with him, did you?


Applegate. Yes, as soon as ever we took him up; it was as soon as ever we
could, at the outside of the Rails. I was the first Chair that, upon the
calling for Chairs after they came thither, was by the Standard-tavern; and
from thence we went into Long-acre.


Mr. Attorney General. Where about is the Standard-tavern?


Applegate. It is at the further end of the Fields by Leicester-house; it is by
Cramburn-lane, which is the Street that leads into Newport-street, and so into
St. Martinslane; and then we were to go to the Bagnio in the Long-acre.


Lord High Steward. My Lord Mohun will you ask this Witness any Questions?


Lord Mohun. Yes, my Lord, I have a Question or two to ask him; I desire to ask
him. Whether, when we were going along, and the Chair in which Captain Coote
was turned up St. Martins-lane, I did not call out to have him stop, and know
whither they were going?


Applegate. Yes, my Lord, you did.


Lord Mohun. Pray whither did I bid you go, when you first took me up at
Lockets?


Applegate. My Lord Mohun bid me follow those Chairs, but go down to
Westminster, for he said they all three, would go together, and lie together
that Night.


Lord Mohun. My Lords, I desire this Man may be asked, whether there were not
several ways of going out of the Fields, besides those of Green-street and the
Standard-tavern?


Applegate. Yes, my Lord, no doubt there are.


Lord Mohun. Then I Will leave it to your Lordships to make the Observation; for
there is no Evidence that I was ever seen in the Field after I alighted out of
the Chair at Green-street end; and I hope your Lordships do observe, That he
has told you, I was as earnest in begging Captain Coote to defer going to
Leicester-fields till the next Morning, and begged as heartily of him for it,
as any Beggar would do for an Alms.


Lord High Steward. My Lord, their Lordships, no doubt, have made that
Observation; for he did say so.


Lord Mohun. My Lords, I have no more to ask him.


Lord High Steward. Mr. Attorney, Who is your next Witness?


Mr. Attorney General. Our next Witness is Peter Ketro, who likewise was a
Chairman that carried my Lord Mohun into the place where the Fact was done.


Peter Ketro was Sworn.

Mr. Attorney General. Pray will you acquaint my Lords who you carried upon the
thirtieth of October last, from the Greyhound-tavern to Leicester-fields?


Ketro. Upon the thirtieth of October last, in the Morning (which was Sunday)
very early, we were called to the Door of the Greyhound-tavern, and when we
came there, there were several other Chairs there, for there was no Coach, it
seems, to be had.


Mr. Attorney General. And who was in your Chair?


Ketro. My Lord Mohun; and there were two other Chairs that went away together,
wherein were Captain Coote and my Lord of Warwick.


Mr. Attorney General. And whither did you go from thence?


Ketro. We went along the Strand, and when we came to the end of St.
Martins-lane, the Chair that Captain Coote was in, we supposed by his order,
turned up the Lane; for my Lord Mohun had given us order to go down to
Westminster; and then when we came there, to the end of St. Martins-lane, he
called out to stop, and to have the other Chairs stopped, and they stood still at
the back Door of the Cross-keys-tavern, which is at the end of St.
Martins-lane, and all the three Chairs did make a stand at that place, and my
Lord of Warwick, and my Lord Mohun, and Captain Coote talked together; and my
Lord Mohun did desire Captain Coote to go down to Westminster, and to put off
the business for that Night, for nothing of business could be done; then my
Lord of Warwick did say, if they did go on he would go on with them; but my
Lord Mohun did endeavor to persuade 'em to go down to Westminster to Lodge,
for nothing could be done that Night; but when the other three Chairs past by,
on the other side of the way, and Captain Coote would needs go forwards to
Leicester-fields, my Lord Mohun did bid us take up and follow them; and he
said, If they would go, he would go and see what came of it; so we took up, and
followed the other Chairs, and went up the Lane, and into Green-street, to the
lower end of Green-street, next the Square, and there our three Chairs set down
my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Captain Coote, and were discharged.


Mr. Attorney General. And what became of them after?


Ketro. There they went up upon the broad Stones, up toward the upper end of
the Fields.


Mr. Attorney General. Did they go all together, or did they part?


Ketro. They went together, for any thing I know; I saw no parting and indeed
it was so dark a Night, that I cannot tell what became of 'em after they went
out of the Chairs; It was one of the darkest Nights that ever I saw.


Mr. Attorney General. Well then, pray what happened after that?


Ketro. I went to light my Pipe of Tobacco, and before we could light a Pipe of
Tobacco, there was calling at the upper end of the Square for Chairs again, and
so up we went with our Chair to the upper end of the Fields; and when we came
there, some body called out to have us lift our Chair over within the Rails,
but we told 'em, if we did so, we could not get it over again, if any body were
put into it; and so we were bid to go to the end of the Rails, in order to the
getting out from that place, and getting in of any body that was to go into the
Chair; and when we came to the end of the Rails, we took up Captain French, and
he bid us carry him to the Bagnio in the Long-acre, and we did so, and at
Nuport-street end he would have had us have pulled off his Clothes, for, he
said, he believed he was a dying Man; but we carried him on to the Bagnio in
Long-acre, and there came after us my Lord of Warwick in another Chair; and
there we set 'em down.


Mr. Attorney General. I have a Question to ask you, Friend, Did you not see my
Lord Mohun after you set him down at Green-street end?


Ketro. No, indeed, not I; I did not, after he went out of the Chair.


Mr. Attorney General. Can you tell whither he went after he went out of the
Chair?


Ketro. No, I cannot tell whither he went; they all three went up the paved
Stones together, but whither they went I cannot tell.


Mr. Attorney General. Did you hear of any other Chair that was at that end of
the Fields at that time?


Ketro. There was another Chair at that time, at the upper end of the Fields.


Mr. Attorney General. Did you hear 'em desire to take Mr. Coote into that
Chair?


Ketro. No, I did not.


Mr. Attorney General. Nor do you know any thing of their putting Mr. Coote
into a Chair?


Ketro. No, indeed not I; what they did as to the other Chair that was before,
they can best tell, for I cannot.


Lord High Steward. Who is your next Witness, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. Attorney General. Richard Edwards.


Lord High Steward. What do you call him to?


Mr. Attorney General. Because we would not trouble your Lordships with the
Repetition of every one of the Witnesses that were here yesterday; this is the
Man that carried Mr. Docwra into the Field.


Edwards was Sworn.

Lord High Steward. Mr. Attorney, What do you ask this Witness?


Mr. Attorney General. Pray do you acquaint my noble Lords here, who you
carried in your Chair to Leicester-fields?


Edwards. Indeed, I cannot tell, there were three Chairs that took up three
Persons at the Grayhound-tavern in the Strand, after three other Chairs were
gone away, and every one had a Gentleman in 'em; I, for my part, did not know
who was in our Chair; but when we shut up the Chair we were bid to go to the
Standard-tavern in Leicester-fields, and thither we did go, and there we set
down the Gentleman that was in our Chair, and away we went; and as we went up
St. Martins-lane, we past by the three other Chairs that had turned up before,
at the Back door of the Crosskeys-tavern.


Mr. Attorney General. Did you see the other three Chairs in Leicester-Fileds
afterward?


Edwards. No, ^^deed I did not; but went up to the Standard-tavern, and set
down the Gentleman that was in our Chair, and there we left him, and went away.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray can you tell who it was that you carried?


Edwards. Indeed, I cannot very well tell; but I believe it was Captain James,
or Mr. Docwra.


Mr. Attorney General. When you came to the Standard-tavern, pray what hapn'd,
what past there?


Edwards. To the best of my knowledge I took hold of the knocker of the Door,
and knocked at the Door, and the Gentleman came out, and was set down there; and
he gave me a Shilling, and away I went with my Chair.


Mr. Attorney General. When you set him down at the Standard-tavern, pray what
did he say?


Edwards. He gave me a Shilling, and bid me go about my business; and so we
went away.


Mr. Attorney General. Were you there when you heard 'em call Chairs back?


Edwards. No, we went away as soon as we had set 'em down at the Standardtavern.


Mr. Attorney General. Did you observe which way they went after you set him
down?


Edwards. No, indeed I did not; I never minded which way they went after we set
him down.


Mr. Attorney General. Which way did you go?


Edwards. We went away down toward Charing Cross.


Mr. Attorney General. Did you see any other Chairs in the Square when you went
down?


Edwards. Yes, there were other Chairs at the other end of the Square.


Mr. Attorney General. Did you see any Gentlemen as you came down, walking up
toward the Standard-tavern, upon the paved Stones?


Edwards. No indeed, my Lords, not that I remember; but I did see the other
three Chairs as I past by at Green-street end; who were in 'em, or what was
become of them that were in 'em, that I cannot tell.


Mr. Attorney General. What did they say to you any of 'em at that time?


Edwards. They asked us if we were going away, and we told 'em Yes, we were
discharged.


Mr. Attorney General. But pray did you not meet any of the other Gentlemen
upon the paved Stones?


Edwards. No indeed, I did not see, to the best of my Remembrance, any other
Gentlemen upon the paved Stones.


Mr. Attorney General. What did the other Chair-men say to you?


Edwards. They asked if we were coming away; and we left 'em behind us.


Lord High Steward. Has my Lord Mohun any Questions to ask him?


Lord Mohun. No, I have not.


Lord High Steward. Mr. Attorney, who is your next Witness?


Mr. Attorney General. Jackson, who was the Chairman that carried Captain James.


He was Sworn.

Mr. Attorney General. Pray will you acquaint my Lords who you carried from
Lockets to Leicester-fields?


Jackson. Captain James: There were six Chairs in all; I do not know who went
in the other Chairs, but in the three Chairs that went together, when we went,
there was Ceptain Docwra. Captain French, and Captain James.


Mr. Attorney General. And where did you set him down?


Jackson. At the Standard-Tavern in the Square of Leicester-fields.


Mr. Attorney General. What became of him after you set him down?


Jackson. We knocked twice at the Tavern-door, and then he gave us a Shilling,
and we went away presently, and went down on the left Hand upon the paved
Stones, toward Green-street end.


Mr. Attorney General. Did you meet any Persons coming up upon the paved Stones?


Jackson. Yes, my Lord, I did.


Mr. Attorney General. Can you tell who those Persons were?


Jackson. Indeed, I cannot tell.


Mr. Attorney General. How many were they in number?


Jackson. They were two or three; but it was so dark, that I cannot tell how
many they were.


Mr. Attorney General. Which way were they walking?


Jackson. They were going up toward the middle Street.


Mr. Attorney General. How far was that from the Standard-tavern?


Jackson. It might be about fixty Yards from the Standard-tavern.


Mr. Attorney General. You say ^here were three Chairs standing at the end of
Green-street when you came by?


Jackson. Yes, there were so.


Mr. Attorney General. Had you no discourse with them?


Jackson. No, indeed, I had not.


Mr. Attorney General. Did you not ask them why they staid there^


Jackson. No, indeed, I did not; we past by and went home.


Mr. Attorney General. You know my Lord Mohun, don't you?


Jackson. Yes, I do, very well.


Mr. Attorney General. Was not my Lord Mohun in that Company?


Jackson. He was when the six Chairs were called to Lockets; but I did not hear
any Discourse, that I can remember, that past among 'em, nor do I know, or did
hear, what became of my Lord Mohun afterward.


Mr. Attorney General. Were those the other three Chairs that went away from
Lockets first, that you saw at Green street end?


Jackson. Indeed, my Lords, I believe so; I cannot swear that they were those
three Chairs; when we had set down Captain James, we did not look back any way
at all, but went away home, it being so late and so dark.


Lord High Steward. My Lord, Mokun will you ask this Witness any Questions?


Mr. Attorney General. Then my Lord we shall call William Salmon, who was the
Surgeon that did search the Wound by the Coroner's Command, when he took the
Inquisition upon the view of the Body.


Who was Sworn.

Mr. Attorney General. Pray did you view the Body of Mr. Coote after he was
Dead?


Salmon. Yes, I did view his Body by the command of the Coroner at the
Watch-house where it lay in St. Martins-lane.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray then will you acquaint my Lords what Wounds you
found upon the Body?


Salmon. There was one upon the left part of the Breast, near the Collar-bone,
which, upon probing, I found to be half an Inch in Breadth, and four or five
Inches deep downward; the other was a Wound that was in his left side, just
under the short Ribbs, and that was upward; and upon probing of it, I found it
was about the breadth of an Inch at the Orifice, and about the depth of five or
six Inches, and pierced through the Diaphragma.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray did you observe any difference in the Wounds, or in
the Orifice of 'em?


Salmon. That below was a large Wound, larger than the other.


Mr. Attorney General. Were the Wounds do you think given with two Swords, or
with one and the same Sword?


Salmon. Indeed I cannot tell.


Mr. Attorney General. Did you look upon either, and which of them to be Mortal?


Salmon. I looked upon both to be Mortal.


Lord High Steward. If you have done with him Mr. Attorney, will my Lord Mohun
ask him any Questions?


Lord Mohun. No, I shall ask him no Questions, for I think I need not, I was
never proved to be in the Company, in the place where the Fighting was.


Mr. Attorney General. We have done with calling of Witnesses, 'till we hear
what my Lord Mohun says to it.


Lord High Steward. My Lord Mohun, This is the time (the Kings Evidence being
finished) for you to call your Witnesses, and make your Defense.


Lord Mohun. My Lords, I shall not call many Witnesses, for I think there is
nothing that fixes any thing of Guilt, as to Captain Coots Death, as to me; but
I shall call one Witness that was here (as I understand) yesterday, but not
Examined, and that is a Person that saw me afterward, and knows that I had a
Wound in my Finger laid open, and that Wound was received at Lockets, by
endeavoring to part 'em when they were quarelling there at that time.


The Witness stood up.

Lord High Steward. Though you are not upon your Oath, yet you are as much
obliged in Justice and Conscience to speak the exact truth, as if you were upon
your Oath, therefore have a care what Testimony you give.


Witness. Yes, my Lord.


Lord High Steward. What is the Question you would have this Witness asked?


Lord Mohun. What he knows of my being Wounded about this time, and what I
declared concerning that Wound, how I received it?


Lord High Steward. I will not refuse to ask the Question, but I must acquaint
your Lordship that it signifies nothing in point of Evidence at Law, what you
your self did declare after the Fact was over. It is Material what you did to
prevent this Mischief before it happened, but not what you said or declared after
the thing was done. You hear my Lords Question, what say you to it?


Witness. I was at my Lord Mohun's several Days after this business happened, at
the Lodging where he lay, and where I saw him; he had a hurt in his Hand, and
it was laid open, it was in the Finger, and that he said was all he got by
endeavoring to part people from Fighting.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray Sir, when was this?


Witness. It was several Days after the death of Mr. Coote.


Lord High Steward. I told your Lordship before, that in Point of Law such
Evidence would signify nothing, because your declaring any matter after the
thing was done, in relation to the Fact, could not be admitted as legal
Evidence; if any of my Lords be of another Opinion, I suppose they will declare
it?


Lord Mohun. My Lords, I submit it to your Lordships, I only desire he may be
asked whether he saw my Hand or no, and how it was?


Witness. I saw my Lord's Finger, and it had been laid open some time before;
and he said, he had received that Wound by endeavoring to part Captain French
and Captain Coote; that is all I know of the matter.


Mr. Attorney General. But pray when was that that he declared so, how long
after the death of Mr. Coote?


Witness. It was several Days after that.


Lord High Steward. You hear, in point of Law, that can be no Evidence at all;
if you have no other Witnesses to call, your Lordship would do well to sum up
your Evidence, and make what Observations you think fit upon the Evidence that
has been given for the King?


Lord Mohun. My Lords, I hope I shall make my Defense against this Accusation
with all the modesty and submission to your Lordships that becomes me; I am
very much ashamed to be brought before your Lordships upon any such account as
this again, after having been once before your Lordships upon such an account
before; I may very well say, I am not guilty at all of having any hand in Mr.
Coote's death, and I can assure your Lordships, I will avoid all occasions of
giving you any trouble of this nature for the future; I do not doubt but to
acquit my self of all Guilt in relation to this matter; and, indeed, with
submission to your Lordships, there has been no Evidence given relating to me,
that do infer any Guilt upon me, to prove that I was at the place where this
Fact was done; therefore I shall only make some few little Remarks upon what
has been said, and leave it all to your Lordships consideration: The King's
Council first have called the Drawer of the House, and he has satisfied that I
did so far endeavor to part 'em, that I threatened to send for the Guards and
secure 'em, if they would not go home, and when they went into the Chairs, I
went into my Chair, on purpose to follow 'em down to Westminster, whither I
would have had 'em gone; the prick that I got in my Finger, of it self speaks,
that I endeavored to part 'em, and so the Drawer he has told you; I am sure it
was the occasion of a great deal of pain to me, it being forced to be
afterward laid open; the Chair-men that carried Mr. Coote, swears, that I, at
the Door of the Tavern in St. Martins-lane, did make 'em stand, and when I came
up to 'em, I begged, as for an Alms, that they would go home; and I asked Coote
whither he was going, which proves that I was not conscious of any design of
going to fight at that time; your Lordships are likewise told, that when we
came to Green-street end, I was set down upon the paved Stones, I was so
indeed, and I went up about five or six Yards, but that is all that is proved;
but I did take the quite contrary way to the place where Mr. Coote was wounded,
then there was another Chairman, one Applegate, and truly what use they make
of him I cannot imagine, as an Evidence against me; for he says, I was very
earnest in St. Martins-lane to hinder any Quarrel, and indeed at the Tavern
door, at Locket's, I was so at first; and when we came to St. Martins-lane end,
he says, that I ordered 'em to make them stop, and asked Coote whither he was
going, and he saying he was going to Leicester-fields, I endeavored all I
could to persuade him to the contrary, and did entreat him that he would go no
farther, but go down to Westminster to his Lodging, or lodge with me; but Mr.
Coote would not give me time, at that time the other Chairs coming by, to give
him further reasons, but would go away; and then it is objected, that I should
say, That if they would go, I would go and see; that was, my Lords, I would go
on till I could have a further opportunity to prevent any Fighting amongst
them; and the Witness Ketro says, my Lord of Warwick did bid the Chair to
follow the other Chair in which Captain Coote was; my design was for
Westminster, to go to my Lodgings, and when we came to the end of the Square,
if I did go up the whole Stones, it was directly the contrary way to the place
where it is proved this Fact happened; for the next Witness, Edwards, he says
he saw no body walking upon the paved Stones, and truly I did go the direct way
into Newport-street; and for my not appearing before, it was for avoiding
confinement, and I must submit the whole matter to your Lordships, how far any
Guilt is fixed upon me, not being proved to be in the Field at the time when
they fought, or seen to be in the Company when they came up and sound Mr. Coote
wounded, and dying, or dead. It is a plain case I could have no hand at all in
his death, and so I think I need give no further trouble to your Lordships, for
I believe your Lordships cannot but be satisfied, that, as I have pleaded, I am
not Guilty of killing this Gentleman; nay, it is impossible that I should go
into the Field to be a second, when my own right Hand was Wounded, for I was
not able to hold my Sword in my Sword Hand, because of that Wound; I submit the
matter entirely to your Lordships, from whom I am sure to meet with every thing
that will be suitable to Honor and Justice.


Lord High Steward. The Kings Council are now to Sum up the Evidence for the
King.


Mr. Solicitor General begun to Sum up the Evidence for the King, but his
Voice was so low, and the noise in the Hall so great, that he could not be
heard, and therefore the Lord High Steward moved the House that he might stand
by the Prisoner at the Bar, which was something nearer than the place where the
Kings Council stood, as was done the day before; and it was ordered
accordingly.

Lord High Steward. Mr. Solicitor, Pray raise your Voice as much as you can,
that all my noble Lords may hear you.


Several of the Lords did move, that one that had a better Voice might Sum it
up, and particularly Mr. Cooper; but it being usually the part of the
Solicitor General, and he only having prepared himself, he was ordered to go
on; but for the better hearing of him, several of the Lords toward the upper
end of the House, removed from their Seats down, as they did the Day before, to
sit upon the Wool-packs.

Mr. Solicitor General. My Lords, I am of Council for the King against this
Noble Lord, my Lord Mohun, the Prisoner at the Bar, who has been upon his Trial
this Day, and it comes to my turn to Sum up the Evidence that has been given
against him, which is but a Repetition of what your Lordships, no doubt of it,
have taken exact notice of; but I must shortly Sum up the chief of the
Particulars thereof, and make a few Remarks what of that Evidence sticks
particularly upon my Lord Mohun. The first Witness was the Drawer of the House,
at the Greyhound, in the Strand, who gives you an Account who were at his
^^sters House the Nine and twentieth of October last, and particularly, that my
Lord Mohun was there in the same Company wherein this Gentleman was that was
unfortunately killed, and that he continued in that Company till very late that
Night, or rather very early the next Morning, when after the Reckoning was
paid, they came all down to the Bar and called for Coaches; and he tells you;
that he was sent out, and he tells you what he was sent for, he was sent for
Coaches, and so cannot give any Account what past while he was gone; but when
upon calling for Coaches none could be had, there was order for Chairs to be
called, and Chairs were brought to the Door; and when he came in again he heard
the Clashing of Swords, and there were three of 'em on the one side of the Bar,
and three of 'em on the other; indeed he does say, he did (...) s^e when the
Swords were drawn, but at that time they were putting up their Swords, my Lord
Mohun was in the Company, upon which I would observe to your Lordships, that
there had been some Fighting, for the Witness says upon my Lords Question, that
my Lord called for a Napkin to put his Hand in, for his Fingar was cut; and he
said, this is all that I have got by endeavoring to part them; so that it
shows there was a Quarrel, and my Lord Mohun was in it: When the Chairs were
brought to the Door they went into them, there went Mr. Coote into one, into
the second my Lord of Warwick, and into the third my Lord Mohun, so that still
my Lord Mohun was in the Company, and they went away together; and though it is
pretended by my Lord, That he did all he could to prevent the Quarrel, yet he
gave Directions to the Chair-men that carried him to follow the other Chairs,
and your Lordships perceive what the business was that they went about, and the
other three Chairs followed after presently, so that they all went away
together; nay, my Lord himself does not disown his being in the Company till
they came into Leicester-fields. Next I would observe what fell from Brown, who
carried the very Gentleman that was killed, Mr. Coote, that my Lord Mohun was
in one of the three first Chairs, and that they all went together, till that my
Lord Mohun called out to stop, upon the turning up into St. Martins-lane; and
though they stopped in St. Martins-lane, and my Lord Mohun did entreat them to let
it alone at that time, yet it was only to let it alone till the Morning; and
when the other three Chairs past by on the other side of the way, and Coote
would have them go on, my Lord Mohun said, If they would go on, he would go
with them and see it. Applegate, the Chairman, that carried my Lord Mohun, says
the same; and so it is plain, my Lord Mohun did go on with an intention to make
one in the Affray; for Applegate says, That when my Lord Mohun could not
prevail upon his persuasions, and when Coote went away after the other three
Chairs were past by, my Lord Mohun said, If you do go, I must go and see it;
and they did go all together: And the Chairman says, he set my Lord Mohun down
at the end of Green-street, at the lower end of the Fields, where the other two
Chairs set down Captain Coote and my Lord of Warwick, and that they all three
walked up together toward the Standard-Tavern; still all this proves my Lord
did go there, and that he himself did say he would go and see it; and it is
plain that my Lord Mohun did go as far as Leicester-fields, and it is only his
Declaration concerning himself, without any proof, that he went away, and did
not go into the Fields, to the place where the Fact was done; and we think it
is sufficient proof that he was one of them that we^^ concerned, because we do
prove, that he was all along in the Company till the very time that they came
into the place where the thing was done. Then there is the Chairman that
carried Mr. James, and he tells your Lordships, That the three first Chairs
that went up St. Martins-lane* went to the Standard-tavern, and there they
knocked at the Door, and paid the Chair-men, and went out of their Chair; and so
says the other Chair-men that carried Captain Do^^ra and Captain French; and
they say also, That when they came down the paved Stones again, they heard
Chairs called for, but they did not interpose at all in the matter, but the
other two Chairs it seems did, for they went up to the upper end of the Square,
where there were two Persons holding up Mr. Coote, and after they had put the
Chair over the Rails, in order to have him carried away in a Chair, but they
could not get him into the Chair. I would likewise observe from the Evidence of
the Surgeon, who gives you an Account of what nature the Wounds were, one was
in the Breast, near the Coller-bone, on the left side, the other was under the
Short-ribs, on the left side too, which could not be given him by the Person
that he was fighting with, he being a right hand Man, as was proved by his
Servant: My Lord Mohun has called but one Witness, which is only about a little
Circumstance of his being wounded in the Hand, and having the Wound laid open,
but that was two Days after this Fact was done; my Lord Mohun could not but
know that the matters he was to answer, related to a time before. It must be
agreed to me, that they all three, my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Mohun, and Mr.
Coote, went all away together, that they were carried to Leicester-fields, that
they were set down together, and walked up together upon the Stone pavement,
when the others were gone toward the upper end of the Fields; so that in all
probability, they all went together into the place where the Fight was, and
were all concerned; and if so, my Lord Mohun must be equally guilty with the
rest, my Lord Mohun knowing what Business it was they were going about. It must
be left to your Lordships Judgment, whether he shall not be presumed to be
there when the Fact was done, especially his saying, when he could not prevail
in St. Martins-lane, to put the matter off till another time, that if they did
go on, he would go and see it; so that putting these two Circumstances
together, his going in one of the Chairs with my Lord Warwick and Coote, and
what he said after when the Chairs stopped in St. Martins-lane, we think are
Circumstances to induce your Lordships to believe, that he was present at the
time of the Fact committed, or very near the place; and if that be so, how far
he is Guilty must be submitted to your Lordships consideration; and this is all
that I shall trouble your Lordships with, without repeating the particular
Evidence, which your Lordships, I am sure, very well remember.

Lord Mohun. My Lords, I desire I may say one Word in answer to what Mr.
Solicitor has observed; I think your Lordships have had no Evidence given you
where Mr. Coote was killed, but only the Chairman that was desired to bring
over his Chair within the Rails, says it was toward Penton-street, which is
quite contrary to the place where I was set down at Green-street end; I must
then be at a very great distance from the place where the Fact was done.


Lord High Steward. If all have done on both besides, then your Lordships have
nothing left but to consider of the Evidence which has been given, which I
suppose you will do among your selves?


Lords. Ay, Adjourn, Adjourn.


Lord High Steward. Is it your Pleasure, my Lords, to Adjourn into the House of
Lords?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


L. H. St. This House is Adjourned into the House of Lords.


And the Lords went back in the same Order to the House of Lords, and there
they stayed for about two Hours time, debateing the matter among themselves,
and afterward returned again into the Court in Westminster Hall, and were
seated all in their places as they were before, and the Lord High Steward was
seated in the Chair before the Throne.

Clerk of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Sergeant at Arms. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes! My Lord High Steward of England, his
Grace, does straightly Charge and Command all manner of Persons here present to
be uncovered, and keep Silence, upon Pain of Imprisonment.


L. H. St. Is it your Lordships pleasure to go on now to give your Judgment?


Lords. Ay, Ay.


L. H. St. Then I must pray your Lordships, to give me time to write down your
Opinions distinctly, that I may be able to acquaint you with certainty of the
Numbers.


Lords. Ay, Ay.


Then the Lord High Steward stood up, and put the Question to every Lo^^
beginning with the Youngest Baron, to know what his Judgment was, and the Lord
to whom he called, stood up in his place Uncovered, and laying his right Hand
upon his Breast, delivered his Judgment in the manner following.

L. H. St. My Lord Bernard, Is Charles Lord Mohun Guilty of the Felony and
Murder whereof he stands Indicted, or Not Guilty?


L. Bernard. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


The same Question was asked severally of all the Lords, who in the same Form
delivered their Opinions, as follows.

L. Herbert. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Weston. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Ashburnham. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Chalmondly. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Jefferys. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Godolphin. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Guilford. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Oselstone. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Osborne. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Craven. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Cornwallis. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Granville. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Berkley. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Lexington. Mot Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Rockingham. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Lucas. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Culpeper. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Byron. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Jermin. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Leigh. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Raby. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Howard. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Lovelace. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Hunsdon. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Wharton. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Eure. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Dudly. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Fitzwalter. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Willoughby. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Audley. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Abergaveny. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Viscount Lonsdale, Is Charles Lord Mohun Guilty, etc.


L. Viscount Lonsdale. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Viscount Townsend. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. H. Steward. The Earl of Grantham, Is Charles Lord Mohun Guilty, etc.


E. of Grantham. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Albemarle. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Tankerville. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Warrington. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Scarborough. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Mountague. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Portland. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Rochester. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Nottingham. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Yarmouth. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Radnor. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Macclesfield. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Feversham. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Burlington. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Carlisle. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Bath. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Anglesey. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Essex. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Scarsdale. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Thanet. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Chesterfield. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Carnarvan. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Kingston. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Winchelsea. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Stamford. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Peterborough. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Rivers. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Manchester. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Denbigh. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Leicester. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Bridgwater. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Dorset. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Suffolk. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Huntington. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Darby. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


E. of Kent. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Great Chamberlain, Is Charles Lord Mohun Guilty, etc.


Lord Chamberlain. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Marquis of Normanby, Is Charles L. Mohun Guilty, etc.


L. Marquis of Normanby. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. Marquis of Hallifax. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Duke of Newcastle, Is Charles Lord Mohun Guilty, etc.


D. of Newcastle. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


D. of Scomberg. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


D. of St. Albans. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


D. of Northumberland. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


D. of Ormond. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


D. of Southampton. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


D. of Richmond. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


D. of Sommerset. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Steward, Is Charles Lord Mohun Guilty, etc.


Lord Steward. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


L. H. Steward. My Lord President, Is Charles Lord Mohun Guilty, etc.


Lord President. Not Guilty, upon my Honor.


Then the Lord High Steward of England, standing up uncovered, putting his
right Hand upon his Breast, said, my Lord Mohun is not Guilty, upon my Honor.

Then the Lord High Steward seated himself again in the Chair, to take the
Number of the Peers who had given their Judgment.

L. H. St. My Lords, Eighty Seven of your Lordships are present, and you are
all unanimously of Opinion, That my Lord Mohun is Not Guilty of the Felony and
Murder whereof he stands Indicted.


Lords. Ay, Ay.


L. H. St. Let the Prisoner be called to the Ba^.


Clerk of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make (...).


Sergeant at Arms. O yes, O yes, O yes, My (...) his Grace, does straightly
charge and command all manner (...) to keep Silence, upon pain of Imprisonment.


Clerk of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Sergeant at Arms. O yes, O yes, O yes, Chief Governor of the Tower ^^^don,
bring forth the Body of your Prisoner, Charles Lord Mo^^^, Whom you committed
to you, in order to be brought hither this Day, (...) Pain and will fall
thereon.


Then he was brought forth to the Bar, and the Lord High Steward (...) dressed
himself to him in this manner.

L. H. St. My Lord Mohun, you have been Indicted fee the (...) of Richard
Coote, upon which Indictment your Lordship has been (...) upon your Arraignment
has pleaded Not Guilty; and for your (...) put your self upon your Peers, my
Lords here present, and they (...) Evidence, and have considered of it, and
delivered their Judg^^^ (...) matter; and I am to acquaint your Lordship, they
are all (...) ^^^nion, That your Lordship is not Guilty of the Felony and (...)
stand Indicted; and therefore your Lordship is discharged (...) paying your
Fees.


Then the Lord Mohun made his Reverence to the Lords, (...) himself thus.

Lord Mohun. My Lords, I do not know which way to (...) Thankfulness and
Acknowledgment of your Lordships great (...) to me; but I crave leave to assure
your Lordships. That I will (...) it the Business of the future part of my
Life, so to behave my self in (...) ^^^^sation in the World, as to avoid all
things that may bring me (...) Circumstances, as may expose me to the giving
your Lordships (...) this nature for the future: And then making his Reverences
to (...) away from the Bar.


Clerk of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Sergeant at Arms. O yes, O yes, O yes, All manner of Pers^^ (...) are
commanded to keep Silence, by my Lord High Steward of (...) Grace, upon pain of
Imprisonment.


L. H. St. My Lords, The Trial ^^ing at an end, (...) to be done here, but the
determining the Commission.


Lords. Ay, Ay.


L. H. St. Sir Samuel Astry, let Proclamation be made in order (...) the
Commission of High Stewardship.


Clerk of the Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Sergeant at Arms. O yes, O yes, O yes, My Lord High Steward (...) Grace, does
straightly charge and Command all manner of Person (...) and that have here
attended, to depart hence in the peace (...) and of ^^veraign Lord the King,
for his Grace, my Lord High Stewards of England (...) tends now to dissolve his
Commission.


And then the White Staff being delivered to his Grace, the Lord High (...)
(...) he stood up, and holding it in both his Hands (...) it in (...) then
leaving the Chair, came down to the Wool p^ck and said, (...) Lordships
pleasure to adjourn to the House of (...)?

Lords. Ay; Ay.


L. H. St. This House is adjourned into the House (...).


And so they went back in the same order that (...) and all the Assembly (...)

FINIS.

