SEVERAL Living Testimonies Given forth by diverse Friends TO THE Faithful
Labors and Travels Of that Faithful and Constant Servant of the LORD

Robert Lodge

Who was a true Minister of the Gospel of Christ, a Valient Sufferer for the
Testimony of a good Conscience, and one that held out to the end, and is saved.

ALSO, Two General Epistles, written by himself long since, to the Believers in
Christ; And are now Printed for their Edification and Refreshment.

The Name of the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance, etc.

Printed for T. Soul; And Sold at the Crooked Billet in H^ll^^^^-Lo^e,
Sh^^^ditch, 1691.

The Testimony of Peter Hardcastle concerning the Life and Death of Robert
Lodge.
THis our Friend and Brother, a Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, Robert Lodge,
I was acquainted with before we were gathered to be a Meeting, to sit down in
silence to wait upon God in his Light; for he then lived near me, with one
related to me, and we had much discourse about Religious matters, and he saw
the Errors of the Priests more clearly than I did, and was serviceable to me at
that time: But after this, it pleased the Lord to send his faithful Servants
amongst us to Preach the everlasting Gospel; and they directed our minds to the
Light of it in our Consciences, and many were convinced of the way to eternal
Life and Salvation; and thus were we gathered to be a Meeting, to sit in the
silence of Flesh, waiting upon God in his Light. And in process of time, we
being gathered in the Name of the Lord Jesus, he made his Power known in our
Meeting in an admirable manner, to the renting of the Vail, and breaking down
the partition Wall, and raising our Souls from Death unto Life, which caused
great Joy and Comfort in us and amongst us. And by the Power and Spirit of Life
(after a little time) our deceased Brother Robert Lodge was moved to go into
Ireland, to bear Testimony with other Brethren of the everlasting Truth, and
way of Truth and Salvation; and having done his Service there at that time, he
returned again into England, and traveled in many parts of it, and went into
Ireland again, and traveled in both Nations to visit the Gatherings of the
Lord's People, and to stir up their pure minds by way of remembrance of the
manifold Mercies and Favors, and Loving-kindnesses of God which he has made
known unto his People in this our day, after the long Night of Apostasy. And
the Prophecy of Daniel is fulfilled in this our Age, where he says, Many shall
run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased; and he says also, They that
be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many
to Righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12. And he was
Instrumental in the hand of God to turn many to Jesus Christ, God's
Righteousness, the sure Foundation and Rock of Ages, which yields living Water
unto the Soul; and so his Testimony reached to the Witness of God in the
Consciences of many; and I have been many times sweetly refreshed under his
Testimony and Ministry: Oh the sweet Union, and Society, and Fellowship we have
had together in the Gospel, it breaks my Heart, and tenders my Spirit at this
time when I am writing these Lines! I loved him before we were gathered, and
much more since, because of his Sincerity and Truth in his inward parts; for he
kept his first Love and Habitation in the Truth. And he was Instrumental also
for building up in the holy Faith, that the Spirit of Opposition and Separation
might not get advantage to draw us from the Spirit and Power of our Lord Jesus
Christ; he was committed to several Prisons in this Nation, and in
Wakefield-Prison he wrote an Epistle to Friends; and when he suffered
Imprisonment, or otherwise for the Testimony of the Truth, he was kept in
patience, and rested in the will of God: So he having kept the Faith and
Patience of our Lord Jesus, and dying in the Lord is at Rest, his Body is in
the Grave, but his Spirit is with the Lord Jesus, and with the Spirits of just
and holy Men and Women, who have served the Lord in their day, according to his
Will revealed unto them by his holy Spirit; Praises, Honor, and Glory to the
Lord God and the Lamb for evermore.

So I having known him so long a time, and some of his Trials and Exercises,
and faithfulness to God and his Truth, I could not well but give this short
Testimony concerning him, Peter Hardcastle senior.

Thomas Whitton his Testimony concerning the Life and Death of Robert Lodge.
THat the Memory of the Just may be had in Remembrance, and the Travel of the
Righteous in future Ages not forgotten, this Testimony I have to bear for our
dear Friend Robert Lodge, who is now gone, whose Exercises and Travels are at
an end, and I doubt not but that he is at rest with the Lord; He was a man whom
I knew above this thirty Years, even from his Youth, who received the Truth in
his tender Years in a large measure, and the Lord has made him a very
serviceable Instrument in his hand, for gathering many to the Way of Life, out
of the ways of the World, and that in his young Years, both in this Nation and
also in Ireland, as many can testify; and not only so, but the Lord has, as I
may truly say, made him a Son of Consolation amongst his People, to the
watering and refreshing of many weary Souls; his Travels in Spirit I knew
(being one of the same Meeting) even for the hindmost of the Flock, and his
sympathizing with those that traveled for the same. I also knew him in the
helping on the Work of the Lord; and when that Life and Power of God rose in
him in a Meeting to the opening his Mouth, the Lord has made his Words as the
Balm of Gillead to the broken hearted: Much might be said of his Service in and
for the Truth in his day; and toward the closure thereof he labored with and
for the young Friends, that they may come up in the Footsteps of those who are
gone before, and at Rest with the Lord, with many and frequent Supplications,
to the Lord for them, that they might walk as becomes the Truth in their
Generation. The time of his Sickness was short, but about three or four days,
and about three or four days a little ill before, I going to see him, asked him
how he did, and how it was with him; he gave me account of his Distemper and
Infirmness, and did question his recovery of the same, But, says he, the Lord
knows my Heart, and that I have served him; and it has been of more account to
me the gaining of one Soul, than all my Labors and Travels. So I have great
cause to believe he was in a good sense of the Recompense of his Reward; so
leaving him very weak that night, and I going again next day with my Sister to
see him, finding him near to Death, and being beside him in great brokenness of
Heart to part with such a near Friend he as one sympathizing with us, said, We
shall meet again in Eternity: Then a little time after his Mouth was opened,
and in great power and tenderness, with heavenly Expressions and Praises to the
Lord: and after some time again, I went to him, and told him, I was come to
take my leave of him, but thought see him next day; then he named me by my
Name, and said. It is well with me, and I have no disturbance in my mind: He
spoke these words as a man at ease, from whom the Lord had taken Sin away,
which is the sting of Death; this being about the third hour in the Afternoon,
and he departed this Life that Night, it being the 15th of the 7th Month, 1690.

And though his Body be gone to the Earth, yet the Memorial of his Life and
Spirit lives with us, as it is written, For the Righteous shall be had in
everlasting Remembrance, and precious in the sight: of the Lord is the Death of
his Saints, for they rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them, and
they live in that Life which is hid with Christ in God.

And indeed a Lamentation might be taken up for the loss of such an Instrument
in the Hand of the Lord, who had labored and gathered many (by that powerful
Word of Truth which the Lord put into his heart) unto God, and also to the
refreshing, watering, and consolating of the Heritage of the Lord in that meek
lowly Spirit of Life and Love, which very frequently did run through him, and
reached the Life in others, for which I cannot but praise the Lord for the many
Visitations of his Love in our Meetings; but this bears up our Spirits, that as
the Lord has begun so great a work in our day for his Truth and Name sake, he
will carry it on to his own praise, and will not leave himself without a
witness upon the Earth, that from Age to Age, and one Generation after another
his own Works may praise him, who is God, and changes not, to whom be
everlasting Praise for evermore.

He was buried at Low-Ellington, at the Burying-Place for the People of God,
the 17th of the 7th Month, 1690. And was accompanied with many Friends of
diverse parts, and Neighbors also, being one well-beloved of the Neighborhood;
and there was a living and serviceable Testimnoy for God born that day by our
Friend George Myers, to the great satisfaction and refreshment of Friends, and
to the Convincing of others.

T. W.

The Testimony of Miles Oddy concerning Robert Lodge.
AS concerning my dear Friend and Brother Robert Lodge, I have had knowledge of
him ever ^^nce that day it pleased the Lord God in his Mercy and Favor to
visit us, and make his Power known, and manifest himself both to him and me,
and many others in these parts; and though he was very young (even a Boy) yet
the Lord did wonderfully appear unto him in his great Love, and God's eternal
Power did mightily seize upon him, and operate in him, so that he was
constrained thereby to open his Mouth, and make mention of God's Eternal Power,
even when we were but a few; and God's witness was much reached in several
present with us, blessed and praised be the Name of God for evermore: The
mighty Power of God did work wonderfully at that very time in the Hearts of
those whom the Lord had touched, and also made to believe, but especially in
the Heart of our dear Brother abovementioned, and thereby in the Lord's due
time was he fitted, imboldened and raised up, and made an Instrument in God's
hand, and a true and faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, and sent forth by him
to preach the everlasting Gospel into some parts of this Nation of England, and
in a short time into the Nation of Ireland, where he met with many great Trials
and Exercises, yet the Lord did mightily preserve him, and attend him with his
blessed presence. What shall I say or write concerning this our dear Brother in
the Lord Jesus Christ, whom the Lord has been now pleased to take away from
us; surely the loss is very great unto many of God's People, but unto him great
gain. When I consider of the blessed and heavenly Opportunities, and wonderful
Appearances of God, in, by, and through him many a time amongst God's People,
when met together, my Heart is truly broken and tendered (even as at this
present time;) and this is my belief of him, he was a man well-beloved of God,
and also of his People every where, that had a true knowledge of him, and the
great Power of God did mightily attend him, and his presence comfort him; and
many sweet and precious Testimonies have sounded through him, to the comforting
and refreshing of God's People in their Assemblies. He was convinced of God's
heavenly Way and precious Truth thirty Years since and upward, and has born a
faithful and living Testimony for God ever since, not only in Words, but in
Life and Conversation, and also in Sufferings, both in this Nation, and in the
Nation of Ireland; he was a man not subject to Passion (that ever I did see)
but meek and gentle and of a healing Spirit.

Given forth the 18th Day of the 8th Month, 1690. By Miles Oddy senior.

The Testimony of Thomas Hardcastle senior, concernning Robert Lodge.
IN the tenderness and brokenness of Heart, and in the remembrance of the
goodness of the Lord am I made willing to give forth this Testimony concerning
my dear Friend and Brother Robert Lodge: In his young Years we traveled many
Miles together, and great was his Care at that day, in much love to bring me to
the knowledge of the Truth, sparing no Labor nor Pains, in much patience and
good will his endeavor has been among us, and the Power and Presence of God
has mightily appeared in and through him many a time, and in Innocence his
labor has been; and great have been his Exercises and Abuses that he received
from unreasonable men, but the Lord did uphold him, and carry him on in his
blessed. Work; and many heavenly Testimonies has the Lord enabled him to bear,
and our Hearts many times have been comforted together, and filled with Praises
to his holy Name. And this dear Servant of the Lord he was lowly in Mind,
tender in Spirit, lovely in Behavior, his Ministry very precious; and truly
the Gifts and Graces the Lord bestowed on him were very large, and in the same
has he finished, and laid down, and is gone to Everlasting Rest with the Lord
forever and evermore.

This short Testimony is given forth in the love of God, by him who is a Lover
of Truth and Righteousness, Thomas Hardcastle senior.

Katherine Winn's. Testimony concerning Robert Lodge.
THe Memory of the Just, and Travels of the Righteous are worthy to be kept in
remembrance, and left upon Record to future Ages, in which I am concerned
according to my little measure, in a short Testimony for our dear Friend and
well-beloved Brother Robert Ledge who is now deceased, and his Travels at an
end, but many are in being who have reaped the benef^^ thereof; his lot fell to
be in our part in the time of my Convincemen^ and I being a Woman of a deject*
Mind, he was the first that ev^^ reached me with Words of Comfor^ which were so
printed in my hear^ and engraven in my mind, that it never yet was raced out,
but often w^ a strengthening to me through m^ Exercises, and a confirmation of
the love of God to my Soul: It was afterward my happiness to be of the same
Meeting, where many were the Spiritual Comforts I received by him; he
proclaimed Liberty to the Captives, and spoke comfortable words to the Mourners
in Sion, his Words were as healing Medicines, and as Gillead's Balm to many
wounded and weary Souls, and that which he planted was frequently watered by
him: O the watering Seasons we have had, that Fountain which frequently opened
in him, that Rivers and Streams thereof that were conveyed by him to many a
thirsty traveling Soul, did fill our Hearts with unutterable Joy and
unexpressable Gladness, which causes a Lamentation to be taken up by us for
want of such a be-dewing Instrument, and loving Nursing-Father: he was a Son of
Consolation, a planter indeed, and also a waterer of the Lord's Plantation, and
frequently accompanied with the living presence and power of our heavenly God,
which gives the increase: He was a sympathizer with innocent Friends in Joy and
in Sorrow; he could mourn with those that mourned, and rejoice with those that
rejoiced, yet his care was over the weak and hindermost of the Flock; and we
are bowed in Spirit, For want of him, for his presence could greatly have been
desired by us, and needful for us; but he is dissolved, and I believe is now
with Christ, which for him is far better; and it is our hope, which bears up
our Spirits, that the Lord will raise up Instruments to carry on his own Work
to his own praises; and he gives and he takes, blessed be his Name for ever.

The time of his Sickness being short, at which time I had been weak and but
little recovered, I had word if ever I thought to see him, I might venture to
go; and the next day I went with my Brother to visit him, and found him very
weak; he looking up, (and saw me full of Sorrow) with a pleasant Countenance,
yet in much brokenness, cheerfully said, What Woman, we must meet again, we
must meet again in Eternity. And sitting by him, he gave me an account of his
Distemper, and of the exercise of his mind, and the dealings of the Lord with
him, and said, The Lord knows I never was Commissionated by him to go any
way, or to do any thing, but I have willingly answered him, and the Lord who
has been my Rock and Refuge, my Shield and Buckler, and a Sanctuary to me,
has been with me all along to this very day. With many such Expressions, and
in much brokenness and tenderness of Spirit he rendered Thanksgiving unto the
Lord; and being weak he seemingly fell asleep, and I retiredly sat by him, and
that Life wherein we had often reached one another did spring, venly
Expressions, and pure Praises to the Lord for his many Deliverances and great
Preservations, and the continuance of his living presence, and the opening of
the Fountain of his Life and Love unto us to this very day and time, with
heavenly Supplications unto the Lord for the continuance of his Loving Kindness
and tender Mercies to his whole Heritage every where; his Exercise continued
for a considerable season, as if he had been in a Meeting, with much brokenness
of Heart, and tenderness of Spirit, as a man filled with heavenly and divine
matter, which very much broke my Heart, with his Son Nathan then by him, which
I hope will never be forgotten by me: And after this he weakened very fast, it
being about the third hour of the day; he did speak little more to me, yet
signifying his gladness of my recovery, and also of my company, and that all
was well with him; and falling into a Slumber and Rest more sweet and
comfortable, as we thought than his usual Sleep had been to him at other times,
in much quiet and great meekness he departed this Life about the first hour
that Night. And though he be dead, his Works live to praise the Lord, and great
was the Work of his Day, in turning many from Darkness to Light, and from the
power of Satan to the living God; he bore the burden in heat of the day, and
was a true Traveller for Sion's sake; his Life was comfortable, his latter end
happy, he lived the Life of the Righteous, and his latter end was like his: And
it is the fervent desire of my Heart the Lord will be pleased in love to his
whole Flock, and for his own Honor and great Name sake, to raise up
serviceable Instruments in his Work, such workmen as need not be ashamed of
their work, but can rightly divide the Word of Truth, such Laborers in his
Vineyard as may gather many Sheaves into his Barn, and Lambs into his Fold, as
this our deceased Brother did; in the days of his Youth, and in his tender
years, he thought not his Life dear to venture both by Sea and Land in this
Nation, and elsewhere, and was instrumental in the Lord's hand, to pluck many
as Lambs out of the Wolves mouth, and Brands out of the Fire, which are as
Monuments of the Lord^s mercy this day to praise him: And as his Body decayed
and strength failed, great was his Travel, and many his Supplications to the
Lord on the behalf of young Friends, that they might rise in their Day and Age
to serve and honor him in their Generation. O the Travels, with the sweet
flowing streams of Love reached to us by him can never be forgotten! O the
melodious sound, that heavenly Harmony, the echo of Life which often sounded
through him, made the Morning-Stars to sing, and the Saints to shout for joy O
what can I say of him! I am not able to express or utter the excellency of the
Work of this the Lord's worthy, but hopes it will be done by others better
accomplished for such a Work than I; but in the discharge of what has lain
upon me, according to my little measure in this short Testimony to leave to
Posterity, and for the encouragement of a future Age, to keep in the Line of
Life, and walk in the Path of the Just, where heavenly Felicity is to be
attained and enjoyed, and Spiritual Pleasures lived in, which the Almighty in
his unchangeable Love has been pleased to continue from Age to Age, and by a
mighty hand reached from one Generation to another, that in every Age his own
Works may praise him, to whom all Praises does belong (and is freely ascribed
from my Soul) now henceforth, and for ever.

Katherine Winn.

The Testimony of Christopher Blackburne, concerning my dear Friend Robert
Lodge, who departed this Life the 16th Day of the 7th Month, 1690.
Dear friends,
I could not with clearness be silent in this matter, because I found it as a
Duty incumbent upon me, being one of the same Meeting, to write a little
amongst my Brethren, concerning this faithful Champion of the Lord* whom he
has taken to himself, and is at Rest with him, who is over all, God blessed
forever. I being but young in years, have not been so long acquainted with him
as many have been, but what I know I shall write: He was a man that ever had a
tender regard over me, and other young Friends; and I can truly say, his
Counsel and Advice to me when I was a Child, was reaching, and I hope will
never be raced out of my remembrance; and as I grew up I loved him as my
Father, he was of a lovely Countenance, and an undaunted Spirit; his Service
was much in the Ministry, he had a quiek discerning in a Meeting: Oh how has
he labored for the good of a Meeting, and if at any time a Vail has been
over, or that any seemed to be unconcerned, Oh how he would have been weighted,
and labored to withdraw the Vail, and raise the Life at such a time; and on
the contrary, when the Life was up in a Meeting, and that he saw Friends in a
Heavenly Order, Oh it was Marrow to his Bones, his very Countenance was
comfortable to the Meeting; and his Travel, especially in che latter part of
his days, was much for the settling the Meeting in a divine Order; and his
Prayer for us that were young, was frequent in this manner; Heavenly God,
ingraft thy heavenly Truth in the Hearts of our Children, that they may stand
up to bear Witness for thee, when it shall please thee to take us hence.

Now I come to his Sickness and Death, which was on this manner, Upon that 4th
day at Evening I went to see him, as was my usual manner, when in that Town,
not knowing that he was Sick, so asked him how he did; he said, He had a very
bad Night the Night before, but was something better: He also told me how it
was with him, and said, That many had dyed of the like Distemper, but whether I
dye or not, the Will of the Lord be done. So I went over Night to see him, and
he grew weaker and weaker, yet he was able to go till the First Day, and after
the Meeting that day he got up by help, for then he was taken with a strong
Fever, which grew extremely upon him; and as he was getting up, he said,
Blessed be God, I have Heavenly Peace. So after a while I going away, took my
leave of him, for I had a sense of his Death; and he said to me, He was freely
given up to the Will of God. So the next day I went again, but was not present
when he did declare, but I understood it was powerful as at other times; so in
the Evening I went, but he was in a sweet Sleep, and so continued till about
the first or second Hour the next Morning, and so departed this Life in a
Heavenly frame, arid is at Rest with God, whom he served to the utmost of his
Power. I can truly say, he was a man worthy of Everlasting Remembrance, and one
of the Worthies of God's Israel. So seeing it was the pleasure of the great God
to take him from us, it is the desire of my heart, that I with the rest of
God's People may be kept and preserved in God's heavenly Truth, as this man
was, so shall we meet again in God's Kingdom, where we shall receive the full
of what we enjoy the Earnest of here.

So seeing it has been the pleasure of God, who is the Orderer of all things,
and has the Souls and Bodies of all Men at his dispose, to take this dear
Friend from us, we have reason to be content, knowing that our Loss is his
Gain, our Sorrow his Joy, I cannot but return him the Praise, who is God over
all, blessed for ever and evermore; Amen.

Christopher Blackburne.

The Testimony of Rebecca Blackburne concerning Robert Lodge, who departed this
Life the 16th Day of the 7th Month, 1690.
HE was a dear and loving Friend toward me, and his desire was much for the
prosperity of Truth, it was great joy to him to hear that the Truth prospered,
especially in those that were young, and that they might bear their Testimonies
for the Lord, after the decease of the Elders: One time after the Meeting, he
looking toward a young Girl, turned him about, and said, The Lord bless you
all Children: which caused me to say within my self, Whither is he going?

Now seeing the Lord has taken him from us, he is able to preserve those that
are left behind, and will do as we put our trust in him.

So to him that orders all things according to his pleasure, do I return all
the Honor and Glory, both now henceforth, and for evermore; Amen.

Rebecca Blackburne.

The Testimony of Ann Blackburne concerning Robert Lodge.
THis dear Friend I knew him from a Child, and was acquainted with him from his
Youth: He was of a quick apprehension, and had much discourse with one Anthony
Procter, and Other Priests in the days of Oliver Cromwell, but they were always
put to the worst by him: He was of a Valient Spirit from his Youth upward; and
it was great gladness of heart to me to see him in a Meeting; it was also great
Sorrow to me to part with so near a Friend; but seeing it was the pleasure of
God to take him from us, i^^ my belief he is at rest with him, who is God,
blessed for evermore.

Ann Blackburne.

The Testimony of Alice Clarke concerning Robert Lodge.
THis is my Testimony for my dear Friend Robert Lodge of Massam, lately
deceased; he was an Instrument in the hand of the Lord, and the Lord by him
wrought upon the Hearts of many, to turn them out of the broad way of
destruction, into the narrow way that leads to Life and Salvation; and good
cause have I amongst many more to praise the Lord that ever I was acquainted
with him: I being of the Meeting that he was of, was many a time sweetly
refreshed and comforted, which I hope shall never be forgotten of me ^or raced
out of my remembrance^; and though he be gone from us, yet his Spirit is with
us in our Meetings, as we come to the Spirits of just men made perfect; he had
a heavenly Gift, and had good skill to use it, so that he got love of most that
knew him. He was taken away of a short Sickness, and what he spoke relating to
Truth in the time thereof, was much to the satisfaction of all that loved him,
for he largely signified the love of God to his Soul at that time: He was in
his Day a true Traveller in the Lord's Service; and doubtless he has received
his Reward, and though he be taken from us, I doubt not but the Lord will raise
many faithful Witnesses to bear a Testimony to his Name, that he may have
Honor, to whom all Honor is due.

Alice Clarke

A Testimony concerning our dear Friend and Brother in the Lord Robert Lodge.
WHo was a Yorkshire man, and dyed in the Lord, in the Year 1690. when he had
fulfilled his Ministry, and finished his Testimony, who was often under great
Persecution, Sufferings and Spoiling of Goods, which through the assistance in
the Lord's Power he went through them all joyfully, and many times had great
Exercise with Backsliders, Apostates and Profane. He was a man that labored
and traveled, and had a great Care upon him for the Peace of the Church of
Christ, and his Government of Peace, the increase of which there is no end; he
traveled up and down in many places in England, freely preaching the
Everlasting Gospel of our Lord and Savior, and did turn many to it, being a
man much endued with the Gifts of God, and being an Elder and Pillar in the
Church of Christ; he traveled with me up and down in Ireland, jeopardied his
Life among the Priests and Papists there, in the Year, 1669, where there were
many large and precious Meetings of the Lord's People; and the Lord's Presence
and Power was among us and them. And when we had finished our Testimony there,
we came over into England, and in it he traveled up and down, visiting the
Churches of Christ, and turned many to the Lord; and he dyed in the Lord in
Yorkshire, and is blessed, and entered into his Rest, and is ceased from his
Labors, and his Works follow him. And much more might be writ of his faithful
Labor in the Lord, who was well known in the Church of Christ, who preached in
his good Life and Conversation, as well as in his Doctrine, and was much
beloved; and he will be missed in the Church of Christ, but the Lord can raise
up more faithful Laborers in his Gospel to stand in his place; Amen.

The 13th of the 9th Month, 1690. G. F.

An Epistle To FRIENDS, Written from Chambrussel, in the County of Armagh in
Ireland, the 24th of the 4th Month, 1660.
MY dearly beloved Friends, with whom I have Unity in the unchangeable Love and
Life in the Lord Jesus, in whom we receive pure and living Consolation, whereby
the Seed is refreshed, which breaths and thirsts after the Fountain of Love and
Mercy, which tenderly falls down upon the upright in Heart as Dew to the tender
Herb, whereby that which has been in the want comes to be satisfied, and
filled with the living Virtue, which comes from the presence of the Lord; and
in this my dearly beloved Friends I salute you in the Fountain of Love, Life,
and endless Joy, which is shed abroad in my heart, which streams forth it self
through me, whereby the Seed is refreshed; and in this feel me as you are felt,
in the measure of the unchangeable Life of God, in which I rejoice, feeling you
in that which is everlasting, in which my Unity stands with you, who are of a
broken and contrite Heart, who are kept in a feeling of the dreadful presence
of God. And therefore wait all Friends to feel the Power which raises the Seed
immortal, to which the Promise of Blessing is due, which Seed the Lord is
satisfying with the breakings forth of his Love, in all them who in patience
are kept waiting to feel the opperation of God's living Power; for by the Power
of God comes the Seed to be brought out of the weary Land, which the Lord
abundantly waters in all the Faithful, who in faithfulness are kept near unto
the Seed, such come to receive of the loving kindness of God, and to partake of
his sweet Mercies, which daily are felt, to the glory of the Lord for ever.
Therefore my dearly beloved Friends, wait in the Light the Power to feel, that
you may be kept safe in the Arms of the Lord's love, that you may be shadowed
over with the Power of the Most High God, which is our strength and daily
support, wherein we feel the Spirit of the Lord lifting up a Standard against
all the Enemies of the Seed.

So dear Hearts, be stayed in the Light, continually to feel the dreadful Power
of God accompanying you, unto which all your Enemies must become subject, whose
Power and Presence is felt, wherein our Souls rejoice, who has enlarged our
hearts, and filled us with the heavenly joy; for in him we have Peace and
Comfort; therefore be not cast down at the sight of Affliction, but all be
watchful and deligent, to feel the pure workings of the Spirit of Life, whereby
a change may be wrought in your Hearts, and you raised above the Grave, by the
quickening Power of the Almighty God, for in this is Comfort and Refreshment
felt, and Peace and pure Love which many Waters cannot quench; and in this all
wait to be knit up and united, that the one Fountain of Love and Mercy may be
every particulars satisfaction and reward. So rest your Friend in the Truth,

Robert Lodge.
Let this be sent to Hardcastle-Garth, and so to Masham.



A Salutation of Love from the Opening of the Springs of eternal Life, unto the
Flock of God in Bonds, or elsewhere, scattered upon the Earth, but are one in
the endless Life of God, Greeting.
DEar Friends, whom the Lord has visited with the Day spring from on high, and
unto whom the Lord has made known his Power, and the Arm of his strength for
your deliverance, from the deep captivity that your Souls lay in, in times
past, when there was none to help you, nor to comfort you; when you spent your
days in mourning, for want of the presence of the Lord: and in that day did the
Lord hear your groans, and the sighs of your Spirits, and he appeared for your
comfort, when you were comfortless; and in that day the Lord made known his
Judgments in you, for the purging of the Dross out of you, that way might be
made in you for the sweet dispencing forth of his Mercies: And since the Lord
prepared you for himself, by the work of his own Spirit, how has he let forth
himself unto you, to the making of your Hearts glad, and to the overcoming your
Souls with the strength of his love? that has made you to say in secret, who
is like to the Lord, or what is to be compared with his love? and when your
hearts were thus disposed of by him for whom you had waited, what was all the
worlds glory to you; for this was more to you than all, whose hearts were
opened in the sense of the want of him? And now seeing the Lord has done such
great things for you, it is the pleasure of your God to try your love unto
himself, whether you can follow him to the loss of all things in this World,
yea or nay, for such a Birth the life of God has been long traveling for, and
now they are blessed that can say, This birth is brought forth, in which they
can give up all for the enjoyment of the Lord, who has turned a Wilderness
into a fruitful Land, and a fruitful Land into barrenness in the inward; and he
likewise is able to make it so outwardly, for them that believe and follow him
in faithfulness unto the end. So my well-beloved in the Lord, who have felt his
Judgments and Mercies in your Hearts, who by the same are engaged to follow the
Lord, and hold forth your Testimonies for his righteous Name, blessed you are,
as you abide in the overcoming love of God, by which your hearts have been
drawn after the Lord, and after a further enjoyment of his Life, who cannot be
satisfied without the fresh breakings in of his Love into your hearts. Oh
blessed are you for ever, however the Lord may dispose of you as to the outward
man; the Lord will be unto you as the shadow of a mighty Rock in a weary Land;
you are the begotten of himself by the Word of his Power, he will nourish you
by the virtue of his own life, and by the sweetness of his own love, and this
being felt, it makes all easy and delightsome whatsoever, for there is nothing
to be compared with this love of our God. Therefore arise you Sons and
Daughters of the Lord, and show forth the love that you bear to him, that all
may know whose offspring you are, and how highly you esteem of the goodness of
God, that you can forsake all for him, and the light of his countenance, which
is more to you than all the world. Oh Friends, it is for your sakes that the
Lord has done great things already, and yet will the Lord do greater things in
the Earth for you, as in the heavenly life you abide, the Lord will arise for
your help in the time of your distress and need; And therefore fear not you the
wrath of man, nor the fury of the ungodly, but in the life look unto the Rock
of your Salvation, and he will beautify you with the Robes of Righteousness,
and with the Garments of Praises, that all may see and confess, to the glory of
him that has shined forth of Sion this day. And dear Friends, you that have
felt the love of God, in gathering you out of the world, and in preserving you
unto this day; let the kindness of the Lord, and the compassion that he has
showed to you, be an engagement upon your hearts, to walk with the Lord in
faithfulness, that as the Lord has watered your Souls with the streams of
life, and pure love from day to day, and from time to time, he might still
continue the same to you unto the end of your days, that your blossom thereby
may not wither, but be kept beautiful in the Eyes of the Lord, that his delight
may be in you to do you good, to rejoice over you in his love, as it has been
in times past, that by the same we might grow further in love with him, and be
more and more affected with his glory, that however it be permitted to fall out
concerning these Bodies, we may be the Lord's, and he the lot of our
Inheritance; Then shall we be constrained to say, Our lot it fallen in good
Ground: And therefore you render Babes, be not discouraged nor amazed at the
face of things, for mighty is the Lord who is with us, and glorious is his Arm
that does compass us about this day, and pure is the Food that the Lord is
feeding the tender spirited withal, which makes us undervalue all the world,
and its glory, because our hearts are ravished with the love of God, which
wonderfully is made manifest this day; glory be to the Name of the Lord for
ever, who breaks in upon us by the force of his love daily, so that our Souls
are become as watered Gardens, through the thowring down of his Blessings,
wherewith my Soul is visited at this time, and in which I do visit you all in
the life of God, in Bonds, or elsewhere who are called to bear witness for the
Lord, in this trying, but not destroying day, that the purpose of our God may
be fulfilled, and his determination completed, that the works of the Lord may
bring him praise in the Gates of the wicked, who alone is worthy of Glory and
Honor, for ever and ever, says my Soul.

From a Friend to all the upright hearted People of God, that wait for the
building of distressed Sion, known by the Name of Robert Lodge.
Given forth at the House of Correction in Wakefield, the 9th Day of the third
Month, 1665.
A Testimony concerning the Life and Death of our dear Friend and Brother in
the Lord John Stubbs.
HE received the Lord's Truth in 1653. at Carlisle, and forsook much for it, and
did Travel with me in the Lord's Service up and down in England: And he was a
Scholar, and an excellent Writer, and a notable Minister of the Gospel of
Christ, and went through many Sufferings and Hardships for the Gospel's sake;
and after he and William Caton for declaring the Truth at Maidstone in Kent,
the Magistrates and wicked Priests and Professors caused them to be set in the
Stocks, and Whipped, and put out of the Town, about 1652 in Oliver Cromwell's
days: and he having been a Baptist, did convince some of them, and turned many
to the Lord: And after he, and Samuel Fisher who had been a Baptist, and a
Parish Priest, traveled to Rome through those dark Countries, and they having
cast some of our Friends into the Inquisition, all was shut up; but only they
had some Service for the Lord with some Cardinals, and the Jews, and some Monks
and Friars, and such like; and they confessed it was the Truth; but if they
should confess it openly they would burn them. And about the Year 1660. he and
some other Friends had it in their minds to go to the East Indies, and the
East-India-Company would not let them go in their Ships; and they got an order
from the King to let them go, and they would not obey it. And then they went
into Holland to get passage there for the East Indies, and they also denied
them; and then they took Shiping, and went as far as Egypt to (...) the
East Indies by Carav^^^ (...) where the English Consul banished them out of
Egypt; and then they came to England again, after they had had some Service for
the Lord in several places. And John Stubbs the Lord let him see that the
English and the Dutch would go to War one with another, which not long after
came to pass. And about the Year 1670. he Traveled with with me to Barbados,
and also he went to New England, where he labored in the Grace of God, and had
a good Service for the Lord; and from thence he went to Barbados again, freely
preaching the everlasting Gospel of Christ, and then he came into England; and
when he had fulfilled his Ministry, and finished his Testimony, he dyed in the
Lord, and is at Rest and Peace with him, and is blessed, and ceased from his
Labors, and his Works follow him: And he departed this Life near London, about
1673. He was a wise Man, and sought the Peace of the Church of Christ, and was
a good Example: he preached in good Life and Conversation, as well as good
Doctrine, and was zealous, and never turned from the Lord from his first
receiving of him, but bore all his Sufferings and Reproaches faithfully for the
Name of Jesus, who was one of his Followers, and was many times exercised with
Apostates and Profane, and had Trials by false Brethren, but the Lord in his
Power gave him Dominion over them all, blessed be his Name for ever; Amen.

The 13th of the 9th Month, 1690. G. F.

THE END.

