THE Notorious Impostor: OR THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF William Morrell alias
Bowyer, etc.
THIS Famous Rover, from the Multitude of his Titles, to begin with his right
Name William Morrell, was by Profession a Chyrurgion, and more than twenty
Years ago, for many Years together, a Practitioner of good Credit in Banbury,
where his Industry honestly got him, by his Practice, near two Hundred a Year,
with which he maintained himself, his Wife and Family very handsomely, till
about eighteen Years ago he began to be very Lazy, and much addicted to hanker
after the Conversation of the Gentry thereabouts; and being a Person very
Facetious, and his Company not disacceptable, he screwed himself into the
Society of the best Quality round about, and would be a Month or two a Guest at
several Great Men's Houses; more particularly he some time since insinuated
himself into the Favor of a Worthy Gentleman near Banbury, viz. Humphry Wickham
of Swakely Esquire; whose Person and Character he pretended to represent, and in
which Imposture he made his last Exit.

But to begin our History in order; From his Conversing with Gentlemen and
Herding with Quality, Business began to fall off: His many Rambles from home,
soon made his Practice flag; when the Glass and the Bottle came into play, the
Salvatory and Playsterbox went out. And his Patients could not well stay for
the Setting of a Broken Limb, or Tenting a Green Wound, till our Esculapius was
to be called, the Lord knows where, and found the Devil knows when. This Trade
continuing, the other fell to decay, till at last Poverty began to peep in at
his Window, and Duns to hover about his Door. In these little Exigencies and
Necessities (for the Gentleman's Tables abroad would not fill the Bellies at
home, nor would Hunting or Hawking pay Landlords Rent) his Wants put him upon
Shifts and Artifices for his Subsistence; and what with a Natural Wit and a
pretty large Talent of Confidence, the pressing Hand of Fortune threw him upon
several Tricks and Frauds to hold his Head above-board. But not to trouble you
with any of his lesser Diminitive Exploits, the Infancy and Nonage of his
Activity, we do not think fit to treat you with these pettier Adventures, but
even set out in one of his noblest Achievements, and paint our new Guzman in
some of his boldest and fairest Colors.

Accordingly he Equips himself with a Sturdy Young Country Fellow, a Ralpho to
our Hudibras, and takes a Knight-Errantry one day to a Fair at Brayls in
Warwickshire, his Habit between a Grazier and a plain Country Gentleman; where
Santering about with his Man Tom (for so his Squire was titled) at last spying
a Knot of good likely Kine (near a Score of them) Ah Master, says Tom, what a
parcel of brave Cattle are these. Ay Tom, replies the Master, I am sorry I saw
them no sooner; these would do my Business to a T; but as the Devil and ill
Luck would have it, I have laid out my whole Stock already, and so I Will even
set my Heart at Rest. The Country Fellow, the Owner of the Cattle, seeing a
Gentleman of his honest Appearance surveying his Beasts, and hearing every word
that passed between the Man and Master (for they took care to talk loud enough
to be heard) thought he had got a good Chapman, and desired the Gentleman to
draw nearer and handle the Cattle. Handle, answers Tom, what for? You know,
Sir, you have laid out all your Money already, and what should we handle Cattle
unless we had Cole to buy 'em. I confess they are for your Turn above any I
have zeen in the whole Vair, but that is nothing, the Money Master the Money.
The Money, replies the Countryman, Troth that shall make no Difference, nor
break Squares between us; if you and I can agree, the Cattle are at your
Service: I suppose you are some honest Gentleman hereabouts, and the Money will
do my work next Market Day. Pray what may I call your Name? My Name is Walters,
replies our Cattle-Merchant, Walters, Master, answers our Countryman, What any
Relation to his Worship the Noble Sir William Walters? Ay, Friend, a small
Relation, a Brother of his. A Brother of Sir William' s! Off goes the
Country-man's Bonnet at the next word, and a long Scrape made; for no Respect
was too great for a Brother to a Person of such eminent Quality. My Cattle,
Noble Squire, Ay with all my Heart. In short after much ado to make the
Countryman be covered before him, he fell to treat about the Price of the
Cattle, in which he bargained so warily, that they had almost parted for a
single Shilling in a Dispute between them. But at last the Bargain and Sale
concluded, Tom is commanded to drive home the Cattle, the Money to be paid next
Market Day, and the Countryman has the Honor to drink a Pot at parting with
his Worshipful Chapman our Sir William's Brother: This Feat performed, he takes
a walk round the Fair, and picks up a pretty Country Girl, a Masons Daughter,
at a small Town about four Miles off, and gives her the common Country Civility
of a Fair, viz. a Glass of White Wind and Sugar. During this Entertainment of
our young Damsel, he is most desperately smitten with her Beauty, insomuch that
our Inamorato must wait upon her home to her Father's House, nothing but Death
and Despair attending if he cannot have that extraordinary Happiness. The Girl
who by this time had learnt his Name and Quality, was not a little confounded
at the pressing Importunities of a Person of his Worth to a poor Girl of her
little Capacity, and notwithstanding her modest Refusals, felt a secret Pride
from so kind an offer, and at last accepted of his Service home. No sooner was
she got safe handed home, and Mother and Daddy, were privately whispered what
Honor they received from such a Visitant; the best the House could afford was
not good enough for him: after the courser Compliments of [Lord, Sir, such a
Person of Quality under our poor Roof] and the like; the best welcome that
could be made him was not wanting: Nay, for what was deficient at home, the
whole Neighborhood was Ransakt to lend help toward the Accommodation. Our new
Lover not to baulk a good Cause, openly Professes no less than honorable
Matrimonial Affection to his dear Conqueror. Estate he wants none; and Portion
or Quality are below his Consideration, the Satisfaction of Love is the only
thing in the World he resolves to gratify.

The Father and mother are much astonished at such an Addressor to their
Daughter, nor is the Daughter her self a little surprised at it, though of the
two her Wonder is the least; for her Sexes natural Frailty was so apt to make
her think it the pure Effect of her own sweet Face, that the power of her
Charms, and the Quality of her Captive was not altogether (she fancied) so
extraordinary an Adventure. In fine, Our passionate Admirer pushes on his suit
with all the Vigor and Application imaginable, and truly you may well conceive
so weak a Resistance could not well hold out long against so Puissant an
Assailer: The Siege is pressed home, and in three short days the white Flag is
hung out, a Parley beat, Articles concluded, and the Fort surrendered. Our
Damsel, in short, commits Matrimony; and the whole Family is not a little
Transported at such a Noble Alliance. Thus Wedded and Bedded, Our new Couple
are all Honey and Sweetness, and though Sir William Walter's House was not
above a dozen Miles from thence, his Adopted Brother all safe and secure,
sleeps in the soft Arms of his young Bride with all the Rapture of Pleasure and
Delight. After three Revelling days were spent in Feasting and Joy, the
Father-in-Law and himself enter in a close Cabinet Consult about providing for
Family and Settlement. He tells the Old Man, that truly his Brother the Knight
will undoubtedly take no little Dudgeon at this Match, not that he cares a
Farthing for it. He has Married the only Creature of the World he can Love, and
he is resolved to Cherish her accordingly. But however, to manage Affairs with
Discretion, he thinks it his best Prudence and Policy, to get his Trunks and
the Writings of his Estate safe out of his Brother's Hands, before he publishes
the Marriage. And for that purpose he has no better way than for his
Father-in-Law to help him to a small Cart and a couple of able Horses, and to
drive to his Brothers, and take up his Trunks, etc. And considering he had laid
out all his ready Money in Cattle at Brayle Fair, he desired the favor of him
to furnish him with Ten Pounds, that he might not be unprovided with a little
of the Ready about him, in case of any Rupture between his Brother and himself,
till he could furnish himself better amongst his Tenants.

The Old Man very readily embraced this reasonable proposition, and though
truly the Sum of Ten Pounds was above his Stock, nevertheless living in Repute
amongst his Neighbors, through great Solicitation, some forty and some thirty
Shillings, and such like Sums, with much ado he raises the Ten Pounds desired;
and more and above he proeures two very Able Horses and a Cart to bring away
the Treasure aforesaid, etc.

By this time his Man Tom having Sold the Cattle, is come to wish his Noble
Master Joy of his fair Bride, and so the Master and Tom attended by a Brother
of his Bride, an Honest Country Swain, who though so highly honored with this
new Affinity, is at present planted in no higher a Post than to be a Mate with
his Man Tom to drive the Cart, set forwards, etc.

The Brother-in-Law, Cheek by Jowl, with the fore-Horse of his small Team,
drives on very merrily for about Nine of the Twelve Miles to Sir William's,
entertaining his Worshipful Relation with the very best Tune he could Whistle
all the way they traveled.

But now within Three Miles of home, our politic Bridegroom thinks it
advisable, that one of his Carters, the Brother, should make a Halt at an
Alehouse where they stopped, and the whole Manage of the Cart and Horses be
entrusted with Tom, for fear the sight of a Stranger to come to take up Goods
at his Brother's might give occasion of Curiosity and Inquiry, whereas Tom, an
old Servant in the Family, with less Suspision and Inspection might do it.

These strong Reasons (or indeed weaker would have served turn) were
satisfactory enough, and so the Gentleman Equipping his Brother Clodpate with a
George to stay and Drink till they returned, the Master and Man fairly drive
on, for the remaining three Miles to bring off the Bag and Baggage, etc.

The Potent Sum of a whole Half Crown to be laid out in Ale, set in our
Country Youth to a hearty Carouse with the kind Hostess of the House, where the
Esquires Health was over and over remembered, not forgetting the Great Man at
the Great House about Three Miles off, where, as simple a Country Fellow as he
was, he expected one day to be better acquainted.

But to draw this Adventure toward a Conclusion, our waiting Carter long
expecting the return of the Brother, the Palfries and the Cargo,
notwithstanding the Strength of powerful Ale, and his Sweet Land-Ladies
diverting Company, began at last to be Impatient; sometimes he fancied the
Loading was too heavy for the Poor Beasts, and he thought it his best way to
walk out and see if he could meet them: But all Inquiry was in vain, Night at
last drew on, and the best part of his Half-crown melted down: at last, though
very Uneasy* and Restless, he is persuaded by his kind Hostess to take a hard
Nap till Morning. The Cock was not so soon awake as he, for to tell Truth, he
never slept at all, though indeed he dreamt all Night, for he could not think
less, than that some Retainers of the Family had undoubtedly followed the Cart,
and Murdered the Squire to run away with the Treasure, and what his poor Sister
would suffer to be a Widow so early, was little less than a mortal
Apprehension. Thereupon very betimes in the morning he pads to Sir William's,
and very earnely enquires, what was become of the Squire, the Knights Brother.
Sir William's Brother, replied the Servants, we know none he has; it is true, he
had one some years beyond Sea, but whether dead or alive, is more than any Man
upon English Ground (God wott) can tell. How! no Brother-in-law Squire! No Sir
William's Family! No Sister like to be a Lady, nor Brother a Gentleman! nor no
Horses nor Cart neither! This staggering Account put him into so doleful a
Dumps, that he stood almost Thunderstruck. And truly the twelve Miles home
again, was so tedious a Journey, and the lamentable Narrative he must make 'em
at home, so killing a Fancy, that it was a great Mercy he did not make a stay
upon some convenient Twig in some Hedge in the Road, rather than live to be the
Messenger of such a woeful, sad Tale -- But ill News at last must out. The Bird
and the Beasts were all flown; the poor Bride sweetly brought to Bed, a Cart
and two Horses to pay for, a Son-in-law to find when the Devil was blind, the
Daughters sweet play thing lost, the Father and Mother dipped ten whole pounds in
Chalk, and the whole Family under the suffering of a whole Chamberpot full of
waylings and Tears for their Calamities and Misfortunes.

But to return to our Rover: By the sale of Cart and Team, ten pound in Cole
the last lump, and the price of his Kine the other, his Pockets were pretty
well lined; and considering this spot might soon grow too hot for him, he
thinks it wisest to shift the Scene, and thereupon dismissing, for some time,
his Man Tom, who had pretty well licked his Fingers in so profitable a Service,
our Grasier now transmogrifies into a Spark, and very sprucely rigged, takes a
ramble Westward, where meeting with no Adventure worth recital, in some small
time he gets to Ludlow. There taking up the first Night at an Inn, his Garb
(though unattended by Servants) soon made him good Reception; his first enquiry
was to learn out the Eminentest People in the Town, of which being readily
informed by the Drawers; he learnt. amongst other Relations, that there was a
Substantial Wealthy Tradesman, had two pretty Marriageable Daughters: Being
directed to the House, he addresses to the Father, telling him he was a
Barkshire Gentleman, and intending to make some small abode in Ludlow, he did
not think fit to continue in a Public House, but would gladly gain admission
to some private Family. The Tradesman (whose name we will not mention) being a
Widower, and taken with the manner of his Discourse, kindly invited him to his
own House, which our Traveling Gallant as kindly embracing, Accommodation was
made, and he was lodged that very Night at this private Landlords.

His entrance here gave him the opportunity of daily conversing with no mean
wit and charms in the two sweet Daughters of the Family; and our Gallant, very
apt to take fire at but a small matter of Beauty, especially with a Portion at
the Tail of it, felt no little wamblings at the extraordinary accomplishments
of the elder, somewhat the sweeter Creature. But this new Adventure was not an
enterprise so easy as the last; this Sire of some fashion, was so far above
the Education and Extract of his former Father-in-Law, a Man of Mortar and
Trowel; and his Daughters of a reach and understanding so much beyond the
others humbler capacity; that measures must be quite altered here from those
that he took before. Accordingly now his discourse was always upon Foreign
subjects, himself and his own affairs the least part of his talk; and if any
inquisitive question, either by Father or Daughters were made relating to his
Family or Concerns, he answered with that Modesty, and almost silence to all
demands of that kind, that he left their curiosity still in the dark; and which
indeed was so much a heightning to the favorable imaginations they had
conceived of him; that they doubted not in the least, but he was of eminent
Quality; and what any boasting Vanity would have made 'em rather suspect, his
Modesty on the contrary confirmed. 'Twas some few days before they inquired his
name, for which he had ready at his Tongue's end, the name of a very great
Family in Barkshire; but not descending to particulars, the remoteness of the
place did not gain 'em much intelligence of his Quality from only the bare
name. All this while, at some little distance, he dropped a great many
complaisant words to the elder Sister, which looked very much like Love, and
which he indeed desired should be so interpreted. In this Conversation, now of
a Fortnights continuance, he had rendered himself so acceptable to the whole
Family, that a great many favorable thoughts on all sides inclined toward
him. The Address to the Daughter, at last looked a little more plain and
barefaced, and at that time a Fair happening at Ludlow, where he had been
diverting himself with seeing of Fashions, he came home in much Concern, and
some kind of Passion, much greater than hitherto they had at any time seen from
him. Certainly there is no place in the world ( says he passionately) so
retired, but some Devil or other will still find out and haunt me. The odness
of this expression invited the elder Sister to ask him what he meant. Why
truly, Madam, (he replied) I have been hunted from three or four Towns already,
for in spite of all my resolutions of living incognito, some unlucky Person or
other comes full in my mouth, and will betray me in splght of my Soul. This
answer did but heighten her Curiosity, and having, as she thought, some little
Interest in him as a professed Servant of hers, she was a little the bolder in
pressing the Question; and therefore plainly asked him why he lived incognito,
and what accident had now discovered him: To this at last, with a little more
frankness than he had hitherto used, he replied, the reason of his Ramble from
his Family, with his Living three or four Months past unknown to the whole
World, was only to prevent the ruin of a Sister, who like a foolish Girl, was
in much danger to be undone by a Beggarly Match she was too fond of; and her
Portion being in his hands, he had absented himself from his home, lest the
softness of her tears, the importunities of several Advocate's in behalf of
this indigent Lover, together with the weakness of his own tender heart, might
at last be prevailed upon to grant his consent to what he knew would be his
shame and her undoing. And as ill luck would have it, he had unfortunately
tumbled upon a Countryman of his, now at the Fair, who would infallibly run
open mouthed to his Sister and his Family, and tell 'em all where he was. This
discovery gave a good occasion to the fair Examiner to be not only a Pleader
for her own Sex in the Person and cause of his unknown Sister, but likewise to
be a Champion for Love. For now she plainly told him, that a great many grains
of allowance were to be made, where hearts were inseparable. If this Lover of
his Sisters was a man of Sense and Quality (as neither of those he could deny
him) it was a little barbarous in him to oppose the whole Repose and
Contentment of so near a Relation as a Sister, for so sordid a consideration as
a little Worldly Interest. Besides, there was a Providence always attended
Faith and Truth in Love, and undoubtedly sooner or later would provide for
their well-being, or else enable 'em to bear a meaner portion of Riches, which
others perhaps might, less contentedly, possess, This argument was almost the
daily discourse, in which she seemed to gain some little ground, but not enough
to persuade him to the unreasonable Grant of his Sisters desires.

About five days after comes a Letter directed to him at Ludlow, with the Post
Mark upon it very authentically, which in a very legible Woman's hand contained
these words.

Dear Brother,
WHat unhappy Star am I born under, to suffer all this miserable Persecution?
Certainly, when my Father left me to your disposal, and tied my Portion to your
liking of the man that must marry me, surely he could never have died
reconciled to Heaven, could he have foreseen the Slavery he tied his poor Child
to, in putting me into the power of so cruel a Brother. To run so many Months
from your House, your Family, nay, your Honor too, (for what must the
censuring world talk of you) and all to break a poor Sister's Heart. Oh
shameful! to hide your self from the World, and run from Mankind, only to shut
your Ears against Justice, and to be deaf to all Goodness and Humanity! Alas,
what Capital Crime have I committed, who only loved a Gentleman, in Birth and
Blood no ways my Inferior; and what if an unfortunate Younger Brother's
slender Patrimony of a Handred a Year, is not answerable to a Portion of Two
thousand Pounds. A wonderful Cause to make me the most unhappy Creature living,
in refusing me the only Blessing the World has to give. How many fair steps to
Preferment and Honor lie in the way of so accomplished and so well Related a
Gentleman, notwithstanding his Elder Brother run away with the Estate; and what
good Fortune have I not to hope for, if your Barbarous Aversion did not
interpose between my Felicity and me. In short, resolve to return home, and be
kind to your languishing, and almost despairing Sister, or else expect very
speedily to be visited by her at your Bedside in her Winding Sheet. For if
Ghosts can walk, and your Barbarity has sworn my Death, expect to be eternally
haunted, as you shall deserve from --

Your Distracted --


The next Post four or five Letters more came after him; one from his Bailiff,
to desire him, for God's sake to come home again; for the Devil a Farthing
would his Tenants pay till they saw their Landlord. A second from one of his
Tenants, complaining of his bad Crop, and the low price of Corn, and that
unless he would bate him Twenty pound a Year Rent, he could never hold his
Farm; earnestly desiring his Worship to come home, and take care of his poor
Tenants, etc. A third condoling his Misfortune in the loss of his Eldest Son,
and desiring to see his Sweet Worship's Face, that he might get him to put his
Second Boy's Life into his Copyhold; and others of the like Import.

These Letters our Spark left in his Closet Window, and one whole day going
abroad, by a pretended Negligence, he shot the Bolt of his Closet Lock out of
the Staple, and so left his Door a-jar, and his Letters exposed to any body
that would please to read 'em. This Stratagem succeeded to his Wish, for the
Daughter, whom I may now call his Mistress, knowing him safe abroad, had dropped
into his Chamber when the Maid was making the Bed, and finding the Closet Door
open, made bold to peep, and spying his Letters there, tips the wink upon the
Maid, whom she made of the Council, and read 'em all out The Contents put her
mightily upon the gog; for certainly she concluded he must be a Man of a mighty
Estate, so many Tenants, and the Lord knows what; and if a Sister had Two
thousand Pounds, what must an Elder Brother possess. After she had conjured the
Maid to silence, she could not forbear running to her Father, and telling him
all she had discovered: The Father at first a little reprimanded her Curiosity,
but considering he had found out a Love Intrigue between his Daughter and him,
he thought it no unwelcome discovery. At last looking very steadfastly upon his
Daughter's Face, with a sort of a kind fatherly leer, he cried, Ah Child, would
he were a Bed with thee. How, Father, replied the Girl blushing. Nay no harm
(quoth the Father) Chicken, that is all. Thou say he makes love to thee, and
troth I must own it no small part of my Ambition to have a Person of his
Quality and Fortunes for a Son-in-law. In short, The Father gave her very
seasonable Admonition; for having sounded her Inclinations, and found 'em to
his own wish, with a Fatherly Authority he commanded her, if his Addresses
hinted at Marriage, to make him all reasonable Advances that way.

Our Gallant found his Plot had taken; for he had critically observed in what
most particular manner and station to a quarter of an inch he had laid his
Letters; and finding all of 'em displaced more or less from the exact point he
had left 'em, he plainly perceived they had all of 'em been read. Besides, in
compliance to her Father's Orders, and indeed a little to her own Inclinations,
he discovered her usual Coldness to him a little diminished, and her Aspect
more favorable, which plainly told him the Bait had taken. Whereupon one
Evening finding her alone in her Garden, with a confidence more than usual, he
plainly spoke home, telling her what an inestimable Blessing he should acquire
in possessing so much sweetness for a Wife.

A long Courtship ensued, the Particulars too tedious, only the Girl was a
little more pliant than ordinary, but much doubting the integrity of his
Protestations; alleging it was very unlikely he would debase himself to marry
a Creature of her mean Fortune, for all she could at present challenge, except
what her Father might do for her after his decease, was only a 100 l. left her
in her Father's hands by an Uncle deceased. Our Gallant presently with much
disdain seemed to slight all thoughts of her Fortune, for that, he thanked
Heaven, he wanted not; and truly her dear Person was the only consideration
that had fixed his Heart entirely her Captive. To bring him to the happy point,
48 hours are not past, before he comes to reap the fair Fruit. The marriageknot
is tied, and the Nuptials consummated, and Joy and Felicity runs high between
them.

In this happy State, and uninterrupted Delights, they continued some days,
when of a sudden his old Servant Tom, booted and spurred, comes to Ludlow, and
now in a little higher station than before, in the garb and figure of one of
his Bailiffs, he comes post thus far, first to tell him the Distraction of his
Family occasioned by his absense; 2dly, The Lady his Sister's sudden departure,
God knows whither, for she went away by night two days before he set out from
home, and has not been heard of since. And that a Letter was come from Bristol,
intimating that his Venture in Sherry was safely landed there, and that the
King's Customs came to 97 l. but his Correspondent at Bristol being lately
dead, the Custom was yet unsatisfied; and truly for his part none of the
Tenants would pay him one Groat till they saw their Lanlord again, and
therefore he could not raise the Money to satisfy it. Our new Bridegroom
hearing all this, presently communicates the whole matter to his sweet
Bedfellow, desiring her to get her Father to accommodate him with that Sum; not
that he asked it as any part of her Unkle's Legacy, he scorned to be so
poor-spirited; no, he requested it as a Boon, and the Moneys should speedily be
repaid with Thanks: Which if he pleased to do for him, his Servant should fall
down the Severn, and take care of his Wines, of which his dear Father in-law
should have one Hogshead to drink to her Hans in Keldar. The Daughter was a
speedy and successful Embassadress, for the Money was presently laid him down
in Gold, for the more case of his Servant's carriage of it. Tom had not been
two hours gone, but a Footboy in a very fine Livery brings him a Letter from
his Sister, signifying her extreme Concern for his deserting his Affairs and
Family, and that her Griefs and Disquiets had made her take a long Ramble to
see him once more. And that she was now at Hereford, not daring to approach any
nearer till she had his gracious Warrant and Permission, which she humbly upon
her bended Knees entreated of him, with a great deal more passionate Courtship
to him upon that Subject. Upon perusal of this Letter he seemed to melt into a
great deal of good nature and compassion for his dear Sister, insomuch that a
Tear stood in his Eyes which his sweet Bride very kindly drank in a kiss. At
length launching out into a great many tender Expressions toward his Sister,
which Goodness his kind Bride much applauded and encouraged, throwing in many a
kind word in her Sisters behalf; At last the Brother concluded he would be so
civil to her, that since her extravagant Affection had brought her thus far to
visit him, he would return her the Favor of Riding himself to Hereford to
fetch her, if his kind Father would procure him a Horse. Ay, with all his
heart. Nay, both Father and Daughter proffered to take the same Journey with
him to pay their Respects to the young Lady, and attend upon her as part of her
Train to Ludlow. No, by no means, replied our Spark; that was more than the
Rules of Honor would allow: for his dear Bride, as his Wife, was a Person in
Quality above her, and whatever Kindnesses she pleased to show her when at
Ludlow, was in her free Power; but this complaisance was too great a
Condescension, and consequently he begged her leave that the tenderness he had
of her Honor might absolutely forbid her any such thought. And indeed his
Father's was much the same Condescension, which he must likewise no way suffer.

The Father and Daughter both silenced with this Answer, acquiesced with his
Reasons, as being much a more experienced Master of Ceremonies than they could
pretend to; consenting to let him go alone only attended by the Sister's Page;
in the mean while resolving to apply their officious Respects to this fair, tho
yet unknown Relation another way, viz. in making a suitable preparation for her
honorable Reception. But first a very stately Horse was borrowed, one that a
Colonel of the Guards had lately bid a lumping Sum for; with all Accoutrements
answerable. And at mounting, our Cavalier whispering in his Father's ear, and
telling him he had been long from home, and not knowing whether his remaining
Stock might hold out to his present Occasions, he desired -- The Father would
not hear out the Speech, but running up stairs presently, fetched down, and
stole into his hand a silk Purse richly lined with Twenty Broad Pieces.

Our Squire thus every way obliged, after his due Conges all made, bids them
all Farewell till to morrow, and so prances off. Here let us leave the Father
and Daughter as busy for the Credit of the Cause, as may be imagined, making
all suitable Provision for to morrow's Entertainment; the Kitchen, and Pantry,
the Bedchamber, and the Court-Cubboard, must all appear in Splendor
extraordinary.

And now to return to our Traveller: Heaven knows he had the misfortune to miss
his way, for he never found Hereford, nor Sister. His Barb too found another
Chapman than the Colonel of the Guards; for both Horse and Accoutrements all
embargoed, and the dismounted Cavalier slipped into a Frize-Coat of his Man Tom's
providing, who waited his coming, The Master, Page, and Tom, in a small
prepared Vessel, troul'd down the Severn as fast as Tide and good Speed could
carry them.

As we thundered down the Severne, one of our Strollers being at present
useless, our Page (well rewarded for playing his part in the Farse) is dropped at
Worcester, from whence we continue our Voyage to Bristol. Arrived there pretty
late in a Summers Evening, it is not thought convenient to appear in any Dress
whatever had been seen before at Ludlow, nor indeed to expose his Face, lest
any Inquiry might be made there about him as a Sherry-Merchant, and so trunking
up all his best Raiment, he gets himself new rigged at a Salesmans in a genteel
Garb, but something modester than his Ludlow Bravery, and Tom and he next
morning move off to Bath.

It fortunes here, that he Quarters at one of the great Inns, it being the
beginning of the Summer, just before Bath time, where was a brisk Daughter of
the house, about half way stage between 20 and 30. and consequently much
inclinable manwards. A Girl that had had the Honor of many a slap cross the
Mouth, and chuck under the Chin by Lords and Earls in her time, her Fathers
honorable Guests at Bath season. Our most constant Lover of every new face,
feels the old Itch again. Business he finds will thicken upon him, and
therefore flusht with his late Successes, he resolves to throw out his winning
hand as far as it will run.

But now to know what Portion this Damsel had, for without a spill of yellow
Boys, naked White and Red has but indifferent Charms with him. This
Intelligence was quickly made, without asking the question; for there was a
Jest in the Family of one of the Drawers being Suitor there, who belike wanted
a tite sum of 80 l. to set up withal (a small Portion of hers formerly left her
by a Grandfather, and now at use.) This Drawer forsooth was a Rival, but not an
over-formidable one. For truly our Innkeepers Daughter had so often been
tickled with the Addresses of Quality, that (Foh!) her Fathers Drawer was
scarce worthy to hold up her Train. A Gentleman, or nothing for her. Nay, if
she has not the happiness to strike in for a Lease for Life at Bed and Board
with some honorable Person, rather than dye in ignorance, keep a stale
Maidenhead, and so lead Apes, she has long since resolved not to stand out at
a lower game, and en'e admit a Tenant at Will to an Inmate of Fashion and
Quality; and was grossly suspected she had tried the Constitution of her Body,
under a load of Honor long before her present year of twenty five. But true or
false, that is a small Blot in her Scutchion.

Our Don John is absolutely captivated, and plies lier home with all the
Rhetoric that Love can afford. Our man Tom in the mean while but very
modestly, is whispering amongst his Mates, the lower Tire of the Family, the
Servants, what a Worthy Gentleman his Master is, being a Rich Norfolk Gentleman
(a pretty large stride from Bathe) of 500 a year. This Narrative passes pretty
well amongst the shallower pates, the Chamberlain, the Tapster, the Hostler,
and the rest of the inferior Domestics; but our hardfaith'd young Mistress of
the house, whither bit before, or naturally not over-credulous, does as good as
declare, That her Principles are to look before she leaps. Our Norfolk Suitor
finds his Addresses very acceptable, but still with a reserve, Provided he be
the Man he appears. He plainly sees, that the Girl, upon good Grounds is very
pliable, but she is a little past the years of being dandled and kissed out of her
Reason: He or any man else (any Tooth good Barber) with Honor and Estate may
go far with her; but Demonstration is the only Argument that must carry her
Cause. As many years as she has lived (or at least past for) a Maid, she is not
so hard set, but she can tarry till Substantial Testimony (as far off as
Norfolk lies) can make out the Lands and Tenements, before she consents to an
Enclosure. Our Spark therefore put to his last Trumps, finds this last a
craggier and more difficult Enterprise than any he had ever yet encountered;
however, thinking it a very great scandal to his Wit, to lie down before her,
and shamefully for want of Ammunition, be forced to raise the Siege, he sets
all his Brains at work for one last Mine to blow her up; or if that take not,
he is resolved to quit the Field. In a day or two after, he begins to be
Melancholy and indisposed; during this fit, he is very cold in his Love, and
applies him to Religious Books, talks much of very odd Dreams he has had, till
at last he takes his Bed. Physicians are sent for, whether they found any real
indications of sickness or no, or acquiesced to his own Declaration of the
Pains he felt, no Medicinal Application was wanting. His Distemper increasing,
he desires a Man of Law to be sent for, accordingly a Scrivener of the Town is
called, who draws up his Will, in which he gives away about Three Thousand
pounds in several Legacies, leaving his Nephew his full and sole Executor. The
Will is sealed up, and delivered to his Man Tom; and all the cognizance taken
of his Mistress, is only 10 l. to buy her Mourning. Next a Man of God is sent
for, and all the necessary preparations for a Man of another World are made.
His Conscience settled, and his Viaticum for his long Journey most devoutly
furnished. But it pleases Fate, or the Sick man rather, in some few days after,
to give some small symptoms of amendment, and to shorten the matter, in Eight
or Ten days time he is pretty well recovered, and the next talk is of fancying
his own Native Norfolk Air for perfecting his Health; all this while the young
Damfel, who, tho not called to the Will-making, knew all the Contents of it,
and finding from all hands, the great uprightness and devotion of her humble
Servant, could not fancy that so much Religion and Piety could be an Impostor,
and therefore she doubted not in the least, but the Estate in Norfolk was
unquestionable; and tho indeed her Prudence would still incline her to a full
inquiry and satisfactory account, yet it is now too late, her cooling Admirer
talks of speeding to London; and tho he professes he will leave his heart
behind with her, She is afraid that new Faces and better Fortunes will soon
shake her hold there, and therefore taking her Pillow upon the business, she
resolves not to slip so favorable an opportunity, but to lay hold of the
serelock, and take a good offer whilst she may have it: For with all her
natural Pride, she considers her self but the Lees of a Tap; and it is not every
Rich Gudgeon will bite at a Bait so blown, and so stale.

Her departing Lover still pressing for his Journey, the good-natured Girl
watches the next amorous sally of her Gallant, and takes him at his word, and
without asking advice, thinks her own wit sufficient, and in two days time
enters into for better, for worse. The Town-Bells soon rung All Joy; and the
best Hogshead in Daddy's Cellar run Claret. His Honorable Guest and Son-in-Law
was the little Idol of all the Virgins of the Town, and the envied preferment
of sweet Mrs. Betty had filled all Tongues; and scarce a Prayer offered up for
a Husband, but Mrs. Betty's felicity was made the Pattern of their Devotion.

But now, as the Devil would have it, our dignified Bride is for having her
Dear Spouse, by all means, doing her and her Father the honor of staying out
the whole Bathe Season (now coming on) amongst 'em, and nothing can divert her
from that resolution. This is a very unwelcome proposal; for the multitude of
Faces from all quarters of the Kingdom, may not only be very dangerous to his
circumstances, but likewise his Norfolk Abilities, long before that time, may
be examined too narrowly; and therefore not being able to make any harsh
refusal of his fair Brides request, lest it should look like design, and to
marry a young Girl, and be a shamed of her parentage, would appear so unkind,
that he has no Artifice to wean her from Bathe, and drill her out of Town, but
by pretending a small relapse of his Indisposition, which he acted so well,
that he denied himself the very pleasures of Love, and fell off even from
Family Duties. This Curtain-failure began to moderate her passion for staying
at Bathe, for her tame Bedfellow still preaching up the virtues of his own
Native Norfolk Air, his poor defeated Bride could not but have a womanly
longing for so necessary a Restorative, and thereupon for so important a
Medicine to her feeble Yokemate, she consented to go along with him.

All her fine Clothes were Boxed up, together with several Bed and
Table-Linnen, etc. (for she had pretty good Movables, all the Legacies of
Deceased Aunts and Grannies, and other good Kin) and all sent by her Man Tom to
the Carriers, and two days after places took in the flying Coach for their
speeding to London.

But one main thing was almost forgotten. She had called in her Portion, which
for a Guinies Gratification the Scrivener had ready at an Hours warning, having
at that time some other peoples Money by him undisposed, and hers being out
upon Mortgage, the Owners were very well pleased to make an Exchange upon the
same security. This Money was not to be trusted by the Wagon, but to be
carried up with her in the Coach-box, for which her Man Tom begged her
acceptance of a little Gilt leather'd Trunk that happened to be just small
enough to go into the Coach-box. The Day of setting out being the Morrow, her
thoughtful Spouse had nicely considered that the Coach would be in London half
a day before the Carrier, which for some Reasons you will find in the sequel was
not altogether for his convenience, and therefore he made a shift to put off
the Journey till next Coach-day.

Against that time the Gilt-leather'd Trunk, and the Key to it was delivered
her, (though by the by he had got two Keys) and the 80 l. some Broad pieces, a
Caudle-Cup, half a dozen of Silver Spoons, and some other Toys were all stowed
in it; and the Kind Couple are trundling away for London, with the Man well
mounted riding by.

Now as a Man of his Estate, he had freely given her all her own Portion, a
small Privy Purse to buy her Pins with, having Mirryed her only for Beauty, and
much disdaining the addition of so small a sum to his plentiful Fortune. The
first stage being done (for they had but one Night to lie by the way) the small
Cabinet of Treasure was carefully taken out of the Coach, and lodged in a
Closet in the Chamber, and next Morning delivered to Tom to see safely laid in
the Coach-box as before.

The next Night arriving both at London, (whither Tom about Brenford was
commanded by his Master to speed a little before to prepare for their
Reception) a very fair Lodging near St. James's was ready to entertain her, but
no Tom had been there; and coming to open the Trunk, instead of the Gold and
Silver Entrayls there was nothing but a Bag of Stones, and a piece of a
Brickbat to supply their places, enclosed in a few Rags that stuffed up the
Trunk. This amazing sight threw the poor Lady into a most violent Distraction,
and 'twas very hard to hold her from falling into a Fit, her Husband seeming as
much amazed as her self, and joining in the complaint as loud as she. But to
abate her Rage, he told her the wicked Rogue should not so escape, he had very
sufficient security from able Friends for his honest and faithful service, and
their Purses should make her Reparation, till when the Loss should be made up
out of his own Pocket. Nor would he sleep till he had made her some farther
satisfaction, and therefore begged her Excuse but for one half Hour till he took
Coach, and made that search and quest that perhaps would bring her some
considerable Light into the Villainy. Her Zeal for her Loss never looked any
farther, and accordingly well pleased with the Kind Motion, she took leave of
him for the half Hour aforesaid.

But, alas, a long half Hour, for half the Evening, nay the whole Night was
gone, and neither Man nor Master to be heard of. So Husband and Portion all
departed, she thought fit to secure her Goods and Clothes at the Carriers, but
the same Calamity attended there likewise, for Tom had been there too, and
swept all.

To describe the Distress and Anguish of our present Female Sufferer, or either
of her two foregoing Sisters in Affliction, being a work beyond our power, we
shall e'ne do as the Painter did of old, that is, draw a Vail before the Face
of sorrow, the Lineaments of true Grief being above the Pen or Pencils skill.

And now to follow our Libertine through all his Rambles and Exploits in this
wide Town of London, (for there lies his next Scene) being matter we have not
yet fully been informed in, we dare not venture to play the Historian any
farther than certain Intelligence (which yet we have not received) can guide
us, being resolved not to load our Rambles with Romance or Fiction, his Life
being furnished with matter sufficiently voluminous without the addition of
Flourish or Fancy.

Let it suffice that some time after all these three successive Adventures, the
poor Ludlow Wife comes up to London, being the last place she has to make her
quest after this Impostor and Monster, for those are the gentlest Names her
Sufferings and Resentments can give him. She has a great Opinion that Newgate
or Newgate Roll, or some other such Chronicles of his Renown will give her some
light into his Life and Fortune, and perhaps the Justice of Heaven afford her a
sight of him at least, if not a power to execute Heavens and her just Vengeance
on so egregious a Reprobate.

Her Inn being at Holborn Bridge, she lights into the Company of a good
Motherly Woman just come from Oxfordshire; the sorrow in so young a Face, and
the swollen Eyes which were not yet dried, the Fountain being indeed
inexhaustible, the Curiosity of the Elder Traveller made bold to ask her the
cause of so doleful a look, etc. The young one (who now had no Reserves)
plainly told her whole sufferings, to which the Matron replied, Alas young
Woman, what are your griefs to mine? I have been many years the Wife of the
most Infamous Miscreant that the Earth ever bore; deserted and abandoned by the
wickedest of Men, after long years of Honest and Loyal Fidelity to his Bed, and
exposed to perish (which you, thanks to able Friends, need not fear) etc. with
a great deal more bitter Invectives against him. Till at last upon further
conferring of Notes, and describing of Characters and Persons they came to jump
together, and found 'emselves both abused by the very same Monster, the eldest
being indeed his old Banbury Wife. What Amazement this Accident produced may
easily be conjectured, it will be enough to tell you that the Anguish of both
their Souls, and the Bitterness of Gall on each side made 'em Swear an
inviolable Friendship, determining to search (if possible) the whole World, to
hunt down this Devil. Accordingly they take a Lodging a little higher in
Holborn, where making no secret of both their hard cases, they open their whole
Souls to their new Landlady to engage her assistance in the Quarrel. The
Landlady Transported at both their Narrations fell upon her Knees, and blessed
God he had sent 'em to her House, for this Lucifer they had described, was
certainly the very Man that next Week was to Marry her Daughter. This surprise
put 'em all into new Confusion, and the Daughter being called to the Council,
it was evident that this very Fellow had made Love to the Daughter of the
House, the day of Marriage concluded, the Ring and Wedding Clothes preparing,
etc. This last Deliverance made the poor old Woman, and the Daughter no less,
melt into Tears at this happy Discovery.

Well, it is agreed between 'em all, that they shall not stir till he comes
thither, which will be in twenty four Hours at most; and all their united
Vengeance, Constables, Warrants, and what not, shall be prepared for his
Reception.

This Resolution was heartily fixed amongst 'em; only the Banbury Wife would
that Evening take a walk to a Cozens, a Citizen, where she had some important
Affairs, but nothing should stay her abroad above an Hour; she had not walked
half a Furlong but Destiny or some other ruling Power threw her full in the
Mouth of her Husband; her Passion at sight of him rose so high, that at first
it could not find vent for words, which he perceiving desired her to walk into
a Tavern which was just before 'em, and there recover her Confusion. You may
conceive she was very ready to accept the Invitation, her Stomach being so
full, that 'twas the only thing she wanted to have her full swing at him. The
Discourse of her part you may well guess at; but his Answer was so tender, and
his Confession so open, that at last she grew patient enough to hear him out.
He plainly told her all he had done, or at least the greatest part: that it was
only the Effects of his Wants and Necessities, that now he had raised enough to
re-establish him in the World, that the Honey Moon of Love had been almost over
between them, and that if he had made any Lapse in Disloyalty to her Marriage
Right, it was not Infidelity but Interest that had enforced him to all. And so
showing her handfuls of Gold and Silver, he humbly entreated a Reconciliation
betwixt 'em. Which good Words and Address at last so perfectedly obtained, that
he persuaded her to send for all her Household Goods, and to live with him
somewhere in the Liberties of Westminster, where disguising his Name, and
amending his Faults, he doubted not through his practice to recover a plentiful
Being, and maintain her like a Woman.

The poor Creature absolutely mollified, promises Fidelity to him, and never
returning to her new Lodgings, takes him along with her, defeating the whole
Vengeance that was hatching against him, and not stirring from him till all her
Goods were come up from Banbury, and a new House furnished with 'em. She had not
lived there three days, till finding a Gossiping Errand for her to keep her
from home a whole day, at her Return at Night to Bed, she finds neither Husband
nor Goods, Bed to lie, or Stool to sit upon; the whole House being utterly
dismantled, and nothing but nakedness and empty Walls to receive her.

This last Cruelty of her Barbarian made her almost run stark Mad, and
returning to her Holborn Lodging to own her frailty in believing an Infidel,
and the Just Judgment that had befaln her upon it, she found the poor Ludlow
Mourner departed, and all her Relief left was to return to Banbury to live upon
the Alms of the Parish.

This Libertine Life of our Renegade did not long continue till found at last
by the Ludlow Wife he was thrown into Worcester Jail; from thence by Habeas
Corpus (at the Charge of a Parson in Southwark whose Daughter he had likewise
Married) removed to Newgate, and upon an Indictment of six Wives appearing
against him, being then Tried by the Name of Morrel alias Bowyer (a Name of a
Worthy Person of Quality, for personating of whom he had stood in the Pillory)
he pleaded Guilty to those six and twelve more, and thereby received only the
punishment of a Squeeze in the Fist.

After this Escape of a Halter, what his following Adventures have been we are
not informed: it is to be believed his Will was no ways wanting, though his
power of managing such hardy Exploits might undoubtedly be a little retrencht:
and therefore we have reason to conclude he fell into smaller Games, in which
his Walks have lain something more obscure, and thereupon by reason of our
unacquaintance with the Truth of that part of his Life, we shall over-leap some
years, and bring him to his Conclusion.

Some few days before Christmas be came to one Mr. Cullens a Baker in the
Strand to seek him a Lodging, his Habit but indifferent, and his Stock not
above Two Shillings, pretending himself to be a Person of Worth and Honor,
viz. Humphrey Wickham of Swaclift in the County of Oxon Esquire; a Person whose
Name and Reputation was well known to Mrs. Cullen, being Born not far from him,
which contributed much to the swallowing of the Imposture. His pretense for
leaving his Family in the Country, and living here Incognito was occasioned
(he said) to avoid the payment of 500 l. which he stood engaged for, and for
which the principal had left him in the lurch; and which he had made a rash Vow
he would not pay.

Mr. Cullen's Family thus imposed upon supplied all his wants, and paid him the
due Respects to the Quality he Personated, till falling sick, on the 28th of
December he made a Will, as follows.

His WILL.
IN the Name of God, Amen. I Humphrey Wickham of Swatclift, in the County of
Oxon Esquire; being sick and weak in Body, but of sound Mind and Memory, do
make this my last WILL and TEST AMENT, revoking all Wills by me formerly made:
And as touching such Worldly Estate as God has been pleased to bless me
withal, I do hereby give and bequeath the same in manner following.

Imprimis, I do give, devise, and bequeath, to my Kinsman William Wickham, of
Gazington, in the County of Oxon, all that my Mansion House of Swaclift
aforesaid; and all the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments thereunto belonging,
to hold unto him the said William Wickham, and his Heirs for ever.

Item, I give and bequeath unto John Cullin, Son of Thomas Cullin, of the
Parish of St. Clement Danes, in the County of Middlesex, Baker, all that my
impropriated Personage of Sowgrate, in the County of Northampton, with the
Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof.

Item, I give unto Anne Cullin, Sister of the said John Cullin, the Sum of Two
hundred and fifty Pounds.

Item, I give unto Thomas Cullin, Son of the said Thomas Cullin, the Sum of
Three hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Dorothy Halford of Halford, in the County of Warwick, the
Sum of two hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Richard Davis, Son of William Davis of the said Parish of
St. Clement Danes, the Sum of Four hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto William Davis, Son of the said William Davis, the Sum of
Two hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Anne Fowkes, for her Care and Diligence in Looking after me
in my Sickness, the Sum of one hundred pounds.

Item, I give unto Robert Croker, Son of William Croker of Sanford, in the said
County of Oxon (being my God-son) the Sum of Five hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto the said William Croker, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Robert Penniston, Son of Sir Thomas Penniston, and younger
Brother to Sir Farmalis Penniston of Corn hill, in the said County of Oxon the
Sum of Three hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Mrs. Jane Penniston, Sister of the said Mr. Robert
Penniston, the Sum of Two hundred Pounds.

Item, I do hereby give, devise, and bequeath, all my Lauds, Tenements, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, called by the name of Appletree Ducy, in Cropridee,
in the County of Northampton, unto John Brooking of Rashly, in the County of
Devon, Esquire, and the said William Davis senior, and Thomas Cullin senior,
and the Survivor of them, and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them upon Trust
and Confidence: Nevertheless, that they the said John Brooking, William Davis,
and Thomas Cullin, shall sell and dispose of the same; and out of the Money
thereby raised, pay, or cause to be paid, the respective Legacies herein before
bequeathed unto the said Anne Cullin, Thomas Cullin Junior, Dorothy Halford,
Richard Davis, William Davis Junior, and Anne Fowkes. And whereas I have herein
before bequeathed unto my Kinsman Will. Wickham, and his Heirs, all my
Mansion House at Swacklift aforesaid, with the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments thereunto belonging; my true Will and Meaning is, That the same
Devise is upon this special Trust and Confidence, That the said William Wickham
shall pay, or cause to be paid, the several Legacies herein before bequeathed
unto the said Rob. Croker, and Will. Croker, Robert Penniston, and Jane
Penniston; and also pay and discharge one Bond for the Principal Sum of five
hundred pounds, with Interest, which I became bound for with Thomas Walker, to
one Thomas Irons, any thing herein before contained, to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding; and also that he the said William Wickham, shall out
of his Legacy, and Lands, and Premises aforesaid, to him devised, pay, or cause
to be paid unto my Executors hereafter named, the Sum of five hundred pounds,
to be by them bestomed, distributed, or employed for the use and benefit of the
Poor of the Parish of Swacklift aforesaid, in such manner as they, or the major
part of them shall think fit and convenient.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the said John Brooking out of the Moneys that
shall be raised of the Sale of the said Lands and Tenements, called Apple tree
Ducy aforesaid, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds: And all the rest and residue
of the Moneys that shall be thereby raised, I do hereby give and bequeath unto
the said William Davies Senior, and Thomas Cullin Senior, to be equally divided
between them and the Survivor of them.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Alice Cullin, Wife of the said Thomas Cullin
Senior, the Sum of Six hundred Pounds to her own proper Use and Disposal.

Item, I give and bequeath in like manner the Sum of Six huadred Pounds unto
Jane Davis, the Wife of the said William Davis.

Item, I give unto the said Robert Croker and Will. Croker, the Sum of Ten
Pounds a piece to buy them Mourning: and also to each of them a Ring of Twelve
Shillings.

Item, I give unto Jane Croker and Mary Croker; and also to the said Robert
Penniston, and Jane Penniston, and all other my Legates herein before
mentioned, and to every of them the Sum of Ten Pounds a piece to buy them
Mourning, and a Ring of Twelve Shillings.

Item, Where as I have the Sum of Seven hundred Pounds lying at Iuterest in the
hands of Mr. Ambrose Holbitch, in the name of Oliver Charles, my Servant, I do
hereby give and bequeath the same to and amongst my Four Servants, Oliver
Charles, John Harber, Sarah Winn, and Margery Smith, and the Survivor of them,
to be equally divided amongst them, share and share alike.

Item, I give and bequeath my Three Geldings, and all my Accoutrements
belonging to them unto the said John Brookeing, William Davis Senior, and
Thomas Cullin, Senior, viz. my Bright Bay Gelding to the said Thomas Cullin,
and my Black Gelding to the said William Davis, and my Dapple-grey Gelding to
the said John Brookeing. All the Arrears of Rent in my Tenants Hands at the
time of my Decease I do hereby freely acquit and discharge. And all the rest
and Residue of my Personal Estate, not herein before devised, after my Debts,
Legacies and Funeral Expenses, paid and discharged, I do hereby give and
bequeath unto my said Kinsman William Wickham.

And, lastly, I do hereby nominate, constitute and appoint the said William
Wickham, John Brooking, William Davis senior, and Thomas Cullin senior,
Executors of this my Will; hereby revoking and making v id all other, and
former Will or Wills by me made.

In Witness whereof I the said Humphrey Wickham have to this my last Will,
containing one side of a Sheet of Paper, and almost half the back thereof, set
my Hand and Seal this Twentieth day of December. Anno Dom. 1691.

Humphrey Wickham.
Signed, Sealed, Published and Declared in the presence of us, with the words
(Will. Wickham) being first interlined, Rob. Smith, Jo. Chapman, Rich. Chapman,
Mart. Pinckard.

I, the abovenamed Humphrey Wickham, having omitted out of my Will
abovementioned, the Disposition of my Estate in Huntingtonshire, do hereby
make this Addition to, and part of my said Will, in manner following: I give
and bequeath all my Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, called Pryor's Farm,
and all other my Estate in Holly-well and Needingworth, unto the abovenamed
John Brooking, William Davis senior, and Tho. Cullin senior, and the Survivor
of them, and their Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivor of them, under this
special Trust and Confidence, that the said Jo. Brooking, William Davis, and
Thomas Cullin, shall sell and dispose of the same; and out of the Moneys
thereby raised, pay, or cause to be paid the respective Legacies hereafter
named; viz. I give and bequeath to Humphrey Longford the sum of six hundred
pounds, and to his Sister Mary Longford the like sum of six hundred pounds.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the said Tho. Cullin Sen. the further Sum of
800 l. and all the Remainder of the Moneys thereby raised, I give and bequeath
unto the said Will. Davis Sen. and Jane his Wife, and the Survivor of them.

Item, Whereas I have by Will abovesaid, given unto John Cullin, Son of the
said Thomas Cullin, the impropriated Parsonage of Sowgrave; my true meaning is,
That I do give and devise the same to the said John Cullin, and his Heirs for
ever. In Witness whereof, I the said Humphrey Wickham have to this Codicil
Addition, or futher part of my said Will, set my Hand and Seal, this Twenty
eighth Day of December, Anno Dom. 1691.

Humphrey Wickham.
Signed, Sealed, Published, and Declared, in the Presence of us, Robert Smith,
John Chapman, Rich. Chapman, Martin Pinkard. Probatum fuit, etc.

This stupendous confidence of a dying man is very amazing, nay he drove on
the Masquerade at that strange rate, that he may be truly said to have ended as
he began, having received the blessed Sacrament, pretended the settlement of
his Conscience, and making peace with Heaven with that seeming sincerity, as if
he had resolved to prevaricate with God with the same assurance he had all
along done with Mankind. The credulity of these deluded persons his Landlord,
and the rest, is not much to be wondered at, when the last Gasps of Death could
carry so fair an Hypocrisy, and their Transports for his extravagant Legacies
bequeathed 'em are rather to be pitied then rediculed. And if they have been
faulty in any little over-fondness of their imaginary good fortune, the Jests
and Gibes they have received, have been their sufficient punishment; besides
Mr. Cullin's being run out of above 30 l.

After his Death care was taken to provide him a Coffin of about 10 l. value,
and the Embalmers were paid for some of their Office of preserving him sweet,
till preparations for a solemn and sumptuous Funeral could be made, suitable to
the remains of the honorable Deceased. And this Letter was sent as follows.

Sir,
THESE serve to inform you that Humphrey Wickham Esquire of Swaclift in the
County of Oxon died this morning at my House where he has been about ten days;
He has made his Will, and you are one of his Executors with me and others; A
very great share of his Estate is given to you; therefore pray Sir speed to
London, that we may take care of his Funeral and other matters necessary to be
done upon this occasion.

I think it may not be amiss that you keep this private, lest any thing may be
Purloyned or Imbezelled by any of the deceaseds Servants, or any else at his
Seat at Swaclift, which is all given to you, some Legacies thereout to be paid;
I am, Sir,

Your Servant Tho. Cullin.
London 3. January 1691/2. From my House at the Wheat-sheaf near St. Clements
Church over against Arundel Street. Strand.
To Mr. William Wickham of Gazington inquire at the Blew Boars Head in Oxon.

These following Lines were enclosed from the aforesaid Executors in the said
Letter being left by the deceased.

WHereas, I Humphrey Wickham Esquire, in Company with my own man John Harbert,
and John Austin, Son of Nich. Austin, did carry a black Hoggs Skin Trunk,
marked with the Letters

H. W. 1688.

Wherein are the Deeds of my Estate at Sowgrave and Aple-tree Ducy; these are
to desire you to deliver them to the Executors, signed with his own Name, thus
(...) Humphrey Wickham.

Memorandom, that there are two Mortgages in the hands of Austin, the one for
1400 l. and the other for 400 l. In the name of Oliver Charles, in the hands of
Mr. Ambrose Holbech.

In answer to this Letter came a Gentleman from Oxford to tell Mr. Cullin, that
the Christian name of this Mr. Wickham of Gazington was mistaken, which gave
the first Alarm of an Imposture, otherewise Horse and Mourning had been
provided to have carried him down to Swackley for his Interment there.

Mr. Cullin being not over apt to believe himself cheated, but more to satisfy
the rest of the World, sent down a Messenger to Swackley, with fifteen
shillings in his Pocket, mounted upon a poor Hackney, but ordered to return
upon the Bright Bay Gelding bequeathed him in his Will; being not convinced of
the Delusion till his Messengers Return notwithstanding several persons of
Reputation had declared him a counterfeit; and Major Richardson and Mr. Compton
had both inspected the Corpse, and averred him to be the very man formerly
Judged for six Wives as before mentioned, and more than once their Prisoner in
Newgate.

The Messenger returning Tuesday the 12th of January he brought a Compliment to
the Executors from Captain Wickham, (who had treated the Messenger very
civilly,) to this effect; that he gave 'em his hearty thanks for their intended
kindness to him, and if they would please to come to Swackley for a Month or
more they should be very welcome, and have the use of all the Geldings, viz.
the Black, the Bright Bay, and Dapple Gray, tho he could not well part with 'em
for good and all.

Upon this full satisfaction received, about three the next Morning with no
more than a Watchman and a Lanthorn in a a Coffin of four shillings price, he
was laid in Earth in a Nook of St. Clements Church yard.

Postscript.
THE Nurse and Assistants that attended him in his sickness now call to mind,
that they once or twice observed him to laugh to himself very pleasantly, which
they suppose proceeded from the pleasure he took in cheating the World he was
then just upon leaving.

FINIS.

