THE SEVERAL INFORMATIONS OF JOHN MAC-NAMARRA, Gent. MAURICE FITZGERRALD, Gent.
And JAMES NASH; Gent.


Relating to the HORRID POPISH PLOT IN IRELAND; Together with the RESOLUTIONS
OF THE COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT, Upon the said INFORMATIONS, and MESSAGE from the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament.

Thursday the 6th. of January.

Perused and appointed to be Printed according to the Order of the House of
Commons; by me, W. Williams Speaker. January 6. 1680.

DVBLIN, Reprinted by Joseph Ray, at College Green, for Samuel Helsham and
Joseph Howes, and are to be sold by the rest of the Booksellers in Dublin. 1681.

THE INFORMATION OF JOHN MAC-NAMARRA.
WHO Informs and says, That William Bradley Esquire one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of Waterford in the Year 1677. gave him
the said Informant an Oath of Secrecy touching the Plot intended and designed
in Ireland, by the Earl of Tyrone and the rest of the Confederates against the
Kings Majesty; At which time he imparted to this Informant, the Earl of Tyrone
had received a Commission from the French King to be a Colonel of Horse in the
County of Waterford, and that the said William Bradley was to be his Lieutenant
Colonel, and desired this Informant to provide himself with Horse and Arms, and
to procure as many as he could of those he dare trust: and that this Informant
should have a Command of being a Captain under the said Earl and Him.

Whereupon this Informant did provide himself and speak unto John Follis, James
Finican and Dennis Mac-Namarra to provide themselves with such Necessaries as
were requisite for that purpose; informing them also, That Mr. Bradley did
impart such matters unto this Informant, and who knew that the said Mac-Namarra
had imparted such matters to the said James and Dennis, who afterward did
confess the same to his Grace the Lord Lieutenant and Council, and before this
Informant had liberty to speak with them, or they with him, being then kept
close Prisoner from any one of the Kings Evidence.

The precedent Examination this Informant gave, when on a Petition preferred by
the rest of the Kings Evidences, this Informant was kept from any of the Earls
Friends and from Quartermaster Ely, who was always with this Informant before
and not denied to be with him; But on the Petition of the aforesaid Gent. then
it was Ordered, That this Informant should be kept close and not to have any to
come to him: This Informant was then very fearful to discover his Mind, because
of the guilt that was upon him, being Condemned; which after a promise of
pardon, if this Informant spoke the Truth, he then resolved to Discover so far
as he knew, though against himself: Upon which he freely declared his mind in
this following examination.

After the aforesaid William Bradley did impart to this Informant the aforesaid
Treason, this Informant met with the Earl of Tyrone upon the Land of Gaveston
in the County of Waterford with two of his men, viz, Thomas Power his
Gentleman, and Garret Mac-Teige his Follower, and another whose name is Luke
Power, this Informant having in company with him one William Power, and
Boethius Clausy, being then abroad Hunting with Dogs; The said Earl knowing this
Informant at a distance, called to him, upon which this Informant went to him:
The said Earl taking this Informant from the company, asked him whether Mr.
Bradley had imparted to him any matter of Secrecy; this Informant replied, that
he had,, The said Earl then told this Informant that he must be very private
and discover it to none, but those he was very sure of. After which, the said
Earl drew a List out of his Pocket, and showed this Informant a List of several
persons that were to be Superior Officers, both in the County of Waterford,
County of Cork, County of Kerry, County of Limerick and County of Clare, which
this Informant took special notice of and knew several of the Persons; amongst
the rest, the Earl entered my Name with my own Pen and Ink in the List; The said
Earl telling this Informant, he had his Commission sent him from the French
King, under Hand and Seal to be a Colonel of a Regiment of Horse in the County
of Waterford, and said there was hardly a County in Ireland, but persons were
appointed by the French King for that purpose: and named in the County of
Limerick, Colonel Pierce Lucy and the Lord Brittas, Sir John Fitz gerrald,
David Fitz-gerrald and several others in the County of Clare, John Mac-Namarra
and several others in the County of Kerry, Sir Turlo Mac-Mahan and several
others in the County of Cork, and that the said Earl of Tyrone was to be
Colonel in the County of Waterford, and Mr. Bradley to be his Lieutenant
Colonel, Quartermaster Ely his Major, Mr. John Butler Senior his Captain, with
the names of several others of that Company, which he did not read unto this
Informant; The said Earl saying they were to raise several hundreds of men in
every County, and that the Superior Officers were to meet on purpose to return
an exact account of their Forces to the French King: On which the said King
would Land many thousands of men in the River Shanon, and as soon as they were
Landed, the next business was to go to the City of Limerick with 500 men and
divide them into two Parts, the one party to enter the City at Candlelight,
and that at several Gates, and such as best knew the City were appointed to set
upon the Guards and put them all to the Sword, and the rest to be hard by the
City, and to enter in immediately when the Alarm was given, and the Body of the
Army to draw up as fast as they could.

By which, said the Earl, we do not question but to possess our selves of the
City and Kings Castle, and to banish the English very soon; and indeed said the
Earl, it is the Providence of God to bring some Downfall on that unjust King,
the Duke of Ormond and his Children, that wronged me in so high a Nature on the
account of Villiers: therefore said the Earl, Go home, lose no time, but make
your selves ready, for we know not how soon occasion may require your
Assistance, and speak to as many Friends as you can, which accordingly this
Informant did and provided Horse and Arms for that purpose.

After Discovery made hereof by Hubburt Bourke as you may read in his
Information, who partly knew the Proceedings, and having Discovered the same,
was bound by Recognizance to prosecute the said Earl at the next Assize at
Waterford, he did for want of this Informants and others Testimonies absent
himself from the Assizes, unto which he was bound, and for other Reasons
mentioned in his Examination.

But in a short time after, the said Earl hearing that Mr. Bourke was going for
England to make his application to the King and Parliament; the said Earl
Commanded this Informant to write unto the said Bourke, which accordingly he
did, and signified in his Letter, that this Informant would very willingly
speak with him, but he not answering this Informants expectation, this
Informant went himself to him at Waterford, and Courted him to go along with
this Informant to his House, which he prevailed with him to do.

This Informant then hastened to the said Earl, and gave him an Account of his
proceedings, which the Earl liked very well, whereupon he ordered Major Butler
and John Rovan, and this Informant to confer with the said Bourke, and at the
Mill of Carrygninier we met, and according to the said Earls order did offer
the said Bourke a Farm Stock, together with a sum of money so as that he would
charge Mr. Villiers, Captain Nicholas, Mr. Bradley, and others with Suborning
or prompting the said Bourke to prosecute the said Earl, and that he should
acknowledge it, and Mr. Bradley aforesaid should confess the same, and that so
Bourke and Bradley should be committed Witnesses against Villiers and Nicholas,
upon which the said Earl would bring his Action of Scandalum Magnatum against
Villiers and Nicholas for 40000 l. which was contrived by Mr. Andrew Lynne and
Mr. Bradley the said Earls Friends, unto which the said Bourke refused to
consent.

Here it is to be observed, That Mr. Villiers, and Captain Nicholas were at Law
with the said Earl, and therefore the said Earl did suppose the World would
sooner believe what was laid to their Charge, upon the Earls account, though
falsely alleged against them.

Bourke not accepting the aforesaid Offers, the Earl then Petitioned the Lord
Lieutenant and Council, who sent a Summons for the said Bourke, and Brought him
to Dublin, and being Examined of several matters, he gave in his Informations,
and got also Mr. Sampson and Mr. Jury to be Summoned up, and to be Examined,
upon whole Examinations: A Summons was issued out against Quartermaster Ely,
John Povan, Major Butler aforesaid, and Lawrence Smillirand and this Informant,
who were all sent for to the Council Board; Quartermaster Ely went first to
the Earls House to have Instructions touching the Management thereof. The Earl
also sent to his Gentleman Mr. Power for this Informant, he being then in
Waterford, and the said Power came to this Informant and told him, That the
Earl of Tyrone and Quartermaster Ely sent for this Informant, to the intent he
might repair to Dublin, and having no Horse with him at Waterford, the said
Power the Earls Gentleman provided this Informant with a Horse, on which he
went with him to Curronymore to the Earls House, where this Informant met with
the said Earl and Quartermaster Ely together.

Upon which the said Earl and Quartermaster Ely took this Informant into the
Garden, and there did agree to send to John Rovan, who came immediately, at
which time the Earl and Quartermaster Ely did instruct us what we should say,
when we came to Dublin before the Council; and told this Informant the great
Danger, if we should discover any thing of the Matter: but profering an Oath
unto us, and finding us unwilling to Swear what they would have us to Swear,
the said Earl then told us, that we should be Absolved by Dean Powers his
Cosen and the rest of the Clergy, and after instructing us in the garden for a
considerable time, the Earl gave this Informant an Horse, and gave John Rovan,
Lawrence Swillivant, and this Informant money to bear our Charges to Dublin,
and when we came there, we were maintained at the Earls Charge; with promise to
get Bail for this Informant, if Imprisoned, and we were there always
accompanied with the Earls Friends, who promised this Informant great Reward,
if he would conceal what he knew.

This Informant also had money from Quartermaster Ely, whilst he was in the
Pursivants hand, and several Masses were said in the County for the Earl and
this Informant, whilst this Informant continued from Discovering, but since
has Excommunicated him.

But at length Mr. Ivy and Mr. Sampson Petitioned the Lord Lieutenant and
Council to have this Informant kept close Prisoner, and to keep the Earls
Friends and Solicitors from this Informant, which accordingly was done.

Now this Informant being by himself, and considering the evil Case he was in,
God so touched this Informants Conscience, that he confessed the Truth: Several
other things there are relating to the Powers, concerning stealing of Horses
and providing of Arms for the same purpose, which is treated of in Mr. Ivys
Examinations and in James Finicans, which Powers were Examined upon Oath before
Sir Jo. Davis, and since bailed out of Goal by means of Captain Morris the
Prosecutor, who now goes Armed mostly accompanied with the Earls Friends and
Kindred.

James Finican was by the said Mr. Bradley solicited not to confess any thing
against him, for which the said Bradley promised him a good Reward in money,
and was before the Committee, and did for some time endeavor to conceal the
matter; but being kept from the said Bradley for a season in the Marshals hand,
told the said Marshal, that he would not be in trouble for concealing other
Treasons, he the said Finican desired to be carried again before the committee,
confessed the whole Matter, saying, that if Mr. Bradley were put where he was,
he would confess the Truth too; this astonished the said Bradley, for as much
as the said Finicans promise to the said Bradley of Concealing, made him the
said Bradley to tell the Committee, that he would be saved by the said Finicans
Testimony.

You may observe that while this Informant denied to confess the Truth and
conceal the Plot, the Earls Friends got a Petition writ against Mr. Ivy, to be
preferred to the Lord Lieutenant and Council, viz. That the said Ivy was a man
of ill Fame and a dishonest man, and that he knew nothing of those Treasons and
Briggs beforementioned, which Petition they gave this Informant to send unto,
or deliver unto the Lord Lieutenant and Council.

In the mean time this Informant being kept from them, his Conscience forced
him to confess the Truth. He then showed the Petition unto the said Mr. Ivy, of
which they were much ashamed and would have denied it, but that this Informant
Justified it, and told who brought it unto him (meaning Mr. Michael Roe) the
hand also being known, which way this Informant always observed, they always
made use of to endeavor to clear themselves, by calling in Question the
reputation of their Accusors.

John Mac-Namarra.

This Informant says, That in the year 1676. one John Brenan which was then
lately come out of Rome was made Archbishop of Cashel, Waterford, and Lismore:
And that by the Titular Primate of Ireland the said Brenan producing Bulls from
the Pope to the said Primate for that purpose, together with several other
Bills brought over by the said Brenan, which Deane Power, the Earl of Tyrone's
Kinsman informed him of, as hereafter is treated of. In the said year this
Informant has observed the tumultuous congregation of Priests and Friars which
resorted to Knock-house, a house of Entertainment three Miles Westward of
Waterford; And that in the same year 1676. This Informant took extraordinary
notice of it, being not a thing so usual; But being in company with several of
the said Priests in the said house, and that at several times, and especially
with Dean Power aforesaid, who was next in power to the said Brenan: This
Informant began to enquire the reason of their public meetings so often, it
being in time of Prosecution; The said Power made answer, that he would
satisfy him as to that effect Patron day at Kesk, which on our Lady following,
being within few days after the said time, which accordingly he did, as
follows; The Congregation being gathered together to confess and receive the
Sacrament after the Popish way, one Edmond Power a Jesuit preached a Sermon,
which was to let the Congregation understand that they had Indulgences from the
Pope of Rome granted them, and liberty to eat Flesh on Wednesdays: But in the
Conclusion told them, there was some consideration whereupon this was granted,
which the Priest of every Parish was to give in charge to his Parishioners, at
the time of Confession, and proceeded no farther: On which, the Priests fell to
their Offices, which was to confess the Congregation; And this Informant being
then one of that Religion, this Informant confessed to the aforesaid Dean
Power: but in his Confession, the said Dean gave this Informant in charge as
follows;

That he should not divulge to any person whatsoever on pain of mortal Sin and
Damnation what he would impart to this Informant; which this Informant promised
he would not; with that he proceeded thus; That the consideration of the
aforesaid Indulgence and Liberty was, that whoever was in a capacity to help
and assist the holy cause, designed and in hand for a long time, was to have
great preferments, together with the benefit of the aforesaid Indulgences which
was a pardon of Sins for many years; and also that the Clergy of Ireland were
to have the benefits and profits of the Tithes accruing out of each Parish,
with the Gleabes and Monks lands and Appurtenances belonging unto them, which
the Heretics did wrongfully possess for a long time: And that the French King
and the rest of the Popish Confederates, together with the assistance of his
Holiness the Pope, did intend imediately to Invade the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, and doubted not but by the assistance of God, to fulfill it ere it be
long, and to wash the hands of Heretics out of the Estates of our Ancestors,
for the Duke of York gives full consent and is of our side; together with the
assistance of the Earl of Anglesea and several other Persons of Quality in that
Kingdom, whom we are ordered to celebrate several hundreds of Masses; which he
the said Dean had accordingly ordered all the Popish Priests within his
Jurisdiction. After which time this Informant observed that there were several
Masses celebrated in the Honor of the Earl of Anglesea through the said County
of Waterford. And also the said Dean said, that the Earl of Anglesea did
endeavor that the Parliament should not Sit, with the assistance of the Duke
of York, to prevent the Persecution of Roman Catholics. In October 1679, this
Informant being then employed by the Earl of Tyrone to Tamper with Mr. Bourke,
as is set forth in this Informants former Informations: the said Earl showed
him a letter from his Father-in-Law the Earl of Anglesea, wherein he read, that
the said Earl made so many Friends both in England and in Ireland, that he need
not fear what was laid to his Charge: And that he spoke to the Duke of York
about the same; which the Duke promised he would.

John Mac-Namarra.

THE INFORMATION OF MAURICE FITZ GERALD, Gent. TAKEN BEFORE US John Odel, and
Nicholas Mounckton, and George Aylmer Esqs; Three of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for the County of Lymerick.
THe Informant being duly Sworn on the Holy Evangelist, says, That on or about
Winter, 1676. after Captain Thomas Mac Inerina, returned out of Flanders and
France, whither he had been employed as Agent from the Irish Gentry, there was
a very great Meeting at Colonel Pierce Lacy's House at Curroe, where met,
besides the said Colonel, the Lord of Brittas, Molowny the Popish Titular
Bishop of Killalow, Brenane the Popish Bishop of Waterford, Duly the Popish
Bishop of Lymerick Two Jesuits, whose Names this Informant knows not, Sir John
Fitz Gerrald, John Power Son to David Power late of Killalow, John Hurley,
Eustace White, John Bourke of Cahirmoyhill, William Bourke his Brother, Captain
John Purdon, Captain Thomas Mac Inerina, Captain Richard Stephenson, Mr. David
Fitz Gerrald, this Informant, and several others whose Names he remembers not:
Where, and at which time, the said Captain Mac Inerina gave an Account of the
Effects of his Agency, and what Force the French King had promised to send over
into this Kingdom of Ireland, which to the best of this Informants remembrance
was, to be about Twenty Thousand Men, and Artillery, Arms and Ammunition for
Twenty Thousand Men more, which were to be raised in Munster; And they then and
there consulted how the Twenty Thousand Men should be raised, and resolved, it
should be by their Clergy; made Computation, and Appointed how many each Priest
should raise in his Parish. And likewise appointed the Officers that should
Command; and says; that the Lord of Brittas, Colonel Pierce Lacy, Sir John Fitz
Gerrald, John Mac-Namarra, of Cratelagh, John Power, Captain Suillivane of
Beerhaven, one Carty and several others, were to be Colonels: That John Bourke
of Cahirmohill, was to be Lieutenant Colonel; and that Captain Thomas
Mac-Inerina was to be Lieutenant Colonel or Major to Captain Suilivanes
Regiment; and that Captain John Pardon, Captain Richard Stephenson, Mr. John
Hurley, and Eustace, White, were to be Field-Officers; And he has heard that
Mr. John Anketill was to be Lieutenant Colonel; And that Mr, William Bourke,
Mr. Theobald Dowdall, Mr. Oliver Stephenson, Mr- David Fitz Gerrald, now in
London, this Informant, and several others, were then appointed Captains; And
that John Bourke of Ardagh and several others were appointed Lieutenants; and
that John Dury, and Thady Quin, were to be Captains; and that Nicholas Bourke,
and many others of Lymerick, were then pitched on for the surprise of Lynd,
whose Names at present he remembers not. And says, that on notice from Captain
Suilivane of Beerhaven, of the French's Landing there, was a Massacre of all
the English (...) in one Night, and persons particularly assigned to the
Massacre or Murder of every Family; And says, that the Popish Servants in
each Family were to betray and open the Doors or some other way let in those
Irish, and so Murder the English in their Beds; and after, if they could not
surprise, they were immediately to Besiege Lynd; and says, that by reason of
the Emperor, the King of Spain and other the Confederates joining and
assisting the Dutch, the French King was hindered from sending over those
Forces and Arms he promised, and so all things were at a stand till about
Michaelmas 1679. that all the forenamed persons and John Mac-Namarra of
Cratelagh, John Anketill of Farrihy, Capt. Levalin, and many others met at Mr.
William Bourks House at Lisnekilly, and continued there 2 or 3 days together,
And that the said Captain Levalin brought and produced a Commssion for the
raising those 20000 Men, and Uniting them with what Forces should be sent out
of France and raised in other parts of the Kingdom. And says, He heard that
the Earl of Tyrone was to be a General Officer; and Colonel Fitz Patrick and
Sir William Talbot were to have some Great Commands: And says, That all then
present at Lisnekelly bound themselves by strict Oaths and by an Instrument
under their Hands and Seals, to be true and faithful and stand by each other.
And says, That the Plot is still going on, and that they have daily hopes of
the French Kings Invading: And that he has heard there was some Powder lately
landed in the County of Clare side of the River Shannon, and that he will
labor to discover it; And says, he has some Papers which he will peruse, and
hopes by them other things may occur to his Memory, which he will be ready to
add to this Information. And further says, That he has been told that David
Fitz Gerald discovered the Plot both to Sir Thomas Southwell and John Pigot,
Esquire And this Informant says, that in case this Information should be known, he
and his Family are in danger of being Murdered.

Maurice Fitz Gerald.
Taken before us this 11. December. 1680. John Odell. Nich Mounckton. George
Aylmer.


THE DEPOSITION OF JAMES NASH.
JAmes Nash of the County of Limerick, deposes, That about Four Years ago,
Captain John Purden, after he had heard Mass, took this Deponent aside, and
after several inconsiderable discourses, questioned this Deponent why he did
not go into France, being the only place to improve him, and make him a
complete Man, for that there were like to be troublesome times, and there would
be want of such improved Men. But being no further pressed at that time, This
Deponent took little notice thereof. Soon after, this Deponent being at Mass in
the said Purden's house, Burgatt a Priest applied himself to this Deponent much
after the manner Purden had formerly, and in conclusion, commanded this
Deponent to go to Captain Thomas Mac Everie's house, for there he had somewhat
material to impart unto him; and imediately after they had dined, there the
said Mac Every took this Deponent aside, and after having Sworn him to
secrecy, discoursed with him as follows.

You know, says he, that the King at Breda before his Restoration, promised
the Irish Gentry to restore them to their Estates and Religion, but since this
is not performed, we have designed to cast off the English Bondage and free our
selves from their slavery, and to recover our Estates and Religion. When this
is done you shall have your Fathers and Uncles Estates in lieu of your
Services, for I intend you shall be my own Lieutenant, for I am to have a
Regiment, by which means I shall have an opportunity to advance you; for the
King of France has promised us aid of Ten thousand men and twenty thousand
Arms to carry on the design. At this time the said Mac Every gave this
Deponent a Case of Pistols and about Thirty Shillings in money, to carry
Letters to Colonel Ossulivan at Beer-Haven, and directed him. That if this
Deponent should be questioned on the way, to declare he belonged to the Army;
accordingly this Deponent delivered his Letters, and returned with Answers,
Pursuant whereunto, Captain Every went to Captain Purdens House, where was a
great Meeting of the Popish Gentry of the Country, who rejoiced much at the
answer of the said Letters, but what they were this Deponent knows not, but
that at that time they were sworn to Secrecy upon a great Book, which this
Deponent thinks was the Life of the Saints, viz. John Purden, Thomas Mac
Every, Eustauce White, John Hurley, John Bourke, with many others, which this
Deponent has forgot at present. That there were several other Meetings,
sometimes at Mac Everie's, sometimes Purdens where they usually drank a Health
to the prosperity and good success of the design; after which they all kneeled
down and said an Ave Maria, with other Prayers.

That this Deponent going another time to Beer-Haven with Letters saw in the
Harbor a French Man of War, who as this Deponent was informed, came on purpose
to sound the Harbor and to try the peoples minds and the posture of their
Assistance, if there were an occasion. Upon this Deponents returning to Mr,
Everies with an answer, there was another great meeting of the Gentry, and
great Rejoicing at the said Sullivanes answer. Not long after this, the
Deponent went again to Sullivane, but at his return with Letters their
countenances were much changed to what they were formerly, for this Deponent
was given to understand, that the French King being involved in a War with the
Emperor and Spaniard, could not possibly spare those Assistances he had
formerly promised, for that he rather wanted Men to supply his own Army, so
that for a long time this Affair stepped, having no encouragement from abroad but
of late, by the Industry of the Priests and some other great Agents, their
designs begin to take life again, having assurance that the French King being
at Peace with his Neighbors will in a short time make good his promise as to
his former intended aid.

That this Deponent reflecting with much Reluctance on the sad Subject he was
engaged in to the ruin of the Nation, applied himself to Father Brodeene the
Parish Priest, and in confession desired to be absolved of his so heinous
offense in being assistant to the Disturbance of the Kingdom; Upon which the
said Priest bitterly Cursed him, commanding him to secrecy, and that if he did
desist from carrying on the Design, he should be eternally Damned. Some little
time after, this Deponent being from home, had his House broken open, Robbed of
his Money, the aforesaid Pistols, and all his Papers wherein he had kept a
Catalogue of all the Names, and the precise times of their several Meetings,
Swearings, etc. By which this Deponent guesses that the Priest had aquainted
them with his Confession.

THE MESSAGE FROM THE LORDS to the COMMONS. January the 4th. 1680.
Resolved,
BY the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and in Parliament Assembled, That they do
declare that they are fully satisfied that there now is, and for diverse years
last past there has been a Horrid and Treasonable Plot and Conspiracy
contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion in Ireland, for
Massacring the English, and Subverting the Protestant Religion, and the ancient
established Government of that Kingdom, to which their Lordships desire the
Concurrence of this House.

The Resolution of the COMMONS, upon the Consideration of the said Message.
January the 6th. 1680.
Resolved,
THat this House does agree with the Lords in the said Vote, with the addition
of these words; That the Duke of York being a Papist, and the expectation of
his coming to the Crown has given the greatest Countenance and Encouragement
thereto, as well as to the Horrid Popish Plot in this Kingdom of England.

FINIS.

