THE Present STATE OF ENGLAND In Relation to POPERY Manifesting the Absolute
Impossibility of Introducing POPERY and ARBITRARY POWER into this Kingdom.

Being a Full Confutation of all Fears and Apprehensions of the Imagined
Dangers from thence; and particularly of a Certain Pamphlet, Entitled, The
Character of a Popish Successor.

By E. SETTLE.

LONDON, Printed by J. Gain, for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the
Lower Walk of the New-Exchange, in the Strand; Anno; MDCLXXXIV.

TO THE Loyal GENTRY OF KENT.
Gentlemen,
WRITERS set out in Print, as Adventurers to Sea: The happy Discovery of some
extraordinary Fortunate Coast the first Voyage, is an Invitation to attempt a
Plantation there the next. Such was the Temptation of a Newfound GOLDEN WORLD:
whilst the Sails of a CORTEZ, were only swelled by the Prosperity of a
COLUMBVS. The same Success, and the same Attraction is my Loadstar, whilst the
Honor of Dedicating my First Piece, my Narrative, to the Worthy Sir THOMAS
TAILOR, has brought me, like a Bolder Inmate amongst you, resolved to plant my
self, and my whole Labors in no other Soil.

I confess indeed my own infinite Unworthiness makes my Intrusion wholly
inexcusable. However that Innate Goodness that ever attends the LOYAL and the
BRAVE, is no little Encouragement; when I consider, that whatever my past
Faults have been, yet Clemency and Forgiveness, as being the brightest
Emanations of GLORY from that inexhaustible Fountain of Mercy, the Best of
KINGS, are ever the natural Borrowed Beams to that Loyalty that shines from
him. A more particular Portion of which enlightening Brightness, is so justly
your own, that a never shaken Loyalty, and an unsullyed Fidelity are the very
Claim even of your BIRTH RIGHTS. For whatever weaker and less fortified Hearts
the Growth and Progress of Faction may have subdued; YOU challenge that Native
British Honor, so much of the Hero, derived down from Ages to you; that the
Vindication of MONARCHY and the opposing and repelling all Republic Arts and
Machinations against the ROYAL-CAUSE, with the same Souls and Resolution that
your Renowned Ancestors withstood the Norman Arms, is but asserting your own
Hereditary Glory of KENT, that is, of being INVINCIBLE.

The Assurance of which Generous Virtues born and bred with you, that
Illustrious Genius that runs in your very Veins, gives me hopes, not only of
obtaining your Pardon for this Presumption, but likewise your Patronage and
Protection from the Slanders of my Enemies, who endeavor to intercept all
Favorable Thoughts of me, and my Writings, by alleging that I have written
so virulently and maliciously, that I ought never to be trusted for a Convert.

The first part of their Accusation, my own guilty part, it is true, I own, and
submit to all the Load that Justice, Reproach and Shame can lay upon me. But
alas! am I the only Libeller never to be Converted, or never to be believed
so; when some of my own Faulty Predecessors, the present Honor both of the
PRESS and PULPIT, under as blackning Circumstances, have sometimes in their
Lives played the very Panegyrists upon a Cromwell. And though indeed, a
Submission to the Government of a Rebel might come under Self-Preservation, yet
public Encomiums upon him are these Super-errogating Works of Affection and
Applause both to the Traitor and the Regicide, which no little Penitence could
wash off. Yet whilst not only the present Generous Arms of a Pardoning COURT,
and the kindest Embraces of an Endearing CHURCH are those Royal Credentials of
THEIR Plenary Conversion: with what Eyes must the World look on Me, either to
find that unmalleable Impenitency in My Temper, or that Hardness of Belief in
their Own.

It Is probable, I confess that this following Discourse may give Distaste to
some of our late Members of Parliament, written to convince the World that the
Church of England, and the Protestant Strength of this Kingdom stand upon a
ROCK Immovable; whereas on the contrary, the False Prognostics of our la^e
State-Wizards have Seated them on Bogs and Quicksands, just tumbling and
sinking.

However, for my Justification I have this to say; We live in a Kingdom where,
Thanks to GOD, and our yet safe MONARCHICAL Constitution, we are in that
Temperate Region, that (unless now and then of late in the too sultry DOG DAYS
of Black-rod, and Messenger Time) we are only Governed by LAW. And when I find
no Statute, nor one Letter of that LAW to make my Denial of our Popish Dangers
Criminal, I think I may safely with Honesty and Justice in the open Face of Day
aver, that we are no more bound to believe any such Popish Dangers near us
because this TRUE PROTESTANT Sham-Patriot, or that PLOT-COMMITTEE has
pronounced them Oraculous; than we ought to stand up for the ALCORAN, because
this Mufti and that Mussullnam will dye for it. POPERY in England being that
Goblin that is not seen by ALL Eyes: and it being highly unreasonable, because
three Parts of the Kingdom have been troubled with the JAUNDIES and seen all
things yellow, that therefore every Man with SOUND HEALTH and BRAINS should do
so too.

For my part, I am of Opinion, that no Man with three Grains in his Skull is
any more obliged to believe OTES his Discovery, because so Voted, the
PRESERVATION of the Kingdom, than the Lending the King Money, as Voted
likewise, had been the BETRAYING of it. Nor can I possibly fancy a Bill of
UNION, because so adjudged (that is, the Incorporating of all sorts of SCHISMS
down from the Presbyter to the Muggletonian into the Body of the CHURCH, were
the way to preserve Us from POPERY, any more than the letting of Pickpockets,
Shoplifts, and Ruffians INTO the House, were the keeping of FELONS and
BURGLARERS Out of it.

I confess I pay as great a Respect to every Resolve in Parliament that carries
REASON, HONOR, and LOYALTY along with it, as every good Subject ought to pay.
But I profess, if I should find, Resolved by this HOUSE, that his Majesty's
Life has been twice in Imminent Danger from a certain Screwd Gun, most terribly
charged, once with all Bullets and no Powder, and a second time with all Powder
and no Bullets; and therefore be it likewise Resolved, as the only Expedient
for the SAFETY of his Majesty's Person and the Protestant Religion from the
Danger of such bloody Popish Assassinates, that an ADDRESS be made to his
Majesty, that all the MEN-WORTHY Papists in Masquerade be removed from all
Offices of Trust, and the True Protestant WORTHY-MEN be placed in their Room;
and that a Bill be likewise brought in for the Lodging the Militia for forty
two days in Confiding Hands for the King and Kingdom's DEFENSE. Now I say, if I
should read this a thousand times over with an Imprimatur WI. WILLIAMS in
Letters of Gold, confirmed too by the Infallibility even of Nemine
Contradicente it self, hang me if I should find out either that Wondrous Danger
to his Majesty in the first Resolve, or that secure Preservation of him in the
Last.

If ten thousand Resolves of Parliament should declare Coleman's Papers a
Confirmation of OTES and BEDLOES Popish Plot for the Murder of the King, or
raising Armies for cutting the PROTESTANT Throats. I should be sorry to think
that any thing within the Pale of Rationality should believe it, when there is
not one Syllable throughout those Papers that bear the least Tendency that way;
and the whole Plot of that false Intriguer was more a Design of French-Jesuit
MONEY Catching, than French Religion, or French Government Building.

And if Bedloe himself should rise from the Grave, and in a Conference betwixt
Prance and him, should swear as boldly by STYX and ACHERON, as formerly they
had done by the four EVANGELISTS, that Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey was murdered
with a Pillow and Long Cravate at FIVE in the Afternoon in the Upper Court of
Somerset House, by Walsh, Lephaire, the Lord Bellasis's two Gentlemen, and Mr.
Atkins, Mr. Pepy's Clerk: and murdered likewise the same Evening at NINE at
night, with a twisted Handkerchief, at the Stables in Somerset House Outward
Court, by the Hands of Green, Gerald, Hill, Berry, and Prance: and if a hundred
Successive PARLIAMENTS upon the Receipt of such a Testimony, should Resolve
that a Disbelief of either of the two Relations, and a Dispute of the VERACITY
of the two Witnesses, were a Downright Countenancing of POPERY and a Weakening
the PROTESTANT INTEREST, with all the rest of the dreadful Senate House
Anathema's at the Tail on it: Maugre all those Parliamentary Fulminations, I
should be loath to see three honest Men in three thousand, either convinced by
the Oaths of the One, or terrifyed out of their Senses by the Menaces of the
other.

And when I read upon RECORD our Swearing Master OTES one day upon Oath
affirming, that he had no other Person to accuse of the Popish Conspiracy than
those he had already Impeach't, and yet the next day, bringing the very Queen
her self into the PLOT against his Majesty's Life: after so damnable a Perjury
from so impudent a Reprobate Varlet, Lord have Mercy upon the STRONG FAITH of
Three Kingdoms, that could hang a Rat upon an Affidavit other Credentials to
support it, than bare OATHS from such a Wretch; without one concurring
Circumstance, one scrap of Treasonable Papers, Consults, Commissions, etc. of
so many hundred of them all Sworn to, and all trusted in the Discoverers Hands;
or the least Breath of a Confession from any one dying Malefactor. Nay, and
more than all this, a Discovery too, that with such palpable Contradictions,
Incongruities, and Impossibilities throughout it, is such a mere ROPE OF SAND,
that not all the Craft of MAN or DEVIL can ever make HANG TOGETHER.

Take all this Discovery (a Prodigy which nothing but this one only Greater
Prodigy the CREDITING of it can exceed) with some few more of its Dependencies
along with it, such as that precious HOUSE OF COMMONS Vote, of revenging the
King's Untimely Death upon the Papists; with the subsequent Use of that Vote,
Viz. when the most Zealous TRUE PROTESTANT Members, the fiercest Promoters of
that very Vote, were actually Themselves engaged in his MURDER, and resolved to
turn their own SHAM into ORACLE, by doing the Feat with their own Fanatical
Hands, and then Lodging the BASTARD at the Popish Doors: Take the whole PLOT I
say, and this Fabric built upon it together, and it is a Million to a Mite but
the Foundation will at last appear as HELLISH as the Superstructure: and when
the Popish Plot, thus made a Property for the Fanatical Conspirators, shall be
duly and througly examined; he that will but give himself the trouble but of
Looking or Thinking, will have but too much Reason to suspect the Tool as
Infernal as the Hands that used it.

And to give our great Witness even the fairest Interpretation of his
Discovery; I know no unlikelihood why the Regicide and Massacres of Whitebread,
Fenwick, Ireland, and the rest of them should not be of the the same piece with
Mr. Elliots MAHUMETANISME and CIRCUMCISION. For perish me, if I can find the
least Glimpse of Reason why he that could be so cursed a Limb of Lucifer in his
Evidence at Drs. Commons, should have so much Immaculate Divinity in his
Testimony at the Old-Bayley, whilst the same Breath that smelt so rank of
Sulphur one day, should be so Heavenly Perfumed another.

It Is true, there is a sort of People will call this Discourse an ARRAIGNING the
Justice of the Nation; when indeed they are wholly mistaken in the Matter. For
the Justice of the Nation is safe whilst it acts by LAW: and therefore while
the Witnesses SWORE and the Jurors BELIEVED, not Pickering himself fell
otherwise than by the Sentence of Justice.

It Is true indeed as to the English Latitude of BELIEVING in some Cases,
Extraordinary Examples may be given. 'Twas but enough to cry Halloo! Popery!
and the whole Populace of the Kingdom, as Natural BLOODHOUNDS at that Game,
would certainly take the False Scent so readily, that there needed no more than
Look there she goes; and the Seven-headed, Ten-horned Babylonish Beast, with
all her Bloody-Pilgrims, Black-Bills, Screw'd-Guns, Teuxbury Mustard-Balls,
etc. were all as DISTINCTLY VISIBLE as the French Army Landed at the Isle of
Purbeck was to two or three whole Counties round it. And if the Sense, Reason,
and Intellects of whole Countries together could be so grossly Imposed upon as
in that Purbeck IMPOSTURE; I know neither Law nor Gospel why it should be a Sin
to averr a poor Jury of twelve may possibly once in their Lives be mistaken.
Nay, or that the Optics Within a House of COMMONS may as possibly be no more
Accurate than those Without it, it being not the first time that
REPRESENTATIVES have been as Blear-Eyed as their ELECTORS.

And considering the first Fanatic CONSPIRACY of ever infamous Memory, made
its Approaches and Attacques, and indeed gained its whole Triumph by a previous
SHAM Popish One, as the only necessary Pipe to set the Fools of three Kingdoms
a dancing after it; I know no Reason why our later CONSPIRATORS under the same
Necessity, should be less Industrious than their Predecessors; and therefore
think it not at all an Impossibility that the Headpiece and Interest of a
Shaftsbury should be able to pick up upon occasion, a Brace of VAGABONDS from
the Jayls and Alms-Baskets of three Kingdoms to swear a few PRIESTS into a
Halter; when the same Phanatick Faction the last Age had a whole Set of
MERCINARY ROGVES at their High COURT OF JUSTICE ready for True Protestant
Evidences against the very Life of MAJESTY it self.

But to leave the POPISH PLOT to the Hell that engendered it, the Villains that
Midwiv'd it, the Rebels that Nursed it, and above all, the TAP that Suckled it:
that no man may think I design any Reflection upon the Constitution of
PARLIAMENTS, (for though Corruption optimi est pessima, and therefore nothing
more detestable than Depravity and Faction in that Great COUNCIL of the KING
and KINGDOM) to show that no Man can have a higher VENERATION of the Nation's
REPRESENTATIVES when TRULY Venerable, I hope to see the Day, when those Great
State Pilots shall make JUSTICE and LOYALTY the only Stars they Steer by,
whilst TRUTH, the Child of TIME shall have the Honor of Their Hands to bring
it into the World; and when all our late Popish Trash, that long unwinnowed
Chaff, shall be sifted away; and the Security of our Religion, and the Peace of
Men's Minds shall be cleared from all such Dross and Rubbish: the Disquisition
of Truth, being that indispensible Duty of the Nation in Parliament Assembled,
that without a Cordial and Impartial Inspection and Suppression of all Factions
FRAUDS, and all our FORGED Dangers; all the National UNGROUNDED JEALOUSIES, and
the Violent and Fatal Effects of them lie at their OWN Door.

And therefore it ought to be the Prayers of all good Men for such a next
Meeting of that Illustrious ASSEMBLY, who under a true Sense of their DUTY,
both as Patriots, Subjects, and Englishmen, shall so effectually provide for
the Kingdom's Safety as to hang out their Best Lights and Fairest Sea-Marks to
warn a poor deluded People to avoid that old Treacherous Rock, the False Fear
of POPERY and SLAVERY, on which so lately* we so fatally split before. And
persuant to this Work, I hope to see them so Zealous for Truth, and the
Unvizoring of all Impostures, that they shall not only unravel the Negromancy
of our SHAFTSBURIAN-PROTESTANTS, and plainly discover that only the Old
Republic Rump began to Flyeblow again, and all our Fears and Dangers from ROME
and POPERY were but the Corrupted Insects,, the Popular Maggots bred in that
Carrion; but likewise Retrive the sullyed Reputation of a Derided Kingdom, by
amending the Headlong ENGLISH Credulity, and using even some unhappy RECORDS
Themselves, with almost as little Mercy as a NOBLE PEERS SPEECH, or a
Fitzharris his Libel, as being indeed the more Unfortunate, though possibly,
less wilful Incendiary of the Two. And lastly, shall do that Justice to the
Memory even of the Top Evidence Otes himself, as to Eternize his Due Glory of
being Judas his SUCCESSOR, only with this Difference: Judas of the two was the
more Innocent Imp of Hell. For he ingenuously took the thirty pieces of Silver
as a barefaced Traitor, approach't and seized like one; and neither acted nor
pretended to any other than the visible Villain he was. But this profligate
Miscreant with Guilt of a yet deeper dye, to the blackest of Forgerys and most
diabolical of Murders added the fairest and most painted HYPOCRISY, being the
Disturber and Enflamer of a whole Distracted Kingdom, under the most specious
Mask of the Protector and Savior of it. Nay, and is yet the more hardened
Desperado of the two: as his Face is more Brazen'd, and his Heart more Steeled;
and that he has not all this while those Horrors of Conscience enough about
him to make him fly to the same Medicinal Halter of his Predecessor.

However as the Fanatic Overfondling and too much Hugging of the late Beastly
Popish Discovery gave the Government an occasion to suspect the True Father of
the Dow-dye, whilst the greatest Outcrys of Popish Dangers being bawled
LOUDEST, and almost ONLY from the Geneva Throats, warned us to look for the Old
Serpent lurking under these New-Leaves. And as accordingly never was a more
accursed Legion of threatening Devils raised than from that filthy abominable
piece of Enchantment; insomuch that the whole Genius of the Nation was almost
all turned Demoniack: so no common Oblation of Thanks for a National
Deliverance, are due to Heaven, and Heaven's Darling Vicegerent, the BEST OF
KINGS whose Wisdom and Princely Resolution alone stepped Boldly and Timely forth
to play the Mighty EXORCIST. Which to his never dying Glory he has performed
with that wondrous Success, that succeeding Ages shall justly Record him in
Chronicle, of all our Crowned Heads the greatest Founder of the CHURCH OF
ENGLAND, and even of MONARCHY it self, whilst the strongest Pillar of the
First, and Cement of the Last has been the peculiar Work of his OWN HAND, Viz.
By so great a Suppression of the dangerous Growth of FANATICISM, and this ever
memorable Defeat of the Machinations of those most Restless and most Formidable
Enemies, not only of the MITER, but of the CROWN.

Yet nevertheless as the Popish Bugbears are not quite vanished, and the dying
Confession of the late Traitor Holloway lays the greatest Ferment of the late
damnable Conspiracy on the yet too spreading Panick Fear of POPERY still coming
in; and indeed Sidney and the rest, nay Russel himself in his highest
Affectation of dying Innocence still concurs in that Point, that their whole
Uneasiness and Turbulency, with the intended Stirs, Anglice Insurrections, were
only levelled against that Danger: whilst in reality the Storm now seems to be
a little cleared up with them from the Valadoly'd and St. Jago Quarter, the
Pilgrim and Black-bill Region; and the lowering Popish Clouds are now only
engendring nearer home, the Wild-House and White-Horse Consults and Caballings
being by the Insolent Faction removed, and most audaciously lodged in
WHITE HALL it self; considering, I say, how Villainy and Delusion still retain
their POISON, and so many weaker Constitutions of Fear and Ignorance have not
yet thrown off the INFECTION, this following Subject cannot come unseasonable.

Besides, not only my Service to my Country, but likewise my own Vindication
demands it of me. For since the petulant Whiggs are angry with so open a
Deserter: amongst their many Snarlings against me, there is none so common with
them as Hang him Rascal he turned only with the Tide, and in spite of all his
Recantations, his Popish Character has that Sense and Truth in it, that not He
nor any Man will ever be able to Answer: and in spite of his Teeth will stand
a perpetual Record against the Baseness of so vile a Turncoat.

As this is the general Clamor against me, it is high time publicly to clear
my self from that Calumny, and by engaging my Pen in a GOOD Cause, lay open the
naked Impotence of a BAD One, by unravelling the false Positions throughout
that feeble Pamphlet. And though indeed much better Pens than my own have long
since chastized that Licentious Libel, yet it is absolutely necessary my own
Handiwork should give it this last Stroke.

And, Gentlemen, the better to recommend it to your Patronage, I shall not
spare my self a tittle, but lash my own Faults as heartily as any other
severest hand would do it for me. Which Integrity in this Treatise makes it the
more presume to throw it self at your Feet, and the Author more confidently
aspire to subscribe himself,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, ELKANAH SETTLE.

THE Present STATE OF ENGLAND In Relation to POPERY, etc.
GReat and Terrible have been the pretended Dangers of Popery; especially for
some late years; and Indefatigable have been the Arts and Sorceries of Faction
and Villainy to conjure up this Hideous Apparition, to fright the deluded
Multitude both out of their Wits and their Allegiance. But not to insist much
upon the Grosser Impostures of Fanatical Incendiaries, such as the old most
Impudent Cheat of turning both the Best of PROTESTANT-KINGS, and a Protestant
CHURCH it self into Popish and Antichristian; hoping that the most Vulgar Eyes
and Humblest Capacities have fully seen through so Diabolical a Delusion:
However, as there still remains upon some weaker Understandings, and
unsatisfied Minds, a Terror yet unvanquish't; the Business of this Treatise is
to examine what National Operation or Influence a REAL Popish Crowned Head can
have over the Lives, Liberties, or Estates of Englishmen, as now enjoyed, and
the Religion of the Kingdom, as at present Established; and by confuting even
the most Substantial of their Imagined Dangers, dissipate those False Fears of
Popery, which no man possibly (I mean in my humble Station) has more unhappily
raised than my self.

The wonderful State-Convulsions that Popery (or rather the Sophistry of
Scriblers upon that Theme) seems to threaten, are no where, I confess, more
spightfully, more venemously, or indeed (considering the weakness of the Cause)
more Artfully described than in that Libel called, The Character of a Popish
Successor. But not to answer particularly to a Rapsody of Rhetorical
Flourishes, a Tautology of Gay Words and Big Sounds to little or no
Signification; which indeed is almost the whole Jargon of that Pamphlet, being
truly the Best Reason the Subject would bear; I shall chiefly reply only to the
Argumentative Part of it; or at least, that which was intended as such.

Therefore as this following Discourse will naturally fall under these two
Heads, Viz. If Popery be ever Introduced, it can have only these two Doors for
its Admission, Presecution, or Persuasion, I shall accordingly examine,

First, What Progress toward a National Conversion, and the Establishment of
Popery, the CRUELTY and TYRANNY of it under a Popish Successor is able to
make, by an Assault on the Weak Side of Mankind their Cowardice.

And Secondly, What Advance toward the aforesaid Conversion, etc. the SUBTILTY
and ELOQUENCE of Popish Emissaryes, and Jesuetical Seducers under the Vmbrage
and Encouragement of a Popish Successor are likely to work, by an Attacque on
the Blind Side of Mankind their Ignorance.

To begin then with the First of the two, as the more Horrible Horn of the
Beast; Persecution. The Character is not a little prolix on that old Popular
Arch-Devil Arbitrary Power, whilst POPERY and SLAVERY, those always Twin
Monsters, those Never Seperable Feinds are so painted to the Life, with all
their Fire and Brimstone round them, that it has little else from the B^ginning
to the End but the Rattling of Chains, the Crackling of Flames, the Blazing of
Smith-Field Piles; and in fine, the universal Groans of Destruction and
Desolation through the whole Land.

And for an unanswerable Demonstration of all those most certain Calamities
from a Popish Successor. The Character tells you, that in the first Place, the
Romish Principles are such, That they value neither their Word, Promise, Vows,
Oaths, nor Sacraments, but all their strongest Engagements are lighter than the
very Breath that utters them. Next, That they so little consult either their
Reputation or Glory, that there is not the most Abject Thing, that even Grown'd
Heads themselves shall not undertake, when Rome, or Rome's Interest shall
command. And Lastly, That the putting all this Barbarity into Execution, is so
highly meritorious in the Romish Church, that the Pope will undoubtedly assign
him no Common Diadem in Paradise for this Undertaking. But upon his Remissness
or Tenderness in this Point, bethunder him with so many Curses and Anathema's,
as, an undutiful, unactive Son of Holy Mother Church, a Scandal to her Glory, a
Traitor to her Interest, a Deserter of her Cause; One while accusing the
Lukewarmness of his Religion; another while, the Pusillanimity of his Nature,
etc. till in short, To spare a Faggot in Smithfield, he does little less than
walk upon Burning Irons himself.

But how is it li^ely, that Rome's continual B^lls (as the Character fancies)
shall bellow so loud against a Popish Successor for sparing a Faggot in
Smithfield, when under the Infamy* and Execration of so Tyrannic^^ ^ Murderer
(for what in Queen Mary's Days was the Sentence of Justice, and the Legal
Execution of the Law, must now be the highest Subversion of Justice, and
Abrogation of Law) he must expose himself to the whole World as a greater
Monster than NERO; so much a greater than He, as Nero's Barbarities were
committed under the Ignorance and Darkness of Infidelity and Paganism, and this
Man's Murders and Butcheries under the Light of the Gospel: Nay, the terrible
Burning, Broyling, and Roasting denounced in the Character, with the heating of
Popish fiery Furnaces like Nebuchadnezar's seven times hotter than ordinary,
with all the rest of the Romantic Popish Throat-cutting, will be ten times
worse from a Popish Successor than the whole Ten Primitive Christian
Persecutions. For a Nero, Caligula, Domitian, and the rest of them, as they had
the Law in their own Breath, and a Sic volo, sic jubeo, was as much Authentic
in old Heathen Rome, as an Act of Parliament in little England; and
consequently, how Barbarous soever the Christian Persecution was, yet it had
the Face of Law, as being the Edict of the Absolute Prince, and thereby the
Ordinance of the very Government: But such a Scheme of Cruelty here, as being
beyond the Reach of the Prerogative, and notoriously contrary to the
Established Constitution of the Kingdom, would, ipso facta, be ten times more
dreadfully flagitious, as it is the highest Violation of Law, and Dissolution of
Government. And what ever Opinion the noysy Fools of Mankind may have imbibed
of Jesuitisme, Papisme, and all the Chimerical Terrors from Rome, how can that
very Rome (if it pretends but to Christianity) that has Canonized so many of
those Suffering Primitive Martyrs, at the same time likewise make Saints of
really Worse Monsters amongst THEMSELVES than the very Heathen Butchers of
those very Martyrs.

It Is true, Inquisition Houses and Lollards Towers, and the Cruelty of Fire and
Faggot we know have been frequent; but all this while they were never erected
by Standing ARMIES, Arbitrary CUTTHROATS, nor Military EXECUTION, but
Established by the Legislative Power of the Respective Governments that used
them, and consequently introduced with the solemn Institution of Law, as a
necessary Support of the Community: neither has it been a Practice singular
only to the Papists, to secure the Established Religion, and thereby the Peace
of the Civil Government by Capital Punishments, when the Protestant Government
has done the like.

For Example, Does not the Character instance two several Acts of Parliament;
one of Queen Elizabeth, in which, not only the Popish Priests, that shall have
taken Orders from Rome, and afterward return to England, but likewise all
Persons withdrawn by them from the Protestant Religion Established, to a
Reconciliation to the Church of Rome, are equally guilty of High Treason, and
to suffer as in Cases of Treason. -- And a second Act of Henry the VIII. In
which, the Refusal of the Oath of Henry's Supremacy, in Renuntiation of the
Pope, was also made High Treason.

Now if every Papist in England, without lifting a Hand, uttering a Word, or
imagining the least disloyal Thought against his Lawful Sovereign, his Crown
and Dignity, or against the Peace of the Nation where he is a Subject, yet
nevertheless, out of a point of Conscience, and mere Matter of Faith, cannot be
induced to believe a Temporal Prince capable of being Head of a Church, but is
invincibly persuaded (how erroneous soever) that the POPE is Peter's undoubted
Successor, and Christ's unquestioned Vicar upon Earth, and cannot, without
hazard of his Soul, so much as consent to acknowledge otherwise; yet
notwithstanding, by the Protestant Laws of the Land, this Invincible
Persuasion, without any other Crime, is interpreted High Treason, and punished
as such. Now I say, in this Case, what wondrous Difference is there between the
Rigor of a Popish or a Protestant Constitution? This, that makes a Defection
from Their Church-Establish't TREASON; and the other, from Theirs, HERESY: This
that punishes an Apostate with Hanging and Quartering at Tiburn; and the other
with Burning at Smithfield. It Is true, that Branch of Queen Elizabeth's Statute
that concerns the Popish Layman's High Treason was never yet put in Execution;
and I hope, for the Glory of the Reformation Established by that Illustrious
Princess, as so extremely Sanguinary, was never intended to be, being severe
enough to give our Popish Enemies a Matter of Recrimination, though Enacted but
in Terrorem.

But here I beg the Reader to be assured, that I urge not this Comparison in
Disparagement of our Protestant Laws, but only to satisfy the Mistaken Part of
Mankind, that all such Judicial Severities under the Government of both
Religions have ever been introduced by the most Awful and Sacred Authority of
the rightful Lawmakers of the Nations, and consequently in the English
Constitution, not only the King's, but the Peoples Acts and Decrees; and so to
convince them of the unreasonableness of that senseless Surmise, that upon the
Admission of a Popish Successor, all the forementioned Cruelties, though
without any such Induction of Law (and consequently with all the Injustice,
Rapine, and Cold-blooded Murder, even to that formal Solemnity of Butchery,
that humane Imagination would tremble at) must and shall be introduced. For
alas! how ridiculously extravagant must those Fears be that can a^dl^ Men's
Senses into a Dread of that prodigious Stroke from Popery that was never given
by it since the Creation. What Magnifying Glasses therefore must the Popular
Fears see through, to behold such Stupendous Visions of Popery, as that THAT
shall be that NEVER was, whilst a Popish Crowned Head in England must be the
first, nay, only Royal Savage of a Papist that ever Reigned.

However, for once, let us suppose the Devil and Pope as familiar together as
ever they were painted at a Queen Elizabeth's Night, and that this Gospel
Propagation were really the Doctrine of his pretended Infallibility, and this
Bloody Mandate to a Popish Successor the special Edict of the whole
CONSISTORY, what would the Execution of that Mandate make toward the Growth or
Advancement of Popery? God knows, so far from promoting the Romish Religion,
that possibly there wants but that One Attempt to shame it almost out of the
World.

For in the first place, it is so far from a way or means to convert even one
Soul in England, that it is the only Course to increase their Abhorrence and
Execration of that Religion, and bring the very THOUGHT of Popery even below
Damnation. 'Twould no more make Converts to Rome, than the old Heathen Caldrons
and Gridirons to Paganism: For as the greatest Prejudice of Englishmen against
Popery lies in their Horror of the Cruelties of it: so consequently nothing
can contribute to the Advancement of it but the Clemency and Mercy of its
Professors to reconcile us even into mere Charity with them: whilst the
Exercising of the formentioned unexampled Barbarities would make us fall from
our present Ill Opinion of Popery as a Corrupted Church, to believe it no
Church at all, but rather an Association of Monsters, and a Den of Cannibals
and Tigers: and the greatest Operation such unprecedented Cruelty could meet,
were at best but to force the frighted People into a superficial, counterfit
Compliance, and make them Temporize a little, only to compound for their Lives;
yet that Temporizing under so Villainous a Persecution, would be so far from a
True Conversion, or any thing like it, that they would only play the Highest of
Hypocrites, come perhaps to Mass to mutter Curses instead of Ave-Mary's; or be
hunted into the Popish Fold, only to pray for a favorable Opportunity of
having a pull at the Throats of the Wolves that drive them thither.

And Secondly, Besides the Impotent Effects, it is certain to find toward the
Heretic Conversion* the Pope's Command, nay indeed, Connivance at any such
Arbitrary, Tyrannick Stake-burning, or Throat-cutting from a Popish Successor,
instead of advancing of Popery by so excentrick a Motion, will be enough to
stagger half the Popish Hearts in Christendom; for as Implicit as the Faith of
the Romish Zealots is, and as entirely devoted as they are to their Peter's
Chair, and Mother Church, undoubtedly there are Thousands of them, that
notwithstanding they can digest a Wafer for a GOD, can never be wrought to
believe the Transubstantiation of such visible Tyranny and Butchery into
Righteousness and Christianity, how Zealous soever they may be for the
Conversion of so Heretical a Nation as England.

And that this would be the Infallible Consequence of all such Barbarous Popish
Measures: they that will but look back to the Annals of Queen Mary, will find
Historians telling us, That nothing so much advanced the Reformation as the
Mistaken Conduct of Queen Mary and her bloody Counselors in that Point. And
Dr. Burnet expressly assures us, That the whole Body of the Nation grew to
dislike the Cruelty of Rome [Abridg. Book the 3 d. Page 275.] to that degree,
that the Popish Bishops for their Apology, threw it off from Themselves, and
openly laid it on the King's and Queen's Commands; insomuch that King Philip,
for his Excuse, made his Confessor preach a Sermon at Court against the taking
of Peoples Lives for their Opinions in Religion, and inveighed against the
Bishops for doing it. By which means a stop was put to it for some time. But
nevertheless, as the same Severity soon after returned again, he tells us all
along, That the Nations Dislike of it was Universal, and the repeated
Acclamations, and universal Transports of Joy at the Proclaiming of Queen
Elizabeth proceeded from the People's Hopes of better Days under Her Scepter
than her Sister's. By which it appeared how weary the Nation was of the Cruel
and weak Administration of Affairs under the former Reign. And the Joy in this
Change (he says) was so Great and Universal, that but a Sad Look was thought
Criminal.

So that to balance Cases, if the Severity of Burning of two hundred and sixty
Protestants in Queen Mary's Five Years Reign under the Legal Sentence of the
Then Law of the Land, and in that Respect by the Hand of Justice, begat such a
Hatred of Popery, and made so many Converts to the Reformation, that possibly
'twas one of the Greatest Lifts to the Downfall of the Romish Religion in
England; insomuch that it is the Opinion of all wise Men, that a Bonner and a
Gardener did more toward the Propagation of the Protestant Religion than a
Cranmer and a Ridley. How much infinitely more therefore must the Exercise of
such Popish Cruelties from the Hand of the most Arbitrary Tyranny under the
visible Monstrous Face of the most notorious Illegality, and the blackest
Injustice, increase our Irreconcilable Detestation of Rome, and by making more
Apostates Proselytes to their Cause, heap up but fuel for the Popish, not
Protestant Confusion: and so at best, this Arbitrary Bloody Tyranny can have no
higher prospect than of committing Murders for mere Murders sake.

But to silence all Dangers of such stupendous papal Excursions. This
barbarous Model of Gospel Propagation is at this present Age of the World
wholly unpractised in all the Popish Nations in Europe, and excepting the
Spanish Inquisition (and that too, seldom rigorous against any but the Open
Seducers of the People from their Religion, to prevent the Disturbance of the
settled Peace of the Kingdom under so general and unanimous a Conformity of the
Roman Religion in Spain) There is now no Popish Government whatever, that
proceeds against Heresy with Fire and Faggot, or any other Sanguinary
Punishment; whilst on the contrary, the Reformers are more or less Indulged or
Tolerated through almost all the Popish Kingdoms in the World; though it is
true, that Indulgence or Toleration in the public Exercise of their Religion
is sometimes more enlarged, and other times more curtil'd, according to the
more or less generous Temper of the Respective Kings that grant them; which
though magnifyed at a prodigious rate by the present Dreaders of Popery, such
as the Tenderhearted Condolers of the true Protestant Dissenter Count Tekely,
etc. is no more than what is daily done even by Protestant Princes in the same
Nature, whilst the Immunities and Privileges of all Dissenting Persuasions
against the Established Religion of the Land, as being but the Donation of the
Governments Discretion and Curtesy, are increased or diminished, as the Favor
of the Sovereign shall extend, or the Policy of the Nation shall require.

However, as all Sanguinary Persecutions of Heresy are now so universally left
off, and that too, considering the Popes Influence over the Royal Sons of his
own Church, undoubtedly with his own Pr^vity and Consent: it is certain, that
both He and his Crowned Heads are by Experience convinced of the Fatallity of
such Rigorous Ecclesiastic Extremities, as wholly ineffectual to the Great
Work Designed, the Intended Propagation of Religion. And consequently, the Pope
must be strangely out of his Right Senses, to put a Popish Successor, and that
in England, of all the Countries of the Universe, upon a Projection so long out
of Fashion in all the World beside; nay, and to a more Monstrous height of
Extravagance (as being positively against any Law or Right whatever) than was
ever practiced in the World before.

Nevertheless, laying Policy, Prudence, nay, Common Reason aside; for once,
we'll dispense with all manner of Incoherencies and Absurdities whatever, and
put the Supposition, That the Pope should be stung with that strange Tarantula,
as to begin this Frantic Dance, and a Popish Successor, that Madman, to
follow him. The next Question that arises, will be, How he shall set this
Arbitrary Machine agoing? And which way he shall find Hands, Tools, and
Materials to build this Terrible COLOSSUS, called Arbitrary Power. It Is true
indeed, the Character tells us the way of doing it, as follows: Let us but
rightly consider how far the Foundations of Popery (Viz. Arbitrary Power) may
be laid in England. First then, if a Papist Reign, we very well understand
that the Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all the Judiciary
Officers are of the King's Creation. And as such, how far may the Influence of
Preferment on Baser Constitutions culled out for his purpose, are vail even to
deprave the very Throne of Justice her self, and make our Judges use even our
Protestant Laws themselves to open the First Gate to Sl^very. Alas! the Laws in
corrupted Judges Hands, have been too often used as barbarously as the Guests
of Procrustes, who had a Bed for all Travelers, but then he either cut them
shorter, or stretched them longer to fit them to it. And after all this, the
Character proceeds, and tells you, that to crown the Work, and make the Pope
Absolute, this Popish Successor wants a STANDING-ARMY, and he shall have it,
etc.

This True Blew Protestant Scheme of Introduction for Arbitrary Power, by the
way of distorting of our very Protestant Laws to bring it in, the History of
the Popish Plot only excepted, is one of the most Comical Whimms that was ever
invented. I confess indeed some intricate Cases in Meum and Tuum may occur,
where the most Impartial Judges may be divided in their Opinions, even in
Matter of Law, and the diversity of various, and almost absolete Records and
Statutes in several lesser Law-Matters may sometimes admit of Disputes and
diverse Interpretations, and a corrupt Judge under such a Latitude, may lean or
turn as Inclination shall guide. But that part of our English Law that concerns
our Religion and Liberties, the long and labored Work of so many Successive
Parliaments; nay, and after the very Lopping of the Prerogative to secure the
Subject by the Abolition of Oaths ex Officio, Star Chamber Courts, Court of
Wards, and by the Benefit of Habeas Corpus Acts, etc. the continued Care and
Industry of our Lawmakers for a hundred years together, stands so strongly
fortifyed against all Romish or Arbitrary Invasions, that there is not the least
Cranny in the Law left open for the Admission of the One or the Other. However,
this part of the Character was very well timed for the Season 'twas writ in.
For when the very Protestant Clergy and Bishops of the Land, the whole Court,
nay and the KING himself not excepted, were all helter skelter, just upon being
turned into downright Papists in Masquerade, 'twas not at all unseasonable to
improve upon the Fiction, and bring in the Protestant Laws too in the Crowd for
Popish Masqueraders among their Fellows.

However, notwithstanding this Pretended Dangerous Inlet to Arbitrary Power,
the Character, by a certain Fault which I have read in a Treatise, called
Richard and Baxter, (a Figure of Speech much used by that Eloquent Divine, and
truly much borrowed in the Character, being little else throughout) makes bold
in another place point Blank to contradict this Passage, and positively
affirms, That to set up Popery or Arbitrary Power by Law, under the Laws we
have already against them, is wholly impossible, and that our Laws will be but
the Hedge to keep in the Cuckoo. For Papists and Slaves we must and shall be
made, as the inseparable Concomitants of a Popish Successor. And to prove all
this Breaking of all Laws whatever, it says in haec verba;

How can the Force of Laws, made by a Protestant Predecessor, and a Protestant
Parliament, in any sort b^nd a Popish Successor? When the very first Advance
of the Pope's Supremacy [a very nimble leap] introduces that higher Power,
those Canonical Ecclesiastic Laws, which no Secular, or any other Temporal
Court can or may Control. Laws that shall declare, not only the Statutes and
Acts of Parliament made against the Dignity of Mother Church, void and Null,
but the very Lawmakers themselves, as Heretics, wholly incapable of ever
having any Right of making any such Laws. No doubt then, but that Fire that
burns those Heretic Lawmakers, shall give their Laws the same Martyrdom.

Here indeed the Affairs are altered, and truly, the Matter much mended. This I
confess, says the Character, and this, at least three parts of the Fools of
English Mankind believe for Oracles. And though all our Records, Histories,
Chronicles, and the whole Series of all Ages since the Conquest to this day, do
notoriously prove the Contrary; yet this Popular Maxim, That the Romanists by
their Ecclesiastic Laws, pretend to anull and make void all Secular Laws
against their Church, and to incapacitate the very Prerogative and Authority of
that Majesty, and those Lawmakers that made them, though one of the most
Impudent Falsehoods in nature, is nevertheless one of the most received Vulgar
Traditions that ever startled Idiots.

For Example, to begin with their very Heretici Comburendi: The very Ax and
Fasces of Rome, was it not an Act of the Secular Power? In the very highest
Reign of Popery, did, or could the Pope punish an Heretic Apostate by
Imprisonment, Fire or Faggot, any further than by Parliamentary Permission, and
excepting that the Clergy were made Judges of Heresy, and that too, by
concession of the Secular Authority: Was not the Execution of that Law kept in
Temporal Hands?

Nay, though it is true, the papal Power made many Usurped Encroachments here,
through the Bigotry of the Government; yet, upon too hard Pressures from Rome,
did not several of our Kings many hundred years before the Reformation, resume
their own Original Right; and expressly in the Statute against PROVISOES under
Penalty of Forfeiture of Goods, and Imprisonment for Life, forbid the admitting
of the Popes Legantine Power in England, or making Appeals to Rome, or taking
Inductions to Episcopal Sees from the Pope.

And for Queen Mary her self, was there one Syllable of the Laws Enacted by her
Father Henry, or her Brother Edward in favor of the Reformation, that she ever
pretended to Overruled by any Ecclesiastic Law or Pretense whatever? Nay, and
did not the Pope's Supremacy it self and that not till many a hard tug, and two
years after she came to the Crown, come in by Act of Parliament, under several
Limitations of his Power, with the Confirmation of the ancient Statute against
Provides, etc. and several other Boundaries; as much as to say, Move thus far,
and no Further.

But alas! what is all this to the Author of a Popish Character^? Popery and
Arbitrary Power in spite of Fate, shall and must be set up. And therefore what
Laws shall, or shall not get uppermost, is ene as Mr. Scribler pleases. For
truly Malice put pen to paper, and Truth and Reason were never minded: and
indeed, there was no need of either of them; for as that Pamphlet had the
honor in the Title Page, of being humbly offered to the Consideration of the
then HOUSES of Parliament, both Truth and Reason were Immaterial to it^
Recommendation. For where an O^es his Narrative past for Gospel, the Devil's
in it, if a Popish Character could miscarry.

However, to confute that senseless Fear, that a Popish Successor will subvert
the whole Foundations of the Government, and erect his own Arbitrary Edict, for
the Supreme Standard of JUSTICE, and that he shall find those Popish Judges,
Sheriffs, or any other Officers or Ministers, that under the Protection of a
Standing Army, shall make our Lives and Liberties wholly dependant upon the
Caprichio and Pleasure of the Prince, and persuant thereto, shall furnish him
with Jayls, Gibbets, and Smithfield Piles, or any other Arbitrary, though less
Sanguinary Persecution to convert us to Popery.

First, let us examine the Courage of all these Arbitrary Judges, Officers, and
State-Ministers that embarque in this Arbitrary Undertaking. They must be all
those hardy popish Tools, whether corrupted by Zeal or Interest, that they must
not value all their own Lives, for notwithstanding whatever Protection or
Impunity they may receive during the Life of their Royal Popish Driver; no
sooner shall the next Protestant Heir succeed him, but every Mothers Son of
them shall be answerable with their Necks for the least drop of Protestant
BLOOD they have shed, or Protestant Liberty they have invaded. The Protestant
Laws of the Land will not be so tamely overthrown, without a certain Vengeance
attending it; insomuch that those bold Babel Builders, these Arbitrary Popery
Raisers must either be so generous to their King as the Indian Wives to their
Husbands, and make one glorious Funeral Pile upon his Grave; or else, resolve
to live to offer up their Throats to the very Sword of Justice in the Hand of a
Lawful Authority, which themselves before have so Unlawfully abused in their
own.

And that the Liberty of the Subject is so tender in the Eye of the English
Government, the very misusing and torturing of Heretics in Prison, though
under that Attainder, liable to the most ignominious of Deaths; and though done
in a Popish predecessors Reign, was sufficient to have taken the great
Statesman Bonner's Head off, but only that Queen Elizabeth's Mercy interposed,
as unwilling to stain the beginning of her Reign with Blood. [Reform* Abridg.
B. 4. page 357.] And if his Illegal Compliance with his Prince was so Capital
an Offense, what must the more violent Irruptions of Arbitrary Rapines against
the untainted Liberty of the Protestant Subjects now pull down upon the bold
Invaders Heads.

It Is no difficult matter to possess the overcredulous World, the easy
swallowing Multitude, with what wondrous Achievements the Zealots of Popery
shall undertake, and what indefatigable Labors and Hazards they will go
through for the Re-building of their Fallen Temples, when animated and influenced
by a Popish Sovereign.

I acknowledge ('it is true) there is no Courage more daring than that which Zeal
inspires; and no Zeal possibly more violent than that of the Papists, and
undoubtedly for Rome's Restoration, there would be many venturous and bold
Champions amongst them in so Meritorious a Cause.

But alas! every Hero is not a Sampson. There are, no doubt, those of them
that would spare neither pains nor study to propagate their own Religion,
though never so indirectly; those possibly that would have it in their Power
(if they could come handsomely by it) to use their Heretic Adversaries with as
little Mercy as HE did his Philistian Enemies; but alas, not with his Hardiness
too, as like Him, to pull down that Roof upon their Heads to their own
inevitable Destruction only to have the pleasure of crushing some of US with
them.

We read, I confess, that pro Aris and Focis men will venture far. Yes truly,
for their Religion and Estates together they will do so. But in the Popish
Case, where the Founding of the One will be the Destruction of the Other; where
the Setting up of their Religion, will be the Forfeiting not only their
Estates, but Heads too; it is more than a hundred to one, betwixt these two so
directly opposite Interests, but that the keeping of their Skin and Bones warm
on the one side, may make their Zeal a little the cooler on the other. For let
me tell you, where the Erecting of the Altar will at long run make the Builders
the Sacrifice, in all humane probability that Popish Temple will go but slowly
up, whose Stones are to be dug out of so fatal a Quarry.

It Is very remarkable in Queen Mary's Reign, when by the Majority of her
Parliament, the Protestant Religion then but in its Minority was abolish't, and
the Romish Government and Papal Supremacy Re-establish't; and indeed the
Grandeur of Rome even to Haeretici comburendi maintained. Yet that Parliament
that had it absolutely in their power to gratify the Pope's utmost Wishes,
refused the returning his Church Lands again.

Nay, the Parliament were so averse to the thought of such a Restitution, that
they had never been wrought up to the restoring of the very Supremacy it self,
and of making of all those favorable Acts toward the re-installing of Popery
again, but by much pains used (as Burnet in his Abridgement, page 268 says) by
the policy of Bishop Gardener, to ensure the Kingdom from the Fear of coming
under such Tyranny from Rome as their Ancestors had groaned under, and likewise
from the Loss of the Abbey-Lands. Insomuch that Gardener promised them for
Removal of all such Jealousy, that all the old Laws against Provisions should
continue in Force, and to show them that Legates should exercise no dangerous
Authority in England, he made Pool take out a License under the Great Seal for
his Legantine Power; and for the other, Viz. the Abbey-Lands, he promised both
an Act of Parliament and Convocation confirming them, and undertook that the
Pope himself should ratify the Alienation of the Church Lands; which, History
tells us, was accordingly done.

Nevertheless, as this Papal Dispensation came very unwillingly from Rome,
being only a Forced Compliance and Temporizing with the English Obstinacy in
that point. The Queen her self restored all the Church Lands in her Possession,
and proceeded so far as to the Re-building of several Religious Houses,
declaring to her Treasurer, and some of her other Officers, that she thought
her self bound in Conscience to restore all the Church Lands, as being
unlawfully acquired, and not to be held without a Sin: (as Baker in his
Chronicle tells us) Nay, the Pope himself set out a Bull, excommunicating all
that kept any Lands belonging to Abbeys or Churches; which gave such an Alarm
to the Nation, that Gardener was forced to pacify them, by telling them, that
Bull was intended only to the people of Germany, and not England. However, the
Pope continued his high Resentments against the Undutifulness of England, that
he could not forbear telling the Queen's Ambassadors. (Abridg. page 221.) That
it was beyond his power to confirm Sacrilege, and all were obliged, under the
pain of Damnation to restore to the last Farthing every thing that belonged to
the Church; he said likewise, that he would send over a Collectour to gather
the Peter Pence; for they could not expect that St. Peter would open Heaven to
them, so long as they denied him his Rights upon Earth.

Yet all this made so little Impression on the Commons of England, that
whatever Conscience might dictate, their Priests insinuate, their Popish
Successor Solicit, or their Pope himself endeavor, so powerful was Interest
above Conscience, and all other Motives whatever, that several of the Commons
in Parliament laid their hands on their Swords, and declared that they would
not part with their Estates, but defend them. And every Motion that way, was
always carried in the Negative. (Abridg. of the Reform. B. 3. page 309)

Now, pray, for once, let us compare Cases. If the Papists in her Reign, with
the highest Papal Dominion and Sovereignty in their own Hands, under an
Established Roman Church, against both their Priests and their Prince; nay, a
Prince too, with her Heretics under her Feet, and her Religion in the very
Saddle, could refuse both their Pope, and their popish Successor so Just and
so Sacred a Right, and so important to his Church's Interest, and that too,
when with all Safety round them, they might have confirmed their Oblation even
by the strongest Bonds of Law; so on the other side, how shall it be supposed
that the more prodigal Papists in our Age, in the quite contrary extreme, shall
gratify the unjust Demands of a more Impotent popish Successor, under the
lowest Ebb of Popery against all Law or Pretense of Law whatever, by launching
out into the most notorious.075 Violation of all the highest sanctions of Right
and Justice, and the most openfaced Tyranny and most impudent Barbarity in the
world, and all (forsooth) for the Establishing of Popery; and all, God wot, too
little for the Work; and this too, to the running themselves into unavoidable
Iayls and Halters; and not only to the ruining of their Estates, but to the
cutting off of the Lives of Themselves, and even the very RACE of Papists under
the next immediate Crown'd-Head that succeeds.

Besides, as boldly as the Roman Zealots stand up for the Interest and Dignity
of Mother Church, and the Grandeur and Dominion of their Peter's Successor,
not only the Papists, but the very Priests themselves are not so overcouragious
in this Cause as the World suspects them. For Instance, in Henry the Eighth's
Reign, the whole Clergy of England, by a State-surprize upon them, were found
guilty of a Praemunire, by submitting to Cardinal Woolsy's Legantine-power, as
derived only from the Pope's Authority, and thereby expressly against the
Statute of PROVISOES, an old dormient Law, made several King's Reigns before,
though rarely, or never put in Force, by reason of the Remissness of the
Government, and the Supiness of the Nation and Kings Submission to Rome, and
therefore unwarily transgrest by the Clergy now. By virtue however of which
they had forfeited their Goods and Chattels to the King, and their persons to
be imprisoned. Upon the King's Menace of executing which Law ( Reformat. Book
the 2 d. page 112.) the Convocation of Canterbury, in tenderness to their Skins
and Estates, brought a Petition to his Majesty, acknowledging him in the Title,
Protector, and Supreme Head of the Church and Clergy of England. Which was
agreed to by nine Bishops, 82 Abbots, and the majority of the Convocation in
the Province of Canterbury, praying him to accept of 100000 l. in leiu of the
Punishments incurred. And the Province of York soon afterward consented to the
same Submission, with the Offer of 18840 l. for obtaining the same pardon.

Insomuch that we find the very popish Clergy themselves so servilely
compounding for their Mammon, and their Carcases (not so much in the Voluntary
Tribute of their Purses) as with the Renunciation of the Pope's Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, the very brightest Jewel in the Tripple Diadem, and consequently by
this sordid Compliance, even the Priesthood it self by their own Leading Act,
gave the fatal Original precedent to the succeeding Act of Parliament to
confirm that Supremacy in the Crown, and so struck the first main Blow toward
the shaking of the Romish Prerogative in England, and thereupon Conspired to
the greatest part of the ensuing Fatalities to their Religion it self.

And therefore, if the Ecclesiastical Sons of Rome could ward themselves from
the Stroke of Law due to that less Capital Transgression THEN, by denying their
very Pope: Why must the Sons of Rome be so prodigiously Foolhardy NOW, as to
run themselves into a more Dangerous and more Mortal Noose of Law for his
Vindication.

It Is very easy preaching to Fools and Madmen (as the popish Character has
very Rhetorically done) what miraculous Fire and Faggot Feats, or other
Arbitrary Extravagancies the wonderful Papists under a popish Successor shall
do. But as great a Deity as the Romanists make of their Keeper of the Keys of
Heaven, as the Devil (speaking of Job) makes answer to God Almighty, put forth
thine hand, and touch him in all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy
Face. So let his Holiness put these Zealots upon that Hard Task, where their
Necks are sure to stretch in the Service, and Obedience will be so little a
part of the Sacrifice they will make his Divinityship in such a Command, that all
his Bell, Book, and Candle will be too little to conjure up half hands enough
for so ungrateful and so cursed an Employment. Whatever pleasure they may take
in bringing Us to Stakes and Gibbets, they are not overfond of Martyrdom
themselves. And though Great is their DIANA of Ephesus, whilst Profit and
Safety go along with her, and upon Reasonable Terms, much might be done to
exalt her; yet there is that Universal Charm in that thing called OUR ALL, and
that strange superseding Quality in those potent Operators, Self, and
Self-preservation, that it overrules the highest Excursions even of the most
daring Zeal, and the very biggest Devils of Outrage and Tyranny are laid by no
other Spell.

But perhaps it may be objected, That to encourage the bold Laborers in this
Harvest, this popish King, to prevent the Ruin both of his Cause and his
Party, will take Care, in case of a protestant Heir, to divert the Succession,
and continue the Crown upon some other popish Head; and so by a longer
Usurpation of this Arbitrary Supremacy, and a more lasting Persecution of the
Protestants, provide as much as in him lies, that the propagation of the Romish
Faith may be completed in succeeding Ages, upon so good a Foundation laid in
his Own.

This foolish Supposition is so lewdly ridiculous, that there is scarce a shadow
for such a Fea^: For (alas) there will be so little Hopes of a popish Vsurper's
mounting the Throne, after so notorious a Tyranny under a Lawful popish King
before him, as nothing can scarcely be more impossible. It Is possible indeed,
the Duty of our Christianity, and the Bond of Passive Obedience, as having the
Lawful Power of no other Weapons but our Prayers and Tears against the Tyranny
of our Lawful Prince, may tie up our hands, and keep us in the Bounds of Peace
and Resignation during his Reign. But the setting up of a popish Usurper after
him, in wrong to the Imperial protestant Right Heir, will undoubtedly engage
all the Protestant Hands and Hearts against so impudent an Invader; (and if
Occasion require, his Protestant Royal Neighbors in such a Cause) whilst the
taking up Arms in such a Quarrel, which had been Rebellion against his
Predecessor before, would be the work of their highest Duty and Allegiance
now. And as the Remembrance of their past Yoke to all true English Spi^its,
would certainly double Edge their very Swords; so, in so just a Cause, 'twould
infallibly spur them to so perfect, and so unanimous a Revenge, as to cut off
their popish Enemies, even to the last Man. Now what popish Usurper shall
venture to pass such an Ordeal to a Throne? Or what hopes a popish King can
have of such a Successor, or of accomplishing his own popish Designs on such a
Basis, let common Reason judge.

And therefore the Pope must have a very little Paternal Care of his Royal Son
of Rome, and indeed of all his Catholic Sons in England, as to imbark them in
a Cause so apparently Derstructive, whilst by misleading them into such
sanguinary, illegal Cruelties against the Protestants, and all for an
impossible Conversion of a Nation, he runs his own darling people, Root and
Branch into an inevitable Fate under the next Protestant Successor, exposed not
only to the highest popular Swords and Fury, but even to Cords and Axes, and
the severest Stroke and Vengeance of Law it self. But possibly their Fate shall
not wait so long as the next King's Coronation, but overtake them in the first
Onset of their popish Barbarity. For let ut but look back to the Gunpowder
Treason, a Plot where Faux's Powder-Barrels were neither like Otes his Teuxbury
Mustard-Balls, nor his Black Bills, Invisible. A Plot too, where the
Conspirators dyed not Tongue-tyed, but confessed their Guilt, without that
wonder-working Dispensation of asserting a Counterfeit Innocence, to the
stretch o their Salvation, and Renuntiation of their God, on the very Brink of
Eternity. Let us look back, I say, to the Discovery of that Plot: and History
informs us, that 'twas as much as the King, Court and Government could possibly
do to restrain the peopl's Rage from Butchering all the Papists in England, the
Guilty and Innocent together in the Revenge of so barbarous a Machination,
though uneffected; tho by Providence detected and frustrated. And if the Genius
of England was so highly exasperated, and so furiously transported in Zeal for
their Prince's and their Representativ's Danger, though past and escaped. What
Security shall the Pope, or his popish Successor promise themselves, that the
people's Zeal for their own Dangers Approaching, will not be as much
transported too. And that the Eruption of Smithfield Fires, with the dragging
of their Fathers, their Wives, their Children, or their Kindred (and possibly
their own Turn next) to a popish Stake, will not equally, if not more violently
inflame them into as great, or greater Outrages than the Gunpowder Plot could
do.

But whether this certain Ruin should pursue these Arbitrary popish
Instruments either sooner or later, and that it were really possible* these, or
any other Illegal popish Measures might give us some Trouble and Disturbance
during this popish Monarch's Reign. How wretched a piece of Work must the
Wisdom of the Pope and the whole Conclave undertake, to make Popery and
Arbitrary Power under a popish Successor, those Feeble Serpents that shall but
just bite our Heels to provoke our succeeding Vengeance to crush their Heads.

In the second year of Queen Mary, after the Repeal of King Edward's Laws, but
before the Restoration of the Pope's Supremacy, we are told in the History of
the Reformation: ( Abridg. B. 3. page 253.) of a project proposed by the
Spanish Ambassador to the Queen, of assuming the power of a Conqueror, and
ruling at pleasure; by which she might restore both the Religion and the
Abbey-Lands, and be under no Restraint. This she communicated to her
Chancellor Gardener and charged him to give her his Opinion of it sincerely,
as he would answer to God for it at the last day. He read it carefully, and
told her it was a most pernicious Contrivance, and begged her not to listen to
such Platforms which might be brought her by base Sycophants. Upon that she
burnt the Paper, and charged the Ambassador to bring her no more such
pro^ects. This gave Gardener great Apprehensions of the Mischiefs that Spanish
Councils might bring upon the Nation: and so he procured the Act to be made; by
which the Queen was bound by the Law, as much as her Ancestors were.

Now if that Bloody popish Zealot Gardener was so violently averse to the
Thought of bringing Arbitrary- power into England, for what Service soever to
the Romish Cause, as in his Opinion so most pernicious; when at the same time
the Majority, or Half of the Nation at least were of that persuasion. And if
popish Standing Armies could have done the Feat, they were ten times easier to
be raised for any Arbitrary popish purpose then; especially too, when the Queen
lay in the Bosom of that potent Spanish Husband (witness his Invincible Armada
soon after against Queen Elizabeth) that could have lent her a very
considerable Helping Hand from Foreign Assistance to push on the project, had
her English Strength been Insufficient. Now I say, if nevertheless the Design
was deemed so pernicious then, what popish State Councillors at this time of
day will run their own and their Prince's Fingers so far in the Fire, as to
advise him to any such Arbitrary Projection now, under so low a Wane of Popery,
that scarce the 200 th. part of the Nation are of that Religion, and therefore
infinitely more pernicious than in Queen Mary's Case, and consequently, which
nothing but the most abandoned Lunacy can ever pretend to advise, or attempt.

It Is true indeed, the popish Character lays down a most Expeditious Method of
raising this dreadful Standing Army, that are to accomplish the mighty Feat of
Popery and Slavery under a Romish Successor; which for the Reader's Diversion
take as follows.

To make the Pope Absolute, there wants a Standing-Army; and he shall have it.
For who shall hinder him? Nay, all his Commanders shall be qualified even by
our present Protestant Test for the Employment. He shall have enough Men of the
Blade out of one half of the Gaming Houses in Town, to Officer twice as many
Forces as he shall want. It Is true, they shall be Men of no Estates nor
Principles. But they shall fight as well as those that have Both. For people
are ever as Valiant that have their Fortunes to raise, as those that have them
to defend: Nay, of the two they shall be the more Faithful. For they have no
Property to be concerned for, and will more zealously serve him, by Reason
their whole Interest and Estates lie in Him. And that this Army may be more
quietly raised, how many honorable Pretenses may be found? Perhaps the
greatest and most important Preservation of his Kingdom shall call for it: and
then upon second Thoughts, instead of defeating some Foreign Enemy, they are
opportunely ready to cut our Throats at Home, etc.

This Projection I confess is the only passage through the whole Character,
that endeavors to make out the possibility of any part of the numerous popish
Mischiefs denounced through the whole Pamphlet. For all along it absolutely
supposes the power of a popish Successour's doing whatever he pleases; and
after so fallacious a Petitio principii, it leaps over all Mountains in the
way, and only labors to prove the Depravity of a popish Successour's
Tyrannical Inclinations, and give him the Will of putting that power into
Execution.

But to examine the Depth of this Projection, granting such a Set of Atheistick
Officers could be found; what then must their Army be? Here Is a Foreign
Invasion, or some other Honorable Cause proposed, and an Army raised for that
seeming Intent and Purpose: an Army of papists they cannot be, for there is not
40000 Men, Women, and Children of that persuasion in the whole Kingdom, and
consequently, far short of 10000 Fighting Men amongst them all; and possibly,
not one half of them neither, such Foolhardy Desperadoes, as to hazard their
Lives so madly and so extravagantly in so unpromising a Cause, so
unaccomplishable a Design as Subjecting of England by the Hands of the papists.
So that an Army of Papists can be no part of a popish Successour's Thoughts.

And that the number of the papists in England is really no Greater. The King's
Indulgence formerly to those of that Religon, in gratitude for their Loyal
Endeavors at Worcester; and indeed through all his Fathers Distresses; has
been so far from putting them to the Shifts of Disguises or Concealment of
their Persuasions, that before the late wakening of the Laws against them, the
papists were every where as visible, and generally as distinguishable* from the
rest of Mankind as one Sex is from another; insomuch that (unless their Numbers
have increased by Converts made since the popish Discovery, and the Execution
of the Statutes against them) there is scarce one papist in England, that all
his Neighbors round him cannot particularly point at. And how thin sown those
Papists are, is notoriously manifest, when in many and many a ten Parishes
together in England there is not three Papists, and the whole number computed
through the Nation, scarce the 200 th. Man of that Persuasion. Notwithstanding
there have been many Fanatical Pretensions of wonderful popish Dispensations;
by virtue of which, there are at least thirty or forty thousand Church-papists
as some old Oliverian Rebels shall tell you, tolerated by the Pope to an
Absolute Protestant Uniformity, and ready upon occasion, to show themselves in
their proper Colors. The Villainy of which Damnable Falsehood is sufficiently
apparent, from the forementiond Indulgence. For why such a Dispensation? Why a
playing the basest of Hypocrites, and Bantring with Religion, Sacraments, nay,
GOD himself; (as such a Dispensation is no less) when under so universal an
Impunity, there was not the least Occasion for it? There Is a natural Pride in
all Religions to avow their own Principles; and no Man, like St. Peter, denies
his Master, unless, like him too, under some Apprehension of Danger in Owning
him. And therefore these papal Dispensations must be the Second Part of Otes
his Commissions, and nothing but the Restless Malice of Schism, and the
Diabolical Spirit of Rebellion can raise so false an Alarm of popery, and
bugbear the Ignorant Rabble by so vile and so cursed an Imposture.

But to return to our Standing Army. An Army of Papists is not to be had; and
an Army of Atheists is as unseizible as the other. For whatever dissolute
Debauchees might possibly be culled out (as the Character tells you) of no
Religion nor Principles, for a few particular Officers; the whole Gross of an
Army of the same Stamp is not in rerum Natura: For if a popish Successor will
have an Army of Englishmen, he must take them as he finds them, the loose and
poorer sort of Rabble, the Bore and Peasant, the Refuse of the Shop and the
Plough, which are ever the Composition of Armies in a Kingdom not so
extraordinary peopled as England, and these must be the Hands that this popish
Successor must raise for his Standing Armies. And if so, how far the Genius of
the Commonalty of England lies toward such a popish Undertaking, and this
No-popish Army shall push on to these All-popish Designs, is worthy our
Consideration.

Here Is an Army expressly raised for a Foreign Invasion, or the like; and on
the quite contrary, intended to cut our own Throats at home; raised for the
Kingdom's preservation, and used for its downright Destruction; and all this,
forsooth, because their Arbitrary popishly Affected Officers shall pull off the
Vizor, and wheel about, and at the word of Command, the whole Army after them.
But the Quaery is, Whether they will obey that Command, and be so tamely
indifferent pro or con in their Obedience, to act the most opposite thing to
what they were raised for, and maintain perhaps the only Cause that they abhor.

I confess, in the Quarrels of Princes and States, as to Foreign Engagements,
the vindicating of a National Honor, or the enlarging of Dominion, etc. Armies
are generally of their Leaders Inclinations, and it boots little possibly to an
English Army, whether engaged against a Dutch or a French Enemy. But in
Domestic and Intestine Jarrs, the Favor of the Cause ever animates the Arm
that fights it. In all the popish Rebellions, or Massacres, whether in Ireland,
Piedmont, or Paris, whether for or against the Prince, or in all the several
Hugonot Rebellions in France, or any other Kingdoms of Europe; when Religion
was the Quarrel, 'twas not the Command of the Leader but the Principle of the
Party adhering to him, that was ever the First Mover on both sides. And a
popish Cause in England can never move, but upon the same Axle. And nothing is
more i^le, than to fancy such an Extravagance in any People or Religion in the
World, as to swallow such Implicit Obedience to Princes, as to do any Thing,
or all Things because Commanded.

It Is not the first time that through prejudice to the Person or the Cause,
disgusted Soldiers have shot through their Captains instead of their Enemies
Heads, and the Fate of Kuniski amongst the Cossacks, is no Original of the
Kind; nor is it any such Rarity in History, to find whole Armies turn
Deserters, and not only set up new Leaders, but new Sovereigns too. And truly
upon engaging an English Army under so Bloody a popish Standard, what Assurance
can this popish Successor propose to himself, not so much of going through
with so crabbed a piece of Work, but even of his own mere Safety under the
Protection of such Hands and Swords to uphold him? What Security shall he, or
indeed can he in common reason expect from the Stubborn, obstinate English
Hands, a People too apt to fly in the very Face of Princes upon a less
Provocation than so ungrateful a piece of Service: and that upon raising an
Army for any such kind of purpose, he has not put the Sword into their very
hands that may guide it to his own Throat, whilst possibly they shall be
opportunely raised for some more Darling-protestant Favorite to step into the
Head of them, and dismount, not only their popish Officers, but popery too, and
the very Royal popish Nimrod himself; nay, and perhaps use him with as little
Remorse as the Turkish Janissaries have done several of their less hated Grand
Seigniours under a much more Trivial Disgust.

But to give an Example out of our English Chronicles, of the Obedience and
Loyalty of English Armies to a King they hate; I shall only refer the Reader to
the Fate of King Richard the Third at Bosworth Field. Baker tells us, that
Richard's Army was double the Strength and Number of his Adversarys, the Earl
of Richmond's. Yet see the Infidelity of an English Army to a Prince under the
popular Dissatisfaction and Prejudice. A great part of his Army raised for his
preservation, was actually engaged in his Destruction. For the Lord Stanly by a
Revolt with 2000 Horse, Sir William Stanly with a party of 3000 more; and with
these Sir Walter Hungerford, Sir John Savage, Sir Brian Stanford, Sir Simon
Digby, all Commanders, who withdrew likewise with their Respective Inferior
Soldiers, amounting between them, to the Majority of Richard's whole Army,
turned all to the Earl of Richmond, and carried the whole Fortune of the day to
the Victorious Enemies Side, to the Loss both of Richard's Crown and Life
together. Nay, he goes further, and expressly tells us, that in this Battle
Henry, Earl of Northumberland, a Commander of Richard's Party, never struck
Stroke; as likewise many other, who followed him moreout of Fear than Love:
which Neuters upon the same Revolt as the Lord Stanly, might undoubtedly have
withdrawn their party to Richmond too. So that upon that dangerous and Fatal
Rock, the people's Aversion, how easily are the Crowns and Lives of princes
Shipwrack't? and what little Trust can Monarchs repose in the Strength and
Swords of Armies whose Hearts are not Theirs.

But alas! if Richard the Third found such Treachery from a Revolting Army; and
an Antipathy so destructive to him; What Truth or Faith is a popish Tyrant like
to find from Armies under a more universal and inveterate Detestation.

For wherein was King Richard's Crime so great? (I mean, as to the people) It Is
true, he Mounted the Throne by the most Inhumane of Murders. And from that only
Grievance proceeded the Defection of his Soldiers, that cost him his Life and
Empire. But still, that was not half so great an Incentive to his Revolting
Subjects, as the forementioned Barbarities of a popish Tyrant now. For though
he was so deeply stained in Royal Blood, yet that was not so nearly felt by the
people, as a Romish Tyrants cutting his Subjects Throats would be, by reason
that Englishmen have ever a greater Tenderness of Themselves than their
Princes. Besides, whatever Wrong he had done to the Royal Family, never had
Prince more endeared himself (or endeavored it, at least) than he to his
people. For Baker gives this Account of him, That having gotten the Crown by
pestilent Courses, he sought to Establish it by Wholesome Laws: for in no
King's Reign were ever better Laws made, for the Ease and Solace of the people,
or more Immunities granted to the Subject. Nor was there any thing of Religious
Difference in his Case ( Religion, that the Character tells you, sets all
Nations in a Flame) For Richard and his Soldiers were of One Church; and so no
part of the people's Hatred (as in the Case of popery now) nor any part of the
Coals was blown up from that Wind. Yet, if under no Danger to Religion and
Liberties, no Approach nor Apprehension of Tyranny and Slavery, nevertheless
his parricides alone outweighed all other Merits, and their Hatred of Richard
only on that Score, could turn his Subjects Swords against his own Breast; how
much more violent an Aversion will the Hatred of a popish Tyrant, both for his
Religion and his Cause together produce, being enough to exasperate the English
Constitutions, not only into Rebels, but even into Savages too.

But for a farther Instance of Revolting Armies, the History of Demetrius,
Emperor of Russia, is a memorable Example. This Demetrius, the only Heir of
the Empire, was in his Infancy stolen away to be rescued from the Danger of his
Life from the Cruelty of the Usurper Boritz Fedoritz, then in possession of the
Empire, and another Body very like him, was exposed Dead to the View of the
people. This Demetrius being brought up in Poland with the Palatine Sandomi^,
after he had traveled into Germany and Italy for the space of twenty years,
gave himself to be known for the Son of Bazil, and Heir of Russia, and by the
Assistance of the Palatine, the Jesuits, and the Favor of the King himself,
entered into Muscovy, well accompanied with Germans, Poles, and Cossacks.
Against whom Boritz raised a puissant Army. Nevertheless the Infidelity of his
People, who rose in Arms against him, together with several Losses sustained,
deprived him both of Courage and Life, and thereupon he dyed, but left his Son
to succeed him; who was received indeed by some of his Faction. But the City of
Muscovy, together with all the Country, having joined with Demetrius, threw
Boritz Son into Prison, and Established Demetrius upon the Throne; whose
Coronation, (as it is largely described in the History of the Iron Age) was
attended with such loud Transports of the People, and such universal
Acclamations of Joy, as could scarce be exceeded. Yet this very Prince had no
sooner ascended the Throne, and was scarce yet warm in the Seat, but those very
Subjects whose Hands and Swords had so cheerfully and vigorously asserted the
Justice of his Cause and Birthright, and advanced him to the Empire;
nevertheless, understanding that he had embraced the Romish Faith, and
acknowledged the Pope, and that he had introduced the Jesuits, as they
apprehended, to endeavor the Change of the Religion (which in Russia, is the
Greek Church) fell so totally off from their new Allegiance, and entice into so
sudden and so perfidious a Conspiracy against him, that upon a General Uproar
they fell upon the Poles, and others, as they were going to Court, insomuch
that they overpowered all the Foreign Assistance he had brought with him, and
approach't so near to his Palace, till the Emperor left his Queen, and got
away, and upon persuit, leapt down from a Tower through a Window; at the Foot
whereof (being found alive) he was forthwith dispatched, and the Cruelty of the
barbarous Multitude continued upon his dead Body, which they tore in pieces:
And so swift was the Change of popular Affections, and so violent the Fury
stirred up by the mere Alarm of altering the Religion, that all this
prodigious Revolution was wrought in a Month's Time after his Acquisition of
the Crown.

And if the Imaginary Introduction of Popery (as this was hitherto no more)
could raise so rapid a Torrent, and so sudden a Turn of Tide from the Revolting
Muscovites; what miraculous Fidelity can a Romanist expect from Englishmen,
under as great an Abhorrence of the Religion, and a more real Appearance of the
aforenamed Tyrannous Effects of it.

But put the Case, the best and most plausible way, Viz. That a popish
Successor (as some people will fancy) though really impossible) could raise a
whole Army of the same Stretching Conscience as the Character has raised him
Officers, a Crew of all Atheists* and neither Principles nor Religion were any
part of their Consideration, and consequently pliable to any purpose whatever;
as a Pack of such Reprobates as shall obey their Prince and his Officers in so
unjustifyable a Command, and so unnatural a piece of Service as cutting the
Protestant Throats, or upholding those Arbittary Judges that shall do it; what
Faith shall he dare lodge in an Army so Qualified? For what shall hinder them,
upon any Opportunity or Overture of greater advantage, from turning as great
Reg^es against him as for him? and truly with as little Guilt, and as good
Conscience on one side as 'tother. For an Actual Obedience, even to a Crowned
Head in the Execution of an Unlawful Act, especially so notorious as the
Massacring of his Subjects, and Destruction of the Government, is as much
against our Duty, both as Christians and Subjects, as downright to rebel
against him. And if this Army can stretch so far as to such horrid popish
Outrages, so much against the English Grain, it is very great Odds, but they would
much easier lean to their more Natural Bias on the other.

I need not insist much farther upon the manifest Inability of Popery's
Advancement by Armies or Arbitrary Power, when Arbitrary Power of it self
alone* without the other unweildy Clog of Popery at the heels of it, has been
ever adjudged so impracticable in England, that the very Conqueror himself,
the Norman William thought not his Victory secure, but by engaging to adhere to
William the Confessors Laws, or at least, to introduce no Noveltyes, excepting
such as Trials by Juryes, or the like; and these to the Privilege, not
Infringement of the Peoples Liberties. And the long and Bloody Baron's Wars,
upon a less Invasion of Liberty, are a sufficient Demonstration of the
Uneasiness of Englishmen under any Yoke whatever. Insomuch that a popish
Successor, under the undeniable Suspicions, and at best, but faint Affections
of his People, is so far from a Capacity of Tyrannizing either with Armies, or
without them, that he has no other Support both of Himself and his whole Party,
but by following the forementiond Measures of Richard the Third, and either to
in dear himself by making of Wholesome Laws for the people's Freedom and
Tranquillity; or at least by keeping within the Bounds of those wholesome Ones
they have already made for their Security.

Now with all these Numerous and undeniable Blocks in his way, why must a
popish Successor be Able, or indeed possessed with so Enthusiastic a
Presumption (for nothing less than Supernatural Inspirations will do it) as to
Think himself able to accomplish that very Thing in England which was never
done by Monarch before. Nay, to make the Presumption a little more prodigious,
this very Successor, who of all the Kings since the Creation, has the worst
Tools for such an Achievement, must be the first and only person that is for
undertaking it. For as a National Slavery is always the work of Time, and can
get footing at best but by slow and subtle Encroachments; and likewise, if at
all (...) a thousand times more Feasible from a Prince that is the People's
Darling, than one that is the ^^^version. How unfit a Prince will a popish
Successor be, for so hazardous an Attempt, when the continual and united
Jealousies of his Subjects will prevent the first part of the Danger, by
forewatching even the least Surprise or Arbitrary Encroachment upon them, and
next will never furnish him with half hands enough to perfect the Undertaking.

Well, but notwithstanding all this, there are a sort of People in the World
that shall make Answer, that Arbitrary Power in a Papist is not a thing so new,
nor so unpracticable, when the Government of the now French King is so manifest
a Testimony to the Contrary. And truly there are but too many Incendiaries in
this Age, that distract the Brainless part of Mankind with almost no other
Gorgon, Viz. That the French King's Standing-Armyes are to be the Pattern of a
popish Successour's Government, and the Persecution of his Hugonots, the very
Fate of the Protestants in England, whilst under the Rose, Popery and Slavery
are to Copy from no other Original.

As this is one of the main Pretensions of the Whig-Fears, and indeed the
Top-Demonstration of Popery and Arbitrary Power; so when truly examined, you will
find it just such an Apparition as Otes's bloody Pilgrims; the more terrible,
the more ridiculous. For as it is the common Fate of all popular Arguments on
that Subject; so much the more Formidable, still so much the more Ayry the
Phantom.

For first, not to insist much upon the General Mistake of Mankind, when
possibly the French Arbitrary Power is infinitely magnifyed above what really
it is; for excepting the French King's now and then fleecing an Over-rich
Cheating Courtier a little Arbitrarily, and thereby, in truth, making but a
Reprizal of his own, I could never yet learn by those that know the French
Government, that any man's Meum or Tuum was Illegally taken away, or any Man's
Life or Fortune stood or fell, but by the Judicial Process of the Laws of the
Land. It Is true indeed, his Wars have been Expensive, but then his Revenues
have been large to support them; and not only that, but his Foreign
Depredations have supplied the greatest part of the Expense. Nevertheless
whatever Arbitrary Taxes he may have raised, to the Injury of any particular
aggrieved Subject, or whatever Tyranny he may have exercised over the distressed
and persecuted Hugonots, if either of the two can be properly Arbitrary or
Tyrannick, when past into a Law, and made a Decree enacted by parliament, as
both the Taxes and the present Hugonot Persecution are; the French King's
Arbitrary Encroachments in France, are no precedent for a popish Successour's
Imitation in England, and that because the State and Constitution of the Two
Kingdoms are so extremely different, that there is not the least Ground for
such a Foundation here as there.

For first as to the Nature and Genius of the People: In France, the Peasants
ab Origin have not enjoyed half the Privileges and Immunityes of the Freeborn
people of England. And therefore under that sordid Education, as knowing no
better, and being in a manner inured to Slavery, it is no such great wonder to
see the French Commonalty submitting to such Oppression, as indeed, why should
they otherwise, when they submit but to Law.

And if the French King has any greater Ascendance over his Parliaments than
the Kings of England over Theirs, to perform all this; why should that be any
Rarity, when in reality they are of so different a Constitution from those of
England, that they are rather the settled Magistrrcy of the Nation than any
thing like Our Parliaments; and as Ours are of the peopl's Election, Theirs in
a manner only the King's, every Member of the French Parliaments holding his
Office not only for Life, but even to his Heirs, unless alienated by the Prince
upon a Forfeiture, or any personal Dislike; that in short, as being the
Creatures of the King, they are truly more like a Turkish DIVAN than an English
House of Commons.

But in fine, to make a Parallel of our Dangers between the State of the two
Nations, which in truth is bringing North and South together. BECAUSE a popish
French King, with the Majority of the Kingdom of his own Religion, the Religion
Established by Law, and Flourishing in Glory; by help of such vaste Armies too,
entirely of that Religion, and thereby principled for his own Service, can
squeeze some particular of his Subjects Purses a little Arbitrarily, and
oppress and persecute the poor forlorn Hugonots, a Party infinitely the
Minority, disabled too from all power, and at highest, but suffered by the
Indulgence of the State, and that even with the most favorable Aspect of the
Government, under that pittance of Encouragment, that (for Example) to the
whole Body of the Reformers inhabiting in that vaste and populous City of
Paris, there is tolerated but One Hugonot Church, and that standing like our
Pancras, only more Miles out of Town, because I say, the French King under
these Circumstances can do all this: THEREFORE (pray mark it) a popish English
King with his Diminitive Romish Party, the most inconsiderable Handful of the
Nation, under not only the Censure of the Law, but the utter Abhorrence of the
People, with the help of an Army (if he has any) of a quite contrary Religion,
and thereby wholly unprincipled for the Service intended, shall vanquish and
subject the Protestant Established Religion in all its Luster and Strength,
upheld by all the Fortifications of Law, and by Numbers even to a more than
hundredfold Majority; whilst the English Protestants are not only to feel the
French Hugonots Smart, but (if either the Fanatical Suggestions, or the popish
Character speaks Truth) to groan under a hundred times (Oh! Monstrum
Horrendum!) more dismal Persecution and Slavery: the present French Arbitrary
Stretch being little more than a Fleabiting to our total Abolition of our Laws,
Libertyes and Religion.

But to make this French Goblin more monstrous still, there are some People
that go a Bows Shoot farther yet, and will tell you, that by the aforesaid
almost Omnipotent Things called Standing-Armyes, a popish Successor shall not
only crush our Protestant Laws and Liberties to pieces Himself, but likewise
hectour our very parliaments to that degree, as to force them to the giving up
our very Birthrights to him, nay, to the very passing of at once both Popery
and Slavery into Law it self; and then Lord have Mercy upon poor lost England.
For alas! the same Absolute uncontrollable Sovereignty that the French King has
over his Parliaments, is (they will tell you) the intended Scheme of a popish
Dominion in England. And then where! Oh where! is our Religion and Liberties
when that black Day once comes?

Now in the Name of Lucifer, what Infernal Impudence reigns in the World, when
such Rank, such Nonsensical Stuff as this can be asserted by Rogues, and
credited by Fools. For besides the most infamous Calumny that this execrable
Imputation throws upon the whole Body of the Nation, Viz. That Englishmen shall
be such tame, such abject, such despicable Wretches and Cowards, as out of any
personal Fear whatever, to yield up their Laws, Rights, and Religion, to the
Ruin of themselves and their Posterity, and thereby offer, as it were, even
their own Throats to the Slaughter. What Relation has the present Management in
France to that of Popery in England, or the French King's Parliamentary
Influence to that of a popish Successour's?

For whatever extraordinary Obedience or Subjection the French Parliaments may
yield to their King in the grant of any Oppressive Impositions upon the Subject
to advance their King's Exorbitant Power and Greatness; are the French King's
Arbitrary Endeavors to root up the Foundations of his popish Laws and the
Established Religion of France, which vice versa, is the Case in England; so
that if a popish Successor can hector our English Parliaments to no farther a
Compliance than the French King does His, the Devil an Inch of Ground will
Popery get in England; for as I take it, the French Parliaments are all popish;
and as such, are in so little danger of their Religion, that truly their Prince
in the other Extreme is in the highest Extravagance of Advancing it.

So that unless we state the Parrallel between the two Kings Thus, Viz.
(Supposing the French King a Hugonot, which is but turning our Tables) that
then both his popish Armies and popish Parliaments would nevertheless be awed
and bullyed into that entire Submission to him, as to abolish the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, and thereby subject themselves and all their Brethren
Papists to the self same Persecution and Slavery under the Hugonots, that the
Hugonots suffer under Them: without which Supposition his Tyranny is wholly
alien to our popish Successour's; and nothing but the most Villainous Phanatical
Sophistry dares cant at this wretched rate, to pretend to make the French
Tyranny a Model for English Popery to work by. But put the Case there were a
French Hugonot King, and that had the forementioned purpose in Agitation,
either by Armies or Parliaments (as pliable as the French Genius is supposed to
be) his Ill Success in such an Exploit might be soon guest, by the Difficulties
and Obstructions of their Hugonot Henry the 4 th. in his way to the Throne
under but a suspicion of inclining that way. And consequently, what worse
Success would attend the like popish Changes in England, under the manifest
disproportion of the English Papists to the French Hugonots, is past dispute,

However, if neither English Armies nor English Parliaments can do the popish
Feat, there is one last Expedient yet to vanquish all Obstacles, and that I
assure you, (if no small Authors may be believed) a most puissant one, Viz. If
the popish Hands in England are too weak to enslave us, this popish Successor
shall borrow the Assistance of popish Neighbors to help out, and so what
cannot be done by Domestic Forces, shall be performed by a Foreign Army,
called over on purpose. This Expedient I confess, is so much the more
remarkable, as it has some little Affinity to Bedlow's St. Jago Expedition, and
truly has sometimes had the Honor to be harangued upon even in a House of
Commons, as no small Danger from Popery.

But notwithstanding the Authority and Veracity this Projection may seem to
arrogate from its Admission into an Honorable House of Parliament; upon due
Examination, I am half afraid, 'twill prove but one of the Observator's
downright Twangers* For if this popish Successor be for setting up Popery by
pitched Battles and plain Conquest, and that too, by Outlandish Aid; in the
first place he must have far more than tenfold as many Foreign popish Hands as
he has of his own to pretend at least to a strength able to subdue England*
nay, and in truth, here is one unlucky Circumstance attending, that is, if he
can borrow popish Neighbors, it is odds but the protestants may borrow
protestant Neighbors too upon occasion; for Princes have as often lent Armies
to succor oppressed Subjects, as to assist Oppressing Tyrants. But let that pass.

But supposing the best face of the thing, that there were some Chance for him
in this bold Cast, and that after his setting of Honor, Life, Empire all at a
Throw upon the hazard of War, there were only an even Lay of Keeping or loosing
them, a Caesar aut nullus, 'twere a little more pardonable Venture. But as the
Devil would have it, there is not one syllable of this in the Matter. For if
overthrown, he is so irrevocably lost, that possibly not only his own Ruin, but
that of all his Royal Family, and of Monarchy it self goes together. But
admitting he Conquers, the Question is, whether the Caesarship on the other
side be so secure or no?

For truly, what if the aforesaid tenfold Majority of Foreign Conquerours
should make bold to pass a Civil Complement upon this Successor Militant, and
the rest of his popish Remnant, and fairly keep the Victory when they have got
it. For I assure him little England is a pretty Parcel of Terra firma, and
'twere no small Temptation to popish or no popish Fingers to be a little
tenacious with so fortunate a Prize. And when those Triumphant Foreigners have
tasted the sweet Air of so delicate a Spot as England, it is forty to one
whether They, or at least the Crowned Head that lends them will be overhasty of
resigning so inviting a Trophy as the English Diadem; and truly cosidering the
Blackness of the Cause they came over to engage in, if any Foreign Prince can
lend an Army for so Dishhonourable a Quarrel, which indeed all Nations and all
Religions must cry Shame against, with much less Dishonor may he wear the
Laurel he wins, and assume that vanquished Kingdom to himself, when he robs but
a Robber, and at most deposes a Cutthroat.

And therefore to make Instance in the Case, what popish Successor will
venture to call over, suppose thirty or forty thousand French to enslave his
people (and thereby at one dash loose his People's Hearts beyond all Thoughts
of a Recovery) as thither indeed the Whig Fears seem to point) upon a
Confidence that the now French King's Generosity, though possibly not the best
Faith-keeper in Christendom, after the Accomplishment of the Conquest, will
make so entire a Resignation of all Pretensions of Victory to Establish this
Absolute Popish Sultan: especially considering the insatiate Ambition of that
aspiring Prince to Universal Monarchy, and particularly to the Sovereignty of
the Seas; which though with all his present great Ships under the Maritime
Weakness of France he cannot atchieve, he might entirely possess by so
opportune and so important an Addition to his Conquests as England.

Now they must have a wonderful Stock of Faith, with no small mixture of
Madness, that can really believe any popish Crowned Head in the World will ever
play so cursed a Loosing Game, and take that Path toward Popery, with two such
amnable Precipices both on the Right Hand and the Left, that the very
Masterpiece of the Projection is but in effect writing his own MEAN TEKEL over
his own Head.

So that all the forementioned Impotence and Impossibilities of popish and
arbitrary Tyrannys Introduction into England, being fully demonstrated; I have
only this to add; There is no greater Mistake in the generality of Mankind,
than an Imbibed Opinion, that the Papists think themselves obliged to endeavor
the setting up of their Religion hap-hazard, right or wrong, hand over head,
without Consideration or Regard to the Issue or Success of the Undertaking; and
that in fine, a popish Successor will certainly muster all Forces and all
Engines to attempt the Storming of the whole Protestant Liberty and Religion,
though under a tenfold Odds of laying his very Bones at the Siege.

But the Grossness of this popular Error will appear from the past Conduct of
all the Papists in all Ages and all Countries, when they never attempted a
Rebellion, Massacre, or any such Monstrous Design, but where they had, not only
proper popish Instruments for the Service, but also a popish Strength capable
in all reasonable prospect of going Through-stitch with it. Besides a Bigot in
Religion is nevertheless a Statesman in the Establishing of that Religion, and
excepting such Bedlamite Enthusiasts as the old Fifth Monarchy Adventurers,
there is Policy as well as Faith in all Churches; and how far soever Faith may
stretch, Policy moves in the Bounds of Reason, and he that can believe the
greatest lying Miracle in a Romish Legend, will never trust to Miracles in a
Romish Battalia. And were a popish Successor in his Nature ten times, if
possible* a Bloodyer-minded Tyrant than the very Character has shaped him, if
he wants Humane Strength to enslave us, let us not suspect his relying on
Divine or Infernal Assistance, the Aid of Angels or Devils to help him.

And truly when a popish Successor shall seriously consider the Temper of the
Headstrong English, a people always impatient of Wrongs, to that degree of
Ill Nature in the Resentment and Prosecution of Ills above all Mankind beside,
that whereas all other Nations cry [ Run Rogue] it is observable the English
Note is ever [ Stop Thief] But above all, a People so nicely Jealous of
Liberty, that the very Name of Oppression (especially from the Crown-side)
without the Thing, is enough to make them slip the Bi^^ and run stark mad;
insomuch that a King of England is but too justly called a King of Devils; when
he considers all this, I say, a popish Successor, a thousand to one, will
never venture the raising those mutinous English Devils, without a Charm full
strong enough to lay them again. And whatever his Inclinations might be for the
Heretic Slavery, yet as Vana est sine viribus Ira.

It Is not the Thunder in a Popish Successour's Heart, but his Hand that can
hurt us, and where the Arm's too weak, and the Belt too unweildy, let us never
trouble our Heads with fearing the Blow.

But that Point, Viz. A popish Successors POWER of Enslaving, Persecuting,
Burning, etc. being sufficiently discust, let us next examine the Veracity of
the Character in another Point, that is, granting he either had, or fancied he
had the Power of doing it; Quaery, whither it necessarily follows that he must
have the Will to do it.

The Character, it is true (as I said before) makes him plunge headlong into the
Breach of all Promises, Vows, Obligations, Oaths and Sacraments, all the
Dictates even of Morality and Common Humanity, and what not; and renders it
withal so inseparable an Impulse and Principle of a popish Conscience, that in
a manner, that popish Prince that neglects so incumbent and meritorious a Duty,
is little less in the popish Balance than a Judas or a Julian, etc.

Though I confess, for all this terrible Oathbreaking, the two Instances
recited in the Character to prove this universal popish Infidelity are possibly
the Idlest that a Man could wish to meet with. The First of them is Queen
Mary's Breach of Promise of their Quiet Exercise of the Protestant Religion,
made to the Norfolk and Suffolk Inhabitants that mounted her to her Throne,
which I acknowledge was both ungratefully, and in the highest degree
dishonourably done; yet when truly weighed, is far from any thing of that
damnable Law-breaking popish Perjury that the Character all along endeavors to
blacken all Romish Princes with; that on the contrary, though it is true, she
broke her Promise given to Capitulating Rebels; for the Norfolk and Suffolk
Inhabitants were indeed little better; for as their utmost Endeavors of
setting their Lawful Sovereign upon her Throne, was their absolute
indispensible Duty, whatever her Requital might be, yet the Chronicle tells us
they refused the Queen any Assistance whatever till they had first conditioned
with her, and extorted that Promise from her. And if nevertheless she broke
that Promise afterward with them, here was no Tyrannick Cruelty exercised, nor
any Coronation Oath Violated, when she only burnt them by Law; and as her
Coronation Oath obliged her to rule by Law, 'twas only her Misfortune to
believe the Equity of that Sanguinary Law, and accordingly, to act by it, and
consequently, their Misery to feel the Scourge of it.

The 2 d. Instance of a Certain Gentleman on the Other side the Water, that
once took the Sacrament never to invade Flanders; which since he has so
notoriously broken: and the Inference from thence, that a popish Successor
will much more break all Oaths, for the meritorious Propagation of his
Religion, when a popish Prince has violated even Sacraments themselves for his
irregular, unjustifyable Ambition; is so impertinently urged, that nothing can
be less to the Purpose. For that Gentleman's Breach of his Sacramentary Oath is
no Sin of the papist, but the Man, not a Principle of his Religion, but the
fault of his little or no Religion in so slight a Regard of so sacred an
Obligation, wherein his Ambition overpowered his Christianity; and possibly
under his Lust of Power, an Oath upon the Bible or the Alcoran might be much of
a Strength.

But to find a better Example of Popish Perfidy than the Character affords, I
acknowledge the horrid and most barbarous Infidelity of Charles the 9 th. of
France, and the Impious and Execrable Massacre of the French Protestants by
that Inhumane and Treacherous Monarch's Machinations: which Davilah, an
Historian of his own Church describes with Detestation, and which all Religions
must remember with Horror: but at the same time, to do Justice likewise to the
Hugonot Guilt, all good Men ought to reflect on the three Hugonot Rebellions in
his Reign (though whatever their Provocation were) as wholly unallowable by the
Laws of God; and their Daylight Bloodshed such a Blot in a Christian Scutcheon,
which nothing but the others Midnight Murders could exceed; and possibly those
Rebellions no small Incentive to that Diabolical Assassination.

I confess likewise, that I have read in a more sacred Record, how the Jews
upon Picques and Revenges have cut off almost whole Tribes amongst them; but at
the same time, as it is certain, those Throat-cuttings committed upon their
Brethren, were against their Religion and the Laws of God; and which nothing
but Exemplary Penitence could Atone, so the Massacring Spirit of Charles the 9
th. when rightly scanned, will not be found so Canonizing a Qualification in a
Romanist, as the World suspects it.

For if it were really that Signally Meritorious Principle of Popery, how comes
it about that there is so few Popish Champions in so Holy a Popish War? For to
instance the Practices of the Romanists in all Kingdoms, and all Ages since the
Reformation. In the first place, in France (as Dr. Burnet in his Preface to his
Rights of Princes assures us) the Hugonots enjoyed their Liberties, and the
public unmolested Toleration of their Worship for several King's Reigns
together; nay, and what is particularly remarkable, the Edicts that confirmed
that Toleration were granted all by popish Kings and a Majority of Papists in
Parliament, a Favor which was never granted to the Papists by any protestant
Parliament whatever since the first Establishment of the Reformation in
England. Nor is this popish Good Nature peculiar only to the French Climate,
when so many of the Principalities of Germany, and of the Cantons in
Switzerland, where Popery is the Church Established, have from Age to Age
continued the same Toleration of the Reformers in the public Impunity of their
Persons and Estates, and the Exercise of their Devotion. Now if Persecuting and
enslaving of Heretics, etc. were so highly meritorious in the popish Church,
nay, the very Shibboleth of the popish Christianity, as the Malice of popish
Characters, and the Prejudice and Fear of English Fools has represented them,
and that the highest of papal Blessings and Seats in Heaven were the promised
Reward of such Transcendent Merit; what unpardonable Apostasy lies at the Doors
of almost the whole Body of Papists through the World, and what Curses and
Anathema's must such wilful, such undutiful, and such graceless Omission of a
Duty so Obligatory, the Remissness and Lethargy of so many Kingdoms and
Principalities from so many Generations to Generations, deserved.

But alas! as the Tree is known by the Fruit; and the Test of all Principles
and Inclinations (I mean, under no Restraint) are their Actions; and as all
those popish Governments have the popish Majority and Strength on their side;
and thereby are in a visible Capacity of Oppressing and Persecuting their
weaker Heretic Subjects; therefore this general Indulgence and Mercy is an
unanserable Argument, that under the POWER of Tyranny and Cruelty, they
manifestly want the WILL. And whilst their Le^ity and Clemency so much exceeds
even that of their Boasting Accusers, and the Favorable Concession of
Romanists to Heretics, out does that of Heretics to Them; the Injustice of so
false an Attainder, and so infamous an Imputation is sufficiently confronted
from such a Cloud of numerous Examples to the Contrary; whilst it does no more
follow, that a popish Successor, by the Tenants of his Church, must hold
himself obliged to be a second Charles the 9 th. or any thing like him (had he
the Ability of being so) than that every popish Priest must be a Mariana or a
Clements, and every Papist a Raviliac.

So that if it be true, as the Character affirms, That a popish Successor in
England, that keeps Faith with Heretics, and Rules by Law, will be the
greatest Laughing Stock of the whole World, whilst all Roman Catholic Princes
will deride the Feebleness of his Arm, and the Tameness of his Spirit for
sparing a Faggot in Smithfield, etc. It Is very strange that those very Princes
should so loudly exclaim against Him for that very Fault in which Themselves
are five hundred times more criminal than He can be, by reason their greater
Romish Transgression (if it be one) is so much more inexcusable, as THEY have
popish Opportunity, Strength, Power and Dominion to capacitate them for such a
Persecution, and the Devil an One of them has HE.

And at the same time (if it be the Doctrine of Rome) the Pope himself too, in
so extraordinary severe an Imposition upon an English Romanist, must be
prodigiously partial, nay, a worse than Egyptian Taskmaster, to lay such
Rigorous Injunctions upon so Impotent a popish Sovereignty here in England, and
yet allow such profuse Dispensations, and such extravagant Latitude to the more
powerful Papists through all the World beside.

Now after this pretended Brittleness of either Promises Obligations or Oaths,
let us come to the next dreadful Phenomenon of Tyrant and Barbarian in a
Popish Successor. And that is, that his Zeal for his Church will supersede all
the Dictates of Honor and Glory whatever, and nothing so horrid or villainous
that a Papist, though never so great, either Prince or Potentate will stand out
at, when for the Advancement of popery.

The Intended Proof of this Assertion is the very Master-stroke of the whole
Character, Viz. Verbatim, as follows.

The Glory of a Papist! A pretty ayry Notion! How shall we ever expect that
Glory shall steer the Actions of a popish Successor, when there is not that
Things so Abject, that he shall refuse to do; or that Shape or Hypocrisy so
scandalous he shall not assume, when Rome, or Rome's Interest shall command;
nay, when his own petulant Stubborness shall but sway him: As for Example; For
one fit he shall come to the protestant Church, and be a Member of their
Communion, notwithstanding at the same time his Face belyes his Heart, and his
Soul is a Romanist: Nay, he shall vary his Disguises as often as an Algerine
his Colors, and change his Flag to conceal the Pyrate. As for Instance;
another fit, for whole years together, he shall come neither to one Church nor
'tother, and participate of neither Communion; till ignobly he plays the
Unprincely, nay, Unmanly Hypocrite so long, that he shelters himself under the
Face of an Atheist to shroud a Papist. A Vizor more fit for a Banditto than a
Prince. And this methinks is so wretched and so despicable a Disguise, that it
looks like being ashamed of his GOD.

Now to the Eternal Shame of the Contagious Air of 79, and the most Flagitious
Depravity of that Infamous Season; as nothing but the most unpardonable Malice
encouraged and animated by the Licentiousness of those Libertine Days could
have produced so exquisite a Mass of Rancour; so the Reader is to observe that
it was exactly Calculated for that very Age 'twas written in, an Age when all
Venom and no Reason was in Mode. For first, next to the old High Court of
Justice, here is the most Impudent Tribunal set up, and a Prince most
audaciously Arraigned, and Sentenced for a Downright papist in his Heart at the
same hour he is a Member of the protestant Communion, an Accusation beyond the
possibility of Humane power or Knowledge to make proof of, and of which only
God, that knows the Secrets of Hearts could be Judge. I remember I read of a
Tyrant that hanged a Fellow for a Sower Look, as a certain Conviction of a
False Heart. But the Character goes a Bows Shoot beyond him, and pretends to
Impeach Thoughts, and Adjudge Souls. And though neither the highest Scrutiny of
Law, or Inquest of Humane Reason can inspect any further than into Visible
Conformity and Ocular Demonstration: No matter for that, the popish Character
can Out-fadom all Laws, and out-see all Reason, to find the vilest of Dirt to
throw in the Face of Princes.

The second Inglorious and Monstrous Blot in the Princely Scutcheon, as the
Character designs him, is the Being a Papist, and yet not daring to go to the
popish Communion. Which by the way, is all Supposition still, and no Proof.
However, granting the Supposition, that he is one, does not the Express Law of
the Land say, That no papist, at least, no Native popish Subject of England,
though never so Princely Born, shall go to the popish Communion. Yet
nevertheless, here is a Prince most arrogantly asperst and vilyfyed in the most
barbarous Terms of Unprincely, Unmanly Hypocrite, Pyrate, Banditto, etc. and
all this for obeying the very Laws of the Land, and consequently, for
performing the Duty of a Subject and a Christian: Nay, and in the Character way
of Demonstration, he does an Act that looks like no less than being ashamed of
his God, in submitting to the Government, and thereby obeying the very
Ordinance of God. If This be not a Master-stroke, as I told you, I know not
what is.

But truly to be plain with this single Paragraph in the popish Character (no
disparagement to the rest of that Libel) no Impartial Reader but would swear
the Devil himself could not have crowded more Spite and Virulence, and less
Sense into fewer Words; and yet to show the misery of the time 'twas writ in; I
was so far from an Original in that almost universal Spirit of Bitterness that
then Reigned, that the Reader cannot forget (as indeed the whole Nation has but
too much Cause to remember) that if he at that time walked but Westminster or
Oxfordwards, he might have seen five hundred Men together, much my Betters,
that talked, and what is worse, acted as bad as I writ, and truly with as much,
or more Gall, and full as little Reason.

Having thus fairly stated our Case, and proved the Imbecility of our Fears,
and the Invalidity of the Arguments used for the Danger of Popery in England
this Rougher way, through Perjury, Barbarity, etc. I shall come to the second
Head of my Discourse, and enquire what Danger there is of its Introduction by
Persuasion and Rhetoric, and all the gentler Means of a National Conversion.

Now I confess, the pardoning of an Offender lies in the Prerogative of the
Crown, and the punishing, or not punishing of popish Priests, or any other
Romish Emissaries, is wholly in the Breast of the Prince. And upon the
Admission of a popish Sovereign to the Throne, it is presumed, that the Numbers
of popish Visitants from Foreign Seminaries, will not only Increase, but
likewise act less Clandestinely than formerly under the Confidence of
Connivance at least, from a Prince of their own Persuasion, and a Relaxation of
all the poenal Statutes against Popery.

The Eminent Danger of Popery from this Inlet, raises no little Dust in the
Character; and as if the whole Defense of our Protestant Religion was secured
by no other Barriere than by keeping out popish Emissaries at Swords point, and
hanging and Quartering of Priests and Jesuits, and the severest Execution of
the Statutes of Recusancy; which by the old Figure Petitio principii taken for
granted, the Character most furiously lays about, to prove the Moral
Impossibility of such a barbarous unnatural popish Successor that shall hang
and quarter those very Men that from the bottom of his heart he believes, are
the undoubted Disciples of Heaven, and Pillars of Christianity, etc. And if he
does not do all this, the Protestant Religion is upon it last Legs* and our
whole Church under a manifest prospect of being undermined and blown up.

Though by the by, here is another piece of Richard and Baxterisme in the Case:
For if popery shall make its Entrance, and sweep all before it this way, and by
mere dint of Logic or Sophistry shall pervert the Church of England, what need
was there of all the aforesaid Broyling, Roasting and Cut-throating, etc. to do
the Job.

However, as this very Indulgence and Remission of the penal Laws is no more
than what has been granted by the Clemency of the Crown even for Ages together,
and all without one popular Murmur, or the least Blot in the Royal Arms; the
next Question is, what necessity of Shackling the Prerogative, and tying up a
popish Successor to harder Meat than all his protestant Predecessors; or what
more mortal Crime is that Indulgence in a Papist than in all the protestant
Crowned Heads before him.

Oh yes, infinitely more they will tell you: for the Case is different, the popish
Hopes will be more Lively, their Courage more daring, and Themselves by their
popish Prince, more publicly and more solemnly embraced and countenanced; so
that the Inconveniences attending us from these more propitious Royal Smiles to
the professed Enemies and Supplanters of our Religion, will, God knows, have
those Victorious Effects, which all the feebler popish Efforts before could
never obtain.

Well, imagine all this extraordinary Benign Aspect toward popery, and for
once, let us put the Case the Worst that can be. Let us suppose all the
Indulgence or Encouragement to Popery from a popish Successor, that the
highest stretch of the Prerogative can give it. Nay, let us suppose a popish
Chapel in every Hamlet, and Mass sung in every Parish in England, and to
officiate in this Work, the whole Tribe of St. Omers, Doway, and all the rest
of the English Seminaries abroad, transplanted hither, to perform the Mighty
Operation. What would all this do to bring in Popery? Nay, let the whole
College of Cardinals come over with them too, they would be almost as
inoffensive to the protestant Religion as the Jewish Synagogue, and altogether
as unable to make a National Conversion to Papisme, as the other to Iudaisme.

For Instance, who are they, that these numerous popish Missionaries shall
convert? The Understanding part of the Nation, Men of Reason and Learning? Not
at all. For let the popish Numbers increase as they please, the popish
Arguments are but the same, whether defended by ten, or ten hundred Romanists.
And therefore they that have their Principles of Faith, and the Grounds of
their Religion Rooted and Confirmed by sound and well pondered Judgment and
Mature Consideration, will no more be shaken by all the popish Numbers they can
send over, than all the popish Volumes they have written. Besides, what greater
Affront can be put upon our Religion it self, than to imagine it so weakly
supported, as to be so much as capable of being thus overthrown.

Who then shall they Convert? the Ignorant Multitude. No, Them less than the
other. For as the others have Sense to defend themselves, These have that which
is as strong, or stronger, and more Invincible, Viz. Deafeness, Prejudice and
Resolution. For let any man seriously consider the Genius of the People of
England in that point, and but fancy a Jesuit, a Priest or any other popish
Emissary, tampering with the poorest high-shoo'd, thick skull'd Clown, to
possess him with a Faith in Transsubstantiation, Purgatory, Saint-praying, the
Pope's Infallibility, or any other of the Terrible Romish Principles, and
instead of making him a Proselite, upon the least Breath of that sort of Air,
he should be so far from hearkening or listening so much as to the Means of a
popish Conversion, so far from attending even to the Eloquence of Angels upon
that Subject, that he should sooner look downwards for the Cloven-foot of the
Seducer that utters it. For certainly those very people that have always been
so Mazed and Night-mared with popery, that they have scarce seen any thing else
but popish Specters and Goblins even at the very Shadow of it, will fancy
nothing less than Belzebubs and Lucifers at the real Appearance of it.

The Reduction indeed of England to the Romish Religion is a thing as easily
SAID, either in an Amsterdam Coffee-House, a popish Courant, or an Oxford
House of Commons, as a Tale out of the Seven Champions, and truly with as much
Credibility: But alas! when it comes to the DOING once, the Papists will find
that the whole Body of the people of England, even to a Nemine Contradicente
(at least, not one in a hundred excepted) if without any other Defense of their
Belief, are still those Opinators in Religion, that maugre the general
Ignorance of the Multitude, or the great Learning or Rhetoric of the Jesuits,
they would be no sooner persuaded to quit their plain English Bibles, nay, not so
much as poor Sternhold and Hopkins, to listen to an unintelligible Latin Mass,
or join in an Ora pro nobis sancte Paul, sancte Petre, sancte Loyola, and the
rest of the Fraternity of Major, or Minor Saints, then they would kneel to the
Talmude or the Alcoran, nor be no more persuaded into the possibility of a
Wafer's Transsubstantiation into a Deity, than of a Cartwheel into a Star: and
without these and the rest of the Romish Fundamentals, where is the Restoration
of the Romish Faith, or the Progress of a Popish Propagation in England.

But to confirm this certain Truth from a more substantial Authority than my
own. It Is the very Opinion of the Reverend Dr. Burnet himself, a person, let me
tell you, under no small Pains-taking for the protestant Religion, and as a
Churchman, under no common Consternation from popish Dangers, and therefore not
at all likely to lull us into a false Security of our Religion. The Instance of
which Opinion I find in the 9 th. page of his Preface to the Rights of Princes,
as follows;

It Is the Maxim of the Popes, not to reform Abuses in their Church, for if some
Corruptions were once acknowledged, and amended, that would give credit to the
Complaints which the Heretics made, and be a public Confession, that the
Church had Erred, and would set on foot a humor of making Changes, which could
not be easily limited or managed. These Politics prevailed at Rome, so that
instead of removing Abuses, all were justified and maintained, and yet humanely
speaking, it is not to be imagined but that if some more palpable Abuses in the
Worship, such as the scandalous Use of Images, the denying the Chalice, and
saying the Office in an Unknown Tongue, had been corrected, the Reformation
could not have made so great a Progress as it did. Wise Men are unwilling to
make great Changes, and the Rabble are wrought on, not so much by Speculations,
and subtle and learned Arguments, as by prejudices to some public Abuses, of
which they are ALL sensible; and while these are continued, 'twill be easy to
heighten their Dislike of them, and to lead them almost into any Opinions, to
which the hatred they bear to the Abuses may any way dispose them. And the
defending or maintaining of Abuses, which cannot be defended, endangers the
whole Cause in the Opinion of those who judge of Parties in Gross, and not by
the Retail of particular Arguments.

So that to sum up the Matter: Here Is the whole Cause of Rome in a manner
wholly lost by the Gross Abuses in that Communion. And what between the
Invincible Obstinacy of the Romanists on one side, never to recede from those
Abuses; and the Rabble's unanimous Disgust against them on the other, as being
apparent even to all Capacities; here is the greatest progress of the
Reformation, flowing from almost no other Channel; and by consequence, if the
Original Prejudice against those Abuses, could open so brord a Gate to the
protestant Religion, the present more irreconciliable Antipathy against Rome,
heightened by so many successive popular Inflammations, will make the Resumption
of that popish Vomit so more universally nauseous, that it will undoubtedly
much more contribute to the Confirmation of the Protestant Religion, than ever
it did to the Introduction of it.

For let but any reasonable Man consider, that during so many Ages of Impunity
to the Papists from the long Mercy of the late Kings of England, when Recusancy
went unmolested and unregarded, and neither Papist, nor popish priest, either
punished, or examined: excepting some few Families, that bred up their Children
in their own Persuasion, what Conversions have the popish party, and all the
Romish Missionaries made in England for half a hundred years last past? So far
from any Increase, that on the contrary, they have from Generation to
Generation apparently dwindled less and less till they are now scarce a handful
in consideration of all England. And if Popery and Jesuitisme, with all their
Learning and Insinuations under such Royal Indulgence have made such feeble
progress in the Conversion of England, that they have daily lost ground, not
gained it; shall the yet larger Indulgence of a popish Successor, with the
permission of their popish Pr^ests barefaced, the multiplying of their Numbers,
or the Influence of Regis ad Exemplum do the Work? The quite contrary. For
suppose the popish Priests a hundred times more numerous, and a hundred times
bolder than now, yet as the popish Seducers are increased, so likewise under
the dismal Apprehension of a visible popish Successor the popular Aversion
will so much more increase too, and thereby become the more impregnable,
whilst the Universality of their Fear and Hate will make them so much the more
Fortifyed against the utmost Assault. Besides, if the Jesuits have made so
little Advances of Popery formerly in England, that (granting it true that is
said of them) they have been put to the poor shifts of herding with Fanatics,
and disguising into Conventicle Preachers; what Encouragements (Oh wonderful!)
are they like to meet, when they throw off the Vizor, and walk by day, in the
open Propagation of a Religion so universally loathed, that it wants the
subtlest of Artifices and Disguises to obtrude even the least Tenet of it into
the World; at least, our Part of the World.

But surely nothing in nature can be a more ridiculous Supposition at this time
of day, as that the Example or Favor of a King in Case of Popery, shall
contribute toward the People's Embracing it, when undeniable Experience tells
us, that the very Aspersion of but popishly affected, has lost our Kings so
many Hearts, nay One of Them (with horror be it spoken) his very Crown and
Head. By consequence, how many more Hearts shall Popery in earnest loose a true
Popish King? and what little hope of gaining Proselites or Friends to a real
Romanist, when the mere Imagination has raised such contagious Desertions and
Enmity even to the best of Protestant Crowned Heads. And therefore how wretched
a piece of Sophistry must that be that Imposes on the unreasoning World so
impudent a piece of Falsehood, Viz. That Popery and a Popish Successor will
find such favorable Stars in England, when on the contrary, the bare Notion of
Popery and popish Councils have been attended with such Fatality.

However, to answer a little nearer yet to the Danger of Popery's coming in
through the Remissness and Neglect of executing the Laws against it, and the
Indulgence and Encouragement of the Prince to promote it, I have only this
Request to make to thee, thou poor frighted, half-witted Creature, that fear
all this Danger (for nothing of sense can fear it) to lay thy hand upon thy
Heart, and answer me this Question. Amongst those Proselites that the aforesaid
Toleration and Encouragement of the popish Successor, and the Witchcraft of
the Pope and Jesuits are like to make, Art thou thy self one of the number that
is in that danger of turning Papist? Now to answer for thee in thy own Dialect,
No! God forbid, thou wilt say, what, shall I turn to a Religion that has nothing
in it but Superstition and Idolatry! a Religion worse than Paganism and
Judaisme, a Religion that consecrates Daggers, and canonizes Murderers, that
makes nothing but stabbing of Kings, and Massacring whole Nations the only
meritorious Act of Christianity; and do you think that either the Insinuations
of Priests, or the Flattery of Kings themselves, or any Earthly Reward shall
make me turn such an Apostate from Truth, as to damn my Soul and renounce my
God: no, I have more Assurance in his good Grace than to imagine he will abandon
me to such a Thought: no, no, my Fear is not for my self. But alas! though I
shall never turn Papist, too many others will; and when these Jesuits,
Priests, and Villains have perverted the greatest part of the Nation to their
Idolatry, and thereby come to be able to set up the Romish Religion, with all
the old Fire and Faggots that belongs to it, then shall such honest Protestants
as my self be burnt at a Stake, for not turning Devil too for Company with
them. And what a miserable Condition will the poor Protestants be in in that
dreadful day.

Why thou fool, can thou thus make this confident and Resolute Answer for thy
self, and art thou so secure for thy own part, and only suspectest the Danger
of a popish Conversion from the weakness of thy Neighbor. If that be all,
trouble not thy self, nor distract thy little Brains for nothing, but for thy
Comfort, examine thy Neighbors Hearts as thou have done thy own, and of ever
hundred amongst them thou will find almost every where at least ninety nine of
them that have the same dreadful Opinion of Popery as thou have, and as utter
an Abomination of it as thy self, with the same Confident Assurance of
themselves too; nay, and that have only thy very Reasons of fearing it. How
ridiculous therefore must thy Fear be, when if thou art secure, they are so
too. And if so, where then are the Infinite Numbers of those Weak Brothers that
the Pope's Emissaries shall subdue, and that Majority of a perverted Nation
that shall Establish and set up this Nebuchadnezar's Image, and doom thee to
Fiery Furnaces for not kneeling with them to Worship it.

If the Dint of Persuasion and Indulgence then be all the Introduction of
Popery, and this the highest Flight of a popish Successor (as indeed it is)
all our Dangers are quite vanished, and the more the Nation abhors Popery, the
less Cause it has to fear it, whilst the Universality of the Detestation is
the certain Security of keeping it out; and none but Fools or Madmen can be
frighted by the Apprehensions of it that way. For the Blacker the Feind, the
less power he has over us, and they that are above Temptation need not fear the
Devil himself.

But beyond all these various Pretenses for Popery's coming in, there is one
more general Argument almost in all Mouths, which we find daily urged, and that
bears no little sway in Vulgar Apprehensions, Viz.

Why is it impossible that Popery should come in again, and that too, by Law
Established? Experience plainly tells us, that Henry the Eighth laid the
Foundation of the Protestant Religion, nay, and by a popish Parliament too. For
by a Romish Parliament was the Pope's Supremacy destroyed, by a Romish
Parliament the Monastery's and Abbey-Lands confiscated, and that very Monarch,
after the Continuation of Popery by a Reign of more than half a thousand years,
in the very Infancy too of the Protestant Religion, when possibly the
Protestants then in England, were a less handful than are the Papists in
England now. This very King I say, with so small a Party of Protestants, could
nevertheless lay the very Corner Stone, that the whole Reformation was
afterward built upon, and that too by Act of Parliament. And why on the other
side, shall it be so impossible for a popish Prince, with Henry the Eight's
Courage and Conduct withal, after not a hundred and fifty years Reign of the
protestant Religion, to be likewise able to do the same Favor for Popery, and
lay the very Basis of it even by Parliaments and Law. And a protestant
Parliament now, as a popish one then be so managed or Influenced, as to give a
main Lift to the Work.

Besides, why should the Change of the Religion be so wondrous or difficult a
Deed under a popish Monarch now, when upon every Change of the Prince's Faith
since the Conquest, the Established Religion of the Kingdom has been changed
with it. For Instance, after Henry's good Stroke toward it, Did not an Infant
Prince, Edward the Sixth, in poor seven years time Establish the protestant
Religion by Law? And did not Mary his popish Successor subvert it again by
Law, and by Law restore the very Pope's Supremacy? And lastly, Did not the
protestant Queen Elizabeth after her, trample both Pope and Popery under Feet,
and confirm that very Protestant Religion that Reigns at this Day. And why
shall a Popish Successor now, with as much Zeal and Industry as his
Predecessors miscarry in that very work in which not one of them failed before
him.

There is nothing that possibly passes for a more Authentic Confirmation of
all our popish Dangers than this One Assertion so universally received for
Current Sterling, by being only taken at a Lump upon Trust unweighed and
unexamined. But when considerately and thoroughly inspected, all rational Men
must blush to be deceived by so light and so drossy a Popular Tradition.

For to begin with Henry the Eighth. In the first place, here neither is, nor
can be the least Motive for the present Protestant People, or their
Representatives to make the least Change whatever in the present Church of
England, in any kind answerable to the several Inducements that wrought those
Changes in Henry the Eighth's Time.

For first, as no small Encouragement for the Reformation, the People had then
contracted a general and just Odium of the whole Clergy, strangely occasioned
by the Murder of Hunn, a Merchant of London in Prison. This Hunn being sued in
the Legates Court for Non-payment of a Mortuary to his Parish Priest; in
return, sued the Parish Priest in the Temporal Court for a Praemunire, for
bringing the King's Subjects before a Foreign and Illegal Court. This incensed
the Clergy so much, that they threw him into Prison for Heresy; where having
several Articles exhibited against him, upon Confession of part of them, and
begging Mercy, he was only enjoined Penance. But not being prevailed upon to
let fall his Suite in the Temporal Court, the Bishop's Chancellor, a Doctor,
and other of his Officers inhumanely Murdered him in Prison, by breaking his
Neck with an Iron Chain, and other Wounds given him upon the Belly; and then
hanged him up in his own Girdle to possess the World that he hanged himself.
And what was yet worse, upon a full Detection of the Truth of this Murder, the
Bishops of Durham and Lincoln, to palliate the Guilt, proceeded to charge him
with new Heresies after Death, and having sound a Wickliffs Bible in his House,
they condemned him as an Heretic, and burnt his Body. All which Proceedings
being now looked upon as the Act of the whole Clergy, they lost the Affections
of the People to that degree that they could never recover them; and nothing
more disposed the People to the embracing of the New Preachers than the
Resentment of so infamous a Murder, committed and patronized by the whole
Clergy.

[Hist. of Ref. page 14, and 15.]

And then for the Changes made in Parliament. The Suppression of Monasteries,
one of their Acts, was no more than what was designed, and begun in some
Measure by Cardinal Woolsey, and the Pope himself, and that long before the
Breach betwixt the King and Him, who granted a Bull to destroy several of them,
to convert into Bishoprics; [Ref. page 22.] the scandalous and lewd Lives of
too many of the Monks and Friars being obnoxious even to Rome it self. Though
it is true, the King and Parliament proceeded to a total Suppression of them
afterward for the same Intent of erecting new Episcopal Sees; though indeed
the vast profits arising from their Sale, through the Extravagant Profuseness
of Henry the Eighth, were not wholly converted to that Use; notwithstanding,
part of his Promise was performed, Viz. In his constituting six new
Bishoprics, and making Allowance for fourteen Deanaryes and Prebendariships to
fourteen Bishop's Sees.

But to gain the Parliament to the King's Party in the Destruction of
Monasteries, there was that which Governs the World, Interest in the Case;
which was no small Wheel in the Machine. For the King selling of the Lands at
easy Rates to the Nobility and Gentry; by this Policy the Parliament Members,
as Purchasers, by the Temptation of such good penny-worths, were engaged to
assist the King in the Maintenance of the Changes made. [ Ref. page 223.]

And for another part of Henry the 8 th's Reformation, Viz. The censuring and
condemning of Bulls, Indulgenses, Shrines, Pilgrimages, and Relics, with the
pulling down of Images; the scandalous Impostures of several of them by the
fraud of the Priests, being publicly discovered, [ Ref. p. 242.] created no
little aversion in the People. But besides all that, here could never be a more
pleasing Change to them than so beneficial a part of Reformation, Viz. The
freeing them from all those Ecclesiastic Romish Dreins, that had so long
swallowed almost half the Wealth of the Kingdom, in which too many of them had
been too great Sufferers, not only through their own, but also the deluded
Superstition of their Bigoted Ancestors, and by which no less than whole
Families had been Impoverish't and Undone, through the pious Frauds and
continual Suckings of those Church Horse-leeches.

And lastly, for the Exclusion of the Papal Supremacy, the above cited penalty
of Praemunire incurred both by the whole Clergy and Layty of England in
submitting to the Pope's Legantine Power, contrary to Law, as against the Act
of Provisoes, contributed no little matter both to the Clergy and Commons
Submission to the King in the point of that Supremacy. Besides, to facilitate
the Assumption of it, it was plainly proved by that Provisoe Act, and other
Substantial Records, that the Pope's Encroachments in England were but
Usurpation, and the Supremacy in reality ab origin and de jure inherent in the
Crown; and therefore the Resumption of it by the King, no more than a Challange
and Reprizal of his own Invaded Prerogative.

As these were all the Changes made by Henry the Eighth, the Popish Religion
being so far from abolish't by him, that he rather struck at the Court than
Church of Rome; witness the Act of the six Articles made by him, defending the
greatest and principlest Tenets of Rome, by no less than Capital Punishments,
and a Parlimentary Reinforcement of the old Statute de Hereticis comburendis;
[Ref. page 147.] the Heretic Burning continuing through his whole Reign. As
these I say, were all the Changes made by Henry the Eighth, instrumental to the
present Reformation, and that too, not without Obstructions, witness several
Rebellions occasioned by this Change; the one of 20000 Strong in Lincolnshire;
another more formidable one in Yorkshire, called by the Rebels, The Pilgrimage
of Grace, attended with a general Insurrection in all the North. However, as I
said before, here is no Motive or Inducement now for the like Parliamentary
Compliance with a Popish Successor, to make any, the least Change Instrumental
to the Romish Restoration.

For first, supposing (how notoriously false soever) an equal Mutability or
Disposition in the People now, to return to Rome, as then to depart from it.
Here Is no stigmatizing Brand of Murder, or any other public Perpetration or
Avowing of any Villainy whatever to taint the whole Protestant Clergy, and
thereby withdraw the People's Hearts from them.

Here Is no Holy-Cheats and Superstitious priest-Impostures practiced to drein
the People's Purses to gratify a scandalous, voracious Clergy. Or any detected
Abuses and Corruptions to disgust and exasperate the People against them.

Here Is no least Dormient Statute or Title whatever, for a Popish Successor to
lay hold of, in favor of the Papacy's Return into England, as there was for
its Expulsion. The Fence of our present Protestant Constitution being so strong
against it, and all Pretensions of Rome so utterly extinct and abolish't*
Neither is here any Praemunire incurred by the whole Clergy and Nation to
affright, or dasterdize them into any sordid Condescencion or Grants in
Diskindness to our Religion.

And lastly, here is no Fleeeing of an Overgrown, Overrich Church in the Case.
(The present Church Revenues under so many Impropriations, being no more than
will but just support its Dignity and Pastors but with Subsistence and
Decency.) No Ecclesiastic Booty nor Prize to bribe or allure an Avaricious
Parliament to weaken or impoverish their Church for the temptation of sharing
the Spoil.

But above all other Obstacles against Rome, here is an Absolute Impossibility of
a Temporizing Clergy to favor Popery. For supposing even the most barbarous
Insinuation of their Fanatical Enemies, True; and that Mammon, Interest,
Sycophantry, (how rascally soever that Infamous Suggestion) were above Religion
with them. Yet nevertheless the utmost Influence of a Romish Prince could never
warp them to any such Execrable Apostasy; by reason the Indispensable Coelibacy
of the Romish Clergy would totally exclude the present Members of the Church of
England, as being Married Men, from any Share or Hopes under a Romish
Government, whilst instead of Preferment or Interest, nothing but Degradation
and Beggary could attend them.

And for an unanswerable Dispurity between Henry the Eighth's Influence toward
the present Protestant Religion, and a Popish Successour's toward Popery. The
Protestant Religion with an inviting Face was in a State of Innocence,
untainted by any of its Corrupted Professors with any thing like Parisian
Massacres, Irish Rebellions, or Gunpowder Treasons; enough of themselves alone
to open that uncloseable Chasme, that never to be cemented Breach between
Englishmen and Popery; that Popery could not now gain three Proselites to a
hundred gained in Henry the Eighth's Time to the Protestant Religion.

But here I cannot but take notice of one Gross Mistake, that is commonly
received for Truth, Viz. That Henry the Eighth hectored his Parliaments to what
he listed. Which is oftentimes made use of as an Argument, that a Popish
Successor, with the same Courage may do the like with his; when on the
contrary, they acted only by their own Inclinations; and when any thing was
proposed by the King that went against the Grain; not all his Menaces could
force them to a Submission. For Example, when a Bill had past the House of
Lords for regulating a common Practice then in England, of defrauding the King
and several of the Lords of their Advantages made by Wards, Marriages, and
Primier Seisin, by Men's making such Settlements of their Estates by their last
Wills, and other Deeds to that purpose. Yet notwithstanding the utmost pressure
both of the King and Lords for redressing that Abuse, the Commons rejected the
Bill [Ref. page 116.] And as to the Reformation, some part of it was of their
own seeking. For Example, in his 22 d. Year, the Commons complained to the King
of the grievous and intolerable Severity of the Ecclesiastics, for calling Men
before them ex Officio, and laying Articles to their Charge without any
Accuser, and then admitting no Purgation, but causing the Party accused either
to abjure or burn. Reform. Page 116. And indeed in all the Reformation they
rather drew with him, than were driven by him.

And to show the vast Difference betwixt the Operation of the Prince, either by
Edward or Mary toward the Change of the Religion, and the working of a Change
now.

In the first place, besides the daily Converts made to the Protestant Religion
in Edward's Reign, which added Strength and Vigor to the Reformation wrought
by that Prince, as the State of Religion then stood the Popish and Protestant
Party were grown in a manner to be an Equal Division of the Nation, and it is
not to be wondered, that where the Weight's even, the Sovereign Power added to
the Balance, could turn the Scale; as both in his and his Sister's Reign.
Either Party having an Easy Game to play, whilst the Respective Monarch might
with small Difficulty turn up his own Religion Trump, when he had half the
Cards in his hands.

Besides, the Law had then so weakly provided for the true Settlement of either
Religion, that the greatest part of the Ecclesiastic Changes then, lay almost
wholly in the pleasure of the Prince: For after the Parliament had fully
invested Henry the Eighth with the Supremacy, they empowered him as Head of the
Church, to dispose of all Episcopal Sees by Letters Patents during pleasure.
(Abrid. Ref. Book 2. page 4.) and the Bishops by the same Authority had the
like Jurisdiction over the Inferior Clergy.

This unbounded Latitude of the Supremacy continuing through both the next
Reigns, a great part of the Changes was owing wholly to this Prerogative;
whilst King Edward made choice of a Clergy of his own Persuasion* and in like
manner Queen Mary placed or displaced her Bishops, and removed all the
Inferior Clergy ad Libitum, turning out whom she pleased, without any Form of
Process, or special Matter objected against them. All which ( Abridg. B. 2.
page 249.) was done by virtue of the Queens being Head of the Church; which
though she condemned as a sinful and sacraledgious Power, yet she now employed
it against those Bishops, whose Sees were quickly filled with Men for her
Purpose.

So that nothing could make a greater Turn of Church Affairs in the Kingdom in
those Days, when under such a Total Alteration of the Clergy, and all ready at
hand to step into their Seats, the whole Interest of the Adverse Religion
through the forementioned Equality of Parties could not but be extremely
shaken, and the Prevalence in Parliament be highly moved by no other Spring.
Besides, the Act De Hereticis comburendis was then unabolish't, and as the
Determination of Heresy lay in the Breast of the Clergy, here was an easy leap
into all the foregoing Severities of Rome even by the Law it self. Insomuch
that either of the Religions could not properly be called by Law Established,
whilst our Pastors and our Fold were in a manner at the Will of the Sovereign,
and there wanted but little more than the Royal Breath to drive us to the Right
or the Left, the Sheep or the Goats.

But all this is so prodigiously remote from the present State of England, and
the Religion now Establisb't, that Light and Darkness can be scarce more
dissonant. For besides the infinite Disproportion of the Popish Numbers in
Queen Mary's Reign, to Ours, enough of it self to silence all Dispute; a popish
Successors Removal of the present Protestant Clergy, and the Introduction of
Priests and Jesuits in their Room, as Head of the Church, is no more in his
Prerogative than the Government of Transylvania: The present Bishops and Clergy
holding for Life, and only to be displaced or silenced upon Crimes or
Insufficiencies adjudged or condemned by the Protestant Censure and Sentence.
And all the popish Clergy so incapable of their Places, that they are Aliens to
the Nation, under an attaint of Treason upon the very Assumption of their
Sacerdotal Orders; and so shut out from our Church-Ministry by Parliamentary
Oaths, Tests, and Abjurations, that nothing but the most Diabolical Papal
Dispensation, and a Conscience even Brimstone Proof could introduce them, were
there really Room for their Admission.

But alas! considering in what Equilibrium Religion then hung, whatever
Concurrence the Prince could then obtain from his People in Parliament in
favor of his own Persuasion: The Genius of England is now quite another thing.
All our Parliaments for almost a hundred years last past, have been so far from
granting even the least Concession to the Crown in favor of popery, that on
the contrary, all their Study, Votings, Labors, and Endeavors even to a
Nemine Contradicen^e, have been levelled at the very Root of it; so far from
countenancing of it, that the very sound of it has made them fly out into the
most rapid Torrent of Contradiction even beyond the Duty of Subjects, and
instead of Complimenting either Pope or Popery, they have tied up their very
Hands even from the best of Protestant Crowned Heads, and in their highest
Extremities denied them their most reasonable Demands in the most pressing
Necessities of the Crown, and all for the Apprehension of popish Designs, and
for keeping the least String of their Purses from popish Fingers.

I need not instance what Load of Miseries attended the late Royal Martyr from
this Fatal Original. Neither do I urge this in Relation to those detestable
Regicides, the corrupted Limbs of that Exetrable Senate, that under the Vizor
of Religion, were plotting the most Infernal of Mischiefs; and so from the
false Alarm of popery, denied their Sovereign All Things only to make him
Nothing. No, as All Men are not Monsters, and even in that Accursed Parliament
there were some honest Men; yet those very honest Men, those that by the
universal Delusion were enchanted into False Fears, and so designed nothing but
Truly the Prevention of popery, were yet under that Terror, so Jealous of
their Prince, so Deaf to his Interest, and so inexorable even to his most
Crying Wants, and all for battring these fancied Ayry Castles, that in the
vehemence of their Zeal they contributed to the very Designs of his Murderers;
and how ignorantly soever, heaped together the very Coals to the universal
Conflagration; so far too, that they had only Time to detect the Infernal
Imposture, and deplore the dire Effects of their miserable Mistake too late.

Besides, to come a little nearer home, What dismal Consequences were the late
Malignant Conjunction of Fears and Iealousies in the same Fiery Trigon
producing again? What Demigods and Nation-Saviours did the whole Vox populi,
nay, the very sensible Men of the Nation make of those very Varlets, which now
their Opened Eyes and wakened Senses (I appeal to their own Consciences) tell
them are those flagitious, unparalled Villains, that would shame a Gibbet.

And yet the very Loyallest of all our late Members of Parliament, for they
were not all Shaftsburys nor all Sidneys; neither such that were for
Associating to Kill-Kings, to keep out Popes, nor answering of Filmers out of
Buchanan's and Miltons, nor seating the Good Old Cause at the Right Hand of
GOD. Not those that made popery the pretense alone to manage their own Hellish
Republic Machinations. But only those that (alas, and well a day!) had been
Beuk-Blawd a little out of their right Wits by the aforesaid Nation-Saviours,
and so were for combating of Popery, possibly for the Real Preservation of the
King and Kingdom. Yet the very Loyallest of these Men, I say, were wrapped up to
that height of perverseness, that to use the gentlest Terms I can find, they
thought they could never do little enough even for that very King attested by
their own unanimous reiterated Acknowledgments to be the very Isthinus that
kept POPERY from Surrounding Us; and on whose Only Thread of Life the whole
FATE of the Protestant Religion depended.

I shall not trouble my self with the Repeating the Diversity of Statutes
recited in the Character to instance the various Bandying of the Succession of
the Crown in Henry the Eighth's Reign, designed there as an Argument of Justice
for a Parliamentary Bill of Exclusion against a Popish Heir. For whatever
different Settlements of the Descent of the Crown that King and his Parliaments
were pleased to make, occasioned by the Intricacy of his Daughter's Titles,
grounded upon that long controverted Point, the Divorce of Queen Katherine, the
Mother of Queen Mary; and therefore not at all enacted as an Exclusion, but a
Confirmation of the Right Heir.

However, as far soever as a Parlimentary Power may pretend to extend in that
Case, all these Statutes make nothing to the purpose for Justification of an
Exclusion for matter of Religion.

For had those Parliamentary Proceedings been a Warrant or Precedent for any
such Exclusion, never was a more urgent Necessity than in Queen Mary's Reign,
of laying hold of such a Pretension. For considering the State of Religion in
her Time, when looking back to the two last King's Reigns, so formidable a
Progress had the Protestant Persuasion made, and the Inclinations of the People
leaned so much toward the Reformation, that the very Change of the Prince was
enough to turn the whole Balance; and therefore as all her popish Measures
were under a manifest prospect of being broken to pieces under a Protestant
Successor, and that Successor was notoriously foreseen in her Sister
Elizabeth, so much that Bishop Gardener (speaking of her) could say, That their
burning of Heretics was only vainly cutting off the Branches, whilst the Root
was still alive. Yet nevertheless it was so far from entering the Breasts of a
popish Sovereign and a popish Parliament to Exclude a Protestant Heir, that Dr.
Burnet in his Abridgment of the Reformation, Book the 3 d. page 325. says as
follows. A Bill was brought into Parliament, confirming the Letters Patents
which the Queen had granted, or might grant. This related to the Foundations of
Religious Houses; but only Coxly opposed this, and insinuated, that perhaps the
Queen intended to dispose of the Crown in prejudice of the Right Heir; at which
the House expressed so great a Dislike, as showed they would not have it so
much as imagined, that Lady Elizabeth could be excluded. He had a public
Reprimand given him for insinuating a Thing so much to the Queen's Dishonor.

Now notwithstanding here was a Queen so Zealous for Popery, and a Parliament
so officiously forward in Establishing of it, that they gave their Queen
possibly one of the most Ample Royalties that ever Parliament lodged in the
Prerogative, Viz. the confirming indefinitely all Letters Patents that the
Sovereign either Had, or Might grant; yet still this very Parliament utterly
abhorred even the Imagination of so infamous a Projection as an Exclusion Bill:
nor did the Bigoted Queen her self ever debase her self so low as to make use
of this Act of Parliament, or any part of her Prerogative for so Dishonorable
a purpose as the Prejudice of her Sister's Succession.

Now to compare Cases. If both a popish Prince and a popish Parliament detested
the Exclusion of a protestant Successor, though in so threatening a Juncture,
and so truly an Impending Danger to their Religion from that Succession, and
that too, when her Parliaments had declared the Divorce of Queen Katherine,
Queen Mary's Mother, unlawful; and consequently might have foreclosed the Right
of Elizabeth under the most specious Pretext even of Illegitimacy it self. On
the contrary, why should a protestant Monarch and a protestant Parliament now
Strain Honor and Consciences beyond the very Papists themselves, and exclude a
Royal Heir upon Presumption of being a papist, though with never so undoubted a
Right, and above all pretensions of Scruple or Dispute, and that under little,
or indeed no Danger to our Religion at all, a Religion not only so invincibly
Fortifyed with so many strong Bulwarks of Law, but likewise by that most
Impregnable of all Bulwarks, Defendit Numerus junctaeque umbone Phalanges.

The almost Totality of the Nation (comparatively speaking) against so feeble
and scattered a Remnant of Papists, and so universal an Odium of popery.

I shall not think it worth my while to make much Reply to that part of the
Character that treats upon Passive Obedience, and so boldly justifies the
taking up Arms againg an Oppressing Monarch. It Is enough that Great Point of
our Christianity has been the Subject of Nobler Pens, and therefore the
discussing it is a province above me. I shall only give the Reader this Quaery.
If the Great Lord of our Salvation could enjoin the turning of the other Cheek
even to Injuries received from our Equals; I would fain know what part of
Christianity can allow Resistance to God's Anointed? Let it suffice, that all
that part of the Character was written by the Direction of the Right Honorable
the Earl of Shaftsbury, after an Amendment made in the Character by the Advice
of that LOYAL Peer, bidding me speak more favorably of Rebellion.

Thus have you heard, not only all that the popish Character, but likewise the
popular Fears have urged for the pretended Danger of Popery and
Arbitrary-power. And I doubt not but all understanding and unbyassed Readers
will be fully satisfied of the unreasonableness of that Epidemical Jealousy
that has so long infected the Head and Brains of the Short-sighted populate
through those Scarecrows. I shall only now give the Reader his last Farewell of
the popish Character in the Concluding Paragraph of that Pamphlet.

After that whole Libel by a Tautological sort of Rhetoric, a great many
accumulated Words, but especially gay Allegories, has over and over again drawn
a popish Successor only in so many several Disguises; as one while making him
a Nero with his Harp, and then his three Kingdoms are in one General
Conflagration: another time an Alexander in his Cups, and then every honest
protestant Clytus that does but thwart his drunken Frenzy, is immediately his
Frenzy's Sacrifice. Another while he is in the Prophet Elisha's Dream, and then
the poor Protestants are the very Birds and four legged Beasts that bo^ at his
Mouth, with this Label over their Heads, Rise, Slay, and Eat. In another place,
instead of Pater patriae, he is nothing but a downright Lupus Agri, and then we
are only Sheep and Lambs. Cum multis aliis, etc. In short, having danced him
through all the Elements, and transformed him into more several Bestial Shapes
than ever Jupiter Whored in; after the Character has all the way brought us to
universal and inevitable Destruction, and Enslaved both Us and our posterity,
till the Admission of a popish Successor at last is no less than a Plot of GOD
himself to scourge a Nation, and make three Kingdoms miserable, a Design formed
by the Irresistible Decree of Heaven, either for our Sins, or what Cause, to
its self best known, to lay a Groaning Country in Ruin, etc. After all this,
no sooner is this Ruinous Doom pronounced, but the Character immediately
proceeds in haec verba.

Upon the Supposition of a popish Heir we must not conclude, that it is only the
poor distressed Protestants that shall feel the Smart, and stand the Mark of
Slavery and Martyrdom. A popish King has that pestilential Influence, that he
blasts even the very party he smiles upon, and entayls a Curse upon his dearest
Darling Favorites. As for Instance, if after this King's Reign, steps up a
protestant Prince (for surely the whole Royal Blood must not all follow his
Apostasy, and degenerate in secula seculorum) then what becomes of the popish
Interest in the next Generation; and all that flourishing Party, whom either
the Witchcrafts of Rome, or the Contagion of Regis ad Exemplum has nursed up for
Ruin. It Is the greatest Toil of the next King's Reign, to make those severer
Statutes for future Ages, to suppress the Insolences and Follyes of the past;
whilst those very Idols that were Saints but yesterday, are now crush't and
dash't to pieces.

Now in the Name of Blunder Egregious, here is Richard and Baxter to the highest
of Perfection. For here is the whole fo^egoing Design of the Character quash't
at this one last blow. For if really all the popish and Arbitrary Movements and
Acquisitions of a Romish Prince (as the Character it self affirms, which indeed
by Chance is the very Oracle of the Pamphlet) will be totally crushed and
destroyed under the next protestant Sovereign: and all his popish Tools and
Partisans, nay, the whole Romish Cause it self given up to the protestant
Justice and Revenge, that shall crush them to pieces; so that in perfect
Contradiction, instead of inextricable Slavery, universal protestant Ruin, and
a total Extirpation of Heresy, prognosticated all along in the Character;
here is at most but a Temporary Flourishing of Popery, and so far from a real
protestant Suppression, either by Persecution or Massacres, or the Devil knows
what, that we shall be strong enough to rise up under the next protestant Heir,
and to pluck up and demolish even Root and Foundation all the preceding
Batteries and Machinations against our Religion and Liberties, whilst the True
Ruin lies in fine, not on the protestant, but popish Side. If so, I say, as
the Character has unluckily started this undeniable Truth, certainly we lie
under no danger of a popish Successors ever attempting that irregular popish
Achievement, and setting up that Short-lived Arbitrary popish Dagon, which, as
has been proved before, and is even confessed here, will be of so Calamitous a
Consequence to the Interest and Safety even of his whole Party and Religion.

You see, Reader, what Incoherence, Absurdities, Contradictions, and indeed
Impossibilities the popish Character is fraught with, and what notorious Stuff
that is that Revenge and Malice obtrudes upon Mankind, where popery is the
Theme.

But truly it is to be considered, that that Pamphlet was written and
published, not for the Instruction of the Seven Wise Men, but of the seven
thousand Ill-natured Knaves, and the seventy thousand credulous, unreasoning
Fools of that Age, (the REPRESENTATIVE Patron, to whom that Libel was
Dedicated, not excepted from the Number) that would have swallowed every
Syllable of it, had it been ten times more lewdly ridiculous than 'twas.

Now, as not only the Character, but the unpondered and groundless
Apprehensions of Men, have so dreadfully predicted such a terrible bloody
Revolution under a popish Successor, without one Jota of proving or examining
how that wondrous Change is possible to come to pass; that the Reader may not
be surprised at that weak sort of arguing in the one, and that headlong
Credulity in the other, it is remarkable, that not one Pen that ever wrote upon
Popery and Arbitrary-Power, ever scribbled otherwise. For as the HOW and WHICH
WAY they can be introduced into England, are not in posse, those Essential
Circumstances are always slubber'd over, and nothing but a Huddle and Jingle of
general Notions of Fire and Faggot Assassinations and Massacres, Popes and
Devils, etc. And a Declamatory Discant upon those Tragical Heads, are ever the
whole Contents of the Chapter; and whilst the peoples Fears are set a tingling
by this sort of Din and Gibberish, they are babled out of their Senses, and
transported into Frenzy it self without looking farther, or searching deeper
for the Grounds of their Fears. For Example, let us trace up the first Alarm
of Popery and Arbitrary-power even to the Fountain Head. In all the venomous
Libels in the late blessed Martyr's Reign (for there were popish Character
Writers in those Days too, though in other Names) in all the Licentiousness of
that Villainous Age, and the highest Encouragement of Rebellious Senates, there
were neither those Pens nor Tongues within the Parliament House, or without it,
that could ever go further than to a bare general (...) and Outcry of Popery
and Arbitrary Power; for in all the hideous Roarings against popish (...) (as
it is not the Councellers, but the Council put in Execution that can hurt us)
was there (...) Man of them all that did, or indeed, pretended to particularize
those popish Counsels, or form the least Draught of any Dangerous popish
Machinations whatever under the least probability of shaking our Laws,
Liberties, or Religion.

It Is true, there were strange and wondrous popish Incendiaries represented at
work, but about doing of what, The Devil a word they inform us. Not all the
Republic Rhetoric, nor all the Eloquence even of counterfeit Fears and
Jealousies could lay down one tolerable Demonstration of the fatal Compositions
of those popish Fireballs those Incendiaries were to use, or the
Conbustableness of what they were to set on Fire. Nay, those very Devils that
had Impudence enough, not only to murder the best of Kings, but to bring him to
a Scaffold; with a solemn Pageantry of Justice, were nevertheless so far from
the Confidence of pretending the popish Strength or Numbers in England to have
the least Shadow of Ability to erect their Romish Altars, and subvert the
Protestant Religion; that to carry on the popular Fears by that Forged Sham of
Popery, and give Body and Bulk to the Gorgon, they were forced to help out one
damned Imposture by a Greater, and bring in the very Church of England for
Popish and Antichristian to join in the Plot. Nor were our later true
Protestant Rome-dreaders much short of the same Artifice, to crutch up the same
Cripple.

Nay, for want of any Substantial Pretext of the Introduction of any of the
Real Fundamental Superstitions of Rome, they were put to the wretched Shift of
making the harmless Book of Sports, licensed by Bishop Laud, and an
after-Service Game at Coyts or Stool-Ball, no less than all over Rome and
Antichrist; yes, and to push the Jest a little farther, the old Kings
tolerating half a score of Priests (in Indulgence to his Queen) to wear the
Habit of their Order, though in Reality an Object more for the Hooting of Boys,
than the Converting of Men, was screwed up to no less than a Plot upon the
whole Reformation.

Now, as the Characterizing of such a Tyrannick popish Successor in England,
is but Mounting that Chimerical Jehu in the Chariot where neither his Wheels
can move him, nor the Ground will bear him; and all the Pretensions of Fears
from Popery are only Suppositions and Delusive; nay, and considering that those
most violent Asserters of Romish Dangers in that very Age, when they had this
Advantage to help out, Viz. To allege the Old King was a Papist in Disguise;
by which Villainous Supposition they had ten times a fairer Field for the
pretended Introduction of Popery than can be under a Visible popish Prince;
could nevertheless urge so little to the purpose, and so weakly support the
Cause of such Fears: The Contradictions, Noise, Rumble and Nonsense in the
Character on the worse side of the Hedge, are a little more Excusable.

Having (I may with Confidence say) fully answered and confuted all Appearances
or Suppositions of Danger from a Popish Successor; yet as the Minds of some
People are so strangely possessed and infatuated with those Brainsick Fancies,
and Visionary Specters of Popery and Slavery, that scarce the most apparent
Truth, the most substantial Reason, not Oracles, nay, not Angels from Heaven
could Cure or Dispel. I shall therefore go one step further, and to dissipate
all Storms or Clouds whatever from Romewards impending, plainly and absolutely
convince them, that whatever Scruples may yet remain unsatisfyed; at this
present day there is not the least Prospect or Idea of any such Threatening
Successor in the present Royal Line of England.

For though that Illustrious Prince, whom the Malice of Antimonarchal and
Associating Traitors, and the Insolence of a Pack of Seditious and Confederate
Commons, like the old Sons of Earth, have levelled their spightful, though
feeble Vengeance at; though that great Injured Prince, I say, through the false
Mirror of those Anarchical Boutefeus has been villaniously rendered almost the
only Object of the greatest part of the popular Jealousies, as the intended
Underminer of our Laws, Religion and Liberties; I shall unanswerably
demonstrate the utter Impossibility of that glorious Prince's ever being that
Man, or debasing himself so much, as to entertain the least Thought that way,
be his Religion what ever it will.

For supposing he were really a Convert to the Romish Persuasion, what Pillar
is that Prince likely to make to the Romish Cause? For if he be that Convert,
either the Pope believes a popish Heir of England Capable of setting up the
Romish Religion, or not capable of doing it.

If capable, as that is the present Point; Then undoubtedly (which is but a
reasonable Conclusion) he has left no Pains nor Industry unmanaged to Advance
or Advantage the Popish Interest by such a Convert as an Heir of the English
Crown. And if so, the only Policy, or indeed the only possible Means of
favoring the least Romish Hopes whatever, had been to have used the utmost
Papal Authority for enjoining and persuading him, not only to have kept himself
wholly undiscoverd, but likewise wholly unsuspected to the Kingdom by any
Abscenting from our Communion, or any other Imaginary Symtome of such a
Conversion.

For as all the greatest of Inconveniences and Misfortunes have attended the
whole popish Party upon the mere Supposition of such a Conversion; and that
only founded on the forementioned Occasion of Suspicion. Witness the removing
all Papists whatever from all Offices of Trust in the whole Kingdom, from all
Seats, either in State Administration or Parliaments by the present Protestant
TEST, wholly created upon that Suspicion; by Force of which there is not the
least Admission of a Papist into any Place of Power in the Government, except
by taking of the Protestant Sacrament, and entering into a Solemn Oath against
the popish Religion, and subscribing to a Recorded Abjuration, even of the
greatest and most Essential Articles of their Faith as Superstitious and
Idolatrous; and so by the most impudent premeditated Perjury, and setting the
notorious Brand upon themselves of that sordid and scandalous Renuntiation of
their very Religion, which the poorest Soul'd Pagan that ever worshiped but
Garlic and Onions would blush at.

Besides all this weeding out of the popish Party from all Authority and Power,
being no small Blow to their Interest under so weak a Number of that Persuasion
in England. There is not any one Calamity that for these seven last years has
befallen the whole popish Party, that is not truly owing almost wholly to this
Suspicion.

And therefore as all the Ill Consequences (or worse) attending them, are
really no more than the Pope and all his Counselors could in common Reason
expect from a Nation so extravagantly jealous of Popery? whilst woeful
Experience might have remembranced him bow dangerous and destructive even a
less Shadow of popish Inclinations had been; nothing was more indispensable (I
mean for the popish Interest) in a popish Heir, than all means of avoiding such
Suspicion; nay, possibly even for his own secure Access to the Throne.

It Is true, some ridiculous People have foolishly objected, That the Deserting
of our Communion was for the Advantage of their Cause; it being as it were
setting up the Standard of Popery to call all Hearts and Hands together;
whereas otherwise the Romanists had been kept in Ignorance of the Champion God
had raised for their Deliverance; and thereby might have neglected the glorious
Opportunity that offered it self. -- Now in the Name of Dullness, if any such
Deliverance were imaginable, or any Succor to the Romish Cause whatever,
either sooner or later could be expected from such a Convert; or lastly, if the
Conscience or unsullyed Glory of that Heroic Prince were possible to be
wrought upon to stoop to so ignoble a Design, as any unwarrantable popish
Assistance; Why must the Papists be kept in Ignorance of his being one of them,
if he were so; without some kind of public Declaration: when it is notoriously
known to all the sensible part of Mankind, what Advantages of Intelligence and
Correspondence the Papists have above all Religions in the World; when their
Jesuits are by the very Duty of their Order, the greatest Spies upon
Christendom, whilst the privatest Affairs and Secrets of Families, Courts and
Kingdoms through all Europe, from hand to hand, and from Superior to Superior
of them, are conveyed to the Pope himself.

So that take the whole Matter together with this Advantage of Communication
even under Confession it self on the one side, and the forementioned Dangers
from a National Jealousy on the other, as I said before; whatever Discovery
might have been requisite to their own Party, the highest Policy of Rome had
been to have concealed the very Suspicion of it from the Protestants; more
especially, if they had had any such Thing as a King-killing Plot in hand, or
the least part of the Salamanca Conspiracy upon the Anvil. For then they might
have made use of Ruffians, or Screwed Gunners, and as Dugdale swears, have laid
the King's Murder upon the Presbyterians, or any other of the scattered
Churches with ten times more ease; and have hastened the Mounting a popish
Successor with more Facility into the Royal Seat.

And therefore as nothing can be a plainer or greater Ob^tacle to all popish
Designs whatever than this Conduct in the present Heir of England, if he be a
Romanist, and they had an Expectation of any considerable Advantage to their
Religion from his being one: undoubtedly there has been no Oratory wanting to
induce him to so necessary and so Venial a Disguise, as being the most
important Prop of their Cause. But maugre all the Necessity of such a
Compliance, and all the Romish Interest depending thereupon, notwithstanding
the papal Power of a Dispensation in that Case, and all the Arts that may have
been used to that purpose; nothing is more visible than his Indisposition and
Aversion to so dishonorable a Condiscension as playing the Hypocrite, how
dispensable soever in that Church, or how advantageous soever to his own
Circumstances.

Now I appeal to all Mankind what least Apparition of popish Danger, or what
humane possibility of that very Princes ever being that so much dreaded Romish
Instrument for Arbitrary popish Tyranny, through the most execrable Violation
of the most sacred Royal Trust, the most flagitious of Perjury in the Breach of
a solemn Coronation Oath, to trample our Laws, Religions, and Liberties to
pieces; that has already proved himself so incapable of dispensing but with one
poor piece of Hypocrisy, though against the highest Interest of Rome, though to
the wakening of all the sleeping Statutes against Recusancy, tho to the raising
of Tests, Oaths, and Sacraments; and thereby not only excluding the Sons of
Rome from all Honors, Trusts, and Employments, but likewise exposing them to
the Daily Severities and Persecution of the Laws, nay, and very near to the
shaking of his own Hereditary Succession to an Imperial Crown.

Now (I say) if this very Prince (upon Presumption of that Church) be
nevertheless a Person of those rigid Principles of Honor and Conscience, that
he durst not so much as digest so inconsiderable a piece of Dissimulation,
though for the highest and most Important Service to himself and his whole
Church; how much less shall he ever condescend to the Ignominious and Indelible
Brand of downright Perjured, and launch into all the Barbarities and Outrages
of Tyrant and Murderer, and all this too, as has been plainly proved before)
with very little, or none; at least, no reasonable Hopes of doing himself or
his Church any Service at all.

Besides, as it is utterly impossible either for Pope or Papists, even with the
most Romantic Assurance and Confidence of Success ever to hope for a National
Conversion, or a Romish Establishment in One Age; insomuch that it is not a
single Popish Successor, but a Line of Popish Successors that can be so much
as supposed capable of going through with so difficult an Undertaking; what
least Shadow of any such Intention can we imagine from this Royal Heir, when he
has not only bred up his next Immediate Heirs, his Children in the Protestant
Religion, but likewise lodged them in the Bosoms of those very Protestant
Princes, as far from the least Inclination toward Rome, or a Look that way, as
the whole Choice of Christendom could have picked out. So that upon the Issue of
the whole Matter, how contrary to common sense is it, to think that very Prince
either is, or can be so stupidly infatuated as ever to Embark in so hazardous
an Achievement, which (were he Crowned to morrow) with his years upon his
back, he begins but with the latter part of a Life, and which the length of a
Queen Elizabeth's Reign could never finish. And all this so preposterously too,
as to be for building that Romish Interest with one hand, which he has so
palpably destroyed with the other.

Considering then, (as has been fully proved before) that Popery in the present
State of England, is something like the vulgar Tradition of the Basilisk, it
must either look Us safely Dead, or we shall look that so; For there is no
Medium in the Case, between Conquering or Dying: who in his right wits can
imagine this Prince will ever Begin what he himself before hand has taken Care
shall never be Finished. And if not finished, will be but put into a ten times
worse Condition than if never begun. And therefore not only his mere Pride will
be our Security, it being impossible that any thing that has one spark of Glory
will ever engage in a Cause under such Certainty of a Defeat: but likewise
supposing even the utmost Suggestions true; under such an Impossibility of
Crowning the Work, the Greater the Zeal, the more Inoffensive the Zealot: since
all Irregular exorbitant Ferments of Popery will but hatch Scorpions and warm
Stings for its own Destruction: the greater the Tenderness for his own Party
and Religion, the greater the Security of ours.

Moreover the Character positively lays down this Maxim. That the Papists doom
all out of their own Church to certain Damnation: and on that Foundation all
their Bloody Principles are built, as thinking no Cruelty too severe, nor any
Tyranny too sanguinary; but on the contrary, the most barbarous Gospel
Propagation the greatest Obligation of their Religion. And therefore it tells
you, A popish Successor will never believe he can do his Subjects an Injustice
in that very Thing in which he does God Service, or that he injures Us when he
does our Souls right. And that therefore all the threatened Miseries, Horrors
and Desol^^^o^s, etc. from the beginning to the end of the whole Character,
flow from no other Source.

Now if this be truly the Tenet of a Romanist, and all our horrible dangers
proceed from that Tenet, either our present Royal Heir must be no Romanist at
all; or if he be one, however he absolutely dissents from Rome in ^a^
particular Main Principle. For if such were his Faith, and such his Principles,
why has he so wilfully and so egregiously contributed to his own Children's
Damnation, not only in their severest Protestant Education, but likewise in
that additional Strengthening that Damnable Persuasion by such Fatal Marriages,
whereby he has not only endangered their living and dying in that Erroneous
Faith, but likewise secured the Interest and Establishment of that protestant
Religion in likelihood by Them and their Heirs to the End of the World; and
consequently contributed to the Damnation of succeeding Heretical Generations
in Secula seculorum.

I have only one thing more to add for the Safety of our Religion. There is not
in the World that Prince in his Nature more grateful for Services and
Obligations received, or a firmer and more unalterable Friend than himself* And
as the Church, and only the Church of England has truly and vigorously asserted
the Justice and Duty of maintaining his unforfeitable Succession and Inviolable
Birthright, and has stood ALONE in the Gap against all the whole Crowd of his
Enemies; we may confidently assure ourselves, that if ever it is Heaven's
pleasure he should be our Sovereign, that all such kind and signally good
Offices will never be ungratefully requited by the most Generous of Mankind.

I shall only conclude; under this manifest Security of our Religion and
Government on all hands, They that shall have Impudence enough (no Person nor
Quality, in any Station whatever excepted) to persecute that Prince under the
Pretense of Fear, are undoubtedly planting the same Batteries against three
Kingdoms that were raised in his Royal Father's Reign; and a Bill of Exclusion
must truly carry the Design of all the old Remonstrances, Ordinances,
Covenants, etc. with the Soul of a Cook, a Bradshaw, and a Cromwell at the
Bottom on it: and all the Senate House Church-proppers under that Vizor, are
only Establishing Religion with the same Brand in their Hearts that Cain built
Citys. And I doubt not but the Wisdom and Loyalty of Succeeding Times will
regain Sense enough to countermine all such Villainy, and redeem the yet
unrecovered Honor of England by shaming such a Second Imposture from the World.

And now to draw to a Period, I have only this Warning to give to the great
Sticklers against Popery and Arbitrary Power, to have a Care that they
Themselves do not bring in what they so Zealously endeavor to keep Out. For if
Popery and Arbitrary Power shall ever get Footing in England by a Popish
Successor, it can only be then, when by Unlawful Exclusions, and Rebellious
Associations against him, they shall put him upon cutting his way to his Throne
by his Sword, and consequently give him the Occasion, both by Foreign and
Domestic Assistance, of gaining that Right by Conquest which is denied him to
assume in Peace; and thereby enable him by the Power and Right of a Conqueror,
to Abolish what Laws, and Establish what Government he pleases, without either
straining his Honor or Prerogative. And so shall the Irregular Designs of
defending our Religion and Liberties (...) of destroying them. And that this
will be the undoubted Success of such unlawful and traiterous Opposition of the
Royal Heir, let all such Turbulent Spirits (for their Comfort) consider that
the World is much mended of late, and whatever Prosperity attended their
victorious Father's Rebellious Arms, the old Cheat will not pass altogether so
glibly a second time; and the deposing of Monarchs will be, in all reasonable
prospect, a tougher piece of Work in this Age than the last. For Men's Eyes and
Understandings begin to be more Enlightened, and the Odds (thanks be to Heaven)
is on the Loyal Side.

However as a Caution to those unwary People that may be seduced by the false
Suggestions of Republican Conspirators under the plausible Pretense of Liberty
and Religion, to engage in so impious a Cause. Besides the Breach of their
Christianity and Hazard of their Souls in so wicked an Undertaking; they are
linked into that very Rebellion in which they are certain of making themselves
Miserable, not only if they are Subdued, but likewise if they Conquer too. For
as I said before, there is not only a certain Slavery attends their Defeat, the
Impudence of such flagitious Treason being it self alone a sufficient
Provocation of Tyranny, enough to exasperate even the sorenest and best
Tempered Princes into a Spirit of Cruelty, and consequently, to make him impose
that Yoke upon their Rebellious Necks which they have but too justly deserved;
and so put him upon Acting what otherwise had never entered so much as into his
Soul to Think: So on the other side, supposing their Strength and Fortune would
prove so great and successful as should answer their most Flattering Hopes, and
that it would be possible for them to gain that Absolute Triumph over the Royal
Cause, as to reach, not only the Crown, but also the Head that wears it: yet
all this while what have they done, but through all the gaping Wounds of their
poor Bleeding Country, through all the Horror and Miseries of a barbarous
Civil War, deposed and butchered One Imaginary Tyrant to set up possibly five
hundred Real Ones.

For as all Victorious Rebellion ends in Anarchy and Confusion, and all the
Conquests, Acquisitions, and Trophies devolve into the Possession of the
greatest Ringleaders of the Conspiracy, whilst the popular hands, the working
Tools that set them up, have little or no share in the Booty. What have the
deluded Wretches gained by the Change, but only avoided a lesser Scylla, to run
into a greater Charybdis, enslaved themselves and their Posterity to a Herd of
Tyrants, to escape a single one. A worse Subjection than that they feared and
fought against. A Republican Tyranny being so much more intolerable than a
Monarchical One can be, as this has but the Ambition of One man to satisfy,
and the other of Hundreds, whilst the particular Pride and Avarice of each
respective Dignifyed Rebel in Power, has so many separate sinister Interests
and Appetites to gratify, and thereby our Estates and Patrimonys continually
to be squeezed and drein'd not only for the Chargeable Support of Standing
Armies that must uphold this Anarchical Constitution, but likewise be exposed
to the insatiate Gorge of every State-Cormorant amongst them. A Tyranny so much
more unsupportable than that of a Crowned Head, as there are so many of them to
conspire and abet all the the greatest of Insolences and Injustice, and so many
to divide the shame of it. A Tyranny yet so much more execrable still as every
Low-born Villain amongst them dare stoop to all those dishonorable, abject,
and sordid Deeds, that IMPERIAL Blood and ROYAL Heirs would staggar at.

FINIS.

