Several Reasons for the Establishment of a Standing Army, and the Dissolving
the Militia.
1. BEcause the Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and the whole Militia,
that is to say, the Lords, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of England, are not fit
to be Trusted with their own Laws, Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and therefore
ought to have Guardians and Keepers assigned to them. 2. Because Mercenary
Soldiers, who Fight for Twelve Pence a Day, will Fight Better, as having More
to lose, than either the Nobility or Gentry. 3. Because there are no Irish
Papists in the Militia, who are certainly the Best Soldiers in the World, for
they have Slain Men, Women and Children, by Hundreds of Thousands at Once. 4.
Because the Dragooners have made more Converts, then all the Bishops and Clergy
of France. 5. The Parliament ought to Establish One Standing Army at the least,
because indeed there will be need of Two, That One of them may defend the
People from the Other. 6. Because it is Thousand pitties a brave Popish Army
should be a Riot. 7. Unless it be Established by Act of Parliament; the
Justices of Peace will be forced to suppress it in their own Defense; for they
will be loath to forfeit an Hundred Pounds, every Day they Rise, out of
Complement to a Popish Rout, 13 H. 4. c. 7. 2. H. 5. c. 8. 8. Because a Popish
Army is a Nullity. For all Papists are utterly Disabled (and punishable
besides) from bearing any Office in Camp, Troop, Band, or Company of Soldiers,
and are so far Disarmed by Law, that they cannot wear a Sword, so much as in
their Defense, without the Allowance of Four Justices of Peace of the County:
And then upon a March they will be perfectly Enchanted, for they are not able
to stir above Five Miles from their own Dwelling House. 3. Jac. 5. Sect.
8.27.28.29. 35. Eliz. 2.3. Jac. 5. Sect. 7. 9. Because Persons utterly Disabled
by Law are utterly Unauthorized; and therefore the void Commissions of Killing
and Slaying in the hands of Papists, can only enable them to Massacre and
Murder.

