SEVERAL QUERIES Relating to the present Proceedings in Parliament; More
especially recommended to the Consideration of the BISHOPS.
I. HOW the House of Commons can answer it to those People whom they Represent,
if now they have an Opportunity, they do not settle the Government upon such a
Foundation as will be likely, not only to preserve the Nation from Foreign
Enemies, but also from falling into the like unhappy Circumstances which it is
but just now escaped out of, and which in a great measure, have proceeded from
a want of a right Settlement of Public. Affairs at the Restoration of King
Charles the Second.

II. Whether this can be done without altering the Succession, sin^^ the Birth
of the Prince of Wales is not proved supposititious, ^^(though perhaps no Body
doubts but it is so)? And supposing it proved so, Whether it would not be more
feasible to make a President now, than to try the Experiment first, when the
next Right of Succession is claimed by the Infanta of Spain; or perhaps some
Prince her Heir, too strong to resist without the Assistance of the Prince of
Orange, especially if there happen to be such Divisions amongst Us as are at
this Time?

III. Whether it can be immagined to be worth the Prince of Orange's while to
leave Holland, where he is the chief Man, and become a Subject in England; nay,
and have such an uncertain Interest in his stay here, that if his Wives Life
chance to drop, perhaps he may be banished in a Years time, and not have a
Place, as things may happen, to put his Head in? For his Interest in Holland
must necessarily fall into other Hands; And no Body knows what fallings out may
happen betwixt Us and the Dutch, or what other Contingencies may happen that
may give cause of Disgust.

IV. Whether (considering the present State of Affairs) the Strength of the
King of France, and the Irish Rebellion, (to say nothing of the Effects which
the Entreaties, and subtle Insinuations of a Father must necessarily have upon
any one that is good natured) it be safe to trust the Administration of Affairs
to a Woman, though never so virtuous? And whether we shall be able to protect
our selves against all these formidable Enemies, and bring things to a due
Settlement, without the Assistance of the Prince of Orange, whose Foreign
Alliances are such as we can never hope to obtain if we confer the Crown upon
any other?

V. Whether it would be a greater real Kindness to the Princess of Orange to
make her sole Queen, after such a manner as she will be likely to be turned out
again; or to make her and her Husband joint King and Queen during their two
Lives? I say, her Husband, who is a Prince, not only able to defend her and her
Kingdom from all the Dangers that may happen, but also to take all the Trouble
which may occur in the Administration of Affairs off her Hands, so that she
will enjoy all the Pleasure of being Queen without any thing of Trouble: And we
may add to this, that if it had not been for him, she had never enjoyed the
Crown, nor the Nation their Freedom?

VI. Whether the Terms the Parliament shall make with one that can pretend no
Right to the Crown but what they give him, will not be more likely to be kept
by him, than by one that pretends a Title, and will be flattered up, both by
Lawyers and Divines, (I mean, the Scum of them) with Notions of a Right jure
Divino, and a Prerogative which cannot be parted with or abolished, though by
the King's Consent, or Act of Parliament?

VII. Whether the House of Commons, upon these Considerations, and diverse
others too long to mention, will not think it necessary that the Prince and
Princess of Orange be crowned King and Queen for their two Lives? and whether
it can be imagined that the Commons should so far betray their Country as to
recede from this Point (so necessary for its Preservation) notwithstanding all
the Disturbances which the Bishops shall make in the House of Lords, and though
they do not meet with the Concurrence of that House so soon as in reason might
be expected?

VIII. Whether the House of Lords will suffer themselves any longer to be
imposed upon by the Bishops in a thing that will be so injurious to the Nation,
as it will be not to comply with the House of Commons in this great Point;
which must necessarily put such a damp upon Trade, that it will certainly be
the Ruin of many hundreds of Families in the Nation whose dependence are upon
Handy-Craft-Trades, to say nothing of the Disadvantages which may accrue by
such a Delay to the poor Protestants in Ireland? and admitting they should,
whether the Circumstances of Affairs would not in a little time force them to a
compliance with the House of Commons?

IX. Whether the Prince of Orange will not show himself one of the unkindest
Men in the World if he does not stick by these People, till he feeth them
secured, that have ventured their Lives and Fortunes for Him and their Country
in confidence of his Protection? and whether he as Head of the Protestant
Religion, be not obliged to stand by the 48 Protestant Lords, and House of
Commons, that have served their Country so faithfully?

X. Whether it would not be Prudence in the Bishops (supposing their Designs be
good, as I would hope they are) to show their readiness to assist the Nobility
and Gentry in carrying on this great Work, whereby they might settle the Church
upon the surest Foundation, the Laws of God and of the Land, and continue
themselves in the Affections of the People?

XI. Whether all the Protestant Blood which shall be spilt in Ireland by reason
of these long Delays, will not be justly laid at the Bishops doors, if they
proceed after the same manner they have begun?

And lastly, To answer the great Objection, that we shall lose the Kingdom of
Scotland if we make the King elective for this Turn.

Whether the Scots can choose any body that will be more agreeable to their
Interests than the Prince of Orange? and supposing they can, Whether it be not
madness to imagine, since they have a different Parliament, different Laws, and
a different Original Contract (so that the King may commit a Forfeiture there,
when he has committed none here, or a Forfeiture here, when he has committed
none there) that they will not place the Crown upon him without any respect to
what is done here, whether we make it a Forfeiture, or only a bare Demise?

FINIS.
London, Printed in the Year, 1689.


