A NARRATIVE.

WRITTEN BY E. Settle.

Humano capiti cervicem pictor equinam
Jungere si velit, and varias inducere plumas
Undique collatis membris, ut turpiter atrum
Desinat in piscem, Mulier formosa superne,
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis, amici.
LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Thomas Graves for the Author. 1683.

To his Honored Friend Sir Thomas Tailor Baronett.
SIR,
YOUR promised Acceptance has lent me Confidence to make you this Present, yet
whatever Pretensions your own Goodness has given me for this Presumption, or
the Present it self might otherwise obtain, the unhallowed hand that offers it,
is enough to make it undeserve the Glory it claims. However I lay hold of your
generous Condescension, and fix your Name before this Piece, not only as a
Patron; but a Precedent to all Loyal Gentlemen to forgive my past faults as you
have done.

It Is with this Design I shelter my self under the Protection of a Person of
such Eminent Worth, and so high in the List of Honor: For no man has a Soul
more entirely devoted, and a Loyalty more firm to his Prince; and to heighten
the Blessing, no man a Courage more daring to signalize that Loyalty, when ever
his Prince shall call for it. But, Sir, as your Country may be proud of you in
either Capacity, may it never want you in the last. May our Caesar Reign like a
second Augustus; have his Janus Temple ever shut, and his Peace for ever
Flourishing. And that he may not only have the constant Prayers, and hearty
Endeavors of all good Subjects to give him it: I hope he has some Prognostics
even from Heaven it self to assure it him. For certainly that Noonday Star
that shined at his Nativity, and that Miracle that shined more bright, his
Bloodless Restoration, both from the Immediate Finger of God, are undoubted
Forerunners of some more then common Glories attending him; Those Divine
Propheticks that he neither can be what the Malice of his Enemies would
Character him, nor shall be what their Treachery would make him.

But, Sir, before I aspire to the Favor of so Honorable a Friend as your
self, I ought first to shake off that Load that holds me down even below your
meanest Thoughts. And truly Sir, as I want no little refining to purge my Dross
away, so I am resolved to be so candid in my Confession, that in Testimony of a
perfect Abjuration of my past Ills, I Will give both Your self and the World as
plain a Picture of my faults and follies as my severest Enemies can or would
paint them for me.

About ten years since I writ a Play called, The Empress of Morocco, and some
time after I carried it to His Majesty's Theater, where in the height of Mr.
Hearts Health and Excellence, I flattered my self with assurance of wonderful
success from the performance of then so able a Company: but upon former
Treaties with His Highnesses Servants, they made a complaint to their Royal
Master, and got the Play commanded back again to their own Playhouse, where
though His Royal Highness, upon condescending to hear his Servants in so humble a
Cause, upon the Circumstances against me, did nothing but the highest Piece of
Justice, yet Self-justification and my defeated Vanity begat that malignant
resentment, that manet alta mente repostum, and engendered that unhappy Gall,
that above Seven Years could not remove; and the License of the Press, and the
Eruption of the late accursed Plot, furnished me with an Opportunity, under the
umbrage of a popular Champion, to wreak my own private Spite and Revenge. This
I declare was the true Cause that misled me into so much Spleen and Venom, of
which I heartily repent and am ashamed, and humbly implore Pardon at the Feet
of that Royal Prince for all those accumulated wrongs I have done both against
his Honor and Virtue: and from the bottom of my Soul I wish, as I have been
the greatest (I mean in my little capacity) so I may be the last of his Enemies.

And truly my Faults, how criminal soever, are likewise so Universal, that I
stand not alone under this convicting Accusation. For too many, alas, and those
of the greatest Men in England have my sins too to answer for. For where the
true Preservation of the Protestant Religion makes One Patriot (as they call
themselves) Uneasiness, Disgust, or a Court-Grudg makes Twenty; whilst
Reformation is the least buysiness of those that most pretend to it. How many
Persons of the highest Quality in the Kingdom (if they would be but half so
ingenuous as I am) could tell you that though Religion and Property are the
pretended Quarrel against the great Pilots above, their real Greivance is that
their own Hands are not at the Rudder, and the State Helm is only Steerd awry,
because some happier some envied Court Darling sits at it before them. Thus as
poor Abel Dyed for being a greater Favorite to God then his Brother, the same
Discontent that made Cain a Murderer, makes a great Man a Patriot.

But now, though this plain Confession, how disadvantageous soever to my self,
might have been curtil'd into a something more Excusable Error, by laying the
whole blame on that more pardonable Folly of being mistaken or seduced, yet I
declare I had rather trebble my blushes, than fly to so mean a refuge as a Lie
for any part of an Apology. And therefore I must own, though with the greater
shame, I was so far from any Advice or Encouragement for the writing my first
Libel, The Character of a Popish Successor, that I had finished it before ever I
let it see Light: But then indeed I Coveted the Approbation of my Honorable
Aldersgate Street Patron, and entrusted a Friend to show it him, who truly made
but little Correction, only he expressed his Dislike of one or two passages in
it, and for Amendment, Bid the Author speak more favorably of Rebellion.

But now since the Malevolent spirit of Revenge was the fatal Lust I gratified,
and that foul Tempter the Plot rose up to lend both Means and Opportunity, I
am resolved, like a true penitent Debauch, to renounce both the Whore and the
Bawd; and as I abhor the Sorcery of the First, so loath the Lewdness of the
Last: Lewdness indeed! for to all the loose Desires, and prostitute
Imaginations that Faction ever whored after Our late Plot has been the unhappy
Pandar.

What was it but the Plot that furnished the world with so much counterfeit
Zeal, and Gilded Hypocrisy, making the greatest of Athiests, the greatest
Stickler for Religion? What brought the most rigid Fanatics to the Church of
Englands Communion and Sacrament to Capacitate them for an Office of Trust; and
widend the Throats of the greatest true Protestant City Dons even to the
Gorging of Perjury, but the Plot. What makes the Metropolis independent of the
Crown, and the lopping the Prerogative, and borrowing the Militia to fight
against Black Bills the Principal Expedient for the safety of the King and the
Nation but the Plot? -- What has set up so many City Posts and Chains, to keep
out Spanish Pilgrims, and Popish Guards, but the Plot? -- And riddle me riddle
what made the whole Body of the Antipopish Dissenters in their Highest Enmity
and Dudgeon against Plots, and Rome, desire to be united, and incorporated with
the Popish Church of England, but the Plot? -- What is it arraighns the Laws,
Libells Courts, and Blackens Kings; supplies the poisoned Gall to all Republic
Pens, prefers a Raree-Show before a Te Deum, and sets a Milton above an
Evangelist, but the Plot? The Plot writ the Association: and 'twas Plots Popish
Plots too that installed the Covenant, Plots that pulled down the Church to set
up the Kirk, raised an Arbitrary Common Wealth to pull down an Arbitrary Legal
Monarchy, and cut off the Kings Head to make him Glorious? -- What is it that
Plots cannot or have not don though never so Romantic or Impossible? Have they
not made a whole Protestant Church all Popish, and the Episcopal Clergy Tooth
and Nail conspiring for their own Destruction? Yes, and the Mildest and Best
of Kings, after so moderate an Administration of Government, a Reign of above
Twenty quiet Halcyon years together, a Reign, where Law and Justice were never
stretch unless into Mercy and Indulgence, a Reign, where too easy Forgiveness,
and receiving his pardoned Enemies the warm ungrateful Snakes too near into the
Bosom of Majesty, and too high into his Trust and Honors, has been the only
fault in the Throne; This very Godlike Tempred King after so long a Harmony of
Government in so calm a Sphere of Glory, by the all-aspersing Libel of a Plot,
shall nevertheless all of a sudden throw his long golden Reins away, and to
bring in that unweildy Leviathan Arbitrary Power involve his Gray Hairs in
inextricable Broyl and Tumult, loose all the peaceful Rest of Age, and all to
turn a Tyrant, a Jehu, a Phaeton even in the last Race of his Life. Nay and to
make the Hideous Fantom a little more Gigantick, this very Prince (if Noise and
Plots may be believed) shall be pensioning and confederating with France,
though against himself, to the betraying of his Crown and Empire.

But Popery and Arbitrary Power are to be brought in; and though by Head and
Shoulders, though by the most Ridiculous Means, as wide from Sense and Truth as
North from South, it is all alike. It Is but insinuating into the Brainless heads
of the People that the King himself (as I told you) is leaguing with France to
bring in the Pope: and though the French King has his Sword in the very Bowels
of Flanders, against the Faithfullest Son of Rome the King of Spain; though he
can scarce keep his profane hands even from Italy, the Seat of the Roman God
himself; though he has pyrated the very best Flower in the Popes Garden the
Regalias of his Empire, and shaken the very Papal Supremacy, even to the
pulling down of that dreadful Curse of Excommunication, had the Pope but
Courage to pronounce it; nay though he has promoted the Protestant Rebellion in
Hungary, and brought the very Turk into Christendom, possibly not many years
journey from the very Gates of Rome; yet all this while this very King of
France shall be the Popes right Hand, his Spear, his Shield, his every thing,
and is setting up the Romish Interest with all the Industry and Vigor in the
World: And to complete this Mountainous Monster of a Conspiracy, the King and
Court of England (for Plots and Popery make all things go down) shall be as
deep in it as He. And though, God knows, there is not so much as the least
Sign Appearance or shadow of any thing of this, and the Infusers of all this
poison into the unreasoning Multitude are conscious it is all rank Forgery, no
matter for that: They know whom they have to deal with, the Headlong Mobile of
England, a People of that strange Constitution, that they fear nothing that
they See, but all things that they Hear. And those very men that in Visible
dangers shall face the Mouths of Cannons, yet at the Apprehension of Castles in
the Air, Popery and Arbitrary Power, from the Imaginary Thunderbolts from that
quarter shall start like Hinds. It Is but winding that Horn, and they fall as
flat before the sound as the Walls of Jericho; and nothing but breathing the
Spirit of Rebellion into them, can rowze them out of the fright on it. And who
at last are the Great First Movers in all these National Enflamings? -- Truly
those very Men that bawld lowdest for the Preservation of His Majesty's Person,
against Plots and Popish Swords, are the Numerical Persons that Scandalize His
Majesty with Popishly affected, to the withdrawing the hearts of his Subjects,
which are his greatest and strongest Guard against all Plots or Swords
whatsoever. And whilst this Zeal for the King and the Government Established,
brings these mighty leading Nimrods into the Chase, it is much to be feared the
Cry of running down Popery, is more to call the Hunters together then the Game
intended.

Thus since the Plot is made the Tool for all this Mischief, and furnishes all
the Fuel for Dissentions and Discords the great Incendiaries of the World; I am
resolved to bid adieu to it: and to leave it as I found it, draw the true
Picture of that Wonderworking Prodigy that has so long and so highly (to
astonishment be it spoken) put three Kingdoms into a Distraction.

And now, Sir Thomas, having shaken hands with that troublesome Companion
Whiggism; my Conversion, as the Divines say of Christianity, makes me happy, if
but in the very Ease of Mind it gives me, and the Slavery it rids me of; A
Whigg being that Owlight sort of Animal that, unless in a Coach and six, it
never looks abroad without being hooted at. And I thank my Stars I shall now
be no longer confined but to two perches in a Cage, like the Salamanca Doctor,
just to hop to Amsterdam Coffee-House and then home again; But once more
venture to walk by Daylight, and from this time forward look Sense and Quality
in the Face, and instead of Shades and Coverts return to Conversation and the
World again; And that I may no ways forfeit those good Graces that, Sir, from
your self and all other Persons of Honor and Loyalty I shall ever ambitiously
Covet, and study to preserve: I shall fully and entirely abjure all Turbulence
and Malignity whatever; and to avoid the Crime and Fate of Saphira retain no
one part of my unrepented sins about me, that might make my whole Atonement
Sacrifice unacceptable; but persevere with that Integrity and Honesty that may
render me so much the more worthy to subscribe my self,

Sir, Your most Obedient and most Humble Servant. E. Settle.

A Narrative, etc.
IN the Year 78 it pleased those Powers that inspired them to raise up Mr.
Oats, Bedlows, Dugdale, Prance, etc. to be the Preservers (or what properer
name, you will give 'em) of the King and three Kingdoms, from the Malice and
Machinations of the Papists; who by an ample Discovery (whether given us by the
right or left hand of Providence it matters not) came enlightened by Repentance,
and animated by Zeal, or something as active, to betray their old Colleagues
and Patrons the Papists, and Jesuits, and by detecting Crimes ineffable, and
Plots inscrutable to give the World that unknown scene of Villainy, and the most
unaccountable Mystery of Iniquity, that ever Mankind was astonished to hear, or
puzzled to fathom. And that this Plot is more remarkable, than all that Rome and
Pope, Conclaves or Devils ever managed before, it has so many cross Windings
Turnings and Mazes throughout, that whatever Wit, Prudence, or Conduct, those
Great and Politic Enemies of our Religion have ever been Masters of in former
intrigues; in this only Plot We have a Cabal of such extravagant Fools, and
Madmen, as History affords no Parrallel of.

The Conversion and Subjection of Great Britain to the Romish Religion and
Power, after so long, and almost total a Revolt from Rome, is, or ought to be
(and the Jesuits must be Sensible as much) a Work of that politic
undertaking, that requires the wisest and Subtlest steps, that the mightiest
Machiavels of all Ages ever moved in; and yet through the whole carrying on of
this Conspiracy, the Jesuits and their Adhoerents took such indirect measures
and opposite Means to obtain their great Ends, that there is not so much as the
Shadow of right reason, or scarce common sense in the whole management. The
business therefore of this following discourse, is to manifest what an
unthinking pack of Jehues the Papists have been through the whole Plot, and
what Lunacy and Infatuations drove 'em; with the particular account of what
Snares and Nets they had provided against us, and what Cobweb Lawn they and the
Discoverers have made 'em of.

First then for their killing of the King.

This dire undertaking being the great Wheel that was to set the whole Machine
a working, the Papists by virtue of a Summons from father Whitebread, beld a
General Consult at the White-horse Tavern in the Strand, at which were present
Father Warren Rector of Liege, Sr. Thomas Preston Baronet, Father Marsh Rectour
of Ghent, Father Willams Rector of Watten, Sr. John Warner, Oats Nar. par.
XXVIII.
and Sr. Robert Brett Baronets, Father Poole, Edmond Nevil, etc. who together
with Dr. Oats came over Sea upon the said summons, and met the English Fathers
at the said Tavern, in all to the number of fifty Jesuits, on April the 24th,
78.

Where after long and serious debate, the great Resolve of this general
Consult, was, that Pickering and Groves should go on in their attempt to
assassinate the Kings Person, for which the first should have 30000 Masses
said, for the health of his Soul, and the other 1500. l. which Resolve they all
Consented, and Signed to, and Mr. Oats carried it from Consult to Consult, and
Chamber to Chamber to get all their hands subscribed to it.

Now this Pickering and Groves were two blind Gunners, that had followed the
King for several years for the same Murdering Design, but ineffectually.
Pickering as Bedlow affirm's, having had several fair opportunities, but
miscarried. One time the flint of his Pistol was loose, another time there was
no Powder in the pan, and another time he had charged with all Bullets, and no
Powder. for which Misdemeanors he received 20 Lashes of Discipline. Trial. p.
24.
But his Comrade Groves for ought we know never charged his Gun at all, for we
neither read of his having any opportunities or hitting or Missing.

Here is to be observed the great Depth and Wisdom of this grand Consult of no
less then 50 Politicians, These Popish Conspirators, that (as it appears,) had
been for several years together, at Pistolling the King, by the hands of these
two heroic blood-thirsters are at the charge and trouble of coming from
several parts beyond Sea: and the great Result of that famous Assembly is, that
these two aforesaid Wretches, a brace of fumbling fools, that had been so many
years so aukwardly about it before, should still be continued and Employed for
the great work of murdering the King, without so much as the least proposition
of one wiser head, or better Marksman to come in for a snack with them.
Irelands Trial p 22.
For the greater Sons of Thunder, such as the four Gentlemen Irish Ruffians,
were not thought on till the August following, and in the same month Conyers
and Anderson struck in with their Leaguer Cloaks, and broad Daggers for the
Kings New Market walk: nor was Sr. George Wakeman treated with, till the July
after this Consult; besides Sr. George Wakeman could be engaged in the Murder
without the trouble of any such general. Irelands Trial p. 21.
Assembly: a letter from Whitebread then at St. Omers being sufficient
authority to propose 10000. l. and embarque so great a Man in the design
without any For reign Summons for general Consults, conveying Resolves to be
Signed, or Subscribing of hands either for his Poisoning, Nart. par. XXXIII.
Conyers Stabbing, or the four Ruffians Assassinations.

But tho this April Subscribing to that very Decree, that belike had been their
Act and deed of so many Years before, is somewhat Oddish, yet this great hinge
of April Consult is almost all the whole Plot to move upon: and tho the
Jesuits, Pickering's Elder Brothers, for no wiser a Resolve at so vast a
Meeting deserved as many Lashes as he. yet I assure you, and the Doctor shall
swear it, it was absolutely necessary, that Whitebread and the rest should
Subscribe in April 78. that they might be hanged for it in June 79.

But before the Reader proceed's, he is requested not to be startled at
Incoherence Absurdities Contradictions, or indeed Impossibilities. For a Plot's
nothing without 'em. For example, he will find in the unerring Drs Depositions,
that the Dr. read a Packet at St. Omers directed from Whitebread to Ashby,
where amongst other matters we meet these Numerical words.

In the packet was contained an account of one Pickering, that waits upon the
Jesuits at Sommerset-house, to shoot the King as he was walking in St. James's
Park when he was at some distance from his Nobles and Attendants, but the flint
of his Pistol being somewhat loose, Nar. Par. XIX
he did defer the action till another opportunity, and if he had done it, and
had suffered, he should have had 30000 Masses for the health of his Soul ['tis
well he tells 'em what reward he was to have had; for possibly the first design
upon the Kings Life might have been made without a general Consult, and
therefore they might be ignorant at St. Omers, either of the Man or the
Bargain; or else it might be so long since they set him at Work, that they
might have forgotten it] But these Letters were Signed by Thomas White alias
Whitebread; which Letters when read, the Fathers in the English Seminary were
in great trouble for the negligence of the said Pickering; and the Deponent saw
and read them in the latter part of January etc. And that we may be assured
January was the Month, the next Paragraph in the Narrative is the Subject of
the Dr, and his Confessors discourse about keeping the Kings Martyrdom Day.

But notwithstanding this invincible demonstration of Januaries Packet: The Dr.
upon Oath before the House of Lords, assures us, Journal 29. Nov. 78.
that this Attempt and failing of Pickerings Gun was some few days before the
Consult in April. And more particularly at Pickerings Trial he ascertains the
express time to be in March, being asked. Trial p. 24.


Sir Chapter L. Do you know any thing of Pickerings doing penance, and for what?

Oats. Yes my Lord in the Month of March last (for these persons have followed
the King several Years) but he at that time had not looked to the flint of his
Pistol, but it was loose, and he durst not Venture to give Fire, he had a fair
opportunity as Whitebread said, and because he mist it through his own
negligence he underwent Penance, and had 20 strokes of Discipline.

Now can any thing in Nature be more strange, than that Whitebread should send
the St. Omers Fathers in January, a perfect Relation of a crime not committed
till the March following; Well but that the Devil and the Pope are sworn
Friends, and Conjuration may do much, otherwise some foolish unbelievers would
not stick to call it a downright Elliotism. But alas to confute that Error, we
are to consider that the confinement to Unity, Time, or Place or any of those
circumstantial Popperies are a formality fit for a Country Assizes, or an
Evidence against a poor Sheep Stealer or so. But against that terrible thing
called a Kingkiller, and such a Goliath Traitor as Pickring, so mean a
Tongue-tye had been much too humble and servil an imposition for the High and
Mighty Dr. Oats the Savior of no less then three Kingdoms.

And to show you that this Figurative way of speaking is an Elegance, that the
Dr. extremely Prides himself in, you shall have it from one end of the Plot to
the other. For another instance at this very consult in his Narative, Trial p.
28.
and at Pickerings Trial the Assembly consisted of fifty Jesuits: but at
Langhorns Trial, because 'twas proved there was never a Room at the White-horse
Tavern that would hold above a dozen People, then the aforesaid fifty upon
second thoughts were dwinled into eighteen or twenty, and those in several
Rooms. Langhorns Trial p. 47.
And therefore as I said before since 'twas inconsistent with the Glory of so
Sacred a Deliverer to be so poorly confined; January and March in his Calendar,
and fifty or twenty in his Arithmetic shall be all alike. Whilst he scorns his
Discovery should be understood by Vulgar Capacities, and therefore like a
second Revelation has wrapped it in Riddle and Mystery.

Besides the Reader is humbly desired not to be puzzled to imagine how Mr.
Pickering should present a Gun (between a Pistol and a Carbine) twice at the
King, which one time for want of Prime, and another by being Charged with all
Bullets would not go off, and yet not be apprehended or so much as seen by any
one of all the Kings Attendance, and that too in so public and open a place as
St. James's Park, a place where there is not so much as a Bramble or Bryar or
any one Covert throughout it enough to Shroud a Pigmey, much less two
Manslayers; excepting the Osiers within the Canal (but those are moated round
and therefore inaccesible) neither would I have the Reader surprised at Armies
of Pilgrims and Legions of Black Bills, and other Miraculous Tools used in the
Popish Service: for let me tell you, Time was, that is in the first year of the
Doctors Reign, rather then such a Bloody Assassin as Pickering should have
wanted convenience for so Damnable a Design, the Doctor if occasion had been,
could have concealed him in a Misty Cloack, or have Conjured up a Bush to hide
him in, like a second Jonas Goad, that should have grown up one day, and
withered down the next; besides rather then the Pilgrims should have wanted
Strength for the Work in hand, he should have made 'em all Giants at least, nay
and if that would not have done, before the Massacre should have went lame, or
the Protestants have wanted Cutthroats he should have brought you half Ovid's
Metamorphosis into the Plot, and have marched ye an Army of Satyrs and Centaurs
through Cheapside.

But now after the Kings being besett all round like the Man in the Almanac
with so many Pistols Ponyards Swords and poisons; after the Issue and Success
of all this dead doing Artillery the next great movement of the Plot was, when
the King had had the pre-eminence of having his Cut first, the Protestants
Throats were to have been Cut next.

For doing of which we have the Drs. List of Officers for the raising of an
Army of which the Lord Belasis was to be Lord General, Lord Petres Leiftenant
General Sir. Thomas Ratcliff Major General, etc. and their Patents or
Commissions were Signed by the General of the Jesuits Johannes Paulus d' Oliva,
And particularly Mr. Oats Swears before the Lord Chapter Justice Scroggs, Oct. 24.
Nar. p. 58.
that he saw the Lord Bellasis Letter to Fenwick in the month of July 78. to
accknowledge the receipt of his Commission, and in May 78. he saw the
Commission for the Lord Petres in the hands of Mr. Langhorn, and another in
July to make Sr. George Wakeman Physician to the Army; and for the inferior
Commissions Stamped and Sealed by Whitebread he himself in these very months
delivered several of them with his own hand.

This Army being to be fixed for striking immediately upon the Kings falling,
was consequently to be all Listed and Armed in the Kings Life time, and all
incognito in a Protestant Kingdom, and upon having none but such notoriously
known Papists for the Commanders, it was Morally imposible to have drawn in any
other Malcontents into the Confederacy: Besides the very proposal of listing
any of the Protestants had been the way to have Discovered the Conspiracy and
Ruined all: and therefore the whole Body of this Army must necessarily have
consisted of all Papists; and if the Jesuits were so cocksure of the Strength,
and Courage of the Popish party in England to think 'm able to give a tug for
the Popes Restoration Vi et armis with open Hostility against all the
Protestants in England, they must certainly be inspired with no common
Enthusiasms, and take their Leaders for no less then Readiness and David's,
expecting to see 'm return flusht with so wondrous a Success that the very
Daughters of Rome should meet 'm with Songs and Timbrels, and give them no less
a Welcome then Petres has Slain his thousands and Bellasis his ten thousand.

But no matter this is but one Drs. Opinion. Mr. Oats and his Jesuits were for
doing the Work with Popish Generals and Popish Armies, but Mr. Dugdale is of
another mind, and he and his Jesuits were for quite another sort of conduct.
It Is true he concurrs with Mr. Oats that the King was to fall by as many private
hands as the Dr. pleased, but then to subdue the rest of the Kingdom. (Lord
have mercy upon us) a Massacre was to ensue. And because he and his Plotters
were not altogether so Strong in Faith as Mr. Oats his, and believed the Popish
party to be too Small and therefore too Weak of themselves alone to go thorough
stich with so great an Undertaking, they had found this expedient, Viz. They
had designed (he tells you) to fling the Murder of the King upon the King
killing Presbyterians and then to engage the Episcopal party to rise with the
Papists in revenge of the Kings blood, (...) p. 25.
and cut the Fanatick's throats; and when with their help they had destroyed
the Fanatical party, and weakened the Kingdom by so universal a Blow, then they
had decreed to turn their Swords all of a sudden against the hearts of their
Colleagues the Episcopals; and so playing the subtle Polyphemus, and reserving
them for the last morsel, when they had no other Enemies left, by this last
dexterous Wheel about, and cutting the Episcopal Protestant Throats too, the
great Work of Projection had been Completed, and the Papists left Masters of
the Field, whilst Jo by Faean Jo^ Triumphum England was there own. Here we find
Dr. Oats his Measures quite broken, for alas this Massacre of Dugdals is of a
quite different piece with Oats his Batalia: but no matter more ways than one
to the Wood, and neither false Scents nor hunting Counter spoils the sport
either in Plotters or Discoverers.

But methinks, this last stratagem of Mr. Dugdales, is the oddest fancied
out-of-the-way project that ever Folly or Frenzy invented, for suppose the
bloody minded Pickering had learnt to charge his Gun the right way, with some
Powder, and not all Bullets, and let us imagine that after his late discipline
upon his shoulders he had mended his aim, and had Killed the King. How must the
Episcopal Party be possessed it was done by a Presbyterian hand, for it was
impossible the Jesuits should ever expect, that a single Assassinate in such a
place as St. James's Park in the Face of the Court, and approaching so near as
within Pistol shot, upon the Murder of the King should ever escape seizing,
either by the hands of the Nobility, or His Majesty's Servants that always
attended him. Upon this Consequence how must the Papists, I say steer to draw
in the Episcopal Party to the Massacre, must they give it out it was done by a
Presbyterian hand, and thereupon hand over head without any Examination, but
right or wrong the Episcopals upon the mere motives of a Hearsay should Pellmel
fall to butchering perhaps one third of the Nation. This Presumption in the
Jesuits is such an impudent Piece of Madness as certainly was never matched, it
being so far from the Principles of the Church of England, that nothing but
Lunacy it self could suspect them guilty of so brutal nay so execrable a
Thought. But suppose this Massacre was not to commence till Pickering had been
taken, Examined and Tried for the Fact, and let us for once imagine further,
that they had before hand instructed him to own himself a Fanatic, and
resolutely and impudently even at the Gallows dye a Sectary, and lay the crime
upon the Dissenters; yet never did the Jesuits so famed for Politics go so
senslesly to work, as here, first not only to choose so shallow a headpiece as
Pickerings for such a Masterpiece of Cheat and Villainy, and so known a Popish
Face as his too a Lay Brother, and Candlesnuffer of the Queens Chapel to
disguise for a Presbyterian. So that here upon the upshot of Pickerings being
discovered (or indeed any other of the Ruffians) as none but Fools could think
otherwise, if they had believed the Church of England of that Massacring Spirit
(as belike they did) had they been in their right Wits, they ought rather to
have feared to have had the Massacre on their own side, and their own Throats,
not the Fanatics have paid for 't. These are the Tribe of the Jesuits, and
this the Plot the Dr. assures us had been hatching ever since King James his
days, yet we see after no less than almost a Hundred years Labor, what the
Mountain brings forth, and after so much Intrigue and such indefatigable Pains,
how sillily and awkwardly at last these Matchiav ils put their Noddles together.

But notwithstanding this movement of Dugdales, does not extremely well cotton
with Mr. Oates's, yet that Discoverers like good Wits may sometimes Jump, Mr.
Dugdale is for an Army too; for after the laying the Death of the King on the
Presbyterians, and engaging the Church of England in the Massacre, he says in
these words. And then my Lord there was to be a Massacre, the Jes. ^r. page 25.
and if any did escape ( viz the Massacre) that they could not be sure were
Papists, they were to have an Army to cut them off.

So that here was an Army in Embrio, tho not so early raised as to do the Drs.
Execution; for alas here it is plain, that the Massacre was to come first and
the Army last, to cut off the Remains of what had escaped the Massacre, the
Massacre being supposed to be performed by down right Bear-garden play, with a
helter skelter of Assassinates with Quarter staffs, black Bills, Spits,
Pole-axes, or any other Weapon that came next to hand, and the succeeding Army
was only to be engaged in the Rear of the Catholic Cause, the greatest part of
the Brunt being over before the Army came into play. Here it is true that the
Lord Bellasis, and the rest of the Right Honorable Commanders had entered the
lists; but alas, only to attaque those scattered remnants that had escaped.
This Dispensation of Affairs at Rome would appear an Indignity to Persons of
the L. Bellasis, Petres and Powis Quality and Estates: but we are to Consider
'twas the Popes pleasure, and no Post too mean even for Princes and Potentates
in the Catholic Battles.

But here the Astonished Reader must make a little pause and stand amazed at the
unprecedented Cruelty of all Popish Miscreants: It was not enough belike for
'em to make a Massacre of the Protestants throughout the Kingdom, and mow down
the Heretics with so universal a blow, but after all this an Army too must be
raised to destroy even the very Gleanings of the Field. Never certainly had
been so in humane a Scene of Butchery, when after no less then a Massacre, all
that were not known Papists that had Escaped were to perish likewise; insomuch
that by this Depopulation of Root and Brance, not so much as a heretic Hewer
of wood or Drawer of Water had been left unslaughter'd.

Now after this damnable Popish Decree, and all this Lamentable Tragedy, I
admire what need the Pope had in his long Bull read by Dr. Oats in Blundels
hands after the disposal of Bishoprics, Nar. p. 72.
Abbotships etc. for want of English born Priests enough for all the dignities
of the Church of England to decree such and such Spaniards, and other
foreigners should supply that want, and order such and such for reading
Philosophy, and Divinity in all great Towns and Colleges, and such and such to
be employed in Preaching, catechizing, and assisting at the Altar.

Alas and welladay, after so Numberless an Assassination as All the Protestants
in England, there would have been so little Occasion for Supplies of Spanish
priests, that there would scarce have been Flock enough left to overstock the
very St. Omers Brotherhood. Many a great Town in England would have stood in so
little need of a Philosophy or Divinity School, that there would not have been
so much as three souls left alive in it: and three Surviving Families had been
more then many a nine Parishes in England could have produced, That the Pope
(one would think) might have Spared his untimely provision for his
Underchurches, for unless his Jagoe Pilgrims and other kind Visitants had
repeopled the Kingdom, the Underchurches might have even stood Idle, and the
very Cathedral alone in many a fair Town have held the Congregation of the
whole County.

Besides in my Mind 'twas mighty ridiculous in the Plotters to trouble their
heads about the Succession, and (as the Dr. tells you) to threaten the Duke if
he followed his Brothers steps to send him after him. For truly when Mr.
Dugdales Massacres and Armies had left him no Subjects living but Papists,
'twas not three Farthings matter what the Successors Religion was, nor was it
likely he could ever follow his Brothers steps and favor the Protestants, when
he had not one Protestant left to favor.

But now after all this dismal, and deplorable business, methinks, I cannot
make a livelier Representation of the woeful state of England, than by fancying
I see the distressed and desolate Britannia, mourning over her slaughtered Sons,
like the Brentford Kings howling over Lardella's Coffin. But now what if by a
new turn of State Lardella should be alive at last, and maugre this fatal and
universal Doom, several Thousands of those Sentenced Heretics should live many
a fair Summers day after it. And that all this is undeniable truth, we have no
less then Mr. Bedlow's Reprieve to save them: for after his landing an Army of
10000 Men from Flanders at Bradlington Bay to surprise Hull Garrison, and the
Lord Petre and Powis having another Army to march to Pembrookshire, to meet a
Third Army of 20 or 30000 Men, who were to land at Milford haven, being an Army
composed of all Religious Men and Pilgrims from St. Jago in Spain, Lords Journ.
12th day of Nov. 78.
and whatever should happen that their Strength, as they said, might be
sufficient, they had 40000 Men (a Fourth Army) ready in London, besides those
that would on the Alarm be posted at Every Alehouse door, to have Killed the
Soldiers, as they came out of their quarters, which I suppose at least must
make a fifth Army more, besides a sixth Army of Mr. Oats's from France,
expressly to have been let in upon the Kings death, but at present forgotten by
Mr. Bedlow. Irelands Trial p. 29.
Now amongst all these formidable Armies to be commanded by Bellasis, Petres,
Powis etc. The edge of Mr. Dugdales Massacre is a little rebated: for here, as
Bedlow tells the House of Lords, after Conyers had killed the King, Keins the
Duke of Monmouth, Pritchard the Duke of Buckingham, Mr. Right my Lord
Shaftesbury, Mr. O neal my Lord Ossory, and one whose name he had forgotten the
Duke of Ormond; after all these Persons were killed, the Papists did not
question the Power of the rest, or their Counsels, but that they should out do
them; for they would give such great Pay, that all sorts of Malcontents, and
People that depended on their fortune, Lords Journ. ibid 12th of N.
would be ready to serve them. All this performed, (as he tells you afterward,
they designed to establish their Government secure enough, for they intended
utterly to extinguish all sorts of People, that would not really be converted
to the Church of Rome, and to prove it, persecute their nearest Relations that
were Obstinate.

Here we have the abovenamed Lords Generals a little more honorably employed
under Mr. Bedlows Banners, than Mr. Dugdales, the whole Glory of the Day being
now like to be theirs, and not only Mr. Dugdales Presbyterians, that were to be
Massacred by a medley of Papists, and Episcopals, manifestly rescued from
destruction, but they and all other Malcontents to be bribed into the Popish
Army, and vice versa make a part of the Catholic Forces to cut the Episcopal
Throats. Here tho all the Protestants at long run were to be extinguished, yet
the stream is not half so rapid as Mr. Dugdales; for here the Heretics had
time to cry Quarter, and have the fair Proffer of Conversion for their
Deliverance, whilst the destruction of the Obstinate was only to approach by
the slower hand of Persecution.

Thus far I have showed you the many and wonderful Windings and Turnings of
French Armies, English Armies, Flandrian Armies, and Pilgrim Armies and all the
rest of the Plot Forces, that were to destroy the King, Subvert the Government
and Religion, and Subject the whole Nation to slavery and Popery. But after all
these manifold and various Motions of so many Armies for the Protestant
Destruction, (as Bays his whispering Conspirators wisely observed of the two
Brentford Kings: viz. When they heard us whisper, 2dly. What they heard us
whisper, and lastly whither they heard us at all or no.) So likewise in our
Conspiracy after we have given you an account by What Armies and When this
great Design was to have been accomplished, what if we come to Bays his last
point, and prove the Work was to have been done by no Armies at all. I, that
would be a Rarity indeed, and an Achievement enough to immortalize the Policy
and Glory of Rome.

Well! As wondrous as this Achievement may look, it is no more strange than
it is true. And that too as shall be manifestly made out by the clearest
Demonstration through the whole discovery. For Example Mr. Oats swears (as you
have been told before) that Pickering and Grove by the Jesuits order, had been
at Killing the King the March before the April Consult, and not only then but
several Years before had been dogging the King, for the same Murdering purpose:
nay upon further Examination we may track the Plot upon occasions, even to the
Firing of London. Here it visibly appears, that many Years before the April
Consult the Design was Ripe for Execution, and the King for Falling, and
consequently the Subversion of the Government, and destruction of the
Protestants that were always to attend it, must necessarily and inseparably
have Succeeded his Murder. This granted, and that upon further Inquiry we find
the Commissions for the Army to be raised in England, not so much as delivered
out till the Months of May, June, July, August 78. and the Foreign Armies from
Jago, Flanders etc. Expressly to come over to join the English Forces, under the
Command of Bellasis, Petres, Powis etc. Which Joining of Armies Mr. Bedlow
assures us was just ready to put in Execution, Lords Journ. 12th. Nov. 78.
when the Design against the Kings Person was discovered. Besides when
Pickerings Gun Miscarried in January, or at any time Winter or Summer, for all
those Years that Pickering followed the King, it was morally impossible, for
either the French or Spanish King to have always Armies ready to March, and
Navies to Land them: so that upon the whole it is unanswerably Evident that the
stroke was to have been given without the least Limb of any Army whatsoever,
either Foreign or Domestic.

Upon these undeniable Demonstrations mark the prodigious Prowess, Strength and
Courage of the Sons of Rome. Here to follow their first Blow, viz. the Kings
Murder, must the Popish hands in England without any assistance whatever have
made a Massacre, and to have kept their ground, either Killd, or Subjected the
whole Body of the Protestants throughout the Kingdom. Alas! What were the
Foolish insignificant Irish, Piedmont, and Parisian Massacres compared to This?
There the Religion of the Countries, was Popish, the Strength and Government
Popish, and the Majority of lhe Peoqle all Papists, and what with the help of
Surprise their Strength and advantages treble to those of their unarmed
Enemies. But the State of England has quite another Face; here the Strength,
and Government of the Nation, is in Protestants hands, and upon several
Scrutinies made of the number of the Papists throughout all England, upon
Computation they are not found to be the hundred and fiftieth part of the
Nation. So that as the Old poor Grovelling Cutthroats in their ignobler
Enterprises went on with those cowardly encouragements of Hope, Reason and
Possibility on their side, The bolder English High-flyers lay all these duller
inglorious trifles aside, resolved to assume the Souls and Strength of
Hercules, each Man an Almanzor, or Cousin German to him at least, whilst the
vast Bulk of a Hundred and Fifty to one odds had been to have fallen, no doubt
like a second Goliath, with the strength of a Pebble from a Roman hand.

So that, put but the Kings Murder and the Protestants Massacre together, and
examine the strange Methods of the Jesuits for effecting them, and we shall
plainly see, that as God has restored His Majesty by Miracle, so the Pope and
the Devil were resolved to destroy him by Miracle too.

But suppose after all, that this Immense and Supernatural Courage had not been
in them, and that really they knew they had not been able to atchieve all this;
why, truly that had been no hindrance to the business, nor any part of their
Consideration; for a Jesuit in a Plot, when his hand is in, like Sr. Martin on
the Lute, plays on, and never stops at all; and in Season or out of Season
troubles not his head. For Example.

The Jesuits Fired London, with an Intention to Kill the King in the hurry, and
Massacre the Protestants upon it; and yet, see the oddness of the Design, Nar.
par. XXXIV.
they laid London in Ashes, and yet were not at all provided to go through with
the Work. And why! as the Dr. expressly tells us, they were not secured of the
Duke; [a wonderful Impediment, when from the beginning of the Plot to the end,
they never were, nor hoped to be secure of him; the Duke being wholly a
stranger to their Design, and no part of their Trust, but the whole Family of
the Stuarts being possitively to be cut off Root and Branch. Nar. page 64.
]

And the next Obstacle to their Design was, the King was industrious about the
Fire, that they could not find in their hearts to do it, [a very odd Qualm of
pity in a Plotter, and an extraordinary stop to a Conspiracy of almost a
Hundred Years growth.] - Besides in this Fire they used 700 Fireballs, and
those made of Sheeps Fat, Nar. par. XXXIV.
no more an Ingredient (to my knowledge) for the Composition of a Firebal than
for a Sack-posset, and might as honorably have been sworn into one as the
other. But the Reader may remember that about the great Fire-time, and some
Years after, there were a sort of Thieves had got a trick of Killing Sheep by
Night and stealing the Fat, as being a more portable, more profitable, and less
dangerous Luggage than the Mutton it self, and this Thievery commencing about
the Fire of London, came pat in the nick for the Fright and Ignorance of the
Rabble, to fancy it stolen for Fireballs; and the Jesuits that can improve
Fables into Records, found out an Art of putting the Whim into Execution

Besides, in this Fire they pilferd Holland, Cambricks, fine Cloth, some
considerable Quantity of Plate, and a Box of Jewels, in which were One Thousand
Carracts of Diamonds, Nar. ibid.
l^pt up in several Papers for several Goldsmiths. A wondrous stock for one
Man's keeping, and a vast Treasure, especially of that Lightness to be carelessly
left behind, to the Rapine of Thieves or Flames. And what is still more
remarkable; so Infinite was the Wealth of London, that amongst so many several
Goldsmiths concerned, not one of them from that day to this, has mist them or
made inquiry after them.

The PLOT in IRELAND.
BUt here let us take our leave a while of the Rebellions, Assassinations,
Massacres, and Fireworks in little old En land, and see how the Posture of
Affairs stands in Ireland, for the doing of which we can have no greater Light,
than from the Trial of Oliver Plunket late Titular Arch Bishop of Ireland,
where indeed we find the whole Irish Plot so to admiration made out, that even
Infidelity it self must tremble at such undeniable Proofs, and unanswerable
Demonstrations: and to the Confusion of Rome, all this undoubted Truth
delivered by Oracles, sworn home by no less then the very Oaths of Members even
of the Popish Clergy it self.

The whole sum of which Conspiracy is as follows,

Oliver Plunket was made I rimate of Ireland, by the Election of the King of
France, and upon his Election he made those Conditions with the King of France,
Trial p. 84.
to raise Men to join with the French to destroy the Protestant Religion, the
said Plunket having Engaged to get Dublin, Londonderry, and all the Sea Ports
into their own hands, to Levy War and Destroy the Protestant Religion, (a Vast
undertaking for a Titular Bishop to go thorough with) and that they should have
the King of France to protect them during Life; Trial p. 84
as Mac Leigh swears. Upon this Contract we have Plunket keeping touch with his
promise, and undertaking to raise 60 or 70000 Irish to be ready to Join with
the French, as Duffy and Murfey the two main Witnesses attest, the said Plunket
having taxed the Irish Clergy several Sums of Money, for the carrying on of
this War, and maintenance of this vast Body of Men, viz some of them 10 some 20
nay some 40. s. p annum, (a wonderful Sum for so Vast a Design) and himself
pitched upon Carlingford Haven for the French's Landing. This Design it seems
after some Years collecting for, and preparation toward it, grew so ripe, that
as Mr. O Neale swears, he heard Bishop Terril in August 78. in the head of 40
Horse alighting at Vicar General Brady's Door, give those 40 odd Horsemen an
Oath which they took willingly from hand to hand, to forward the Plot against
the Protestant R ligion, and to make an end of them all in one hour from End to
End of Ireland, and said he, I will come within two days with an Order from the
Lord Oliver Plunket, and you ne^d not be afraid, for the Lord Oliver Plunket
and I, have sent some Gold and M^n^y into France to get Men, and bring them
from France over Sea, and do not fear this will go on in one hour through all
Ireland, from End to End. (Tho by his good leave I should have much doubted,
whether the French Men could have kept pace with these nimble Irish Men; for
Landing all at Carlingford Haven, it is much to be feared, they would have made
it above Two Hours work, in running through all Ireland.

This Plot was carried on so far, that (as Mr. Wire attests) it was to have
taken Effect, Trial p. 72.
and the Invasion to have been made in 79. a Year after the Discovery of the
Plot in England, he himself affirming, that since Plunket was taken he saw in
the time of Plunkets Imprisonment his Commands to his under dignitaries, not to
be forgetful of the Moneys, that were assessed toward the supplying the French
Army, and that there was no better time to bring in the French, than when he
was in Prison.

And for sure Work Mr. Duffey attests, that this Invasion was not only to be
made by a French Army, but by a Spanish Army too, that was to land with them.
Trial p. 77.
For Duffey heard Plunket at a Consult, and giving Special Order for some of
them to get a List of all the Officers that lost their Estates, and that they
should be more forwards than they to proceed in that Wicked Design, to destroy
all the Protestants together, which was expressly to be done by an Army, of
Irish, Spanish, and French together, Plunket at the same time encouraging every
one that could dispose of Money to provide some for those Gentlemen, that would
soon come over into Ireland, viz. the French Army and Spanish Army together.
Duffy having likewise, besides the sight of several Orders for to raise Money,
seen a Letter from Plunket when he lay in Jail signifying, that that was the
only time for bringing the matter to an end, and that the French and Spanish
Kings should take the Advantage, that now was Offered whilst he was in Prison.

In all this Irish Plot we have a Model of State Affairs extremely different
from those in the English Plot. As first for example, we find the French King
not half so Generous in Carrying on the Catholic Cause in Ireland, as in
England. In England he was to Lend the Conspirators an Army gratis, and help
them to make a Conquest for themselves, whilst the Vanquished Crown and
Government was to have been disposed of as Bellasis, Petres and Arundel, and
the rest of the Victorious English Generals thought fit. But in Ireland he
plainly sets up for himself, and poorly and mercinarily sides with the 60 or
700000 Irish Champions, to conquer and possess their Kingdom, nay, he is so
wretchedly ignoble, that he robs the very Spittle, and suffers the poor
beggarly Vermin the Irish Clergy, that were not able altogether to buy Horse
and Arms for 20 Men, not only to be taxt for the maintenance of their own 70000
Irish, but likewise to send over Money and Gold, even to the Mighty King of
France, toward the bringing his Army over Sea.

Secondly, we find the Irish not half so valiant, and resolved in carrying on
their Heretic Massacre, as the more Heroic English Catholics in theirs. For
the English (as we have read before) upon the going off of Pickerings Gun in
March 77. were prepared for a Massacre, and that too when one Man was to Kill
near a brace of Hundreds for his share; But the poor Spirited Irish in the
other Extreme, where the Popish Party are 50 times more numerous than in
England, with an Army of no less then 70000 Conspirators all ready for the
stroke, are cowardly distrusting so vast a Strength, and Calling in French and
Spanish Armies to their Assistance, though to the inevitable Enslaving
themselves and their Posterity, to so known a Tyrant as the King of France. The
Foresight of which Slavery was the reason that Duffy Discovered the Plot,
telling us he had been in 77. almost a year in France, and seeing there how the
poor People are brought in such Slavery by the French, Trial p. 79.
he thought of it, and had rather the Devil should reign over them than the
Frenchman.

Thirdly, we have here the most unpolitick, and most senseless conduct in the
Spaniard, that the Chronicles in all Ages can never parallel: viz. We have the
King of Spain (if there can be such an Animal of a Monarch in Nature) at the
very moment, that he is courting the Alliance of almost all Christendom to
assist him against the French, having lost so great a part of Flanders to him,
and being so much in danger of loosing the rest of it, is notwithstanding
Lending this very French King an Army to help him subdue Ireland, and enlarge
the Conquests of his most Potent and most Formidable Enemy.

Well: But that Miracles are not ceast in the Romish Church, this would appear
most Monstrously strange. However for this, and the rest of the Extravagancies
in the Plot, we have all along Substantial Oaths, and therefore are bound in
Conscience to believe. Tho let me tell you, for a belief in this case with his
Spanish Majesty's pardon, we must lead our Imagination so far as to lodge the
very Soul of a Changeling in the Breast of a King. For a Soul of Gods Common
handy Work, could never be so void of Common Sense.

But, alas! this Blockhead of a Spaniard (con licenza Signior: For I vow I
cannot forbear calling him so) is not only Blundering this once, and Committing
this one enormous piece of Stupidity: But the English Plot, and his Affairs
there, are of the same Leven with the Irish Conspiracy. For this very King, had
not only this Army ready to Land at Carlingford Haven, but another of 30000
Jago Pilgrims to Land at Milford Haven, and 10000 Flandrians likewise to be
Landed at Bradlington Bay, and all this at a time when he had so many Irons in
the Fire, and his hands so full to secure his own Dominions, and so hard a tug
at home to preserve himself; and yet he has no less then Three spare Armies, of
at least half a Hundred Thousand strong to send out abroad. What in the name of
Dullness should make this Prince court the English Arms to relieve Man's for him,
when he had no less then Three such Powerful Armies, and all lying idle by him,
that (one would have thought) might have saved him that trouble. Well but that
there is a Plot, and has been a Plot. Otherwise Mankind had been left in the
Dark, and not one quarter of all these Apocrypha's had ever been Canonical.

But as ridiculous as the Plot-craft has hitherto been, we have not only the
Jesuits, and the Spanish King playing the Fools or Madmen, but even the High
and Mighty King of France, under the same praemunire: for Example, was ever a
Soldier of his Martial Cunning, so Egregiously out of his Royal Senses, and all
the Rules of Conduct, as First to Attempt the bringing a Navy into that very
Port of all Ireland, so notoriously known to Carry scarce water enough for a
Fisher-boat, much less a Man of War to ride in.

And secondly, to conduct his Navy so far about, to the very North part of
Ireland, not only through all the dangerous Irish Seas; but also in the Face of
all the Irish Ports, and Consequently through the Mouths of all the Kings Men
of War, that lie in the way, and by so long and hazardous a Voyage (especially
after the Discovery of the Popish Plot) to give the Three Kingdoms sufficient
Alarm to prepare for their Opposition.

Besides all these Gross unpardonable Faults, we have one yet more heinous
piece of Lunacy, then Story ever matched. This Foolish French King, is at the
Charge and Trouble of manning out a Fleet to land an Army in Ireland, when to
the Eternal Shame of all ill Memories, both He and all his Statesmen had quite
and clean forgotten they had Landed one there already, for does not the
Infallible Dr. Oats give us to know, in his Examination before the Parliament,
in these very words: That the French King had already Landed a great Army in
Ireland, being those Forces that left Messina, and it is to make them up 25000
which are to Join with the Irish Papists, in a second Massacre to Fire the City
of Dublin, and destroy the Duke of Ormond, and his adherents, and this part of
the Conspiracy was Managed by Coleman, etc

N^w what the Devil could make so subtle a Monarch, so strangely Overseen as.
so abominably to expose a Navy, and a new Army to all the forementioned
hazards, when he had one so much better for his turn there already, an Army too
of so vast a Number as 25000, and all Disciplined Soldiers, being the very
Forces that left Messina: nay, and to outdo all yet, an Army even Miraculously
Disposed for the Eruption of a Massacre, an Army that had out gone, even Bays
his Knights-bridge Expedition, having Landed, Marched and Encamped Invisible
being a kind of such Heterogoneus Animals, that from that day to this, they had
never been Seen, Felt, Heard or Understood. But to excuse the French King and
the rest of his Privy-Counsellors, his Armies are so numerous, that possibly a
poor handful of 25000 might not be mist amongst them, otherwise if he had
remembered any thing of these 25000 being Landed before, a Force of that
Strength, as our Salamanca Oracle tells us were to Fire Dublin, and Destroy the
Duke of Ormond and the Protestants his adherents, this last Navy and Army, I
fancy were to come like Esop in the rear of his Fellow Servan^s, to do just
Nothing, because the former had done all things before. Thus were see what
humane policies are: Hamanum est errare, and not only the lesser Plotters the
Jesuits, but the Imperial Plotters too, even Monarchs themselves may once in
their Lives be overtaken.

Now 'twill not be amiss for our Farther Light into this Conspiracy, to search
the Mine from whence the Treasure comes to defray the charges expended, and to
be expended, to support so vast a Body of Cutthroats. And here upon due
Examination of matter of Fact, for the Carrying on of this fly Plot, we shall
meet not only great Heads all along, but great Purses too Employed to Encourage
the Laborers and Undertakers in this Sacred Cause, insomuch that wherever the
Assurance of St. Ship and Canonizations, and the brightest Crowns of Paradise
for their Reward, was not of it self alone a sufficient Spur to their Vigorous
Endeavors; when the slow Pav of Heaven hereafter was thought a Bribe too
little, the Jesuits never wanted ready Money to make up the Sum. Neither do we
ever find them unfurnisht, where or whenever those Golden Tempters were
necessary. But here as in the rest of their Affairs we meet with little else
then the Highest Extravagance. For in Distribution of their favors to the great
Pillars of their Cause, we find such Inequality and Partiality throughout, as
to their Eternal disgrace will never be forgotten. For Example; what more
unconscionable disproportion could there be between the 15000. l. contracted
for, and no less then 10000 l. bid at first word to Sir George Wak^man to
povson the King, and but that inconsiderable trifle of 80 pounds given to the
Four Irish Ruffians, when most of them were Gentlemen of as great or greater
Quality and Fortune then Sir George, and the whole sum of 80. l. no more than
either of them would not have valued spending in a Week, nay and when more and
above, Sir George Wakemans undertaking had not the tenth part of their Dangers
attending it, his business being only the Legerdemain of slipping a Pill
extraordinary into the Kings Broth or so, and Theirs to Assassinate him in the
Face of open Day.

Or could their be a greater Affront to Persons of their Quality, to know that
honest William, alias John Grove a poor retainer to the Jesuits, should have
Fifteen Hundred pounds reward for his King Killing Work, and all those Four
Gentlemen together, have but one Twentieth part of the Sum for the same
Service. This Indignity no doubt the Jesu^ts were sensible of, but possibly
knowing them to be civil and well bred Gentlemen, they trusted to their
Generosity to forgive it.

But how close fisted so ever the Jesuits were in the pitiful Reward of Twenty
Pound a Man, to Persons of their Rank and Character for Killing the King. Yet
not long after, their bounteous Liberality was something more open-handed, when
they offered William Bedloe, alias, B^dhoe, originally the Son of a Cobbler,
Lords Journ. Mar. the 1278
and at present a Runner of Errands, no less then the sum of 4000. l. to hire
him to Kill Sir Edmond Bury Godfrey, and that too, when himself was but to be
one of the Four or Six that were to do it, witness his Oath before the House of
Lords. William Bedloe says on his Oath, that this Examinant being treated with
by Mr. Lephaire, and Mr. Walsh Jesuits about the beginning of October last,
they offered him a Reward of 4000. l. if he would be one of the Four or Six
that should Kill a Man, that was a great Obstacle to their Designs, [ viz. Sir
Edmond-Bury Godfrey, as it proved afterwards] (a very round sum together, if
the other Five were to be as well paid) But here the Reader is desired to take
notice, of the most matchless Example of self Denial in Mr. Bedloe, that
pe^haps they have met with, and the vast and wonderful Difference of some Men's
Consciences. Those very Gentlemen to whom 500. l. was less in their Pockets,
then five pound in Mr. Bedloe's could notwithstanding bite at 20 l. a Man, to
Murder no less than a King; when on the contrary Mr. Bedloe refused 4000. l. to
Murder but a poor Justice of the Peace. For as we have it in his aforesaid Oath
before the House of Lords. Thus following, he this Deponent promised [viz. to
Lephaire and Walsh] to be one to do it upon their giving him notice; afterward
viz. ( the Friday before Sir Edmond Bury was missing) Mr. Lephaire met him this
Deponent, about Four a Clock in Grays-Inn-Walks, and appointed to meet him
again the next day, at the same place about the same Hour to do that Business:
that upon his taking the Sacrament to do it, he this Deponent should have the
Money paid down; but he not liking the Design faild of meeting him etc. Is not
this (as I said before) a wonderful piece of self denial, but as wonderful as
it is here is the fellow on it to come.

After Sir Edmondbury was murdered, this Deponent meets Lephaire again, and is
showed Godfreys dead Body, and upon the spot is offered half the aforesa^d
4000. l. to be but only one of the Five or Six, ibid Jur. 12 N
that should carry the body to a place where they had Chose to lay him. To
which he seemingly agreed, but begging their pardon for half an hour, telling
them he would wait on them again, he went away and came no more; and being charged
next day for not coming according to promise, Mr. Bedloe gave this Powerful
Reason for his Absence: viz. he was unwilling to come because he knew the
Person that was Killed. A very cogent Reason indeed. But to heighten the
Miracle of Mr. Bedloes refusing 4000. l. for a M^rder; and 2000. l. for a
Porteridge, the least of them (one would think) a very attractive sum; the
Reader is to Consider, that Mr. Bedloe at that very time was none of the
squeamishest or nicest conscienc't Men, being all along not only privy to all
the Popish Designs, the Landing of 20 or 30000 Jago Pilgrims at Milford Haven,
10000 Flandrians at Hull, besides the other Armies to be raised in England, the
Commissions given out, and himself to be a Commission Officer, and consequently
to be engaged in all the Protestant bloodshed intended (the Kings only
excepted) and that this Man should all of a sudden stagger, at one poor
Heretics dispatch, tho for 4000. l. reward, or if that would not down to
refuse 2000 l. and all but for the 6th part of the Luggage of one poor Carcass,
but to Primrose-hill, is not (take it all together) a little stupendous.

But having entered into so sad and deplorable a Story, as the Murder of that
unfortunate Gentleman, nothing methinks can strike a greater Impression on all
tender Hearts, than the Barbarous Circumstances and Methods, used by his
Inhumane Butchers for his Destruction. Mr. Bedloe (for Example) in his former
Examination before the House of Lords Nov. 12th. has him trappan'd into
Sommerset-house in this manner. Lephaire, Walsh, and my Lord Bellasis
Gentleman, meeting Sir Edmondbury about Five of the Clock by the Kings-head-Inn
in the Strand, and pretending to bring him to a place near St. Clements Church,
where they would show him a great Company of the Principal Plotters against the
King, and Surprise both them and the Principal of their Papers, they walked on
till they came at Sommerset-house great Gate, and there made a Halt, desiring
him to walk in, and take a turn or two with two of them, till the Third went
and got a Constable: here after they had took a turn or two, two more Persons
came out, and shoved him into a Room; and when they had him secure; They held a
Pistol to his Breast, threatening to shoot him if he made any noise, but if he
answered their Expectations, they would not hurt him, then asking him to send
for the Examinatious, he had taken about those that were Committed, he told
them 'twas not in his Power, for he had sent them to Whitehall; upon that, and
his refusing to answer other Questions they seized him, and stifled him with a
Pillow, and so they thought he had been dead, but coming into the Room some
time after, they found him struggling; and then they strangled him with a long
Cravat. Thus in ample form from the Records of Mr. Bedloe, have we the true
History of this poor Gentleman's untimely Fate.

But now after this Barbarous manner of Trappanning him, and then Killing him
stone dead, one would imagine we were come to the last Act of the Tragedy. But
truly no; there is as bad or worse behind still, For the kind Mr. Prace upon his
further discovery, has more Bloody Scenes of it to come yet. Upon his Oath
before the King and Council, and afterward confirmed before the House of Lords
he says, that Hill, Lords Journ. jur. Dec. 24 78
Green, and Gerald, after a Week or Fortnights dogging Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey,
they watched him at last passing from St. Clements, till he came to the
Watergate at Sommerset-house, about Nine at Night, where Hill making some have
before stepped within the Wicket, which was open, and turning soon again called
to Sir Edmond as he was passing, and said there was two Men quarrelling within,
who might soon be quieted if once they saw him, whereupon he entered through
the Wicket, and after him Green and Gerald, and down all went till they came to
a Bench, that is at the bottom of the deep descent, and joining to a rail next
to the upper end of the Stables on the right hand, and that upon the said
Bench, there was Sitting and Attending their coming the said Examinant Miles
Prance and Berry the Porter of the other Gate, with an Irishman whose name he
knows not, and by that time they were come half way down. Berry and Prance rose
up from the Bench, and one went up to the Wicket, and the other to the Stone
steps going up to the great Court, to give notice if any came to disturb them,
and so when Sir Edmond was got to the Bench, Green who followed him whipped about
his Neck a large twisted Handkerchief, and thereupon they all assisted, and
dragged him into a Corner, and twisted his Neck till they broke it, one of them
Thumping him on the Breast to make sure work on it; and all this without one
Syllable of a Pistol or Pillow, or any Questions ask't him, or the least
dispute about sending for Depositions, Papers or any thing like it.

Here we may observe how strangely the Devil helps his Servants: Hill Green and
Gerald, had dogged Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey to the Watergate at Sommerset-house,
where neither of them stirring from him, to give notice of their coming, only
Hill just leaving them to step into the Watergate, and out again, with the
Story of that sham quarrel: yet Berry Prance and the Irishman, are sitting on
the Bench by the Stables, and attending their coming, having the Knowledge no
doubt from some Infernal Intelligence, not only that Hill Green and Gerald,
were at that time following Sir Edmond from St. Clements, and that Sir Edmond
would take the Watergate in his Walk, but also that upon the Story of a Quarrel
within the Queens Palace, Sir Edmond would Officiously thrust himself where he
had nothing to do, and all to part a Fray, only with the Face of a Justice of
Peace, at Nine a Clock in a Winters Night, and that upon that very spot of
ground within sight of a Centry, who had Ten times more Authority and Power to
do it then he.

But to proceed with the Villainy of these Popish Assassinates, that very Night
he was conveyed out from Sommerset-house, Mr. Lephaire courts Mr. Bedloe with
2000. l. to be one with himself, Mr. Walsh my Lord Bellasis Gentleman and Mr.
Atkins, Mr. Peppys Clerk, to help convey him out, Lords Journ. jurat 12 N. 78
and the next minute Mr. Bedloe is showed the Body of Sir Edmond, and the
aforesaid Persons all there, and all ready and agreed to do it, but Mr. Bedloe
disliking the Employment, leaves them by an excuse, and the next day is chid
for not keeping his last Nights promise of returning and assisting them.

But Mr. Prance does not finish here but finds new matter, and new Nights work
still; for he does not only all along leave the Body in the Custody of his own
Crew of Murderers Green, Berry, Hill etc. but after many a Removal of it
upstairs and downstairs, from Room to Room, tossed as I may say from Pillar to
Post, the aforesaid Green, Berry, Hill, with Kelly, Gerald, himself, and one
Irishman more, were the very numerical Persons that carried him to
Primrose-Hill.

In all this admirable Variety mark how pat it falls out: as Sir Edmond-bury
was found with those Two fold marks of Assassination about him, viz. both
Strangled and Run Through; so likewise it is observable, that Twofold was the
way of Trappanning him, Twofold the Fatal place, and Twofold his Murder (oh
how insatiate is the Popish Revenge, that One Death could not suffice) and even
to the very last, no less then a Double set of Night-walkers are employed, for
the Expedition to Primrose-Hill.

I shall insist no farther, either upon the Cruelty or Strangeness of this
Assassination, and the Appurtenances thereunto belonging, only to reconcile all
doubts, that these seeming Extremes, or what else you please to call them, may
not grate the Gentle Reader, let him but inquire farther, and he will soon learn,
that by that time those three Murderers, Green Berry and Hill were apprehended,
and Tried for the Fact, all Difficulties were removed; and all Differences
adjusted; whilst like East and West as (they say) differ but in a point, or
like Virtue placed between two Vices, the Golden Mean was at last found out,
and the aforesaid three Blood thirsters, received the condign reward of so
outrageous a Crime. And I heartily wish, that all the yet undiscovered Aiders,
Abettors, or Actors in that Murder had their as just, or more just Reward.

Fiat Lux.

But to return to our Plot History, and the Conduct of those Eternal Blunderers
the Jesuits, one most remarkable Observation is, that in all those Numerous
Letters and Pacquets seen and read by Dr. Oats, delivered at Valladolid, St.
Omers etc. or elsewhere beyond Sea or received from thence, tho they contained
no less then the whole sum of all their Consults in England or elsewhere, and
all the several Proposals and Methods for Regicides, Massacres, Assassinations,
and all the rest of their Villainies whatsoever; The Jesuits in all their
politics, were such stupid inconsiderate Fools, as to Venture the bringing and
carrying of all those dangerous Papers from, and to all parts whatever, with
the contents (excepting one or two in Latin or Spanish) in plain downright
English words at length, only now and then intermixing such an inconsiderable
Cipher, as 48 for the King, 66 for London, or Barly-broth for the Parliament:
insomuch that the most dangerous Letter Mr. Oats ever broke open, without the
least trouble of a Key, or the opposition of Figures or Characters he read Ex
tempore. Nay Mr. Dugdale in the 5 Jesuits Trial p. 25, and 26. intercepted no
less then a 100 Letters, expressly upon Oath directed to other Men, all
containing Treason in them for Killing the King, and Introducing of Popery, and
all too in plain English without any Cipher at all; and those Letters more and
above too sent by the Common post. Jurat. before the H^use of Lords De. 3 78
Besides honest Bedloe's the greatest Plot Messenger of them all, swears he
never carried one Letter or Packet, that he did not break open and read.

And now methinks in so subtle and hazardous an Enterprise, never were such
egregious Oversights committed by Men of the Jesuits Brains, as to venture such
notorious Treasons so nakedly dressed, to all Accidents that might occur; when
Coleman, who had not one Syllable either of Killing the King, Firing of London,
Massacres in England, Scotland, and Ireland; Jago Pilgrims, French Armies;
Popish Ruffians, Black Bills, Pistols, Ponyards or Poisons, not only writ but
received all his Papers in Ciphers, nay a great many of them too from those
very Jesuits beyond Sea, whose handwriting with a 100 times more dangerous
contents in it, Oats, Bedloe, and Dugdale daily saw and read, without the least
veil of Cipher Character or Disguise whatever: when the intercepting of but one
of all those innumerable Pacquets, by any Protestant hand, had certainly
destroyed the whole Fabric of the Plot, and laid both the Papists and their
Cause in unavoidable Ruin. Good Heavens, that a Cabal of such prodigious
Undertakers, should most of them be Men of such Infinite Learning, and yet to
so little purpose.

But alas, the Jesuits were those hardy Desperado's, that they writ Treason,
and posted it about at random, without either Fear or Wit: insomuch that
Dugdale after intercepting, and breaking open so many of their Plot Letters,
swears he kept those he could not handsomely Seal again, Corkers Trial p. 9th.
and yet not one Man of the Conspirators ever complained of the Miscarriage, or
made the least Uproar, though for the loss of Recorded Treason in grain.
Besides, as ill luck would have it, Mr. Dugdale could never find the place
where he laid them, nor produce but one of them so kept, tho for the saving the
credit of his Colly Flowered Face, and preventing his Evidential Carbuncles,
from being brought in for the ratification of his whole Discovery.

Nay the Jesuits were that confident pack of Treason mongers, that they durst
Preach it even to Schoolboys; whilst they had every day in the Week several
Places, where Blundel taught the Youth of London, Treasonable and Mutinous
Doctrines against the Interest and Person of His Sacred Majesty, and gave
certain Sums of Money to their Parents (if poor) to encourage them to send
their Children to be thus Instructed. And all these Children (it seems) so
grown up as to understand Morals as well as Letters, Nar. par. XIV
and yet not one of them from that day to this, so unlucky as to tell Tales out
of the School.

I have one piece of Conduct more in these Everlasting Noddies the Jesuits, and
that too likewise in the case of Coleman, which certainly is one of the Idlest
Whims of Policy, that ever Stupidity in the Name of Nonsense could have
contrived. We find this Machiavel Coleman, in the greatest part of all his
Papers corresponding and treating with the Foreign Jesuits, and all the
greatest Plotters abroad all about Proroguing and Dissolving of Parliaments,
sometimes pushing on the project of a Toleration, and otherwhiles laboring for
their Proroguations upon their every least motion in disfavor of the Roman
Catholics. And that this was the Design in the very Year 78, we have the
Testimony of that Gentleman Evidence Mr. Robert Jennison for it, who in the
first page of his Narrative says, that about the beginning of the Year 1678.
he has heard Mr. Ireland and Mr. Jennison both Jesuits, discourse of a Design
by the Roman Catholics to obtain a Liberty, or a Toleration for the open
Profession of their Religion here in England. And the way he then heard them
speak of, was by collecting a round sum of Money among their party, and by
bribing the greatest part of the then Parliament. Now considering at the
writing of Colemans Letters, and all the time of his Foreign Correspondency,
nay and as long before, as since the very Firing of London, not only the Sword
(as the Plot Discoverers tell you) was every day almost at the Kings Heart, and
all the Protestants Throats, and Coleman himself a Person so deep in the mire,
that as the Dr. Swears not only the Firing of Dublin, the Duke of Ormonds.
Murder and the Irish Massacre was managed by him, but himself too was the
Play Master of the Four Irish Ruffians, and in fine engaged through the whole
Plot. Now considering I say all this, and that it is plain, what with the Murder
of the King, and Massacring the Protestants, whether by French Armies, Pilgrim
Armies or Black Bills, Popery was manifestly to come in by nothing, but open
Hostility and downright Conquest: What the Devil was in the Fools heads of so
many of the greatest Roman Conspirators, to be thus sencelesly day after day at
the ridiculous trouble of so inconsiderable an Under-Plot, as poorly
picqueering at the silly Sessions or motions of a Parliament, when upon
murdring the King, and Subjecting the whole Nation by the Sword, not only the
Parliament had been Dissolved, nay and a Members Brains possibly as easily
knocked out as a Plow-jobbers; but more than all this, upon the Papal Empires
entering by Conquest, they might have put an end to the very Constitution and
Being of Parliaments.

Why all that Cost and Labor then, and so much wast Paper in Figures and
Characters, and ready Money too for Parliament bribing, and all to do just
nothing, if at the same moment they had so much a vaster Machine at work to
accomplish even their utmost Wishes without it. Well but as whimsical as all
these Affairs appear, as I told you all along, the Jesuits were Infatuated, and
through the whole Labyrinth of this Conspiracy, no Man can better solve the
Phaenomena's he meets, then by saying in short they all hang together by
Geometry.

Now after all these Fantastic, and almost incredible Proceedings of the
Jesuits through their whole Plot, some People perhaps may object and say, that
such underlings as Bedlow, Dugdale, Oats etc. whose chief business was but
running of Errands, and themselves but a sort of Goers between to the other
greater Plotters, might possibly be not fully entrusted with the whole Plot,
and therefore by picking up of but scraps and hearsays of it, that might
probably be the Occasion of many Stumbles Contradictions and Mistakes in their
Discovery.

But to refute that feeble objection, we have the very worst of them at every
turn Hail Fellow at all Consults with their Lords and Masters; nay besides the
Letters broken open by Mr. Oats scarce one of them all, that ever he carried
that was not showed him, Mr. Dugdal likewise opend all that came down to his
Masters in the Country; and Mr. Bedloe broke open all his. Nay for a farther
Confirmation of their great trust, they had Access to Persons even of the
highest Degree. Mr. Oats for instance, had that privilege in the Palaces of
Princes, that he peep't through at least three Key-holes, in as many several
Doors to see the Duke at Mass in a corner of his Closet. But little Mr. Bedloe
had the greatest Honor imaginable viz. to be by when the Queen was snubbed for
not consenting to the Kings Murder. I marry was he, and all this Honor too was
done to Bedloe a fellow proved at the Five Jesuits Trial, to have been a
Prisoner in the Marshalsea in May 78. and so poor, as to Live on the Basket;
tho by the bye, the Jesuits were a little foolish here too as well as in the
rest of their Affairs, p. 76.
to let a Person so long privy to their Designs, that Consequently had their
Lives at his Mercy, ly in a Goal, and in so much Necessity as to be next door
to starving; considering too they had been such kind Masters to him, that at
Pickerings Trial, Bedloe's Junior swears he had received 50 or 3 score pounds a
time from them; and not many Months after, he had no less than the proffer of
4000 l. from them at one clap but for one job of Work: However (as we have
before proved) if no greatness of Quality was too high Company for these
Discoverers, and no secret concealed from them, there cannot be the least
shadow for any such objection, and all their respective Testimony must be given
in their full and perfect knowledge of the whole Intrigue.

Nay that was unlikely the Dr. should err through any of his Affidavits,
through that vulgar frailty Forgetfulness, we have him a Person of that
prodigious Memory, that through his whole Examination before Sir Edmond-bury
Godfrey in LXXXI Paragraphs, the whole Subject of above Fifty of 'em is the
contents of Pacquets, and innumerable Letters too and fro from the Jesuits from
all parts, and almost all of them (excepting two or three of them broken open
by himself) read only in other Men's hands; yet I say we have him so complete a
Remembrancer, as besides the wonderful variety contained in them, to give us
their express date of the day of the Month, even to the nice distinction of
Stylo novo and Stylo Vetere: A taste of which unexampled Memory I Will instance in
paragr. LXXII where he says as follows.

Item this Deponent says, that the Pope has issued out a Bull, a Copy of
which Mr. Blundel showed this Deponent on the 30th of August, in which the Pope
was pleased to Order and Dispose of the Bishoprics in England, and other
Dignities of the same as follows

CANTERBVRY.

Cardinal Howard, with an Addition of 40000 Crowns per annum, for maintaining a
Legantine Power and Authority.

YORK.

Perrot, Superior to the Secular Priests, who has power of probate of Wills
Licenses for Marriages, and all Episcopal Jurisdiction except Ordination and
Confirmation, etc.

In this manner, the Dr. goes on with Bishops and Abbots to the number of about
30, without forgetting one single Name or the Latitude of their Jurisdictions;
with a further account, by whom the lesser Dignities of the Church were to be
managed etc. And all this ad unguem from only the sight of the Copy of a Bull
showed him by Blundel.

But lastly, to draw toward a Conclusion, for his last Entertainment, I shall
give my Reader the most profound piece of the whole Diabolical Plot.

The Dr. you must understand, and his Epistle to the Reader in his Narrative
tells you as much, made the Discovery of the Plot to His Majesty on the 13th of
August 78. by the Means and Introduction of that Worthy and Honest Gentleman
Mr. Christopher Kirby. And mark ye, after that very 13th. of August 24 of his
81 Paragraphs of his Narrative are the business of the Plot, still carrying on
to September the 7 following, from p. 37 to p. 57. In which last part of his
Narrative (and all after his Discovery to the King) we have the greatest
Transactions and Consults of the whole Conspiracy. Particularly that very 13th
of August, Nar. par. LV. II.
at 6 at Night was the Dr. not designedly, but by accident at a Sermon Preached
by John Keins, to 12 Men poor in habit yet Men of Quality, as the Deponents
supposes, by their white hands, in which Sermon was delivered, that Protestants
and other Heretic Princes were ipso facto deposed, because such, and that it
was as Lawful to destroy them as an Oliver Cromwell, or any other Usurper.
August 18. the Dr. was at a Consult, where Mr. Vincent, Nar. par. IXI
Joseph David Keymash, Mr. Dominick, Mr. Collins, Mr. Fedding, Mr. Mansell, and
Mr. Laumsdale all Dominicans, met and consulted with John Keins, Father
Hartcourt, Father Fenwick, Father Wright, Father Blundel Jesuits, about Killing
the King and Carrying on the Design; at which Consult Oats was present too and
fro, and afterward employed by them to carry the Proposals of the Consult to
the Carmelites, viz. Dr. Hanson, Mr. Kimbal and Mr. Trevers, par. LXIII.
etc. On Wednesday the 21 of August. was another Consult held by the Jesuits
and Benedictines about the Irish Affairs, and a 3d Consult at Mrs.
Saunders-house, of which the Dr. had notice before the meeting of it by John
Grove. Nay the Irish Ruffians were all Hired and sent down to Windsor, not till
after the 13 of August, Par. LXVII.
and the Dr. by at the telling out and sending the 80 l. after them, expressly
the 22d of August. Besides Conyers and Anderson too were not engaged in the
Kings Murder till now; for Conyers on the very same 22d of August showed the
Dr. his Dagger of a Foot long in the Blade, spick and span new bought of the
old Cutler in Russel Street, and the same 22d day does the Dr. meet Mr.
Blundel, with a Bag of Fireballs under his arm: and the 30th following is
showed by the said Blundel at Fenwicks Chamber (being invited thither to see
it) a Paper Signed by Whitebread in the name of the whole Society, containing a
Scheme of the manner of Firing of Westminster, Tooly-street, St. Thomas Apostle
and the Kings Ships at Wapping.

Besides we have the Dr. at every turn, at his old sport of reading of Letters,
Packets Memorials etc. one time a Catalogue of the Popes disposal of all the
Dignities of the Church seen August 30. Par. 72.
on the 2d of September a Packet directed to John Grove from the Fathers at
Edinburgh to tell the Fathers here, that they had 8000 Catholics ready to
rise, when the business grew hot to join with the disaffected Scots. These Plot
Papers cum multis aliis too tedious here to recite did the Dr. peruse, and went
hand in hand still with the rest of his Brother Plotters.

In all these many Consults and Matters transacted since the 13th. of August,
we find first this wonderful ill fortune, that the Jesuits should meet,
consult, etc. with as much or more vigor than ever, without the least Breath or
hint of a Discovery made to His Majesty from the very 13th of August to the 3d
of September following.

Secondly, we have the Doctor all along as deep in the Plot, and as much
trusted by the Jesuits as ever, and tho he had been with the King to discover
it, and not extremely Credited by him, endeavored to give him all the
satisfaction and Confirmation of the Plot, that he could possible; yet he
neither keeps seizes or causes to be seized, any one of these Letters Pacquets
Memorials Proposals or Commissions, seen or carried too and fro by him; nor so
much as endeavors to apprehend either the Jesuits Dominicans Benedictines etc.
at any of their forementioned Consults, tho in the height of all their
Plotting, with all their treasonable Schemes, Pacquets, Papers, and Resolves
before them.

Now some unreasonable dissatisfyed Critiques, have been apt (God forgive them
sor't) to make this unlucky Dilemma viz. that either there were no such
Treasonable Packets, Papers etc. seen, read, or carried by the Dr, nor to be
seized or produced, nor any such Consulters to be apprehended; or else, that
Titus Oats instead of his pretended Zeal for the King and Protestants
Preservation, is the unhappy or rather execrable Betrayer of both, whilst
neither the safety of his Prince, Country, or Religion could prompt him to make
use of such favorable and many opportunities, tho for the full Confutation of
all Objections whatever, and the Plain and Visible Detection of the King and
Kingdoms Enemies, by such convincing Testimonies, as might have confronted even
Malice, Impudence, nay Hell it self.

It Is true, it is to be Supposed that a Traitor engaged in a Conspiracy, during
the time of his Faith and Truth to that Conspiracy, might never preserve any
such thing as a Commission, Patent, or any other Treasonable Paper; and
consequently the Dr. in times past, might not take care to furnish himself with
any such visible Proofs against them. But from that very day that he repented
of his Crimes, abjured their Treasons, and sided with them only to trepan and
betray them, making it his whole business and study to furnish the World with
Invincible Proofs of their Villainies, and yet thus egregiously to let slip such
numerous Advantages, and daily offered Manifestations of their Rogueries, yes
and for this very Discoverer to be introduced to the King with no other
Credentials about him, than the bare Tale of a Plot, and that too in the very
height of his giving out daily Commissions for raising of Armies etc. Nay after
the Dr. was plainly sensible (if he believes as he swears) that he had seen
Pacquets to the Fathers at St. Omers, bearing date January 1. new Style, in
which the Fathers were assured, that His Majesty of great Britain was brought
to that pass, Nar. par. XVIII.
that if any Malecontent amongst them should not prove true to their Design,
His Majesty would never give ear to their Information etc. and yet after such
fair Warning, for this very Patriot, that knew he had so much Difficulty and
Infidelity to cope with, to come thus unprovided, with not one scrap or scraul
out of all those Infinite Manuscripts and Undeniable Records against them,
daily trusted in his hands; for this Plot-swearer I say, to be thus zealous for
the Protection of the King and three Kingdoms, and yet to come so empty handed
to his Discovery, is such a Riddle, Prodigy, or what else you please to style
it, as certainly never had, nor will have the Fellow on it.

So that through the whole Series of the Plot, we find not only the Motions of
the Jesuits, but likewise the very Discoverers too, so notoriously excentrick,
that the Liveliest Representation of the Whole, is, If one Pack of Phaetons
were setting the World on Fire, another Pack stepped out to quench it.

But that the Jesuits have such roving Head-pieces, that no Man can fix them to
one Point, we might be extremely astonished, at all the Infinite Diversities we
meet in the Popist Plot; and yet as numerous and as Mysterious, as their
Methods have been for the Introduction of Popery; viz. sometimes by Massacres,
another while by no Massacres, first by Killing all, and then by saving half,
one while by one Army, and then another Army, and afterward no Armies etc.
with all the rest of the forementioned Yariety: what if at last we find out a
new Projection for it still, a Projection not so much as resembling any of its
Fellows, and possibly the very best in the whole Bundle. This Projection we
find in the 23 paragraph of the Drs. Narrative verbatim as follows.

That the Fathers of St. Omers, viz. Richard. Ashby Rector, Edward Hall, Edward
Nevil, and others of the English Seminary, did write to Thomas Whitebread and
other Fathers, in which was expressed that it was now apparent, that the
Catholic Religion was to be brought in the same way, that they had used for
the Destruction of the Father of this King, and as that could not be effected
till much Blood was spilt on both sides, so this must be effected by Effusion
of Blood, etc.

Here 'twill be worth our while to inquire what that way was, the Roman
Catholics used for the Destruction of the old King: and for that we will go no
further than the Authority of the Dr. himself, in the Epistle to his Narrative
dedicated to His Majesty; where after many other Allegations against the Popish
Party, he says.

Who besides These were the first Authors and Contrivers of the late unnatural
War, by their known Diabolical Arts of Inflaming Parties and Passions against
each other, and of your Royal Fathers Sufferings and Barbarous Osage It was
those that brought him to his End, and flourish't Swords, and triumphed over
his dead Body, whom they durst not approach when Living, etc.

This Assertion granted, the Means they used for his Destruction, and the
Effects that followed can be no other then these, viz. the Papists who under
the Reign of the old King, by the Indulgence of so Merciful a Prince had a
private Toleration of their Religion, with a full and perfect Enjoyment of all
the Liberties, Privileges, and Immunities. Peace and I ranquillity, of any of
the rest of His Majesty's Pr^testant Subjects, we^e notwithstanding privately
enflaming a Crew of Fanatic Traitors to Murder their Prince, destroy the
Monarchy, and set up a Commonwealth to their own inevitable Ruin; and the more
artfully to pull down that Ruin, they were most of them in actual service for
that very Prince they were plotting to destroy; thereby not only hazarding
their Lives in his cause, but likewise forfeiting both their Freedoms and
Estates, to the Rapine and Revenge of the Victorious Rebels for their defending
him. And all this for the Advancement of Popery; An Odd sort of Advancement;
but let that pass.

Now to sum up all, if the Fathers at St. Omers were unanimously agreed, that
the apparent means of bringing in their Religion, was the way used for the old
Kings Destruction, and it is likewise as apparent this only was the said means;
How can we make the Conspiracy and Bias of Affairs in that Age run with this,
but by concluding the Papists, or their Brethren in Iniquity for them, are a
blowing the old Coal again, f^^^^ to raise a false Outcry against Popery and
Arbitrary Power, to exasperate the Kingdom into a Civil War; then mount the
Fanatic into the Saddle, and the King to the Block; whiln my old Patrons late
Association was but a Bird of their own hatching, the second part of the old
Covenant to have played the old Game over again. And faith, all things
considered (Papists or no Papists in the Cabal) this may be the most probable
of all the Intrigues we have met yet; and how unwilling soever some People may
be to grant this point, if our Dr. ever swore truth, the Inference falls so
pat, and several late Passages look so much that way, that it is the very Top of
all his Discovery.

This unlucky piece of Intelligence so mis-matcht to all the rest of his
Evidence, however it got into the crowd, and slipped into Print, I know not; but
I am certain his good Patrons the Brethren were mightily overseen at the
perusal of his Papers, in not castrating this Luxuriant Branch; and the Dr.
Himself deserved no less then a True Protestant Penance for it, and to be
turned over to Satan to be buffeted.

But the Plot it self is not more Extraordinary, than Mr. Oats his good Fortune
and Escape to prove it; for on the 3d. of September, long after his being with
the King, he tells us, Nar. par. 75.
That he saw a Letter from the Provincial, specifying that the Provincial had
been Informed of some Discovery made, at which he was somewhat surpised. Pa.
76. the same day at Night Mr. Oats went to Visit the Provincial at his Lodging,
and was ordered to come again the Morning following. Par. 77. the next Morning,
being the 4th of September, according to the aforesaid Orders, he went to the
Provincial, who upon sight of him, asked him with what Face he durst look on
him, since he had played them such a Treacherous Trick; and struck him 3 blows
with his stick, and a Box on the Ear, and charged him with being with the King
and a Minister with him, whom he suspected to have Informed the King of these
things etc. the Provincial having had Intelligence by a Letter from Father
Benningfield, that had suggested some such thing to him; and therefore judg^d
it must be he that had Discovered, and was drawn in by some Parson to the same
etc. But at last the Provincial told him, he was willing to be reconciled to
him, if he would discover who the Parson was, and his Name and Place of Abode,
to the end he might be secured of him, and were resolved to Kill him: and in
the mean time, the Dr. was ordered to go beyond Sea within 14 days, as the
Provincial said, and that the Deponent might not Cheat them, they were to pay
for his Coach-hire, and ordered him entertainment at Sittingbourn, and other
places on the Road to Dover, and there Mr. Conyers at the Kings head was to pay
for his passage to Callice, and the Master of the Feathers in Callice to St.
Omers, where he was to remain till farther Order from the Provincial.

Aft^r all this, (Paragr. the 78) on the 6 of September, we have the Dr. and
Pick^ring conferring Treasonable Notes together, and the same Night we have him
coming again to visit the Provincial.

That about night the D^ponent attending the Provincials d or and about to go
in, he heard White and some others whom the Deponent supposes by their Voices
to be Father Mich^^, and one Mr. Poole consulting about the disposing of a
Person he supposes to be himself; their words were these. This Man has betrayed
us, and therefore we will give a Coachman twenty pound to take him up, and
carry him directly to Rochester to E^quire Lees house, who lived near the Town,
and from thence to D^ver by some bye way, because he was acquainted at S^^tin
bourn and said, if they could get him on to other side the Water, they would
torment him till he had confessed to them, who it wa^ had been with the King, and
Informed him of the business; When the Deponent heard those Wor^s, he made have
away and durst not lie that Night in his own Lodgings.

In all this is remarkable, that Dr. Oats who not many days after durst not
trust himself abroad, without half a score stout Beef-eaters, to defend him
from Popish Assassinates, yet here, after his Discovery to the King, and
reading a Letter from the Provincial expressing his intimation of the
Discovery, like a bold Knight Errant ventures himself alone at the Provincials
own Lodgings Sept. 3d, yes, and upon further Orders waits on him again the next
day, nay, and what is yet the greatest piece of Herculean Courage, that e're I
met with, after not only being taxed with it, and handsomely cudgelled into The
Bargain, but the very Minister that drew him in was fairly threatened to be
murdered; The undaunted Dr. ventured again the 6 day to the Provincials door
(tho for n^ ^usiness in the World with him) and had went in had not his
fortunate over-hearing the Consult about him, made him troop off in a whole
Skin; secondly we are to observe, that the Provincial that suspected him
before, and sent for him to tax him with it, at the same time he had him safely
alone with him, and with no less thoughts about him, then Killing the Minister
that drew him in (which is supposed was Dr. Tongue) to prevent a farther
Discovery; yet on the otherside, just at the critical minute of unravelling all
those Jesuitish Intrigues, that had been an Hundred Years in hatching,
foolishly even to hazarding their whole Cause, lets go the very Man, who had it
in his Power to undo them all; a Person more dangerous ten times than Dr.
Tongue; and for his falsehood ^o the Jesuits in such a Discovery, ten times more
deserving to be secured, and to have his Mouth stopped with a Dagger than he; nay
what is more lewdly foolish than all the rest, at the very Minute he designs to
pack him beyond Sea, to prevent farther danger, he gives him 14 days time in
Town before he sets out for Dover. Good Heavens; that the Principal of the
Jesuits in England, that one would think should have a little more Wit, one not
only so highly concerned in the Plot, and so industrious for the Popes
Restoration; but so bloodily principled that Murders, Regicides and Massacres
were his daily Study, should so ridiculously loose so fair an opportunity of
dispatching, or at least securing one poor Renegado, tho for the Preservation
of the Lives and Fortunes of himself and his whole Party.

Well! nothing but Folly and Madness reigns, and therefore 'twas impossible
such a Thought should enter into his Head: Besides as the Drs. Discovery, take
it altogether, was wholly Miraculous, so 'twas ordained that Miraculous should
be his Preservation to make it.

POSTSCRIPT.
THis and this only is the Popish Plot, as the Discoverers give it us, and
these the particular true Methods taken by the Jesuits and their Engines, for
both the Murder of the King, the Massacring the Protestants, and Subverting the
Religion and Government. In this Narrative of the Plot (how light soever some
may interpret the Style I have used) I defye the severest Plot-hunter, and the
most angry Liberty and Property Morger in England, to tax me of one false
Quotation out of the Records of Titus Dugdale, Bedlows, or any other of the
Discoverers. However if my Inferences displease them, and any of them have read
the Plot with other Optics then mine: and in fine can kick it into any better
shape than I have done, I heartily beg he would set Pen to Paper, and mend the
faults I have made, For I declare I should willingly hear Reason, and stand
Convicted by it.

But in them an while to return to the Plot. The greatest part of this
Discovery is comprised in those fatal Examinations, taken before that unhappy
Gentleman Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey. But having named that u^fortunate Martyr, I
cannot but make one reflection more on the Jesuits Infatuation, in that piece of
ill timed Cruelty. If I had been one of their Consult, I should have been so
far from giving my Vote for his Murder, or one 10th part of 4000. l. a piece to
his Assassinates, and all to suppress the Formidable Drs Depositions; that on
the contrary, I should have civilly entreated him first to have Printed them,
2dly. have petitioned the 3 Kingdoms, to read them with Deliberation, and
lastly have honorably rewarded the kind Dr. for his Discovery, with at least a
Pension for his Life. This way I am sure might have probably saved a great deal
of Bloodshed and more Distraction; and I am Confident a Pension to the Dr. for
this service had been better laid out, and better deserved from the Popish
Party, then many a round sum expended by them elsewhere for less Consideration.

This is the Plot, the insufficient Prosecution of which (as some Sham Patriots
please to think, or at least call it) has Exasperated them into that Gall and
Rancor, as has made them brand even the Throne it self, and make the very
Government in the Conspiracy for its own Dissolution: and because the^e
Malcontents either cannot or dare not be plain in reciting all the particular
Omissions and Transgress^ons committed in that kind, for once I Will do it for
them; And since the Court and the Court conduct is the great grievance to some
of His Majesty's true Protestant Subjects, I shall endeavor to Muster all the
most visible Enormities and neglects, either in the detection of the Plot, or
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion. For Example.

After no less than 30000 Spanish Pilgrims were just in their March toward
England, were not the King and Coun^el extremely to blame in such a dangerous
Exigence, not to dispatch Ambassadors to all Foreign Princes, to deny passage
through their Kingdoms, to such a terrible Legion of Blood-thirsty Vagabonds,
and more especially to break Alliance with the Spaniard for so Treacherous a
Conspiracy, was it not high time for the safety of the Nation to alarm all the
Ports of England, and draw down the Militia that way to keep them out. But this
the true Protestants know was not done.

Was it not Likewise as great a Neglect in the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in
not Issuing out a Lat tat or one and Cry, or some such thing against the 25000
Messina Soldiers Landed and Concealed in that Kingdom, and making a strict
search for 40000 Black Bills, with a Proclamation likewise of so much reward to
bring in either the Smiths, Ironmongers or Waggoners concerned either in to
ging Lodging, or carrying of them.

Is it not a manifest exposing of his Royal Person, to the very great fright of
his true Protestant Subjects, for the King to venture himself to Windsor, or
any other of his Country Seats, and Possibly but in the head of not above 200
Guards, when no less then Four Irish Ruffians have so notoriously attempted h^s
Life there.

Can there be a more heinous scandal to the Government, and the great Men at
the helm, after the not only Firing of London and Southwark with 700 Sheeps fat
Fireballs alias Teuxberry Mustard Balls, but Likewise such numerous hands
hired and posted for the Firing of the rest of the Suburbs, first not to make a
stricter inquisition after these Jesuitical City burners, and 2dly not to have
a severe eye upon all Mutton dealers from the Drover to the Butcher, nay from
the Cook to the Kitchen stuff Maid, to prevent the dangerous use of all Sheeps
Fat, and that for no less then the safety of Englands Metropolis.

But above all this; what more unpardonable Fault could His Majesty commit; or
what greater neglect could he show both of his own, and his Kingdoms safety, as
not to disband his Guards, especially when his Loyal Subjects, and the Nations
Patriots, for the Protection both of the Protestant Faith, and the Faiths
Defender, so humbly and so Seasonably desired it of him. And what is yet more
Capital than all the rest; neither to resign his Militia, nor take his Forts
and Cinque Ports from his Friends, and commit them to their Trust, whom They
his Wiser Guardians kind Protectorships thought fit to choose for him. Have not
the true Protestant Party just cause (think you) to Exclaim; and in the height
of their fervent Zeal for their King and Country, Launch out now and then into
a Libel or so, upon so unconscionable a Denial of these so reasonable Petitions?

Nay have not the Brethren a yet more severe Complaint against His Majesty, for
his Weakness of Faith, in not sufficiently crediting Dangerfields receipt of 20
Guinneys from his Royal Highness? and that too against a Brother, and a Prince,
upon the Single Attestation of one poor Jail Bird, a Testimony not sufficient
to convict a Corn-cutter; nay, and all in down right contradiction of all the
other Evidence beside, who still to the last swore the Duke both Ignorant and
Innocent of the Plot. But alas! what is Innocence in the Face of a Bill of
Exclusion; or what signity such foolish scruples as Nonsense, Improbability,
and Contradiction in the Case of the Descent of Crowns? and why should not that
Evidence strike at the Birthright, nay lives of Princes, and be believed for
High Treason at the C -- s Bar, that at a Quarter Sessions would not have been
credited for the Proof of a petty Larceny? Ay, and very good reason for it too,
for the true Protestant Cause is a Theme so sublime and so Divine, that ipso
mom^nto it consecrates all its Supporters, and puts Oracles even into all
Mouths; and the Devil himself could scarce lie upon that Subject.

Besides all Errors at Whitehall, have not those unnatural Mothers, the two
Protestant Universities, a just Cause to blush, to see themselves so much out
done by the more generous Academy at Salamanca? Is it not a crying Shame they
have not celebrated a Commencement on purpose, to admit the Reverend Dignified
Titus into his Drs. Robes? Nay, are not the whole Body of the Clergy down right
Papists in their Souls, that they have not with one Heart, and one Voice, made
it their humble Petition to His Majesty, that the so well deserving Pillar of
their Religion, may be desired to lay by his Amsterdam Jump, and do them the
Honor to Accept of a Bishopric.

Or what more Barbarous Ingratitude could have been shown to the Preserver of 3
Kingdoms, and the Atlas of our Christianity, then that this very Person should
be so heinously neglected, that from not being worth 12, d. and raised
afterward to 12 pounds a Week, he should be 700 worse for the Discovery of the
Plot. But alas, that may very well be; for we are all sensible he brought over
his Discovery as Whittington did his Cat, with no less Expectation then to be
made an Alderman by it; and, as it is likewise plain, it came upon us very like
Whittingtons Cat too, no less then a Rarity and a perfect Original, being the
First and the Last either of the Kind or the Price; what greater National piece
of Injustice can be offered, then that he wants both the Reward and Exaltation
he deserves.

It Is true, some ill natured Snarlers are apt to lessen the Drs Merit, upon
several Lapses and Mistakes in some of his Affidavits; but alas! how
insignificant are those Trifles (like the Spots in the Sun) to the shading of
his Glory? What if his Infallibility forswore it self a little at Drs. Commons;
dares any Man be so Impudent as to say any thing that he, or any other of the
Narrative Men swore before the Council, or Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey etc. how
improbable or contradictory soever was not Oracle? What if Elliots Mahumetanism
and Circumcision were a little Fabulous, must not every tittle therefore of
Popery and the Plot-History be Sacred Truth? or is it not Downright turning a
Favorer of Popery, and Enemy to the Protestant Religion to suspect it
otherwise? What if he had a little forgot himself in his description of Don
John? and what if before the King and Council he disowned any Personal
Knowledge of Coleman; and yet at his Trial was intimately acquainted with him,
and the Top Evidence that hanged him? And what if another time at the Council,
he knew neither Sir George Wakemans Person nor Handwriting, or any ill thing
by him; and yet at his Trial positively swore both his Writing a Treasonable
Letter to Ashby, and the whole Circumstances of his Undertaking to Poison the
King for 15000 pounds? Alas; shall these and Twenty other venial slips in the
Drs Testimony be any blemish to the Prowess and Reputation of so Doubty a
Discoverer?

Ignorance indeed may prate, and Cynicks may Snarl, and several of the Drs
Oaths, especially that against Elliot may be the Subject of their Mirth, that
do not understand it: But alas the world little imagines the depth of that
Oath, when that Oath, I assure you, is one of the greatest Atchievments, that
ever the Doctor performed for the Preservation of the Protestant Peace, and
Religion. For mark ye, the Whigs (see what Superstition can do) were so
strangely rapt up with the Contemplation of so Divine a Preserver, and looked
upon him as so great a Guardian Angel to the Protestant Cause, that they Styled
him no less then the Savior of the Nation, a Title so arrogant as out did the
greatest Roman Canonizing; till the Careful Dr. troubled at their mistaken
Adorations, to restore them to their right Protestant senses again, and prevent
this more then Popish piece of Idolatry, very generously resigned his borrowed
Divinity, and kindly forswore himself, only to show he was but Humane Flesh and
Blood. Yes kindly indeed; and may the World acknowledge it: And so may the Eyes
of the Nation be opened by it, till for the future Men shall weigh before they
believe, and think as well as hear. Till neither Figments nor Phantoms,
Incoherencies nor Absurdities be imposed upon them for Gospel; nor the Artifice
of false Alarms, and false Fears fright them into a true Disobedience. So may
our Jealousies daily lessen till our Concord increases, and the Best of Kings
be universally Loved and Obeyed by the Best of Subjects.

Why, alas! should the Apprehension of Imaginary Dangers put us into real
Distractions; how much is it below the very Courage of an English Man, to fancy
the Papists able to cut our Throats? for my Part I am so far from granting the
Supposition of a Massacre, to be made by the Roman Catholic hands in England
(I mean of late Years,) that I defy the Eloquence of Angels, to convince any
rational Man of the Possibility of any thing like it. And truly amongst all the
false Doctrines of the Plot, tho I have been as bold a Pamphleteer as most Men,
and possibly could have rigged out a feeble Argument, in as gay Trappings as my
Fellow scriblers; yet I vow I had never Rhetoric enough, or indeed had never
so much Impudence, amongst all the Gorgons through both my Characters, as to
defend that Bugbear, called a Massacre. And I am certain if Popery had no
other Door for it is Entrance, the Jesuits might even as well have contrived to
have brought it in by a Trojan Horse, and perhaps the better way of the two.
Insomuch that I have read that Fate denouncing Line under Sir Edmond bury
Godfreys Picture

Had He not Dyed, We had not Lived. Without up lifted hands for our
Deliverance. For truly, I was so little of the Authors Faith that writ it, that
I fancy if that poor Gentleman had escaped that Execrable Murder, both he, and
many a score of Thousands of his Protestant Countrymen, had been in a fair way
of living, till the Papists Hearts aked, and of seeing 7 and 7 merry Christmas's
after it.

But one thing I have observed. Of all the Liberty and Property Men, and the
rest of the great Patriots for the Protestant Cause, that have hung the Popish
Swords but in a Thread over our Heads, and so often alarmed us with Massacres,
in all this long License of the Press, and the Loads of Pamphlets written on
that Theme, through all their Pains-taking to convince the World our Throats
were all to have been cut by the Papists, there is not one of them has told us
How and which Way. And truly there is good reason for it: That part of our
Danger is so extraordinary Gigantick, that as not being in rerum Natura it is
only to be Supposed; and the Papists in that Design were much in the Case of
that Philosopher, that briskly vapored

(...). Give me but place on which my Feet may Stand,
From their fixed Base I Will throw both Sea and Land.
And no doubt he would have kept his Word; only the Misery on it was, The
Philosophers (...) was never found out, and so the Feat was never performed.

But now Suppose we laid the Massacre asleep a while, and let the Jago Pilgrims
take a turn home again; and what if for once we ventured to call in all the
Doctors Commissions, and disbanded the innumerable Thousands and so forth; and
then, (instead of the Charge and Trouble of Pickering, Grove, Conyers, the four
Irish Ruffians, and the rest of the Bilboe Sparks, and all those more dangerous
barefac't Assassinates) take the most Probable way of advancing the Catholic
Cause: for Example, Let us Suppose the Jesuits had kept only Sr. George Wakeman
in pay, and by his dexterity of hand had Slyly taken of the King, unsuspected
by the World, and mounted a Popish Successor more Calmly into the Throne,
without the open Murder of the King, to Set the whole Kingdom in a Flame, and
possibly raise that unquenchable Fury against the whole Popish Party, that
might not have Stopped till it had acted a second part in England of Cromwels
Revenge in Ireland. Imagine, I say, that the Jesuits had taken this Course, and
gotten the advantage of a Popish Sovereign in Quiet Possession of the Imperial
Crown; nay and a Prince too molded to their own hearts Liking, and would make
their Most of him; what wonderful Exploits could He and they together atchieve
for the Subversion of the Government, and Establishing the Popish Tyranny.

It Is true, it is an Easy thing to muster up all the Cruelties of Queen Mary's
Reign, and All the Breach of her Oaths to her Protestant Subjects; and from
that threadbare Theme cramp out Matter enough to patch up a Scarecrow to fright
the Ignorant Rabble both out of their Wits, and their Allegiance for fear of
Popery; tho God knows with no more Resemblance between the present State of
England, and that in Queen Maryes Days, then between Bedlows and Prances way of
Murdering Sir Edmond, or the two most Opposite Things in Nature. Alas! she
lived in an Age when the Majority of her Parliament were Papists, and the very
Restoration of the Pope came in by Law; and when her Smithfield Bonfires blazed
she had a Decretum est Lege for Hereticis Comburendis, and waved her Bloody
Ensigns under the Standard of an Act of Paliament: but had her Fire and Faggot
Statute been as down the Wind, and as little in force as now, I question if
she, and all her bloody Counselors, her Bonner, Gardener, and the rest of
them, durst have Ventured to Set their Smithfield a Smoking, unless they had a
mind to have had her Palace have Smoaked after it. Neither do we ever read, in
all her Popish Bigottry, that she and her Zealous Philip with all their Spanish
and English Power together, and in all their kindness for Rome, durst venture
so much as to restore the Pope but his Abbey Lands again, or set up any thing,
that but looked like Arbitrary Government. And why, if we had a Popish Successor
in our Age, he should dare do ten times more then She, and yet without the 20th
part of her Power to effect it, I profess I am to learn. It Is true the Popish
Character gives you a great many dreadful Features of that devouring Monster
Popery, and as I remember, it goes so far as to bring a Popish Successor to a
downright Nebuchadnezzar at last, with his fiery furnaces no less then 7 times
hotter then Ordinary; but there as ill Luck would have it, it breaks off
abruptly, and never gives the Reader Account, how and where a Popish Successor
shall find those hardy Britains, that like Nebuchadnezzars Captains will burn
themselves to throw Us into fire; and without that Latter part the Story's
imperfect. For the Introduction of Arbitrary Power, Popery, and Smithfield
Piles in this Age, is an Attempt will be so hot in the Fingers, that it will
never be handled without Mortal Danger to the Undertakers. When the Phaeton
Spirit sets a driving, Phaetons Fate must follow; and an English Monarch that
takes that way of steering would quickly to his own sad Cost find himself a
King not of Men but of Devils. For if the Shadow and Chimera of Arbitrary
Power, and Popery, can raise so troublesome a Ferment in the Stiffneckt People
of England, the Substance of it will do worse: and Rome that now has been Ages
a falling (let the Jesuits flatter themselves, as they please, or the Dr. for
them) will never be rebuilt in a Trice.

But suppose a Popish Successor either could, or would be the very greatest
Monster that Dreams or Fears would paint him, yet The very Inspired Oedipus of
the whole Whiggish Party, the Dr. himself has over and again cleared his Royal
Highness from the Possibility of being that Creature. For in his Nar. par.
XXIV. after the receipt of a Letter from the Dnos of St. Omers, which gave the
English Fathers Instructions to feel how the Duke stood affected to their
design a foot, we have no less then Thomas Whitebread, John Keins, Bazil
Longworrh, Richard Petres, John Fenwick, Father Ire land, Father Harcourt,
Father Blondel, Father Matthew Wright, Father Jennison, and Father Simmons all
Subscribing this answer: Viz that tho they had found the Duke a good Catholic,
yet he had a Tender Affection for the King, and would scarcely be engaged in
that concern: and if they should intimate their Design or Purpose to him, they
might not only be frustrated of their Design, but also might loose his Favor,
Nay we have the Duke so far from being thought a Prop of their Cause, that his
Life is several times in the Plot, no less threatened than his Brothers,
Whitebread tells Ashby at St. Omers June 10th. 78, that if the Duke should set
his Face in the least measure to follow his Brothers Footsteps, his passport
was made to lay him asleep too. Nar. par. XXIX. and in par. LX. we have Keinsv
telling Oats that the Duke was not the Strength of their Trust, for if James
did not comply with them, he must go to pot too. Nay we have the Dr. before the
House of Lords, (October. 30.78.) upon his being informed that Coleman had highly
Impeached the Duke of York by Letters; comeing voluntarily to clear his Royal
Highness, and giving six several Reasons to prove he thought the Duke was
wholly Innocent. The First of these Reasons was, that the Plotters had got a
trick to counterfeit his and her Royal Highnesses Hand and Seal, etc. Now if
the Doctors Testimony be their infallible Confirmation for all the Villainy of
the whole Popish Plot, why not likewise of the Dukes Innocence and Ignorance of
it; and if so, why shall that Prince of Morals so opposite to the Jesuits
designs, that his very knowledge of them had by their own confession been
enough to have ruined both their Plot and them: A Prince though by their own
Assertion so good a Catholic, yet in his Nature so averse to any Irregular
Act, though for the crowning even that great Work that Rome and all her Engines
had been laboring to perfect ever since Queen Elizabeth's days; how is it
likely, I say, that a Prince thus Principled should upon Mounting the Throne,
turn a Domitian, Caligula, Nero, and what not, and be all those Devils, that
either the Fright of Fools, or the Malice of Knaves has represented him.

But that neither Prejudice nor Ignorance should fly in my Face, and think this
Treatise designed for the stifling of Truth, and lessening the Popish Guilt, I
will give them yet a farther Confession of my Faith. I believe that such a
half-witted Zealot, or so over-believing a Wreteh as Pickering might have that
confidence in the Popes Key, that for the Assurance of Paradise, and 30000.
Masses he might be hired to Pistol the King. And yet I declare, I neither think
Pickering the best Gunner for that adventure, nor that his Pericranium was able
to throw the Murder of the King upon the Presbyterians, as Dugdale has it: Nor
that Mr. Oats in January 77. read a Letter at St. Omers containing a matter of
Fact not committed till the March following: I cannot believe neither that Mr.
Elliot was Circumcised, or had Killed his Patron, and that the Doctor in Foro
Conscientiae was not as much perjured at Doctors Commons, as he he could have
been at the Old Bailey. And though I most heartily abhor the Irish and Parisian
Massacres, and the Hellish Gun-Powder-Plot, or any other of the Popish
Villainies whatever; yet I declare if any Man should swear that Guido Faux, or
Father Garnet had had an Invisible Army of 25000. Soldiers landed at Barn-Elms,
and a French Navy Riding in Chelsey-Reach: I vow from the bottom of my Soul, I
should not believe him. And I am so far from thinking that any reasonable
Creature ought to pin his Faith only upon Oaths for his Credentials, or that
all Accusations must be true, because they are alleged against Rogues and
Villains, that on the contrary I Will lay little Tuus a Wager, that it is possible
to draw up a Narrative (if he will be but so kind to swear to it) against a
Judas, nay the Devil himself, that shall not have one syllable of Truth in it.
Alas! it is my opinion, the greatest Monsters of Men may be belyed, and he is
equally guilty of Perjury that swears falfly against a Barrabas as against a
Jesus.

But now ever since the first Discovery of all these Hellish Conspiracies, and
all the hideous and bloody Matters in Agitation by the Papists, one thing is
strangely Remarkable, none are so vehement against Popery and Plots, and so
loud against Arbitrary Government as the Dissenters. In my Opinion the
Episcopal Party were no doubt in as great danger from the Papists as the
Non-consormists. Their principles are as opposite to the Romanists, and I am
sure their Preachers, as Bishop of Lincoln, Pierce, Stilling fleet, Tillotson,
etc. have done the Popish Religion more mischief than a thousand Baxters or
Owens; for which they and their Disciples ought in all Reason to expect as
fatal, and as universal a stroke from the Popish Swords as the Dissenters; and
yet methinks there must be something more than ordinary in the Wind, that the
Dissenters of all the Nation, are the greatest and almost only Dreaders of that
unexpressible Inundation of Popery that was just pouring down upon us, with all
those Torrents of Treasons, Fires, Massacres, and Rebellions, etc. so
extraordinary apprehensive of it, till they make each Part and Tittle sworn on
that Theme so absolute an Article of their Creed, that their Faith is stronger
than an Estriges stomach, and can digest even Inconsistence, Romance, and
Contradiction. Nay they will push it farther still, and arraign even Majesty it
self, and with all the most virulent Exclamations, make the Prorogations and
Dissolutions of Parliaments a palpable encouragement of the Conspiracy, whilst
the restless Malice of the Jesuits is (they will tell you) at this very day as
active, and the Plot no doubt as vigorously carrying on as ever.

Now whether all these terrible Apprehensions against Popery be unfeigned, and
from the bottom of their Hearts is the thing to be Examined: for Experiment of
which, since no humane Power can faddom Thoughts, we can have no plainer Proofs
or Signs of their Faith then by their Works; an Instance of which I shall give
you in some few Particulars.

Mr. Oats Swears, that London and Southwark were Fired by the Papists, Nar.
par. XXXIV. and Irelands Trial p. 32. and Nar. par. 71. he gives us a full
Relation how himself, and the Lord knows who besides, were hired to Fire the
rest of the Suburbs in August 78, and that his words are no common Authority,
there is scarce a Dissenter amongst them that will not confidently averr to this
very day, that he believes the Fire at the Temple, and Wapping, and indeed
every considerable Fire of late Years has been done by the Treachery of the
Papists.

Yet notwithstanding all this, I would gladly know how many Rich Presbyterians
since the Plot, in whatever part of London dispersed, have sold their Estates in
Houses to the unbelieving Tories, or refused to lay out their Money for a
Common Market price, even in those very Estates, that are every day incident to
so much Ruin, and continually exposed to the Malice of such fatal and restless
Enemies. Nay what is yet more strange, since the late Ensurance Office has been
up, how comes it about in a City, that has above 10000 Houses in the Dissenters
possession, there is not yet 3000 Houses ensured of all Parties; considering
too that but the laying out of one five Shillings per annum, secures no less
then a 100 pounds. Lord that the Brethren should have such Expansive Faith in
Fires and Sheeps Fat Fireballs, and see such frequent and terrible Examples of
them; yet should nevertheless be so strangely negligent, in so critical a
Juncture, as not to expend so little a Trifle tho for so important and so vast
a Security. Besides if Popery were so near upon us, and the Pope had so many
hands at Work, and all resolved to make Reprizals of his lost Ground in
England, I wonder how it comes about, that the price of Abbey Lands is fallen
no lower.

In another parr of the Doctors Narrative, we have no less then 20000 Fighting
Papists in or about London all ready to rise in 24 hours. (par. IX,) and those
20000 like Falstaffs Blades in Buck^^on run up afterward by William Bedlows to
40000 (Lords Journal 12 Nov. 78) and all to cut the Protestants Throats. And if
the Plot be still carrying on, no doubt they are still in the same readiness to
do the former Execution, and if so, I desire to know how many of the Dissenting
Brethren throughout London, in this Plotting Season barricado their Doors with
one Bolt, Chain or Bar Extraordinary when they go to Bed, to keep their Throats
the better from being cut before Morning. Besides notwithstanding all their
Outcries against Popery, and the pretended Court Encouragement for the
Blood-thirsty Papists to proceed with their Insurrections Armies Massacres, and
all the rest of their Roman Thunderbolts, I would willingly see a List of all
those rich Dissenters that have sold their Patrimonies at home to remove to
Carolina, Pensylvania New England, or any other Foreign Sanctuary to escape
the Popish Blood hounds, tho for the Preservation of both the Estates and Lives
of themselves and their Families. It Is true the Suppression of their
Conventicles has done much that way, and sent several of them outward bound.
But if the 25th of Tory Elizabeth had been repealed, or but the Kings
Indulgence continued, tho the 40000 Black Bills had run up to Seed, and
increased to Ten-fold the number; tho the Jago Pilgrims, Messina Soldiers, and
the rest of the Papists Militant had been improved into half a Million; and the
Plot it self made ten times a greater Garagantua than it is, I had defied them
all from frighting one of them hence. Now certainly if the Dissenters believed
as they say, and that all those daily imminent dangers from Popish Swords, and
so universal a Destruction still threatening us were a true Article of their
Belief, it is to be admired we find so few or none of their Actions to
demonstrate their Fear's in Earnest. Their Fears in earnest? no, the wiser
Heads amonst them know better things, and Fears, Plots, and Jealousies their
old State Tools, are used always as Boys do Vizors, to fright every body, but
themselves that wear them.

And what is and ever has been for these 40 Years last past, the Confusion and
Ruin of three Kingdoms, but setting up of Shadows and Chimera's like so many
Ignes fatui to mislead deluded Ignorance into Distraction and Rebellion, whilst
the great Knaves traile the Carrion, and the little Fools hunt after it.

For let the Whiggs take it as they please, they cannot be divided but into two
Classes. They amongst them that are so shallow as to believe a hotch potch of
Incongruity and Contradiction for Truth are Fools; and the greater and Wiser
Men amongst them that I am sure have better Intell^cts, and yet notwithstanding
by all the Arts, and Study endeavor to impose that upon weaker understandings,
what they do not believe themselves, are Villains; and whilst they make it
their business to uphold Lies and Shams, are so far from what they pretend
themselves Patriots, that they are nothing but Incendiaries, whilst the
National Service is but the pretense and their own Revenge or sinister
Interests the great end they drive at.

The effects of which all good Subjects ought to their utmost endeavors and
capacities to prevent, and the whole business of this Treatise is for no other
design, that Noise and Nonsense may usurp no more, but Sense and Reason ever
reign in Peace, till the great Disturber of the World, False Fear, be banished
from our Borders, and Unanimity and Obedience ever Flourish amongst us in
Secular Seculorum.

But now to take my leave of all Republic Projects and state Cheats; and also
to find a Comparison black enough for the late Damnable Plot, I cannot liken
its Appearing in the world better than to some deformed Hagg, with Paint
Patches and Perfumes coming into a Masque; what with the help of good
Trappings, good Fucus, good Plaistering and other Embellishments, at first
sight by Candlelight she appears pretty enough, till having danced too long to
a Popular Jigg, at last her Paint begins to melt, and the poor Thing is forced
to withdraw; where after laying by her false Curls, her false Teeth, and her
Glass Eye, Monster and Deformity even goes to Bed, and is just now falling
asleep.

FINIS.

