THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MAJOR CLANCIE, The GRANDEST CHEAT OF THIS AGE.

WHEREIN Is set forth many of his Villainous Projects (Real matter of Fact) both
in England, Ireland, France, Spain and Italy; at last was Executed at Tyburn,
the Reading of which will give the Reader great satisfaction.

PVBLISHED by AVTHORITY.

LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet, and are to be sold at his House in Half Moon
Court adjoining to Ludgate. 1680.

MADAM,
I Cannot but apprehend howgreat my Honor and Happiness would be, if by my
Service I could incline your Ladyship to believe the real sense I have of the
many favors you have so often, and so undeservedly placed upon me, nor have I
other returns to make but my obedience. Truth is Madam, my obligations are such
as cannot be concealed, which makes mechose rather to subject my self, to
censure for impertinences than ingratitude, which I hope will induce your
Ladyship to mittigate the rigor of what censure I may have justly deserved;
and by your example stop the current of such tongues as might otherwise
critically carpat every thing, they see though never so well intended. This is
the sum of my Request, only that your Ladyship will assure your self in the
knowledge that I desire to be esteemed, Madam,

Your Humble Servant. E. S.

TO THE LADIES OF THE COURT.
PArdon me Ladies that I did,
Not right you as my Fancy bid;
Nor in my well meant Lines infer
Your Dues in each particular.
Wherein if I have erred by chance,
Charge it upon my Ignorance:
Whose harder Fate could never own,
The Bliss of being better known.
To your Perfections,
So fall in Short
Pray waste a Frown upon me fort.
TO THE READER
BEing ready to lay hold upon the first opportunity, I made use of this
occasion, that by my Obedience I might Evidence some thing of Gratitude in my
Nature to Her that so often and so largely contrib^ted to my Preservation, when
in my weakest and lowest condition of Health. It Is the Countess of Marlborough,
who commanded me to undertake this Task, to whom it is Dedicated with all the
Service I can be capable of; under whose Protection I hope it may find a kind
Reseption, with some shelter from the Storm that may otherwise threaten it from
the severe lash of the Censorious.

You seldom meet with Books of any sort but some advantage may be had by
reading them. Where you will find Virtue cherished, and Vice punished. I d^ubt
you will find but little mention of the former in this discourse, his while
Life being taken up in Studdies to practice the contrary. Some have the art to
put a good gloss upon an ill Cause. I am none of those, nor do I pretend to the
Pen of a reddy Writer, or any part of Eloquence, which you will find by the
plainness of the Style; nor can I free it from a great many Errors that may
justly deserve a Censure; which makes me entreat your favorable construction,
both of it and me. That propose to my self no other advantage, but to obey my
Lady: and present you this subject for divertion. If it please you I have my
wish, if not, I can but be sorry; That what was so well intended, should have
so ill success. It is impossible to please all: and therefore I content my
self, if I am so Fortunate as to please any: whose favorable interpretation
and good Opinion is desired by your Servant.

E. S.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF MAJOR CLANCIE.
IN the time of the late disorders, by Commotions in Ireland, which some called
Rebellion: when the Irish made choice of such of their Party to manage and
Steer the Course of their affairs as they thought the fittest, and best amongst
them for so great an undertaking; to whom they gave the Title of Supreme
Council, whose Orders, Decrees, and Determinations were uncontroulably to be
observed all Ireland over; under such Penalties, Forfeitures, and Punishments
as they thought fit to inflict; according to the Nature of the offense or
disobedience to such Laws, and orders as were Prescribed by this Supreme
Council.

Their Place of Residence was Kilkenney, where they were constantly visited,
and Courted from abroad, particularly from Rome, by the Popes Nuncio, from
Spain by Don-Diego. D' L' Torris, and from France by Monsieur Monery; a Person
so accomplished, and so obliging Civil that all men coveted his Company;
insomuch that there seldom was a meeting or Design of Merriment intended, or
Contrived by any Person of Quality there, but Mounsieur Monery must be one, who
as often returned their kindness in their own way.

It hapened that to one of his Feasts or Grand Balls, there came a Gentleman
out of the County of Clare, invited to that Feast, by the Master of i^; this
Gentleman had amongst the rest of his Attendants, a very fine lively Boy, that
waited on him as his Page, whose Carriage and great Diligence in his Office of
Page-ship, Monsieur Monery took great notice of, and was very much taken with:
which the Gentleman perceiving was very willing to Oblige; and the other
conceiving it a greater preferment of the Boy, bestowed him as a great Present
to the Monsieur, who received him so: and having with a great deal of Language,
expressed his thanks, desired to know the Boys Name: he told him his Name was
Dennis Clancie; the Monsieur immediately altered the Boys Habit, and gave him
all the testimonies of a kind Reception; with which, the Boy was so
transported, that he studied nothing more than to please his Master, by being
ready at his Call or Beck: never out of the way to wait the Service or Command
of his Master: and continued so (not only during his Masters stay in Ireland)
but for some years after his coming into France, where the Boy had all
convenient opportunities for his Education could be wished for, which he
neglected not; but made so good use of his time, that he improved it to the
full, by acquiring the French Tongue perfectly, and all that he could gather
both from his Latin and Dancing Master, or what else the Academy could afford:
which took so with the Monsieur, that he could not conceal from his Friends and
acquaintance how precious a Jewel he had of his Boy Clancie; to whose Breast he
durst commit the greatest Secret: Nor was he Master of that thing in the World,
he could not trust his Servant Clancie with.

As appeared upon an occasion the Monsieur had to Travil into some far remote
part whither his occasions drew him, and required his attendance for some
considerable Time; which he acquainted his trusty Servant with; and told him
withal, how great his satisfaction was at Parting, to know he left behind him
the trustiest, carefullest, and honestest Servant in the World; in whom he so
much confided, that he would leave him in his House at Paris, to have a
particular Care of his Trunks; wherein there lay some Papers of concern, his
Apparel, and some Money. The Boy having with Tears expressed his great sorrow
for being left behind his Dear Master; from whom he had never been separated
since his coming into his Service till now; not knowing what it was to disobey,
receives his Charge, takes leave of his Master and Fellow Servants, and with a
heavy heart prepares for Paris to his Masters house, where he was received by
his Fellow Servants there with much cheerfulness; and as soon as he had showed
his Masters Orders, it was with a great deal of readiness immediately observed,
and Clancie put into the possession of those Rooms wherein lay those Trunks
formerly mentioned.

Clancie very Dilligently came every day to discharge his Trust, by Airing his
Masters Clothes, sorting his Papers, and some times Fingering his Money, only
to please himself by the sight of such a sum in his own Custody, which he
could hardly believe, although hourly at the sport of telling.

One Day being invited to his Exercise of Brushing, by a Clear and bright
Sunshine day (which he seldom neglected) comes into the Room, Locks the Door,
lays apart each Suit of Clothes, with all that belongd to it:) (and looking
about, seeing no body to interrupt him) had a great desire to see how that
would become him, which he puts on, walks up and down, then to the
Looking-Glass he goes; where he was so startled at first, that he stepped back;
hardly knowing who it was in such a Habit. But finding at last, after part of
his wonder was over, that it was himself; begins to propose to himself, how
happy and how fortunate should he be, if he could order matters so, as to keep
all this finery by which he was so altered, that he might but appear to all
others, as to himself in the Glass.

This Great and strange Alteration more and more increases, being by his
Thoughts pursued upon every occasion when ever he changes out of one Suit into
another. Till at last it is resolved that his Thoughts are restless, till this
Design is effected: which he believes will be very easy, considering that all
the People in the House will give him no opposition, being very well satisfied,
he will do nothing without Commission from his Master: and therefore will
rather assist than hinder him in whatever he attempts.

Clancie tells the People, he will remove his Trunks to his Masters
Country House, where he is commanded to wait his coming. In order to which,
there are Carts prepared, the Goods packed up, and Clancie upon his Road,
accompanied by several of his Comrades that came in Compliement to see him part
of his way. Who no sooner took their Leaves, but he steered his course another
way, and Bends toward the Seaside, where meeting a Ship ready to set Sail for
Wexford in Ireland, agrees with the Owner: puts his Goods aboard, of whom we
hear no more till his arrival in Wexford.

Where was received by the chief of that place as a person of that Quality
(that he professed) ought to be. The show he made by his Equipage, and the
number of his Attendance, with his bounty to the Captain of the Ship, and his
Seamen who were not sparing to give a vevery large Character of him: confirmed
the Inhabitants of Wexford that he must be a great Man; and was so free of his
Coin at all times, to those that did him any Service, by which he gave occasion
to be made the only Table Talk, and chief Discourse of the Town: happy was he
could have opportunity to Contract a Friendship with him, his Discourse was
very taking, especially amongst the Ladies, and the better sort: spending his
time in Feasting, and making entertainments at any Rate; and receiving Returns
of like nature was so pleasing a Pastime to him, without regard to expense,
that he intended to spend most of his time there, to the great satisfaction of
them all.

He had not been many Months there, when there chanced to arrive in the same
Harbor a Nobleman of Scotland, coming out of Spain, by Name, the Earl of
Crafford. The Townsmen Resolving to Receive, and Entertain him as became them,
made Suit to their Friend Major Clancie to Countenance them in this interest:
who was very glad of the occasion, to bring him into the Earl of Craffords
Acquaintance; who did it so well, and so much to their satisfaction, that they
look upon it as a great Addition to the many former favors he had conferred
upon them; after the Ceremonial part was over at the water side, the chief
Magistrate with all the Aldermen and most considerable of the Town, having
finished Compliment, and

Major Clancie his to some purpose, first in discharge of his Trust, and next
in his ow^ behalf, signifying how happy he accounted himself, to have so fit an
Opportunity to give his Service to my Lord: for all which my Lord makes such a
return of thanks, that all were extremely satisfied. The Major desired his
Lordship to do him the honor to make use of his appartment till his own was in
readiness, which my Lord willingly accepted of: where was prepared for his
Reception, a very Hansome Treat; to which were invited (to keep my Lord
Company) the Best of the Town; so soon as my Lords Quarters were ready, they
all in their several stations waited upon his Lordship thither: and all took
their Leave, only Major Clancie, with whose conversation my Lord was so
pleased, that he was unwilling to part so soon, though sufficiently weary after
so tedious a Voyage.

The day following, his Lordship having refreshed himself, was very desirous to
spend some time in Merriment, with those Gentlemen that had been so civil to
him upon his Arrival, especially Major Clancie, to whom my Lord sent to invite
the Rest to Dine, and bring such others with him as he thought fit. The Major
to observe my Lords Command, having first invited those of the Town, and
meeting accidentally with a Person of Quality, dwelling two or three Miles from
Wexford, named Mr. Cheevers, who was very desirous to kiss my Lord of Craffords
hand, the Major invites him to Dine with my Lord, my Lord welcomes him with all
the Cheerfulness imaginable.

Much time was spent in Feasting, each one striving to outdo the other, all
intending the welcome of my Lord of Crafford. Major Clancie is counted the
best Garnish to each Feast: Mr. Cheevers being at several of them, conceives
himself obliged to take his turn in the List, which he speedily effects, being
seldom unprepared for all such Encounters: some few days after, Mr. Cheevers
having acquainted his Lady how he was invited by Major Clancie, and so
extremely much made of by my Lord Crafford, commending to that height the
Person and Parts of the Major, which put both Wife and Daughters into no small
longing for the Sight and Conversation of the Person so much commended by Mr.
Cheevers, that seldom was heard to commend any Man, that they all press for
his coming to their House, which is agreed upon. An entertainment is prepared
in Mr. Cheevers's House, to which is invited the Earl of Crafford, Major
Clancie and some Neighbors.

It would undoubtedly be too tedious in the recital, if I should particularise
each Circumstance and Ceremony made use of, where so many Ladies are concerned,
and so many great Persons entertained. Therefore let it suffice, that you know
the Preparation is great, the Company very Gallant, and the Ladies very Fine;
this Feast continues fourteen days, every Creature so satisfied, and
Complaisant that cheerfulness might be read in every ones Countenance,
especially the Major, who is so taken with his new Acquaintance Mrs. Katherine,
eldest Daughter to Mr. Cheevers, to whom he bends all his Addresses, with so
much earnestness, as if he had resolved to Dedicate his whole Life and Fortune
to her Service (she finding so great a confirmation of those Truths, as she
believed spoke by her Father in praise and Commendation of the Major) was
willing enough, so far as her Modesty would give her leave, to receive and
return in like manner, all those passionate Expressions of his unquenchable
Flame; if not restrained by the strict Rules of his Duty, which she resolves
never to swerve from. Her Father having some hints given him of the Business,
took a seasonable opportunity (meeting his Daughter in the Garden very
solitary) begins to examine her, with a strict Charge not to Conceal any part
of the Truth, as she valued her only happiness, and the quiet and consolation
of a sond Father (whom she knew loved her above the rest of his Children) To
which she made this Answer, That she would sooner hazard her being for ever
unhappy, than once displease him, and that she never intended to dispose of her
self, without his Privity and consent: and that however her inclinations were
bent, this was her resolution. My Child (says Mr. Cheevers) I am glad to hear
you say so, and yet do find that you count your self unhappy for ever, if you
have not this Gentleman. But my Child, have a little patience till I make a
farther inquiry into the matter; that in Case I find him to be the Son and Heir
of Mr. Clancie of Enestmian (as he says) I may provide him such a Portion as
his Estate deserves. Whereupon, she being willing to second her Inclinations,
and having this little encouragement from her Father, continued her wonted
kindness to her Lover; which the Father perceiving, and being apprehensive that
so much Familiarity might occasion worse effects, either to her Reputation, or
the dissatisfaction of her Parents, would sometimes* give her Admonitions, some
sharp Reprehensions; bidding her beware, lest she run headlong to her one
destruction, by Marriing a Man (that for ought he knew) would prove a
Counterfeit, she having contracted so great a Frindship with her Beloved, could
conceal nothing from him not so much as her Fathers Advice. Wherein the word
Counterfeit was used, which by the Major was interpreted as the greatest term
of Reflection in the world, and told her; that if it were not for her sake that
was dearer to him than all other considerations; ^e would expect reparation:
she percieving how great a Discomposure her indiscretion put him into, could
not forbear to express with her Tears, the sorrow of heart; he persuaded her by
all the endearing Language of a passionate Lover to forbear grieving, giving
her all the assurance of his constansie, that her own heart could wish: by
telling her that neither this, or any thing could happen: should ever have
power to alter him, or lessen his affection in the Least: and that affection
should never end but with his Life. With which she rested satisfied, being
willing to give Credit to all he says; this past on till Dinner, to which the
Major was called. The Company being set, all took Notice of the great change
they observed in the Majors Countenance; my Lord asked him what the Matter was?
Whether an Indisposition of the Body, or the Mind? He answered, That his
Provocation was such, as might very well occasion both; when his Honor and
Reputation were questioned, where he could hope for little or no redress. This
put them all to Silence; every Body bethinking themselves wherein, or which way
they or either of them had given the Major any manner of Offense. Mr. Cheevers,
who was extremely troubled to see so great a Disappointment, both to him, and
his Friend, that intended nothing but Mirth: broke the silence first by
desiring the Major to assure himself in the knowledge that there was not one in
this Company but loved and Honored him, and would be most heartily sorry to
give the least occasion for a thought of disservice to him, and therefore
desired him to lay aside all such apprehention: and continue his wonted custom
of being the best company in the World; without which there was no living. My
Lord and the rest said as much, or rather more to the same purpose; to which
the Major listened with a great deal of attention, and after having given to
each particular thanks for those kind expressions, turns to Mr. Cheevers, and
tells him that he scarce knew how to reconcile those differences that
occasioned all this dissorder. First, his obligation for all the Favors he had
received in so p^entifull an entertainment, and so large professions of
kindness, and but the day before when he was advising his Daughter in Terms of
so great reflection upon him, by calling him a Counterfeit: that he did not
well know how to bear it, and told him with all, that it was an ill Garnish to
so brave entertainment, to upbraid Gentlemen of Quality, whose Birth, and
education rendered them capable of better Language: and that for his own part,
his trouble was so great to accasion so much disquiet to this noble company,
and so discomposed for his affront: that he could believe no better of himself
than a Bedlam, nor could he propose better Medium at all, but to leave the
place, and so depart, he desired my Lord of Crafford's countenance: who was so
much a Servant to the Major; that he could deny him nothing; but being very
desirous to reconcile those differences, used all the means he could think of,
but all in vain.

So soon as dinner was done, my Lord gave orders to his People to make ready,
so did the Major, it is impossible to tell you how this sudden change of the
Scene turned and altered the Face of affairs in this place. Where hitherto
there was nothing to be seen, or heard: but what gladly contributed to the
unspeakable satisfaction and consolation of the whole Company. Now upon the
sudden (as if the fates had conspired the ruin of all their happiness) turned
quite another way: all so con^ounded and troubled for parting in this manner,
that none knew well how to dispose of themselves, especially poor Mrs.
Katherine: who looks upon her self as the most miserable, and most unfortunate
Creature in the World, to be the only and absolute Author, and occasion of this
so unhappy a separation: she is now like a Prisoner confined. After taking
their leaves, and distributing to the Servants; the whole Company dispersed, my
Lord and the Major go together to Wexford, where I must for sometime leave them
to direct themselves as their several inclinations lead them.

The Major taking hold of this occasion and fearing some other discoveries,
resolves to remove from thence, acquainting his dear Friend my Lord with the
intention at this time accasioned by Mr. Cheevers, and finding how apt the
People were to censure him he would endeavor to prevent the like for the
future, by making known that he was the Son of such a Father as he professes,
and no Counterfeit, as Mr. Cehevers took the Liberty to term him. In this
resolution he desired my Lord to do him the Favor to dine with him before his
going away: to which request my Lord made answer, that he had too much
friendship for him ever to deny him any thing though sorry to loose his company
so soon, yet could not disapprove of his so well grounded reasons. The next day
being appointed, my Lord came to the Majors House, so did a great many more of
the chief of the Town, all seeming to be much troubled to think that the Major
is upon leaving them, he receives them with a great deal of kindness, and
promises, so soon as he settles his affairs to return to them again.

Being at dinner, and in a pretty pitch of Jolitry the Major calls his trusty
Servant privately, gives him orders to be gone to a Place called Ross: and
thither to carry with him all his Trunks, and Cloakbags, with all the goods he
had there, to take Lodgings and wait his comeing, which was no sooner
commanded, then with all the speed that could be observed. The Major had no
more trouble about it who had nothing now to do, but entertain his Friends, in
which he lost no time, when (beleiving his Servant to be a good distance from
the Town) bethought him of his time to follow, then calls for the other Glass,
and begins to my Lord a health, to that poor distressed for lorne Prisoner his
Mrs. which my Lord most readily pledged, and seemed much troubled he had not
the Honor to begin it, while healths were going round, the Major calls for
Boxes, and Dice, then for his Servant, to bring him Money, whom he knew to be
some Miles from thence, which my Lord observing, bid his Purs-bearer to give
the Major Forty Pound, or what sum he would have: which the Major made use of
a while, then left one in his place, as if called upon in haste, took Horse and
went away followed his Servant (without noise) to Ross. My Lord, and his
Company at play wondered at the Majors stay, then calls for a Glass, and drank
his health, giving him commendations by the Dozen, till at the last the company
began to grow weary; called for their Servants to attend them to their several
homes, some to lead, and some to carry, but before they part, the Master of the
House appears with a long Bill of Fair in his Hand; which the soberer part of
the Company (as my Lord, and some few others) seeing, asked what he meant by
it, he told them he knew not who to call to for his Money; that the Major had
been in his House a good while, and never gave him Penny yet: nor did he now
know where he was, or what became of him; and that he hoped his Lordship, and
these Gentlemen would not see him undone

The Gentlemen looking one upon another, wondering, were all struck dumb! Come,
come says my Lord, it is not not to be supposed much less believed, that a
person of Honor and Quality would do an unhansome thing; therefore let us
suspend our opinions till we hear farther: for I dare say there is some
extraordinary accident that occasioned this sudden departure or there never
had been this cause of complaint; however he is my Friend, and shall suffer
nothing in my presence, and for your Bill of Fair my Man shall pay you
presently. The Man was called, Major Clancie's debt of two and Twenty Pounds
paid, the Company parted, my Lord to his House: the Gentlemen to their homes,
and the Major to Ross.

I must now for some time leave this good Company, and return to the poor
discontented Prisoner, whose unacquainted passions bred such a distemper in
her, that she fell sick of a Fever: but by the Indulgent care of a sond Mother,
soon recovered of that distemper. She studies nothing naw, but how she shall
make some Reparation to her beloved, and conffirm him in an Opinion of her
constancy; this she contrives to do by a Letter: sends it by her Foster Sister,
(whose care is not questioned) she delivers the Letter to the Major at his
House in Ross, who no sooner read it, but puts himself into a posture to comply
with the Contents, which signified her sorrow, for the separation occasioned by
her self, and that she knew not how to repair it otherwise, than by giving him
this Testimony; that if he pleased to come to such a place, at such an hour,
with half a Dozen Horses; she would not fail to meet him, resolving to be for
ever after at his Dispose (I suppose I need not mention how he was Transported
with joy when he received this comfortable Letter, or how plentifully he
rewarded the messenger that brought it, and carried back his Answer) after
dispatching the messenger, he immediately takes Horse, and goes unto Wexford,
where the memory of this Prank was yet fresh.

I know not whether I may call it confidence, or impudence; but into my Lord of
Crafford's Chamber he goes, who welcomed him as Cheerfully as if his Lordship
had received many obligations from him; the Major finding his reception to be
such as he could not in reason have expected from any Body, began to make his
Excuse, attributing the misfortune of so abrupt a departure to an accident that
suddenly befell him, which my Lord would hear no more of: why then my Lord
since you are still my best Friend, pray read this Letter, which he did, and
and then asked him, what Service can you imagine me capable to do in this
occasion. Only to lend me your best Horse. That I conceive will not be enough
(says my Lord) for here she directs your coming not only well Horsed; but well
accompanied with half a Dozen Horses; it is pity but she mould be observed:
which (for her sake) I will adventure first to go. You shall have my Gray Horse
for your self, and I with my Five Servants will wait upon you, this being a
business could admit of no long delay. My Lord orders the matter so, that in a
very little time they are all on Horse back, marching fairly to the place
appointed by the Lady, who failed not to do her part in coming at the hour
according to her promise. After she had saluted the kind lover, over joyed; my
Lord told them this was no time or place for dalliance; so to Horse she went,
they as before, and she behind her Servant. Where was interchanged some glances
of Love-looks, while they had leisure; which was not very long, when Mr.
Cheevers upon notice of the Design gathers all his forces together, pursues the
party, for whom they were too hard; yet they disputed their interest like men
of Honor. But Mr. Cheevers soon decided the quarrel, though not without blood,
which (he might the better do) being ten times their number. In short, the Lady
was rescued, the Major wounded, and my Lord taken Prisoner; the Major escaped
by the goodness of his Horse, which in little time brought him to Ross: where
he lies under the hands of his Surgeon, the Lady is made Prisonner the
second time, with many threats of punishment for occasioning all this bussle:
as also the breach of promise in the Garden; my Lord is led into the
Common-dark-hall; where he walks up and down in Querpo (like a prisoner of War)
without Hat, Cloak, or Sword; the place not affording so much light as to let
them see who it was, till Mr. Cheevers coming in thither in state with Torches
carried before him, who seeing my Lord of Crafford in this posture: asked him
Pardon a Thousand times, and wondered extremely to see his Lordship there,
blameing all his people for being so disrespective as not to distinguish
between my Lord and others: my Lord (who knew very well what did belong to
Fighting, and how few Ceremonies of that Nature are then used) makes excuse for
the People; who immediately brought him his Sword, and all that they had taken
from him; and set his Servants at Liberty; Mr. Cheevers is now at quiet,
believing the storm now over his Daughter is rescued, and secured from any
farther Attempts of the Major, so as he only bends his endeavors wholly to
entertain my Lord; who he hopes will appear no more in countenancing the Major,
in a thing so prejudicial to that Family; this he expressed in his discourse to
my Lord, who made Answer, that what he did in assisting his Friend, was not to
prejudice him in the least, but that it was his constant Custom never to fail
that Friend to whom he once professed Friendship. Supper being ended, they
believing my Lord weary after the Counter-scuffle lighted him to his Chamber,
and so left him to his rest. Who next Morning betimes takes his leave and goes
to Wexford.

All things in this place seem now to be at ease, save only the restless
condition of the poor Prisoner, whose apprehensions torment her, not knowing if
her sweet heart be Dead, or alive; then considering how instrumental she was in
his misfortunes, these and many such distracting thoughts do so perplex her:
that she is at her wits end; (a thing easily believed, especially of all such
as either are or have been Sick of her disease.) Sometimes she resolves to make
her Escape, and come to him where ever he is: again that seems difficult, or
rather impossible. Then is she as far to seek as ever; at last she resolves to
Write, and commit it to the care of her Foster-Sister; this resolution takes
place: she Writes to let him know how unquiet her Life is, and how little
satisfaction she has in the World without him; not knowing what was become of
him, she farther signifies, that if he please (seeing public meetings will not
do) to try a private, to come to such a place, at such an Hour, such a day in
the Evening, she would be ready to meet him.

This Letter she delivered to the Foster-Sister, with promises of a large
Reward for her Care. The Foster-Sister thinking to prevent more mischief, takes
the Letter, and delivers it not where she was directed; but to Mr. Cheevers who
read it over and over; and believing he could make some use of it, looks upon
the superscription, as if he had read it in mistake, and tells her, this Letter
is not for me, go and deliver it to him it is directed to, whereupon she goes
to Ross, where she found the M^jor laid upon his bed, and gives it him, by
which he received so great satisfaction, that he waited no longer for his
Plasters; but Writes his Answer, and dispatches the messenger, then prepares
for the day and Hour appointed Nor was he more diligent or careful in his
preparation for that meeting, then Mr. Cheevers, so that when the Major was
come to the place, expecting his Mistress there, instead of her whom he
expected, he meets a company of Clubbatiers; that lay in ambush to wait his
being on Foot. Who no soonner lighted, but they laid hold of him; and where he
expected Embraces, and sweet Kisses, they paid him with Buffets, and
Crabsticks into such a pickle, as never was any poor Man before in this
posture. They carry him to Mr. Cheevers, who believed himself sure of this
booty, and therefore prepared to receive him, not as heretofore, but with a
pair of Stocks, which he had placed in his Common Hall, purposely to be in
Sight of all, both Men and Women, in the House; with which Sight very few were
pleased but himself: who resolved to eat in the same Room, purposely to affront
the Major, who is now in the Stocks, with his Clothes torn, his Face buffeted,
and his Head broken. A Sight so displeassing to the good Mistress. of the
House, that she desired her Husband to mitigate part of this Rigor, or rather
Tyranny; for her part she was not able to endure to see a Person of his
Quallity and parts thus used like a Beast in her House, and that he might find
other means to Right himself, or prevent the harm he apprehended, without
infringing the Laws, and Rules of hospitality thus. This speech did in some
measure mollify the unreasonableness of Mr. Cheever's passion; so that he
turned toward the Major, and told him how much it was against his inclination
to use any Gentleman thus, and that if he would pass his Parole, never to
proceed farther in this mattor, or give him any farther trouble in it: he was
ready to restore him first his Liberty, and then all that had been taken from
him, as his Horse, and Arms, and all that belonged to him.

To this Speech, she Major makes this Answer, Mr. Cheevers, it should seem
(although you are a very knowing Man) you never read of the Knight of the Sun,
or of his Brother Ross Clear, or of Rogero, or any of the famous and brave Men
at Arms! how much they suffered for their Mistresses: (if you had, undoubtedly)
you would in some measure have considered me, who of my self can consider
nothing in comparison to my Mistress for when I Remember, or call to mind, that
what I suffer, or endure, is for her; it sweetens all my sufferings. I must
confess Liberty is a great, and very pleasing thing (especially after such
hardships as has been put upon me,) and a thing I should covet and court. Were
it to be purchased either by Labor, Coin, or Blood I should not stick at it.
But to Relinquish my Pretenses to my Mistress as if I would prefer any worldly
consideration before her, I will never do it, nor is it in the Power of the
whole World to make me do it. Let them and you, whose Prisoner I now am,
Inflict what Punishment you please, it shall never be of force sufficient to
divorce me from her Service.

This Answer wrought so upon the Mistress of the House, as also upon all that
heard it, that it moved them all to Pity (I hope his own Mristress was not far
off) She never left soliciting her Husband, till she obtained the Majors
Liberty, then were all the Servants striving who should do him most Service.
One brings Water, another the Towel, another his Hat: all waited upon him to
Supper, and from thence to his Chamber. Next Morning, having his Horse and Arms
delivered him in very good Order, he takes his Leave, particularly of the good
Lady of the House, that procured him his Liberty.

No sooner did he find himself without the Gate, mounted upon my Lords Gray
Horse, and his Pistols fixed before him, but he turns toward the Door, and vows
with a great imprecation, that no Body shall pass that way, but he will have
his Life; unless they let him see his Mistress before he goes. This put Mr.
Cheevers into such a Rage of Anger with his Wife; You see, says he, what you
have done, by giving this Man his Liberty; which way will you contrive to
pacify him now? Were it not better to have kept him where he was? Let me see
which of all you that were so much his Friends, Dare go and reason the matter
with him? Not I, says one; nor I, says another; I am not so much concerned in
the Matter says a third; in Conclusion, none of them seemed willing to venture
on so desperate a Man, whose Anger they were not willing to provoke. At last
they fixed upon a Reverend Person that was Chaplen to Mr. Cheevers, who with a
great deal of entreaty, took upon him to Argue the matter with the Major. The
Major seeing him come in such fear, bid him not be afraid, and told him he
should be heard without Danger; and likewise asked him what his Reverence had
to say, and whether he spoke by Commission, or of his own accord. The Reverend
Father told him, he came to advise him chiefly for his Souls sake, and next
desired him to desist this Suit; for he knew of his own knowledge, it was to no
purpose to do otherwise. Pray Father, Replies the Major, do you know more of
her Mind than I do? Hark you Sir, I know you are a Priest, and therefore
Conjure you by all that is Dear to you, to bring me an Answer to the Message
you are to carry, or else by the same Oath you are to take, I will, without
regard to your Function, Pistol you before you leave this Place. This great
Threat, put the poor Priest into such a Fright, that he knew not what to say,
or do; only promise to deliver his Message, and bring an Answer: which was, to
let him know, if he may see his Mistress before he go or not. The Priest
undertakes it, to return upon the same Penalty, in case he procure not the
Sight of his Mistress: in whose Retreat to Mr. Cheevers and the rest, you might
see the Greatest Fright, the greatest Consternation that ever Man was in. His
own Shadow was enough to startle him; several times thinking as he looked
back, it was the Major in pursuit of him: He no sooner come into the Hall,
where Mr. Cheevers with his Lady, and Company were, but he throws one way his
Hat, another way his Books and Spectacles, lik^ a mad Man, declaring his
Misfortune in coming into that Service, hoping now for no other Reward, than to
be killed by Major Clancie, still crying out, what had I to do with your
Daughter, or your self, or her Sweetheart? What need I to involve my self in
all this trouble? I must go back again to be Killed. Good Father says Master
Cheevers. be quiet, and tell us what ails you, what ails me? cries he; The
Devil ailed me, to concern my self in this affair, wherein I am sure to loose
my Life, for if you do not consent that he may see your Daughter before he
goes, (which I know you will not) I must go and tell him so, and am confident
never to return with Life, for what cares that Man what Mischief he does me.
Truly Father, I would do so much to save your Life: therefore let me entreat
you to pacify your self, and Believe I will free you from this Danger you so
much apprehend, by letting him see my Daughter; but it shall be at such a
distance, and in such a place as She shall receive no prejudice by it. So
having given this hope of Relief, to the Reverend Father, with some Cordials to
bring him to himself) They all walk up to the Castle where, in the middle of a
large window, they held her to be seen by the Major to the Middle, at which
Sight he rejoices more, than if thither came an Angel from Heaven. In this
Posture, and the Hearing of all, they gave each other the comfortable assurance
of Constancy, unalterably to be preserved by both, during the whole term of
their Lives. The Major departs and Rides away.

CHAP. II.
THe Major at Ross, where since his first coming he daily continues his
Hospitable course of Life, by which he had Purchased a general Good Opinion,
with the Character of the bravest Man, and best Companion that ever came into
that City: where most of their time was spent in Feasting by Turns, which
Custom is now continued upon the Majors Return. The first Night he invites all
his Companions, and fellow-Feasters, with their Wives, to Sup with him. All
came overjoyed to see him safely returned; from whence they knew not; yet were
very sensible of their own loss, by his Absence.

They are all so desirous to be linked by some Title or Tie of Friendship to
the Major, that one calls him Uncle, another his Brother, another calls him his
Patron; by which all are entitled, not only to a greater Interest in him; but
also to a large and fair pretense to good Drinking.

The next time it came to his turn, observing some of his Companions absent,
contrary to promise and agreement: he seemed to be something discomposed at it,
which they interpreted to be a great Argument of his good Nature: he calls
aside one of the Company, with whom he had contracted the Greatest Friendship
of all, to whom at all times he imparted his greatest Secrets, or at least made
him believe so; tells him of the great Trust, and ^on^idence he had always
reposed in him, having so often experimented the reality of his proposed
Friendship, which he is now necessitated to make a farther Trial. Thus,

. You have been no Stranger to my manner of Living, since my coming into this
place, which I must con^ess is the same I have ever used in all my Travels, and
is chiefly the occasion of this Trouble to you, which I hope will prove
advantageous to you in the end. My constant Expense, has exhausted my Stock of
Money, which you must supply with the sum of Fifty pounds, to carry me into
Twomond, where my Estate lies. I am told that my Mother is married to my Lord
of Insiqueen's Brother, Mr. Christopher Obrien, and what Provision is made for
me, or how things may be imbezled I know not, by reason I was sent abroad very
young, where I have continued till now, trusting to Providence for my
subsistence; and for this great kindness, I will bestow a Farm of fifty pounds
a Year upon you, Rent-free, during your Life: and for your better security for
the present, I will leave in your Custody one of my Trunks, which I must
entreat your care of, till I return you your money; which I intend to bring you
within few Months.

Mr. White was in no small trouble at this request, not knowing well how to
deny, or grant it, being but newly Married, and that without the consent of
either his Wives Parents, or his own; nor did he know what Money his Wife had,
and therefore desired the Majors Excuse till he went home, and spoke with her;
which he did immediately, and told her how great an Addition to his small
Fortune he was like to have by the kindness of his new sound, and most dear
Friend Major Clancie; who had given him a Farm of Fifty Pounds Per Annum. Rent
free, dureing Life, and only desired a small Courtesy, the Loan of Fifty
Pounds for some Months, and in the mean time would leave in his custody, one of
his Trunks; a very sufficient Pledge for a greater Sum. The Wife made many
Excuses; at last, being by her Husband importuned with so much earnestness
consented; delivered Fifty Pieces in Gold to her Husband, who made all the
haste he could, and carried it to the Major, who no sooner received it; but he
orders the Trunk to be delivered to his good Friend Mr. White, and he to his
Wife, where it is very safely, and securely laid. By this time the whole
Company were in such a height of Jolity, minding nothing else but drinking,
that Major Clancies Servant had leisuer enough to observe the directions he had
from his Master the day before, to Watch his opportunity to be gone, with all
the remaining goods to Kilkenney, and there to stay, and wait the comeing of
his Master: this was very punctually observed* and performed, a fine thing! a
dilligent discreet Servant! of this we hear no more till we meet in Kilkenney.
The Major seeing most of the Company elevated, begins a Rouzing health, to put
all a sloat: and before that health went round, took occasion to go down Stairs
(leaving one of his trustees to see fair Play) he walks fairly on the Ferry,
there being an Arm of the Sea to cross: takes boat, goes aboard a Ship that lay
in the Harbor, being well acquainted with the Captain, who bid him veary
heartily welcome, repeating his obligations for several kindnesses received at
his quarters in the City; the Major unwilling to make any long stay, told he
only came to take his leave, being upon his Journey toward Killkenney; so
having distributed to the Seamen, takes his Boat, the Captain with him, that
resolved to complement him to the shoar-side: and so return to his ship; where
at his going, he ordered half a Dozen Guns to be given to the Majors farewell;
which made such a noise, that the whole Town alarmed (especially) the company
that were solaceing themselves by drinking the Majors health, to whom they were
so much beholding; all started at this shooting of great Guns, not knowing
where, or whence it came: till one coming up stairs, tells them it is a
Shipboard; whereupon they all resolved to go aboard that Ship that shot, and
know what the matter was, which they immediately very furiously did, in company
with the Major of the Town, who was then with them, and was no sooner aboard,
but fell so fiercely to examine the Captain; all talking together: being so
confoundedly Drunk, some threatening to punish him, for putting the Town into
such a fright, others seeming to excuse him, though they knew not yet for what,
or which way; but all in such a disracted confusion, that the Captain thought
Hell had been broken loose; they were so disorderly, that he knew not how to
pacify them, at last turning to the Major and the rest, he tells them,
Gentlemen either be quiet, and hear reason, or go home and sleep: for I have
done nothing but what is warrantable, and just; in giving a noble person a few
Guns, being upon his Journey to Killkenney, that had been very civil and kind
to me, and bountiful to my men. I have not been spareing of my Powder upon
such an occasion as this, to persons of far meaner quality than Major Clancie;
they no sooner heard the name of Clancie, but were all silenced, as if struck
mute with admiration, and wonder at the Major's departure in that manner; thus
are the People quieted, and the Captain at rest: each to their several homes,
entertaining their Wives with stories of Major Clancie, now the only pastime of
that Place. Whoever was pleased with this Subject for discourse (I do suppose)
Mr. Deverox, the Master of the House, where Major Clancie lay, was not, who
from the time of his coming to Ross, to that Hour never received promise of his
Money, poor Man, not knowing which way to turn him, having several ways run
himself in debt for the Supply of the Major, from time to time; whom if he
should follow to Killkenney, he is certain to lose his Labor; if he shall stay
in his House, he is afraid of his persecuting Creditors; who now begin to call
for their Moneys, which the poor Man has not to give them, nor indeed dos he
know what course, or whose advice to take for his preservation: at last he
bethinks him of a way that in appearance seems Feasible, and easy; which he
first communicates to Mr. Mayor (being related to him) that is to Petition the
whole Town: most of them one time or other, having part of his spoil at those
entertainments made for them by the Major, desireing them to consider him as a
Native and long inhabitant of Ross: whose deportment none of them could be a
stranger to, and that this sum of Thirty Pounds must unavoidably destroy him,
and if that they pleased to contribute toward his preservation so far, as to
divide this sum amongst them, which would make the burden light to them, the
weight of which must break his back.

. The Major approves of it, the Aldermen and Citizens consented, so that the
Creditors are satisfied, Mr. Deverox repaid his disbursments: who now thinks
himself as Rich as an yof them; Mr. White who quietly hitherto listened to the
several Complaints of those that exclaimed against the Major, he applauding his
own happiness, in having that Interest in the Major, who had promised him so
good a Farm, and left him so good a Pledge for his fifty pounds, that he laughed
in his Sleeve, at all others.

One Morning his Wives Fingers Itched to be at the Majors Trunk, desired her
Husbands leave to save her Longing; He tells her how unwilling he is to meddle,
lest some of the Majors Goods might receive some Prejudice thereby; but she
presses him so to open the Trunk, that there is no denial; only he must first
acquaint the Mayor of the Town, and desire him to be present for prevention of
mistakes; to the Mayor he goes, and tells him how he had lent money to Major
Clancie, who left him a sufficient Pledge, and that his Wife being desirous to
see the inside of it, pressed him to open the Trunk; to which he desired his
Worship to come and be a Witness to what was in it; and that no injury should
be offered to the Majors Goods. The Mayor promises to be with him at the hour
of three in the Afternoon without fail.

. The Mayor comes at his hour, with several of the best in Town, to witness
this great exploit; upon whose coming the Smith is sent for, with his Tools to
break open the Trunk (which is not long a doing) no sooner the Lock is off, but
the Wife runs in all haste to open it; the first thing the met with, was a
piece of Satin, with which all the r^st was covered, which you may believe
were better so than seen: for from that piece of Satin to the bottom of the
Trunk, there was nothing but Brickbats, Clods of Earth, and such like; at which
Sight the Mayor and all the rest, could hardly forbear Laughing.

. The Wise seeing her self cheated, without any manner of Hope ever to be
relieved; falls a railing at her Husband, whose Patience is now sufficiently
tried. From Railing she falls to Fighting of him; so that the Mayor* and those
others that came with another intention, had enough to do to part Man and Wife:
whose best pastime is to scould, imputing the blame of all their misfortunes,
to each other; a Fate that attends stolen matches so made without the Privity,
or Consent of Parents.

. The Major by this time is arrived at Towmond, where his old acquaintance and
Friends very much admire to see the greatness of his Change, both in Apparel
and Education.

The Gentlemen of that Country are extremely taken with his conversation,
especially Mr. Macnemarroe of Ralahim, a place so often frequented by him, as
if it had been his constant dwelling. The constant Resort of Strangers thither
so common, and so well known, that I must suppose there needs no other mention
of his Hospitality.

One day as the Major was Traveling the Road near that place, he accidentally
met a Gentleman newily coming into the Country from abroad, going homeward
where he had not been in some years: longing much to pay his Duty to his
Father, the Lord of Mountgarrot. The Major Accosts him with so many
extraordinary signs of Joy, that Mr. Butler marvelled at the suddenness of this
great Intimacy upon the first acquaintance; which the Major perceiving, told
him, Sir pray wonder not at my Presumption, nor my Transport, till I have
unfolded the Cause. First, I had the Honor to know you in such a place in
France, where you were pleased to own me for your Servant. The next is, my
great satisfaction to meet you here, from whence you shall not go (if I may
prevail so much with you) till you t^oroughly inform your self what my Fortune
is, that am nearly related to you, by my Marriage to your near Kinswoman,
Daughter to Mr. Cheevers near Wexford, where I have been lasht with the censure
of being a Counterfeit; which I hope you will soon be able to remove. My house
is not far from hence, whither I must entreat your Company.

. Mr. Butler told him he had not time to spare at present, and that he would
rather choose to come on purpose from his Fathers House to wait upon him at his
own house, than lose one hours time now: and that he would go to his Cousin
Cheevers purposely to remove that Doubt, and censure: and give such a Character
of him, as should render him capable of a better Opinion both with Mrs. and Mr.
Cheevers and all his Friends. For his own part he desired nothing more than an
opportunity to renew this his Acquaintance, and return this Civility; and
withal assured him, how glad he was of his Alliance. After the exchange of many
expressions to this purpose, Mr. Butler absolutely refused to go to his new
Acquaintance and Cousins house, by whom he was very much importuned.

The Major seeing he could not prevail, presses him with much earnestness, to
take a Bait with him, at another house of his, lately let to an Uncle of his, a
Gentleman of that Country, of a very good Family, and good Estate; one Mr.
Maccnemarroe, being just in his Road to Limerick: whither Mr. Butler intended
to go that Night, and Major Clancie resolves to wait upon him, and see his
Cousin safe out of the Country of Twomond, at least so far as Limerick, in his
way was extremely glad of the Occasion, which Mr. Butler did not much scruple
then, being willing to observe his Cousin.

. To Maccnemaroes house they are come, led ^hither by the Major, who has that
observance and ready Attendance from the Servants in the Absence of their
Master, that he believes them to be Uncle and Nephew in good earnest. The
Design of calling Maccnemarroe his Uncle was, that Mr. Butler should see he had
Relations of Quality, and likewise take some notice what care, and at what
distance he was obeyed here; they are plentifully entertained, the place being
always provided for such occasions* Healths go very quickly about to Mistresses
and Friends so fast, that they scarce take notice how the time goes;
notwithstanding Mr. Butlers haste. They had not been long at this sport, when
one of the Servants came running to the Major, to tell him that his Master,
Maccnemarroe was allighting at the Gate: the Major asks Pardon and Leave of
Mr. Butler, to go and welcome his Uncle who is come to the Gate. Down he
hastes, and after Salutation, tells Maccnemarroe what a Guest he had brought to
the house, believing it to be a great disparagement to the whole Country, if
such a person as my Lord of Mountgarrot's Son should pass through without
Entertainment. Mr. Maccnemarroe Embraces him, and gives him many thanks for
that great favor. The Major tells him farther, how he had made Mr. Butler
believe, that Maccnemarroe and he were Uncle and Nephew, to the end he might
not wonder at his Interest there, nor the power he had taken upon him, which
Maccnemarroe desired him to continue, and loose no time from that good work of
entertaining that Gentleman, in which he would give all the Assistance he
could, by surrendering to the Major all the power he had in the house: which the
Major very readily, and gravely took upon him: into the House they both go
together, where the Major presents to his Cousin Butler, his Uncle
Maccnemarroe; Cousin Butler pray take notice of my Uncle; likewise presents his
Cousen to his Uncle: so that here is upon the sudden a Knot of Kindred my
Cousen, my Uncle, and my Nephew.

. The Uncle Maccnemarroe did really believe that the Major had a Design upon
some Lady of Fortune, in which Mr. Butler might be useful to him, which made
him use all the means he could to promote that Interest, and settle such an
intimacy as might be necessary upon such an occasion.

Mr. Butler thinks it high time for him to be gone, who, notwithstanding all
the Arguments that are used both by Uncle, Nephew, and Cousin, persuading him
to stay for some time, at least this Night, resolves for Limerick with his
Cousin Clancie: who upon this Resolution, borrows his Uncles fine Horse; Mr.
Maccnemarroe was in a manner ashamed to deny him in the hearing of Mr. Butler,
before whom he had been so kind, and had confessed his Relation: so lent the
Horse and his Groom to attend him, with money in his Purse, lest either might
have occasion to use it.

. To Limerick, goes Mr. Butler, accompanied with his well-beloved Cousin
Clancie: who is now bravely mounted, and well attended by two Servants, his
own, and his Uncles: his Interest in his Cousin Butler is grown so great, that
he can persuade him to any thing (though never so contrary to his own
Inclination) insomuch, that notwithstanding his haste to see his Father, the
Major wrought with him to stay in Limcrick, eight or ten days: most of which
time, if not all, was spent in good fellowship with some new Acquaintance.
Clancie being by this time almost weary of this place, and Company, begins to
think of a way to get handsomely from thence, in order to which he calls the
Groom, who was commanded to obey him, and bids him go to the West-Gate, and
stay there for him, and leave the Bay Horse in readiness for him. As soon as
the Groom was gone, he calls his own man, and bids him go toward the East Gate
of the Town, out of the Grooms way, and about an hour after to come to him with
some Story orother, by which he might pretend Excuse to part this place and
Compahis Man being very apt, and quick of apprehension, and well versed in his
Masters ways, soon understood his meaning; so went his ways.

. The Major returns to his Cousin Butler, they had not been together above an
hour after breaking their Fast, to which they had taken a large
Mornings-Draught, when in comes the Majors Man, like one half out of his Wits,
which he taking notice of, says to his Cousen Butler, I think my Man is Drunk;
what is the matter with you Sirrah? You look as if you were either Mad or
Drunk? Whence came you, that makes you seem thus distracted? The Man being
Sober, and not Barren-witted, tells him, it were no marvel if I should have
lost my Senses to see so many of my own Relations and Friends undone, and
ruined upon your Account, by having so many of my Lord of Insiqueens Soldiers
quartered upon them, who with a great many more of your Tenants, are flocking
with their Complaints to you: and you spend your time here.

The Major bids him go to them, and forbid them to enter the City: and to tell
them he would immediately go to the Commissioners, and see them have
Reparation; with this seeming Resolution, he rises from the Table, borrows his
Cousin Butlers Scarlet Cloak, Guarded with Gold-Lace, his fine Embroidered-Belt
and Guilt-Rapier, goes down Stairs, and with much Expedition takes his Uncles
Maccnemaarro's Horse, Rides quite another way from where he appointed the Groom
to wait for him: whose Heels may cool before he comes; so may his Cousin Butler
too, who intended the next Morning to begin his Journey toward his Fathers.
His Condition I can but pity, to meet with such an unfortunate Accident, by
which he is so disappointed, disordered, and disarmed, not knowing which way to
turn him, or what course to take: only expects the coming of his Cousin, who I
suppose intended it not.

. The Major designing to shun such places as he supposed the likeliest to meet
any of those he so lately played his prancks with, takes the Road to Gallway:
who should he meet, within a place not possible for him to avoid, but his very
good friend Mr. Maccnema^^^ whose occasions had at that time dra^ (...) that
way? and seeing Major Clancie (...) mounted upon his own Horse, so far from
home with Mr. Butlers Cloak, and Belt, begun to suspect there was some Roguery
in the matter, which in Examination he found it to be so: he first asked the
Reason of this coming that way? and not sending home his Horse, which he only
borrowed to Limerick? Then next he asked him how he came by that Cloak and
Sword and Belt, which he knew belonged to Mr. Butler? He Answered, that he
borrowed all with intent to restore them at his Return, within two or three
days; which did not at all satisfy Mr. Maccnemarroe, who was very much
concerned for Mr. Butler, which makes him resolve to take all from the Major,
and go purposely to Limerick hopes to find Mr. Butler there, that he might
restore him his things, so unhandsomly taken from him, which in conclusion he
did; by which means Major Clancie is left naked, without Horse, Cloak or Sword.

. Mr. Butler hearing much of Major Clancie heartily wished it had been sooner,
or that he had never known him. He is in such disorder, and so perplexed for
this disappointment, that he does not well know what to do: he is very
unwilling to send to his Father, by which he (...) Discover how he was Cheated,
under (...) and pretense of Friendship, whi^^^ he had rather conceal by much;
at last he resolves to go to the Commissioners, and inquire if Major Clancie
had been with them? (as he pretended at parting) and what was become of him?
Mr. Fanning the Chief Commissioner, understanding who Mr. Butler was, and what
had befaln him, having ever deservedly had a great Regard for his Family;
received him with abundance of kindness, and respect, and told him how sorry he
was to hear him fall into the acquaintance of Major Clancie, of whom he never
heard Good; and told him, if he wanted money to carry him home, he should
command it, or any other Service within the reach or power of the
Commissioners: who kept little or no Correspondence with Major Clancie, so as
they could give no Account of him. This occasioned a long discourse between Mr.
Butler, and the Commissioners: who were very desirous to hear how he came to
have any intimacy with Clancie, he concealed nothing; but told them of the
meeting upon the Highway, with all his Invitations, and how he carried him to
his Uncles House Mr. Macnemarroe, and so to Limerick, where he played him this
last Pranck: at which the Commissioners laughed heartily, knowing very well that
Mr. Maccnemarroe had no Relation in the World to Clancie. One of the
Commissioners standing in the Window, observes to come over the Bridge the very
person Mr. Butler is discoursing of, Mr. Maccnemarroe, he turns about, and
tells them, there comes the Gentleman you spoke of: he is no sooner got to his
Lodging; but the Commissioners sent for him, to give them a further account of
this matter: upon entrance into their Room, after a cold salute from all: one
of the Commissioners asked him (by appointment) what was become of his Nephew
Clancie? And before he could answer, told him how sorry they were that a Person
of his Esteem, and great Reputation in his Country, a Man of that known Honor
and Worth, that all his Lifetime was looked upon as a principal preserver of
the Credit of Twomond; at last to join with a Cheat, and could find no fitter a
Subject for this Contrivance, but my Lord of Mountgarro^'s Son; and further, to
the great discredit of the whole Country, to put a gloss upon the ill cause,
and palliate the Design, there must be nothing but Uncle and Nephew, then a
Pedigree must be found for a Relation to my Cousin Butler. I am so much ashamed
to think you should have a hand in the like, that I can, say no more; but leave
to the Commissioners to speak their own Senses. The Gentleman Mr. Maccnemarroe,
extremely troubled to hear himself thus scandalously reproacht; had scarce the
patience to forbear interrupting the Commissioners: at last makes Answer: that
he conceived he had very hard measure to be thus censured before he was heard;
and that he scorned to have a hand in Cheating, as much as any of them that
charged, or any other person in the World: as for joining with Major Clancie,
he was so far from giving any Countenance upon any Design; that meeting him but
lately upon the Road, he took from him Mr. Butlers Cloak, with the Sword and
Belt, which he brought thither of purpose to restore them to Mr. Butler; who
being present at this Account, much joyed to have his Goods restored, which was
done immediately, gives them all his most hearty thanks, goes forthwith to his
Lodging, discharges all them, so goes on his Journey. Mr. Maccnemarrhe could
not hold to express his resentment in such Terms, as gave so much offense to
the Commissioners; that they thought fit to Commit him; but before he was
carried away, they asked him why he did not bring the Major, as well as the
Goods; to which he only replied, he had no Commission.

. The Commissioners knowing very well Mr. Maccnemarroe's Life and Conversation,
to be very far from the giving occasion for any the least suspicion, intending
not to keep him under a Restraint any longer, sent for him, and assured him it
was for no ill opinion they had of him, or ill Intention toward him, made them
continue him: only for the jest sake, and desired him to take it so; with which
he rested satisfied, only desired from them an authority to apprehend and
bring before them that Villain that occasioned him all this trouble, and bitter
reproaches. That they readily granted, with direction to the Sheriff of the
County, to be aiding and assisting upon occasion. Mr. Maccnemarroe takes his
leave, begins his way toward Galleway: Imagining that to be the likeliest
place, supposing the Major could make no very long Marches, being a Foot: he is
wholly bent for Revenge, and makes it his absolute and only Business to find
out his Haunts; in which he spent much time, and labor before he could give
himself any Information: But at last having placed his Spies, and Watches of
all sides; he finds the Major in a very good amiable poisture, courting one of
his new found Misses, from which divertion he carries him away to Limerick to
the Commisioners, who commit him to the Almighty in Prison, where the Jailer is
ordered to keep him close.

The rumor of the Imprisonment and restraint of Major Clancie, with its cause,
is spread all the Country over, so far as the County of Newford: where it is
brought to the hearing of Mr. Cheevers, who is not at all troubled at it,
although his family be, especially his Daughter. By the way Mr. White in Ross
being told of this, obtains a Warrant from some person in Authority, that Major
Clancie shall be sent from Constable to Constable till he be brought to Ross,
to be gazed by all that have seen him in his Bravery. There revenge is sweet,
though without hope of ever seeing his fifty pounds again, about the time that
the Major was brought as far as Cashel in his way.

The Earl of Insiquin in persuit of the Ulster Army under the Command of
General Owen Onele, chances to quarter at a place called Farmbridg, near
Cashel, where the night seeming very tedious to him, he desired a Gentleman
then in his Company, somewhat acquainted with the Courses of Major Clancies
Life, to entertain them with some passages to divert them; which the Gentleman
did, and continued his narration so long, that after many fits of Laughter they
found they were all asleep; and he talking to the walls, then thought it time
for him to sleep too, they all slept heartily till morning, though upon bare
Boards.

Next morning betimes there comes a fellow to the Door, the Centrey challenged
him, and bid him stand; asked him what he would have? whither he would go? he
answered he would fain speak with a Gentleman that was with my Lord: the
Centrey told him he should not, that it was an ill time now; for they were all
asleep. The fellow pressed very hard for an admittance, or at least to have his
message carried up to the Gentleman: whereupon the Soldier asked what his name
was; he told, that his name was Clancie, at that the Gentleman with whom he
would fain speak knew him very well: they both spoke so loud that my Lord and
the Company heard them, and did verily believe this to be that Person so much
talked of, the night before. Whereupon the Gentleman so inquired after, goes
down to see who it was; and seeing a man almost stark naked, without Hat or
Cap, without Cloak or Coat, without Doublet, Shoe, or Stocking, or any other
thing in the World; only a pair of Breeches with many Patches, and a Shirt
suitable and fit to be worn with such a pair of Breeches: so dirty as if it had
been dipped in a Kennel, in so much that the Gentleman knew him not, Major
Clancie perceiving that his disguise had altered him from the Gentleman's
knowledge, discovers himself to the Gentleman; who immediately carries him up to
my Lord in that very posture: the memorey of the last nights Stories, with the
sight of him in this Habit, put Lord and Gentleman into such a sit of merriment
and Laughter that some were forced to leave the Room.

The Major gives his Friend a Petition to present to my Lord, which the
Gentleman took, but before I delivered this Petition if you would have this
Gentleman to mediate for you, pray oblige them with the relation of some
Passages of your Life, especialy such and such; being the Stories he had told
the night before; which the Gentleman would have needs confirmed by the Major
himself: who did it so exactly well, and with such additions, as made them all
so taken with him, that they joined in the request of his Petition, wherein was
set forth how that the Major and his Predecessors having had there an ancient
relation, out of mind of dependency upon his Lordships House, and Family, and
that he hearing of his Lordships being in the Field in pursuit of Owen Onele:
came to wait upon his Lordship; being some days before well prepared for such
an occasion, being very well Mounted, and well Armed. But meeting with a number
of disorderly Highway-men, as he took them to be, was robbed of all he had, and
left in the posture you now see him in: the sum of his request therefore is,
that his Lordship will be pleased to give him a Pass to go through the
Country to Limerick, where he means to recruit himself, and return to wait
upon his Lordship in this expedition: which my Lord at the Entreaty of all that
were present granted; Clancie takes his leave of all the Company, particularly
his old Friend: and finding a Horse of very little valiue (or a Garran more
properly speaking) which he thought fit for his Turn, provides him a bundle of
straw for a Saddle, a rope of Hay for his Bridle, and thus he rides in State
into the County of Limerick: where he was so well known, that the people
believed he had broke Goal, and by that means had made his escape: some run to
apprehend him anew, who upon sight of his Pass from the Lord Insiquin were glad
to let him alone. To his Lodging he rides without interruption: sends for his
Barbers, prepares to be Bathed, and Trimed, and being provided of Clothes was
soon in condition to be admitted into Company.

This only shows what Fortunes Change can do
Makes Beggars brave Men in an hour or two.
CHAP. III.
THe Major is now returned unto Limerick, free from his fears of more
restraint, the only Gallant of all the Town, the most pleasing, and best
welcome Company that can be: no Company pleased without him, he seemingly
resolves a new course of Life, clearly to reclaim himself from his long
continued Vicious and most dishonest Practices: declaring in all Companies how
apprehensive he is of his former carriages, and how justly punished for them,
by which he is made so feelingly sensible, that there can be nothing, though of
never so great value, of power sufficient to make him attempt to the prejudice
of any man for the future. To second this resolution, and make the World
believe what an uncounterfeited Penitent he is, he seldom misses being at
Church, at those hours of Devotion appointed for the Godly: this was so
generally observed, to the unspeakable Wonder of all that saw it, as hardly
believed when reported to those that saw it not, and were no Strangers to his
former Life: that it occasioned a resort of some that had a desire to satisfy
their curiosity, by the sight of this unexpected reformation, especially the
Commissioners of the Revenew, who had not long since committed him, and are in
some doubt whether they shall believe their own Eyes or no: the chief of these
Commissioners meeting Major Clancie at his constant, and never failling place,
and hour of Devotion; invites him to his House, where his welcome was evidenced
by the cheerfulness in each ones countenance, both of Men, and Women; the
Majors carriage more and more confirming all men in an opinion of his constant
resolution, never to swerve from his pious Intentions: having no other
reparation to make for his many and great Transgressions, than for ever to shun
all occasions of temptation, left his frailty might be wrought upon. These and
many such like expressions of his, at all times, and in all Companies, had so
firmly fixed the opinion of his Hearers, in an assurance of his reality; that
there needs no further testimony; or trial.

This Commissioner (Mr. Fanning) was so taken with the Company and conversation
of Major Clancie, that he could not be one meal without him, and in a token of
his extraordinary satisfaction, desired him to command his Trunks to be brought
thither* and that he himself would remove his quarter; to that House where he
should have the absolute Command of all. The Major returned him hearty thanks,
accepted his very kind Offer; and immediately came with his retinue to Mr.
Fannings House; where he has so insinuated himself, as well with Master,
Mistress, and Servants, that there is no man commands more. In so much that
what ever he will have done by the Servants is obeyed, and approved of by the
Master.

This Gentleman Mr. Fanning being upon a Purchase of a parcel of Land, from one
Mr. Obryen in the County of Clare; had appointed a meeting at Mr. Obreyens
House, upon such a day, to conclude the Bargain by paying one hundred pounds,
as an earnest penny, there to sign, and seal according to agreement: in order
to which they prepare of all sides; Mr. Fanning for his Journey thither, and
Mr. Obrien for his reception. Mr. Fanning in his way, after having ordered his
servant to follow him with the hundred Pound to Mr. Obryen's House it is still
to be observed, that the great intimacy, or rather the great fondness that Mr.
Fanning has of Major Clancie, must needs engage him to make one at this
meeting, without whose presence there can be no satisfaction to Mr. Fanning) As
they ride along, each one entertained with their several distinct thoughts,
Major Clancie observing the man that had orders to follow with the hundred
Pounds was not come up to the Company; slackens his pace, and waits for him,
being prepared with a coulorable, plausible Story: with which he acosts the
Servant, telling him how angry and impatient Mr. Fanning was for his long stay:
whereupon he sent me back with orders for your return to Limerick, with all the
speed you can make (though you were forced to take a fresh Hoar) there you are
to go into his Closet, where you shall find behind the right hand leaf of the
Window, in a piece of paper rold up twenty Pounds in Gold: which he intended to
bring in his own Pocket to give to Mr. Obryen: you are likewise to deliver me
the hundred Pounds to lighten your Carriage, that you may come the sooner to
Mr. Obryens House, where your Master, and we all expect you; this requires
have, which your Master commands you by me.

. The Servant not questioning the matter farther, being very well satisfied
that all is real, and true that comes from the Major, whose interest in Mr.
Fanning was well known to all the Servants; particulerly this very Person;
delivers him the hundred Pounds, rides back to Limerick as hard as he could
drive, gets one of his Fellow Servants to make ready another Horse; while he
goes up stairs to finish what he comes about. But when he came to the Closet
and found the Door shut, and Locked, he was at his Wits end; not knowing what to
do, whether to break open the Closet-door, or go back without the money: at
last after many Changes in his resolutions, and apprehending that the want of
this money (for ought he knew, might break off the Bargain with Mr. Obryen
which he so often heard his Master commend, resolves to break open the Door,
which he could not easily do without some help; goes to the Window, searches
every paper, and every corner ten times over: but could find no Gold, which put
the poor innocent Fellow into such a consternation, that he falls a cursing of
both Master and Major, so vehemently that he was troublesome to all the House:
till in the end his Mistress was forced to use her power to quiet him, who was
not a little troubled to see her man in this disorder, her Husbands Closet-door
broken, all his Papers tossed most confoundedly. Then to think of her Husbands
disappointment put her into some disorders too.

. The Fellow runs down stairs like a Bedlam, rides whip and spur into Twomond,
to Mr. Obryens House; where he finds his Master full of strange apprehensions
for his long Stay, sometimes pacified by Mr. Obryen, telling him that his
nonpaiment of the hundred Pounds should be of no prejudice to him in his
Bargain; but when the poor distracted Fellow, almost weary of his Life,
appeared, and his Master asked him what the Devil ailed him to stay thus long:
put the Fellow into such a rage, that he hardly gave his master leave to speak,
but very snappishly answers him thus: Sir you may very well ask me what the
Devil ailed me, for sure enough it is the Devil, or I had never been tormented
thus, upon so little ground, or reprehended thus only for obeying: having done
nothing but by your own orders, brought me upon the high way by Major Clancie:
commanding me to make all possible have back again to Limerick, there to go
into the Closet: where I should find behind the Right Hand leaf of the Window,
in a piece of Paper, twenty pieces of old Gold, which you intended to bring in
your Pocket to give Mr. Obryen; which I did accordingly, and when I came
thither, found the Closet Door locked, which I was forced to break open, and
after long painful Search, not only in the window, but in every corner, where I
saw but a piece of Paper; thinking it might be that I came for, till wearied
off my Legs, I quitted the Search, and followed you hither; to give you this
Account; at which Mr. Fanning was astonished, believing his Man to be Drunk, or
out of his Senses; having in all the Discourse made no mention of the hundred
pound; whereupon, he asked him if he were not Drunk, or Mad and possessed with
the Devil in good earnest? Or what else made him talk of a Closet, and a
Window, and of twenty pounds of Old Gold; of Mr. Obryen and Major Clancie? Sure
thou art Raving? But where is my hundred pounds, which should have been now
given to Mr. Obryen, and was this Morning delivered you to be brought hither
for that purpose? Truly Sir, said he, I gave it Major Clancie according to the
Orders he then brought me. But says Mr. Fanning, where is the Major with the
money? How can I tell Sir, that never saw him since? but sure I am my Heart is
broke. Thy Heart broke, you Villain, where is my money? To which he could have
no other Answer, but that the Major had it; who it seems is gone about his own
Affairs.

. The whole Company are now put to Silence at the suddenness and strangeness of
this Accident. Mr. Fanning not believing there could be so much Ingratitude in
Nature, to requite all his Kindnesses thus: the rest endeavoring to pacify
him, particularly Mr. Obryen; by telling him, this should in no wise hinder him
of his Bargain; and that any other time should serve for the Payment of the
money as well. Mr. Fanning is absolutely bent for Revenge, vowing the
Punishment of the Major to the full: the rest of the Company disperse, some
laughing heartily at the seeming Artifices used by the Major, with the
strangeness of his Success in all his Attempts: others more concerned for Mr.
Fanning, pitied him. This was not so privately carried, but it is suddenly
brought to Limerick, and many other places, where all People, from the highest
to the lowest, make it the Subject of their Discourse and Pastime. Mr. Fanning,
seeing there is no remedy for the present, must Arm himself with Patience, and
study how he may have his Revenge, and Recover his money: sometimes he advises
and consults his fellow-Commissioners, what Course is best to take, and how far
the Law will warrant his proceeding in this Case. One is of Opinion, that he
will but lose his time and labor in Prosecution of such a Person, that has not
wherewithal to make him satisfaction. Others are of Opinion it is fit to make
search, and find out the Offender, both for Example to others, and in some
measure the satisfaction of Mr. Fanning; for probably though the Law will not
bear the hanging of him for this Fact, yet there are punishments sufficient and
warrantable. To this Opinion all agree; whereupon Mr. Fanning issues forth his
Warrants into all parts for the apprehending of Major Clancie, in search of
whom there is much time spent, and labor, at least half a year to little
purpose; so that all begin to give over the search and Thought of him. One day
it fortuned, Mr. Fanning having occasion to Travel toward the County of Cork;
that a Gentleman in his Company Riding a good distance before him, observed
Major Clancie coming along the Road, without Horse or Cloak, being lately come
from Galloway, where he had lost at Play all he had in the World. The Gentleman
Rides back to Mr. Fanning and tells him, Major Clancie is now at his Dispose,
walking up that Hill. Mr. Fanning makes have to meet him, and at first Sight,
was so enraged, that he had scarce power to tell his Resentments: Yet told him
sufficiently of his base, unworthy, ungrateful Carriage to one that had been so
kind to him, and used him more like an only Child, than a Stranger. But now
that I have you, I will make you know your Villainy. Clancie, who never wanted
Impudence to make his Defense, (though in never so unjust a Cause) would needs
excuse himself: but Mr. Fanning would not hear him speak, has him put on
Horseback behind one of his Servants, Pinioned so fast, that he left him no
hopes of Escape: and to be sure of his long looked for Prisoner, he defers his
Journey to Cork, and returns to Limerick to see the Major in safety in the
Dungeon, with Orders to the Jaylors to use him Rigorously, where he is kept so
close with such a weight of Irons, and so slender Fare, and continued in that
manner so long, that he absolutely despairs ever to escape that imprisonment,
till he is carried to his Grave. No Mediation or Intercession now prevails; no
hopes of Comfort left; only the expectation of his Torments will soon end, with
his most miserable Life, which he hourly wishes for, all that he can study or
Aim at, or that his Torments will give him leave to think of is, to prepare
himself for another World, where he must account for what he has done. In this
now appears plainly to him the transitoryness of things, how little Comfort or
conversation can be hoped for here, where there is nothing permanent; but all
sublunary.

The Jailor being the only person privy to his most secret thoughts: drawn to
some pity and commiseration by the long continued Sighs and Groans of the poor
and akeing-hearted Prisoner:gives him privately some Ease, by taking part of his
tormenting Irons off; other times relieving him with some small Crumbs of
comfortable Bits of Meat; and such like Acts of Charity: really believing his
stay could not be long in his Custody: but that Death must soon ease him of his
Burden. One day the Jailor coming to visit his Prisoner, asked him if there
was any thing he would have done, or any Message he would have delivered to any
Friend, or Relation of his, or if he had a Will to make, either by Word or
Writing: if so, he was very ready and willing to do him all the Service he
could. To which the Prisoner made Answer; no, only gave him thanks for that
Offer of his, and his many other Kindnesses, which he doubted not, but God
would reward him for; one Request I have to make, and to none but you, that is,
to consider me as a Dying Man, who now wholely and solely bend my thoughts and
works to make my Peace with God, in order to which, that you will not deny me
your Assistance, chiefly in bringing me the Superior of the Franciscans, Father
Delahyde, that I may make my Confession before my hour come; which cannot be
long now, that he may be assistful to me in this great Work.

The Jailor made all the have he could, lest the Prisoner should die before he
returned. Father Delahide having heard much of Major Clancie, wondered at such a
Charecter as the jailor gave of him, pressing with so much earnestness the
Reverend Father to come away in have; who is no sooner entered the Prison, But
is struck with wonder at the sight of the Major, whose durance, hardship, and
Pain, reduced him to the most lamentable Spectacle in the World: nothing but
Skin and Bones; his Eyes sunk, his Lips dried up, his Jaw Bone ready to pierce
the Sin; a direct Anatomy, or perfect Ghost; with so little Breath, as he was
believed would only serve for this short time of Confession: which the Major
begins, having examined the whole course of his Life, from the beginning to
that hour, with some uncounterfeited Zeal, so much seeming Sanctity, so strong
Resolution of amendment; in case of Life (contrary to expectation) with so
hearty Repentance that the Reverend Father admired him as the truest Penitent
he ever met with, and having pronounced Absolution, sent presently to his
Convent for a Cordial, to prolong the Majors Life if it could be, and where the
Major begged his Reverence to come once a day to see him, the Father seldom
stayed one hour in a day from him, for the oftener he came the better he liked
the Conversation, or rather Recantation of the Major, never mentioning holy
things, in which he took so much satisfaction that he believed it an acceptable
and meritorious work to preserve him, and believed himself obliged to endeavor
it.

One day Father Guardian went to see Mr. Fanning and the rest of the
Commissioners, who all received him with a great deal of Respect and kindness,
and asked him if his Reverence had any Service to command them. He said his
chief business was to see them; and withal told them where he had been, to see
one of the Wonders of the World; one he believed had not his fellow in the
World sor true Penitency and perfect Devotion. One of the Commissioners asked
who it was, he told him it was the very Picture of sorrow and Repentance, Major
Clancie. Mr. Fanning starts up, and wonders that any Man would mention him for
any Good; but he had so generally abused mankind, nay those that had befriended
him most, he betrayed soonest.

To which the Friar replies, how merciful God is, and how Men ought to imitate
and follow his Example!

This Subject occasioned a long Discourse, that at last wrought upon Mr.
Fanning so far, as to grant Father Dallahide his Request; which was, that Major
Clancie should be brought before the Commissioners, and there be heard speak
for himself: Orders were sent to the Jailor to bring him. The Jailor makes
Answer he may as well bring the Prison upon his Back as the Prisoner in his
Bolts, that is hardly able to walk without a supporter; if he had all other
freedom: whereupon he is commanded to take his Irons off, and bring him with
some Soldiers to attend him. The Crowd in the Streets was so great, that the
Soldiers had something to do to clear the way for this walking Ghost; who with
much ado is brought before the Commissioners, who were moved to some compassion
at the appearance of this lamentable Spectacle: Father Dellahide break the
silence first, and turning to the Major, tells him, my Child, I have persuaded
these Gentlemen to hear you; therefore what ever you have to say, speak it
freely. I humbly thank your Reverence, and these worthy Gentlemen; I have not
much to say, but only this, that I cannot but apprehend how I must inavoidably
subject my self to the Lash of Censorious persons, who will undoubtedly
reproach me with the scandalous Terms of Flattery, in repeating what I have
just reason to believe, that God is well pleased with all these Gentlemen that
have so justly punished and imprisoned me, whereby I come to know my self; and
call to mind my many former Errors, and Transgressions so often committed, with
which I might have hazarded, if not absolutely purchased, perpetual Damnation;
from which, I hope that God will now defend me. Nor do I petition Life or
Liberty, lest I might never be so prepared for my End: only desire so much Ease
from those Tortures, that I might spend the few hours I have to live, in the
Exercise of those Admonitions I have from my Ghostly Father. If I cannot obtain
this, I submit with satisfaction, that some will take Example by my deserved
Punishments, and amend their Lives, which I heartily wish all good Christians
may do. With these and many such Expressions the Major wrought so upon all the
Crowd of Hearers, that some wept for Pity, others wished it in their powers to
release him; more especially Mr. Fanning, who now begins to listen to the
Intercessions of Father Dallahide, and the rest of the Commissioners. In
Conclusion, Mr. Fanning turns to the Friar, and tells him, Father you have
wrought a great Miracle, for my own part I am glad if I have contributed any
thing to it; as for those injuries I received by the Prisoner, I very freely
forgive; upon the assurance that he will prove a new Man, as we have all Reason
to be consident he will: I therefore bestow him upon you. Whereupon is
expressed a great deal of gladness through the whole Town. The Jailor is
discharged, Major Clancie is led along in Company of Father Guardian. to the
Monastery, where he is received after the wonted Ceremony of the place, and
Orders.

It is a constant custom, and an observed Rule, that no body must take upon
him the Habit of St. Francis, till he first serve out a year os probation, or
Novelship, which Major Clancie with all humbleness did, and is granted his
Petitions; sor where he is employed, behaves himself with so much humility,
that there can be no Employment, or Office so mean or servile, but he most
readily undertakes: as for those Exercises of Devotion, no Man can be more
punctual. Father Dallahide is so very fond of Brother Clancie, that he appoints
him to lie at his Bed's feet, lest he might by Overworking after his late
Imprisonment, bring himself into any Fit of sickness, that his Cordials might
be in readiness at his Call. Brother Clancie is now in his Novelship, a
professed Friar in the Order and Habit of St. Francis, and Chamber-Fellow to
Father Guardian, who is sometimes disappointed of his Rest by that continual
Exercise of Mortification practiced by Brother Clancie, who every Night to
torment and cool that wanton Body of his, pulls off his Habit, and rouls
himself upon the cold Ground, and when ever he hears the Cock to Crow, falls a
whipping his naked Body, till commanded by Father Dallahide to forbear thus
rigorously to torment himself; assuring him that to preserve himself, were it
but for example would do much more acceptable service to God, than to make
himself away, and desired him withal, to remember how lately he came out of
Prison, and how severely dealt with there, and how it brought him so low, that
he could hardly crawl, and therefore would have him Cherish, and Nurse himself
till he recovered his former strength. In this manner stood Affairs for some
time. Brother Clancies Diligence more and more engages the Affections of all
his Brother-Friers, especially Father Guardian, who seldom or never goes any
where without him, chiefly when he goes to preach to his Congregation, to whom
he often Declares as undeniable Truth, what had been told us by our
Predecessors, in order to the Amendment of our Lives, and preservation of our
Souls. Yet knowing how incident and natural it is to all Men, to be more taken,
and give more Credit to what they see, than what they hear, I must here take
leave to point out to all your Views, the wonderful and almost miraculous work
of the Almighty, in the clear and perfect Reformation of one of the loosest
livers in the world. I hope, for your examples, as his own preservation, who
had heretofore so plentifully tasted the pleasures of the World in every form
Man's wishes could propose: nor did his want of Youth deprive him of hopes to
continue so; yet being touched with a timely Remorse, by which the vanity of the
World was made appear to him, quits all hopes of the pleasures of this World;
for the poor begging habit of St. Francis; wherein he now sits at the foot of
the Pulpit, at which all the People look, knocking of their hands and breasts
for admiration, still listening to the Preacher; who pursues his Story, by
telling them how strangely studious poor Brother Clancie is, to find out
unheard of punishment; in hope thereby to make some reparation, to purchase the
Pardon, and expiation of his Crime, for the transgression of his Youth. I my
self that am a Friar, and a Preacher these two and thirty years, am now glad to
learn new ways or Mortification of my poor Brother Clancie. Thus did this good
and reverend Father continue of giving attributes of Praise to Brother Clancie,
who by this time is very well versed in the several ways of both Clergy, and
Laity; one thing he observed to the rule in the Monastery: not to reserve for
the next Meal, (yet being dispensed with because of the War) they of that
Monastery had got a little slock of money together, from their charitable
Neighbors, which Brother Clancie knew of; who finding an opportunity by the
absence of Father Guardian, goes to brother Spencer, who was then their
Cash-keeper, and told him that Father Delahyde being with the Commissioners,
they had promised to do them a very kind piece of Service, which was, to employ
their own Servants to the Fair of Mollengare to buy lean Cattle for the winter
Provision, and would give them Grass till they were fit to be eaten, to which
end Father Delahyde sent me for that little money, to deliver to the
Commissioners for that Use, Father Spencer believing all this to be true,
delivers him the money, being threescore Pounds; he no sooner had it but he
carries it to a private Lodging, where he puts off St. Francis's habit, puts on
his other Clothes, and bids adieu to his benefactor Father Delahyde, and all
the rest of his dearly beloved Brother-Friers; as soon as the Guardian came in,
his first enquiry was for brother Clancie, being always very tender of him,
asked him how he did, and where he was?

Truly says Father Spencer he eat his Dinner heartily; for my part I have not
seen him since he brought me a message from you. From me a message? what do you
mean by a message? for I have not seen him this day, are you sure you do not
mistake? I am sure Sir he brought me your Order to deliver him over our little
Stock of Money to be carried to the Commissioners, who promised to send their
own Servants to the Fair of Mollengare: and there to buy lean Cattle, and that
they would bestow Grass to seed them, till they were fit for us to eat. God
bless us says Father Delahyde, I am afraid you are Drunk, or have lost your
Senses. Should I be Drunk, that have not tasted any manner of Liquor this day?
what then? what makes you talk at random thus of the Commissioners. of
Mollengare-Fair, of Servants, of Lean cattle and God knows what? Sir I know no
more, I do but repeat his own words, he may give you a better Account which I
suppose he will do when he comes in. But have you given the money in earnest?
yes truly have I. And do you not know where he is? no in good faith not I. Why*
then I am afraid we are all undone.

This last Act of the Major's to the great disappointment of the reverend
Father, and the rest of his Friars, and Fellow Sufferers, soon spread up and
down the Town, that it came to the Hearing of the Commissioners, who next day
came to see his Reverence, and condole his great Loss. Mr. Flanning begins to
enquire for Brother Clancie, that Example of Humility, that Pattern of
Penitence: enlarging so upon that Subject till Father Delahyde much out of
countenance, begged him not to torment Him with those reproachful Sentences, and
Repetitions of his irrecoverable Loss; and believe this was sent for their
Punishment, and Trial of Patience, who have no remedy, but Leave it to God.
Father Spencer standing by, and hearing him say he would leave it to God; being
troubled, replies there should be no search for Clancie, leave it to God, and
if this wicked Fellow comes with one tear of Repentance, God will forgive him.
But what shall we do in the mean time for Meat? at this the People fell all a
Laughing, till the Company parted, each one to his Home entertaining their
Selves, and Friends with those Passages formerly repeated.

CHAP. IV.
MR. Clancie concievs it not safe for him to make any stay in them Parts, where
he had so lately played so many Pranks, and had incensed so many Persons of
Quality; who would undoubtedly have apprehended him, were it but only in
revenge of poor Father Delahyde, injured so: believing Limerick too hot a place
for him, to take his Journey toward the County of Keary a place he never had
been in before, there makes his inquiry as well of Names of Places, as the
Inhabitants, and having thoroughly informed Himself in every particular, he
likewise inquires who those People were that lived in the Wood, and upon the
Mountains, and what shift they could make for their Livelihood, and
Subsistence?

Answer was made him that most of them were Gentlemen of good Rank, Men of
great Courage, and Resolution, put now to so much Hardship, that unavoidably
they must be very Burdensome to the Country, troublesome enough to the
Neighboring Garrisons, having no Pay or other ways to live but what they must
take by force from their Enemies, their Friends not daring to relieve them. He
farther enquires which was the next Garrison, and who commanded there? it was
told him that Cork was the next; the Governors own Name he knew not. Pray do
you know any of the Gentlemen's Names that live near Cork? can I have admittance
into the City? yes Sir, I know Mr. Ocallechan, and several others that pay
Contribution. After this Information the Major goes toward Cork, to a
Gentleman's House with whom he had some small acquaintance; who bids him very
welcome, and gave him good entertainment, which the Major makes this Use of,
and tells him that the occasion of his coming thither was to make Use of his
kindness, in a Business he was very confident would be very acceptable to all
Men, and injurious to none: whereupon the Gentleman of the House promises to do
him all Service. Why then Sir my request is, That you will do me the favor as
go to the Governor of Cork, and tell him that I am a Person that have a small
Command amongst those Gentlemen that cannot but be troublesome to him, and his
Quarters; and if he will give me good conditions, in order to my Transport, and
those under my Command, I will wait upon him, provided he first send me a safe
Conduct by you. The Gentleman of the house was very glad of the occasion;
believing it a very welcome Message, goes next morning to the Governor: who
kindly thanked him, and immediately gives him a safe Conduct for Captain
Clancie, and desires him to bring the Captain to his House, and to assure him
he should have good conditions, and shall be very punctually performed. The
Gentleman returns to the Captain with this account, who without delay comes to
the Governors House in Cork: where he is most nobly feasted, his company very
pleasing to all: no sooner Dinner was done, but Captain Clancie desired a
private conference with the Governor, where he reasoned the matter, so
signifying how resolute all his party were, and absolutely resolved to revenge
their selves, in case of no relief: such of them as had not the intention with
Captain Clancie, who likewise told him how necessary he would be in this case;
whereupon the Governor desired him to know what conditions would satisfy him?
Sir I would not willingly be counted unreasonable to a Person so obligingly
civil as your self. I would have a safe and free Quarter for my Men and Horses
during our stay here, a good Ship well Manned, and Victualled, to transport us
to our Harbor beyond Sea, with some money in our Purses to serve us upon our
arrival, which I will leave to your discretion.

Truly Captain I can but commend your care of your men; nor do I find so much
of unreasonableness in your Demand, and to dispute any farther, but grant all
you desire; all which was presently reduced into Writing, signed by the
Governor, and delivered the Major, who no sooner finished his complement to
the Ladies, but he takes his leave of the Governor, and those Officers with
him, goes along with his Friend in whose House he had lain some nights before,
and from thence to the Mountains: where he was very well known to a great many
there, begins to wonder at their manner of living, without Meat, without Drink,
without Lodging. Some answered though their Fare was bad, yet their Cause was
good, and others answer, would God for all the goodness of our Cause, we knew
where to eat and drink one hearty good Meal; to which Clancie makes answer
thus: Gentlemen I must confess I pity you. Pity us? a plague take your pity,
could you help us to some Meat. I do assure you Gentlemen if you would be but
ruled by me, I would soon help you to Meat, and Drink enough. They all that
were there present resolved, and vowed to observe him, and his orders in what
ever he would command them, (provided they law a provision made for them with
any manner of safety) ho told them that if they would but own him for their
Captain, he would warrant with his life to provide for them as he promised, to
which another makes Answer He liked the motion well enough, if he knew how to
believe Clancie: with whom he had been well acquainted before; whereupon
Clancie, to remove that Doubt, produces the Articles he had made with the
Governor of Cork. Upon sight of which to the number of threescore and ten of
them, call him Captain, and march along with him through the Country very
safely, being every where much made of, a far pleasanter, and sweeter way of
living than on the Mountains. Thus they march to the gates of Cork, where they
are received, and provided for by the Governor: who presently upon their
Arrival appoints each one his Quarter, where they are to stay till the Wind
serve: there being no other Let, the ship being in readiness, and the money
that was articl'd for, paid to the Captain.

Soon after this the wind served fair for their Voyage, the Governor sees all
clear, and aboard, waits upon Captain Clancie, wishing him a good Passage. The
Captain having civily returned his thanks, set Sail, of whom we hear no more,
till his Coming with his Troop into Flanders. Where some of them asked him for
the share of their Money given him by the Governor of Cork for theirs Use? He
told them that what money was given him was for his own Use, and not theirs. But
they not satisfied with this Answer, resolved to have it out of his bones, and
threatened him, so that he was glad to get from them by stealth, and leave his
Troop to shift for their Living, who not knowing where to follow, dispersed
several ways to seek their Fortunes apart.

CHAP. V.
THe Major is by this time got into a remotest part of the Country, where he
had intelligence of a very Fair, and Rich Widow, to whom he resolves to make
his address: having for Excuse (of his presumption of coming with such an
intention to a person of that Quality, in so mean an equipage, and so slenderly
attened) the distress of his Country, well known to most Nations; which he
begs her Ladyship to consider, and not to look upon him as mean, though
peradventure his Habbit, and retinue might speak him so, which she should find
upon enquiry.

The Lady with a great deal of modesty gave him thanks for his large
expressions, and told him withal, it was not her business to inquire after
any man's Fortune, especially having neither intention or inclination to change
her condition, which she desired might serve for an answer: not that she
misbeliev'd what he had said, or ever intended to question tho matter, only
that she knew not how to be rude to any Man; and that at present she had some
occasions called her away. This he took for an Encouragement to come again,
which he often did without Invitation. One day meeting with some of his
Acquaintance of the Gentry of Ireland; he imparts this Secret, by which he
questions not, but to be shortly enabled to relieve them from their necessitous
condition, and put himself into a very splended posture. This relished so well,
that these Gentlemen asked if they or any of them by their attendance upon his
Person, or any other way could be serviceable to him in this affair? he told
that was not it, but the only thing he wanted to carry on this design, was so
much money as would furnish him with some Aparrel; that he might not always
appear in one Dress.

Truly say they our stock you know can not be great, yet howsoever we will
devide with you upon such an occasion as this, that cannot be every where had.
He ingages that they shall never have cause to repent this kindness. They
encourage him to proceed, having already made so fair a progress, they make up
forty pound between them; which they very cheerfully gave him. He no sooner had
it, but he forthwith quits his Matter, leaves his Lodging undischarged, and his
Friends strangely disappointed of this great Expectation; crosses the Country,
and comes into England: so to London. Where at a place called Nells Ordinary,
to which there was great resort to, which there came two Strangers that
discoursing of their Travels, one of them asked his Friend, if he knew of any
that he could confide in, now I am going into France; and have some money which
I would willingly put into the hands of a Friend, that would be just to, and
save me the Trouble of Exchange; his Comrade told him he would inquire, and was
sure he could not miss of many that would be glad of the occasion.

Major Clancie having heard the discourse as soon as Dinner was done, and
Reckoning paid, called for some Wine to entertain his Friends: to which he
invites these two Strangers, to whom he had made himself so known: that before
they parted he contracted such a Friendship, as if they had been of long
acquaintance: insomuch that they were sworn Brothers. They had not spent many
hours in this new purchass'd Brotherhood, when he told him, Brother, if I am
not mistaken I heard you wish for a Friend that would be true to you, and could
help you to your money upon your Arrival in Paris. If that be a Service to you,
I am sure I can help you; for there is a noble Person there, that has a
considerable sum of money in his hands, that shall pay you upon sight of my
Bill.

This the Earl of Insiquin, a Man very well known to be Responsable and just,
and if you please to make a farther enquiry as it is sit you should, you will
find this true. The Gentleman hearing the name of Insiquin believing the thing
withour any more ado, and told the Major he had two hundred Pounds, one he
would carry about him, the other he should have: whereupon the Major draws his
bill with a very careful earnest Letter of credence, with which the Gentleman
was very well satisfied, and delivered the money, when the Reckoning was paid:
The Company parted; The Major about his affairs, the Gentleman to prepare for
his Journey.

How that he is gladly eased of the burden of his money, into so good a Hand,
who no sooner Arives at Paris, but comes to my Lord of Insiquin, delivers his
Bill, and Letter. My Lord seeing the name of Clancie: could hardly contain
himself from laughing. So that he was forced to make an Apology, by telling the
Gentleman that the many former stories that he had heard, and known of Major
Clancie: being brought fresh by this Bill, and Letter into his memory, was the
cause he could not forbear laughing; and withal told the Gentleman how sorry he
was that any Gentleman should fall into the Hands of such a known Cheat, and
for his part he never had money of Clancies in his Life, and that withal his
heart he pitied the Gentleman: not knowing how to advise him for the recovery
of his money, other then to make what haste he could back again to London.
where probably he might find Major Clancie before all the money were spent.
This was such a sudden surprise to the Gentleman, so contrary to his
expectation, that he neither knew what to say or do: stood stock still like an
Image, or Statue without Lfe, or Motion. But upon second thoughts, and serious
consideration, he resolves to take my Lords advice; this being a Business could
admit of no long deliberation.

And after a very little rest and some small repast, he takes post, and rides
back to London, where he finds the Major that dreamed not of his return in the
least, and rising suddenly from the Company to welcome his Brother, meets half
a dozen Baliffs, that handled him very roughly. The Gentleman hearing him call
Brother, answers him with a curse, a plague take all such Kindred: in brief,
the Major is carried to Prison, wihout making restitution of any money, having
little or no^e about him; Where he had not been above ten days, but he makes
love to the Marshalls only Daughter, with some success: so much as gave him
admittance, and oppertunity to make his pitied Passion known; he had a familiar
acquaintance with the Daughter of the Great Earl of Twomond. To whom he takes
the liberty to signify by Letter the State of his condition as a Prisoner,
without hopes of redemption: desiring her Ladyship with much earnestness to
continue still his Friend; to whom he had a very humble request. Which was,
that She would command her Chaplen to come to the Prison, and hear his
Confession* this request He hoped She would not deny him, it being the great
concern of his Soul; The Lady did so. The Chaplen puts on his Disguise, and
came to the Prison, where he was carried to a private Room. The doo^ being shut
close, he begins to tell the Major by whose command he came, and desired him to
consider how he, and all those of his Function were persecuted; and that he
could not stay long, and doubted not but he was prepared:

Sir (says the Major) I know it very well, and shall not keep you long, my
Confession is but short: I know what you have said to be very true that you are
a Priest, my Confession is that I want money, which you can and must supply
before you leave this pIace; or I will Inform against you. The Chaplen was so
startled at this Confession, knew not what defense ^o make, finding all his
arguments fruitless: at last was forced to give the Major all the money he had;
being twenty Broad Pieces, and his Bond for thirty more to be paid at the day
agreed upon. The Chaplen goes home to his Lady, like a distracted man, to whom
he tells what befell him, Imputeing the blame of his misfortune to her Ladyship,
at whose Entreaty and Command he undertook that unfortunate Journey.

The Lady very much troubled conceiving her Self the absolute occasion of this
Disaster; knew no way to repair this injury but by paying the Twenty Pounds,
and ingageing for the Thirty, which She immediately did.

During the time of the Majors Imprisonment, there chanced to come into
England, one Sutton commonly called Duke of Northumberland, the pretended Heir
of the Lord Dudley of Dudley-Castle; who then had a Relation in Town, who he
often visited at his house, where he was sometimes entertained with Stories of
Major Clancie, with which the Duke was so taken, that he acquainted the French
Ambassador with, whereupon, this Gentleman and Friend to the Duke, was invited
by the Ambassador to Dinner, where he was desired to satisfy that Company with
some account of Major Clancies Life, of whom the Ambassador had heard so much,
which the Gentleman did, with so much satisfaction seemingly to all the
Company, more especially the Ambassador's Secretary, who longed for nothing so
much as the sight of this Major that was the Author of all this Discourse, so
that when Dinner was done, the Secretary takes one of his Matters Coaches, and
some Footmen along, and having found after some inquiry, where the Majors
Habitation was, makes him a Visit to the Marshals House, where he was Prisoner:
The Major receives him with all the kindnesses that could be, and entertained
him so plentifully, that the Secretary could not choose but wonder to see with
what Decent order he was served, upon the sudden: as if he had expected him;
and a preparation made purposely for his Reception. Yet there could nothing be
so satisfactory as the freedom of Discourse with which the Secretary was so
taken, that he resolved to come often to see him, with intentention to do him
Service. Thus they entertained each other for that Afternoon, and at parting,
used so much Courtship and Ceremonies, as made the Marshal believe there must
be a great deal of Intimacy and Friendship between them.

The Secretary is no sooner gone, but the Major, who seldom, or never wanted
wherewithal, to put a good Gloss upon an ill Cause, and resolving to make some
Use of this Visit, puts himself into the Posture of the most unfortunate
Creature in the World; and Acted that part so well, that all the People there
present, were very much concerned; though they knew nothing of the Cause:
chiefly the Master of the House, who with a great deal of Earnestness pressed to
know the occasion of this so great and sudden a Change? To which the Major
makes Answer thus, I know you cannot but wonder at me, that am indeed the
wonder of the World for misfortune: so misfortunate that if you knew my
Condition, I doubt you would not Relieve me, though your Charity might point
you to things of greater difficulty. Yet for your satisfaction, I will not
conceal from your Knowledge, the true State of my Case. When I was in France
last, I did Article with the King, that I would bring hIm out of Ireland, a
Regiment consisting of two thousand Men. On this depended my Fortune, now crossed
by this cursed Imprisonment. The French Ambassador not knowing any thing of my
Restraint, and much wondering why I did not go with my Capitulation, sends his
chief Secretary to know the Reason why I came not at him, that he might move
all Objections, either with the Protector or elsewhere; that gave
intterruption to this Design. Now you know the cause of my Distraction and
Trouble, then judge if I have not reason to be so, to see the neck of my hopes
broke by this restraint; where I cannot promise my self so much Liberty, as
would give me time to finish my Business with the French Ambassador.

. All that heard him, could not choose but be concerned for him, especially his
Mistress, the Jailors only Daughter; who now made Use of her Interest with her
Father: alleging such Reasons and Arguments of pity, in behalf of the Major,
whole future Happiness depended wholly upon this so considerable Employment, as
the Command of so many Men, by which it was not unlikely, but he might in
little time be enabled to procure his Liberty, and make large Returns for the
Favor should be conferred upon him; and what pity it was that a Person of
that Honor and Quality, should be thus restrained now in his Distress: The
Father considering with great Attention the words of his dear Child, with how
much reason spoke, and she was concerned; tells her how sorry he was that it
lay not in his power to redeem and free him from all his trouble, being a
person for whom he ever had a very great Respect: and whose generous and free
good Nature, was well known to him, seeing the Ambassadors Secretary come to
him in such an Equipage, made him believe all to be very true; whereupon he
calls the Major to him to acquaint him with what the Daughter had said; and how
heartily she pleaded for him, which indeed had wrought so much upon the good
Man, he desired the Major to be very free with him; and let him know wherein or
which way he could serve him, and he should find him a real true Friend. The
Major returns him most hearty Thanks, with an assurance of that his Gratitude
should speak it self; so as what ever kindness was done him now in his greatest
necessity, should not be counted lost. Telling wit^ all, how that the French
Ambassadors Secretary told him how requisite his presence would be to go along
with the Ambassador to the Protector, in Order to settle a course for the
Raising of his Regiment in Ireland; and when that was done, he was to receive a
very considerable sum of money, out of which he would not fail to pay that
sum for which he lay in Prison, and plentifully reward the many kindnesses he
had received there; and in Order to the effecting of all this, he desired no
more, but that the Marshal would be so kind as to let him go to the Ambassador
once a day, and take his own Parole for his Return at Night. The Marshal told
him it was not usually practiced to set a Prisoner at Liberty without Bail.

Yet that the consideration of so pressing and weighty an Occasion, with the
mediation of his Child to whom he could deny nothing, had persuaded so far with
him, that he should have his Request, not doubting but the Major would be so
just to him as not to fail that expectation of coming in every Night till his
Capitulations was finished: by which he hoped to see him free from that and all
his other troubles, which the Major moved to do, by all that was dear to him in
this and the World to come. He now at Liberty to go every day about his own
affairs, and follow his own Inventions; comes in every Night very punctually,
nor can he all this time omit the least opportunity of making his address to
his Mistress the Marshalls Daughter: who by this time is so wrought upon by
those his many Passionate expressions, that she resolves to grant him all his
desires, provided he first give her as an assurance of his constancy: that
irremoveable Pledge, and engagement of marriage, which the Major did not often
deny any for, whereupon they both consent for many reasons to have it done with
as much Privacy as could be, sirst, because it suited not so well as affairs
stood with him, to have the Marriage, which the Major did Publicly; and next
by reason She never consulted Father, Mother, or Friend; so that it is agreed
they both must meet in a secret remote part of the Town; with very few
Witnesses, the Thursday following, where all things were solemnized, to the
unspeakable satisfaction of both; after which home they come; each their
several way without the least suspicion, where they have leisure, sufficient
convenience to meet, and advise as often as they please, one day the Major being
in Company with some of his own Crew, notice was given him how that his
Creditor was informed of his liberty, and that it was intended the Marshal
should be called to an account for it, and that a course would soon be taken to
restrain him, is not very speedily prevented: he no sooner comes to his hour of
Loanliness and privacy with his Wife: but he acquaints her with the design,
telling her with all what his apprehensions were, and that he knew no way so
safe for the preservation of his liberty from the Malice and Prosecution of
his Prosecuting Creditors, as for them both to be gone into some place of
safety out of the reach of his enemies. Though he scarce knew how to effect
this without her help, by reason of the scarcity of Money, occasioned by those
several misfortunes that lately befell him, especially his last Imprisonment. To
which She makes answer that She had so absolutely settled her heart and
affections upon him, that She will never decline or forsake him: But will with
cheerfulness go with him into any part of the World he pleases, so She may
enjoy him, and bear a snare as well in his Sufferings as his Plenty: and as for
his present supply, She knew of some Gold her Mother had in a drawer, in the
bottom of a Trunck of Linen, to which She had admittance at her Pleasure; and
it should go very hard but She would bring him this Gold to any place, and at
what time he should appoint with this he was overjoyed, signifying by all he
could say or do, the great sense he had in his own Happiness in Her, which he
would not change for the Empire of the whole World. This mutual satisfaction
was sealed with a kiss, the hour of meeting at Gravesend apdointed; he goes
abroad about his Affairs, and She about her Design, which She affected that
very Afternoon.

Her Father and Mother being gone as far as Hamstead, and leaving Her as their
chief Trustee to oversee, and have care of all their concerns at Home, which
She was not unmindful of; for as soon as their backs were turned, She went to
the Trunk having the key in Her own custody, so as She could meet with no
Dificulty till She came to the Drawer; with which She was forced to spend some
time; and use some Art before She could break it open, which She at last
overcame, with as little noise as She could. Where She found two small purses
with a Hundred broad pieces of Gold in each, and having put the Gold into her
pocket, closes up every thing in as good order as She could, or her have would
suffer her, and so takes her leave of London for some time: away She marches to
Gravesend; where She met her most dearly beloved Joy, to whom She delivered
this most welcome present, She thought it not convenient to make any long stay
there; for fear of some persuit, and therefore made all possible have into the
low Countries, where they spent their time merrily as long as their stock
lasted. He finding the Purses were grown very light, and his expense very
great, resolves to put her to the Trial of Wits, if not out of her Wits, by
sending her back to her sond Father and Mother, presuming her presence might
reconcile them to their Darling in order to the separation, he makes her
believe his resolution is to go into Flanders; where he has great hopes of such
a Fortune as would make them live happily together for ever after* She not
being in condition to Travel being with Child, to this part of his will She
knew not well what answer to make, being overcome with grief, to think of
leaving him, a thing so contrary to his promise, and so averse to her Nature;
that she would undoubtedly rather choose to leave the World, than him: but
since it was his pleasure to have have it so, and that there was no remedy She
would obey him in this, as in all things else: away She came into England, so
to London; where I must leave Her to make use of what Interest She has in
Friends to procure her Pardon, and persuade a reconciliation in which they meet
with much difficulty.

Till at last her Father being moved with several considerations of her being
deluded by that false Villain Clancie, whose insinuating Snares the Father
himself could not escape: then She ever having been the fondest and most
dutiful Child in the World; upon whom he had placed all his Comfort and
Consolation; now returned home in her rags like a Beggar; and which was worse,
great with Child, and very near her time: he takes Her in his Arms, washed her
cheeks with his Tears; gives her the same command She had before her
misfortune; at which the Mother was overjoyed.

CHAP. VI.
MAjor Clancie having turned off his Wife, is now at liberty, free from any
apprehension of Danger or Imprisonment, travels into Italy, Arrives at a place
called VIENA. where he is put to his Wits end for money, he privately calls his
Servants to him, gives them Orders that when he called any of them by their
Christian'd names, they should be sure to answer him my Lord, as if he had been
one in disguise, and would not have it known that he was so. They being very
well versed in his ways knowing he was designing some tricks to get money;
withal observed him very punctually, and seemingly in so much that the Master
of the House taking great notice of this, invites the Majors Servants to an
evening repast, with intention to inform himself of the quality, and true Title
of his new Guest: to this purpose he Feasts them, and at the Feast drinks
himself and them into such a pitch, as that neither of them could say much;
however he made a shift to let them know the desire he had to be informed of
them the true Title of their Masters quality, having often overheard them call
him Lord, and he being apprehensive that through his Ignorance he might abridge
his Honor, made it his request to them to inform him. One of them told him
that he had been so obliegingly civil to them, he for his own part knew not how
to deny him any thing: provided he would be secret in a thing that would do
them much prejudice to discourse it, being contrary to the command of their
Master, and him no good; they knew not why, and that although his quality was
far above what he now seemed to be, yet he for some reasons best known to
himself, not fit for them to pry into; commanded their Secrecy, which they
would never have violated without the same promise of Secrecy from him, and
withal desired that this might serve to satisfy his curiosity, and ask no more
questions of particular relating to that: and for fear of any discovery, to be
sure to use the same freedom as hitherto. All which the Master of the House
promised he would be very careful to observe in every respect.

One day as the Major and his Landlord sat at dinner, there chanced to pass by
the Door a great many Hors-men attending upon some great Gentleman, they knew
not who till one of the Hors-men, having formerly lodged in that house, steps
to the Door to inquire how his Friends there did, the Master of the House very
heartily welcomed him, the Gentleman made no stay: the Master returns to his
Dinner, and the Major being one of the inquisitive asks who that was, that was
so kind as upon his first coming to visit your House, to which the Master made
answer, that this Gentleman Signior Gerardo had been a long time lodged in his
House, and that all his Lifetime he never lodged a Worthier Person, or a
Braver Man; nor did he ever know any Man more generally beloved, and now coming
to Town with the Prince of Tuskaine, to whom he was a Servant, would not defer
that visit. Truly says the Major I cannot but commend Him for it, and could
wish for an opportunity to be known to a Person of so much Worth as you
describe, and as he seems to be, and should take it for a great kindness, if
you would let him know so much. I may do it with ease replies the Master; for I
am to see him this night by appointment, where I shall not fail to observe your
command.

The hour being come the Master went to see his Friend Gerardo, who received
him with all the kindness that could be, and after having exchanged their
ceremonies of Joy to see each other: the Master tells him of a request he had,
that could admit of no denial; and in the end he should find it no disservice
to himself. Mr. Gerardo desires to know what request this was that should need
so great a preamble; you knowing very well you may command me. Why then says
the Master, there is a Gentleman that now lodges in my House, who upon some
discourse of you, desired me to bring you acquainted; let me assure you, you
will not think your time ill bestowed in his Company; he is a Stranger in these
Parts, and I believe of far greater quality then either his Equipage, or
Attendance speaks him: but is of a very Noble, and generous Spirit, a free
hearted Man and of Good, and very pleasing conversation as ever you knew: this
acquaintance (replies Segnier Gerardo) must needs be of greater advantage to me
then to the Gentleman; and should sooner sue for it: but since it happens thus,
I will with much willingness give him my attendance to morrow about Midday:
for we must part by reason of some business that calls upon me, being but newly
come, and not knowing what our stay may be. The Master comes home to his House,
gives this account to the Major his Dear Guest; who gives him many thanks, and
desires him to prepare for Segnior Garardo again that time of the day, which
was done accordingly.

Next day these met in the Majors Chamber, where they were very plentifully
entertained, when the Major and his new acquaintance grew to such an intimacy,
as no Brothers could be dearer. After dinner the Major takes Gerardo into his
Closet, and there discourses with him of the times, and asked him if he had
lately heard any thing of the King of England, or if he knew any one of that
Court, to which Gerardo makes answer how impossible it was to conceal from the
World the usage of the King of England, and for his part he had no knowledge of
particulars, or any acquaintance with any of that Court: but had heard very
much of the constancy, Loyalty, and fidelity of the Lord of Ormond in all
places, and in all Companies: but more especially from his own Master, who
often gives that noble Person such Characters as were not to be paralleled. The
Major, as if struck dumb at the very mentioning of that Name, was silenced for
so long time; which Gerardo perceiving the suddainness of his change, and
seeing him more concerned than ordinary; took the liberty to ask him if he were
not of some near Relation to that Noble Man: to which the Major males this
reply, Sir the description given by my Landlord of your worth, and the great
confirmation I find in your Self, denies me the power to conceal from your
knowledge my Relation, with what else I have to impart. I must first entreat
your secrecy, and then the constancy of that Friendship you were pleased to
profess to me, with this assurance that I shall ever make it my study to
requite kindnesses of this Nature. I must confess my self, that Person, though
probably not deserving the Characters that had been given: and now returning to
my Master, am a little pincht, and therefore must entreat you to acquaint the
Prince, that I beg it as a favor he will not give Himsef the trouble to see
me, nor so much as take notice of my being here; or take it ill that I cannot
wait upon him, other then by you that are his Servant, and my best Friend. I
shall not name what sum to carry me home, other then what can be spared with
convenience. This I must earnestly entreat you to keep to your self from all
Men, but the Prince; not doubting but I may be in condition to requite your
kind care, as becomes me. I must further desire that you make no discovery by
any chance, or distance while we are together; but believe me to be your reale
Friend; or I should not have used this freedom.

Gerardo being strangely surprised, begged his Lordships pardon for these
errors his ignorance had led him into, which he would endeavor to repair by
this faithfulness in what Service his Lordship had now commanded him, in which
he knew he should be very successful, knowing the temper of his Master, and
patticular respect he had for his Lordship; of all which he should suddenly
have an account. Whereupon Gerardo takes his leave, goes to the Prince, and
ingages him to secrecy: before he would discover, or let him know any thing.
The Prince wondering what should be the cause of all this Pudder, and being
very desirous to know what the matter was, and knowing very well that Gerardo
was a stayed sober Man; must needs have some strange thing to acquaint him
with, which makes the Prince promise him as much of privacy as he can desire.
Whereupon Gerardo told him all, how that my Lord of Ormond was in Town in
Disguise, and how he came to know it, and what discourse past between my Lord
of Ormond and him, and what my Lord had given him in command to acquaint his
Highness with, in order to a supply of some money for this occasion; and that
his Highness would much oblige him in not taking any notice of his being in the
Country, and that as soon as his Lordship came to the King, his Highness should
be sure to hear from him with all acknowledgments imaginable.

The Prince was so surpised at this relation that he started at it, and asked
Gerardo if my Lord would not give him leave to wait upon him privately, as for
any thing else he desired, he should most willingly command it: in order
thereunto he commands Gerardo to go back to my Lord and carry him three hundred
Pounds, and bid him tell my Lord he shall have as much more as he pleases, and
that there was not that thing in the World within the compass or reach of the
Prince but he should command; and that, the only trouble the Prince had at this
time is, that his Lordship forbids him to see him: there being nothing he
coveted or longed more for then the oppertunity to contract a real Freindship
with his Lordship. But since it appears to be his pleasure not to be seen he
will obey, only attend his Lordship in his wishes.

Gerardo returns to the supposed Lord of Ormond, who receives him with a great
deal of cheerfulness, and large promises of reward; engaging him by all the
indearing terms that can be, to express to the Prince how feelingly sensible he
is of this great favor thus seasonably placed upon him: which Gerardo promises
to perform very effectually, Gerardo takes his leave; the Master of the House
appears with a sad countenance to think of parting with the best Guest that
ever he had; the Major having paid all his scores, and with an open hand
distributed to the people, presents the Master and Mistress of the House very
largly, designing thereby to raise the report and continue the belief of his
greatness. At his going to Horse he threw money to the standers by, being his
custom so to do when his purse was full; which by some was construed to be
more for ostentation, then devotion.

He now abounds in plenty, so that he resolves to deny himself nothing his
fancy can propose, sometimes his inclination leads him to the Wars, where he
behaves Himself like a Person of a clear courage; and an undanted resolution:
in places of greatest danger he is sure to be one of the first, either in
charging the Enemy, or making an Attack, of which there is so much notice
taken; as also of his free, and unlimited way of expense, that in little time
he acquires a great Reputation, and a general good opinion of all his
acquaintance: at another season of the year he retires, and makes his abode in
some City, where he courts all occasions to show his generous disposition: so
that his company is coveted by all. Thus he spends some years abroad till he
understood by his correspondent in London, how that his last Wife, being
received into her Father and Mothers bosom, died in Childbirth; which was
some encouragement for his coming thither, if there was no other rub in his
way.

CHAP. VI.
THe Major by this time is thoroughly assured, that the King will soon come
into England, to the unspeakable satisfaction of his people, of which number he
accounts himself one, and therefore resolves for London, to join in that great
Congratulation where he soon arrives in a very splended and flourishing
condition; richly aparrel'd, and very well attended: he comes one day to a
Merchants House, as if it were by chance (though indeed it was a contrivance)
to carry on another Design, with intention to take some Lodgings; which the
Merchant seemed willing to accommodate: shows him the prime part, and best
furnished Rooms in his House which the Major could not mislike; but was so well
pleased with the several conveniences, that he refers to his new Landlord, what
Rent he should pay for so many Rooms, as he shall have occasion for by the
year; pretending that all his servants were not yet come from beyond the Seas,
and having made an Agreement, enquires if the Master of the house be Widdower
or Bachellor, to which the Merchant Answers, Sir my wife will wait upon you
presently. The Mrs. appears, having been all this while making her self as fine
as she could, and preparing a Banquet to entertain her new Guest. Her husband
Ushers her into the Room where the Major was, who is hugely pleased that
fortune is so good, to light upon such a place, and in the dispose of so worthy
a couple; during their Discourse the Banquet was brought up, and set on the
Table where there was nothing wanting that could be thought requisite for such
an entertainment.

The Major asked the Merchant if he knew Sir William Rider? the Merchant told
him that he knew Sir William Rider to be a very worthy honest Man; and very
Rich. The Major likewise asked him if he knew Sir Williams Factor, in such a
Country? The Merchant told him he did. The Major again asked him if he knew the
Factors handwriting? To which the Merchant replied very well: and that he had
been long acquainted with it, having many times accasion of Correspondencie:
whereupon the Major draws out of his Pocket a Bill of Exchange upon Sir William
Rider, from his ^actor, with a Letter of credence, for five hundred pounds;
which the Merchant no sooner saw, but he assured him it was as good money as any
he had about him, and that it would be paid as soon as called for: why then
says the Major, pray keep the Bill of Exchange, and the Letter, and let me have
a hundred pieces for my pocket money, till there is occasion for the rest; which
the Merchant immediately brought him; and told him he should command more at
his Pleasure. The Major was very well pleased to see himself have this success
in all his undertakings; as also with his Entertainment, his Lodgings, his
Landlord, and every thing else, as if conspiring to his satisfaction: but much
more Mistress of the House, whole Conversation was very delightful to him, and
the meekness of her Disposition so taking, being as well stored with the Beauty
of the Mind as the Face, and the Comeliness of her Body, that he makes it his
whole Business and Study to Court her to a good Opinion of him: which in the
end came to be more than ordinary, in so much that before the expiration of
many Months, the Husband began to take notice of their too much familiarity,
and their too often meeting, which he could not well digest; although he could
find no room for a thought, that could warrant the least suspicion of ill in
(...) whose Virtue he believed to be proof enough against all Temptations; yet
being a little dissatisfied, he begins to make some inquiry into the life of
Major Clancie: which by the relation of those more conver^ant with the Major)
he finds him to be the most vicious dishonest villainous Cheat in the World:
which incenses the Merchant, and kindles such a Flame of jealousy in him, that
he is at his Wits end: and in such disorder that he knows not what he had best
to do.

To pocket up his apprehended injury he is not able, to revenge it he knows not
which way; but still inquiring in all Companies, as well in Coffe-houses as
Taverns, after the Major, where he never meets any that affords him a good
word; but the sormer Charecter confirmed by all men. The Merchant has only his
own thoughts to consult in this great affair, which indeed takes him wholly off
from the consideration of all other concerns, he is by chance informed of a
private Lodging the Major frequents when he separates himself from company;
where he and Mr. Berningham a Comrade of his lie together; the Merchant at his
hours of loneliness, contriving some way to repair part of his losses by the
Major: first for the use of his house since the Majors coming thither, then for
the several sums of money from time to time, with which he supplied him: but
chiefly for that irreparable injury which he dares scarce trust his own most
secret thoughts with: but something he must do or not live. At last he takes a
resolution to revenge himself upon the Major, which he conceives he may do with
the more ease; having found out his private Lodging, where he intends to lay
hold of him by the rough hands of six Baliffs appointed and hired for that
purpose. But first he will ^ound how his Wife is inclined, and how she will
relish this design of his, which he does without delay, finding her in her
Chamber alone at her needle work, tells her what had been told him by many, of
the wickedness of Major Clancie: who he fears will make them smart if some
timely course be not taken to prevent it, he reckons up what money he had of
them, what di^t, and lodging, besides the money lent him upon Sr. William
Ryders ^ccount, upon a Bill of Exchange: which he really believes to be
counterfeited, so that money must be lost; if not* all the rest.

To all which she makes answer that it is no small cause of wonder to her that
any man could be so great a Counterfeit; and that if all this was true, she
hoped her Husband had more discretion then to suffer himself to be so abused;
by a Person he had so much obliged, and was so base to requite men's kindnesses:
by Cheating, she uttered those words with such a Passion, and seemed really so
angry at the Majors ingratitude, and the fear of her own loss: that she pressed
her Husband with all the eagerness that could be to Revenge himself upon that
unworthy Fellow. The Merchant hearing all this, and believing his Wife had
spoke nothing but what she cordially wished, was extremely satisfied to see,
and hear her so heartily take his part, and seem so little concerned. for the
Major: whereupon he tells her how he intends to revenge himself, and prevent
his harm for the future; and that he had his Writ and his Baliffs ready to
apprehend the Major: in his private Lodging which he that day found out, and
would that night visit him, she seemed to be very well pleased with the design,
and desired her Husband to loose no time: but to prosecute that base ungrateful
Fellow. The Husband goes his way extremely well satisfied, blaming himself for
having so ill thoughts, and mean apprehensions of so honest and so Virtuous a
Wife: his back is no sooner turned, but she immediately sends for Major Clancie;
and makes him a challenge of unkindness for his company keeping in his Private
Lodging, and never acquainting her: who could not conceal from him any tiling
either of affection, or fortune, he easily made his peace with her, who
continues so firmly her Friendship for him; thoroughly acquaints him with her
Husbands intention, to visit him at his private Lodging, with six Baliffs that
night.

The Major having expressed his thankfulness after his wonted manner, tells her
he knows not where to be in safety from that storm that threatened him, but in
her Arms: to his unspeakable joy, and consolation: thus they interchange
glances of Love-looks, while (...) Merchant is preparing for his intend^^
visit. About eight of the clock at night he comes to the private Lodging, gives
orders to the Baliffs to handle the Major very Roughly; to beat him soundly,
and spare nothing about him but his Life: and in case they found his chamber
door not open, to break it open, and he would save them harmless. Up stairs
they go, and finding the Chamber Door shut, they opened it as they were
commanded, and into the Room they crowd, and finding a Man in Bed, cried out
loudly here he is, we have him. The Merchant bids them pay him soundly, spare
him not, which order they readily obeyed, they fall most terribly a beating of
him, so fast that they scarce gave him time to ask what the matter was, or what
they meant, or did intend to murder him: they cried still with every stroke
thou Rogue, thou Raskal, we will pay thee for all thy Villainies. When they had
done buffiting of his Head, and Face, with the pomels and hilts of their
Swords, till they had disfigured him, he crying aloud Murder, Murder, with
which he alarmed the People of the House, so that they all came up to his
rescue, and amongst them the Merchant, who upon sight of Mr. Berningham, who
was the Man abused; claps his Hands, falls upon his knees, begs Mr. Berningham
pardon a thousand times over, and over to little purpose; for Mr. Berningham
told him in plain, Sir though you seem not to have known me, and that this
abuse is in mistake; assure your self that I know you very well, and am glad
you are of ability to repair me for this abuse, the like I believe was never
heard: break my Head and Face, to tear my Hair and Clothes, to thrust my
Bed-cloaths through with naked Swords, and piercing my Skin, and all this for
nothing, but under color of mistake! Assure your self while there is Law in
the Land, I shall find means to right my self, the Merchant knew not what
excuse to make the Baliffs having proved him to be the cause; and that it was
his private Orders, and public Commands to use him whom they found in Bed thus
rigorously: to which the Merchant makes no reply; but invites the Master of
that House, and Mr. Berningham: who by his Landlord was persuaded, to the
Tavern, where a Surgeon was sent for to dress those hurts Berningham had
received in the Counter-scuffle. The Merchant makes use of his interest in all
the Company to mediate with Mr. Berningham for a reconciliation: to which he
was not willing to listen, till at last with much ado being obliged to his
Landlord, he consented to an accommodation, which was, that the Merchant should
immediately pay him Fifty Pounds before they parted, which he did, and was glad
to come off so.

The Merchant discontented, goes straight home to his House. It Was late at
night, and finding the door open, as he directed, goes up to his Chamber,
bemoaning his misfortunes to his Wife, and she in bed: who joined with him in
railing against Major Clancie the Author of these disasters, who was at that
hour in bed with her; and while the Merchant was venting of his Passion, and
she seemingly much troubled for all those Losses he had mentioned; she directed
her Friend Clancie where to convey himself, before Candles were brought in:
which he had the good Fortune seasonably to do, in a little private Closet of
hers, where he remained till morning, when the Merchants occasions timely
called him. So that the Major had opportunity to make his escape without
discovery. What hours of Pleasure they two stole for the future is not
mentioned. But it is to be supposed he seldom made any public visit. Mr.
Berningham and Clancie at their meeting made themselves merry, with repeating
those passages formerly mentioned. The Merchant rests contented with the
absence of Clancie, for all the losses he sustained by him; notwithstanding he
despaired of ever being repaid his money, or having any other reparation.

CHAP. VIII.
AS the Major was one day a courting of a Mistress he had in St. Martains-lane,
and looking out of the Street-window, he observed a Fellow upon the stall of a
Cutlers-shop, and knowing him to be a Baliff, suspected his being there to wait
for him, he calls his Servant, bids him go over the way, and bring him the Boy
of that Shop that he saw knocking of some nails: the Servant went, and brought
the Boy. Boy says the Major privately, I will give you a Crown if you will do
me a small piece of Service in point of meriment, which he undertook to do if
he could: he takes the Boy to the window and shows him the Fellow that sat
upon the stall; do you see (says he) yonder Fellow with a great leather Belt
how it ^angs a cross the stall, as soon as you go to your work, and as you are
knocking ^he nails, do but fasten that part of his Belt to the stall, and be
sure to nail it so as ^e may not readily free himself. The Boy undertook it,
and was very glad of the occasion, as of the reward: goes over to his Shop,
falls a knocking of some nails as before, of which the Fellow took no notice,
he nails the Belt, and piece of his coat to the stall, as the Major directed
him, who was all the time looking out of the window, till he saw the Fellow
fast. Then comes down to take Coach, the Fellow seeing him come out, leaps off
the stall in great have, and gives it such a pull that down comes the stall,
and all that was upon it: tumbles the Fellow to the gronnd, with the stall at
his heels, and all the Hammers, Nails, and Boxes, which at the fall made such a
clutter that the Fellow was frighted out of his wits: thinking the Divil had
been at his back: out came the Neighbors to see what the matter was* they
disintangle the Fellow, carry him into a house till he recovered his wits
again* The Master of the Shop asked him if ever he would sit upon a stall again.

The Major by his contrivance escaped the Baliffs, and passing by Temple Bar,
unexpectedly meets one of his old Creditors, a Citizen of whom he had borrowed
fifty pounds some months before: the Citizen asked him if it were not high time
for him to have his money promised him long since to which the Major could make
no other answer then the scarcity of money, which he hoped would soon be over;
and that then he would not sail to pay him; and requite his long forbearance as
became an honest man, that he could not choose but be sensible, of such a
courtesy, and desired the Citizen to go with him into the Globe Tavern hard by,
and take a glass of Wine. The Citizen accepted his Invitation, and after a
glass or too desired him to six upon some certain time to pay this money,
though it were six months more: he did not much scruple that so he might be
sure to receive it at his day: to which the Major makes answer he should not be
so long without it: but that so soon as his Uncle came to Town he doubted not
of such a supply as would enable him to discharge that debt. Being an absolute
stranger to the Majors Relations, the Citizen asked him who his Uncle was, from
whom he expected that supply from, he told him a man very well known, the
Bishop of London. A very worthy reverent good Man says the Citizen, upon whose
Note or Word you shall command what sum you please or have occasion to use:
thus they entertained each other for some time, till the Citizen having some
occasion to rise from the Table, and walking toward the window; observes the
Bishop of London's Coach, where upon he calls to the Major immediately telling
him his Uncle was coming up the Street. The Major, as if very glad of it,
hastening down the stairs, takes the Citizen along, bids him keep a little
distance, within hearing, which the Citizen observes while the Major goes to
the Coach, and bids the Coachman hold. The Bishop not knowing the Major, asked
what Service he would command, or what his business was; whereupon the Major
with a great deal of humility, told him after he had begged his Lordships
pardon for this unseasonable trouble, occasioned by a discourse that happened
between him and his Friend in the Tavern about Religion, and cares of
Conscience by which he plainly discovered several doubts, and scruples that
bred many disorders in this Friend; and were part of his learning or skill to
remove, which indeed (my Lord) made me engage to find him one, whose Ability,
and willingness was sufficiently known to be ready upon all such occasions
(meaning your Lordship) the Bishop tells him it was well done, and I thank you
for your good opinion, and shall be ready to do my part when ever your Friend
appea^s. (My Lord) I humbly thank your Lordship, and look upon the work as half
done, now you have undertaken it, and here is the Gentleman, calling the
Citizen to the boot of the Coach, to whom the Bishop gives this orders, and
assurance in these words, Sir if you please to come to my house about ten of
the clock to morrow morning, I will satisfy you: the Citizen is beyond measure
pleased to have so much certainty of that money, he despaired ever to see, the
Major and the Citizen returned to the Tavern, where after a glass or two, he
asked the Citizen how he was pleased with his Uncles answer? so well plea^ed
that if you have occasion for more money, I am ready to furnish you upon that
security. For I know my Lord to be a very just man, the Major replies you may
be well assured I want money or you had not been so long without yours,
whereupon the Citizen lends him fifty broad pieces of Gold, in hopes to have it
repaid by the Bishop the next day, with the other fifty at the hour appointed.

The Citizen rises betimes joyfully, goes to the Bishops house about the hour
of ten, as he was directed, and meeting one of the Bishops Servants, desires
him to acquaint my Lord there was a man to speak with his Lordship by his own
appointment, the Servant went and told my Lord as much, my Lord having it seems
forgot; asked what manner of man it was, till by mentioning the appointment,
and recollecting upou the discourse he had with a Geutleman he knew who was in
the Street the day before: calls to mind the promise he had made to satisfy
the Gentleman in his doubtful scruples of Conscience, and believing that to be
the Gentleman, bids his Servant take him into the dining room, and there to
entertain him with a glass of Sack, while he staid in his Closet to look over
some few cases and prepare himself for the discourse he expected, his stay was
not long, when coming into the Dining Room he desires the Gentleman to sit down
by him, and very freely to speak his mind and conceal nothing that troubled
him, which the Citizen did after doing his Duty, and giving his thanks to the
Bishop, then falls a telling a long story how that he had lent his Nephew fifty
pounds some months since, and Yesterday fifty pounds more in Gold, upon his
Lords promise to satisfy that debt by the hour of ten of the clock, which he
comes now to receive, the Bishop looked upon him very strangely, admiring what
he meant by talking to him of a Nephew, and fifty pound long since, and fifty
more Yesterday, and gave him the hearing with the more patience, thinking it to
be the effects of a light Head, that having wanted sleep occasioned by what had
been told him. The Citizen wondered what the matter was that the Bishop was so
slow in paying the money he thought himself so sure of, presses more earnestly
for it; so that the Bishop found the man was really in earnest; and therefore
makes him this answer. Sir I am a stranger to you, as also to all you have
said. I know nothing of the matter of money, or Nephew you speak of, for I have
none, nor do I well understand you, as for the promise I made Yesterday, for
which you now challenge me, 'twas net for payment of any money, but to
endeavor your satisfaction another way, by removing those doubts of Conscience
in points of Religion, with which you had been so tormented, that was my
promise, and my meaning, and that I am still ready to perform, and nothing
else. The Citizen hearing this Resolution, grew so stark mad to think how he
was deluded: and how unfortunatly he contributed to his own undoing, by parting
with his last fifty pounds; could not contain himself from telling the Bishop
his resentments; to which the Bishop makes this reply that he believed his
discourse to be a contrivance between the other man and him to cheat him of his
money, but they should find their mistake. Pardon me for that, (says the
Citizen) being very much troubled, and in great rage; for my Lord it looks more
like such a design between your Nephew, and you, then for me to cheat my self:
this made the Bishop so angry that he bid the Fellow go about his business, so
left the Room. the Citizen is ready to hang himself, knows not in the World
what course to take, till upon some Advice he sets forth the whole case by way
of Petition to the King, to whom it was presented by the hands of Sir Edward
Nicolls then Secretary.

The King having read the Petition, and finding it to have so great a
resemblance to the many such like effects often times told of Major Clancie:
says, if Major Clancie were alive, I should think this to be one of his Pranks,
a Gentleman of the Court standing by, says Sir I am sure he is alive, for I saw
him in the Gallery as I came hither now, the King bid him call in Clancie,
which the Gentleman did, as soon as he appeared, the King bid him look upon
that Petition, and tell if it were not like one of his roguish Tricks: to which
Clancie impudently answered (may it please your Majesty) I know this story
well, for 'twas I that did it: so runs hastily out of the Room, the King not
being willing to have the rest buried, commands the Secretary to write a
Refference, upon the Citizens Petition to my Lord of Ormond, to examine and
report, if not determine the matter: as soon as the Pitition and refference was
brought to my Lord: he appoints a day of hearing, in order to which he sent for
the Bishop, likewise to the Citizen, who failed not of coming at the hour to
the place appointed for the hearing. Thither came a crowd of people to hear the
matter debated, first the Citizen was called to make good the Allegations of
the Petition, which he did, with much ease, there being none to contradict.

Then the Bishop was desired to make his defense, who confessed these words in
the Petition to be true, that is that he would satisfy the Petitioner next day
in his doubts, and scruples of Conscience, but not to pay any money, for there
was not a word of any such like thing spoken of by any of them, which was all
he had to say. My Lord of Ormond asked if there were any Witness, or other
proof to be heard on either side? to which he answered no.

Why then says my Lord I do find upon the whole matter, that the Petitioner is
out of purse two several fifty pounds, one was lent long before your Lordship
was any way concerned, so as I must needs free you from any part of that sum,
as for the last fifty which was absolutely lent upon your Lordships promise of
satisfaction by such an hour. I do not clearly find how to ease you of that;
but advise you to compound with the Petitioner, several arguments were used by
the Bishop to strengthen what had been Pleaded in his behalf, and formerly
repeated in this discourse: but all to little purpose.

CHAP. IX.
AT the Kings Restoration, The Prince of Tuscany and his Servant Gerardo being
together, having some occasions offered to talk of the Restoration of the King
of England, at which they were very much rejoiced, Gerardo began to talk of my
Lord Ormond, wondering they never heard from him since his leaving that
Country; the Prince said it was something strange, yet believed the reason was
because they had not been settled in their Possession and Laws, so soon after so
many Changes and Revolutions. Gerardo asked his Master if he would give him
leave to go into England to see the Change? To which the Prince consented, and
said, he would write by him to my Lord of Ormond, a Letter of Congratulation,
with some modest mention of his own small Concern: His preparation for his
Journey took up but little time, nor do we hear much of him till his Arrival in
England, where he spent part of his time in seeing the Country; informing
himself every where as he Traveled of the Peoples Satisfaction, in the Kings
coming home, very inquisitive after the Nobility, of their several Names and
Fortunes, especially my Lord of Ormond, of whom he had such Characters of
nobleness, and a ccomplished generosity as confirmed him in the belief of what
he had often heard before. To Court he comes, there enquires for my Lord of
Ormonds Apartment: where meeting some of my Lords Gentlemen, desired to be
brought to kiss my Lords hand, and deliver his Letter, of which my Lord having
notice, sent to have the Gentleman brought up, who no sooner came into the
Room, and delivered his Letter: but there was observed a sudden change in his
Countenance: at which the Standers by much wondered; although not half so much
as my Lord did at the Letter, which mentioned thing which my Lord knew nothing
of; but having read it, turns to the Gentleman that brought it him, and said,
Sir, I understand by this Letter you have brought me from the Prince, that your
Name is Gerardo, and that you are his Servant; and that you brought me at such
a time from him a very kind and friendly Token. Pray Sir did you bring any
such, or did you ever see me before this time? The Gentleman seeing how grosely
he was mistaken in him, that took upon him to be Lord of Ormond, the greatness
of the difference, both in Person and Carriage; scarce knew what Answer, or
what excuse to make for himself, either to my Lord or his Master were he there
present; and had enough to do to stand upon his Legs; which all perceived, yet
with a great Sigh, he told my Lord, how innocently he fell into a most
unfortunate mistake, though with a true intention of a real Service to his
Lordship, that most true it is, that I never saw your Lordship till now, and as
true as there was a Gentleman, that came into our Country, that did personate
your Lordship very cunningly, and employed me to the Prince; who very readily
sent by me what he desired, believing him to be my Lord of Ormond; though not
resembling you in the least; this my Lord is the truth, and my undoing to be
instrumental in a thing of that prejudice to my Master, and no manner of
Service to your Lordship, to whom it was intended.

To which my Lord makes this reply, that he never knew any thing of the matter
before, yet is very sensible of the Princes kind intentions, and that although
he did not receive the benefit of the kindness intended him; yet his obligation
was no whit the less, and that he would not allow the Prince to be a Sufferer
for his good will to him; but would restore him his money with many thanks,
which he commanded-should be immediately brought to Gerardo, with a Token of
Gratitude for his own good will. The case is much altered with Gerardo upon the
sudden, who resolves for the remaining part of his Life, to evidence to the
World the Bounty, and true Nobleness of the Generous Lord of Ormond brought him
from Death to Life, by preserving his Integrity to his Master, and easing him
of the weight at Present of that great Burden he lay under; which was like to
have sunk him before them all. Gerardo returns homeward cheerfully, gives his
Master an account of his Reputation, and his own astonishment at first sight of
my Lord of Ormond: and likewise how my Lord received the intended kindness of
the Prince, who at hearing this Relation; wished for nothing more then to find
out the Counterfeit, that durst take that Name upon him, and personate so
brave, and worthy a Nobleman; and lofty attempt: to fool and cheat him of his
money, vowing he would give that sum to have him, they were soon weary of the
search.

CHAP. X.
CLancie being no nearer than London, practicing his own Trade, after his
wonted manner. Goes into a Wollendrapers-shop, takes up so many yards of Cloth
to make him a new Livery, has it carried into his Coach, tells the Merchant he
had no money about him, but send one of these young Men your Servants along as
far as my Lodgings, and I will pay him: but before I go, let me see him you
send, that there may be no mistake. The Merchant showed him a young Youth, this
is he shall wait upon your Worship, the Major goes along, the Boy follows the
Coach he knew not whether; the Major instead of going to his lodgings, goes to
a Barbours-house into one of his upper Rooms, to be trimmed and having done,
rewards the Harbor plentifully, and tell him withal, do not you think that I
give you so much money for your pains you take in trimming me. No, for I have a
greater charge to give you, in which I must entreat your care, and diligence;
for which you shall be well rewarded, that is, as soon as I am gone you must
call up hither a young youth that follows me, he is a little bashful, and you will
hardly persuade him to confess his infirmity, till you force him; therefore
lock him in with as much privacy as you can, and search him, and if you find
things be amiss which I suspect you will, pray apply such things for his
recovery as you think most expedient, and I will reward you well. I know the
Boy will be very shie, and seem not to understand your meaning; But let not
that suffice till you have a full view of all, and thereby satisfy your self,
and be careful. The Harbor promises to be mindful of it, and so soon as the
Major went into the Coach, bid the Boy go along with the Harbor, and he would
do his business: the Boy makes a leg, and goes along.

The Harbor leads him into a private Room, locks the door, begins to preach to
the Boy: tells him what a fine Youth he is to fall to his Roguery so timely,
the Boy thought the Fellow mad, and blushed to hear him, come come (says the
Harbor) your modesty must not serve your turn, your Master told me all this, I
must see how you are, the Boy thought the Devil had possessed the Fellow, asked
him what the matter was, or what he would be at: that he came for his Masters
money, the Price of his Cloth, the Harbor replies, your Masters order I must
Follow. I am to search you for you have the Pox, and I am hired, I will do my
duty. The Boy vowed and swore he had no Pox, that his Master lived in
Cheapside, and sent him with that Gentleman for his money. All this would not
serve the Barbours turn, but he must be true to his trust, and will search, so
that the dispute ended in Cuffs; but in the end the Harbor being too hard for
the Boy, forced down his Breeches, and searched the Boy, who he found as clear,
and sound as any Creature could be. The Harbor satisfied himself that he had
done his part. The poor Boy much troubled for his abuse, without remedy goes
home to his Master, with this sad account. Tells him the whole story, how that
instead of money he had a beating, and a long Encounter with the Harbor, and
was searched for the Pox; the Master not knowing how to help himself, could not
choose but smile at the passage, who must sit down with the loss.

CHAP. XI.
THe Major having played so many mischievous Pranks, by Cheating and Abusing so
many Persons of all sorts, without distinction, thinks it high time for to
leave England, and proposes to himself something of more safety in Ireland,
where he had not been in a long time, though not been Idle when he was there.
Thither he goes, where by some he is made welcome, more for the description he
sometimes gave of the passages of his Life, wherein People found some pastime,
then any way coveting his so well known Company. At the time of his being in
Ireland, there was erected a Court for Trial of all Men's Qualifications, called
the Court of Clames, which he very often frequented, and observed the manner of
proceedings there, and how Justice was distributed to all Men according to
Evidence; he being given to understand that in that Court was a day perfixed
according to Rule, for the Trial of one in Makoones Qualification, where he
must either prove his Innocence or be declared Nocent, and consequently loose
his Estate. He that was chiefly concerned in this Cause, and who must have
found Witnesses for to Criminate Maccmahon was, Sir Henry Inglesby, a Person of
much Worth and Honor, to whom Major Clancie offers his Service; as being the
fittest Man in the World for Sir Henry to employ as he pretended: and gave
these reasons, that Maccmahon was well known to him; so were most of his
Actions of his Life. Especially from the first of all the Rebellion wherein he
presumed, Sir Henry was only concerned: here he tells him that there was such a
Cause, such a day to be heard; and that he doubted not of Proof sufficient to
Criminate Maccmahon, nor would he be ungrateful to such as would appear there
for him. Sir says the Major, the Service I can do is this; I can prove by
several Witnesses, that Mac^mahon in the first of the Rebellion was in Actual
Service with the Rebels; that he had command of a Troop of Horse, and that
there were coming from their own dwellings to be sheltered from the Rebels in
Cork, twelve poor Englishmen that were killed by this Maccmahon in such a
place, this alone I can assure (says Clancie) is sufficient to do your work;
and shall be proved before the Judges of the Court, by such Witnesses as I
shall not fail to bring, on which you with confidence rely. Sir Henry was
undoubtedly pleased to have the offer of such a Service so seasonable; gave the
Major many thanks, with the assurance of such a return as became him for so
great a kindness.

The day appointed for this cause, being come, Major Clancie having prepared
his Witnesses, waits upon Sir Henry to the Court where Sir Henry was called,
and asked if he was ready, and where were his Witnesses. He produced seven,
brought him by Major Clancie: whose Testimony agreed so well in every
Circumstance that the Court was satisfied, and resolved to declare Maccmahon
Nocent; till Sir Henry offers to the Court that in case they are not yet
sufficiently satisfied with what they have heard of his proof, he had one more
sufficient good Witness to confirm what had been proved before; to which the
Court answered they would discountenance none; but hear as many as he pleased,
whereupon Major Clancie was called: having given him his Oath, the Court asked
him if he knew Maccmahon, and how long? he answered he knew Maccmahon from his
infancy. 'Twas asked him again how he found Maccmahon inclined as to the
Rebellion, and lastly what he knew as to the cause depending? To all which he
makes answer thus: may it please his Honor and Court to take notice: that I am
upon my Oath, and shall speak nothing but the truth: that I know Maccmahon the
Son and Heir of Sir Tirlah Maccmahon, and from his Infancy had an intimate
acquaintance with him, and that in all that time I never knew an honester a
true Man to the distressed English, and farther by the virtue of the Oath I
have taken, I do believe he never drew Sword in anger, or ever drew drop of
Blood in all his life. I do farther take upon my Oath that I believe these
seven men that swore last before me, knew no more ill of him then I do: that
the Testimonies they gave here against him is only the dictates they had from
me: how says the Judge! here is a great contradiction, that have point blank
Criminated him, knew no ill of him: but what you have dictated, and you swear
him innocent to all intents. How can this agree or be made out? To which Major
Clancie replies, it is all very true; and I will make it out with the Reasons I
had for doing of it. I have been often at Trials of the like nature in this
Court, where I have seen, and observed to my great trouble of mind, many and
innocent Persons suffer to their undoing, by their Perjury of suborned
Witnesses: and being very fearful that such of the like might have been here.
to the ruin and utter destruction of so much innocence: to prevent which, I
choose rather to bring my self upon the Stage by offering my self to Sir Henry.
By which I hope I have preserved the Fortune of an honest Innocent Man. And for
farther Proof of this undeniable Proof, I humbly desire that some of the seven,
sworn and examined before me may be again examined if what I have here
declared, be not all true, to the knowledge of every one of them, which request
was granted. The Fellows were reexamined, who confessed this to be true*
Whereupon the Cat was turned into the Pan. Mr. Maccmahon was declared innocent,
his Estate decreed him, and Sir Henry put to shist for deficiences elsewhere.

CHAP. XII.
MAjor Clancie now begins to find how that by his long continued lewd
Practices he has brought himself to that pass, that few or none will anear him.
Such as do, are in a continual apprehension of some design, which makes most
Men keep at such a distance: that Clancie is necessitated to quit the Kingdom,
which he scarce knows how to do for want of money. Till supplied by a Friend
that had for some time kept him concealed from his Persecutors in a Closet:
till there was an opportunity to convoy him aboard a Ship that was Bound for
Chester, and was Wind-driven into Beumoris in Wales. The Major takes up his
Lodging at the Post-Masters House, one Mr. Jones, where he had not been above
an hour, when there chances to Arrive a Lady that came from London, and was
bound for Ireland. which the Major understanding by one of her Servants,
desired the Servant to acquaint his Lady that there was a convenience very
lucky come into the Harbor, which undoubtedly She would be glad to make use
of, which was the Ship which the Major came out of Ireland in. A strong stansh
Vessel, with good Accomodations, and very skilful Seamen. The Servant very
joyfully goes to his Lady, and acquaints her with all that the Gentleman had
told him, whereupon the Lady being desirous to be rid of a tedious troublesome
Journey, was extremely glad to hear of such a convenience, were it but to save
her the labor of going to Holly-head: which must have cost her the Toil of
another day.

Whereupon She sent her Servant to desire that Gentleman to come to her
Chamber, if it were not troublesome to him after his Voyage; of whom She
expected a more exact account of particulars, in order to her Transportation;
which the Servant neglected not, but went forthwith to the Major and delivered
his Message. You may easily believe the Major would loose no time to obey the
commands of a Fair Lady; (as he found her to be) who no sooner comes into the
Room, after a kind salute; but the Lady desires to know more of those
conveniences, being altogether a stranger to the matters of that kind, or any
things that belonged to Sea Affairs: although her occasions compelled her to
attempt it at this time invoidably. The Major told her that there was no
convenience to be expected in any Ship upon the Irish Seas, but this Ship had,
which he was extremely glad of for her sake; as also that he had the good
Fortune to be Messenger of so good News to her. Some time was spent in
discourse till they were called to Supper, where the Major very diligently
attended each motion, or look of Hers, and that in such a way as must have
expressed a passion, which is impossible but She must take notice of, and
improbability not much dissatisfied therewith.

Thus they continued some days, the Wind being still cross, till at last he
plainly told her, he had not the power any longer to conceal his affections,
which he had so long smothered to his unspeakable prejudice, and disquiet. She
with a great deal of modesty, told him how sorry she should be to occasion the
prejudice or disquiet of any body: and that She believed all this to be but
words of course: and that the Major did it for his pastime, She being very
sensible there could be no such Attractiveness of her part, that could produce
any such effect: to which the Major makes this reply, that if She doubted the
Truth of what he had said, he should evidence it to the hazard of his life, and
turn back from his intended Journey to London without regard, or consideration
of any thing, and wait of her into Ireland, with resolution never to quit his
pretention, or decline her Service. Thus the Major lays close Seige to the
Lady having two Friends to join with him in his undertaking, Opportunity, and
Importunity, who have all played their parts so succesfully, that the tender
hearted Lady was at last forced to yield. But upon the most honorable Terms of
Marriage, which was soon consummated to the unspeakable comfort, and
consolation of both. This Seige held a great while, about six days, to the
expense of many Bottles; at the charge of the Major, whose whole study is how
to reemburse himself by the help of his Lady, whose little stock of money, with
a considerable percel of Jewels, are most willingly delivered as a Marriage
Portion to the Major.

Whose Brains are now as busy in contriving a way to leave his poor betrayed
Lady, as ever they were in giving Her good will to this Unfortunate Match. Too
late to be repented, he wrote a Letter as if brought him by a Messenger of the
Earl of Carbury; from his house the Golden Grove, signifying how much it
concerned the Major, to make all the haste he could thither for prevention of
his own harm, which unavoidably must follow if he come not quickly away. This
Letter he ordered to be brought him when they were all sat at Table, which he
reads with some Surprise, as if a stranger to the occasion, and the pressure of
it; then delivers it to his Lady, who upon reading of it had like to have
fallen down dead, by reason of the suddainness of it: and her own apprehensions
for the loss of her Joy. (though but for a time) The Master of the House and
the rest of the Company applied things to recover her. As soon as Dinner was
done, he takes his Lady aside, and gives her all the assurance imaginable, as
well of his Constancy, as his speedy return; in the interim leaves her box in
which her Jewels formerly lay; makes her believe he had removed none, when in
truth he had left none: he takes his leave of all, and goes toward Aperconeway.

. His Lady fixing her Blubbered Eyes upon him, till he was out of sight, then
goes to her Chamber, bemoaning her self to the Walls (who undoubtedly would
have pitied her, if they had Sense) this poor distressed Lady a term proper to
all that have to do with him) knows not what is best to do, either to go for
Ireland, or stay where she is, and there wait the coming of her Comfort; which
for a long time she did in vain; for he never came thither after, but left her
to pay all his Debts, as well as her own; which gave her occasion to go to her
Box, with intention to dispose of one of the Jewels of lesser Value; But when
she had opened the Box, and found none there; then came her Fits in earnest: by
which she was made the true Object of Pity, having neither money nor Jewels
left; and what was worst of all, betrayed by the false heartedness of a
pretended Lover, who has now left her no other Relief, than what the Charity of
good People will allow her. In this distressed Condition I must leave her to
pursue the Major; who bends his Course toward London.

CHAP. XIII.
THe Major being in few days arrived at London, takes up his Lodging in
Kingstreet at a Barbers House; where he had not been many Months, when he
endeavors to make sure of a Friend there, by Debauching the Maidservant; who
would by no means consent, without a promise of Marriage, which he never
scrupled, having some other Design in which he intended to make use of her; he
had not often been in Company, but some one or other revives a Discourse of his
former Actions, by which he perceives that most Men begin to forsake him, being
in a low Condition; having squandred away his late acquired Jewels: it being
his constant Custom as soon as he had a Stock to Lavish it extravigantly upon
all Occasions without regard to the time to come, or preservation of his Credit
designing nothing but to Cheat; which rendered him incapable of admittance into
civil Company; whereby he was necessitated to play at Small Games.

. As appeared upon making his Address to a very ordinary plain woman, neither
Rich nor Fair, to whom he had promised Marriage, and thereby Invites her to go
with him into a little blind Alehouse, where they lived like Man and Wife for
three or four days. One Morning as they lay in Bed, he tells her how
inconvenient this place is for them to reside in; and therefore would have her
take some course to discharge what expense they had been at since their
coming, for he declared he had it not. She plainly Answered, she had nothing
in the World but that Ring, which she pulled off, of her Finger, and gave him;
a very rich Couple fortunately put together, able enough to undo any other two
they met with. He no sooner fingers the Ring, but conveys himself away and
leaves his Wife to pay the Reckoning, which she was forced to pawn her Clothes
for; and being Jealous of his going to visit others he loved better, She with
Hew and Cry apprehended him, had him sent to Newgate, where he had but few
Visiters save only the Servant-Maid with whom he had contracted a Friendship,
when he Lodged at the Barbers in Kingstreet; who by this time had removed from
the Barbers to the Service of one Mr. Owen, from whence she often went to
Newgate in pure kindness to Major Clancie, and in most of her Visits thither,
she carried in her Arms a Child of her Mistresses who seldom came home without
Creepers at its Back, to witness the cleanness of the place it came from. One
day this Maidservant Visiting the Major, he tells her how Unfortunate he is,
in the want of a small sum of thirty pounds, for which he could now redeem
himself from the great danger that threatened him, and free himself of his
Restraint, and restore his Liberty, which he preferred before the World. She
being undoubtedly much concerned, told him where there lay a considerable sum
of money much above that sum as she guest by the Bulk. If there could be away
contrived to bring it him, she would not fail of her part, at which the Major
overjoyed, told her though he was a Prisoner, and thereby deprived of power to
do it in his own person, that he had those he durst trust, and would do the
work essectua^ly with her Assistance; so that before they parted it was
resolved, that those he sent should come at such an hour to Mr. Owens house to
be merry, with resolution to find fault with any Room they should be carried
into, till the Maid had given them a Sign, by which they were to know the Room
wherein the money lay. All which was effected in very few days, with great
success, in so much, that the two Men employed by the Major, had in their
possession one hundred Broad pieces of Gold, and thirty pounds in Silver; which
they carried clearly away, and considering how rich they were grown upon the
sudden, bethink them how to make this money their own by dividing it between
them two, without thought of him that employed them; so that they Robbed Mr.
Owen, and Cheated Major Clancie.

No sooner came Mr. Owen to the knowledge of his loss, but he with an
industrious Diligence makes such inquiries, as soon brought the Maid under
suspicion of being privy to the Robbery; which upon Examination before a
J^dge, she could hardly deny; whereupon she was committed, and would have been
hanged, but that she pretended to be with Child. Nor did Mr. Owen rest
satisfied with this, but resolves to spare neither Charge nor Labor to find
them out that Robbed him, which he did in few days, and had them Committed to
Newgate, till the Great destructive Conflagration came so near, that struck
such a Terror in all the Inhabitants, that they scarce knew what they did. One
day the Jailor or Turnkey coming to visit his Prisoners amongst the rest these
two that had Robbed Mr. Owen, who plainly told him how that they apprehended
the danger of the Fire much more than the Crime for which they were committed;
Vowing that it he would not take off their their Irons, and set them free from
that Danger, he should never leave that Place, but that they would force him to
stay and take his share of what happened; whereupon, the affrighted Fellow,
strikes off their Irons, sets them at Liberty, and goes away; who were no
sooner in the Streets than they fell to Pluudering all such Goods as they met
with, or could conveniently carry away. Thus Mr. Owen was Robbed without
Relief, the Robbers and the Maid saved, but Major Clancie Hanged.

FINIS.

