OLBIA. THE NEW ISLAND LATELY DISCOVERED.

With its Religion and Rites of Worship; Laws, Customs, and Government;
Characters and Language; With Education of their Children in their Sciences,
Arts and Manufactures; with other things remarkable.

By a Christian Pilgrim, driven by Tempest from Civita Vecchia, or some other
parts about Rome; through the Straits, into the ATLANTIC OCEAN.

The First Part. From the Original.

For Samuel Hartlib, in Ax-yard Westminster, and John Bartlet at the Guilt-Cup
near Austins-Gate London: and in Westminster Hall, 1660.

The sum of this Discourse.
HAving lost his Father, and other Relations, about the great Sickness in
Naples, the Author becomes a sad disconsolate Pilgrim, all alone by Land, till
unexpected dangers force him from Rome, or there about, to the Sea.

Where, in a great Storm and Tempest, he falls into unexpressable Horror and
Anguish of Mind; till at length, by Shipwreck, losing all his Company, he is
cast on a scraggy Rock, and There, by a Religious Person (as an Hermit
entertained; till recovering his Peace and strength with a quiet mind, he also
Learned the Religion, Laws, Customs, Language and Characters, of That New
Island: fully described in the Books following this First Part.

In which the Father discourses the Danger of wrong Judgeing our selves or
others; with the way to a right understanding and Judgment: the great Work of
the Spirit, promised to the World by Jesus Christ; Who was sent to Redeem our
souls from All Deceit and violence: and to offer sacrifice for every one that
Erreth, and for him that is simple. Cleared from Ezech. 45. 20. with Psalm. 72.
Of our Access and addresses to Him, by Prayer; As Saint Paul Learned from the
first Martyr at his Death; and thence, made it the great Character of a
Christian: cleared from His Epistles and the Acts, with the Revelation, and
other Scriptures, in Harmony to the Psalms and Canticles, Conversing with
Christ, and Praying to him. From the 17. page to the 44.

How Christ, taught his Disciples and others to pray, Our Father, etc. How He
prayed to His Father; and How a Christian to Christ, and the Father, in and
through Christ. As Calebs Daughter to Her Father, by her Husband, and Her self.
Of Zelophehads Daughters, and Edoms Widows and Orphans, from Jer. 49. 11. from
44 page to 53.

The great Arguments to be pressed on Christ: as our Brother; Born for a Day of
sorrow; made of a Woman; made under the Law; to Redeem them under the Law.

How the Law lay upon Christ, as the great High Priest, and Prophet, promised
to Moses; to be raised from our Brethren; and Like us in All things, and so in
the Law also. And as our King, to write out the Law, by which he Ruled; and to
keep it all his Days, that so he may do it, and prolong his Days and Reign in
the Heart of his People. Where also, the way, to settle a perpetual Monarchy,
to a King and his Sons for Ever. As God to Moses, Joshuah, David, Solomon, or
others, from 53. to 59.

How the Suffering part of the Law lay upon Christ (and sor whom) but
especially the Doing Part. How All was by himself summed up into Love, and that
but little, if only to Persons Lovely, and Loving again. How God Commended his
Love to the worst of men, to whom the Law it self says I am the Lord Thy God;
and I have Redeemed Thee; and therefore thou shall Love me, and worship me, and
Glorify my Name, and keep my Rest, because I have provided it for Thee; and Do
and will, both Love Honor, and Glorify Thee, from 59. to 64. and 94. to 101.

How Gods Jealousy speaks his Love, and all his Visiting from 64 to 70

How God Threatened Adam in Paradise, and how he visits to fulfill those
Threatenings on Him or others; from 70 to 77.

How much better for us, that infinite Goodness and Riches, now fill a Finite
Nature, that longs to be sucked, as a Breast ready to break with fulness,
still flowing up, and still flowing over: and a Drop that runs over, can
Enrich our Souls, and make us ever Bless him, who has said, It is a more
blessed thing to Give than to receive. And He that has received freely must
give freely. Of his having All Power in Heaven and Earth, being the Wisdom and
Power of God* and Better for himself to use it, for Edification rather than
Destruction; from 77 to 81.

How Christ Loved the World and Prayed for the World, and how not; from 81 to
86. 94 to 101.

Of Gods Hating and Cursing in order to a Change; and how Places or Persons
Hated or Cursed, may be Recovered and Blessed; from 85 to 149. 161 308.

Of the Earth cursed for Man, but Washed or Baptized by the Flood; And of
Baptising Children, and how Holy things of old belonged to every one redeemed
by the Priests, or born in their Families 18 120 186 365.

How cursed Canaan was blessed again, 122, etc.

And cursed Jericho Recovered, 128 129.

And Gibbeon.

And Aye.

And Sodom.

Moab and Ammon.

Edom and Amaleck of Esau.

Egypt and Assyria, with the Philistines.

Of Death and Hell in Saul conquered by Love in David, and bound up for 1000
Years. As coming loose again in Saul (of the same Tribe) struck down as with
Lightning, and Named Paul, after Sergius Paulus that Prudent Roman Deputy.

Of Shimei Cursing David or other Shimeis; and of Judas; and Paul's rising in
the House of Judas.

Of Aeneas, Ananias and Saphira Tabitha, Dorcas, or others Recovered by the
Apostles.

Of Christ's Love to his Father, and duty by the Law, requiring him to propagate
his Fathers Love, with all his might, and manifest his Name, and True Worship,
and to bring in all his Children, servants, sons of his handmaids, Strangers
and Cattle also to keep the Sabbath, and to Rest the Rest of God; from 100 to
117. 141.

Of the Law of Redemption, Laid upon Christ as the Kinsman, that is able and
has Power and Riches in his Hand, and a Tender Heart and Eye, when he does but
see the naked and miserable, that has No Helper: though they cannot weep it
out to him, or do not see him; who will not hide himself from his own flesh,
when their Land or Person, but especially their precious and immortal Soul, is
Sold, or pawned, or mortgaged, or forfaited. How he has promised to draw All
men to him, and to make All things new, 56. 107. 124. to 163.

How a man may put himself out of Christ's Neighborhood by degenerating from a
Man to a Beast, and of Worshipping the Beast and receiving the Name, Character,
Image, or Number of the Beast, Serpent or Dragon; and how all the World worship
the Beast, but those that are written in the Lambs Book of Life.

How God with all his goodness, knows how to punish the wicked, but
especially those that walk in Lust of the flesh and speak Evil of Dignities:
the sin of Corah, etc. the crying sins of the last days, and how there was no
sacrifice for wilful sinners.

Of the patience of Christ to a man turning into a Beast, and how he devises
Devises to prevent it, or recover him.

How he fulfilled the Ceremonial Law also, and how he was in all the
Sacrifices: as a Lamb for the Lambs, and as a Goat for the Goats. Of Benjamin
the Son of the right hand, with other Children of Rachel (a sheep in Hebrew) at
his right Hand: and of the Children of Leah or others at the Left Hand: where
also of Seir a Goat and of the Goats offered at the New Moons and solemn Feasts
etc. and of the Rams of Ishmael accepted on the Holy Alter.

Of Gods face in Scripture toward the East (and of Bowing to the East) and of
his Right Hand to the South, and Left to the North: and of Northern Judgments
turned to Mercies and Blessings, and of great and good things to come out of
the North, in the Latter times of the World: as from Babylon, at the return
from Captivity.

How Christ came in the fullness of time. Of Seven and Ten, the full and Rich
Numbers: of their Powers and Compounds, for Ages Ever or eternity; which yet in
Scripture often has such or such an End, or Revolution in such or such
Generations.

How Christ came out in several Ages, and Persons of Note, in the Bible, to do
the Great things of Gods Power Wisdom and Goodness for Man To Man and in Man,
through all the Times and Seasons of the Scripture, and in special the Times of
the Witnesses

In Heaven, the Father, and the Word (Dabar, Bar, Bara,) Creating Heaven and
Earth, where also the Spirit of the Messiah, (as the old Jews call it, on Genesis
1. 2.) Mooving on the Waters (an other Witness) and parting them by A Dam, and
Adam of Adama (dried Red Earth) akin to Dam, in Hebrew Bload, the other
Witness, John 5. and Acts 17. Of one Blood he made all Nations of men, and
determined the Times appointed, and bounds of their Habitations: which, in
parting the sons of Adam, he bounded according to the Number of the Sons of
Israel (Deu. 32.) which were 12. and to be measured by the 12 Hours of Day and
Night.

Shadowed on the Tabernacle, by the Cloud and Pillar of Fire (for Light, that
Beginning of the Creation and works of God) and in its outer Court, by the
Laver of Water, and Blood on the Alter of Witness (as That called Ed, a
Witness, by the waters also of Jordan, where afterward the Baptist heard or saw
all the Witnesses of Heaven and Earth; to which he bare Record, or was made a
witness also, as diverse other in several Ages:) And All the 7 Washings or
Sprinklings of Blood or Water, so often required in the Law, to represent the 7
Nights and 7 Days of the Week. As the 7 Lamps in the inner Court, or Holy
Place, as the visible Heavens, with its Planets about the Sun, in the midst, as
the greatest Lamp was in the middle of the other 6, or 3 on either side: and by
the 12 Cakes of Shewbread (changed every 7th or Sabbath day;) and made of 24
Omers, out of 24 Seahs, as the Jews, and 24th of Leviticus; for the 24 hours
of Day and Night. Made by the Sun mooving 2 of His Diameters, and the Moon 24
of Hers in each diurnal motion, of 24 Hours, parted into 4 great Watches: as
the 24 Elders in the Revelation had also 4 watchers, with 6 wings a piece as in
the Prophets. And in the Temple also, there were 24 courses of Priests and of
Levites, 24 of Porters, and 24 of Singers; and 24 courses of Standers, or men
of the Station representing all the People or 12 Tribes, as in the 12 Cakes of
24: as 12 Sons of Jacob, or 12 Hours of Light came after the 12 hours of
Darkness, or 12 Sons of Ishmael or Esau, for the 24. Elders. And as God gave 24
things to the Priests, so they gave 24 to him, in their daily Minha of 12
Rouls, at morning, and 12 also at Evening.

And the Seventh, in Hours also, is very Signal (as in Days and Months and
years) by the great Rest and Turn of Sun and Moon (as Water and Blood also, in
the Sea, and bodies of Animals) after every six hours; with Them, and All that
accounted Lilith (that is Night) the first Wife to Adam, and do call her Eve,
or Even, to the Day: As it is, to them that are about the Equator, and to All,
at either Aequinox; when Time seems to begin. And beginning at Sunset (as
the Jews, and many other Nations did) the First six Hours, brought down the
Sun, to the Midnight Nadir; and six more, brought it up, to the Morning
Horizon; and six more, to the Noon, or Zenith; and six more, to Setting again.
So that every seventh Hour, made a Pauz and Turn (And Sabbath is Both in
Hebrew) As if the watchers stood at the four Corners of Earth, or quarters of
the Heaven, (which are called Winds, and Spirits also in the Scripture,
alluding perhaps to the four watching Spirits or Angels) to Turn the Sun, and
Moon, or Hourglass, of Waters, or Clepsydra, in the Seas, etc. After every six
Hours of Day and Night, the walks of the Sun and Moon: but shadows of the good
things within the Veil (or 3d, Heaven.) where the 2 Cherubins of Glory
shadowed the Mercy Seat or Heavenly Throne, over the Earth or Ark of the
Testimony also or Witness; with its 2 Tables or Testaments also. For, the 2d
Covenant, as in 29 of Deuteronomy, was both Law, and Gospel also, written in
the Ark of the Heart of Christ and all his Members, after the first Tables of
Stone were broken, and disanulled, being never put in the Ark, or in our Hearts.

For, know you not that your Bodies are the Temple of God? As Paul speaks to
the Gentiles also. Where our Heads, as the Heavens above (with two Eyes, or
Cherubins of Glory; The Mercy seat or Throne of God, and his Rainbow, as in all
the Scriptures; like our Eye:) And our Heart; Or Altar of Incense, As the Earth
beneath; in the middle Court, or 2d Region: with its Pericardium of Water; and
Blood, in the Pleura, with twelve Ribs on either side; and seven distinct from
the other (Nothi) As also the seven Rackets of the neck, with its spirit, or
spinal marrow, from the Cerebellum; As the Brain has also seven spirits, or
pair of Nerves with Animal spirits: Veyles, and Ventricles; which are shadowed
in the Lower Regions: both of the Earth below (in the Heart) and Waters under
the Earth, in our Bowels. where the Duodenum and Ilea with all the Rest, are
but shadows of things above; As of the Laver or Molten sea, or great Ocean,
with its Ebbings and flowings, as the Earning of our Bowels; and the Altar of
Burnt-offerings in our Stomach, with its heat, or fire, never quenched: and the
seven Planets; with the Firmament of the Midrif, parting between the Bowels or
Waters under it, and those above it, as high as the Brain it self; besides all
the waters about the Earth of the Heart; Or its Air of the Lungs; whose
Inspiration and Respiration, as the Hearts Diastole and Systole, may be shadows
of Air and Light Drawn in, or Covered with Darkness (Cassach, in English and
Hebrew;) and again spread out in Day; as Psalm. 104 and diverse others Scriptures
allude.

But All are Measured by the Pulses of our Hearts; and in our Temples, called
Times and Tempora, in many Languages: Being as the Commune meetings of the Two
Hemisphers of our Jaws, with their Hours (or in Hebrew Years) of 24 Teeth, and
4 High Watchers; which so Many Called Dogs.

Every Region has its Witnesses, As the Head has its 2 Eyes; as the Sun and
Moon, in the Heavens above; between 2 Ears (or Years) As the Heart has also 2
Aurtcles, as the 2 Poles, by which it hangs, in the Air of the Lungs: and the
Lowest Region, has its 2 Witnesses also, Called Testes, or somewhat of
Witness, in so many Languages: As also their Solemn Covenants were made by
putting the Hand, under the Thigh.

And so also the 2 Tables of Witness, in the Ark of the Testimony, or Witness;
And the Witness Bread of Faces; and the whole Tabernacle of Witness; with its
Courts of Witness, and Altars of Witness; with the Morning and Evening
Sacrifice; and Sack and Minha; Meat and Drink Offerings: with Incense, or in
Hebrew Keturah, coming after Sara. As at first, There were 2 Witnesses, to the
Great Word or Promise, that although the Serpent might nibble the Heels of
Messiah (as Psalm 89. 51.) Yet the Seed of the Woman (in the Revelation also,)
should Break the Serpents Head; Cut off, in a Type, before Abraham's Testes, or
Witnesses: At His Covenant, about Beers^eba, As David's was with Bathsheba, the
Daughter of Seven, and of the Oath also. As God in Levit. 26. I will send the
Beast among you, and I will punish you in Sheba (or Seven;) But yet I will
remember my Covenant, with Abraham, or my Sheba, at Beersheba: As also
Zachariah the Lords Remembrance, alludeth to his own Name, and his Wives
Elisabeth, Gods Oath, and Rest also, as some sound the Word, Luke 1. 72, 73.

And This Covenant with our Father Abraham, and Sure Mercies of David, are made
Good to the Lowest, Least Believer; and He that is Weak shall be as David; and
receive his sure Holy things, as Esaias 53, with Acts 2d and 13. Romans 4, and
Galat. 3d. And All as sure in all things, and as surely Witnessed, As the
Everlasting Covenant of God with Noah, at Arrarat the Bar of Curss, and Error,
Terror, and Trembling, or Wandering: When God smelt a sweet savor of Rest (as
the Moon, a Reak of Night; as Jerach, Reak Nihat, may allude; and the Psalms,
As the Moon, a Faithful Witness in Heaven:) He said in his Heart, I will no
more smite Any Flesh (for so it may be rendered;) As I have done; But Day and
Night, etc. shall be, as long, as the Earth endures: Or in All the Days of the
Earth. And I will Curss the Earth no more. But Bless it, and accept, and
delight in it, so (as himself gives the Etymology of Erets in Ezekiel, 20.
40;) That the Saints or Angels in Heaven, give Thanks to the Lamb, that they
shall come from Thence, to Reign upon the Earth; as if the Earth, as the Weaker
Vessel, should have more abundant Honor; and be Center to the Greatest Glory
of God: when the Curtains of Heaven shall be drawn, or the Canopy rent, as the
Vail, before the Most Holy Place. For, the Heavens must be no more, but pass
away, and be rolled up, as Parchment before the Fire: but the Earth Endures
for Ever: Though yet to be Changed, and renewed so, that it shall be a New
Earth; as a New Heaven.

And When, This is like to be; is One Great Part of this Discourse: Concluding,
that As Time began with Night before Day, or Evening before Morning; so with
Winter before Summer; Or in Tisry, the Seventh Month (as the Jews render
Beresith, as the Hebrew Letters, in the first word of Genesis:) So it is very
probable, the New Creation, or the New Heaven, and the New Earth, shall be,
when the Year, that began at Nisan, when they came from Egypt; shall come to
Tisry; or the 7th Month; and Great Feast of Tabernacles; Or Ingathering of all
the Fruits of the Earth, at the Close of Harvest, and Vintage, at the End of
the Year (as the Scriptures speak.) When also, we may Expect the Latter Rain,
or Great Showers of That Holy Spirit, whereof we saw the Former Rain, or Lesser
Showers, or Droppings, in the First Fruits of the Spirit, at the Time of First
Fruits, or Pentecost, in Acts 2d.

In the mean time there are Witnesses fixed, As at Mispa the Watch; and Gilead,
the Rouls or Stones of Witness; That Laban, and Haran, Wrath, and Care, and
Fear shall pass away (As Wrath in Hebrew, is somewhat Passing away:) but shall
not pass over, Those Witnesses, for Hurt to Jacob, or his Relations, though his
Wages be Changed as often as the Moon (or Lebana from Laban:) and he be rouled
between Hamath and Haran, the Heat of the Sun, and Cold of the Moon, or its
Wanderings. Yet Those Changings, and the Moon, shall pass away, but Everlasting
Kindness shall not pass away: And God will also Watch at Mispa, that neither
Leah nor Rachel be Wronged. Who were also, Witnesses to This Covenant, and
though but Daughters of Laban, Yet they may be Mothers to Both Churches; of the
Jews, from Leah; and the Gentiles also, from Rachel; so often called the
Barren Woman, and the younger Sister; or our Little Sister, in the Canticles
(alluding to This of Laban, in Lebana, Lebano, and Lebanon, and Gilead, with
the Goats of Seir, or Esau; and Mahanaim, with other things, in This
Discourse.) And Ephraim, from Rachel, must be scattered among the Nations, till
he bring in, and be, The Fullness of the Gentiles (As Jacob said to Joseph:) and
Then, All Israel also, as well as Judah, shall be saved: as we read in Romans 11.

How long This Woman shall be subject to the Course, and Changes of the Moon;
and when she shall have the Moon at her feet; and when be freed from it (as
other Women, in their Jubilee of 49;) is Here more fully Discoursed. And the
Times of Gods Withdrawing, or Hiding, and Returning to Israel, or the World,
as the Sun to the Moon, or the Earth. And of the Times of Prophesying, and
Ceasing, or slaying of the Witnesses. Which though Diverse in several Ages, yet
are All measured by the Times of the Sun to the Moon; or Both, to the Earth;
with Their Goings and Comings; Hidings or Changes, of the Faithful Witnesses in
Heaven.

Which are still much measured by 3 and an Half. As at first Creation (which
did Bare or Bear out, somewhat Hidden before;) The Sun and Moon did not appear
till the 4th Morning (and the Jews assign the 3d Hour:) Till which, they lay
as Dead, or asleep in their Causes, as the Schools express. And This, being
First in the Kind, is Measure to All that follow, Both in Weeks; which have 3
and an Half, or 7 Halves, of Light, in Days; and as much Darkness, in their
Nights: and in Months, the Moon, or the Earth, may be Eclipsed, 3 Hours and an
Half; or be Hidden, in the Rays of the Sun, 3 Days and an Half. Which Changes
of the Moon, may represent the Changes of the World also. And at every New
Creation, the Witnesses to be Hidden, as Dead, for 3 Days and an Half; or about
the 10th part of the Time of That Month, or Age, or World: and Then Rise with
such an Earthquake, as we read in Psalm 104, and Rev. 11. 13. and Then the
voice from Heaven, Come up Hither, is but as the Word, at first Creation, Let
there be Lights in the Firmament, As Witnesses, etc.

And the New Moons, or Changes, were solemn Moeds; as appointed by the
Sanedrin; and not under 2 or 3 Witnesses, deposing that they had seen the New
Moon. Who were therefore Feasted, and Encouraged, to Watch for it: as Holy Job
may allude in That, All my appointed Time I will Wait, Till my Change Come.

If the New Moon were seen before Noon, That was the First of the Month; but if
not till After Noon, the Next Day, was accounted First, by Their Rule; who also
tell us, that at first, the Moon was equal to the Sun, but in contest, God made
her blush, and hide her face so long, that Adam saw her not, till the Afternoon
of the 6th Day. And to bring it nearer yet to the Revelation; The Moon Crossing
the Ecliptic, in the Zodiac (that Crooked Serpent,) meets a Dragon, as they
call those Nodes, of Dragons Head and Tail; ready to Catch the Woman in Travel,
or her Child, by Eclipses; in which the Moon, or Earth, is Darkened.

So that Darkness may shadow the Dragon, or the Beast, of the Bottomless pit;
or that Abyss, we read in Genesis 1. the measure of the Rest. This slays the
Witnesses of Heaven and Earth; and binds up our Eyes, and other Witnesses
also, both in our Bodies, and the Temple, or Tabernacle of Witness also.

Where all the Witnesses were measured by them in Heaven; and their Goings and
Comings; and by 3 and an Half, or 7 Halves; and 7 (as in the Lamps:) There
being no less Number, or other, made of 3 and an Half, in whole Numbers, but 7,
and those that come of 7. and Seven in Heb notes Fullness; and Rest, and
Turning, as in Sabbath; as in every 7th Hour of the Sun and Moons Motion. And 7
Days also make the Moons Quarters, and 14 Change her whole Face: and bring her
up to Those at the Poles also: Where she is Hidden Half her Monthly Course; and
so is the Sun Half his Year, Returning in the 7th Month: As to All the World;
in One of the Equinoctials. And so, ln the Temple; As in slaying the Lambs, and
offering all the Witnesses, there might be found, Daily, 3 or 4 Hours; So, they
ceased also, 7 Hours, from the Morning Sacrifice, to the Evening Minha; and
Then 14, to the next Morning. As Their Longest Night was but 7 minutes more
than 14 Hours (as the Moons Returns and Fulls, in somewhat more then 14 Days:)
and yet they made or counted Their Night Even (to the Day) as the English still
call it: whose Languages, Phrases and Idioms, are near akin to the Hebrew; as
this Discourse shows, in very many Instances.

And as 7, is made of 2 Threes and an Half, or 3 times 2 and an Half; So All
Their sprinklings of Blood, in their Daily Sacrifice, were by 7, or 3 and an
Half, on their Great Altar, made with 3 Corners and an Half; being Cut, to
bring it All into Benjamine, (and their Incense Altar, and diverse other things,
by 2 or 3 Cubits and an Half:) and the 7 Lamps, in the Candlestick, branched by
3 and an Half, on either side. And their Music, with 3 sorts of Instruments;
besides their breath or spirit; and 3 kinds of Blasts, with Quavering, between
2 plain Songs; as singing Catches, or Chatses;) or it may be Watches: Some of
which had Music, to part them (as our Waits) and others Silence; as the
Revelation; Silence for Half an Hour; while the Incense was offering, and the
People stood without, in silent Meditation or Prayer.

And as 7, is the Lowest Number made of 3 and an Half, in whole Numbers; so is
14 the next, of 3 times 4 and an Half. (for 3 times 3 and an Half, is a
Fraction of 10.) As 7 is made of 3 and 4; or 3 times 2 and an Half, So is 14 of
3 with 4, and 2. 3 being as the Father of All Numbers; and 2 the Mother; Great
with Child in 4, which is its Square; and the First Square (as its name and
form in Hebrew:) and the measure to All other squares; which may be All
Resolved by 4, as Cubes by 8.

Here, discoursing the Scripture Numbers of 7 and 14, the Author finds them All
measured by the Times and Changes, made by the Sun, upon the Moon, or Earth; in
every 7th Hour, 7th Day, 7th Month, and 7th Year, which was also Sabatical; as
the Seven 7th a Jubilee. And the Months so fixed, that whether we begin the
Year about the Vernal Equinox, as the Jews did after their Coming out of
Egypt; or at the Autumnal, as probably before; yet still, the 7th Month also,
will be Holy. One of them for the Passover, on the 14th Day, and the Other for
the Tabernacles, from the 14th.

And Both, had a solemn Moed, of 3 Days and an Half, for the Witnesses, before
the Feast. As the Paschal Lamb was Tied up from the 10th, to the 14th (and so
the Daily Lambs were kept, and searched, and prepared, before they might be
Offered:) And Though Sackcloth and Ashes might go off, at the Close of the 10th
of the 7th Month; the Great Day of Atonement; yet Their Tradition of Gods
Sitting to Judge, All Dying That Year, made them All as Tied up, in Fasting and
Prayer, till the Eve of Tabernacles: which was As the Resurrection, in the
Morning Light, freeing our Eyes and All the other Witnesses, from their Chains
of Darkness. And he brings His Judgment, also to Light, every Morning; Though
the wicked will not see it; As the Scripture speaks.

And the Sun and Moons returns to Them in 14 Hours at Longest Night, and in 14
Days, of the Moon; to Them at the Poles; and for Changing her own Face, and
the Earth, and Tides; may be Measures to all the Great Things, in the Temple,
and other places, Done on the 14th Hour, or Day, or Year, in Scripture. Where
also many Persons or Places, as Witnesses, lying Dead, or as Dead, and lost,
for 3 and an Half; or 3 times 2 and an Half; or 3 times 4 and an Half, whlch is
14. As Abraham's Tenants and Sodom recovered in the 14th Year; and Then as lost
for 3 Days and an Half: And so Jacob served 7 Years, and 7; for his 2 Wives;
(and 6 for Cattle:) Then flies 3 Days, and is pursued 7, to Gilead, the
Stones of Witness. Joseph is also Born in the 14th year, of his Fathers, and
Freed in the 14th Year, of his Own Bondage: and his 2 fellow Prisoners were
freed on the 3d Day. And so, the 2 Searchers of Jericho, lay hid, or as lost,
for 3 Days and an Half. And so David's Wives and Friends of Ziglag. And diverse
others, besides our Saviors 3 Years and an Half, Public Preaching (as Daniels
Half Week:) and 3 Days and Half from the Passover; 3 Hours and Half, Anguish
on the Cross: As in the Grave 3 times 12 Hours, and Half: or about 40 or 42.
And Paul was stricken Down and Blind till the 4th Day: and in a great storm by
Sea, first 3 Days; and Then they Lightened the Ship; and was not fully freed,
till the 14th; and so, he went up to Jerusalem (or to the 3d Heaven) in the
14th year. And Jerusalem was freed from the Assyrians, in the 14th year of
Hezekiah; As Sodom, or the World perhaps, from the 4 Great Monarchies (which
are all showed to Abraham in Visions) in the 14th year; as in the 14th of
Genesis: and also in the 15th, we see the Turtle and the Pigeon (as the 2
Witnesses) preserved whole and unbroaken, between the Heifer, Ram, and Goat
(and all of 3 years old;) Gods own Emblems of the 3 First Monarchies, in the
Prophets: besides, That Vision showed All the kinds of Sacrifice, and other
things, discoursed in This Book.

But especially the Passover; which being the First 14th Day, of the First
Month, of the First year, of their Coming out of Egypt, is to measure All that
follow. Which the Author therefore considers in Hours of the year, to the
Passover; and Thence to Pentecost; and so onward, to the 7th Month, and its
Feast of Trumpets, Expiation, and Tabernacles; which was the Great Feast of the
year: and the Moed of all Moeds. The Ingathering of All the Fruits of the
Earth: and Latter Rain of That which did but Drop in the First Fruits of
Pentecost.

Time first beginning at Evening; 12 Hours brought up Light for Darkness; which
returned again in the 25th Hour: so that 25 is the Root of Darkness (or That
which first Turned Light into Darkness:) and the Next Number below the square
Root of 666.

36 Hours, come to the Morning of the 2d Day, ending at 48. and 49 the Number
of Middah in Hebrew, Measure: and the Number of Jubilee, being 7 times 7; and
the first of the 3d nights Rest. Whose Midnight is about 55, so near the 12th
part of 666.

60, The Morning, and 70 the Evening Minha, of the 3d Day, Ending in 72, of 6
times 12, the Number of their Sanedrin. 84 Hours, or 3 Days and Half, brought
up the Sun of the 4th Day: Measure to all the 3 and Half, of all other
Witnesses. 96 come to the Evening of the Fifth Day; when Blood was first
Created, and its Morning Sacrifice is at Hour CXI, the very Number of Kavh, in
Hebrew, a Measuring Line: and 6 of These is just 666.

120 (the Hours of 5 whole Days; Before Man was first Created;) is the very
Number of Moed, in Hebrew: As 120 years was the Great Moed, appointed by God,
for Men of the Old World: 3 of these Moeds of 120 (which is 3 times 40) make
360 (as Days of their year,) and Half, a Moed more, 420; 3 of which make 1260
(in the Revelation:) which is also Ten Moeds (making 1200) and an Half Moed, 60
more.

135 the 3d Hour of the 6th Day (when Adam was Created:) Afterward the Morning
Sacrifice. And about the Temple, from That they called Hell, or Chel, to the
Court of Israel, were 135 Cubits; as 135 Days from Pentecost, to the Great
Hosannah, or the Last of Tabernacles.

140, That is, Twice 70 Hours showed the Moon to Adam, they say, in the first
Day of his Creation; and he worshipped God; who afterward appointed That Hour
for slaying of the Evening Sacrifice; the Preparation to the Sabbath, whose
Lamb, came up with 144000 Clakins of Time, as the First Fruits to God and his
Lamb: There being just 144 Hours (that is, 12 times 12) before the Sabbath
began; and in 6000 Days, 144000 Hours, as the Number Sealed, of all the 12
Tribes, with the Holy Lamb on Mount Sion, Revel. 14.

155, The Noon of the Sabbath: which was the measure to all Holy Things: being
the very Number of the Hebrew word for Kane; which Ezekiel says was 6* Cubits
and an Hand; as reaching into the Sabbath Day: for, every Cubit had 24 digits,
as the Day had 24 Hours.

The 10th Midnight is at Hour 222, (the 3d, part of 666:) or the Number of
Jerecho: To which they also came, on the 10th day of the first Month; when they
entered Canaan. This is a solemn Fast, with them, for Miriams Death on the 10th
of the first Month: As Eli, and his 2 Sons Dyed on the 10th of the 2d Month.
When also the Ark was Taken by the Philistines. After so many Hours of the year
were past, As there were Years between Egypt and the Taking of Jerusalem; and
Burning of the Temple by the Chaldeans, on the 10th Day of the 5th Month.

And the 2d Temple was also Burnt by the Romans, on the 10th Day of the 5th
Month, (or the same Day of the Month, when in the Wilderness it was decreed,
They should not Enter into the Rest of God.) And This Day of the 5th Month
might be, as many Hours after Pentecost, or before the Tabernacles; As there
were Hours before the Pentecost, or Years before the Flood, or After Egypt, to
the last sack of Jerusalem; or Thence to their Coming in again, with the
Fullness of the Gentiles, at the ^gathering of All the Fruits of the Earth; in
the Great Feast of the Tabernacles: or the Latter Rain of That spirit, of which
the First Fruits were at Pentecost, in Acts 2. which was so many Years After
Egypt, as the Day of Pentecost, was Hours in the Year; which is just after 1^6;
the Hours of 64 Days, before the Day of Pentecost; which was the 65th Day of
the Year, or 50th from the Morrow after the Passover, on the 14th.

The 10th Day of the 7th Month, was the only Fast appointed by God; or the
Great Day of Atonement; to which they reckoned 187 Days of the year: as there
were 187 Cubits in the Court of the Priests and Clean men of Israel; about the
Temple.

The 10th Day of the 10th Month was their Fast, for the Seig of Jerusalem, in
the 9th of Zedekiah, to the 9th of the 4th Month of his Eleventh year: but the
Temple was not burnt, till the 10th of the 5th Month, as Jeremy 52. with Zech.
8. saying, that the Fasts of the 4th, and of the 5th, and of the 7th, and of
the 10th Month also, should be cheerful Feasts of Joy and Gladness; therefore
Love Truth and Peace, and think no evil against your Neighbor; as before in
that and the former Chapter.

All these 10th or Fasting Days might be Hinted in the 10th of the first
Month, when the Thick Darkness began, of 3 Days and a Half (as the Poets long
night of 3 Nights together:) when the Paschal Lamb was Tied up, and prepared to
be slain, in Hour 333 (just Half 666;) or the Evening of the 14th Day, which
ended in Hour 336. And 337 the next Hour, or first of the 15th (which was a sad
Night to All the first born in Aegipt) is just the Number of Seol, the Hebrew
Word for Death and Hell, or the Grave. All typed out in Aegipt; as Leviathan
also, with the Dragon in the Sea; Giving power to the Beast, or Image of the
Beast (as Psalms 74, 106.) Coming first from Babylon to Egypt, and thence to
the Wilderness; and thence to the Calves at Dan and Bethel; whence back again
to Babylon; and There it became an Image of 60 cubits High, and 6 in breadth;
till at length it came to be 666: which is here Discoursed.

360, or 6 times 60 Hours, come just to Sun set of the 15th Day when Israel was
driven out: and pursued so, on the 3d day, they say, that on the 4th morning (3
Days and Half from the Passover,) the Egyptians are drowned (as Job 34. 20.
and 26. 12. adding the crooked Serpent in the next Verse;) and Israel comes
up, from the Red sea (that great Type of the Last Witness, or Blood of all the
Witnesses) singing the Song of Moses and the LAMB, in Hour 420; which is 3 and
an Half of 120 (or Moed in Hebrew:) made of 3 times 40, 4 times 30, 6 times 20,
10 times 12, or 12 times 10: and 3 times 420, make 1260, in the Revelation,
(alluding to This of Egypt and the Wilderness, in Diverse places) being but 30
years after Daniel's 1290 (beginning at the sack of Jerusalem.) that is 3 times
430.

As a Memorial of these 3 days and Half, they have 3 more days of Thirst, and
then come to Marah, that is, Bitterness: Healed by a Tree. And then they find
12 Fountains (for 12 Tribes, 12 Apostles, answering to the 12 Hours of Light.)
and 70 Palms, (as 70 Elders, and 70 souls of Jacob in Egypt) shadowed by the
Palm Trees in the Temple-Courts, as Tamar in Hezron, as the Hebrew may intimate.

This 21st Day began at 480 Hours: As the Temple began 480 years from Egypt: so
that its Feast of Dedication, in the 7th month of Tabernacles, answered to the
Great Feast of Unleavened-Bread, or Last of the Passover week; in the 21st Day
of the Month.

By this Thread, the Author goes through All the years from Egypt: Whose Dark
times, might be shadowed, in the Philistines and others oppressing Israel; Freed
by Samson (that is, the Little Sun) setting as many years from Egypt, as their
year had days.

Saul might be born 337 years from their Entering Canaan; as the numher of his
Name. And Elies 40 years might answer Aarons 40 from Egypt; where he was chosen
to be Priest: as God told Eli, 1 Samuel ^27.

40 more for Saul and Samuel, (as Act. 13.) bring us to David, that is Love;
Conquering Saul, or binding him up for 1000 years; when the 12 hours of day and
night, ran through each other, at Gibeon; with 360 Days of the Year then
ending; to begin a New Year, a New Heaven, and a New Earth; as a New Jerusalem;
which David Took from the Jebusites (who Trod it down, as the name in Hebrew
intimates;) 444 years from Egypt: that is, 2 Thirds of 666.

When David, had also reigned at Abraham's Hebron, 7 years and 6 months: being
the 7th son of Jessi (My Essence, in Gods Language:) and from Abraham the 14th;
as from Noah the 24th (or last Hour of That day; settling the Temple Courses by
24:) as his Name in Hebrew may be 24 and 14, as from Abraham, he was the 14th
Generation, Matthew. 1.

And David's 70 years (an Age or Generation, Psalm. 90,) is the 14th 70 from
Abraham's Birth. Who received the Promise, and came from Haran, at 75 (Genesis 12,)
and before their coming out of Egypt, just 430 years (as Exodus 12) and Then
480, to the Temple, in Solomon's 4th (1 King. 6.) So that David dyed in 476 from
Egypt; and from Abraham's Birth, 980 years; which is just 14 times 70.

6 times 70 more, carry them to Babylon; and 7 times 70, bring them home again:
in the 10th Jubilee from David (490:) but from Abraham's Birth, the 30th
Jubilee: 3 times 490; that is, 1470, which is the 3d 7th 70, or 21 times 70.

And from the First Temple to the Second, in the 2d of Darius Hystasp. were 70
years. Or to Ezra's going up in the 7th of Artaxerxes Long: Twice 70: and 7
times 70 more, as in Daniels Weeks, or 490 years, (which are 10 more Jubilees)
bring us to our Saviors Death and Resurrection on the 3d Day (as the Barley
sheaf, or first of First-sruits, was heaved up the 3d day after the Passover:
And his sending down the First Fruits of the Spirit, in the Pentecost (Acts 2d)
1537 years from Egypt, as the Day of Pentecost (the 65th of the year, or 50th
from the morrow after the Passover, on the 14th) began in Hour 1537. As also
the First of the Great Moed, for Man's Repentance, of 120 years, began in 1537
of the World; and of Noah 480: As the Temple was 480 from the Law.

And Thus, between the Two Great Sacks of Jerusalem, and of Both Temples, by
the Caldeans and the Romans, are just 666 years.

666, being the Number of Change, to the World; and in special to Jerusalem
(which was as the Sun to his Moon, as Jericho may signify:) being made of 6,
the first number of Turn and Change, in the Sun and Moon, or Heaven and Earth,
and the Great Ocean or Waters under the Earth.

And 6 is the First Midnight; and 4 times 6, end the first Day; and Light was
first Turned into Darkness, in Hour 25; the least square Root of 666: the Great
Number of Darkness, or Change, in all its principal parts. As we saw in 55,
CXI, 222 (the 10th Midnight, or Number of Jerecho:) 333 the slaying of the
Passover: 444 in the 19th; and 555 the first Watch of the 24th Night (as the
Last Hour of that Day:) and 666, comes just to the Sun, Darkened by the Moon,
under his Rays.

666 Hours, the Middle of the 28th Day, or the 3d sixth Hour of the 4th seventh
Day: which is just 29 Days and 12 Hours (the Middle point of Sun and Moons
Conjunction:) allowing 42 Hours (for the Moons Hiding) the number of Cled, or
Clade in Hebr: the Lowest Age, or Hour of Darkness, or Temptation: being the
24th part of 1008, (as the Jews Clakins were 1080.) But Half 84 Hours, which
are in 3 days and a half: the longest stay of the Moon in the Suns Rays, in
slowest motion. Which is very different, both in Sun and Moon, and so are their
Diameters; yet so proportional to their Motions, that to each 12 Hours, we may
allow 12 of the Moons Diameters, and one of the Suns: As Silver and Gold; the
Measure to other Weights and Measures, with the Jews and other Nations; here
discoursed:

With Great Changes, made in 666 years, (as Hours to Sun and Moon) in special
to Jerusalem, the Great Sun-Dyal to the World: with its Lines of 666, so near 2
3ds of 1000; which is but one more than 3 times 333, or Half 666. As, to the
Evening Sacrifice, at the Passover, were Hours 333; and the Length of All the
Temple Courts, 333 Cubits: With 14 steps out of the Gentile Court, as 14 Hours,
to the Morning Sacrifice; and 14 days, to the Passover; and 50 more to the
Pentecost, which was the 65th day of the year; and 135 more, to the Great
Hosanna (closing the Tabernacles;) As 187 Days before the Great Atonement, by
the Greatest Priest in the Temple, which was 70 Cubits Long.

Which Numbers are signal in the years of the Patriarchs: As in the Measuring
Kane, of Kainan, the 4th from Adam (as 4 is the first, and measure of All
Compound Squares: and the Sun on the 4th Day; to measure all Motions and
Seasons.) Before Mahalaleel 70; to Jared 65 more, that is 135: 362 before
Methusala, (65 after Enochs Birth, and before Lamech 187; and Noah 369:) 4
times 333, or twice 666, before the Flood: but 3 times 3, less than 5 times
333, or twice 666 and an half, from the Creation; and but 3 more than 666,
After Enoch,

The 7th from Adam: Born just after the 3d 7th year of His 7th Hundred; and the
7th 70 of Seth; 491, or 2.

He lived on Earth, but just so many years, as there be days in a year; 365:
As from Mahalaleel to the Flood, 365: and from the Flood, or Arphaxad (the 7th
from Enoch, and the 12th from Adam) were 365 years, to the Promise in Abraham's
75, (who lived 75 years After the Birth of Isaac; As Enoch lived 75 years,
After Adams Death) and 370, before we read of Salem, or Beersheba, 372, (as the
Numbers of Sheba and Salem, may be in Hebrew;) and 390 to Isaacs Birth, and 430
to his Marriage.

Noah Lived with Abraham 58 years (the Jews say;) as the number of his Name in
Hebrew. He wa^ born 661 years After Mahalaleel; and 666 before Eber, or Ever,
being the Longest Liver, that was boru after the Flood: and Father of Time;
parted, as the World, between Peleg, his Greater Light, and Joctan, the Less,
(as in Hebrew;) with the Moon, and 12 Brother-Months, among his Children.

From Sems Birth, 100 years, to Arphaxad (I will dissolve as the Destroyer, and
I will heal as Shaddais) 135 to Sala (35 before Eber:) 200 to Peleg; 260 to
Serug; 290 to Nahor; 320 to Terah; 390 to Abraham (if his eldest son;) and to
Isaac just 490 years (which are 10 Jubilees, or 7 times 70 years:) as to Jacob
550.

From the Flood, there were 100 years to Peleg; 222 to Terah; 70 more to
Abraham, that is, 292; and to Noah's Death 350: and 390 to Sodom Burnt as
Jerusalem, 390 years After the Flood of Schism, in Jeroboam: 440 to Arphaxads
Death: to Salahs 470; and to Sems 502; to Eber's 530: to Isaaks 572 (which was
after Noah 222, the 3d part of 666:) and to Jacobs, 600; to Joseph's 653. So
that Isreal's Cruel Bondage might be in 666; and Levies Death 676, and from the
Creation 2331: which is just 3 times 666 and an Half, the whole time of
Babylons Rule over Israel and the People of God. All their Pressures and
Darkness being measured by 666 years, as the Sun and Moons in 666 Hours.

So from Egypt, to Jerusalem Taken from the Iebusites 444 (as we saw before)
and to Joash sack, in the 14th of Amaziah, 222 more, in all, 666. And thence,
to the Abominations of Antiochus, 666 more; and to the Sanctuary cleansed by
Maccabeus, 3 more; which make up Daniels 1335, Days of Antiochus. But, as
Ezekiels 390 Days, of Jerusalems Siege, answered to the years of its Sin, from
Jeroboam; so Daniels Days of Antiochus, to the years of Antichrist, or any
defiling the Temple: whom God will therefore destroy; as Paul witnesses to the
Corinthians and Thessalonians.

Thus His 1335 Days, were just so many years from Egypt, to Those Times of
Antiochus; which were also 3 times 430 (as Mahalaleels Death, from the
Creation:) or just 1290, from their settling in Canaan, 45 years after Egypt, or
Caleb sent to spy the Land; as Jos. 14. 10.

And so many years there were between their first coming out of Haran, in
Abraham, to their Going thither again, in their Captivity to Babylon. For,
Abraham left Haran at 75, 430 years before they came out of Egypt; Then Calebs
45, or 46, and 430 to David's Death, and Then 430 more (in Solomon's 40, and
Ezekiels 390) to Their going into Babylon: or Shushan; where Daniel was, when
he heard the Sanctuary should be fully Cleansed, in 2300 Days, yet sealed up
for many days, or years, as we read in Dan. 8.

This was, in the 3d year of Belshazzar (in Baruch, Berosus, Josephus and
others) 31 years after the City Burnt, and All carried Thence to Babylon. And
2300, want only 31, of 2331, the whole Time of Babylons oppressing the Israel
of God: Being also 333, the Temple Courts, multiplied by 14 steps upon them,
from the Court of the Gentiles (Treading them down:) and beginning from the
Gate of Shushan (in remembrance of Daniels Shushan of Persia, Conquering
Babylon;) To Nicanor (in the Maccabees) and Coponius Gate in the West; So many
years (as Cubits here) from Shushan to Coponius, the Roman Governor of Judea,
after Archelaus; when Cyrenius was President of Syria.

333, by 14 half Cubits, or 7 whole, is 2331: Which is 3 times 666 aad an half.
Or 3 Months (that had only Fasts and no Feasts, as the 3 last Woes) and and an
half Month; from the Month of Pentecost to the Tabernacles; when the Fullness
of the Jew and Gentile, with All the Fruits of the Earth; at the Full Moon, of
the Full Month, or 7th, beginning with the Feast of Trumpets: called the 7th,
because of the 7th Month; Though Every Month began with Trumpets.

The First of Those 3 Months, or Moeds, of 666, Was from the First Temple, to
the Second sacked by the Romans; (as That by the Babylonians;) just 666. That
is One 70, to the 2d of Darius Hystasp or rather twice 70 to Ezra, (the Helper,
before Nehemiah, the Lords Comforter) in Artaxerxes Long: and Thence Daniels 70
weeks, or 490 years, to our Saviors Death: and Half 70, to the Seige of
Jerusalem, sacked by the Romans, after a War of 3 years an Half: as our Savior
preached 3 Years and Half; and suffered 3 Days and Half; but on the Cross, 3
Hours and Half, in his last Eclipse: a shadow of the Witness Times.

And for Harmony, between 70, and 666: 3 times 70, makes 210, the number of the
Heb. Dor, a Generation, or a Great Age. 2 of Those, or 6 times 70, make 420, 10
Cleds or Clades; or 3 Moeds and an Half; as 70 is 3 score and an Half. But 3 of
those Dors, or Generations, being 3 times Thrice 70, or 9 times 70, and an
half, make just 665. And Dorothenu Our Generations, in Hebr. letters, may make
666, 670, 676. And (...) the Word so often used by God, For your Generations,
makes 4 above 1260; Which is 10 Moeds and an Half. As in the Revelation also;
1260, for a Time and Times and Half; which is Moed, Moeds, and Half a Moed, in
Daniel. And His 1335, is but 3 more than Twice 666, or 4 times 333: As the 14th
Day ended in 336 Hours, 3 more than 333, the Evening Sacrifice, or slaying of
the Passover. And the Temple Witnesses lay as slain by Antiochus, 3 years; and
then Recovered by Judas Macchabeus, in the 148 year of Seleucus Nicanor, the
very same Month, the Temple was polluted 3 years before (1 Macc. 1. 54. and 4.
51.) That, was Twice 666, from Egypt, or 1332 years; and the Clensing 1335:
Which was also 1290 years from Their settling in Canaan, as Josh. 14. 10. which
was in the 46th or 47th from Egypt: (As Noah went into the Ark on the 46th, or
47th, Day of the Year.)

And if we There fix the Pentecost, which was not, till they were in Canaan (as
Levit. 23, and 25.) There may yet be Greater Harmony.

For, as the years before This settling in Canaan, may be as Hours, from the
beginning of the Year, to the Day of Pentecost; so all the years following This
in Canaan, may be reckoned as Hours After the Pentecost; the 65th Day of the
Year, and Therefore about the 5th of the 3d Month.

430 more, come up to Solomon. 470, to Jeroboam: As 470 Hours from the
beginning of the Day of Pentecost, end about the 23d or 24th Day of the 3d
Month: when the Jews Fast, to this Day, for Ieroboams stopping all the
First Fruits of Israel, from Jerusalem.

430 more, to the City Taken by Nebuchadnezzar, ending as Hours, about the 9th
of the 4th Month; the very Day, when it was broken up. As we read in diverse
places of the Kings, and Jeremy 39, and 52.

430 more (which make up Daniels 1290;) to the Times of Epiphanes: for which,
They Fast also, in the latter end of the 4th Month: as also, for Moses breaking
the First Tables; at their Golden Image in the Wilderness: which themselves
account as a Type or cause, of the Babylonian Image oppressing them, or That
Abomination of Desolation (as the Macchabees call it) of Antiochus; that mighty
Type of Antichrist: Or of any other since On them, and the Israel of God.

And yet again, 222 more added to 1290, make 1512, the number of Hours in 63
Days, between the Day of Pentecost, and the 10th of the 5th Month. That Fatal
Day, when Amalek and Canaan destroyed them to Hormah, the Curss, upon that
Heavy Doom of Not Entering into Rest: And for the first Temple, Burnt by the
Chaldeans, Jer. 55. 12. and the Second also, by the Romans on the very same Day
of the 5th Month. The 65th from the Day of Pentecost (as This the 65th Day of
the year:) and its Morning Sacrifice was in Hour 1526 from Pentecost: As the
second Temple Burnt 1526 years, from their settling in Canaan, 1512 years After
Enoch.

On the 18th of the same 5th Month, they Fast for the Lamps put out in Ahaz
time: and for them that defamed the Good Land, on the 17th of the 6th Month;
but All the first half of the 7th is little else but Fasts (as the first half
of the 7th Day, was Darkness:) and the latter half was Light, and Joyful
Feastings; ending all that years sorrow; and their scatterings; which Damel
makes the Measure of All things foretold in Him: As Chap. 12. 7. And his 9th
says, Desolations shall be determined, at the End of That War: whose very
first Crisis lasted, till That season of the year, in the 7th Month; we are now
Seeking.

Shall we view a Map of All, in the 39, 40, 41, 52 Chapters of Jeremiah.

First, The City Broken up, on the 9th of the 4th Month: (about 860 Hours after
Pentecost; As That, 860 years from Their First Pentecost in Canaan.)

Then the Temple Burnt, on the 10th of the 5th Month: As a Type of the 2d
Temple Burnt by the Romans; on the same Day, of the same Month, (and same
Course of Joyarib:) 666 years after: Or, 1526 years from That Pentecost in
Canaan; As 1526 Hours from Pentecost, to the Morning Sacrifice of the 10th Day
of the 6th Month. In which also, they Fast, for Aaron's Death; a Type of our
Savior, Dying before That Temple Burnt.

Then, the Great, and Rich, and Mighty men, were All carried Captive; and the
Vineyards and Olives, etc. Left to the Poor; As promised, Zeph. 3. Ezekiel. 34.
Levit. 26. with Ex. 23. adding, that What the Poor left, the Beasts should eat.

Then, the Witnesses slain. First Gedaliah (a Type of Christ, the Great Lord:)
and Then the 70 Elders (those solemn Witnesses) in Mourning, and their Hair
shorn, etc. And at Mispa, the Watch of Witness, to Jacob and his two Wives, as
we saw before. And slain by the 10 Great Captains (as the 10 Horns) of Ishmael,
the Beast (as the Angel called him Pere:) first mocking Isaac, and now slaying
him, in a Namesake; and of the Seed Royal.

And Then, the Witnesses Rising again; Or All the Captives recovered, by
Johanan (the Lord's Grace, or Gracious:) And at Gibeon; where the Sun stood
still, for a new Heaven, in Joshuah; and a new Earth, and Age, in David; yet
but Types of more: when God shall do his Work, his strange Work, as at Gibeon,
Isa. 28. Thence they go to Egypt, as Christ, when Herod slew the Children: For,
Out of Egypt God, always called his Son. And the Prophets, and Revelation,
speak of their last Return, as both from Babylon and Egypt. And for the Times
also: besides the great and only Fast prescribed, on the 10th of the 7th Month;
They Fast, on the 7th, for the Golden Image of the Beast They made (as Psalm
106.) a Type of the Beast slaying the Witnesses: and on the 3d, for Gedaliah;
slain in the seventh Month, as Jer. 41: and the other 70, on the 2d Day after.

And 1290 Hours, from the Temple Burnt; on the 10th of the 5th Month (53 days
and 18 hours,) come up to this Time; which may be compared with Daniels 1290
days, or years: or 1260, in the Revelation; written about 30 years After the
Temple and City Burnt by the Romans; As Daniel's Great Prophecy of 2300 days
was just 30, or 31 years, after the City sacked by Babylon: Whose Times are
All, but 3 times 666, and an half; or 2331 years; and so but just 2300, from
the 31st year of that account, which was in the 3d of Belshazzar; as we read in
Dan. 8. to be compared with Baruch, (whence much of Daniels Prayer, in the 9th)
expounding Levit. 26, as an absolute Promise of Repentance, and Returning from
Captivity, etc.

One of Those 666 years (or hours) from the City broken up by the Babylonians,
on the 9th of the 4th: And the Temple Burnt on the 10th of the 5th, To the
Second Temple Burnt by the Romans, on the same Day, of the same Month, in the
Year of Christ, 70, or 71.

And though we do not know the just Hour of that Day; It seems very early; so
that some assign it to the 9th (as that Decree, They should not enter into
Canaan:) and 1526 Hours (As Years from the First Pentecost) came to the Morning
Sacrifice, of the 64th Day, ending in 1536 Hours; as it begins in 1512. And
the First Pentecost, in the 46 or 47 from Egypt, was but 1512 from Enoch. Then
860 more to the First, And 666 to the Second, Temple Burnt, make just 1526
hours, or years from that First Pentecost: or 1572 from Egypt; and 36 after the
Great Pentecost, Act. 2. which we found 1536 from Egypt.

1290 more in Hours come about the very day of the 7th Month, Fasting for
Gedeliah: slain by Ishmael: As so many years of Christ bring up the Ottoman
Family (which the Jews call Ishmael, as Hagarens;) in the East: As many Great
Motions and Earthquakes, in the West; besides the Sicilian Vespers, and the
first great Jubilee, settled by Boniface the 8th; with the Christians driven out
of Judea; and the Jews, out of England, etc.

And so many years from Jerusalems sack, brought up the Golden Bull of Charles
the 4th, with the Great Order of Jesuits; besides That, so many call
Nocticidium Tigur:

And 1572, That famous Year in France, and other Nations, may thus close the
10th of the 7th Month, being but just 240 (the hours of ten days) more than
1332; being twice 666, or two Changes of the Moon, from the last Great Sack of
Jerusalem by the Romans. And if the 2d Change, begun the 7th Month (or 7th
Trumpet) Then 333 more, come up to the Evening Sacrifice of the 14th Day, or
Preparation for the Feast of Tabernacles; which begins the 15th Day of the same
Month: the great Time here Enquired. As that Great Solemnity of David's Dance
before the Ark; or Solomon's Great Feast of Dedication of the First Temple; and
of the 2d also, by Zorobabel and Nehemiah, with Ezra; but Types of This Great
Return from Babylon; that is, All Oppression and Confusion; called Babel in
Hebrew, and English also: being but Lebab (Our Heart in Hebrew) Turned quite
Backward.

And if the Turk (coming up, as Ishmael, on the 3d of the said Month) be to
rule in Europe but 391 years, as days in a Year, and a Month, and a Day, and
an Hour (in Apoc. 9. 15. first hinting This Comparison of Years with Hours:)
Those Hours make but 16 Days, and 7 Hours; ending in the 19th Day, the middle
of the Feast of Tabernacles: which must darken both the Persian Sun, and
Turkish Moon also; as may be hinted in Isa. 24, and Matthew. 24. with Joel 2d and
3d.

And the First of that Feast of Tabernacles, or the 15th of the 7th Month, is
the 3d 65th. As 3 Patriarchs born in 65: that is, Eber (of Arphaxad) and Jared
of Mahalaleel, and Methusala of Enoch, living 365, as days in a year. So that
from him we may begin the Great Year, here measured by Hours: or any other.

We found tbe Romans Burning the 2d Temple, in the 70, or 71, year of Christ;
and on the 10th of the 5th Month: the Hour we do not know.

Suppose the first; or to be reckoned so; (or Evening, Turning Light into
Darkness, in that Great Eclipse of the Jewish State:) And then, the 24th or
last Hour of that Day, will be at the 95th of Christ, which so many make the
first year of the Revelation; being about the end of Domitian.

50 Days more (or 1200 hours) bring us quite through the 5th and 6th Months:
although Both of them should have 30 days; As the Scripture Months in the
Revelation (where 42 Months have 1260 Days;) and other places; besides the
Flood, of 365 Days.

So that 1200, added to 95, come to the Feast of Trumpets, or, to the 7th
Trumpet; beginning the 7th Month: in 1295.

360 more, in 15 Days, come up to 1655: The first Day of Tabernacles. Which may
also be sooner, if the Roman Sack were not Till the Morning of the 10th Day: Or
if each other Month had but 29 days, as the Jews now reckon, by Middle Motions.

However, it may be Hereabout, by all Accounts: yet so, that the first Day of
Tabernacles, must begin (as all other) with 12 hours of Night before Day. And
they Dance not, till the Evening Minha, or Incence, closing the Evening
Sacrifice, with All its Songs and Waters from the Wells of Salvation, as they
called them, from Isa. 12. So that if it began in 1654, we are yet but at
Midnight: and the Sun of This Day, will not Rise, till 1666, twice 666 and an
half.

And we found 666, and all its principal parts, very signal to Jerusalem.
Trodden down by the Jebuzites, 444 years after Egypt: Then Recovered by David.
Then again by Sesac, K. of Egypt, in the 5th of Rehoboam: which may be 444
years from Judahs Burning it (in Judges 1.) As That, about 444 years from
Sodoms flames; After Abraham was met by the K. of Sodom; and Melchizedech of
Salem: which must meet also at this Great Return both of Jerusalem and Sodom,
as we find in That to Abraham, with Ezekiel. 16, and diverse other Scriptures Here
discoursed. And That First Burning of Jerusalem (in Judges) might be as long,
After Their First Pentecost; As the Last Burning of it, was After the Last
Great Pentecost, in Act. 2.

Then again by Joash, in the 14th of Amaziah; just 666 years from Egypt: As
Samaria much about 777.

Then besieged by Senacherib, in the 14th of Hezekiah: 666 years, before it was
Taken again by Herod. As by Pompey, 666 years from the Assyrians first coming
on Israel: And the Temple sacked by Crassus (slain at Abraham's Haran;) 666
years after Hezekiahs Death. As by Antiochus, 666 years from Joash sacking it
666 from Egypt: and by the Babylonians, just 666, before its Last Sack, by the
Romans.

To whom 666, is also very signal, from the very Building of Rome: coming up
with Hezekiah; Born of Ahaz, but 12 years old; which in page 149 is Two, and 75
for 57, in This Sum printed.

These Times are also cleared by the Measures of Both Temples, with Herod's
also; and the Times of Nabonassar, and of Rome; through all the latter part of
This Discourse; from page 196. to 380. where This First Part ends.

Which, though now presented as One Continued Discourse, was many: and at
several times, interrupted also, by Questions and Objections: with other
matters interwoven; which may come, in the following Parts. With Music also
sometimes, heard at distance, As Harpers, or Melodious Voices, with Theorboes,
or other Instruments.

Some of the Hymns, that could be Taken, but abrupt, and ^ost by Translation,
seemed Thus.

Divine Sophia! Though I spraul in Clay;
Yet Thou art near allied: and for a Day
Of Woe, Made of Woman. Reach out thy skirt:
Bow down thine Hemm: For, It can Heal my Heart.
Vouchsafe to know me; and to let me know
Thee, When thou have thy Blackest Mask: and though
My guilt present thee Frowning, Let me see,
The Frowns I fear, are Love, that Vaileth thee:
Made under That most Royal Law of Love,
That bids thee Love us Here, as Those above:
Thy Neighbor As thy self. And who is He?
The Stranger: Any Man, in Misery.
It Is Little Love, to Love our Like, or Friend;
And Less, to Love one Lovely; Fair; and Kind:
All Sinners may do This, and Hypocrites.
Thy Law is, Love thine Enemy, that fights,
And Hates, Reviles, and Offers All Despites.
Yet if he Want; Or if, his Ass, but stray:
Thou say, Relieve him, Lead him to his way.
Nor may we stay for Tears: But Misery
Must melt, our Eyes, and Heart, to Sympathy.
How dwells, Else, the Love of God?
I am That Behemoth! That Beast that stray's;
That Ishmael! Wild Asses Colt, that bray's,
For want of Fodder.
Thou art sent to Seek, and Help, and Save,
All Lost; and Needy, That No Helper have.
To Comfort All that Mourn: To Sacrifice,
For every One that Errs; or is Unwise.
And to Redeem their Soul; Their Precious Soul!
From All Deceit and Violence.
Thou have Received Gifts: Then Freely Give.
It makes thee Blessed more; then to Receive.
And Thou have Gifts for Rebbels! And Thy Breast,
By Flowing always Out; is more increast.
And every little Drop, that falls over,
Is so Precious, that it can recover,
Any fainting, swooning, Heart: and can stretch out
My Narrow Soul; As All the Heavens about.
Thou art gone Over All, that Thou might fill,
All Things with Good. Then do his Holy Will
That sent thee; with Eternal Love, to Dwell
In us; to Conquer Wrath, and Death, and Hell;
As David Saul.
To Break the Serpents Head;
And All his Works, and Power: To raise the Dead;
And make All new: Which Thou have also Promised
Upon thy ^rone: and Lifted up, to Draw
All Men To Thee.
Then Do it, As Thy Law
Requires of All. My Son! Give me thy Heart!
Do Heartily! And Do not Act a Part.
Nor offer with an Evil Eye; lest All,
Abhor Thy Dainties. Do,
To All men, As thou would be Done unto.
Or if thou Hate Us, Love thy Fathers Name,
With All thy Might: and Propagate his Fame:
And Manifest his Love; As Thou have said;
'Twas written in Thy Heart; and seen, and Read,
Of All that Read Thy Words.
But do the same:
Do it again; it is sweet! Declare his Name,
In us: We shall believe: Thou will not cease,
Till Thou have brought Us All to Rest in Peace.
Thy Children; and thy Servants; Handmaids Child,
The Strangers in Thy Gates; and Cattle wild
Must Rest, the Rest of God; and Sabbath keep.
Then see our Woeful Miseries! and Weep
With All that Weep. And let thy Bowels yearn
To Pity; and thy Patience make us Learn,
Its perfect Work.
And when, we Most, thee Grieve;
O Then, Most sweetly, Teach us to Believe
And know, Thy Heart is Love.
And when, we Hear
Thy Loudest Thunders; and do feel, or fear,
Thy smartest Lightnings; Make us sweetly Bow,
And silently adore; and pay the Vow,
We made thee in our Youth, or fears;
And Pray,
And Praise, for what and whom, we ought or May:
While in us Praying Thou do say the same.
Our Heavenly Father! Hallowed be thy Name;
Thy Kingdom Come: and let Thy Will be Done,
On Earth; As it is in, Thy Heavenly Throne.
Give us, this Day, the Bread, we need, to Live;
And As, We Debtors; So do Us, Forgive.
Into Temptation, Lead us not; But Free
Us from The Evil, Evil One.
For unto Thee
Belongs Kingdom, Power, and Majesty:
Through All Eternity, Eternity.
THE Translator also being a Stranger, would bespeak his pardon, if in any
thing his Language shall not suit the Reader, or the Subject; which yet he
hops may be the more excusable, because he durst not hide some particulars of
this following discourse: which it may be some after ages may improve; or at
least excuse the Authors well meaning, in describing some of the many things he
met in so strange a way. So much speaking the goodness and bounty of God, the
great Giver, with the Liberal hand, upbraiding none, nor accepting Persons, but
in all Nations devising how to keep his Banished from perishing (as the woman
of Tekoa spoke to David;) and still accepting and rewarding those that fear and
diligently seek him, hoping in his goodness through Jesus Christ, the only
way of pleasing him: to whom be given, as of right belongs, Kingdom, Power
and Glory, through all ages, for ever more. Amen.

Touching the Author, it may be, we should not ask or enquire his Name, Nation
or Quality, seeing himself so Silent in it: and it may be as unlawful to pry
into others secrets (especially of their mind and spirit) as to unseal a
Letter, break open an house, or discover that which is committed to ones
greatest Trust. Yet by some passages, he seems to intimate his Parents
Christian and Religious, who bred him tenderly (and yet strictly) in the best
way they could, both in Learning and Religion; which seemed to have taken a
deeper impression in his tender years, then he well retained afterward, in the
crowd of this World and worldly employments, both in War and Peace, with many
Civil Relations. In all which he found himself so much entangled, beyond his
expectation, or desire, that for some years together, it seems he wrestled with
something within him, that often moved him to a more retired life; which yet
seemed to fly from him, the more he pursued it.

About the height or greatest heat of the late Plague in Naples, having lost
his Father, with other near and dear Relations, he became so disconsolate, that
in a sad forlorn manner, he wandered a while, rather then Traveled, all alone:
till among other places, coming at length too near the great City of Rome, in
that contagious season, when he hoped for some little rest, he fell into great
danger of Death among some strict searches, for suspected Persons, from
infected places.

But by great mercy, escaping that danger also, he was yet it seems so followed
by the al-seeing eye, that he was scarce got out of sight of Civita Vechia (or
some other place about that City, whence he might escape by Sea,) But in a
terrible storm and Tempest, he was also seized and arrested with many privy
Seals on his Conscience, in most unutterable pangs of fear, Terror, and amazed
Horror; with a most heavy weight of guilt, from all his former course of life,
which then lay gnawing on him, with a grim vizage of death (that King of fears)
staring and gaping on him, with its open jaws, ready to devour him.

This grew up to that height at length (the storm still lasting and increasing)
that there needed no other Process or witness, Judges or Jury, to Indict,
arreign, condemn and execute this Malefactor, but Himself, and his own hands in
his own bowels; had not some overruling secret Power restrained him, or
prevented opportunities.

Which ere long yet, might seem to be offered, when he heard the sad doleful
shreekings of his fellow passengers, while All at once saw their hopes and ship
broken together, spliting on a scraggie Rock; where they all bid adieu, to
themselves and Time; Now lanching out as they all thought, into the boundless
Ocean of Eternity.

Wearied with expectance and pursuit of death, (which they feared, and he
wished, as a little pauze to that Horror, which he judged worse than Death,)
rather then struggling for life; he lay gasping on the top of a scrag, somewhat
higher then his fellows: where those waves that had cast him up, seemed to
leave him a while, as stepping back a little, in regret, rather then pity;
that with greater and renewed force, as he was like enough to fear, they might
return again to assault and afflict him.

In these hoping fears, and strength enough to recollect so much of his
bewildred reason, as to think he yet lived, though he knew not how or where: a
grave aged Person came, or was rather sent from some higher power that had seen
and pitied him it seems, as having been a mournful spectator of that shipwreck.

After some real expressions of most cordial sympathy with his sad forlorn
condition (which came out in sighs, and groans and Tears, rather than words:)
the grave Hermit (for such he seemed) carried, rather then led him, into his
Cell, which was hard by the place, and in the same Rock, where the proud
swelling waves had been commanded so to leave him.

As he was preparing such repast, as that distance from the World could afford,
he perceived such a mien and carriage, with other characters, in his wearied
Guest, as made him much guess of his native Country and Education: to which
therefore he suited his Language, as he judged likest to be understood by his
Stranger. Who yet replied little, but so many sighs and broken groans only, as
with piercing looks, might intimate he was very sensible of his goodness and
compassion; but that it could not avail him now, since he was become the most
wretched object of the Creators wrath, and the whole Creations scorn and hatred.

There needed no more to melt the good Fathers heart, and make his bowels yern
over his Strangers soul and spirit, more then before on his broken and
distressed body. Yet it was some comfort to discern such a sense of his sore,
and what it was. For which also he was the better prepared, by the like
workings and sufferings in his own spirit: which by many years experience of
much affliction and sorrow, had been taught to sympathize with all dejected
spirits, and to long much for their cure and healing. To which therefore he now
soon applied himself, after some few questions, only to discover more clearly
the breadth and depth of the wound; that so he might more perfectly discern
what Teincts, Plasters, or other remedies, were proper for his our.

The poor Soul had very few words to answer any question; not that he would
not, but he could not, speak his grief, and sorrows of a heart too full to vent
it self, in ought but Horror and amazement: when a necessity of Breathing
sometimes, forced out such sighs and groans, as otherwise were unutterable. In
those breathing pawses, when he had not strength enough to weep more, his eyes
and spirit, rather then words, expressed such an ingenuous willingness to
speak his heart, without any reserve (or such shinesse, as is usual to
strangers) that the Father had no need to press him to Confession: which he
waved rather, seeing his poor Guest ready enough to pour out his soul, when
ever he could, and in some things which he thought not meet to hear: much less
to press him, to All particulars, which might occasion such Horror, as was
like enough to overwhelme his soul and body both; so that he thought it very
requisite to apply Cordials as soon as he might; seeing him ready to faint, and
swoon away, in his spirit, almost every moment.

Here the Author craveth pardon, if he be forced to be more confused, then
becomes so great a Subject. But the poor soul being then in great sorrow and
confusion of spirit, could not keep method, in asking questions, or returning
answers: or be clear in stating their discourse. It being written also some
pretty time after; so that he cannot be punctual, in saying this was first, and
this next: His intent being matter and substance, much rather then Manner, or
circumstance. Nor must the Reader wonder, if he sometimes find a long discourse
of many things added together, which came out by degrees, at several times and
occasions, as their mutual discourse, or dialogue invited or lead, rather then
drew them: although one part of the Dialogue (Questions and Objections) be
omitted now.

He is also desired to consider, All things are better much in their Original,
or native dress and Language, then they well can be in a Translation: and from
such a Language as constrains the Translator to conjecture (that I say not
divine) at the Authors meaning in some places. Where happily also, a broken line
and points, may hint the Original there imperfect, or somewhat wanting. Which
yet possibly might be supplied from some other copy; which is not yet found:
and the characters of this, in some places also, scarce Legible.

Yet All things material, and of consequence, are as faithfully represented and
expressed, as they well may be, from such a discourse as sighs, and great pangs
of sorrow (and perhaps also some other causes) make abrupt, and broken, more
then is usual: especially in the first Book; which is therefore presented by
way of Abstract (rather then a literal Translation:) and as the Ancients did
their Parables.

To all the poor soul said against it self, it was replied, to this purpose.
All this may arise very much from mistakes of God and your self; and although
you cannot have too great and high thoughts of God in any thing; yet you may
have too great thoughts of your self, in every thing: yea in your very sins.

God has made all our hearts so much alike, that there is perhaps, no great
difference in Temptations, Thoughts or Actions, but what is common unto men.
And to think our selves better or worse then other men, may be from Ignorance
of our own and other men's heart; which is general and special, is so
desparately evil, and deceitful above all things, that it may be worst when we
think it best; and it may be best, when we judge it worst.

Yea, it may be great Pride, and no Humility, to judge one self a greater
sinner then others; from conceit of having greater Light, or Love, then our
neighbors have. Or, if you think you have more abused these, though not more
of these, then others; yet in this also you may be deceived: and God needs
not your Lie for him, or against your self in any thing. And if you judge
amiss of your self, God is so Holy and Just, that you never need fear that He
will confirm or execute your wrong Judgment.

And if you judge rightly of your self, you are not so miserable, as you
conceive your self; but as you do that which is one of the Highest and Hardest
Acts possible (which is to judge ones self rightly:) so you have one of the
Greatest Bbessings which God gives to the Sons of men, (or to his own Son:)
which is a right understanding of a right Judgment; which was the Great
Argument used by the greatest and best man that ever lived, to prove that he
was of God, and had His Spirit, and a Will also molded into His Holy Will: for
else, he says, he could not Judge Righteous Judgment. And who ever does this
of himself, and his own sins, is in a special manner, partaker of the Holy
Ghost; whose proper work is to convince us rightly of sin, Righteousness and
Judgment: and who ever judges himself rightly, shall not be judged of God.

Here he stopped, and sweetly bowed, and turned aside a little; but returned soon
again, looking as cheerful as he could well force himself: It being not very
easy, so to clear up his eyes and face, but that it might be seen (though he
hid it) that he had wept. Which also pierced his Guest; both to see the Fathers
affection, and his own misery. Who was still so unhappy as he some way
expressed) to be a burden to himself, and all he conversed with: supposing he
had grieved or displeased him by some of his expressions. But when the Good
Father perceived those thoughts, with a most sweet, tender and melting look, he
replied,

No my Dear Brother, no: you do not burden me at all; or in any thing
displease me. But as my general duty bids, or helps me in some measure, to
mourn with every one that mourns, and to weep with every one that weepeth; So
my particular respect and affection now forces me: if at least, it can be
force, upon a Fathers tender bowels, to yearn over his son; or a brother, over
his own dearly beloved brother.

Yet there is somewhat in You, that makes me melt in Joy, rather then sorrow:
tho it may be unutterable; for I cannot express it. I saw you were my
Neighbor at the first, as a Man: and so I found my self obliged (This is
Little and low) both to Love and Honor you; for that Image of God I ought to
acknowledge in you: and the great Law of Love, that commands Brotherly
kindness, bids us add Love also; yea and to strangers also: for the same
chapter that bids us Love our Neighbor as our self, bids us Love a stranger
also as we love our selves.

And among diverse reasons why we should love strangers, it is sometimes added,
Because God loves strangers. Yea and we are bid to entertain them so, As if
they were or might be Angels: seeing some had unawares so entertained Angels.

But now I see somewhat more in you: not only a Man, and my Neighbor, but a
Christian also; and my Dear and precious Brother: whom the Angels do attend,
and love, and honor, as a lively Image of their great Lord and Master Jesus
Christ. And how is it, that the Brother of my Lord thus comes to visit me?

And you are so far from having committed that great sin, against the Holy
Ghost (which you so much fear,) that you are still under the most gracious
workings of that Holy Spirit: Whose great work is to convince the world (even
the world, and not only the Apostles or Disciples, but the World) of Sin,
Righteousness and Judgment. which is also promised to the World, even to the
World: and is fulfilled in you, who are thus, under the convincing spirit of
Promise.

And it will also comfort you: for the same spirit that convinces, is also the
Comforter: and where it wounds, it heals: and when it has convinced both of
Sin, Judgment and Righteousness; (which is there promised;) it will also
comfort. It being the promise, or indeed the property and nature; yea and heart
of God, to heal and quicken whom he wounds and kills: which from Moses Song,
runs all along through the Psalms and Prophets: Who tell us, If he wound, he
will heal: Yea though he kill for two days. He will revive and quicken on the
Third. For he will turn again, and have compassion on us; because he delights
in mercy: though he cause grief for a while, and yet not willingly, or from his
heart, afflicts the children of men; which is his Strange work. But Mercy is
his Child, his Son; and comes as naturally from him, as a child from any
father: For he is the Father of Mercy; yea of a multitude of mani-fold Mercies:
which are also One with the heart of Christ: for, He is the only begotten of
the Father: and yet His Father, is also the Father of Mercies: so that Christ
and Mercies lay together in one womb; and indeed are the same: for, how else is
Christ the Only begotten of the Father?

And you are under the tender mercies of Christ, even that Christ who is Mercy
it self: and this holy Spirit of Promise will certainly be your Comforter:
being already I see your Remembrancer, to bring to mind his words, one of his
proper Works: having also convinced you of Righteousness enough in him,
(Everlasting Righteousness) to satisfy God, and sanctify you.

And I hear you not only acknowledge him to be the Son of God, and sent of
God, to be the Savior of the World; but also you are convinced of sin, because
you have not believed on him (the great promise of that Comforter,) and are
made most truly and highly to value, defire, long and pray for him, and To him:
which you could not, but by the gracious workings of that Holy Spirit of
promise; whose great work was, and still is, to set up Christ, as he set up his
Father.

Which Character given by Christ, of his own spirit, is repeated also by the
Apostles. And St. John gives it as the Touchstone whereby we should try the
spirits; saying, Every spirit that confesses that Jesus is come in the flesh,
is of God: and again, he that confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, dwells
in God, and God in him: and again, whosoever believes that Jesus is the
Christ, is born of God: and again, He that is born of God, sins not, (that
sin) or works not sin: (which is a common phrase in the Language of the Law
of Moses, and other places of Scripture:) Does not sin, So, but that the seed
of God still remains in him; as the sap of an Oak or Teile, when it casts
its leaves: as the Prophet Isaiah, in that most remarkable Chap. cited in the
six first books of the New Testament. For the Jews rejection and return again,
as an emblem of the whole Worlds Restoring or Resurrection: it being plain in
the Prophets, and our Savior also, that God would never deal worse with any,
then with that Nation. And the Prophet Jeremiah says, he that believes shall
never cease from giving fruit, and the Psalmist, that his leaves shall never
quite fall off: and Christ says, that he which bears any fruit in him, shall
be purged, that he may bear more. In him, is all our fruit found: and in him we
go in and out, and still find fresh pasture: and he that once drinks of His
living waters, never thirsts more; or is quite dry, but still finds a
fountain in him, flowing up to Eternal Life.

And St. Paul says, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the Dead thou shall
be saved. For which also, he cites two great Prophets, Isaiah and Joel; which
is cited also by St. Peter, in his first public Sermon: For whosoever shall
call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. For this Jesus is Lord of All,
(even David's Lord also,) and Rich unto All, that call upon him.

And Paul also says, that no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost. (Which was often no little stay to one I sometime knew, in great
anguish, fearing the good Spirit had forsaken him) And to all that so
acknowledge Christ for their Lord, and as their Lord worship him (as the Psalms
bid us) and call upon him; the same Apostle says, that no temptation comes but
common unto man; And that God is faithful and will not suffer them to be
Templed above their strength; but with the Temptation will provide an Issue,
that they may be able to bear it: Which is also the last Petition in Our Lords
Prayer, and so sure to be granted.

And to All, so acknowledging Christ, St. John says, If we confess our sins,
He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness; And to All such he says, If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation
for our sin, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole World; which
are some of the sweetest places in the Bible, and belonging to All that call on
Jesus of Nazareth; which I see you do.

And to All such, and therefore to you also, St. Paul (the great Teacher of the
Gentiles) writes, as from God in Heaven, and his Son Jesus, the Judge of all
men and Angels also, that if we judge our selves (as I see you do) we shall not
be judged by him, which is one of the greatest and highest Prerogatives, or
Royalties, a mortal man can be capable of.

The Jews speak of it, as one of the first things delivered by God to Moses,
and by him to Joshua (and so down through all their Elders and Wise men in all
ages) to be Slow to judge, or very slow in judging; and it is one of the
greatest and most difficult things in the world, to be a righteous Judge, in
any matters of concernment, more of our selves, and yet more in matters of
another world, and yet most of all for all eternity; so far above our sense and
reason also, that we know not how to guess about it but by Revelation.

The great thing foretold of Christ in the Psalms and Prophets, is, That he was
to be the great and most supreme Judge of all Persons in all Causes. Which we
might track through all the Bible up as high as Enoch, Behold the Lord comes
with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all, etc: and for
this he received a most solemn Commission, and was fitted, and filled also with
the spirit of Wisdom, Knowledge, Understanding, Council, Power, and Fear ofthe
Lord; yea to make him very quick or tender in the Fear of God, that he might
judge righteous judgment.

And this was one great reason of his being made Man, that he might be our
Peer, and an equal daies-man between God and us, that should not make us afraid
with his Terror when he judged us: it being so consonant to Reason and to
Scripture also, that the Power Legislative, Judicial, and Executive, should be
in distinct persons, and run in distinct Channels; God would have it so in
himself also, and came out in the person of the Father, giving the Law, (though
indeed the Free persons that receive and submit, (even the Law-takers) are the
great Lawmakers:) But the Son is the Judge, and the Spirit, executes his
judgments.

For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son;
that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. For as the
Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself: (and the Son quickneth whom he will:) and has given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

Jesus Christ therefore being the great and only Judge, (having all judgment
committed to him) no man may pre sum to make himself a Judge, or take it on
him, but when Christ commits it; and then only As he commands and
directs. Let me therefore first desire you to consider, that you run not on a
Praemunire, or be Antichristian, or a Traitor, against the main office of
Christ, while you judge your self, or any other; for, who has made you a Judge
or a divider?

If you say Christ has bid you judge your self, you must be sure of your
Commission; that you have it, and can read and understand it also. For his own
general rule, out of his own mouth, was, Judge not, that ye be not judged. And
he that takes upon him to judge and condemn another, or so much as to think
evil of his neighbor (and it is worse of a stranger whom he knows not,)
speaks evil of the Law, and judges, or condemns the Law; yea, and it may
be, the Lawmakers also.

And though Christ did promise first to his twelve Apostles (Judas also, it
seems, being among them) that they, having followed him in the Regeneration,
should sit on twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. And
afterward (even after his last supper, before his death) he said to them, Ye
are they which have continued with me in my Temptations, and I appoint you a
Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me; that you may eat and drink at my
table, in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel,
(there being then also, it seems, twelve with him, and so Judas also, though
Saint John says, he went out immedately after the sop.)

Yet this was not to be, till he himself was to receive his Kingdom, and As he
did receive it at his Fathers hand and appointment; which was not till after
Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension to his glory.

Then, he received gifts for men, and for the Rebel also: Then, and not till
then, he gave out the Spirit, which was not to be given, while he was not
glorified: Or till he was exalted, and set on the right hand of God, and made a
Prince and a Savior, for to Cive repentance and remission of sins.

Nay, he never speaks of himself as a King or Judge, till his second coming:
Being (as himself said) to go a great journey, to receive a Kingdom, and after
a long time to come again, and call his servants to account. And if the wicked
servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin,
so much as once begin, to beat or strike his fellow servants (for the Lords
servant must be gentle toward all, and be no striker) when he shall but begin
to strike; his Master will come when he looks not for him, and will cut him
asunder, and give him his portion with Hypocrites, the Doom of Antichrist, who
thus took on him, so before his time to sit, and rule, and judge, before his
master gave him power or leave, or indeed was come to sit and reign, and judge
in his own Person.

Which was not till other Thrones be cast down, or set, as we read in Daniel
and the Revelation. For he must sit, at his Fathers Right hand, till all his
enemies be put under him; and then his Throne and Judgment shall sit: and
judgment shall be given to them also that shall sit with him: who still called
himself the Son of man, and never a King, or Prince, or Judge, till That
Coming and That judgment.

And then he says, They shall see the Son of man come in the Clouds with great
power and glory: and when you see those things, (and that sign of the Son of
Man coming in the Clouds;) Then know the kingdom of God is come, even at the
very doors: Then, and not till then; it is come, actually come, and till that
time but coming; and he bids us pray, and say, Thy Kingdom come.

And then, shall the Son of man send forth his Angels, (which before he called
his Fathers Angels, and the holy Angels,) now, His Angels; the Son of Man shall
send forth His Angels, and they shall gather out of His Kingdom (which is Then
his Kingdom) all things which offend, and them which do iniquity.

And then, and not till then, the Son of Man shall sit upon the Throne of
glory; and then the King shall say to them at his Right hand; and again the
King shall answer them. But to the goats at his left hand, He shall say, (he
says not, the King shall say; as if he were only a King to the sheep, or they
only were members of his Kingdom; but to the goats he says) Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For as
the Son of Man has his Angels, so the Devil has his Angels also: of which we
read again in the Revelation.

Where, as also in Paul's great charge to Timothy, and several other Texts of
Scripture, we read of his Kingdom joined or annexed to his second coming or
appearing again after his Ascension, at which time he was asked, If he then
would restore the Kingdom unto Israel; which he does not deny, but waveth only,
forbidding their curious prying into times and seasons, which the Father yet
had kept so secret, that the Son then knew them not, but had them afterward,
it seems, by Revelation.

Which God gave him also, to show unto his servants, unto whom he says it was
given to know the secrets, or the mysteries of that Kingdom, and to search them
out also, by that Spirit, which was given, to make known the things which were
freely given them of God; yea and to search the hidden Depths or Baths of God:
as that Apostle says, who also tells us, The natural man believes not the
things of God, or of the Spirit of God, nor can he know them, being only
discerned spiritually.

And no man can so much as see the Kingdom of God, till horn again of that
Spirit; which the World; as such, neither knows nor receives; but it is
promised to the World also, and to convince the world also; and when a worldly
carnal man is born again of the Spirit, and so made Spiritual, then he also
judges all things, but himself is judged of no man.

Nor may any man judge another man, or any person whatsoever, (or can judge
himself rightly,) till he be made spiritual; and so fitted by Christ the great
and only Judge, of all Causes, and of all Persons.

And to whom, and in what cases, Christ commits this Prerogative of judging
either themselves or others; I know not any has declared better then Saint
Paul in diverse places of the same Epistle.

But as Christ gave that general rule, Judge not according to appearance; and
then surely we may not judge things that appear not, or things of another
world, and for all Eternity: Whereas the Wise man says, A man cannot know Love
or Hatred, and much less, Eternal Love or Hatred, by all before him, or
appertaining to him:

So Saint Paul gives us that general Rule, Judge nothing, even nothing at
all, before the time: That is, as himself adds, Till the Lord come. (For his
coming is the time of judging, and his Kingdom: as we have seen from that
Apostle, and from many other scriptures.) And I would to God your time were
come, that you might judge and reign, that we might reign also.

But the Kingdom of God, and this judging also, is not in word, but in Power:
As our Lord taught us, Thine is the Kingdom, the Power and Glory. And in the
Revelation, Now is salvation and strength, the Kingdom of God, and Power of his
Christ; for the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down: For Christ also makes
the kingdom of God to be a Power to cast out Satan by the spirit or finger of
God; and when Judas was gone out (as a Type of Satan or Antichrist) he says,
Now is the Son of man glorified, and God glorified in him.

And so Christ said, Some standing there should not taste of death, till they
saw the Kingdom of God come with Power. Which another Evangelist expresses by
the Son of man coming in his Kingdom. And S. Pet. (One of the Eyewitnesses of
that glorious Transfiguration which was an Emblem or preludium to his Kingdom)
calls it The Power and coming of our Lord Jesus. And himself being asked if
he would restore the Kingdom, bad them stay, till they received Power from on
High, or the Power of the Holy Ghost coming on them, which he also calls the
Promise of the Father. For the Spirit of Promise, which is to be given to all
the Lord shall call, yea to be poured out on all flesh, is called by Esaias, the
Spirit of Power: and it is so observed of them that received it in the Acts,
that they were full of the Holy Ghost and Power.

And Saint Paul also calls it a spirit of Power, and Love, and of a sound
mind; and says, he came with demonstration of the Spirit and of Power: And
again, when you meet with my spirit, and the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ.

That this was a Judging Power, is plain by all that Chap. speaking of casting
out, and judging them which are within, while God only judges them that be
without.

And in the next Chapter, Do you not know, The Saints shall judge the world?
Are you not worthy then, to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not, that we
shall judge Angels? how much more, things that pertain to this life? Set ye
them to judge, who are least esteemed in the Church? Is there not a wise man
among you? not onethat is able to judge between his Brethren? And in that very
Chapter (you press so much against your self) he says, Judge in your selves,
Is it comely that a woman pray to God uncovered? And of their Church-meetings he
says, If ye speak with Tongues, speak by two or three at most; but if ye
Prophecy, do it by two or three at the least (for so seems the opposition) and
let the others judge: For you may all Prophecy, and you should all desire
earnestly, and pray, that you may Prophecy (even above all other spiritual
Gifts;) but it must be in order, and not confusion, while some Judge: and still
the spirit of all Prophets are subject to the Prophets; both old, and now also;
while you be in Churches, you must keep Church Order; and your spirits must be
subject to the Prophets, before you, and among you also.

But of the Sacrament he says, You must here Judge your selves; and be not
concluded by others Judgment. But let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat and drink: For, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation (or at least Judgment) to himself: and for this cause are many weak
and sick, and many sleep: For, If we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged; but when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should
not be condemned with the World. Which is one of the most sweet and comfortable
places in the whole Bible; as before we observed, in this Epistle also about
Temptation.

Which also may, and should comfort you: So far are you from being condemned,
as you think, by God, who will never confirm or execute any wrong judgment,
though you give it against your self. And yet you should be tender how you
judge your self unworthy of Eternal Life, which is the free gift of God; least
the spirit say (as Paul and Barnabas to the Jews, Seeing you put the Gospel
from you, and judge your selves unworthy of Eternal Life, Lo we turn to the
Gentiles. But if you judge a wrong judgment, God is so merciful and just also,
as not to confirm it.

And if you judge Rightly, you are so far from being so wretched and miserable
as you think your self, that you are one of the happiest men in the World; and
not only still under the gracious Spirit of Promise convincing you ofsin, and
also of righteousness, setting up Christ in you, and making you bow and long
for him; but also receiving from him one of the greatest and highest gifts
possible; which is a right Judgment, and a power and privilege to judge your
self (the hardest and highest work in the world:) so that you never shall be
judged by the Lord.

A Royalty not given unto any, but the Kings and Princes, or firstborn of
Jesus Christ; his Churches, as at Corinth, or the members of them, or such as
are sanctified in Christ Jesus; called to be Saints: and to such as in any
place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ the Lord, both theirs and ours: as I
hear, and see, and know you do.

And therefore I pronounce it, written to you also, as a letter from Heaven, or
the Throne and Heart of God, in Jesus Christ our Lord and yours; whom you so
call upon, and trust in. For, how could you call upon Him, if you had not
believed on him? As you may read in the Tenth of the Epistle to the Romans,
compared with the beginning of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, which we
now speak of.

Nor do I wonder Paul should put such a stresse upon calling on Christ, when
(by his own experience, and observation of all Christians) he had found it the
great Badge of a Christian; and the greatest Character he could well express
of one taught and drawn by God to come to Jesus Christ; who (though the
Mediator to God) yet indeed is the end also of all the Teaching and Drawing of
the Father; which I will therefore on this occasion more largely insist upon,
as one of the greatest and sweetest things I can declare to you, especially in
this great hour of darkness and temptation.

When Paul saw Stephen the first Martyr stoned (consenting to his death, and
standing by, keeping the clothes of them which stoned him,) he might easily
observe and remember, that he died, calling on Jesus Christ, and saying, Lord
Jesus receive my spirit. And again kneeling down, he cried, Lord lay not this
sin to their charge; and saying this, he fell asleep.

He might very well wonder that in the very Infancy of Christian Religion, any
could so quickly speak and pray to Christ: and that also, with such courage and
boldness, as daring to die in it; and to desire no other rest or happiness,
then, that Jesus only should receive his spirit, and forgive his stoners.
Doubtless it could not but take deep impression in so wise a man as Paul or
Saul was.

And so it seems it did, for presently he went and got a Commission from the
Rulers to bring bound to Jerusalem all that he should find calling on Jesus.
Which he could not but see a most distinguishing Character between Jews and
Christians; for the Jews also called on God; but the Christians only called on
Jesus Christ: and by that character he might easily discern who were only Jews,
and who were also Christians; and so bind All, he found calling on Christ.

And when Christ appeared to Ananias in a vision, he bad him Enquire in the
house of Judas: Which we may consider again, when we see Paul rising up in the
room of Judas; and of Saul also, being of the same Tribe, much about a Thousand
years after David, that is Love, had cast him out, and bound him up; as Satan
must be bound for a Thousand years, and then perhaps struck down, as Saul here
was, by fire from heaven; Saul also signifying Hell, or the Grave; and so might
well be an Emblem of Satan, which is the very Phrase used by David, of Abishai;
to which Christ also might allude, when he called Peter Satan.

And when Ananias (or the Lords grace) was sent by Christ to look out Saul, he
said, Lord, I hear he has authority to bind all that call on thy Name: To
which Christ replied, Go, for he is a chosen Vessel to bear my Name to the
Gentiles, and to Kings, and the children of Israel (though the Jews shall
reject and persecute him; yet he shall bear my Name even to the Ten Tribes of
Israel,) and I will show him how great things he must suffer for my Name, even
for my Name, which now he fights against.

And when Ananias came, he laid his hands upon him, saying, Brother Saul, the
Lord, even Jesus, who appeared to thee in the way, has sent me, that thou
may receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. Adding also (as
Saint Paul observes, to the chief Captain and people of Jerusalem,) The God of
our fathers has chosen thee, that thou should know his Will, and see that
just One, and hear the voice of his mouth; for thou shall be his witness unto
all men. And now why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins (for even those that were baptized with the Holy Ghost and fire, like the
Apostles at Pentecost; yet were to be baptized with water also, as we see in
the History of Cornelius:) calling on the Name of the Lord.

And that it was the Lord Jesus, on whose Name he bad Paul pray, and that he
prayed to him, is very plain by that which Paul himself adds to those words,
Arise and call upon the Name of the Lord: And while I prayed in the Temple, I
fell in a Trance, and saw him, saying to me, Have and get thee out of
Jerusalem, for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me. And I said,
Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every Synagogue those that
believed on thee: And when the blood of thy Martyr Stephen was shed, I also was
standing by and consenting to his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew
him. And he said unto me, Depart, for I will send thee far hence unto the
Gentiles. As before, Unto my people Israel.

Which may be one among other, diverse other, Reasons why I may think the Ten
Tribes scattered among them, were then also called Gentiles; yea and that they
might be even some of those Gentiles, while they were to be called Loammi, and
Loruhama; though afterward the very same people were to be called Ammi, and
the people of God; as an Emblem also that the world should come to be the Lords
Ammi and Ruhama, from Loammi and Loruhama. Israel being but the first fruits of
the world, as we may clear anon.

And there are many things which makes me a little suspect, that some Gentile
Nations (as they seem) may be some of the Ten Tribes; or at least the posterity
of Abraham by Keturah, or by Ishmael, if not by Isaak also through Esau;
especially the old Saxons, and those Northern people, whose very Laws, Customs
and Language savor so much of the Hebrew in very many things, and words,
besides their common use of A and The for Articles, with very many
Monosillables, and words written with chapter gh. gn. cn. or kn. th. dh. wh. wr.
fr. And many others, plainly Hebrew sounds.

In another place also Paul giving an account of this matter to Agrippa the
King, says, I verily thought, I ought to do many things contrary to the Name
of Jesus of Nazareth; which I did also, having received authority from the
chief Priests; and I punished them in every Synagogue, and compelled them to
blaspheme; (styling himself also a Blasphemer:) And being exceeding mad against
them, etc. But being stricken down, and hearing a voice speaking, I said, Who
are thou Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; But arise and
stand upon thy feet, for I have appeared to thee for this purpose, to make thee
a Minister and a Martyr, both of these things which thou have seen, and those
in which I will appear unto thee; Delivering thee from the people (of the Jews)
and from the Gentiles unto whom now I send thee: To open their eyes, and to
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified, by faith which is in me.

Which I cite so largely, because I take it for the best compendium of the
Gospel, and a true Ministers Commission that I remember. And that phrase of
Faith in me (not only on me, but in me) seems not by chance, but so
considerable, that Saint Paul often uses it in diverse places, especially to
the Galatians, where he calls it Faith of Christ, or Christ's faith; as if he
would say, He lived, and was saved by faith indeed; but that which was in
Christ rather then in himself; or Christ's faith, rather then His: as if Christ
by believing (for he was justified by faith also in a true sense) did not only
carry out himself, but all his Members also, from the Grave, and Death, and
Hell, to life and glory.

And to sum up all I have, or should deliver, of Paul's observing prayers unto
Jesus Christ, it is said in the Ninth of the Acts, That when he Preached Christ
in the Synagogues, that he is the Son of God; all that heard him, were amazed,
and said, Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this Name? and
came hither that he might bring them bound to the chief Priests? So that it is
clear, it was in Paul's account the great Badge of a Christian, and the
distinguishing Character of Christian profession.

And it is worth observing, How he uses that Name, and what a stresse he put
upon it, all along his life and writings. Having obtained help of God (says
he) I continue witnessing to small and great, saying no other things then what
Moses and the Prophets said; that Christ should suffer, and should be the first
(the very first) that should rise from the Dead (though others might be raised
before him) and should show light unto the People, and to the Gentiles.

Which also he cites to the Jews, in that most remarkable Sermon at Anioch,
Acts the Thirteenth (of the sure mercies or holy things of David, promised to
every one that thirsts, and comes to the waters; and many other
particulars:) concluding with their turning to the Gentiles, as the Lord
commanded saying, I have set thee to be a Light to the Gentiles, and for
salvation to the utmost ends of the earth.

And the Psalm adds, To them also that are afar off in the seas, (and America
in the Hebrew may signify a People afar off; though I believe, that Phrase in
the Psalms may mean some farther, or mere lost, or miserable, then the poor
Americans.)

So old Simeon said, Christ was to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles (first to
lighten the Gentiles) and then to be the glory also to Israel, his people
Israel: Whence People often opposed to the Gentiles.

And another Simeon at the great Council, Acts 15. says, God put no difference
between them and us, purifying their hearts by faith: But we believe (says he)
that through the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved, even as
they.

Here Paul learned (or might learn) his Character, or proper mark he gives
them of his genuine Epistles; The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all: Which he wrote with his own hand, it seems, in all his true epistles.

From Antioch, Paul and Barnabas came to Iconium, and there spoke boldly in the
Lord, which gave Testimony to the Word of his Grace, granting signs and
wonders to be done by their hands. And returning again to Antioch (and other
places) confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue
in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom
of God (which St. Matthew only, calls the Kingdom of Heaven:) and ordaining
them Elders in every Church, praying with fasting, they commended them to the
Lord Jesus, in whom they believed.

Thence coming up, to the Counsel, at Jerusalem, they there declared the
Miracles and Wonders, God had wrought by them, among the Gentiles: where James
(whom Paul calls an Apostle, and so Peter also owned him as chief among the
Brethren, in the twelfth of the Acts, which tells us before of Herod's killing
the Apostle James:) discourses of Gods promise to raise up the Tabernacle of
David, that the residue of men might seek after the Lord; and all the Gentiles
upon whom My Name is called, says the Lord, (even Jesus) who does all these
things.

For we may generally observe that by Lord (especially where distinct from God)
they mean the Lord Jesus: who is Lord of All, as St. Paul to the Romans, and
rich unto All that call upon him: and we have but one God, the Father, and One
Lord, Christ Jesus.

And to Him, the Apostles, and whole Church, prayed, at the Election of
Matthias; calling him the Lord Jesus; and then set two, saying, Thou Lord that
know or searchest the Hearts of All men: the proper character of Christ, as
he writes to Thiatyra, all the Churches shall know that I search the reins and
hearts: and that also as God Man: for as God only, he need not search our
Hearts.

From that great Counsel, It seemed good to the Apostles and Elders, with the
whole Church, to send chosen men, with their beloved (who had hazzarded their
lives, for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ) Barnabas and Paul. For, the Holy
Ghost sets Barnabas generally before Saul, and often also before Paul: which
name is not given him, till he taught Sergius Paulus that prudent Roman
Governor. Assaying to go into Bithynia, the Spirit of Jesus did not permit
them: for so it is read in some of the best copies.

At Philippi (called by a man of Macedonia, in a vision) Paul meets a Damsel
possessed with a spirit of Divination, (tho she cried, These men are the
servants of the most High God, which show unto us the way of salvation; For, an
evil spirit may preach true Doctrine:) but Paul being grieved, turned and said
to the spirit, I command thee in the Name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her;
and he came out the same hour.

And on this, being beaten and cast in prison, and there loosed at midnight, to
the Trembling Jayler they say, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall
be saved, and thy house. Thine House also: Even as salvation came to Zacheus
House also, when to him; and to Lydias Household also, when to her.

At Ephesus, finding certain Disciples, they were baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus. Which seems equal therefore to the name of Father, Son and Holy
Ghost: for the Apostles were commanded to baptize in the Name of Father, Son
and Holy Ghost; and yet they did it in the Name of Christ only: and no wonder

For, the full latitude, or fullness of the godhead dwelt in Him: and there is
no other God, but in him, and one with him; and therefore he that sees him,
sees the Father also; and he that worships him, worships the Father also; and
him that serves him, will his Father honor, as himself says; and by
consequence him that prays to him; which a great piece of worship and service.

He is thy Lord, Worship him: as the Psalmist to the Spouse, or whole Church;
which therefore prays unto him, all along the Canticles, and Revelation also,
where the Bride or whole Church and Spouse of Christ, and the Spirit also,
prays to Him, saying, Come Lord Jesus.

When Paul had laid his hands on the Twelve Disciples also of the Gentiles at
Ephesus (which then might be the head of the Gentiles, and the first that
received an Epistle from Christ in the Revelation:) the Holy Ghost came upon
them, and they spoke with Tongues and Prophesied; as the Twelve Apostles at
Pentecost. To which also, Saint Paul seems plainly to allude, in the first
Chapter of his Epistle to that Church at Ephesus, or to the Saints there, and
faithful in Christ Jesus, as he styleth them, and not a Church; as at Corinth
and other places.

Some Vagabond Jews adjure evil spirits there, in the Name of Jesus, whom Paul
preaches; and the evil spirit answering, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but
who are you? and leaping beat them through the man possessed: Whence fear fell
on them all, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. As we read at the
close of that History, Acts 19.

At Miletus, calling the Elders from Ephesus also, most pathetically he
discourses, how for diverse years he had served the Lord Jesus among them, with
all humility of mind, and with many tears and temptations; testifying both to
Jews and Greeks Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. But none of these (troubles) move me, nor count I my life dear to me,
so I may finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of
the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God; even of the grace
of God.

And now I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of
God, shall see my face no more. And yet that he came after this also, again to
that very place, is probable, or certain, from his leaving Trophimus at Miletus
sick (in the 2. to Tim.) who now went with him to Jerusalem., Acts 21. 29. Or
shall we say, he was deceived, when from Rome also he wrote, to so many near
those countries, that he trusted to be given to their prayers, and to come to
them again. O how watchful must a good man be, least his own spirit rise too
much, with the true Spirit of God: or least the Envio us one sow Tares, with
the good man's Wheat.

And (when Agabus had bound his hands and feet with Paul's girdle) he says,
What mean you to weep and to break my heart? For I am ready not only to be
bound, but to die also, for the Name of the Lord Jesus. Then they ceased,
saying, The will of the Lord (that Lord) be done.

From Jerusalem, where he spoke often of that Name, and in it, and of praying
to it, as I observed before; he is brought by a dangerous Voyage and shipwreck
to Rome.

It is no sign that a man is out of the way, or not sent by God, or called by
him to a journey, when he meets with great storms, and danger of death, by
shipwreck, or otherwise. For the Lord met Moses in the Inn, and sought to, slay
him, in his way to Egypt: though he sent him thither, on so great an errand.

Noah brought rest to the World through the Flood, and many tossings in great
Waters; And we might have lost some of the sweetest portions of the Gospel, but
for such storms by Sea.

In one of them Christ is in the Ship, but asleep; and they wake him, crying,
Carest thou not, that we perish? And he soon took care, and rebuked the winds,
though blaming their unbelief, and fear with amazement: which is Peter's phrase
(to the Daughters of our good Mother Sara) and he might learn it from our
Savior, in their storms and fears, with such amazement: which is a phrase used
several times in the Gospel.

But does God take care of bodies? Will he not be more careful of our souls?
and pity them more? If we would cry (and wake him also, when he seems asleep,
about, or in us, and among us) and say to him, Master, carest thou not, that
our souls perish? Even those precious and Immortal souls, which thou seem to
value above the whole World, saying, What shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? It is said Our blood shall be precious in thy eyes; and shall not our
Souls be more precious? O we of little faith.

At another time, Our Savior did not only send away his Disciples, but
constrained them to go in a ship, when they might have gone another way: But
they would have sent away the poor people supperlesse from him; and when he had
supped them, He sends away his Hard Disciples to be tossed in the Sea, while he
blessed the poor people. In the fourth watch of the night, he shows himself
(God is nearer us in a storm, then we believe or Expect:) and he saw them
tossed, some pretty while it seems; but would not help them (or appear) till
the last watch: and then they are more afraid, and cried out, supposing it to
be an evil spirit. So easily may we mistake the kindness of God, and think him
to be the Devil, to devour us, even then when he comes in goodness to save us.
But he first rebukes their fears; and says, It is I, be not afraid. And when
Peter would venture out beyond his strength, and ready to sink, cried Save me,
I perish; He is moved with compassion, and immediately stretches out his hand,
and catches him, the very phrase used to the Hebrews, He caught not the nature
of Angels, but he caught the seed of Abraham: He suddenly reached out his hand,
and caught, as we snatch a thing perishing in fire or water: So he caught Peter
(As he would do us also; if in our fears and sinking, we would so cry out to
Him, Help Lord, I perish.) How quickly did he bring him into the Ship, and it,
with them all, safe in a calm to their wished Haven? O that men would praise
the Lord for his goodness, and wonderful kindness to the sons of men, as the
Psalmist repeats it several times in the 107. Psalm.

Such goodness and wonderful kindness did the Lord show to Paul also, in that
stormy voyage to Rome; wherein yet he did not only preserve Him safe, but all
his fellow passengers also: as he told him in a night vision: saying Fear not
Paul, thou must be brought to Caesar; and lo God has given thee all them which
sail with thee.

And when he came to Rome, he expounded and testified the Kingdom of God,
persuading them of Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the
Prophets. And for two years dwelt in an hired house, receiving All that came to
him, Preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the
Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence. As we read in the Acts.

That he also taught them to pray to Jesus Christ, is plain enough from the
stresse he puts on it, in his Epistle to those very Romans, in the tenth
chapter; Where, to believing with the heart, he joins also confession with the
mouth: and explaineth it by praying to him: For it is written, Whosoever shall
call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved. For the same Lord over All is
Rich unto All that call upon him. But how shall they call on Him, in whom they
have not believed?

And the first Epistle to the Corinthians, is directed to the Church of God at
Corinth; to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints; with
All that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours. And concludes thus, The Salutation of me Paul with my own
hand; If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema,
Maranatha; The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you; my love be with you
all, in Christ Jesus. Amen. Which belongs to every one that in any place
calls on Jesus Christ. And to All us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are All
things, and we by him: as he speaks in the same Epistle.

And the second Epistle concludes with the Grace of Jesus Christ, and the love
of God the Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you All.

As that Epistle, so all his Epistles generally, begin with Grace and Peace,
(and some add Mercy also) from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ,
who (as the Epistle to the Galathians adds) gave Himself for our sins, that
he might deliver us from this present evil World, according to the will of God
and our Father: and I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called
you into the Grace of Christ. And concludes that Epistle, From henceforth let
no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Brethren,
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, Amen.

And to the Ephesians, among many other remarkable passages of Jesus Christ, he
prays, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by Faith, that ye being rooted
and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the fullness of God.
Namely, by him in whom All fullness dwells; Yea, all the fullness of the
Godhead: And therefore He that desires Him, and prays to Him, prays to the
whole fullness of the Godhead, and desires it. And in the same Epistle, He
that descended, is now ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill All
things, and gave gifts, etc. for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we
all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
And concludes that Epistle, Peace be to the Brethren, and Love with faith from
God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace be with All them that love our
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.

So to the Philippians every where, Especially in that famous place of Bowing
in the Name of Jesus: parallel to that of the Psalm, Early will I seek thee, and
ever will I bless thee, and lift up my hands (as here bow the knee) in thy
Name; when I pray I will pray in thy Name, and confess to the glory of God:
which Christ challenges to himself, in the Prophet Isaiah: and at conclusion,
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. And in the Epistle to
the Colossions, For, it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell; and having made Peace by the blood of his cross, by him, to reconcile
All things unto Himself, by Him, whether they be things in Earth, or things in
Heaven: Which to the Ephesians is, according to the good pleasure of his will,
which he had purposed in himself, that in the dispensation of the fullness of
times he might gather All into One, in Christ; All things in Heaven or Earth,
even in him.

And to the Thessalonians, Now God Himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ direct our way to you, and the Lord make you to increase and abound in
Love to One another, and to all men, even as we to you: that he may establish
your hearts unblameable in holiness, before God. And again, That the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in Him: according to the
Grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. And again, Now our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved us, (for the Father
is Love) and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. And
the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and patience of Christ. Now
we command you brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw from every brother walking disorderly, yet count him not an enemy, but
admonish him as a brother. Now the God of Peace himself, give you Peace,
always, by all means. The Lord be with you All. The salutation of Paul, with
mine own hand, which is the token in every Epistle, so I write, The Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. And it may also be observed, that
what we read, be with you, might be read, is with you; and so it is not only a
prayer, but a promise, and assurance that the grace of Christ is with All,
calling on Christ, and so believing on him: for how can they call on him, on
whom they believe not?

And Timothy, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of All Acce^ation (as much,
or more then all the Mazoreth or Kab^:) that Christ Jesus came into the World
to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Now unto the King Immortal, Eternal,
Invisible, the only wise God, (which Jude also calls Our Savior, speaking
in the language of this very Text:) be honor and glory, for ever and ever,
Amen. Which he subjoyns on this Great Cause, I obtained Mercy, that in me first
Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them, (even
to all them) that should hereafter believe on him to Eternal life. So that
Christ did not mainly mind Paul, in showing him that patience and kindness;
but did it to Him, that he might be a pattern unto others, even unto all others
that should ever after believe, even to all Eternity. And to the same Timothy
he writes, Flee also fleshly lusts, but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity,
Peace, with them that call on the Lord, out of a pure heart. And concludes, the
Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit, Grace be with you. Amen.

The great business of St. Peter's Epistle, is to press forward in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and so he concludes, Grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to him be glory both now and
for ever. Amen. Which also runs very much through the whole Epistle.

The Revelation of Jesus Christ (which God gave to him to show to his servants)
is full of prayers, and praises, and blessings, of, and from, and to, the same
Jesus. Who so plainly calling himself the first and the last, which is and was,
and is to come; the great Jehovah; Lord God Almighty, leads us plainly to the
parallel places, in the Prophet Isaiah; where he says the same of himself,
adding also that there is no other God, or indeed no other True Being besides
himself, Representing himself in several species, or Idea's. For Plato was not
the first that taught there was but One, which yet was All.) And yet again, in
the same chapter of that Prophet, he says, Lo here I am, and His spirit has
sent me; even the Lord God and His Spirit: though I am God, and there is none
besides me; or none else but I and in me; and One with me as the Root, and
every Branch is One with the Vine. And in the same Prophet, It is this One True
God, the First and the last, and so All True Being (which yet is sent by God,
and anointed by his Spirit, and so the Messiah, or-Jesus Christ;) which plainly
swears by Himself, and therefore has no greater) that every knee shall bow,
or pray, to Him, and every tongue shall confess to Him: which the Apostle
cites in that noted place of praying in the Name of Jesus; and confessing to
the glory of God, even the Father also. And may we add? or may we not add, what
Christ of himself said? If God be glorified in Him, or in Them, will not God
also glorify Him, or Them, with Himself; Yea, he will shortly do it; nay, he
has already done it, before any other can glorify Him: for who can give him
first; or lend to him that it may be paid again.

To this also we might refer those passages of holding fast his Name, and not
denying his Name, and confessing his Name; as he will also confess their
names, before his Father and the holy Angels, both in the Gospels and
Revelation: and the call and Counsel of Christ (as also the Fathers Drawing)
being that we come to Christ, and learn of Him, and buy of Him, and open to
Him, that is still knocking to come in, (till his locks be wet with dew, and
his spirit be not only abused, but despised and blasphemed) argue much our
speaking, praying to him (as well as hearing him) who indeed is the end of the
Fathers Teachings and Drawings; so that he that has heard and learned of the
Father, comes and will come to Jesus Christ, and converseth with him, as a man
with his friend, whom he most loves, and honors also.

And the Angels of Heaven (for they are all bid to worship him, as we read in
the Psalms and Epistle to the Hebrews) with the four Watches or Watchers, and
the four and twenty Elders (of which again when we show all measures borrowed
from the twelve hours of darkness, or the twelve sons of Ishmael, and the
twelve sons of Light, or of Israel) they all fall down and Worship, Praying,
and singing Praises to the Lamb also, (even as clothed with flesh:) as well as
to him that sat on the Throne: which yet was Christ also (as is clear from many
passages) but Christ in more Majesty, and Glory of the Deity, then only as a
Lamb slain: For it was the Lamb exalted and set down in Glory, even in his
Fathers Throne;

As of old, the 24. courses of Priests, and of Levites, and of Porters, or
Watchers, or Singers, and other Officers, so ordered by David, (who was also
the 24th. from Noah, as the number of his Name in Hebrew, and the 14th. from
Abraham, as also his Name, when written without a jod, as frequently it is; and
signifies love, and a Fathers Brother, or a very near kindsman:) so in the
Revelation those 24. Elders did fall down, in Adoration to the Lamb, (even to
the Lamb that was slain, and they had Harps its said; and golden Vials full of
Odours, which are the prayers of Saints.

Which may intimate, that as our great High Priest, over all the Household in
Heaven and Earth; The great Angel of the Covenant, offers up his own Incence
with the Prayers of all Saints to his Father: So these Intercessors also to the
Lamb, even the Elders of Churches; offer up their Churches, yea and other
Saints Prayers, to the Lamb. For, the whole Bride and the Spirit acting the
Bride also, do not only converse with Christ as her Husband, but Worship him
also, as Her Lord (as Sarah called Abraham) and she is so commanded in the
Psalms, both to Kiss him and to Worship him; And she so practices in the
Canticles, and the Revelation also: crying to the last, come, even come, and so
come: Even come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

It may also be easy to show very many, if not most or all, of the Prayers and
praises in the Psalms, are plainly directed to Christ: and many commands and
encouragements to call upon him there also.

As, He arken unto my cry, my King and my God, for unto Thee will I Pray: my
voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord in the morning, will I direct my
prayers to Thee, and will look up. And again, they that know Thy Name will
trust in Thee, for Thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek Thee. And again,
Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble; Thou will prepare their heart,
and thou will cause their ear to hear. And again, Blessed be my Rock; and
blessed be the God of my Rock; and my Savior, cleanse me from my secret sins,
and keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not over me, and let the words of my
Mouth, and the Meditations of my Heart, be acceptable in Thy sight, O Lord my
Rock, and my Redeemer. And again, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, and
ride on prosperously, because of Truth and Meekness of Righteousness. And to
the Spouse of Christ, He is thy Lord, Worship thou him. And again, Be still and
know that I am God: Clap hands all People, sing unto God with Triumph, He shall
speak the people under us; He shall choose our Inheritance for us, even the
Excellency of Jacob whom he loved (and his blessing prevailed over all the
blessings of his Ancestors.) And again, gather my Saints together, and I will
speak (and then declares the form of the great Judgment both to the good and
evil:) And concludes, call upon me in the day of thy trouble I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me (plainly spoken by Christ, and repeated by the
Psalmist afterward; Saying, In the day of my trouble I will call upon Thee,
for Thou will answer me: And in an other Psalm, Thou calledst in trouble, and I
did deliver thee; and answered thee in the secret place of Thunder.) And what
time I am afraid I will trust in Thee. And again, Trust in him at all times ye
People, and power out your Souls before him. And again, Praise waits in
silence for thee; And to thee shall the Vow be performed: O thou that hear
prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. Iniquity prevails over me, but thou
have made Atonement for our transgressions: O our Jesus: or our Salvation. The
hope of the ends of the Earth, and them that are a far off in the Seas. And
again, my lips shall ever praise Thee, and and in thy Name will I lift up my
hands when I pray. And again, Thou have ascended up on High, Thou have led
Captivity Captive: Thou have received gifts for men, even for the Rebbels also,
that God may dwell among them. And thy God has commanded thy strength.
Strengthen, O God, that thou have wrought, etc.

And again, In the day of my trouble I will call upon Thee, for Thou will
answer me: and Thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in Mercy
to all that call upon Thee. Or, as St. Paul to the Romans, Lord of All, and
Rich unto all that call upon him: plainly spoken of Christ. As that also, of
the Lord speaking unto my Lord, Sit at my right hand, etc. And then the
Psalmist speaks to him, the Lord at Thy hand, shall smite through Thy
enemies; and Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power; and
the Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever: cited so
remarkably in the New Testament, by the Apostles, and by Christ also, asking
the Jews, who it was there, or how, David called him Lord.

And the 102. Psalm (being entitled a prayer of one afflicted, when his soul
is overwhelmed in him, and pours out his sighing before the Lord,) is plainly
spoken to Christ: as we see, by diverse verses cited in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, as spoken to Him, and proving Him to be the Son of God: and so are
many other, like passages cited in the New Testament, and applied to Christ. As
also the context will show; speaking somewhat that belongs properly to
Christ, and not to God, but as he is in Christ, and the Humane Nature: and so
he has eyes, ears, heart and hands, and passions also, and affections; which
are else improperly given to God, or supposed to be in him: and so, he descends
to earth, and ascends on high, Returning also to judge the World. Which is often
spoken by David to Him he calls Lord and King, and Judge of All. But the
Father judges no man, but has committed al^ judgment to the Son; and
authority also to execute judgment, because he is the son of man. And often
does the Psalmist speak to a Lord, or King, or Judge, (as Job also, saying I
will make supplication to my Judge; and my Redeemer lives: a phrase also
frequently used by the Psalmist) and his Rock; which yet had a God, had a Lord,
or a Father; which is a plain character of Christ. As very many others which an
attentive Reader will easily observe, through the whole book of Psalms: yea,
the Prophets also, in very many places.

And the Proverbs, do not only bid us lift up our voice to Wisdom, and cry
aloud to Understanding, but commands us also to call her our Sister, and our
near kinswoman: which is a plain character he means That Wisdom which was hid
in Christ (in whom are hid All Treasures of wisdom; For He is the Power and
Wisdom of God, who has made him also Wisdom for us, and unto us) Being our
Brother, who of old dwelt with Prudence, and was brought up with him; But His
delight was with the Sons of men: whom he is not ashamed to call His Brethren.
Nay, he commands us to call him Brother, (saying also, that a Brother is Born
for a Day of Trouble:) and to call His Wisdom our Sister, and His Understanding
our near Kinswoman: which is a Comment on that of the Psalms, He is Thy Lord,
and therefore Worship him; But He is also Thy Brother, and therefore Kiss him
also, least thou displease and grieve him: which we see all along through the
Canticles also.

Shall I add yet more to persuade, or encourage you in praying to Christ? Or
why rather to Christ, then to God otherwise? Though we may speak to the Father
also, and with great comfort and boldness. If at least I can, and dare say, My
Father forgive me, as I forgive others: which yet I desire to do, and in some
measure do: but often found it so hard, to make it the measure of Gods forgiving
me; that it made me often turn to Christ, and say, Lord teach me to pray this
Prayer, as John taught his Disciples. And at length I hope he taught me: and to
speak and pray to Him also, as He to His Father; For, he is not only my Lord,
but my Father also; and the Father of Eternity; or (as some read it) of the
World to come: Yea, and my Father in Heaven, where he then also said he was:
Nay, the Son of man which is in Heaven, and your Father which is out of Heaven;
or came out of Heaven; in that remarkable passage of our Savior added by St.
Luke to the Lords Prayer, taught his Disciples in a secret place, as they found
him praying, and said, Lord teach us, as John taught his Disciples: and he
taught them with some difference from what he said before all the People (in
his Sermon on the Mount) whom yet he bid say, Our Father, etc. But in Luke he
adds, If you that be evil, can give good gifts to them that ask you, How much
more your Father, who is, or who came, Out of Heaven: For so it is in the
Original; and by that character he may perhaps hint, That very prayer may be
spoken to him. For, He that sees Him, sees the Father also, and He that
worships him, worships the Father also; and Him that serves Him, the Father
will love and honor. He that speaks to him, speaks to the ear and Heart of
God. For the whole fullness of the Godhead is in Him; and that I may not
separate the Persons, or have wrong conceits of God, (as I am apt enough to;
and so it may be, worship Idols of my own making, in my own brain; which may be
easier, and so more dangerous, then Idols made by my own hands:) I choose much
to speak to Christ: and to God only as in Him.

As of old, They were to pray to the God of Abraham, that spoke to Moses, and
dwelt in the Tabernacle, between the cherubims of glory, shadowing the Mercy
Seat, covering the Arck; so I speak to God only as He is in Christ, where he
dwells for ever.

And though, it may be very lawful to pray to God through Christ and for
Christ; Yet (not to speak of out aptness to look on God as wholly wrath in
Himself, when he is Love; even the Father is Love; and so loved the world also,
that he sent his only begotten Son, to save the world and not to destroy it:)
If one should run me in, to the heart, and I should cry to God the Father, to
cure me for Christ's sake; would he not answer, (and all wise men,) Go also to
the Physician, or to the Chyrurgion, who is to work out thy cure under God, and
is so appointed by God.

So, when sin or Satan Tempts or wounds me to the heart, if I cry only to
God, to heal or help me, for Christ's sake; will he not say, Go to Joseph, I
have trusted him with all things: go to the proper Physician or Surgion for the
heart, Jesus Christ, whom I sent and sanctified for that end to heal your soul
and body both. And He that hears and learneth of the Father, will go to him,
who indeed is the End of the Fathers Teachings and Drawings, as he is the End
of all the Law: And Himself also cries, Come unto me, and learn of me; and buy
of me; and I will give you drink, and Ease and Rest, and Ey-salve thst you may
see. And though none come to him, but whom the Father drew; yet himself also
promised, that lifted up, he would draws All men: even All men unto himself.
And out of his belly shall flow Rivers of Living Waters. And to the Woman of
Samaria he said, If thou knew the Gift of God, and who it is that speaks
to thee, Thou would Ask (and ask of Him surely) and He would give thee Living
Water, which should be a Fountain, still flowing up to Eternal Life.

And they did pray to Him, here on Earth: and sure we might do so again, if we
should meet him here, or could see him with our bodily eyes; or could lay hold
of him with our hands, and wash his feet with our Tears, and wipe them with the
hairs of our heads. If I should meet him as I walked, why might I not speak to
him, as Paul did when he saw him in the way, or afterward in the Temple, as he
was praying? Or as Stephen did, when he died? And is he not as near us, and as
ready to hear, and help and save us Now: though we see him not with our bodily
eyes, as he was then? And yet sure if we could but learn to speak and do all we
do, in the Name of Jesus Christ, as we are bid, we should even see and feel and
taste Christ in our selves, and in one another. When it shall please God to
reveal, Christ in us, as St. Paul speaks to the Galathians, intimating that
he may be in us, when we do not see him, or believe him so; for God only can
manifest himself and him to us: and how, or why does he manifest himself to us,
and not unto the world? But he has promised to be among and in us, and
manifest himself, and his Fathers Name, that the love wherewith he loved him,
might be in us, and he in us also: which is the great thing he promised and
prayed for; that All that did and shall believe in him through all ages, might
be One with Him (He that is joined to the Lord is One spirit with him: and know
you not that Christ is in you, and the hope of glory in you also, except you be
Reprobates?) and that they might be made perfect in One: They in Him, and He in
them.

For if they be In him only, they may bear little fruit, except he also be In
them, as the sap of the Root is in the Branch; or the spirit of the Head, is in
every member of the body, knit together by bands or nerves; receiving
nourishment from the Head; yet so also, that every joint supplies to one
another: so blessed a thing it is, to be in union with Christ Jesus our Head,
and in communion of Saints, and fellowship with them as his Members, and fellow
Members to each other. So that, as the eye may not say to the hand, I have no
need of thee, so neither may the Head say (a very sweet scripture) to the foot,
or least toe of the foot, I have no need of you. For, he does not only take
care of the least pin of the Tabernacle, but indeed is made up of a multitude
of differing Members (for; if they did not differ, they were All One, and the
whole Body were but One Member:) and as in all our bodies, one part is Hot,
another cold; One Hard, another soft; one pulls up, another down; and so it must
be; and yet most accurate Harmony in All parts, and in the whole:

So is it, and so must it be, with the Body of Christ, the fullness of Him (a
most remarkable expression) that fills All in All: and yet they are All in
Him, and His Body; and have all His Mind and spirit flowing, acting and abiding
in them; even the same spirit which is in the Head; but in several and
differing measures, and proportions, and to several ends and uses; as in all
the differing Organs and Members of our Bodies: For All are not eyes, or ears,
or hands, or feet; and yet All are Members.

And as it is natural to the spirit; that is now in any of our members, on the
least touch of fear, or other passion, presently to run to the Head, or Heart,
as its fountain; and thence soon to bring out new supply of more spirits, as
occasion is: (whence we first look pale in our passions, and then quickly
redder then before:) so, in the Body of Christ any little Touch upon any of his
members, makes the spirit of that Member presently run to the Head, which is
chief; or to the very heart of God (the Root of the matter in him also) and
soon returns with a Legion of Angels, as a stock of new spirits; or it may be,
with Christ himself calling, as to Saul (when he pinched some of his little
fingers and toes, or other parts of his body,) Saul, Saul, why do thou pinch
or persecute me? Even me, the Head or Heart of all these Members, and the whole
Body? for if any one member be pressed or hurt, the Head and all the Body is
grieved or pressed also. And why do you press me, says Christ? for in all
their affliction, he is afflicted.

And certainly it is not more Natural, for the Spirit of the Body, or any one
Member of it, to run up to the Brain or Head, then it is for the Spirit of
Christ, and those that have received it, upon all occasions, yea always to be
breathing to God in Christ; Yea, to Jesus Christ himself, the head of the Body:
And through him only to God the Father, (that is the whole Deity) who is the
head of Christ also; As Christ is the Head of his Members: Yea, as St. Paul
says, the Head of every man. and the Church is his Glory also, as his Fullness,
even as the Woman is the glory of the man: and man is the Image and glory of
God. So is the Church (and special Members, or Messengers of it, as Titus was)
the Glory of Christ. So also, Christ speaks in the Prophets, I will place
Salvation in Zion, for Israel my glory. And again, Thou shall also be a Krown
of glory in the hand of the Lord, and as a Royal Diadem in the hand of thy God.
Thou shall be no more termed forsaken, but Hephzibah; Which also was the very
Name of Hezekiahs Queen, living about that time. And again, that they might be
unto me as a People and a Name, and a Praise, and a Glory. And although they
then rejected that great honor offered them, yet it must be, and shall be; For
God has said it and ordained it. The skies shall power down Righteousness,
and the Earth shall open, and they shall bring forth Salvation. And again, I
will build them as at first, and I will cleanse them from all Iniquity, and I
will pardon all their Transgressions: And it shall be to me (not only) a name
of Joy; But a Praise, and Honor, (or Glory,) before all the Nations of the
Earth.

Should not a Spouse converse with her Husband? Or should she be running to his
Father rather, or Himself, in all her wants or desires? And yet his Father also
will hear and Answer. For, he that speaks to the Son, speaks to the Father
also: And the Son speaks nothing of Himself, but as the Father speaks.

And That surely, is one great Reason why we should speak to Christ;
Immediately to Christ: and to God only, through Him. As of old they might not
offer up their own sacrifice, but by the hand of the Priest: So now he is our
Priest and our High Priest also, to receive all the Vials of Insence, even from
the Elders who are Priests also; but the High Priest as the great Angel of the
Covenant, offers up the Prayers of All Saints: And we should bring them all to
him; and desire him to present them, with all our wants, and all our returns
also, of praise and service unto him. And this seems clearly the sense of
those Scriptures that bid us offer all, we offer unto God, not only in his
Name, but also, Through Him; presenting them to Him, that he may present them
to the Father. And our Immediate coming to the Father (while we say it is,
through Christ) though it may be lawful also in its season, if rightly
understood; Yet surely, may be fitter for that time when the Son also shall
give up the Kingdom to his Father; that God may be All in All. Though it may
be, Then, our Prayers shall cease; Or be turned to Praises or Embracings: as
also with the Spouse, when she is not only betrothed, as now, but married also
to Christ, as she shall be. As the Revelation also represents her: when the New
Jerusalem comes down from Heaven, as a Bride decked for her Husband. And yet,
Then also (which I have a little wondered at) She seems to be solitary a while;
as if she had left her Husband, and her heart also behind her, when she came
down from Heaven; and her cry all along, even to the very end of all the
Revelation is, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. As if Christ were not with her,
on earth.

But the greatest stresse of the Argument, may seem to be in this, tha^ God
speaks nothing to us now, but in, and through his Son. Our Prayers, Praises,
sighs and groans, if right, are but reflections back of somewhat spoken to us,
spoken in us. Which must therefore be through Christ and to Christ Immediately,
by His Spirit in us. Which or who, (for that is the Scripture Language) as he
knows the mind of Christ, and so of God in him, and brings it into us; So he
touches our heart, and makes it warble, as the Heart of Christ did, when God
spoke to Him, and in Him, to us. And he whose Spirit it is (that helps us by
sighs and groans unutterable) knows the meaning of his own Spirit. For, it is
he, that makes intercession for us.

Yea and in us also: so that all our breathings out to God, are but his
breathings, by his Spirit in us. And in this sense we may and do pray to the
Father; as Christ in us the hope of Glory prays to the Father of Glory (so he
is called) and the Father of mercies; as he is the Father of Christ, who
therefore is both Grace and Glory, as the Psalmist expresses him, and yet
still the only begotten of the Father.

Let me add also, that the Spirit in us crying Abba Father, is the Spirit of
God made Flesh, or in actual Union with Humanity: For else it calls not God its
Father, and in us it speaks its own Natural Language, for it speaks in us,
Praying, Crying, Abba Father;

Our Father, (For Christ's Spirit speaks, boweth, prays in us:) Hollowed be
Thy Name: let Thy Kingdom come, for it is ours also; And if God be glorified in
us, He will also glorify Us with himself. Yea, he will straight way gloryfie
us. Let thy will be done in our Earth, as in thy Heaven; Even in thy Highest
Heaven (For in this Petition it is in The Heaven, but in the preface it is, in
the Heavens, even all the Heavens:) For, Thy will is ours also, and not only
wiser, but better for us also, then our own will is, till fully molded into
thy Will.

And then a poor Soul dare say, forgive us, even as we forgive. We, and not I,
but we, as all the members together; with the Spirit of the Head also; and in
his Person too: which has often made me hope, he meant and had promised also,
(for our Prayers, or His in us, are good Promises also) to forgive more of his
Enemies, then it may be, I ever thought or believed. Which I cannot much wonder
at, when All his enemies must come to be at peace with him, as his ways please
the Lord. And when the spirit also shall come to Act His Kingdom (which it
shall do in the Heart of His Spouse; for the spirit and the Bride shall abide
and Act, and shall still Live together, as they cried together here:) I hope it
will also forgive more, then it may be, all men now believe or hope.

Yet as the Soul should generally say, and pray to Christ, as the Apostles did,
Lord show us the Father (which is also his great promise to us, and his Father
also, in his solemn prayer, John 17. I have declared Thy Name, and I will
declare it; that the Love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I
in them:) Yet there may be some seasons also, in which a poor soul may think it
self so great a stranger unto Christ, or at such a distance from him, that it
may, and does cry to the Father, Draw me to the Son; show me thy Son; and
acquaint me with thy Son: for I am a stranger to him, or at a loss in seeking
Him.

And yet sure, this is not very usual in a Woman; or it may be, handsome, or
civil for her, to come to a strange man, and say, Pray Sir, acquaint me with
your Son, that I may woe him. But when the Good man has first broken the
matter, in discourse to the Virgin soul, and has Invited and woed for the Son;
Then does the Son come (and is sent of the Father) and woes the soul for
himself: and yet perhaps till the marriage be, or at least the contract or
betrothing, It may sometimes not only be fit, but requisite, to Treat with the
Father also, for settlement of state or other things.

But Then she goes and speaks and converseth with the Son, when she is Married,
or at least betrothed: which indeed is Most, if not All, that is yet done,
between Christ and our souls; it may be, the whole Church yet, is no more but
betrothed only till the New Jerusalem. Which yet in some measure does come
down and appear unto, and in, every poor soul, betrothed unto Christ. For
Jerusalem which is above, is Mother to us all The good Sarah, spouse to Abram,
The High Father (as the name signifies, before it was Abraham, a Father of
many) rather then to Isack, the Son, who was not married, till his Mother Sara
was dead. Though perhaps, That was only to the Gentile Church, brought out of
Syria (a Gentile Land) after Sara, the Jewish Church was dead, or gone. But she
must appear again, and that out of Heaven also: where the Woman first appeared
as a great wonder, in the person of the Wife of Jaacob, as some think, or
Mother to the twelve Patriarchs; presented there (as in Joseph's Dream also) by
twelve stars, round about her. But there is more in it, seeing she was also in
the Sun, or clothed with His Light and Glory, Having also the Moon at her Feet;
and a crown of twelve stars about her head, of which we may speak more
hereafter.

And when the Virgin is espoused, then she begins to speak freely to Her
spouse. And I know not any more sure character, of being so betrothed unto
Christ, then such a free converse with him, as our friend, our Brother, Yea,
our nearer Relation. And yet truly, we do not: receive His spirit, (but some
glances only, through his eyes or mouth, at a distance, if we may so express
it,) till we be actually married; which is scarcely consummate in this Life:
though it may be also, at the coming of the new Jerusalem.

So that all we speak or do, of Praying, or such manner of converse, as is yet
usual with Christ, is in our way only, Yet as betroathed; rather than in our
end, or spiritual enjoyments of him in the marriage bed: where only we shall
fully receive his Spirit. And those whom he sent as his Father sent him,
received it, but as in his breath; for he breathed on them, saying, Receive the
Holy Ghost. And afterward also they received but the first fruits of the
Spirit; as themselves expressed it: saying also it belonged unto all the Lord
should call. For it was then but the Feast of Pentecost, or fiftieth Day of
first Fruits, and that but of Barley. O but now we wait, and hope, and expect
the Feast of Tabernacles also (and the latter Rain, as the former little drops)
even the greatest Feast of Tabernacles; which all Nations also must keep with
Israel; when they shall joy as at Harvest; even at the end of full Harvest,
when all the fruits of the Earth shall be gathered in: and all Nations also
shall come flowing in; as the fruits of all the Earth, in that solemn Feast.
Which was acted also in a Type, as we may say, of somewhat to come; when, in the
last and great day (of the many Feasts, of that great Feast of all, the Feast
of Tabernacles) Christ stood out, and cried, as the Gospel says, O every one
that thirsts, come unto the Waters, and he that believes on me, as the
Scripture says, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of Living Water; as
alluding both to their custom of drawing and pouring out Waters from Siloam
(with joy from the wells of Salvation;) and also to the most remarkable place
in Zech: where all Nations are invited to that Feast; that they might have
Water, and the Rain of Heaven.

And it may be, he that can rightly count the time between the Feast of
Pentecost and Tabernacles, may guess also when that latter Rain, or fuller
pouring out of the Spirit shall be. Which in general, was in the seventh Month;
yet by another reckoning, at the end of the year: as the seventh Day was the
end of the week. Even as Gods appearings and Angels also were generally toward
the end of the day, or about the evening Sacrifice: which is one of many
Reasons why I think the Lords Supper was and now should also be, at Supper, or
at Evening, rather then Morning.

And to all yet said, to persuade us in our prayers, to direct our hearts, and
words to Christ; and to God, only as he is in Christ (as of old in the
Tabernacle between the Cherubims of Glory over-shadowing the Mercy Seat,
covering the Ark) I may add, That Prayer is a Dialogue between our Soul and
God, indicted by the Spirit of Christ: which differs from the Spirit of God;
as being That clothed with flesh, and actually united to a Humane Spirit;
which the Spirit of God, as God, or of the Father, as such, is not. Which
distinction it may be St. John observes, by the Holy Ghost in Heaven; One with
the Word and Father: and by the Spirit on Earth, or in the fleshly Members of
Christ. Now as Christ in the days of his flesh, did offer up strong sighs, and
groans, and tears, and prayers; yea, and himself also; by his eternal Spirit;
unto him that was able to save him; and was heard in all he feared or prayed:
So does he now, by the same Spirit, in the hearts, or flesh of his Members,
which are here on Earth. Yet so, as all those Members give up their Spirit to
their Head; (As the Elders also in the Revelation present their Vials full of
Prayers of Saints to the Lamb:) and he, as the great Angel of the Covenant,
mingles them with his daily Incense, in his Temple, and presents them all, even
all the Prayers of all Saints, to his God and his Father, and their Father, in
and through him. They all being indeed but his own sighs and groans, or motions
of his own Spirit, in his Members.

That we may yet more clearly understand this, let us first consider how Christ
prayed to his Father; and then, how the Christian prays unto Christ, or to
his Father, through Christ.

As the Apostle says, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself; so,
in a right sense I may say, God was in Christ, Praying or speaking to himself;
even as our Soul communes with it self; or as a man communes with his own
Heart: a Phrase we find in the Psalms or other places of Scripture, and we may
use it to illustrate This.

For which also, I may cite that notable passage of our Savior, (which I
sometime look upon, as one of the Keys, to open and discover the rich, but
hidden, Cabinet, of the Mysterious Scripture) where he does so plainly tell us,
that he never said one word of himself; and yet he said all that was ever said
by God; for he is the only Word and Mouth of God: and in the Prophet Esaias he
tells us plainly, that he said all that was ever spoken; and yet, now he tells
us that he never spoke one word of, that is, From Himself: or of his own: but
of and from his Father; and what He said: yea and As, He spoke it, unto Him; so
he repeated it. Being (as it seems) but Gods Holy Echo, to repeat those Words,
and only Those, his Father speaks of himself, and in himself, and to himself.

As if Christ also, compared with God, were such an Infant, that he could not
speak one sentence, word, syllable, or letter, but as God sounded it before
him, and In him, and To him: and so He, only Ecchoed back some little part, it
may be, as the latter end, or loudest part of that Infinite Discourse, the
Father had, and has to Him, from all Eternity to al Eternity.

Thus when God says, in and to Christ, My Son, Give me thy Heart: Christ then
as it were ruminating or repeating in himself, what the Father says, He
Echoes back, Give me Thy Heart: And so it sounds as a Prayer. To Bow down; He
cries Bow down. To Seek my Face; Seek my Face. And at length his Spirit cries
(in his Members also) Thy Face I will seek; Lord Hide not thy Face from me. So
that the Head only properly speaks in Prayer; but His Members draw, also, by
the spirit of the Head, resting and sighing, In Them.

Thus, we have seen a tender Mother or a Father, Teaching their children to
speak, and do, and go, by speaking To them, in them, as it were; and going,
bowing; kissing their hand; and Doing All before them, and as much as they can,
in them, That they would have them to Do and say. Bow down, They say, and kiss
your Hand, and say, I am your servant; or the like; by doing, and by saying,
what they mean, their child should do or say. And then, he stammers after them;
and after many Essaies, comes at length to stumble on that gesture, posture,
carriage, word or work, the Parents have been often Teaching Him, or speaking
In him. For, one may speak his heart out, to a child, or other person, who will
never learn and Do, till he have the Fathers, or the Teachers spirit, or his
meaning, and his Mien, by accent, gesture, or some other way, rather than by
word only, impressed on him. So, that we see our children, and such as are
acquainted with our spirit can discern and understand our mind, by becks, or
nods, or looks, or otherwise, sometimes without words; and sometimes directly
against our words, and quite and clean contrary to our words. As, when we say,
O well done; perhaps they know we mean Ill done; and when we say now fall, or
go do, so or so; they understand we mean they should not fall, or do so: and
many other things we speak by way of tempting, or of Irony, or otherwise,
directly contrary to our words.

It being Thus also in the Scriptures: where often times the sense might be
gathered by accents, stops or pauses, with the signs of questions, parenthesis,
and Ironies, with many other things, which are now very hard to understand,
especially in the old Testament: This is one of the many reasons, why we cannot
pretend to the full or True sense and meaning of the Scriptures, without That
Spirit which did make them, and interpret them, as Christ pleased to give out
through all the several Ages of his Church. Which yet possibly might differ as
the sense and understanding of an Infant or Minor, differs much from That of a
Man, a Wise Man: who now sees another sense and meaning of his Fathers words
spoken or written long since, than he once did or could do, by many readings.
And this differing sense and understanding, even in Principles, may sometimes
occasion or cause different Practice also among good men, and children of the
same Father; in the same or several Ages. Which we might observe from the
difference of Judgment and Practice, that I say not Affection, found among the
Apostles themselves, and the most primitive Christians, about the good Will of
God to the Gentiles, and about the Law, and Circumcision; that I say nothing of
the Nature and Office of the Holy Ghost, or of Christ himself, in Person,
Natures, Offices; the manner and the Virtue of his Death and Resurrection; with
the Form of his Government and Kingdom; with his Coming again, and Judgment:
which are so clearly written in the old Testament, and yet so little understood
by Them, or Us either; even to This day.

And as the Spirit of God in Christ, does say and do, all that Christ says,
prays, works; so also, does the Spirit of Christ, in his Members: so that
every one of them may truly say, I cannot speak, or pray, or do, any one thing,
pleasing to God or my self (if I know my self) but what the Spirit of Christ,
my Head and Father also, as my Spouse, says, prays, does in me. I do
nothing of my self, and I say nothing of my self; but what my Fathers Spirit
works, speaks in me. What and How he says in me, I say; and what he does,
I do: My Father works hitherto, and I work: but my Father works what I
work. And This takes me off, from solicitous Care what to say, or do (as well
as what to eat and drink) because it is given, in that hour, by our Fathers
Spirit. For, Without me, says Christ, you can do nothing; and by Him, we may
both do, and bear, and suffer, All things. All our Fruit is found in Him: whose
Dew, is as the dew of Herbs. As the Dew of the morning, from the Womb of
Eternity.

Now as the spirit of God never comes on us, or speaks in us, or to us,
Immediately, (as from the Father, to his Only begotten Son) but only
mediately, through Christ; who is the Mouth and Word of God: (which may be one
character to try the spirit in some, these days, that pretend to immediate
voices from the Father, concerning His Son Jesus; whereas God speaks not to
us, but through his son Jesus:)

So when we speak to God, we do not, may not, yet speak to him Immediately: but
through Christ, and to Christ; that He may speak it unto God his Father, Even
as God speaks to Christ, and sent him a new Revelation, after his Ascension,
that he might speak, and give it to his Members.

As I cannot speak Immediately to the soul or spirit of a man (though he be
with me) but through his ear or eye, or somewhat of his outward man or body. So
I yet cannot, may not speak to God, but through his outward man; if I may so
speak of Jesus Christ: and yet I speak to a man's ear, or eye, or outer man,
that it may reach also to his heart, and soul, or spirit, and may affect that
also. And so I speak to Christ also, (as the Outward Man of God,) that yet it
may affect his heart, the very heart of God his Father, who is in him. And I
tell him, that I do no so worship him, or pray to him, or trust in him, as a
Man only or mainly; for I am forbidden to put my trust in any man, or in the
Son of Man himself, as Man only; but as he has God in him, and the Heart of
God in his heart: Yea, is One with God his Father: and so One, that there is no
other God besides him; as himself often speaks in the Prophets: where he also
calls himself the first and the last, (as in the Revelation) and the only
True God; and so he is called the Only Wise God our Savior.

He is so perfectly One with the Father, that when we see him, we see the
Father also; and we pray to the Father, when we pray to him: who is the
everlasting Father, or the Father of Eternity, or World to come, as some
translate the Prophet Isay. So that we may say to him, Our Father, let Thy Name
be glorified, and Thy Kingdom come, for it is the Fathers also. And it may be
marked, that Our Savior taught that Prayer Twice; first to the Multitude, in
his sermon on the Mount: and it is no little comfort for them All to see their
leave or Right to cry Our heavenly Father. Afterward alone, and praying, some
or one of his Disciples came and said, Lord teach us to pray; (for Thou have
Told us a Prayer before, but now we pray thee Teach us to pray) even as John
taught his Disciples.

Then he said, When you pray, say Our Father, etc. much as before; but then he
said, After this manner therefore pray ye: and it is there, Forgive us, as we
forgive our Debtors: but in Luke, to his Disciples in private, it is, Forgive
us, for we also forgive all our Debtors. Which is better rendered so, then some
that read it, Those that Trespass against us. But it seems plainly to allude
to that Law and custom of remitting debts to all their Debtors, as the Law
required, in the Jubilee and other sabbath years: and so they might speak it
more sensibly, then it may be we, or I now can; if we should render it, Forgive
us as we forgive all that trespass against us. Yet I have sometimes thought
that Christ even drives us to Himself, when we dare not speak those words to
the Father.

Yet to speak freely, the spirit of Christ in a Christian, is or will be very
free; and it is hardly at Any time, much less at All times, tied up to a form
of words (or kept in rank and file, of any One man's Method:) but as God leads
it. And our experience may show us, that some times we think to speak to God,
and we find our selves such strangers to him, or at such a distance, that we
fly to Christ and cry, Lord show us the Father, and Lord teach us to Pray, as
John taught his Disciples; Yea and better too, as Thou art a better Teacher. At
another time, it may be, we bow down and think to speak to Christ, and then
perhaps, we find a damp upon our spirits, unto him, and some estrangement from
him: so that we fly to the Father, and cry, Good Father, show us Thy Son; Draw
us to thy Son; yea draw us heartily, that so we may know him more, and better
then ever: for, we are strangers to him. And I have known some, that usually
began their prayers unto Christ; or at least bowed their spirits silently to
him, before they spoke to God; and desired Christ both to help them express
their own wants, and then also present them to His Father; Praying in them, to
His Father, while they bowed in his spirit, crying, as he bad his children say,
Abba Father; for all persons, and for all things, they ought or might pray for
(which perhaps are more then they are Tied to) and so usually they concluded
with the plainest sense, rather than words of the Lords Prayer. Which also
seems to have been a more ancient custom in the Church, than only of late;
when some discoursed only, what they wanted, or would beg of God. Which yet I
should not disallow, if done with such an Heart, and life, and Power, and
Spirit, as it may, and yet I hope, it will be done, among the Churches of
Christ.

But I may sum up all in this, the good Father, by the Holy Ghost, (in his
Ordinances,) first breaks the Match to the Virgin soul, and shows her great
want of an helper, in her wretched and forlorn estate; He tells her also, he
has a Son, who will use her kindly and tenderly, if she will accept him. Then,
he sends the Son, a woer; and till all be agreed, for portion and jointure, and
other things, the, Treaty is much with the Father; who also gives assurance of
his hearty consent to the match, and to his making good all the Son shall
promise: and indeed, is as it were, his Sons surety, to the poor soul. And when
the Son is admitted, yea and contracted; he still uses his Fathers Name; and
bids the spouse be confident of all his Father ever promised. And if there do
arise any doubt or scruple in the matter, or manner of contract, dowry, or the
like; the soul has not only leave, but most great encouragement, to go and
speak to the Father: as also to reconcile any difference, or strangeness that
at any time shall rise, or seem to be, between the parties. But when they be
married or espoused, the Son uses her so sweetly and kindly, that she never
has occasion, much less cause to complain to the Father (which yet she might
freely do upon any cause:) but she is so wholly taken up with the spouses
affection, and most hearty love; that her main converse, and solace of her
life, is with Him: Though she often ask her Father Blessing, and very often bow
to him, with most child-like Reverence and dutiful Love, rather then fear;
which if servile or slavish, is exceeding much displeasing unto God and Jesus
Christ, and to the true genius of a Christian, established with a free, Noble,
Royal spirit.

Have we not a Type and Emblem of this, or somewhat more, in Caleb and his son,
and daughter Achsa. Caleb As the Heart (it signifies) and may shadow out the
Heart of God, whom he wholly followed, with an honest, plain, upright, which in
scripture Language, is a perfect heart. He says, who ever conquers Kiriath
Sepher (which may note the book of scripture, which was also called Dehir, that
is the Oracle:) shall have my Daughter, and my blessing with her. Othniel
conquers it (and afterward is made a Judge, and saves his people from the
cruel Tyrant:) and he gets Calebs Daughter. Who first moves her Husband to
ask a field of her Father: and afterward freeing her self from her Ass, (or
bestial nature) she boweth her self to her Father, and asks him in her own
person; saying, O my Father, Thou have given me a piece of Earth, O but give me
thy Blessing with it; and a spring of Water. So, he gave her, both the Upper
and the Lower Springs. An History, so repeated in the Bible, that I have often
thought some great matter is in it.

Besides, that it clearly shows us the Heart of God; such an infinite Fountain,
still flowing up, and flowing over; that he is so far from being drawn dry, by
our sucking; or from being displeased, at our Asking, and Begging of him; that
he expects rather that all we have received from him, even by his Sons Asking,
should but encourage us yet, to ask more, and more still, as we receive more
from him. And when he has given us a Field, or a piece of Earth, He expects we
should ask his Blessing, even the rather, and the Springs of Water. Even as our
Father Abraham; when God came to him after his great deliverance from the four
great Kings (which may be Types, as their names import, of the four great
Monarchies; that should captive his people, and the good men of the world also,
till He should bring back their Captivity, and the Captivity of Sodom also (to
be paralel'd with the 16. of Ezekiel;) just before the appearing of
Melchizedech, resembling Christ in his second Coming; Pursuing them to Dan,
even to the great Judgment, as the place imports. And when God might so justly
expect that Abraham should have been bowing down in great Thankfulness for That
deliverance; Abraham says not a word of That, but is Begging a new boon; (O
the man's confidence!) and cries, Lord God, what will thou give me? as if he had
received nothing yet, or at least very little, in comparison of That he knew
the Infinite Heart of God still had, for him; and was straightened, till it was
more drawn and sucked. And the Mothers Breast is sometimes so full, that she is
glad of a strangers child to suck that which her own child cannot master.

And when it might have been expected of the Daughters of Zelophehad, that the
modesty of their Sex, should have kept them silent; or the shame, or sorrow,
which they should have born for their father, being cut off, in the Wilderness,
and dying in his sin; and they left Orphans and Virgins: Yet they sue for their
Inheritance. And the Lord heard it, and it pleased him so, that upon this
occasion he Enacted a new Law very beneficial to Women, who had therefore much
cause to remember, and bless the memory of these Daughters. And God was so far,
from upbraiding them, or their father; that he answers, They have well done, or
well said, and rightly too, in what they say; (in that they do not judge
themselves unworthy of eternal life; seeing it is the gift; and the free gift
of God.) For, the Fathers sin, may not forfeit the childrens Inheritance. Nor
shall the child die, or lose his Inheritance, for the fathers sin. Which may
not only be considered by those that so deeply stain the childrens blood, for
the fathers sin (perhaps contrary to the Laws of God, and Practice of his
People in several Ages, through the Scriptures:) But it may be also carried
much further, (and Higher also perhaps; even to our first Father in Paradise)
then I shall urge it now. But the very Orphans of Edom, even of hated cursed
Fsay; are yet bid in Jeremy, to come to God and trust in him; who will preserve
them alive, and be the God and Father also of the fatherless and widows; even
of those also that die in their sins, and are out off, for their Transgression,
or Rebellion. Which is also but suitable to that good Law in Deuteronomy. (which I
hope ere long we shall find and see, lying on Christ also, who was made under
the Law, even the whole Law; and so under this Law also:) When thou go to
War with any people (How the excepted Cananites were also received to mercy, we
may show anon) Thou shall offer peace; and if they Take it; Well: They all
shall live. But if they refuse, Thou may slay the men (and so it is said,
they slew the Males of Edom, or Amalech, a branch of Esau; and the Jews add a
story of Joabs wrath to his Master that should have taught him the difference
between Zachar and Zecher; Male and Memory:) But though the Men might be cut
off; yet the Women and children might not; but even by that Law (and so Christ
practiced to Edoms Widows and Orphans;) They must be kept alive.

Thus, ere I am aware, I am come to that great Argument, for speaking and
Praying to Christ; which I shall more fully insist upon; as the richest Pearl
of all, I can yet produce for comforting afflicted minds and consciences.

I speak, and Pray to Christ (and have great comfort in it, through his grace;)
not only because he speaks All that ever God speaks unto me, (and so, sure,
in all Christian civility, I should speak to him again:) But also, I may, and
can, and dare, and should say, That, even many things, to Him, which I dare
not, cannot, may not speak, to the Father, as Father: But that he see them
answered and Done, by his Son: whom I Therefore press upon. And it may be,
These Things (which I so may speak to Christ only) are the best and sweetest, I
can yet present to Him, or expect his Returns upon. Which also flesh and Blood,
I hope, did not reveal to me; but my Heavenly Father, in his Drawing me to
Jesus Christ; and Teaching me some little os That Truth, which is in Jesus; and
some little of his Love which passes All knowledge: which yet All Saints must
come to Taste and see, that so they may be filled with All the Fullness of God.
And He that has heard and learned of the Father, will come unto Christ; and by
Him to the Father.

I may say to Christ, O Lord Thou art the feed of the Woman, promised to
bruise, or break the Serpents Head: to loose his knots, dissolve his Works;
yea, to destroy him who had the Power of death, which is the Devil. Or, as the
Psalm expresses it, He shall break in pieces the Oppressor. And the Prophet
Esaias Thus, With his sore and Great, and strong Sword, he shall punish
Leviathan, the piercing or the Crossing Serpent; even Leviathan; (for he that
made him, can cause his Sword to approach to him) That crooked Serpent
(laughing at the shaking of our spears, and rattling of our Quivers;) and shall
slay, quite slay, the Dragon, in the great Deep. To which the Revelation
alludeth plain enough, both in the Serpent and the Dragon, in diverse places.
And, as he is the Woman's Seed, so is he also, the seed of Abraham, and That
blessed Seed of Promise, in whom not only All Nations, but also All Families;
and every Family of the Earth shall be blessed: as is expressly promised, more
then once. And St. Peter citing that Promise, concludes thus, God has sent
him to Bless you, in Turning every one of you from his Iniquities. So that I
may also say to him, Thou were promised to Bless me; and sent to Turn me from
my Iniquities. Thou were made Man for my sake.

Thou art also my Kinsman: Bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: and did Any,
ever, hate his own flesh? May I not call him Brother? and say unto him, that a
Brother, is born for a day of distress and sorrow? as the wise man tells me.
And he does not only give me leave, but councels and commands me, not only to
lift up my voice to Wisdom, and cry after her, but also to call her my Sister;
and to Understanding I am bid to say, Thou art my near Kinswoman. And is not
this Wisdom the Spirit of Christ? Which is yet promised to stand in every
street and path; and that she shall cry (for, so it is promised in the future
time, yet to come; and not only time past or present, as some render it.) Yea
she cries, and shall cry, to All the sons of men, to All the simple ones. Yea
it is expressly said she shall cry to the Scorners also; How long will you love
scorning? Turn ye yet at my Reproof, and I will yet power out my spirit on you.
And again in another Chapter, it is also, Shall not Wisdom cry? shall she not
give her voice? by the way, in the paths, at the gate, she shall shout, and at
the entry of the City, and the coming in at doors: Unto you O men I will call,
and my voice to the Sons of man: O ye simple, understand Wisdom; and ye fools,
be ye of an understanding Heart. And again, I love them that love me; and they
that seek me early shall find me. And my delights both were, and are, with the
sons of men: Now therefore hearken to me. And to this Wisdom, which is There
described as begotten by God (the same word used by Eve of Cain, I have Gotten
the man Jehovah:) even in the beginning of his ways, before his Works of old,
etc. (which is plainly Christ:) and yet, to This Wisdom, I am bid to call her
my Sister, and my near Kinswoman. So that I wonder not at the Divine Rhetoric
of Those that cried after Christ, O thou Son of David, have mercy on me. For,
by This, he was their Neighbor, and their Brother; born for a day of sorrow.
Which was also caught, and pressed, by the poor forlorn and cursed Woman of
Canaan; though Christ was first silent, and then called her as a Dog, but at
length helped her with much compassion, as a Neighbor, or a Brother: which is
large enough to reach a stranger also, and an Enemy; as we see, by his own
answer to him that said, Lord, who is my Neighbor? and it took in, a Samaritan,
with one of Jerusalem: though at more defiance, and distance of heart and
affection, than of Place or Nation. For this also see the 2. of the Hebrews,
and the 10. last verses.

And we may see, what a stress, God himself put, and would have Us put, upon
This, that Christ is our Brother; by That Great Promise in Moses (cited so
often in the new Testament) I will raise them up a Prophet, from among their
Brethren, like unto Thee: which words are also expressly repeated several times
in the Acts. A Prophet of your Brethren, like unto me.

Which is also the more considerable, because in the very next Chapter before
This Promise (of Raising up a Brother Prophet) It is also strictly commanded,
that when, at any time they desired a King, they might not choose a Stranger,
which was not a Brother; but from among thy Brethren, shall thou set a King
over thee. Which is also several times pressed and repeated with an especial
Emphasis, on that of a Brother, and from among your Brethren. So that, I may
now tell Christ, that I neither do, nor may, receive him, either as a Priest,
or Prophet, or King, but as he is, and so must be, My Brother. Else he is not
That Prophet, which the Lord promised to raise; nor may I choose, or set him
King, over me; except he will own himself to be my Brother: and so carry
himself toward me, and must not exalt himself above his Brethren.

Which was read, it seems, at the Coronation of their Kings: and the Jews tell
us of such piercing looks, at the Reading of This, before Agrippa was admitted,
or Crowned for their King; that Himself also could not hold from Tears: because
he was not their Brother Born, but only made.

And when their King was chosen, and set over them, He is bounded and limited
in that Law: and the great Reason is added, that his Heart be not lifted up
above His Brethren.

One of the great things required of the King, set over them, was This, That
when he sat on the Throne of his Kingdom, he should write him a Copy of the
Law, out of that which was before the Priests: and he must read therein, all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all
the words of this Law, and these statutes to do them: as we read expressly in
the 17. of Deuteronomy.

The Phrase of Writing, when he sat on the Throne of his Kingdom, has made me
remember, that when the Revelation has, with very great solemnity, brought
Christ, or the Lamb, to the Throne of his Glorious Kingdom; He that sat upon
the Throne said, Behold I make All things (even All things) New: Write, (says
He, to St. John) For, these words are true and faithful. And is it not a most
sweet Promise? seeing All, in Christ Jesus, must be New Creatures; that Himself
promises to make All New? Yea and that also sitting on his Throne; and bidding
it be written; with a Behold also before it, as a faithful and True saying: of
Him also, who before his death, promised, that being lifted up, he would draw
all men to him. And being lifted up, and set on his Throne, instead of Writing
the Law, in Tables of stone, or other materials, he promises in the Prophets,
to Write it in our Hearts: and by that also to make us New: and to give us a
New Heart, and Mind, and Spirit; yea His Spirit in us: and by This to make us
New.

Another great matter, to be pressed also, upon Christ our King (sitting on the
Throne of his Kingdom) out of that very Law of Moses, is this; That he must so
Write the Law, for himself; that he must study it, and Keep it also, all his
life. Even the very same Law, he gives, and governs by; he himself must Write
it, and study it, and Keep it To us, all his days.

Which St. Paul also has taught us, saying, That he was not only made of a
woman (as we observed before;) but also Made Under the Law: and that he was
made Like us in All things (but sin) and therefore in Obedience also. Nay, as
if it would be vain to promise the Law written in our hearts, before it was
written in his own; he professes in the fortieth Psalm, that it was written of
him, that he should do the Will of God; even the whole Will of God; yea it was
written in his heart also; so that he came to do it; and delighted in it, even
with his whole heart. As we also find the Law, written over, a second time, by
God himself, in the new Tables also, that Moses (as the forerunner of Christ)
had prepared, after he had broken the First Tables, made and written by God; as
an Emblem of our Hearts written and broken also; yea and renewed too, by the
Law, new written in them, and put in the Ark (a Type of the Heart) covered by
the Mercy Seat (representing Christ also; covering and comprehending the Law,)
over-shadowed also, with the Cherubins of Glory: as the Seat and Throne of God,
dwelling between the Cherubins; who stand prying into the Ark, or Heart of Man,
and the Law in it; seeing by the Churches, the manifold Wisdom of God, is made
known to the very Angels; who thus pry into the mysteries of Christ.

This I take to be one of the sweetest things, I ever learned, or can teach
another; that the same person who is to Teach, and judge and govern me; is made
under the same Law with me. Yea rather more than I, or the first Adam was; who
was Put, or Brought under the Law, rather then Made under it; as Christ Was. So
that he, can as soon cast out his own Being, as he can, cast out the Law of
God; or any one Title of it, from his own heart. Which has it All so molded,
and rivetted into it self, that Heaven and Earth shall pass away, much sooner,
than any one Tittle, or Jota of the Law of God, pass away, or be unperformed by
him. For, he came not to disanul the Law; but to perform it in his own person,
most of All. And while others dispute for whom he did it; I ask only, Whether
we think or doubt he did it not, in his own person? Which is one of the
greatest things I therefore study; that by seeing All the Law, in its greatest
Latitude, I may see the Duty of Christ, (for, I may so speak with Reverence)
and his great Obligation both to God and Man; and his Joy, and Delight; being
written in his Heart to do the whole Law of God.

So God spoke to Joshua (that great Type of Jesus) Thou shall divide the Land,
and make them possess it, only be strong that thou may observe to do All the
Law of Moses my Servant, that thou may be wise, or prosper, in all thou do
(which is Thence, in the Psalms, and to Solomon and diverse others) and I will
never leave thee. Which is also applied to us All: in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, with so many repetitions, as God spoke it several times to Joshua.

That which destroyed Israel, was observing the Laws of Omry, or other Kings
among them; and leaving the Law of God, which was so good, and just, and wise,
that all Nations also should say, they were a wise people that had such a Law.
Which indeed made them the people of God, and so owned by him, so long as they
accepted and owned his Law for their Rule. And he never cast them off, till
they chose a stranger for their King, and a New Law, to govern them.

Yea the great badg of Antichrist (which we should hate) may be, to place
himself above the Law, and think to change the Law, which God has promised to
magnify among all Nations.

And although it be exceeding sweet, to see and know that he was made under the
Suffering part of the Law: In all its heavy Threatenings and its Curses also: so
that all the Waves of God, and all his Billows, rolled over him: and all his
Arrows, did stick fast in Him; (and in Job, David, Heman, Jonah, but as Types
of Christ, and partakers of his Spirit, and acting some part of his
Sufferings:) and when God had so powered out his Anger, his Soul rested, his
Spirit was quiet, and he will be no more angry: as he often speaks; as an
angry person that has vented his heat and is quiet. So, was he in Christ, when
he had born his Wrath, the Fathers Soul Rested in him, and his Spirit is quiet:
so that he can be no more angry. But we may come to him as the Psalmist, Lord,
Thou have turned from the fierceness of thine anger, and have put away all thy
wrath (even All thy Wrath in Christ:) Why then should it lie on us thy poor
Worms? O Turn us therefore as thou have turned thy self, and Reconcile us also;
seeing Thou art Reconciled; and art in Christ also Reconciling the World to thy
self, and not imputing sin. Yet because this has occasioned so many disputes,
How far, and for Whom, or How many, he so bare, the Curses of the Law; I shall
therefore Now rather consider the Doing part of the Law: and what it required
of Man to Man, as well as to God. There being no doubt at all that I know, but
that he was made under this, to All, and for All, the Law required it. So that
now look what ever was required of man, either to God, or to man, Christ was
surely made, and put himself under all that; as his Duty to God also; whose Law
lay upon him, and was written in his Heart also, as his Pleasure, Honor, Joy,
Delight and Happiness; as to be made and kept in the Image of God.

Though also the Suffering part, would soon be cleerer to us, if we did
consider That the Infinite God could have no other fit and full Object of his
Infinite Power, and Justice; or could show the strength of his Almighty Arm,
the Power of his Wrath, or its heavy weight in no other But himself only, or
his own Match, and his Fellow: which surely, no mere finite Being, was, or
could be. If we therefore may imagine God could be any more Angry in Time, then
he was from all Eternity, before the fall, or sin of any Creature: (which sure
he could not be in himself, but to manifestation, and as he makes us afraid,
we judge him Angry:) Or, that he had a mind, or saw it requisite, to show his
mighty Strength and Justice, with the Power of his wrath to the uttermost: yet
sure, he would not choose a little Worm to show it on; (or such, as are much
less than the dust of the Balance; or a drop of a Bucket; even nothing, less
than nothing;) When he had his full Match; and Fellow, which his Sword might
challenge; when it most would wake, and show it self in all its sharpness,
hardness; with all power and strength of that mighty Arm, that held and drew,
and brandished that flaming Sword. Which therefore, none have cause to fear (or
strength to feel, as Christ:) but such only as are high, and strong, and stout,
to think themselves Gods fellows, or his match, and so challenge him. As He or
she that sits as God, even in the Throne of God, and Temple: who must therefore
look to feel the Sword of God, and all that take that Character: which All will
take, whose names are not written in the Lambs Book of Life, even before the
Foundation of the World. And yet These also shall not feel the Sword of his
Hand or Arm (as Christ felt it) but only the Sword of his Mouth: a bright two
edged, blessed Sword; which shall scatter and pierce them so, that as the
Psalms and Prophets speak in several places, He will speak them under him: for,
so, the Phrase is, and may be so translated; rather than he shall destroy, or
subdue, them under him, or under us.

Which Phrase of Speaking them under him (even then, when they have most cause,
to expect destruction) makes me remember a notable place in the 3. of Zephany.
Which the Jews also have marked, as one of the most especial places, in all the
Scripture: having in one verse, every letter of their Alphabet, and those also,
that are only final, as they call them; with other things observable. Which it
may be, also bids us often read and meditate upon it; as One of the most
notable descriptions of the mind; and purpose of God, even in his greatest
Judgments; or in that, we use to call the great, or last Judgment. Which
perhaps is There also hinted. While he speaks Thus; Therefore wait upon me,
says the Lord, to the Day of my Rising up to Eternity; (which some read, to
the Prey) for, my Judgment is, to gather the Nations, that I may assemble the
Kingdoms, to power upon them my Indignation, all my fierce Anger; for by the
fire of my Jealousy, All the Earth shall be devoured. For, (though it seem a
strange For,) Then, I will turn to the Peoples (it is plural, in the Original)
a pure Lip, or Language, (Is not this a Blessed Speaking of them under him?)
That all of them may call upon the Name of the Lord, with one consent, or with
one shoulder. Or one Sechem. For, That is the word in the Hebrew Text; being
the very same with His Name, that circumcised himself, and All the men of his
City Sechem, for the Love of Dinah (which also signifies Judgment, and may
perhaps lead us to the great (or last) Judgment, which may circumcise more men,
than may be, is expected: and be a sore surprise or ravishment to those that
think to ravish it. Which should also be compared with the Judgment on Sechem,
in Judges.

But I will come rather to the plain things of the Gospel, clearly
comprehended, in the Doing Part of the Law. Which I am therefore made to study,
that I may see, not only, my Duty to God or man; but Christ's Duty unto me; a
poor Worm, sprauling here in dust, or thick clay. And yet his Wisdom, and the
Best in him, being now united to Flesh, will not, must not, say to the Foot, I
have no need of Thee: yea, must not disdain to say to this Worm, Thou art my
Brother, or my Sister; and Corruption is my Mother, or my near kindred. And
while others talk of Doing the Law, and performing it to others: I am mainly
bent to see and hope, believe and pray, that Christ will Do it, and perform it
unto me: and so by working in me, teach me, and help me also, so to Act to
others, in some measure As he does to me.

What is the Law which has so long kept us in awe? As if it had, or could,
disanul the free Grace of God, and Covenant thereof, which was made with our
Fathers, and with us in them also, so many hundred years before the Law rose
up. As also the Goodness and Pities of God were from everlasting to
everlasting, and so much longer, and stronger, than his wrath, (which we use to
call his Justice) which is not in him but as a stranger, coming cross his way,
or calling on him, and at most, was but of yester day; when some poor creature
had sinned.

Is not the Law the very mind and Heart of God? even That God, which is Light,
and Love, and perfect goodness? Is it not summed up, by Christ himself, into
Love? All the Law nothing but Love? Thou shall Love the Lord thy God, with all
thy mind, and heart, and might; and the other is like unto this. (Like unto
This! For, Man also is like unto God, and thou must Love, yea, and honor Man
too (But Like as thou do God?) Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

But how can I possibly Love God, or my Neighbor, before God Love me? yea and
some way manifest his Love to me? Can I first give unto God, or lend him, that
it may be paid again? Is it Probable, or Possible, (that I say not noble,
generous, or Ingenuous) for my God to ask and expect my Heart, and Hearts Love
to him, before he had given his Heart, and Hearts Love to me?

What shall we say then? Having loved Man once, he loved him still, being his
own; in his own Image, which he yet owns still in him, after the Fast, and
after the Flood too; Thou shall not shed Man's blood; for, in the Image of God
He is created. Nay, St. Paul is so bold, as to call man not only the Image of
God, but also his Glory: the Image and Glory of God. And yet he speaks of Man
as Man, and of every man; saying also, that Christ is the Head of every man:
and that Man is the Image and Glory of God.

And Wisdom, which is Christ, plainly says, His delights were not only with
Man, but with the Sons of men: or Mankind. And there were no Sons of men, till
after the Fall, and when man had sinned. And Gods Philanthropy, or Love to
Mankind (so much spoken of by St. Paul and others in the New Testament) is
also observed by Moses himself, who beginning to bless the twelve Tribes of
Israel, plainly says, God loves the Peoples also; (for, the word is Plural,
and may take in, all the Gentile Nations also, in the Earth:) yea, he carries
them all in his bosom, as the word he there uses may import. Though he have
also some especial to them that sit at his Feet, and receive the Law at his
Mouth, which he there gives for a sure Character of Gods especial Love: even
his Giving, and their Receiving, of his Law: the Good and Royal Law of Love.
And God so loved the World, even the World, that he gave his Son for the world;
not to condemn the World, but to save it: for, God, even the Father himself, is
Love, and has sent forth his Son in Love: and has also promised his Spirit to
convince the world, even the World, of Sin; and to power it out on all flesh;
that All may see the Glory of God; Yea, every eye may see his Salvation. And
has therefore given his Law to the World, even to the worst of men, as St.
Paul argues to Timothy; that by it, he may convince them, and draw them to
Christ. Having so shut them all up, in unbelief, and conclude them All under
sin, and breach of the Law, that he might have Mercy on them. Which indeed, and
properly speaking, could not be showed, till there was an Object for it; and
there was no Misery, which is the Object of Mercy, till Sin was in the world.

And does not This very Law (this Holy, perfect, Royal Law of Love) express and
speak this Heart and Love of God, to every man, that it speaks to? and that
is the worst of men living. Does it not say, Thou shall love me, because I love
thee? Does it not begin to every Man, to whom it speaks, and say, I am the Lord
thy God? even Thy Lord, and Thy God! and Therefore Thou shall have No other
God, because I am Thy God. And therefore thou shall not bow to Images, but
Worship me only, because I only, am the Lord Thy God. And therefore thou shall
honor my Name, and not abuse my Love, or take my Name or Goodness in vain, or
turn it into Wantonness, because I am the Lord thy God. And will thou not both
love and honor, That is Reverence, that great and Reverend Name, The Lordthy
God. Not a Terrible Name, but a Reverend Name: and therefore to be loved, and
greatly honored, or Reverenced; as God bids us Reverence his Sanctuary, and a
Woman must Reverence her Husband: and the time is coming that we shall not call
our God Baali, that is, My Lord, or hard Master; But Ishi, my Husband. And yet
we shall then most Love and Reverence him with Godly, Sonly, Fear and Reverence.

And because this Name of the Lord my God is so great, and holy, and reverend;
Therefore I am bid to reverence it, and hallow it; even as the first Petition
of our Lords Prayer, teaches us to pray; and by no means to take it in vain.
For, they that name it, must depart from Iniquity.

And although the words added, of not holding him guiltless, that takes his
Holy Name in vain, ought still to keep me in great aufull Reverence, yet they
ought not to make me have any hard thoughts of God, as if he were an Hard
Master, which our Savior showed as the Root of all miscarriage. And those
words may seem to speak a selfish person, and so hard to please, and so
unexorable when displeased, that do little suit the sweet and Gracious Heart of
God; which is Pure and Peaceful, hardly provoked, and Gentle, easy to be
entreated: Slow to anger, and without fury (which rest only in the bosom of
Fools) Delighting in Mercy and abounding in Goodness; The Father of Mercies,
pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin; And when he is provoked to visit and
chasten, yet he does it Gently and Slowly, and by degrees, not at once, but in
three or four Generations, as it may be born, least the spirit that he has
made, should fail before him. And when he afflicts, He will not do it for
ever, For, he does it not willingly, or from his Heart: but he will Turn again,
and show compassion, because he delights in Goodness; and his pitties and
compassions never fail; and his tender Mercies are over all his works. yea all
his works shall praise him, the earth and all that is in it, and the Sea also
is full of his Goodness. He opens his Handwide, and fills all things with
Good, and gives the desire of every living thing. Every Tree in the Forest
shall clap hands, and sing, and rejoice, the very Dragons shall praise him, the
Owls shall answer one another in his Praises. Every thing that has breath
shall praise him. All flesh shall see his glory; and every eye shall see his
Salvation. For, what is Glory, in some places, speaking thus, is Salvation in
others, and so in the Gospel also, Citing it out of the Prophets.

In a word, there is nothing in that Threatening, or in any other, in this Law
(and why then should we fear the Gospel?) but what speaks, Gods tender Love,
and Gracious Pities and Compassions. Even his very Jealousy (which yet is made
the Foundation of all his visitting) springs from Love. It is so in man, much
more in God, who is love its self, and when he means to show his greatest Love,
to his poor people, in recovering them from all captivity and sorrow: he
expresses it, by being Jealous over them, and for them, with a great
Jealousy. And St. Paul calls his tender bowels to the poor Saints, a Godly
Jealousy, or a Godlike Jealousy. Lest a stranger should attempt to get away
their heart, which he had, like God the Father, Espoused to his dear Son Jesus.
And when the Lord resolves both effectually and speedily to recover his
backsliding people, he promises to move them to Jealousy also; as himself is
moved with Jealousy for them: lest another get their heart from him, which
would never trouble him, if he did not very much love them, and very tenderly.

And although Jealousy in Christ (for, it is proper to an Husband) may seem as
the Wrath of a man that will not spare or pardon in his day of visitation, as
the wise man expresses it: Yet even That very phrase of Not sparing, or Not
pardoning (which yet is one of the hardest or harshest expressions in the whole
Scriptures) is no other, than the very same Solomon, does not only observe and
commend, but require and comman^ ^so, in a tender hearted Father, to the Son of
his own bowels: whom yet he must Chasten, and not spare, or pardon: it is that
very phrase. Which, yet sure, cannot mean, that he shall be always angry, and
never reconciled; but that he sorely chasten and correct in earnest, and as an
Ordinance of God, and not for lust or dalliance, or so as may occasion sin, or
harden in the sin so visited. May it not be possible also, that the dearest
children of God, even Moses, may commit such a Failor in his Generation work,
as may in such a sense be never forgiven; that is, Sorely chastened, as David
was, and be still remaining as a Spot, for that Generation work, though they
may, and shall be saved. May They also, or only, commit such Unpardonable sins?

And such a visitation may be threatened, in the second Command: as was
promised, rather than threatened, to David's children. Who yet had the
everlasting Covenant, and the sure Mercies, or as the Acts expresses it, the
sure Holy things of David: which are also promised to every Believer, or every
one that Thirsts, and thirsting comes to the Waters; even to them, and their
seed for ever. So that if his children break the Law, and shall despise his
Statutes, Then will I visit their Transgression with the Rod, and their
Iniquity with stripes. He will chasten them with Rods, and as Ezekiel
expresses it, cause them to pass under the Rod, and Bond of the Covenant: So
that Rods are a part of the Cevenant, and its Bond. But he will not take away
his Everlasting Kindness. Yet, as he speaks of Solomon (perhaps one of the
greatest sinners ever living:) for this, I will afflict, or chasten the House
of David: but not for Ever. Not for ever. I will not retain my Anger for Ever;
which is expressly forbidden Man in general, And so Christ also, in the very
Law that says,

Thou shall not avenge thy self, or reserve thine Anger: No not till the Sun go
down. For so this Law is pressed upon us; and why not so, upon every one made
under that Law also? and by consequence on Christ himself! Nor shall thou bear
any grudg, or thought in thy heart, against the Children of thy People: for my
Covenant is with them and their childrens children also, for evermore.
Therefore thou shall bear no grudg against them, or any of their Children: But
thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Which our Savior, and the Apostles,
so much, the sum of the whole Law. And to this very place, and the phrase here
used, of not reserving Anger, or not retaining ought in heart, he very many
times alludeth: when he says of himself, I will not retain for ever; or I will
not reserve my Anger; or I will not be always Wroth; or I will not contend for
ever: and the like expressions, which himself, and all the Scripture affirms of
him, diverse times: as one of the first and chiefest things we ought to believe
os him. Which is also a most comfortable acknowledgment, that He also takes,
himself to be obliged, with the following words of the same verse (which he
cites also several times:) Thou shall love thy Neighbor, as thou love thy
self. Very sweet, as Lying on Man to Man; but yet much sweeter, as it lies on
Christ (the Son of Man) to Man, Mankind, every Man: As I hope will be fully
cleared anon.

Nor do I find any thing in any of the Commandments, contrary to this. No, not
That of Gods Jealousy (which we touched before) and his visiting the Iniquity
of the Fathers on their children. Even when he sees so much Iniquity in the
Father, that by his general Laws of Justice, Truth, Equity, and Mercy too, (for
they go all together,) he must visit; yet he is so slow to anger, and so loath
to afflict, that he will do it by degrees, and by steps: and not so, that may
make the Father so miserable as he deserves, and might very justly be. But so,
that he may have some part of the rod, as David had; and his children also some
other part of it; so, as may bring them to see, and know, and acknowledge, the
Iniquities of their Fathers also. Which God promised, rather than threatened, to
Moses, on Mount Sinai also, as we read in the 26. of Leviticus: so much cited
and confessed (sor their Fathers also) in the ninth chapters of Daniel, Ezra,
and Nehemiah; that I say nothing of David in the 50. Psalm: and Ezekiel, the
Son of Man, (and so a special Type of Christ the Son of Man) is bid to make his
people Know their sins, and the Transgressions and Iniquities of their Fathers.
Which are forgiven when Seen and acknowledged, bemoaned and repented; as God
promises he will bring them unto. For, it is not, as some read it, If they
shall confess, etc. But it is an absolute Promise, in Leviticus, and
Deuteronomy, (and so cited also by Nehemiah, or Daniel, and Ezekiel,) that he
would bring them to confess: and that they should, confess their own
Iniquities, and their Fathers also, and be ashamed for them.

That which also follows in the second Command, is very sweet; and far from
showing God to be an Angry, Wrathful God; as Satan would fain represent him. As
at first in Paradise, some of his very first spawn, (cast on our great Mother,
and continued ever since, till Christ shall break his head, and destroy his
malice with his works,) was This, That God, was an Envious God: the Root of all
evil, and hard thoughts of God. Who even in Judging, and in Chastening, and in
all, his worst visitations, There Threatened, (where yet, he spoke his heart,
and seems to speak his worst;) will still remember Mercy. Even in Judgment, and
in visiting most, as a Jealous God, he will remember Mercy. And will but
correct in measure: and will not contend for ever, lest the Spirit fail, which
he has made. But will visit only, to the third or fourth Generation, even in
those that Hate him. Which yet we All do, and could not but do; Till he Turn
us, by manifesting Love to us. Love, which he still bears in his heart; and
it is there Rivetted so fast, that he can as soon Un-god himself, I would speak
with Reverence, as he can cast out Love, from his Heart; or act to his poor
creatures without Love. Nay, give me leave to tell you, he loved Adam Better,
more: or with a Better Love, or more Godlike, after his Fall, than before. Nay
it may be, Now much better, since his long sorrows and sufferings, than before
in Paradise. Nay, I had almost said with a better Love than he loved Christ
himself, before his Fall or Sufferings. For, he tells us, it is a Little Love,
to love our like, our Friend; one lovely, fair, and beautiful: kind and
thankful, still to us, for all our love. A very small, and poor, and little
Love: which sinners show, and Hypocrites, and All, to All their like. But, that
God might increase his Love to Adam; or might show a Better Love than he could
manifest (be it spoken with Reverence) while Man was Like him, Holy, Wise, and
Just, Truly Fair and Beautiful in All: he let him fall, into the dirt, and dust
of death. Into the Pox, or worse disease, that might deform him wholly; so that
he might commend his love indeed, to such as hated him, and were unworthy,
ugly: more deformed then poor Job, when botched all, and naked, most forlorn
and miserable, in his own and others thoughts, and left in the hand of Satan,
at his will, But only save his Life, or Soul: as God expresses it. Not only
for a Type of somewhat yet to come, unto All that will wait with Job, and
expect the Lords End: but it may be, representing Adam also, as accused and
tempted by Satan, and at length left in his hands; till God could show, his
love was not only skin deep, as we say; but everlasting. Nay increasing more
and more, as it could make or find an Object, for that pity and compassion, and
that gracious Mercy, which could not appear, but still had been unseen abroad,
from God, or hid within him; had not his Wisdom contrived an Object for it,
which was Misery, and guilt: which was not, till Sin came in: and so he let him
fall, and shut him up under sin and guilt, that he migh show him Mercy: which
he could not do before.

And as before his fall, God did not absolutely tie himself to Punish him; So,
After the fall, he did not execute That upon him, which he might have done: but
devised devices, (as the Wise Woman of Tekoa said to David) that his poor
Banished might not perish. And yet still preserved his own Honor and Majesty,
Truth and Justice too; with such a kind of Love and Tender pity, merciful
compassion; which could not appear abroad, or possibly be shown till sin, or
guilt, or shame, or fear, or sorrow, grief or pain, or some such misery, or
other, made an Object capable of pity, mercy, or compassion.

I shall yet a little more insist on these Particulars, and show I hope, they
very well agree, and no way contradict the Words and Mind of God, even in the
Law, or harshest part of all the Scriptures.

First I premise, God loved him: and could not but love him, very entirely (if
he loved himself,) while he was in his own Image. And having so loved him, and
being so Immutable, in his Heart, Love and Nature, he loved him to the End. And
I do not yet clearly see how any Promise can Oblige God, to a more Constant
Love, of Man restored to that Image; Then his own Nature and Heart, moved him
to love Adam, In that Image.

Now, if his Heart, be not so truly Tender, Gracious, and Perfectly Good, and
immutable also, in his most Genuine and Natural Love; but that it could, really
change, toward Adam, in his own Image; (yea and that also, before his fall, or
any demerit what ever;) as to decree his everlasting ruin; or at least to
leave him to it so, foreseeing that he would, so fall, and rise no more, in
himself and his Posterity; How can any man be sure, and rest upon his Word, or
Promise, that he will not leave him, when he is renewed again, into that Image?
Seeing it may be still doubted, whether any man living, can fully know Gods
heart, and mind, by his words, or expressions; except there be, some way else,
to know it (and to rest and trust in it) then his words can express, or import.

Or unless, a man may also be taught, to believe his Word, is Better, Truer,
and more Certain, Fixed, and Obliging also, then his very Heart and Nature is.
Which (as some Teach or Believe) was Such, even then, when it loved most (or as
much as it could love its self, or its own Image) that it yet hated, and
forsook, and left to I know not what, Irrecoverable misery, his own Image, and
his dearly beloved; in his own person, or at least his posterity: even his very
next Son, and Sons Sons, to all Generations, yea to all Eternity, for the far
greatest part of his Posterity.

May we not therefore believe and say, that with a true, constant and Eternal
Love of Delight and Complacence, from all Eternity to all Eternity, God loved
himself: and his own Image, where ever it was? And nothing else but kimself,
and his own Image, with that kind of Love? And so, before the fall, he loved
man; And being fallen, with a Sweeter, better, Greater, Kinder kind of Love,
of Pity, Mercy and most tender Bowels of Compassion: Which was ever in that
Infinite Fountain of All being; But it appeared not abroad, till the Wisdom of
God, contrived how to shut up some in fear and guilt, that so he might at once,
show Justice Truth and Mercy also, which then Met and Kissed, Embracing one
another.

And the Lord foreseeing, and Resolving all this, that so it should, and so it
must be, while his Heart was such (and such it must be, while he was, and is
himself: which was and will be ever, and beyond all words that express
Eternity) He still spoke so wisely, that when he threatened most, yet he lefr an
Issue for goodness to come forth, and show it self, with Truth and Justice
too. And therefore at the very first Command and Threatening to our Father,
Dying thou shall Dye (or thou shall surely Die) he did not tie his hands, or
bind himself, without such Reservations, as might still afford, room large
enough, for Truth and Mercy both.

I shall not enquire at present, upon what account, it pleased the Lord, to
abridge Adam in Paradise, of That which he granted before (when he gave him for
meat e-Every herb bearing Seed, and every Tree, in which is the Fruit of a
Tree yielding Seed;) which is not Usual with God: To give and then to take
away, without demerit. Nor do I say, Adam obliged himself to that, which he
needed not, if he had considered his former Pattent, or his Deed of Gift. But
this I say in general, there is not a Word, Command, or Threatening, spoken to
man, that is not spoken by Christ; And first therefore spoken by God, in and to
Christ: who then speaks nothing, but what God said to him, in him; and As the
Father spoke it unto him, so he speaks unto man. But certainly there was not
any one word ever spoken by God to Christ, either Precept or Threatening, with
any purpose to make him Despair; But to Do believe and live. And by
consequence, never any one Word or Threatening of the whole Law, spoken by
Christ, to any man, but As the Father spoke it unto him: not to make him
Despare, but believe and live. For which also see, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. and 29. 29.
Psalm. 78. 5, 6, 7, 8. 81. 13. Prove. 22. 19, 20. Isa. 48. 17, 18. Romans 15. 4.
John 3. 17. 17. and 5. 34. and 12. 47, 48, 49, 50. and 20. 31. Again I do not
see plainly, what God meant by Dying, when he said, thou shall surely dye, or
dying dye. Or, that if he meant the worst of deaths for kind, he meant it, so
also for Duration. Seeing Christ, when he bore the Curse, and its heavy weight,
did not dye such a kind of death: or at least for such duration, as it is
supposed to be here threatened. And the very phrase here used to Adam, is
threatened to David's Child by Bathsheba; and to many others in the Scripture.
And to Hezechiah, it is added, Thou shall not live: And yet, he did not die,
but live. And David hoped that his Child might live, notwithstanding that
threatening, dying it shall die, or it shall surely die. And sure when it did
die, he did not believe it dyed Etetnally: or that this was threatened by that
phrase, so frequent also in Scripture.

And if God had meant any such Eternal death to Adam, by that threatening, it is
somewhat strange, that after the fall, he removed them out of Paradise, and
guarded it so, least they should yet eat of the Tree of Life, and Live for
Ever: though he had said, Thou shall surely dye. But to put the matter out of
doubt: We may see Gods Meaning of this Threatening, in the 24. cha. of Ezekiel.
where he says the people should so certainly die in their sins, and pine away
in their Iniquities; with the most terrible expressions, and most vehement
assertions, that can well be imagined. as, Because, I would have purged thee,
and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged, till I have caused my fury
to rest upon thee; I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will
do it. I will not go back, neither will I repent; But you shall pine away, for
your iniquity, etc. which is the terrible Threatening, reserved for the last
place, in that famous and gradual Judgment, so solemnly denounced in the
twenty sixth of Leviticsn. And As a Seal of this most heavy doom, Ezekiel is
stricken dumb (and can no more admonish or comfort them, so finally devoted to
destruction,) so that he never speaks a word more to them from that 24. chap.
to the thirty third.

And there, God lets and bids him speak again, unto the Children of his people.
By which very phrase, we are led back to that sweet place, we cited so lately
out of the 19. of Leviticus, of bearing no grudge against the Children of his
people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; thou shall not hate thy
Brother in thy heart, but shall certainly rebuke him, and not suffer sin to lie
upon him. Which is the Text on which the Lord so comments, to the Son of man,
whom God there sets up (as a mighty Type of Christ) to be the great Watchman
and warner, to his brethren and his neighbors. Or to be a light to lighten the
Gentiles also; each man, and every Man, that comes into the World. Adding also
on that occasion, that if a Nation or a people of a place, do of themselves, in
a time of darkness and danger, choose a man, and set him up for a Watchman, or
a Teacher, or a Ruler among them (there being alike reason;) God will own it as
His Ordinance: though but of Humane Choice and Institution. Which may be
compared with That of the Apostle, of submitting to Man's Institutions in
Government, even for the Lord; or as an Ordinance of God. To be much
considered, by those that reject Rulers, or Teachers, if they cannot show a
special Call, or Mission by God.

Upon That occasion, the Son of Man, (which also reaches to Christ, whose work
is much described in Ezekiel:) has his strict, yet general Rules also; when
ever God threatens Man. And Then remembering the last solemn Threatening, but
now cited from the 24. chapter, (which was the last spoken to them) He
commands Thus, O thou Son of Man, speak unto the House of Israel: Thus you
speak, saying, If our sins be so upon us, that we must Pine away in them (which
was the last great Threatening,) How then shall we, or can we, possibly Live?
Say unto them. As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the Death of
the wicked (even of the wicked) but that the wicked, Turn from his Way, and
live. Turn you, Turn you, from your evil ways, for, why will you die, O ye
House of Israel?

And then gives that sweet, and yet general Rule, for interpreting All the
Lords Threatenings; and This in particular, used to Adam, Dying thou shall die,
or Thou shall surely die: The very Words spoken to Adam, and the worst of All
that was Threatened to Him. When I say to the Wicked (as I did once, to my
dearly beloved Adam, in Innocence) Thou shall surely die: Yet if he Turn (and
Thou must warn him of those very words; that he may Turn and Repent; and Then)
he shall surely live, he shall not die. Which is several times repeated,
notwithstanding that Doom, Thou shall surely Die. Which in general, God has
here interpreted, when ever he so speaks, or shall so speak; (for it is the
Infinite Mood or Manner of speaking;) In my saying, or when ever I do say, or
shall say, Dying thou shall Die, or Thou shall surely Die: Yet it is not, nor
may be taken as any Absolute Doom; but a conditional Threatening. Which, in case
of Repentance, shall never come to Sentence, and much less to Execution.

And yet it was to a Wicked Man, as Wicked; O Thou wicked Man: and so to one in
a much worse condition, and more desperate, than Adam was; when it was so
pronounced to him, in Paradise.

And upon This Occasion also, God Comments on that Clause in the second
Command, of visiting the Fathers sins upon the Children: which the Jews judged
not Equal; and expressed by their usual Proverb, The Fathers have Eaten the
sour Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on Edge. Which he confutes at
large, in the 18 of Ezekiel; and swears it shall not be used any more. Which
is to be compared with That most sweet Chapter, the 31. of Jerem. Where also
That Evil Proverb, is commanded and promised Down: with such a sweet and
gracious Context, both before, and after it, as can never be, too much
considered.

And the Lords Discourse against That Proverb, may be a good Comment, on that
passage in the second Command, of visiting Iniquities of the Fathers, on the
Children: But on Those that go on, in their Fathers Iniquities. And Then also,
the Children never Die for the Fathers sin. They may be visited, or chastened;
But They shall not Die, for their Fathers sin. No not for their Great Father
Adams.

Which is a very comfortable thing, and much to be considered by All: and in
special, with relation to Infants, that die without Actual sin; having not
sinned, after the similitude of Adams Transgression. But the Lord has here
promised, the Children shall not die for, or Bear, the Fathers sin. Nor indeed,
was That Expressed to Adam: or for ought appears, was intended; that His
Children should Die for His sin. Nay rather, God has expressly declared the
contrary: that They shall not. And yet Death came in, by sin, and passed over
All: seeing All have sinned and came short of the Glory of God. And yet They do
not Die (and sure Then not Eternally) for their Fathers sin. Which may be
compared with That of our Savior, touching the man born blind: and yet neither
for His Own sin, or his Fathers; but that the Glory of God might be seen in his
blindness. And yet the Fathers Iniquity (for, That is the Phrase) May be
visited upon the Children: and are the Visitations of God Small things? But yet,
why should we despair of the Goodness of God, even in his visitation? seeing
Himself also has chosen such a Phrase, that with God and man speaks
kindness? And a Love visit rather than any Hatred? And if we rightly understand
Gods heart in All, we would long for his visits, though he should come, but to
chide, or to chasten us: and we should value the very lowest, and the meanest
of his visits, at a very great rate. Sure it is not a little thing to be
visited by a great Man! How much more by a good Man? which if we understood,
and saw the person they represent to us, and the Embassage they still come
about, we should cry, as Elizabeth to the Virgin Mary: How is it, that the
Mother, Brother, Sister, of my Lord, vouchsafes thus to visit me? for, every
one that is His, and does His Fathers will; is his Mother, Brother, Sister; as
himself speaks. And have not many Thus entertained Angels? How much more is
it then, for God, and Jesus Christ, to come and visit, such poor Worms, as we
are? For, What is Man, that thou should so magnify him? (even so magnify
him!) and that thou should set thy heart upon him? and That Thou should
Visit him every morning, and Try him every moment? Yea, as if David would lead
us up, to the very Visits made by God, to Adams Children, after the Fall; he
expresses it Thus; Lord what is Enos, that thou should remember him; and
the Son of Adam, that thou should visit him? For he very well knew it a
great condescension in God, and happiness to Man, that God should come, to
visit him. For, his Visitations sustain our spirits, and preserve us alive. I
need not tell you what the Jews say of Sampsons visiting his Wife with a Kid: or
Abraham's visiting of Hagar, in the Wilderness; a Type of what is on her, and
her Children to this day; as St. Paul speaks. Or what is promised to all the
Kings and great men in the Terrible Pit; that after many days they should be
visited; as we read in Esaias; to be compared also with Zech. 9. 11, 12. Yea even
when his Visit is to chasten us, it is an Honor, and an Happiness. My Son
despise not thou the Chastening of the Lord, neither be thou weary of His
Correction: for, whom the Lord loves he corrects, even as a Father does a
Son of his delight.

Behold, Happy is the man, whom the Lord corrects, Therefore despise not thou
the chastising of the Almighty. For, be makes sore, and binds up: He
wounds, and his hands make whole. Which, in That very Book also, is more
largely repeated by Elihu (in the person of Christ, as his Name imports, He is
my God) who shows Gods designs in afflicting of Man: yea and Then when he
visits in Anger, though he know it not in great Extremity; a very
considerable Expression, whether we take it of God, or of Job: who was taught
that all Gods Angry visits, were for Good of man, to show him his Way, and to
hide Pride from him, and to recover him from his sins and sorrows also. Which
is confirmed also, by the Psalmist, in diverse places. Especially after he has
so solemnly called, Invited, and Wooed all Nations and People of the Earth, to
come in, and bow to God, because of his Goodness and marvelous Kindness, to the
children of men: from the 95. onward. Showing also that Afflictions, and the
Lords visits, even unto Fools (the worst of men,) is to make them cry to God,
and stir up his Pities and Compassions, that never fail: and to make his tender
bowels yearn over them so, that he will hear them in their trouble, and will
save them out of their distress; He will send his Word and heal them; and
deliver them from their destructions. They (even They also) shall praise the
Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works to the Children of men.
Which is diverse times repeated in one Psalm; and that also, by way of Prophecy
or Promise; and not only by Wishing, as some now translate it.

Though the very Wishes of the Spirit of God, writing the Scripture; and it is,
O that all the Lords People were Prophets; and O that they would hearken, and
had Ears to hear, or hearts to do as they say: And O that they would consider
and Turn; and O that they would confess to God, or acknowledge God, or praise
and bless God: And Let All flesh praise him, and every thing that has breath
praise the Lord: and the like Sighs and Groans, Wishes and Prayers, of the good
Spirit of God in the hearts of his People (especially those that wrote the
Scriptures;) are indeed both Prophesies and Promises: or very strong convincing
Arguments, that such things so wished, prayed, and desired, shall be granted to
men, and performed in them, and in all the Earth also.

Even as Christ's setting all his People to pray, that our Fathers Kingdom might
come, and his Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven, (Even in The Heaven,
or Heaven of Heavens) is a very strong argument, and great assurance, with
Evidence, that It shall be so; Even in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Yea, and it
is very usual in Scripture, first for the Spirit to express its sighs and
groans, and ardent desires and longings, for a thing; and afterward, we read
it prophesied, and promised, It shall be so. First it cries, Let All the Earth
be full of thy Glory: and then afterward, It shall be All full of my Glory.
First, Let all thy Works praise thee: and Then, They shall All praise thee. Let
All Nations see thy Glory: and Then All Nations, and Every Eye, shall see the
Glory, yea and the Salvation, of God. The Skies shall power down Righteousness,
and the Earth shall open, and they shall bring forth Salvation: for, the Lord
has created, and commanded it. He has willed it, and his people will it also.
For, Concerning his Sons and his Daughters, They will Ask him; but concerning
the Works of his Hands, even All the works of his Hands; They may, and will,
and shall, (as they are bid) command him. And shall do the same works, yea and
Greater also, than ever Christ did, Then on Earth. For, he did but begin (but
Begin) to do and Teach (as we read in the beginning of the Acts) and has left
All to be finished, by his Servants after him: who for This, is gone to the
Father, and set down at his Right Hand; and so has Power, or must, and shall,
have Power, over All the Works of his Hands.

And has he received All that Power, in Heaven and Earth, for Destruction, or
for Edification? I trust verily for Edification, and not for Destruction. As S.
Paul spoke of His. So it is, and much more, and better much, I hope, in
JesusChrist: seeing that he can heal us if he will (as the poor Lepar said) and
can quicken whom he will (as himself says) why should we doubt his Will?
seeing with us, it is one of the lowest steps of Grace, and Goodness, to be
Willing to be Good, and Graceful: Yea and as Good, and full of Grace, as we can
be, and have any Power to be. Why may we not hope it so, in Christ's Will also?
Is it Less and Narrower, or Worse, and Weaker, then his Power? Is his Heart
Narrow, as Mine is? And his Bowels straightened also? Or his Eye Evil, and his
Heart Envious also? That he will not give, or do, or cannot abide to see, the
Good, he might both See, and Do, and Give, and Work, very easily in us, by that
Power he has received; and the Gifts he had, for Rebels also.

I have sometimes thought it might be better much, and more Ingenuous far, to
think our Savior Weak, or quite unable, to do what he would; then wilful, or
unwilling, to do what he can, for Good. The one, does but make him Weak as a
man; the other, Evil, Envious, or Malicious, as a Wicked Man or Devil. Or an
Hypocrite, that makes a great show of Grace, and good in his Face; as the Heb
Canaph, or Knave, is one that has Grace, which in Heb is Can ap-pearing, But
not in his Heart. Or one that can, but will not, be Gracious. Or makes a show
of Good, without an Heart to it, or a will to be so Good, as easily he might,
if he would.

Especially, when I plainly see Christ founding his Calls and Invitations of
the Gospel, on this very Botom and Foundation: That he has All Power, given
him by his Father; and All things. So in Saint Matthew, All things are
delivered to me of my Father; Come unto me, All ye that Labor and are heavy
Laden; I will givey ou Rest. Come Learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly, (even
as Good in Heart, as in Head, or Arm, or any Power whatever;) And you shall
find Rest, to your Souls.

And again, at his Resurrection, and before his Ascension; All Power is Given
me, both in Heaven and Earth; Therefore go Preach. Do not fight, or force;
though I have All Power; and you shall have it also, for I will be with you to
the end of the World: And therefore Preach.

And so also, before, he Cured a Poor Man, that was borne by others, and had no
Tongue or Heart, that we read, to speak for himself; Or it may be, Faith to
believe, or expect it; for it is said, Christ seeing Their Faith; not His, but
Theirs; he said, Son, be of Good Cheer, Thy sins be forgiven thee: and moved
with Compassion also, Healed him (as diverse also, that were only in his Sight,
though they said nothing for themselves; and he never denied any, for
themselves or others:) and This was, That he might show, the Son of man had
Power, even power on Earth also, to forgive sins. And has he less Power in
Heaven? Or less Heart to use it? Seeing he is Exalted, and set at the Right
Hand of God (and so has Power over all his handy Works) and made a Prince and
Savior, for this very end, and purpose, that he may Give Repentance and
Remission of sins: to All that Ask and Wrestle for it: as the Seed of true
Seekers, and that Brood of Travelers, as Jacob; who by seeking so, and
wrestling, did become a Prince with God: and Thence was called Israel. And the
Lord delights to call himself The God of Israel. Though it might make him
blush (more then any Name, or all the Names in all the Bible:) were not his
Heart, rather better, then his Strength and Power was. For, every time he calls
himself the God of Israel, he remembers How a Poor, Weak, Frail, Halting Man,
Overcame him, at his own Weapons. For he set upon him, and was overcome; and
could not go, (he would not let him go) till he had Blessed him.

He appeared to Abraham by the Name Elshaddai, God Almighty; (and Abraham's
believing but This Power, was imputed for Righteousness:) But afterward by
the Name Jehovah, which speaks his Will also: And I will be, what I will be,
or what I can be. As the Words are; and not as some read them, I am what I am;
which the lowest Creature may be said to be.

And at the Close of the Baptists Testimony of Christ, in the third of John,
This is made the very Ground work of our Faith, and Hope in Christ, and coming
to him; because the Father has loved him, and given All things into his hand.
And so does himself also make it, several times, in That very Gospel. For, the
Father Loves the Son, and shows him, all he does; and will show him greater
things then these, that you may Marvel; For, as the Father quickens the dead,
even so the Son quickens whom he will: For, the Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should Honor the Son,
even as they Honor the Father. For, as the Father has Life in himself, so
has he given the Son also, to have Life in himself, and has given him
Authority to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man. And again,
the Hour is come that the Son of Man should be Glorisied; But, as a Corn of
Wheat, he must first die (that so he may be made a quickening Spirit;) and then
he shall bring forth much Fruit; (for he will not die as a Fool dies; But will
improve his death to the utmost, and do as much good as he Can; and will Work
while he may Work; Least the Night come, and then he cannot Work. He will
therefore do, what is in his Hand, and Power to do, and will do it, with all
his Might: Remembering him that said, withhold not thy hand, while it is in thy
Power to Work; Say not to thy Neighbor go and come again to Morrow; When it
is now in thy Power to do him Good.) And now shall the Prince of this World be
cast out; And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw All men unto me:
and Him that comes to me, will I in no wise (I will not, I will not) cast him
off, or cast him out: But walk while you have the Light, least Darkness come
upon you. These things he spoke, and did Hide himself from them. But he came,
and Cried again, He that sees me, sees him that sent me: I am come a Light
unto the World (and he lights every one that comes into the World) that
whosoever believes, should not abide in Darkness. If any Man hear my Words
and believe not, I judge him not, for I came not to judge the World, but to
Save the World: and these things I say, that you might be Saved.

And again, Jesus knowing that the Father had given All things into his hands,
and that he was come from God, and went to God; he rises from Supper, and took
a Towel, and girded himself, and washed his Disciples feet: (O see his Heart,
when he has Power; for, all this is) because the Father had given, All things,
into His Hands.

And when Judas was gone out, immediately after the Sop (though St Luke seem to
make him present at the Sacrament, and one of the twelve, of whom, or to whom,
he spoke of twelve Thrones, and Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel) he says,
Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him: and if God be
glorified in him, God shall also glorify him, in himself, and shall
straightway glorify him. And shall not All bow to him, and to the Glory of God
also? And if God be glorified in them, God will glorify them with himself: or
where is the stress of our Saviors Argument?

And again, It is expedient, that I go; for else the Comforter will not come;
and when he comes, he shall convince the World, of sin. For, so God loved the
World, that he sent his Son, not to condemn, the world, or Judge it, but to save
the world: by That which he will give for the Life of the World. And again,
which he shall give unto you: for, Him has God the Father sealed.

And again, I have many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now.
Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth;
for, he shall glorify me, and shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. All
things that the Father has, are mine: therefore I said, that he shall take of
mine, and show It unto you.

And again, Father, Glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify Thee, (a
Good Comment on the Lords Prayer: for who can first give to God, that it may be
given? or can lend, that it may be paid again?) As thou have given him Power,
over All flesh, that he should, -- not only may, but should give Eternal Life,
to as many, as thou have given him.

And, if That be not yet plain enough before; in That very chapter he repeats
it again; saying, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which
thou have given me; For they are Thine. And all Mine are Thine, and Thine are
Mine, and I am glorified in them.

And his saying here, I pray not for the world; stands as much alone, without a
Fellow, or any like it, as most words in all the Bible. And how can we build
any great matter of Faith, upon That which has not two or three Witnesses to
confirm it? Yet if it were said, I Will not pray for the world: Is it more, or
more obliging, or concluding, than That in Hosea? Call her Lo-ruhamah; I will
no more have mercy upon the House of Israel; and I will not have mercy on her
children; and I will not be their God. And yet he did turn again, and had pity
on them, because he delighted in Mercy: and where it was said, You are not my
People, There it shall be said, You are the Sons of the Living God.

So also, Thy Name shall be no more called Jaacob, but Israel. And yet God
himself often called him Jaacob, after This.

So also, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice. And I did not command your
Fathers, or speak to them, concerning Sacrifice. And in the same Prophet, They
shall teach no more, saying, Know the Lord. And You murmur not against us, but
God. And they have not rejected Thee, but Me. As in the Gospel: I came not to
Judge the world; nor will I Judge you. And again, I do not, or I will not, call
you Servants. And, You shall ask me Nothing. And when thou make a Feast, Thou
shall not invite thy Friends.

In all which, and diverse other places, sure we do not believe any absolute
Negative, but Comparative: Or at least not so definitive, but such as may be
reversed.

And why should that saying, I will not Pray for the world (if he had said so)
oblige Christ more, than That, I will not be your God, or I will not show you
mercy? Or, Thou shall Die, and thou shall not Live? as it was said to Hezekiah,
and yet he did not Die, but Live. Or that to Samuel or Jeremiah; Thou shall not
Pray for This man, or This people? Which yet, it may be, made them Pray More
than they did before: and so perhaps was One good means to recover them that
else might have been so irrecoverable. And so This very saying of Christ, (if
he had so said) I will not Pray for the world, might have been a great means to
save the World, and to recover them, by convincing them of their forlorn and
desperate estate.

For, This may be one great End of the heaviest Threatenings in the Scripture,
not only to shut men under fear and guilt (that so they may be fitter Objects
of Pity and Mercy;) but to Convince them also, that they may be in a way for
mercy. It being the great Art of the Holy Ghost, to work along with the Word,
suitable to the Subject, and Object it has, to work upon. And in a sharp
Threatening, it is as Vinegar, or burnt Alum, or some Corrasive to putrid
flesh, that must be taken off.

And How will a poor Soul Tremble under This, That Christ, who is Love it self,
should once say, I will not Pray for you. As every one is ready to apply it to
himself, while under the Convincing Work of the Spirit: which is promised to
Convince the world also, of sin, and Righteousness.

But he does not say, I Will not Pray for the world: but only, I Do not. Just
perhaps as in the Chapter before, he said to his own Disciples, I do not say, I
will pray for you: for, the Father himself loves you. And in That day you
shall ask me Nothing. And hitherto you have asked Nothing. Which are Negatives
comparative, not absolute.

And why not This also, I do not pray, only, or mainly, and chiefly, for the
world; but for Those thou have given me, out of the world. And it may be,
Christ finds enough upon him, as a Man, (and so only he Prays) to mind his
Elect, and care for Them: Though God (and He also as God) Loves the world also
(and the Peoples, in distinction from Israel, as Moses expresses it.) Yea, and
He was given also, for the world; and sent to bear away the sins of the world;
and not to condemn, but save the world; and to be a Propitiation for the sins
of the world. As we read (with many such passages) in This very Apostle, who
records This Prayer.

And if we take the words asstrictly as we may, being only in the Present
Tence, I do not yet Pray for the world: We know not how soon, he yet might
pray, for the world also: Though he Now did not.

Seeing in this very Prayer, toward the end, he prayed for others, Many
others, then he Now Prayed for, at the beginning of it. And I know not but the
World, might Then, come in also; if I should grant it did not Now.

Epecially seeing, One great End of all he asked, for his Disciples also, and
for all others, was, that the World may come to know that thou have sent me,
and have loved them, as thou have loved me.

And in the beginning of this very Prayer, Christ shows, that it is Eternal
Life to know God, and Him whom God had sent. And by this, he proved that his
Disciples knew the Name of God, and kept his Word, because they now believed
that God sent him, and knew surely that he was come out from God. And yet in
the latter end of this Prayer, he beggeth so, and so, for His, and all that
should believe; that the whole World also, might come to know, that God had sent
him, and had loved them, as he loved him. Which may be added to That we noted
in the chap. before; When the Comforter shall come to You, he shall Convince
the World also, of sin, and of Righteousness.

And yet (as himself, and St. Paul also said) the World, as the World; and the
Carnal man, as Carnal; did not receive, conceive, or understand the Spirit, or
the things thereof. So, in a safe sense also, we may say, Christ did not Then
Pray for the World; that, As the World, they might be saved, or be Happy, while
they remained Such. But that they might be changed, and called out of the
World, and so Turned from Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan unto God:
and then might also receive an Inheritance, among them that are sanctified,
through Faith in Christ. Which was the sum of This Prayer, it may be, and the
great Commission, given by our Lord himself, when he sent Paul to the Gentiles:
and made him a Minister, and Witness, or Martyr also; to the whole World.

And He gives us This Sum of the Gospel he was to preach, That God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, and Not imputing their sins. And
the Mystery of Godliness; God manifest in the Flesh, and believed on by the
World. And if any take the World here for the Systeme of Elements, and not
for Men of the World; I may say, Christ also might mean only the Worldly
Systeme: which he prayed not for, but for all men of the world, and in the
world. But St. Paul in several places says (and that also in the Spirit, or
person of Christ; whom we found before, as Ezekiel (the strong God, and yet the
Son of Man) to be the great Watcher and Warner for every man: and as Ezekiel,
bid to order a Sacrifice for every one that erreth, and is simple:) he was
Warning every man, and Teaching every man, in all Wisdom, that we may present
every man, perfect in Christ Jesus. And he bids us Love All men; and prays
they might Love All men, even as He loved them. Yea, and we are bid to Honor
All men. For, Man is the Image, and Glory of God. And, directly against the
sense which some suppose in Christ's words (I pray not for the World, but for
These:) St. Paul exhorts first of all, That Prayers, Intercessions,
Supplications, yea and giving of Thanks also, be made for All men. Which he
says, is good and acceptable, in the sight of God, our Savior. Who Will
(directly Will) have All men, All men, to be saved; and to come unto the
knowledge of the Truth. For, there is One God, and One Mediator, between God,
and Men, (All Mankind) the Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a Ransom for
All, (for, he is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for
the sins of the whole World:) to be testified, or witnessed, or manifest, in
due season; or its proper seasons. For, it is plural, in the Original;
expressing diverse, several, and proper seasons: for the manifestation of That
Truth, to the World. Of which we may speak again, in Times and Seasons.

And yet also, in a True and safe sense, we may say, Christ loves not the
World, as the World; nor prays for the World, as such. No more than a Man
ought to love or cherish his Flesh, as such. But only in order to change it,
and make it New. And this indeed seems one of the most proper senses of Gods
Hating any. Which in Hebrew is expressed by a word so near That which is to
Change; as if Hating were but in order to a Change: which is also very near the
sound of the words that in Hebrew signify both to Change, and to Hate. And as
Sone, comes from their Sana to Hate (as we touched before;) So does Sin which
is Hate or Shun. And That which English Saxons (whose Language is much Hebrew)
do call Sin, is in Gods Language Hatred. For, he hates Nothing but Sin. And
the Eng Sin, is in Heb Hate, or Chate, or Hhate.

So that God Hates Nothing but Sin. And no person but (as Sinful, and so) in
Order to Changing of him. As we see in his own Covenant? His First Covenant
(and so his First Creation, and the First born in all Dispensations) must give
place to a Second, which is Better. And the Elder must still serve the Younger:
or give place to it. God will still show himself Better and Better: and so will
ever to All Eternity. And finding fault with his first Expressions or
Manifestations, he Disanuls and rejects, or Hates and reprobates them, in order
to change them, and make them Better. Which he is still Doing. For, what he
does once, he does ever. And the Wheel still goes round, as we find in the
90. Psalm, and Solomon in diverse places; to be compared with that of our
Savior, (so often repeated,) They that are First shall be Last, and the last
first. And behold I make All things New. As in the beginning, so it shall be
ever.

I may add also, That in diverse Scriptures, we may find Love and Hate, to be
but relative Terms, or comparative.

God as God, Loves Himself only, with an Absolute Love: and Hates nothing but
sin, with absolute Hatred. But among Creatures, He Loves One before another,
as it comes nearer to himself, and his own Image: So he prefers it before
another, which he hates, in comparison.

So, Leah was Hated, that is, Less loved than Rachel, preferred before Leah;
who was loved also, but below Rachel.

And in such a sense God speaks, If a man have two Wives, the one Loved, and
the other Hated; that is, less Loved. For else sure, God would never
countenance any man's Hating his Wife. But only, as he does a man's Hating his
own flesh, in order to change it, and prefer somewhat before it.

And so Christ tells us that no man can be His Disciple, except he Hate his
Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Wife and self. Whom yet he never should, or
could Hate, if he be His Disciple; and be molded into Love. But his meaning
is, (as we find in another Evangelist) Except he prefer Christ, and so Love
Him, before All Those: Which therefore in Scripture Language, are All said, to
be Hated; in comparison of Christ.

And why may not Jacob the Younger, be Thus Loved, that is, preferred before
Esau? who in This sense is Hated, and rejected, that is, set behind, his
younger Brother. But however These may be used, or looked upon, as Types of the
Elect and Reprobate: we cannot from Thence determine Final Reprobation (as the
Schools express it) in the person of either. Though the Scripture give us very
sad Characters of Esau, calling him a Profane Person: yet I know not that it
ever shows him to be Eternally Reprobate. That Repentance which is spoken of in
the Hebrews, being his Fathers, (and not his own, but) the changing of his
Fathers mind toward him: which he could not obtain, though he sought it with
Tears. But yet his Father also Blessed him: and though he must serve his
younger Brother, it was but for a season, till he could break his yoke, as we
shall see anon. And This also, but as generally in all the Dispensations of
God, out to the World, the Elder (as we may commonly see, in most, or All the
Elder Sons named in the Bible) or the first, must give place to the Second.
Even the first Covenant it self, must be rejected and disanulled, and judged
Faulty also (that is, Reprobate) in order to a Second, Better, and more
Gracious.

So it was said, The Elder shall serve the Younger. And Christ himself came to
Serve, and to Minister, and not to be Ministered unto. As it is said, Joseph in
Prison, was Trusted with the Care or Government, of all the Prisoners; and set
to serve them: As indeed a Governor is a great Servant, to his Servants.

As it is written, Jacob have I Loved, (is it indeed an Interrogation, rather
than affirmation?) But Esau have I hated. But How Hated? The very next words of
the Prophet, who is cited by the Apostle, show us that This Hating was some
frowning of Gods Face, (as we may say) but not of his Heart: and but upon the
outward Man, or Estate of Esau; whom he therefore says he Hated, because he
laid his Mountains and his Heritage waste, for the Dragons of the Wilderness.
But may, or can, any man know, or judge of True Real Love or Hatred (especially
That which is Eternal) by All that is without, or before him?

Is there not much worse, spoken of Jacob and Israel (in that very Prophet)
than of Esau? Does not the same Malachy, say of Israel, Will the Lord regard
your persons? Even your persons? And no wonder then his Soul abhors their
Sacrifice. Which yet is one of the worst things that Solomon observes of a
wicked man: But How frequent in the Prophets against Israel? And in Jeremy 12.
we see, How God Forsook and Hated, the deerly beloved of his soul. As an Emblem
of Christ himself (so forsaken, Hated, cursed, and Rejected by God;) or of all
the Elect, who once were (as Paul, to the Fphesians) children of Wrath, or
curse, as well, or much, as Any others.

And the same Malachy does not only observe the Jews so neglected and rejected,
but Cursed also, by God himself: several times. Yea, and that, the Lord would
also, curse their very Blessings: Yea, and had cursed them already. One of the
heaviest, or worst, Curses in the Bible.

And This is for Spiritual Adultery, and Judahs marrying the Daughter of a
strange god. As Genesis 38. Judah leaving his Brethren (for, it is not good for
man to be alone;) Turned in, to a Canaanite: who bore Er and Onan: so wicked,
that the Lord slew them. Which is also in Malachy; though lost by reading it;
Therefore will the Lord cut off the Master and the Teacher, which in Heb is, Er
and Oneh. And the Scripture seems often to allude to Tamar also, at the end of
that History (Mother of All Judahs Posterity:) As the Church (or every
Christian) waiting for Christ (that Shilo, or Shela) till with child by his
Father also; leaving his Signet and Bracelets, which save her at the fiery
Judgment. But we translate Tamar the Palm tree, which it also signifies: as
That, which Rises, by Pressing down: and was used at the Feast of Tabernacles:
and yet also, by the Jews, shaking their Palms, Thrice every way, crying,
Hosanna, Hosanna! As their Fathers did to Christ, spreading Palm branches, as
we read in the Gospel.

But how Hated, and Cursed Things and Persons may be Loved and Blessed; as
changed, by Him that is not changed; as we read in the same Prophet (to which
also St. James alludeth) who also tells us, We are All begotten by One
Father: and that He hates putting away (in himself also, I hope,) more than
any person: We must speak anon.

When I consider the solemn engagement of God to his Son; Ask of me, and I will
give thee all Nations, and the utmost ends of the Earth; or in the
Gospel-words, Ask and thou shall receive, seek and thou shall find, knock and
it shall be opened, (which was first said to Christ, before he said it unto us;
and he says it to every one, and with that also, Because it is so to every
one, therefore so to you, or them that then heard him:) I have often thought it
such a ground of Faith and Hope, that instead of doubting whether I was given
to him, or not; I have often pressed it on him: Ask me, that thou may receive
me, seek me, and thou shall find me; and by virtue of the Covenant, my hard
heart also, shall be opened to thee, if thou will knock heartily. Now thou
say, thou stand at the door and knockest; O but do it heartily, which is
the great Law of All Servants, and thou art the Lords Servant, and so called,
through the Prophets, Gospel, all the Bible; And the Lords servant must be
gentle toward all, even to them which oppose themselves etc.

I have also judged it an unworthy thought of God, to think he would so
solemnly bid him, ask what he would, and whom he would, and then to tie his
tongue, or narrow his heart, so as he durst not, or he would not, ask as many
as he could dispose or manage.

And to put it out of doubt, I see him very solicitous to persuade and assure
us, that the Father has so far prevented all his asking, or our fears and
doubts, that he has given him all Things, all Persons, all Power, in Heaven
and Earth. And on this Rock he grounds his Calls, and all our Faith and Hope,
and coming to him.

For we must needs have staggered at all his words and promises, till with
Abraham, we were fully persuaded, that he was able to perform what ever he
promised; and this was imputed to him for Righteousness, and not unto him only,
but unto us also it shall be imputed; (a strange expression to the Gentile
Romans,) If we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who
was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our Justification.

We err greatly, not knowing the Scriptures, and the mighty Power of Christ;
which if we knew, we should not dispute his will, but roll our selves upon it,
(as we daily pray) and say Lord if thou will, thou can make us whole and
clean. The God whom we worship, is able to deliver us out of this Pit, and
fiery Furnace (was it not a great mystery?) But however, we will not worship
the Golden Image of the Beast, or him that was, or is to be a Beast, and to
eat grass as an Ox; nor will we receive his character, or name or number of
it; though set up in the plain of Dura, (every Generation of this World) made
up of 6. in breadth, and 60. in height, 666 was also the number of Talents of
Gold brought yearly unto Solomon. But of this again in our discourse of times
and numbers, weights and measures.

And when our Savior himself came to dye, and all the Scripture was against
him that he could not live, yet he was not afraid to put himself upon the
infinite Power of God; with Father, if it be be possible, and all things are
possible. The Angel to the Virgin said, all things shall be possible with God,
and Christ several times, with God all things are possible: and at his coming
down from the Mount (an emblem of his second coming) he adds, all things are
possible to him also, (even to a poor weeping man) that believes. All things
are possible to thee O Father, and to mealso, (they shall be possible:) But not
my will, but thine be done on Earth, and my Earth also, as in thy highest
Heavenly Throne, which shall also be my Throne. And Father, I will that those
which thou have given me (to whom thou have given all things) may be with me,
and see my Glory, and sit on my throne also.

And his Throne is established with Mercy, as we read in the Prophet Isa. Yea,
rather with Mercy than Truth, or any other thing; for so the Proverbs say,
Mercy and Truth preserve the King, but his Throne is established with Mercy. So
that if he cannot hold both, he must let go Truth, and all Justice, rather than
Mercy: For Mercy shall triumph over all Judgment; and in Judgment, he still
will, still does, remember Mercy: And he that shows not mercy, in all things,
and all times, shall have no mercy showed him; and himself bid them go learn
what that meant, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice; or mercy rather than any
sacrifice. He has showed thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord
delights in, to do Justice, but (especially,) to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God. Ride on prosperously, because of Truth, and Meekness of
Righteousness: and seeing God accepts mercy rather than any other sacrifice;
let him guide thee also, in the way he shall chose and best accept, as the
Psalmist speaks.

I will therefore sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever, for I have said,
mercy shall be built up for ever, Mercy and Truth shall go before thy face. O
blessed are the people that know that joyful sound (and understand it:) They
shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance, in thy name they shall
rejoice all the day, (for they that know thy name, will trust in it) and in thy
very Justice, they shall be exalted. Mercy and Truth are met together,
Righteousness and Peace do kiss each other. Melchizedek (the King of
Righteousness) is also King of Salem, that is, Peace: and his Throne of
Judgment, (in the Revelation) is a white Throne, and is established with
mercy. For his mercy endures for ever, for his mercy endures for ever. Even
that Mercy which is Over all his works, and his compassions never fall. And
Solomon says, he that honors his Maker, has Mercy on the Poor.

He shall hear the Poor when he cries, and him that has no Helper (no
Helper!) He shall save their souls, and shall redeem them from deceit and
violence; (or as this Psalm is expressed in Ezechiel; He shall offer sacrifice
for every one that erreth and is simple.) Precious in his eyes shall be their
Blood, and yet more precious their souls, which himself said, was so exceeding
precious, as not to be compared with the World; must it only be precious in our
own eyes, and shall it not be so in his also? Let us then bow down to him, as
the third Captain of 50. did to Elijah, saying, Let my soul be precious in
thine eyes, and the souls of thy servants; for so the words are in the
original.

And himself summed up all the Law into Love, adding also that it was a little
love to love a friend, or one that was lovely, or like us, fair and beautiful,
kind and thankful; even sinners and Hypocrites do so; but I say unto you, love
your enemies, and them that hate you, pray for them that persecute you, revile
you, blaspheme and offer all despite to you. Bless them that curse you, yea,
bless and curse not, be ever blessing and never cursing. In a word, Be
merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful; and then adds, Judge not,
that you be not judged.

Which is the more to be marked, because himself so often intimates, that
although the Father has committed all judgment to him, and authority to
execute it also, (as we showed before) yet that he neither came to judge the
world, nor will judge it, or any man, it may be in his own person; but will
commit it to his Children, who shall judge the world and Angels also: and then
the Son of man shall sit on the Throne of his Glory, to separate those that are
judged.

And there also, none are condemned, but those that justify themselves; for if
we could, or would Judge our selves, we should not be judged. Yet even then
also, we are judged by the Son of man, For we must all stand before his
judgment seat, who yet loved our nation, and our nature, and was made our
Advocate, and under the same Law with us: The same Law of Love. And did any man
ever Hate his own flesh? though he may chasten it, and keep it in subjection,
Plucking it under the eyes. as some render the Apostles phrase.

Or if he could hate his own flesh, will he not love his own Spirit, and his
owm Image? Will not That love seek to propagate it all he may? he has received
the Spirit without measure: He is infinitely full of that (as Elihu speaks)
which is as New Wine, yea, as Fire in his bones and heart, which as the Spring
in the watch, is ever clicking, and the cause of all the beating in the
Arteries, and all the Pulses, and it must have vent, he cannot hold it in.

So it has now pleased infinite Wisdom and Goodness to screw it self into
the finite heart of Christ in his humanity, so that he cannot hold it in, or
stifle it if he would, as that which is infinite might have done, and so
swallowed it up, as that we might never have seen, or felt, or any way enjoyed
it.

But infinite is now so riveted into finite, that this finite cannot comprehend
it, or detain it if he would: He cannot detain it in unrighteousness; not so
much as he may the wind in his hand, or all the great Ocean in his bowels. So
that if his eye were evil, or his heart hard and narrow, when he seems so
kindly to invite, and call and woo us to his dainties: which the Scripture yet
forbids us once to taste from an evil eye, or from one that cries eat and
drink, but his heart is not with us, which the soul of God abhors: Yet indeed
if Christ do but love himself and his own Spirit, and his own ease, he still
will, and still must, give out freely, having received that which is too great
and strong for him to hold in, and keep down, if he would, being an infinite
Fountain still flowing up, and still flowing out with Rivers of living water
round about him.

So it is in all that do but receive some little drops of it from him: How much
more, is it so in himself, that has it without such bounds and limits? O how
is he straightened (it is his own expression) till he pour out himself and his
Spirit among us. It cannot be taken from him against his will, and yet it
cannot be held in: but is as an Ointment or a sweet perfume in ones hand, the
more it is pressed and heated, the more it flows out and sends forth it is sweet
Odours. And she came behind him saying, If I can but touch him, or so much as
the hemme of his Garment, I shall be healed: and virtue went out at every touch.

As the sweet perfume and precious Ointment on the Sacrificers head, it drencht
his Beard, even Aaron's beard (which yet was but an Excrement, and to be cut
off with every Sissors) and it ran down through all his Garments, and to every
hemm and Fringe of them, although to be changed and laid off, very many times,
besides every nights rest.

And the Laver of old in the Tabernacle, had no cover; how much less the great
Molten Sea in the Temple? which had such a Fountain or Fountains still flowing
up in it, or into it, as the very words in the Hebrew may teach us.

Have you not seen a tender Mothers breast so full and swelled for want of
sucking, that she has been glad of a strangers Child to draw it, when her own
could not, or would not? So, and much more is it with the full breast of Jesus
Christ; which is such an infinite Fountain, that the more it gives, the more it
may. And if thou knewst the gift of God, and who it is that gives, thou
would ask, and ask again, and never give over asking (as we found before in
Acksa, and diverse others) till he fills thee also with the upper and the
lower springs. Rejoice ye then and be glad with him, all ye that love him,
rejoice with him all ye that mourned after him, that you may suck and be
satisfied with those breasts of Consolation.

And a drop that runs over (for he has enough for his Children, Servants,
Strangers, Cattle, all his Creatures,:) every drop has power enough to make us
hunger and thirst, and long for more, till it may stretch out our narrow hearts
and make them as wide as the very Heavens.

And he has received gifts for Rebels also; and his own Law was, he that
received freely, m^st give freely; yea, and he said, It is a more blessed thing
to give, then to receive: As if he thought himself also, and made himself more
blessed, by giving out freely, then by receiving all the fullness he has,
which would be a burden to him, if he could not, did not, give out freely, as
he receives.

And for more clear expressing his own mind and heart, and will, for doing
good, according to his Power, (which is still the measure of goodness also:)
He has not only promised to receive All that come to him; and by no means, no
means, to cast them off, or out; but also to draw All men to him, and to make
All things new; being (as the Psalms express) not only to satisfy the desire
of every living thing, which is no great matter, except also they have great
and good desires (for else I know not ought I fear, or more oppose, or pray
against, then his giving me the desire of my own foolish narrow heart,) but
also, that he shall give forth Good, and goodness so, that all things shall be
filled with it: As we may find by comparing the 85. Psalm (concluding thus; Yea
the Lord shall give forth Good, or goodness, and Righteousness shall go
before him, and direct or set us in the way of his steps) with the 104. and
145. Psalm. which of all is to be marked most, as that which gives name to all
the Book of Psalms, (as the Jews tell us) being thence All called Praises, or
Songs of blessing.

The Lord is gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great
mercy: the Lord is good to All, and his tender mercies are over All his works.
All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Sainis shall bless thee. The
Lord upholdeth All that fall and raises up all that are bowed down. which is
again so repeated and enlarged in the next Psalm also, that it may teach us how
Christ put himself under that Law also, to mourn with every one that mourns,
and to weep with every one that weepeth; yea, and to make us sensible of our
own wants and emptiness, that so he may fill us: being sent to comfort every
one that mourns, and to replenish every empty soul. At this I awaked, and my
sleep was sweet to me, as the Prophet expresses it.

Yea, and Christ is such an Head to every man, (as Paul expresses) and such a
Root to all our souls and Spirits, that our mourning and our sufferings reach
and pierce his soul also: And in all our afflictions, he is afflicted: For if
any one member suffers, all suffer (but especially the head and heart:) and if
one be honored, all rejoice with it.

The strength of a King is in his Subjects, and his glory in their multitude,
and greatness, Riches, Honor, Happiness and Freedom; it being more honor
also to govern one freeman, then many slaves: And it is a union with free
Subjects that makes a King so strong, that as Solomon says, There is no
rising against him. Where the Arabic also may help us to a better sense and
notion of Alkum, then is yet common.

May we not all say to our Savior as Abigail did to David? When my Lord shall
sit on the throne of his Rest, and when the Lord has done to my Lord according
to all he promised, shall it indeed be any offense or grief of heart to my
Lord, that he spared us and did not shed our blood, or avenge himself (which is
so much forbidden) or reserve a grudge in his heart against the Children of his
people? When he shall see us all come bowing to him, to his glory, and his
Fathers glory also: who is glorified (he says) when we bear much fruit, And is
not he so also, When He bears much? And as much as he can.

If he could have been contented to be happy, glorious all alone, he never
needed any world of men or Angels. But O! how was he straightened in himself, till
he had found a means to multiply himself, his Image, Happiness, and Glory, by
Creation? How much more than by Redemption? while we live, we shall praise him;
and shall ever bless him, if he save us. But the grave cannot praise him, death
cannot celebrate him: the living, the living shall praise thee; as Hezekiah
said.

And what profit is there in our blood? He did not care to drink the blood of
beasts: does he now delight in eating man's flesh, and drinking man's blood? Or
what does he gain by losing us? Can the enemy give a recompense for us? As
Esther spoke of Haman. And if he cut us off, will he not look in the morning,
and when he sees our places empty, will he not have desire to the work of his
own hands (as Job and the Psalmist) to that needle work he curiously wrought in
his closet. When he has ground us to powder, will he not say return again,
again, ye sons of men! O that God would persuade us, even in suffering
according to his will, to commit our souls to his keeping, as to a Faithful
Creator.

Can he be angry more in time, then from eternity, before he made the World, or
ought that could provoke him? Or if he can, may little children so provoke him,
with their raising dust, or dirty pies against him, that he must also turn, and
curse them in the name of God, and give them up to Bears to tear them? will he
offer children also, and his own, to Moloch? Or with music drown their
yellings in Gehinnon, or in Tophet, which he so much hates, and threatens, and
his soul abhors so much in others? Or if fury can be in him; (which yet himself
denies in the Prophet Isa.) can it rest in such a bosom? When as Solomon
says, it rests in the bosom of fools? Can it remain in such a soul? which
has so often spoken it self well pleased, satisfied, and infinitely delighted
in himself, and his Image, his Son, and his own most glorious and most gracious
Righteousness? Can the Sun go down upon his wrath?

Or if he must, for some great reason, act a part awhile, and wear a mask, or
frown, and cast abroad his Thunderbolts, and show the fierceness of his sore
displeasure, or the Power of his anger or wrath; can it be shown upon a moath,
a bubble, nothing, weaker than nothing? will he also set his eyes, (or heart,
or heavy hand,) on that which is not?

What Glory, Honor, Profit, Pleasure, can the Power and Wisdom (that we lay
aside awhile, the Goodness) of an Infinite God, beget it self, in crushing us.

Will the King of Israel hunt a Partridge in the Mountains? or pursuit a fly?
will he prosecute dry stubble, or the little moats of dust in the balance? can
his Almighty Arm delight to strangle little worms, or wrestle with a shadow?
will he create a mighty whirlwind to contend with nothing? less than nothing,
and lighter than vanity? when his very thoughts may easily create the Angels;
and his Word, this glorious World, and think it down again at pleasure! Drawing
in his breath, (or spirit) and they perish, and then giving it out again, and
they are created; as the Psalmist shadoweth out his Respiration, or his hearts
Diastole and Syslole.

Will his sore, and great, and strong sword, contend with feathers? or lead
captive atoms? will it boast it self in cutting little straws? or glory in a
Triumph, over that which is more feeble than the tender grass? when yet it
might awake against a man that is his Fellow, and his equal match; Mighty to
bear his weight, and power, and wrath, and strongest blows: when we are all to
him, as Naball, or a natural fool before the wisest man, or Angel of the Lord;
and like a little child, (and less, and weaker much,) before the strongest
and most mighty Giant, clothed with double armor!

Will he contend for ever? when our spirit (that is, His in us) must fail? and
if it should not, yet by conquest he can get no glory from us, but a blush, to
think he should be grieved, or provoked to contest with that, which is so far
below h^, and so much unworthy of his wrath, and so incapable o^ bearing the
power of it: If he would, or could express it abroad, out of himself.

He has already learned much of God, that knows how that great and infinite
Being, is one pure simple Act, without all shadow of change, as he is in
himself; and yet in Christ is all, does all, bears all, suffers all: for he
is Love, and can ungod himself, (for ought I yet see,) as soon as do, or speak,
or think a thought, or any thing, or act, without Love. Though he may hide his
love, (which yet must hide and cover all transgressions, if the Proverbs do not
deceive us;) So that in a veil or mask, it may appear as frowning, or an angry
face; when yet Love is at the heart; and the Lamentations say he does not
afflict from his heart, or grieve the children of men; and I never read any
Scripture, praying that God would alter his heart toward any, but very many,
that he would alter his face, and turn again and shine upon them, or lift up
the light of his countenance, that so they might be saved.

He that sees how that which is Infinite, m^st be principle and end, subject,
and object, to it self, and all it is own actings, yea and Passions, or
Sufferings also, to eternity, will not wonder to hear that God never spoke a
word, or did an act, or struck a stroke, but on, or in, and through, his own
Bowels, Jesus Christ. As a tender man, (How much more a tender God?) never
strikes any, but it even pierces his own soul or Bowels; and the harder the
object is, the more it makes our hand also to ache in striking it: but it is
because our hand is hard also. How easy is it to darken Counsel, by words
without knowledge? But how soon also would True Wisdom come and teach, and
lead us, if we would cry after her, and call her Sister, and wait early at her
gates; in a silent freedom from the noise and crowd, and dust of this world,
and vain thoughts, or forms of words, darkning Counsel without knowledge!

I have yet said nothing, or at least, very little of the great sufferings of
God in Jesus Christ: And indeed what can any man or Angel say of his
Sufferings, when as all the Gospel is but a little short discourse of some few
things which he began [and but began] to say and do: Nor is it much wonder that
we should hear or know no more of that, of which he spoke so Little. For he did
not cry, or cause his voice to be heard in the streets, when hungry, thirfty,
harborless, not knowing where to rest his head; sl^ghted, Contradicted by
Sinners, betrayed by his own Disciple, accused by a multitude, scorned, spit
upon, reviled, buffe ed, and bound; scourged by Pilat, Crowned with Thorns,
wearied with the Cross, and broken on it, and so cruelly pierced, that the
hardest heart shall see, relent and mourn over him; and yet, as a sheep is dumb
before the shearer, so he opened not his mouth. Nor did Living Man complain;
but Dying God; cried to his Father, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Thou art holy still, and inhabi^st the Praises of Israel; Our Fathers trusted
in thee, they trusted and then cried, and still trusted: (Faith begot Prayer,
and that increased Faith) and they were delivered many times, at all times;
never confounded or ashamed: But I am a Worm, and no man, a reproach of men,
and despised of all people.

But thou art Holy still. We are yet but in the Porch, and have scarce touched
the threshold of his Sufferings; which the old Greek Liturgy so rightly
termed, as well unknowable, as unutterable. O how he loved us! How great is
his goodness? How great is his Beauty! which was yet, deformed more then any
man, or any Creature. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows:
He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities; the
chastisement of our peace was on him, and by his stripes we are healed: All we
like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the
Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. I might add also, that
sufferings are of such account with God, that though he never promise, ought
but suitable, to all our doings; Yet our light afflictions, or sufferings, which
are but for a moment, work unto us also [but his shadows], a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory; with so great Hyperbole, as cannot be expressed.

And because he made his soul an offering for sin, he did prolong his days;
raised from the dead; and shall see his seed, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand: And therefore he shall divide the spoil with the
strong, and have a portion with the mighty. And for suffering of Death, he was
Crowned with Honor and Glory; that by the grace of God, he should taste death
for every man; For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their
Salvation Perfect through Sufferings: and though he were a Son, yet he
learned Obedience, by the things he suffered.

For as it pleased the Lord that All fullness should dwell in him, so it pleased
him also, in bringing in that fullness, into his narrowness, as a man, to put
him to sore pain; and thus to make and keep him still quick, or of tender
sense, in the Fear of the Lord: which of all he needed most, because he knew,
and saw, and felt, most Love: Which was therefore poyzed with most Holy fear,
which kept him still in aw, and made him most tender also unto others: as we
see discoursed in the Epist to the Hebrews. God would not trust him (or us in
his hands) while he was only taughr his fear, or his love, by precept; till he
had it also by the deepest experience. And when he put him under the Law ^or
us, he did not only tell him, what measure thou meetest, shall be meet again,
pressed down and running over: And he that kills with the sword, shall be
killed with the Sword; and he that leads Captive, shall be led Captive: And
he that diggeth a Pit; shall fall into it: which are often repeated in the
Scripture, and spoken to Christ also, as well as to us: But he also showed him
the horrible Pit, and shut him up in it, that he might still remember it; and
by his own experience, knowing the terror of the Lord, might persuade men, yea
and save them by fear, and with much compassion catch them as brands out of
that horrible pit, of which we read so much in Job, and the Psalms, and our
Saviors own words also, besides other Scriptures.

And dyed this Abner (Father of light, or Fathers light) as Naball; or a Fool,
dies? Was he drunken also as Naball? Or did his heart dye in him, or becmoe as
a stone, before he died? Will he not improve his death, and all his sufferings,
all he may? Is his heart narrow, or his eye evil to himself also? Does he envy
us (shall I say, or himself,) his full recompense of Reward? for which he
despised the Cross, and endured the shame and pain? being promised that he
should see the travel of his soul, and be satisfied: not only contented, but
fully Satisfied; for all the travel of his soul, which should have a full
recompense; yea and a Reward also. Will he then lose the things that he has
wrought, and Suffered also? Which has often sounded in my ear, or heart, from
his beloved Disciple to the elect Lady, which might represent the whole Elect,
and Church, and Spouse of Christ; who cries to us all in the words of that
Disciple, Look to your selves (and I am taught to say, Lord, Look thou to it
also,) that we lose not the things we have wrought or born; but that we may
receive a full, (a very full) Reward also.

I should tire you much to observe one quarter of that St. Paul speaks of the
Sufferings of Christ; and the mighty weight and stresse he lays on them: yea,
and upon the very little drops of them he felt or bore in his own person; which
yet he calls the sufferings of Christ, and to fill up the sufferings of
Christ. Which in himself also, he is bold to say, were for the Consolation and
Salvation also of others, yea of many others; as he writes to the Corinthians,
and with them also he joined all, that in all places called on Jesus Christ, as
we noted before. And to the Colossions, having said of Christ, that it pleased
the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell, and having made peace through
the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself, (which
afterward in that very Chapter, and to the Ephesians also, he calls the
Mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he had purposed in
himself, to be compared with the 5. to the Romans, and many other Scriptures:)
He adds also, that this Gospel was preached to every Creature under heaven,
(as our Lords commission was;) Whereof I Paul am made a Minister, who now
rejoice in my sufferings, for you: and fill up that which is behind, of the
afflictions or sufferings of Christ in my flesh, for his Bodies sake, which is
the Church. And to Timothy he writes; For the which cause I also suffer these
things: Therefore I endure all things, for the Elects sake: (for the Elects
sake!) that they may also obtain the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with
eternal glory.

And to the Philippians: In my Bonds, you All are partakers of my grace. Yea,
and if I be offered, upon the sacrifice and service of your Faith: I joy and
rejoice with you all.

But if Christ neither loved us, nor himself, or valued his own Glory, or his
own Sufferings; yet his love to his Father or his very duty to him, though he
did not love him, may be found a great foundation of our Faith and Hope in him,
and in God through him. And for this, I may not only cite the Scriptures that
speak of Gods loving Christ, because he loved us, and laid down his life for
us; (One of the sweetest and the strangest sayings in the B^ble!) But also as
Paul said, A necessity is laid upon me, and woe to me if I do not preach the
Gospel: Even so our Savior also, This Commandment I have received of my
Father. And had he not received it, he neither would, nor could, have given
that Commandment to others, (which he so often presses and repeateth as his
own, his new Commandment, to all his Children, Friends, or servants:) that
they love one another, as, even as, he loved them, which was to lay down his
life for them; and this Commandment he received of his Father: and solemny
professes, he never said a word, but what, and how, and as, the Father spoke
it to him; nor did ever do a work but what he saw the Father do, and what he
did; as if the Father also, Suffered in him.

Nor shall we go far to search for this Commandment of God to him, either in
that of Ezekiel (the son of man) the great Watch man, and the great Warner, at
whose hand God would require the souls of all that were under him (who are all
men) yea, and at the price, and weight of his own blood: with which he must
therefore prepare a sacrifice for every one that erreth, and is simple (as we
touched before) to be compared with the 53 of Esaias, and diverse other
Scriptures. And the 58 of the same Prophet, shows, how it delights the soul
of God, that Christ should break every yoke, and deal his bread to the hungry,
and bring the poor and them that are cast out, or banished, into his own
House; and when he does but see a man, naked (though he weep not, beg not, yet)
to cover him, and not to hide himself from his own flesh. If then thou draw out
thy soul, thy very soul to the hungry, and satisfy the aff^icted soul, the
Lord shall guide thee continually, etc. One of the sweetest promises in all the
Bible; and yet sweeter, if we consider it spoken to Christ, before it was to
us: and then follow the gracious promises upon the keeping of the Sabbath, in
which also we shall find, our Savior very much concerned. But the very ten
Commandments, and all the Law of God (through all the Bible,) which he took
upon him, and was made under it; was written in his heart: and so rivetted in,
that he can unmake himself again, as soon as leave, or lose, one tittle of that
Wise, and Just, and Holy Law of God; which is all yet, one Royal Law of Love.
Did not himself sum it all up into Love? Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and soul, and mind, and might; and there is another word of
Love, yet like to this, a strange expression! like to this, or as good as this,
or as much required and accepted as this; and of as much stresse, and strength
or force, as this: which is, Thou must love thy Neighbor also, as thou love
thy self. Yea, and this is not only as the former, of loving God, but rather
before i^, in Gods account; as we may find in his beloved Disciple, and diverse
others: So that God will much sooner dispense with his own love, and h^s
worship (even of the Sabbath day, as we find in our Saviors own words then he
will dispense with loving our Neighbor; yea but showing pity to his Ox or
Ass, fallen into a pit. And as if, God would measure all our Love to himself,
by our loving our poor Neighbor, St. John says, Let a man never talk of
loving God whom he never saw, if he do not love his Brother whom he has seen:
and if he do but see him in want, and shut up his bowels, (though his wants be
not wept, or worded out, but only Seen) How does the love of God dwell in such
a man? as we found also in Esaias, when thou See the naked, that thou cover
him. Which has sometimes been very sweet to me, when I had no words or tears
to express my miseries to Christ, or was sensible enough of any of my wants:
Yet I have often spoken to him from that place (and others in the Psalms, or
Job, or Lamentations) Crying, See my affliction, though I do not see it, or am
afflicted for it, as I should or would. Yet do thou See my miseries, Even when
I see them not; and let thy tender eye affect thy tender heart, for the Love of
God dwells in thee. Do not therefore shut up thy bowels, when thou see my
want, though I do not see it, or am not affected with it: Give me Eye salve
that I may see: And thou have promised an holy Spirit to Convince the world of
sin, Righteousness, and Judgment. Withhold not Good whilst it is in the God
of thy hand to do it. Why then will thou send me away, saying, Come again to
morrow, when it is in the power of thy hand to do me good? For thou have* All
power in Heaven and Earth. Thou art the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God.
And a Brother is born for a day of Adversity.

And there may be also the greatest ^ffering, where there is but little sorrow;
yea, and the greatest sorrow, where the least Exp^ession, either in tears or
words. A piercing look, with an eye fixed on Christ in a promise, as one able
to help, and made for it, [and why then do we doubt of his Will?] may be a
better Prayer; than a great many words or tears.

They are little Griefs that speak, or are spoken: Great ones are stupid, or at
least silent. So also are Praises. They may be best, when they attend God in
Silence. As the Jews also teach us, on those passages of the Psalms, My soul is
silent before thee; and Praise waits on thee in silence; for so it is. And
Silence is commanded us all, not only in those places, which bid our words be
Few, as Solomon, and our Savior also: But when God arises, and does manifest
himself [out of his Temple, or in his Holy place, as his Presence Chamber] we
are especially commanded, to be Silent before him: as we read in the last
words, both of the second of Habakkuk and the second of Zechary. And there is
not only an Evil, but a Good Day also, when All prudent men will hold their
Peace, as we read in another Prophet.

But it is yet sweter than many words, or any, can express, to consider, that
if Christ did neither love Us, nor Himself, nor his Father, as he surely does:
Yet his very Duty to Him, and that Law which bids him Love the Lord his God,
with all his heart, and soul, and mind, b^ddeth him do it also, With all his
Might. And so also, to propagate his love to All he can; by all means he may.
Yea, and to work while it is Day, and to do whatever is in his hand to do, with
all his might; least the night comes on him also, and there be no more
working, or Council, in the place whether we are all going.

Is it indeed enough for Him, in himself and his own person, to have no other
God, or other ways of worship, than are Right, and set by God; and not to bear
his Name in vain, (who yet bears it more upon him, both in words and Actions,
than all men living:) Except he also propagate this Love of God, his ways of
worship, and his Name, his True Name, which is his Nature; all he can, or may
(and he may quicken whom he will) with all his Might? to all his Children,
Servants, Neighbors, Subjects and Relations under him, and in his Power? and
they are All.

May I indeed suffer any Servant, or any other (though I may bear with
children, while they are children, and with Naturals or Idiots; and alas, we
are All so; to Him, all our lives; May I suffer any man within my power, or
Family, to worship a false God? or the True God in a False manner? or to take
his Name in vain, while I can help it? Is He not Lord of All the Family, both
in Heaven and Earth? Are we not All in his hand, and under his power; who has
All Power in Heaven and Earth, and has All things delivered to him, of his
Father?

Can we wonder now, why he so often promises, to manifest the Name of God,
that All may know it, from the greatest to the least? Yea and his Enemies also.
It being so usual in Ezekiel and other Prophets, to close up all his
Threatenings with this, You shall all know me, or I will bring you to Know my
Name. Which is also the great end of the Psalmists sharp and bitter prayers
against All the enemies of God, (which we find mustered up together in the 83.
Psalm) That they may seek thy Name O Lord; and that they may know, that Thou,
whose name is Jehovah, art the most high God over all the Earth: which was also
the great end of that great work on Nebuchadnezar.

And the same Psalms tell us also, that when men come, or are brought to Know
the name of God, they will trust in it: And there also Christ often promises,
He will declare his Name to his Brethren; and (as if they were too few) to the
great Congregation also: And how great that Congregation is, or shall be, I
cannot tell. When also he came to dye, he acknowledges this, for the great
work he had to do in the World. I have finished thy work; I have manifested thy
Name unto the men thou* gave me out of the world. And, as if this were not
yet enough, toward the end of that prayer, he prays for More; this being the
Covenant, Ask of me, and I will give thee All Nations, (and Peoples, and
persons) even the utmost ends of the Earth; and those also afarr off in the
Seas* And is his heart so narrow, that he will not Ask, when he might have us
All, and all things for asking? Ask then heartily, that thou may receive;
seek us All heartily, and thou shall find us All: Knock heartily at the door of
our hearts, and by virtue of the promise, and Covenant of God, they shall be
opened to thee* Neither pray I for these alone, which thou have yet given me,
but for them also, which shall ^at any t^me hereafter, believe on me through
their word: That they All may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in Thee;
that they also may be One in us. And (for this also I pray, and make it my
dying request) That the World (even the whole World) may believe that thou have
sent me; (As now my Disciples do, and are happy by it;) For it is Life eternal
to know thee, the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. Yea, I
have yet one thing more to desire for the World, even for the World also,
(though I did not so pray for them in the beginning of my Prayer:) And the
glory that thou gave me I have given them, that they may be One, as we are
One; and that the World may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as
thou have loved me. And again, I have declared thy Name, and I will declare it,
that the Love wherewith thou love me, may be in them, and I in them. Plainly
intimating that All that come to Know his Name, (which he will ever declare)
shall come to Love God, being Loved of him, with the same love he loved Christ.
To whom he gave many great Revelations, not for himself, as he said when the
voice came from heaven; I have glorified my Name, and will glorify it again:
But that He might show them to his Children, and (so great is his goodness!)
to his Servants also. Thus his Father Abraham, was called the Friend of God,
(because he knew his mind; to which also Christ alludeth, it may be, more then
once; and was made his Privy Councellor: For how or why, should I hide from
Abraham the thing (or any thing; I do; seeing that Abraham shall surely become
a Great and mighty Nation, and All the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in
him? For I know him that he will command his Children and his Household after
him, (his Household after him: for he took his Enocks, or his Catechized men, to
pursue the four Kings:) And they shall keep the Way of the Lord, to do Justice
and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that which he has spoken
of him. Which was, to be a Blessing to All Nations; yea and to All Families,
(and by consequence Households) of the Earth. Which is perfectly fulfilled in
Christ; that Blessed Seed, whose seed also must be as the sand on the Sea
shore; yea and as the Dust of the Earth for multitude; (for I saw a multitude
which none could number, in the Revelation) and as the stars also, through All
the Heavens, for Glory. And yet these are only the First Born, or those that
turn others to Righteousness, Being Kings and Priests to God and his Father:

But there are others also, that shall be as the Firmament, though not so
bright as the Stars; For so we read in the last of Daniel: and of Stars also,
there is great difference, and several Magnitudes, as St. Paul tells us, in
the 15. to the Corinthians. As his Master also said, In my Fathers House are
many (and it may be very different) Mansions.

Every one also of that Blessed Seed, and of the first Born, has the Blessing
of Abraham, and is a Child of the Promise, as Isaac was; and is so made
Blessing unto All Nations, and Families of the Earth; and has the Sure Mercies
of David also (as we touched before) to Him and his Seed after Him. Which may
be hinted also in the close of the second Commandment. For what is there said,
Of Gods showing mercy unto thousands, is plainly meant of Thousand Generations:
as appears by the opposition of three or four Generations (before in the same
Commandment:) And in the 7. of Deutronomy, it is so expressed

Know therefore, that the Lord thy God he is God, the faithful God, Which
keeps Covenant, and Mercy also, (which is hence remembered by Daniell and
Nehemiah,) wi^h them that love him, and keep his Commandments, even to a
Thousand Generations. Which also plainly shows, that the words of the second
Commandment, are not to be restrained to those only that actually love God,
and walk in his Commandments themselves: But to their Seed also, even to a
Thousand Generations. And in the name of Goodness, proclaimed to Moses, this
of Keeping Mercy for Thousands, is written with a very Great and unusual
Letter, as to intimate some unexpressible Greatness of Goodness, as the Jews
will teach us.

And those which are not the Seed of Abraham, may yet be within the thousand
Generations of Noah; who was also a Perfect man in his Generations, and very
dearly beloved, and Blessed by God; who also blessed his Sonns, and made an
everlasting Covenant with them. And his mercy is to a thousand Generations, yea
to All Generations (as the Psalms express it) from everlasting to
everlasting, upon them that fear him, and their Childrens Children. Whereas, on
the other side, when he would express his great Jealoufie, and visiting the
Fathers Iniquity upon their Children, it is but for three or four Generations.
Which is so far from such a Threatening, as may be taken by some, that it is
very great Goodness; That the worst of Gods Visitations here threatened, shall
be only for three or four Generations: and was so proclaimed by God, when he
caused all his Goodness to pass before Moses; who also repeated this on God,
(as a promise) when he interceeded for Israel at their making the Calf. which
sure he would not have then pressed, if he had not taken it for a great piece
of Goodness, as it was the last in that great Proclamation, [and God uses to
reserve his Best for the last.] And when Moses heard it, he made have to
worship; as if he had now seen the very worst of God, to be Very Good, and much
better then he knew before. Though it was a good Report he had long had of Gods
Goodness, but not half, or it may be, the thousand part of that which will be
known; When he shall come to be Admired, by All that Believe. Yea and That
also, of Not holding guiltless, or not Quitting the Guilty; speaks Goodness
also: and was in his Name of Goodness, Proclaimed to Moses; and so taken by
Him, and repeated and pressed on God, as an argument for Pardoning, and sparing
the poor People, when the Calf was made. And God answered, I have Pardoned
according to thy Word: And truly All the earth shall be filled with the Glory
of the Lord, or with the Salvation of God; [as we have found by comparing two
Psalms together, and the 40 of Esaias, with the Evangelist c^ing it:] which is a
very Sweet and Gracious Promise.

By which we may clearly see, that the worst of those Expressions, did not mean
Eternal Punishment; but only such a Visitation for some few Generations, as
might very well stand with Pardoning. So that the persons so Visited, should
not be destroyed [for the Lord visits not to destroy, but to save] but yet
Chastened and Corrected in measure, and not wholly left unpunished. As we find
the very same Phrase used by God several times in the Prophets [and twice in
Jeremy;] of his own dearest Children; whom he says, he will not Cut off or
destroy; but only chasten, visit, or Correct in measure; but not Hold
Guiltless, or acquit them wholly. The very same Phrase used in the Third
Commandment, and in the Name of God Proclaimed in Exodus and Numbers 14. And
the very same Phrase is used by Job of himself, diverse times: although we may
be sure he did not believe. God had cut him off for ever, or would never acquit
him, or hold him Guiltless; though he so speak of himself. But it is such a
phrase as the Prophet Esays, Therefore forgive them not; which yet is no worse,
or more, then we find commended, and commanded also, by Solomon, to a tender
Father: who is bid to chasten his Son, and not to spa^e him, or forgive, or
acquit, or Hold him Guiltless. For they are much the same Phrases.

Yet I may ad (to make us fear the Goodness of God, rather then All his
Wrath:) He that takes the Good Name of God, this gracious God, in vain; or he
that so Turns it into wantonness, is the most guilty Person in All the Bible,
that I know; or most in danger, not to be quit, or held Guiltless; as we find
hinted in several places, from the third Commandment. Except happily we may
also say, the most Guilty Person in the World, whom God will least acquit, or
hold guiltless, is Jesus Christ: In whom the Curses also, are Yea and Amen, or
fulfilled; rather more then the Promises. For in These, he joins his Children,
who are Coheirs in All the Promises, and Purposes of God.

But in bearing the Threatenings and Curses; He is more alone, then in All the
Promises. He treads the Winepress of Gods Wrath alone; and of the People there
is none with Him: He alone can bear it; He alone need fear it. All the Billows
of the Almighty, rolled upon Christ; and All his Arrows stuck in his Heart, and
drunk up his Spirit, more then All the world besides. All else, being little,
weak, nothing, lighter then vanity: Compared with Him that was Gods Fellow, and
his Match: Who thought it no Robbery to be Equal with God; who therefore laid
his strokes upon H m, who was only able to bear them, with our guilt. So that
in a right sense, He is the most guilty Person, as Bearing Gods most Holy Name,
more then All the World besides: And bearing all our guilt for bearing at in
vain.

And as the third Commandment has its not Acquitting: So the second has it is
Jealousy, and visiting the Fathers sin upon the Children. As if this, were
most proper to the false, or Superstitious ways of Worshipping the true God;
rather then to the having other Gods, forbidden in the first. As if God also
were Jealous of none, but such as were Married to him, and had chosen him for
their Husband: But now wandered out in strange ways of Worship, which provokes
his Jealousy, and makes him visit more (it may be) then any other sins. If
it had been an Enemy I could easily bear it. O but my Friend, and my Familiar
in my Bosom: as the Lord may speak when his own Spouse dresseth her self in
an Whor^sh Habit, as it were, enticing Strangers. Which the Lord abhors more
it may be, then the grossest Idolatry of those that are Strangers. Which is not
so grievous as the Provocation of his Sonns and Daughters, (as Caesar also
cried, What and thou my Son Brutus!) or his nerest Relations; which perhaps
also may be more properly called Haters of God (in Hebrew, Sone, much akin to
the Saxon English Name of Son) rather then Strangers; who have not knowledge
enough to Love or Hate Him in a proper sense; as those that by not walking in
the light and love they have received, come at length to be so guilty and full
of slavish fear, that they turn downright Rebbels; and such Sonns, as God
commanded should be brought out to the Judges, to be stoned for Rebellion.
Which is very near perhaps, if not the very sin, against the Holy Ghost; Or
that presumptuous wickedness, which David so prayed against, remembering that
there was No Sacrifice for presumptuous Sinners: but (as the Epistle to the
Hebrews speaks) A certain fearful looking for, of judgment and fiery
indignation to devour the Rebbels. As the Jews also had the Cutting off, and
the Hand of Heaven; yea and that also, they called the Rebels stroke.

But of All Images forbidden in the second Commandment, (as so much moving God
to Jealousy,) Those which are most common, and most dangerous, as little taken
notice of (being most Spiritual, or most Divelish) are the Images we are so
prone to make and mould of God, by that within us, which is therefore rightly
called Imagination, and the proper forge of Images, which yet may reach
farther, higher, and more inward then our senses, or that which the Schools
call Imagination. Worse much, then Images made by hands, which we are so long
in Moulding and Carving, that we bl^sh to worship That we have sweat so much
about, and warmed our selves with part of. But a deceived Heart, makes us eat
the very Excrements and ashes of those Images, or Image-makers. And as the
great thing which brought the Flood, was the evil Imagination of man's Heart
continually, So it is the great promise (in many places of Scripture) that his
people should no more walk after the Imagination, or the Image making, or the
Idols, of their own foolish Hearts.

And it is the great Judgment and Punishment of those, that when they knew
God, did not glorify him as God, nor were thankful; that they should become
vain in their Imaginations, (or in Image making:) and their foolish hearts so
darkened; as to change the Glory of God, into an Image, or an Idol of their own
fancies; the most dangerous Idolatry. And thus indeed they change the Image and
glory of God in themselves, to the Image of a Beast eating grass, (as
Nebuchadnezar:) and it may be, This is some emblem of worshipping the Beast, or
receiving that character, which the Revelation says, All the World should do,
but those only whose names were written in the Lambs book of Life, before the
foundation of the World. And That Beast, or sensual beastly spirit, may be more
common, than is thought. And when man was made in the Image of God, He was to
Rule over all the Beasts, or Beastly natures or spirits: But now losing the
Image of God, and of man also, he takes the Image of a Beast, and of The
Beast, so much spoken of in the Revelation.

But as Love was the foundation of the very Law also, springing out of the
Heart of God, which is Love, (However, it may now gender unto Bondage) yet it
rose from Love: So it speaks Love; to the very worst of men (as Saint Paul
affirms) till their Rebellion make them Outlaws, and put them out of the
Protection of that good Law, which is given to them all: saying to every one of
them, I am the Lord thy God: and upon this Rock I will build my whole Law. and
therefore thou shall have no other God, or make to thy self any Images, etc.
For I am a jealous God; which yet I could not be, if I did not Love thee
dearly, as a spouse: Or else, I should not much care, whither thou go, or
what thou do; But for my great and spouse-like Love, which makes me so
jealouse over thee. But this very jealousy, causes such visiting, as is most
like to recover us again, from all our w^oorish wanderings from the God of
Love, and the Guide of our youth. And so intended by God, to recover them so
visited, as we may clearly see by Elihues discourse unto Job: and the Psalmist
in the 107 th. and many other Psalms; to be compared with the 3 d. of Jeremy,
and the 2 d. of Hoseah, with the first and second of Zechariah, with diverse
other Scriptures.

And our great comfort is, that all the Law also, lay on Christ, as much, or
more, than any of us, or all of us. And besides his love to his own flesh and
nature, or to himself, or his Father, His very Duty to Him, by this Law,
requires him so to love his God, with all his Might also, as to propagate his
love, to all he may: and to manifest his Name and Worship, with the true way
and means thereof. That is, as the 72 d. Psalm expresses, to redeem our souls
from all deceit and violence; or as Ezekiel has it (in the Laws of the New
Temple) to order a sacrifice for every one that erreth, or is simple. And the
Psalmist says, He has received gifts for Rebels also, that the Lord may dwell
among them. Yea, and to cast down all our vain Imaginations, as Saint Paul
expresses it.

And though we strangely degenerate into very Beasts, or to the worst of
Beasts, or worse than Beasts: Yet the very same Law, which bids us and
Christ also, to Love a Neighbor, bids also to love a Stranger, and an
Enemy: Yea, and the very Ox and Ass of an Enemy, so as to help it under a
Burden, or straying out of the way.

And is not our heart (as Ishmael was foretold to be) the wild Asses Colt, on
which no man can sit, till Christ send his Apostles, (as in the Gospel) who
find it bound and tied, in a broad place where two ways met: and They loose
our Asses Colte, and bring it to Christ, who then rides on it; O daughter of
Zion, Meek and Lowly: on an Ass, the foal of an Ass.

And may we not find All this, in the very fourth Commandment? where every
Man, (and so Jesus Christ also) is bid to remember to keep the sabbath: so,
that not only his Children, but his servants, and his Cattle, and the Stranger
in his Gate, may Rest, and keep that Rest of God. That they may Rest as well as
Thou; as it is repeated in Deuteronomy. And in the 23. of Exodus it is, that
thine Ox and thy Ass may Rest, and the Son of thy Handmaid (to which the
Psalmist may allude several times, calling himself the Son of thy Handmaid:)
And that the stranger also may be Refreshed. The very same Phrase and word,
that is used by God of himself (and his own Kest and Refreshing, on That
Sabbath day:) in the 31. of Exodus. And our Savior makes the helping of an
Ox or Ass, and their Loosing, and leading to the Water, to be a special work,
or duty, of the Sabbath days Rest. Which we may compare with that of the
Prophet Esaias: He led them (gently) as an Horse in the Wilderness; or as a Beast
is led down a Valley (or to a Brook) So his spirit caused them to Rest. And in
the Proverbs, Agur says, I am more brutish than any Man: and the Psalmist, so
Brutish was I; yea Behemoth with thee (as alluding to Behemoth, in Job:) and
That, some render Congregation of thy People (in several Psalms) is Beasts, or
Thy Beasts. As under Those Banners of four Beasts (or Animals) of which we read
in Ezekiel, and the Revelation. Yea Solomon says the great design of God (that
is Christ, who as Man also, is the great Searcher of hearts;) is to Try us, and
to make us know, we are but Beasts. She hem Behema, Hemma lahem.

And that the Stranger also, may be Refreshed. Which is but a piece of that
great Law (in the very same chapter, of Loving our Neighbor:) Thou shall also
love a Stranger, as thou love thy self. And in several places it is added,
For thou wast a stranger, and thou know the heart of a stranger in Egypt.
And the word for stranger in the Heb. is so near to Hagar, as if God would put
them in mind of that Bondwoman, who was an Egyptian also; and as Paul says,
Gendered unto Bondage, with a spirit of Fear, (which is another signification
of its Root also.) And Gods Love to Hagar, and to her son Ishmael, (that is,
God will Hear, as he will appear also, in the Mount:) may show the Heart of
God, and his Goodness, more than all his Kindness to Abraham: who was Kind and
Thankful unto God also. And among other reasons for our Loving strangers, it is
added, that God loves Strangers: and in a special manner provideth for them.
And it has been an especial argument, used by good men in all ages of the
Bible: For we are strangers and Pilgrims.

And when we consider, that the Sabbath day did Typifie some greater Rest, may
it not be hoped that at length, we may hear the Lord of that Day also, saying,
to his children, and his servants (and the Sons of his handmaids also) and his
Cattle, and the stranger also, within his gates: Come, enter, into your Masters
Rest: (seeing it is greater than can enter into you:) For, this Commandment I
have received of my good Father.

Do we not also read, that the Owls, and the Dragons, and the Beasts of the
field, and every thing that has breath; yea and All his Works, shall praise
the Lord: but his Saints shall Bless him? Do we not find Sabbatical Years and
Jubilees, provided for the Poor and Strangers, that had no Harvest; and for the
Beasts of the field; and for the Earth also; that it might Rest the Rest of
God? and that every one might return to his own Inheritance, and the possession
of his Fathers? and why not also, of our Father Adam in Innocence? and that All
Debts, and Debtors, might be remitted? which it may be, is minded us daily in
the Lords Prayer: not only, in That Clause, of Forgiving our Debtors, (which
yet, He does also: for it is He that speaks in us; who else dirst not say,
Forgive us, as we forgive:) but also in That, Thy Kingdom come, and Thy Will be
done on Earth, as in the highest Heaven. And He that set us All on Praying so,
knew very well that it should be so. He has willed it, and his people will it
also. Let it be: It shall be so: Amen.

For, the whole Earth also, must Rest, and keep its Sabbath. And not only the
Land of Israel (which was but as the First Fruits of the Earth:) and That had
such a strict Command of observing Sabbatical Years, that they must stay, so
many years, in Babylon, as the Land should have kept Sabboths by the Law, while
They were in it. As we may find in that remarkable Discourse of God on Mount
Sinai, in the 25 and 26. of Leviticus; which I have sometimes thought not only
the Epitome of the whole Law, but the Foundation of the Gospel also, to be very
often considered.

Yea and the Wilderness shall be as Lebanon, and Carmel. Yea Every Tree of the
Forest shall clap hands and sing and rejoice in praising God. As we read in
many places of the Psalms and Prophets. Yea and the Gospel must be preached to
every Creature under Heaven: and the whole Creation longs and travelleth;
for, it is now made subject to Bondage, but in Hope: for it shall be delivered,
from the Bondage of Corruption; into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.
For, God is able even of stones to raise up sons to Abraham. Whose seed, must
be as the Dust (and more than all the stones) of the Earth. And we also, can
daily Turn Plants, and Beasts, yea and Pearls, and other stones also, into our
own selves, and our spirits: so, as that they give us also a New spirit, and
refresh and joy our souls: yea and the Heart of God also (as Jotham says, in
That remarkable Parable of the Trees choosing them a King:) How much easier is
it, for an Infinite God, to Turn All these, into himself (and his own Image) by
his Spirit, making All things New: as they All came out first from him, and
must All return to him? For of him, and from him, and To him, are All things.
From the Throne of God, and his Lamb (when His Kingdom comes) shall issue out
Waters of Life: Yea to the Sea also (even the Dead Sea:) and they shall bring
Healing with them. And where ever the Waters come, there shall be Life, and
Healing. For, the very Leaves of the Trees (on the Banks of those Waters) shall
serve for Healing os the Nations: even of the Gentile Nations. And the
Wilderness, and the solitary place shall be glad for them: and the Desert
shall rejoice and blossom as the Rose. It shall rejoice abundantly, with joy
and singing. The Glory of Lebanon, shall be given to it: The Excellency of
Carmell and Sharon: They shall see the glory of the Lord, and the Excellency of
our God. Yea, All the Earth shall Rest, and Rejoice, and be full of the Glory
of God, as Waters fill up the Sea. And Then the Lord shall be called the God of
All the Earth; and the Possessor of Earth, as well as Heaven. Which was the
phrase used by Melchizedeck in blessing Abraham, when he had pursued the four
Monarchs (or four Monarchies) to Dan, even to Judgment: and brought back the
Captivity of Sodom also; of which we read in several places. Although Sodom was
so accursed, and made a Perpetual Desolation, that it is a Type of Hell, or of
the worst Judgments, in all the Bible. Yet even Sodom must return again, and
her Daughters. And when our Lord Jesus Exulted in spirit, (as he says, Abraham
did, to see his Day:) he said, I bless thee Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth;
even of the Earth also, as of Heaven: as alluding to that Blessing of
Melchizedecks; at the return of Sodoms Captivity.

And the Revelation tells us, that when the seventh Angel sounded, there was
great Voices (or Joy) in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world, are become
the Lords, and His Christ's; and he shall reign for ever and ever. And the
twenty four Elders blessed God, that (yet at length) he had taken to him his
great Power, and reigned: and the Nations were Angry; and thy Wrath is come,
and the time of the Dead, that they should be Judged; and that thou should
Reward Thy Saints, etc. and should destroy them which destroy the Earth. And
Then the Temple of God was opened in Heaven etc. Where before, the twenty four
Elders, and the four Watchers also, had blessed the Lamb, that They should come
(even out of Heaven) to Reign upon the Earth, even upon the Earth. As if the
Earth should be the Center also, to All the Glory of God; and that it should be
more, and greater, on the Earth, than it is in Heaven.

And yet it may be remembered, that from the very first sin of Adam in Paradise,
the Earth was the Great (that I say not the Only) Object of the Curse of God.
The Serpent it self, was not Absolutely Cursed; but above all Cattle, and above
every Beast of the field. And when the Earth shall be New molded, yet Dust
shall be the Serpents meat: as we read Esaias 65. Adam must labor and sweat; the
Woman must be in subjection, and bring forth in pain: but not a word of Cursing
them: For God had loved them, and Blessed them. Yea, and they shall be Blessed.

But the Ground is Cursed, for Man's sake: and in sorrow must he eat thereof,
All the days of his life. Yea, it shall bring forth thorns and thistles: and
when Nothing else, comes after Dews, and Rain of Heaven; It is nigh unto
Cursing: as we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews?

And when the Cursed Earth, had also drunk up the blood of Righteous Abel
(every word of our Savior, is Remarkable:) Then Cain the Murderer (as every One
is, that Hates his brother) was also Cursed from the Earth: but not from
Heaven, that we read: and yet a Sacrifice was provided, and laid at his door,
for sin: that he may have Dominion over it. Though I shall not here dispute the
Jews Tradition, that Cain also, was saved.

Or, that the Earth it self, was cursed, as a Type of our Heart, or somewhat in
us, more spiritual than our fleshly Heart: which is a Metathesis of Earth: as
in Hebrew of Babel, which is Lebab (the Heart) turned backward. And an Heart,
turned back from God, is but Babel (Confusion:) As the Earth which the Lord
cursed. Bringing forth nothing but Thorns and Thistles; yet its Conception is
greatly multiplied, and its sorrow. But I must not here show, How our Body,
represents the whole World: with its three Regions of Heaven above (in our
Head) and the Earth below, in our Heart; with its Pericardium of Waters,
compassed with the Lungs, as the Air; separate by the Firmament of the Midriff;
from the Heaven above, in the Head; and the Waters under the Earth, in the
Bowels: which in Heb are expressed by the same word with the Waves of the Sea:
whose Rowlings, and Ebbings and flowings, are much akin to the motion and
yearnings of our Bowels. And in Scripture the offspring of our Bowels, is
compared to the Sand of the Sea, and the gravel thereof. As the Hebrew words
for the Thoughts of our Hearts, do also signify the sprouts of the Earth: That
Earth which the Lord Cursed.

But Noah found grace with God; which may allude to his Name, being the very
same Letters, which in Heb signify Grace. He is called the eighth Preacher of
Righteousness, being the eighth from Enos. When (it is said) Men began to
Preach, or Proclaim the Name of the Lord. The same phrase with Gods
Proclaiming, his own Name, to Moses. Though it be often used also for Calling
on his Name. As in the 80. and 79. Psalm. Pour out thy Wrath upon the Kingdoms
(or Families) that call not on Thy Name: (Till they seek Thy Name O Lord; as we
read in the 83d) which may be added, for calling on Christ, and Praying to Him.
For, among other Arguments, There, why he should not be Angry for ever, or
remember their Ancestors sins; He cries, Help us O God Our Savior, or our
Jesus, for the glory of Thy Name: and Deliver us, and Purge away, or atone, and
expiate, our sins, for Thy Names sake. Which (as in the 65 Psalm. and many
other places) is a sure Character of Christ in his Priestly Office; being a
Phrase so proper to the Priest, in making Expiation for sin (and the Mercy
Seat, and great Day of Atonement, is from that Word) through all the Law of
Moses.

And if I should so paraphrase the Words, that Noah was the eighth from Enos
who began to Preach Jesus, Or to own him so, as to call upon his Name; I might
not only show many Scriptures alluding (though we now render them by Man, and
the Son of Man; Where in Heb it is Enos, or the Son of Adam:) But I might also,
bring great Arguments, to prove Jehovah (there used) to be most proper to
Christ: Or the great Angel Jehovah, as he is called in Zech. as alluding to the
Angel so often speaking to Moses (and giving the Law at Sinai) out of the
Burning Bush: (and Sinai is my Bush, or my Thorns, or my Sin, or my Hatred, as
it is written, or at least, sounded in the Heb.) And That Angel, speaking to
Moses (when he was first made to turn aside, and say, he would consider, that
great thing, a Bush Burning, and yet not consuming, as Christ also was) plainly
tells him, He was the God of his Fathers; and appeared to them (as it is said
the Word of the Lord appeared to Abraham: and the old Chaldee Paraphrase uses
it very often, where we read the Lord:) Though it was only, by his Name of
Elshadday, or God Almighty (which we found the Object of Abraham's Faith:) but
not yet as Jehovah, speaking his Will also, with his Power: Ehje asher Ehje, I
will be what I will (or can) be. Which now God would be in Christ, delivering
them out of Egypt (which in Heb is Misery:) as he speaks in the Law, calling
himself Jehovah, the Lord thy God.

And This Name also, may seem to be foretold to our Grandmother Eve, and that
He should come from Her: and she could not hold it in (her Name being Chave,
which may also signify a Tatler:) and as soon as Kain was born, she cries, I
have kuned (or kinned) the Man Jehovah. See the same Idiome, particles and
accents, in Ezech. 4. 1.

But as Seth was Set (the Saxon English is very much Hebrew, and a kin to
Abraham:) in the room of Righteous Abel, whom Kain slew: So there was a
Righteous Man also, to rise up, and be set in the room of Kain, the Murderer,
and Brother Hater. Which might be hinted perhaps, when Kain named his Son Enoch
(sounding alike to Enos) the very same name with the Blessed Patriarch Enoch:
That is the Chatechist, or Catechumenus. As is touched also, in Abraham's taking
out his Enochs, or his Catechized servants, against the four great Monarchies.
And Enoch was a great Type of Christ, Walking with God, and was not, because
God took him: but before his Translation, he had this Testimony, that he
Pleased God. Living also 365. years, as there be Days, in a year. And so long
also, did Christ remain in the Purity of the Primitive Church (as the Oracle
answered, That Christian Religion should remain, but One (Great or Prophetic)
year: and then came up. That Grand Apostasy, so much spoken of; and ushered in
by Him, that through all ages since, is Called The Apostate. For, Julian was
about 365 years after Christ: of which we may discourse again, in an other
Season.

When Enoch was Taken away, and Seth Dead, Noah is Born. So Gracious is God, in
raising up other Comforters (as our Savior speaks) when it is expedient that
some be taken from us. Who is to be set in the room of Kain and his issue:
called the Children of Men, in opposition to the Sons of Enos, Named the Sons
of God, as some will have it. Then began Men to be called by the Name of God.

All Kains Issue was washed off, by the Flood; so, that all men now, are the
Children of Seth, (as we read in Scripture) as well as Children of Noah. And as
we see the Justice of God in washing away the Sons of Cursed Kain; so we may
see the goodness of God, in bringing us all since from Blessed Noah: while
also our sins (as the Sons of Kain) are washed off, by the Blessed Flood of
Baptism, by Water and the Spirit. Which must move on those Waters also (as at
first, on the great Waters) till it bring forth a New Heaven and a New Earth,
in which Righteousness shall dwell.

I do not Here stay to compare Noah's Ark with Peter's Sheet; having all kind of
beasts, Unclean and Clean: which He must slay, and eat, and Turn into himself,
and his own spirit. And from This, he is Taught at length, to call No Man
Common or Unclean. Seeing All, are together, and may be alike; as they were, in
the sheet, and in the Ark: Resembling Christ with Rest also, as the Name of
Noah signifies. Which was therefore given him, because He shall give us Rest,
or Comfort, in our Toil, because of the Earth which the Lord has Cursed.

To which also the Prophet Micah may allude, This Man shall be Our Peace, whon
the Assyrian Overflows our Land. For, so also, Esaias Prophesied, that Assyria
should rise up as a Flood, and overflow the breadth of the Land of Emanuel: as
Antichrist the Church of Christ. (see also Jer. 47. 2.) But Christ shall give
us Rest: as himself also promises, when he calls all that are laden, and
that Labor, (as alluding to That of Noah) I will give you Rest; and again you
shall find Rest to your Souls. And the flood so Baptized Noah, that God blessed
Him and his Sons also; which was more then we read done, to Adams Children.

Yea, Noah had a greater blessing then Adam had (as may be showed in diverse
Particulars:) and an Everlasting Covenant, so established with Him, and his
Seed also, that it is made the Pattern of all Covenants with Israel, or any
other: as we may find in diverse places.

And the Flood was such a Baptism to the Earth, also, As helped to wash away
its Curss: and Then, God said in his Heart, I will no more, Or I will not yet
add, or go on, to Curss the Earth, for man's sake; For, or although, all the
mouldings of his heart be evil continually. Which was the great reason brought
for the Flood: and yet now against it, and the Curse, or its continuance. So
gracious was God; seeing the Flood also, did not change man's heart (but still
left it as bad, as it found it) he resolved another Course; and that he would,
Overcome Man with Kindness. For, it it was not only the Heathen Poet that told
us, Love would Conquer All: Nor the Apostle only, that Love covers a
multitude of sins: but Solomon expressly says, Love covers, or shall cover
(as the Original expresses,) All Transgressions. Which St. Paul also Comments
on: Love bears All, believes All, hops All, endures All. Which was seen
before in David's (that is Loves) perfect Victory over All his Enemies; Yea and
Saul also, which is the Grave and Hell: to which David also, alludeth perhaps,
in That very Psalm, Crying, the Kables of Hell laid hold of me: Kable Seol.

I shall not digress, Here to show, How the Flood it self, was a Blessing also
to the Earth, and a Type of a greater Blessing to come; When the skies shall
pour down Righteousness, and the Earth also shall bring forth Salvation. When
we shall receive the great showrs, and the Latter Rain of the Spirit, as we
have received the Former little drops (and first fruits of it) hinted in diverse
places of Scripture. For, the whole Earth also must be full of the Knowledge of
God, as the Waters fill up the Sea; and did once cover the Earth: yea once and
again. But the Spirit also moved on the Waters, and formed out the Heaven and
the Earth: so also it shall bring forth a new Heaven, and a new Earth, in which
Righteousness shall dwell. And in the Revelation, the Earth also holped the
woman, and drunk up the Flood, cast out of the Dragons mouth. May it not also
be, about 1656 from Christ's Resurrection, or the New Creation; as the Flood was
so long after the Old Creation? And, That very Earth, which God so cursed, even
This Cursed Earth, must become, the Blessed of the Lord. Yea so much his
Darling; That he resolves to make it the very Center of All his Glory: and to
fill it so, with his glorious presence; that the very Saints, or Angels in
Heaven, rejoiced in the Revelation, that they should come (out of Heaven) to
reign upon the Earth. Which is many times also hinted in the Psalms, and All
the Prophets: to be compared with that most remarkable Discourse of God with
Moses, on Mount Sinai, of the Lands enjoying her Sabbath of Rest, in Leviticus.
And the very Song of Moses (which is as the Bass, to All following Prophesies,)
concludes with This, He will be gracious to his Land (as to his People,) or he
will Cover, or Atone, or Expiate his Land.

Yea, the very word by which God named the Earth (which is one of the few
things God Himself named, and would not leave to Adams Naming, as he did other
things:) is such a word, as might be also rendered, I will delight, or be
pleased: as if Here, he meant to take his pleasure, and delight; rather than in
All the Heavens. Which must pass away, as a Scroul of Parchment, before the
fire; and They shall be no more: being only as a Canopy, or Curtains, now to
hide the Glory of God; which must ere long fill the Earth: which therefore
shall Endure for ever, and be never moved; though renewed and filled, both with
Righteousness and Peace. And God will come to keep his Sabbath of Rest, and
will delight on Earth; and take his pleasure Here: and Here also accept his
People: as himself seems sweetly to allude (to the very Name Erets, by which
he named the Earth) in the 40. verse of the 20. chapter of Ezekiel. Where also
This allusion is more sweet, and fuller much, in the Original, than other
Languages can well express. Berets sam eretsem. And in the 34. of the same
Prophet, he says, I will make them, and the places about my Hill, a Blessing:
I will cause the shower to come in his season: there shall be showers of
Blessing. And the Tree of the field shall yield her fruit; and the Earth (even
the whole Earth) shall then yield her Increase. Which we also read in the 67.
96, 97, 98, 99. and diverse other Psalms: and in the second of Hosea, and diverse
other Prophets.

And this Land of Canaan (more Accursed, than the whole Earth besides; while it
was held by those accursed Nations, so devoted to destruction:) came to be; the
Pleasant Land, the Holy Land, the place of Gods Delight, and Residence; on
which his Eyes and Heart were fixed, All the Year.

And This also, but as the First fruits of the Earth. For, it must All, be Full
of the glory of God: And All Nations must worship him; and All Kingdoms must be
His. So it is prayed and promised in many places of Scripture. Let All the
Earth fear the Lord: let all the Inhabitants of the World Reverence him. For,
he looks on them, and fashioneth their hearts alike; and his Eyes are on
them: that fear him, and Hope in his Mercy. All his Works are done in Truth, He
loves Righteousness and Judgment. All the Earth is full of his Goodness. And
the next Psalm is David's Heart: or Christ's; when driven out from Abimeleck (the
King my Father, or the Father of the King) he Changed his Habit etc. And among
other sweet Expressions, That may be One; When the Face of God is against the
wicked to cut them off from Earth, They Cry (for, so is the Original) and the
Lord hears and delivers them, out of all their Trouble. And again, All the
Ends of the World shall remember and Turn unto the Lord. And All Nations and
Kindreds, shall worship him. Yea, All Kings shall fall down before him, and All
Nations shall serve him. For, he shall deliver the Needy when he Cries; the
Poor also, and Him that has no Helper. And again, All Nations which thou have
made, shall come and Worship before thee O Lord, and glorify thy Name. And the
reason is in the same Psalm, For, the Lord is Good, and ready to forgive, and
plenteous in Mercy, to all that call upon him. O sing unto the Lord a New Song
(which is cited also in the Revelation) Sing unto the Lord, All the Earth. Fear
before him, All the Earth. Say among the Heathen the Lord Reigns, and the
whole World shall* be Established, that it thall not be moved. Let the Heavens
rejoice, and let the Earth be glad: Let the Sea Dance and Roll, with All the
Fullness thereof (which hereafter we may understand.) Let the Field be Joyful,
and All in it. Yea, Then shall all the Trees of the Wood rejoice before the
Lord. For he Comes, He Comes, to Judge the World. The Lord Reigns, let the
Earth rejoice, and let the many Isles be glad. The Heavens declare his
Righteousness, and all the People see his Glory. Which in the next Psalm is,
All the ends of the Earth have seen the Salvation of God. As in Luke also, All
flesh shall see the salvation of God: Which in Esaias is Thus, The Glory of God
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. And in the same
Prophet, Sing O Heavens, for, the Lord has done it; Shout O lower parts of the
Earth; break forth into singing ye Mountains: O Forest, and every Tree
therein. And again, Look unto me and be saved, All the ends of the Earth. For,
I am God, and there is None else. I have sworn by my self (for, there is No
Greater) that to me every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear, and
pray, and praise, and confess to the Glory of God and my Father: who said, Ask
of me, and I will give thee the utmost ends of the Earth. And while our Savior
lived on Earth, he traveled to Egypt, and to other places, about the Holy
Land. As taking possession of them, Blessing them also, by his blessed
presence. For, the time was coming, yea and Then come, when not only at That,
or other Mountains of that Holy Land, but in All places, men should Worship God
in Spirit and in Truth. For the Father Seeks such to worship him. Yea, and
Those Lands also, that had so afflicted, and oppressed the People of God in all
Ages (even Egypt and Assyria,) must come to sharers with the Land of Israel it
self, in the greatest Blessings. For, in that day shall Israel be a Third (and
but a Third) with Egypt and Assyria; even a Blessing in the midst of the
Earth: whom the Lord of Hosts himself shall bless; saying, Blessed be Egypt my
People, and Assyria the work of my hands: as we read in the Prophet Esaias; to be
compared with other places.

And the Reason given in the very Law of Redemption, speaks This: because the
Land was Gods Land, and they were but Gods Tenants in it: though in the Best
and freest Fee; for it was given to Abraham and his seed for Ever: who was Heir
of the World, as the Apostle speaks. And yet So, that they must still
acknowledge God to be their Lord Paramount; their Grand Landlord. And They might
never give, or sell, or aliene, no nor forfeit it, (which is very comfortable)
but so, that it still must, and should, and shall, be Redeemed again, by the
Tenant himself, or his Kinsman. Or however (which was still to be observed) it
must go out Free, wholly Free, at the great Year of Jubilee: of which more ere
long. And the Reason was This, Because the Land was Gods Land: and He would
still retain his Right to it, and in it: and would still dispose it as he
pleased; whatever the present Tenant did.

And does not the same Reason hold, for All the Earth? Yea, did it not hold,
from the very first Fall of Adam, and Mankind in him? Was not Then also the
Earth, even the whole Earth, the same Landlords? Had he not, as much Right to
it, as to This Land of Canaan? Would he so easily quit his Right in it? Though
Man (a weak, and vain, and foolish Creature) made a Forfeiture of His
Possession, or His Right? shall it not, then be, (as it was, diverse times, with
this Land of Canaan?) that when he shall have purged out the filth thereof, by
the spirit of Judgment and of Burning; That which remains shall be Holy? And
why may it not be Thus also, with our bodies and our flesh, which has so long
been, As the accursed Earth? Yea, as Babylon it self? an Habitation of unclean
spirits, and a Cage of all unclean birds? Why may it not also become the
blessed Land of Promise, and the Land of Rest: Yea, the Holy Place, and Temple
of the Lord of all the Earth.

Which is a Phrase very much to be marked: As a name in which the Lord himself
seems to glory: being also the same Lord that is styled the God of the
Spirits of All flesh. Which may be the Foundation of That Prayer, and That
Promise also, that All flesh may, and shall, be brought to praise and bless the
Lord: as also that All the Earth must be full of the Glory of God. For, the
place of his very Feet, must be Glorious. And what Glory Then, will be upon
This Earth; when the Curtains, or Canopy of the Heavens, shall be drawn, and
the Glory of God shall appear, and will the Earth, as his chiefest Residence?
Will he not Then Give the Greatest Honor, to the Weaker Vessel! and the more
abundant honor to the most uncomly parts; or That which lacked most before?

It might be added also, that the very City Jerusalem, was not only Accursed as
the rest, but longer, than other parts of the Land. Trodden down by the
accursed Jebusites (which had their very name from Tredding down; as the
Revelation also seems to allude) and These Jebusites grew up to be so Odious,
that before he conquered them, it is said, His Soul, even David's Soul (that is
Love it self) Hated them. Even Them, who possessed That very Fort, which was
afterward his Darling; and the dearly beloved of his Soul. Yea That, which God
Chose-above all the Gates or Cities of Judah. Yet in it self (besides its
accursed possessors) it was but a dry barren Rock; and so called Zion, Drought,
or a Dry barren place. And Morijah also, where the Temple stood, was but the
Threshing place of one of these accursed Jebusites (though as a Liberal Prince
to David himself:) And though, in Hebrew, it may signify, the Lords Teaching,
yet others bring it up to Myrrh, or Bitterness: and in Greek it signifies
Foolishness: to which also the Apostle may allude in several places.

And by This time, I may conclude this Discourse of Turning accursed places, or
unholy, into Blessed and Holy, with That solemn saying of our Savior, The last
shall be first, and the first last. Which he repeated so, that I often think,
it might intimate, a greater Mystery, than I am yet sensible of. As if, All the
Course of Gods Providence were as a Wheel in constant Motion; pulling down the
high Spoaks, and bringing up the low ones. Which Moses also, long before,
described in his Psalm of Nature, Grace and Glory. Thou turnest man about (as
grinding him, with the upper and the lower Millstone, of Grief and Pain) to clay
or dust; and Then thou say, Return again; Again ye Sons of Man. Return again
O Lord, How long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants (That is, Make
them Turn and Repent, as we find it plain enough in the 80. Psalm, and diverse
other places, that Gods Effects In Man, are expressed, as His Affections To
Man:) O satisfy us with thy Free Grace, in the morning; (when our Night of
pain and sorrow is past: For, Though sorrow may continue all night, yet Joy
shall come in the morning:) and we shall be glad, and rejoice all day. Make us
glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the years
wherein we have seen evil: (and although I might not see thy Face when I prayed
to see thy Glory; yet) let Thy Work (at length) appear unto thy Servants, and
Thy Glory also to our Children when we are dead. And let the Beauty also of the
Lord our God, be on us All; and establish Thou the Work of our hands to us, yea
the Work of our hands, do Thou establish it. And will he not Then also
establish the work of his own hands? Which is so often brought as a Reason why
the Earth must stand and abide for ever. Seeing All the Works of God are
perfect, and must abide for ever. Yea, and he has set the World also, or
Eternity (as the word is often rendered) in the Heart of every man. And though
it may be (for a while) the Glory of God, to hide some things: Yet it is not
only Lawful, but our glory (and the Glory of the greatest, largest, Kingly
heart, like Solomon) to searth it out: and to search him out. For, in God,
there is No Mole, or shadow of Deformity. Nor will he envy, that All Flesh
should see his glorious face together. Nay our Savior promises, that Nothing
Shall be Hid (no not in God himself, I hope,) but shall be revealed. And every
New Revelation of God, to All Eternity, will be to Jesus Christ (as That we now
read:) but to show it to his Children, and his Servants. Which have also
received a spirit, not only to know and discern the things of God (as the
spirit of man, does the things of a man) and to know the things that are freely
given us of God: but also to search out the Depths, or Baths of God. Who still
speaks perhaps, to them All; as to the Prophet Jeremy, Ask of me, and I will
yet show thee great and wonderful things, which thou know not. For, such a
God we have, so Infinite; that still he is, a Fountain flowing up, still
flowing over: and a little drop of that infinite Ocean, can stretch out our
narrow souls, still wider, and yet wider; to receive more, and yet more, and
still more, to Eternity: till we are wider than the very Heavens. For our
Savior and our Head is gone up, Over All Heavens (still spinning out the
spring of his Watch, which was wound up, Here on Earth, while He was straightened,
and made perfect by suffering:) that he may now-fill All things: and bring us
All up, to his own Balance of Eternal Glory. Even to the fullness of that
stature which each Member is to have, in His Great Body; Which is the Fullness
of Him which fills All in All.

This also of Turning Cursed things or places into Blessed, might be yet more
cleared from Jericho: which was the first Fruits, of all the I and of Chanaan,
And (as all first Fruits) it was so sacred, that all were cursed, that but
touched it. And yet, the Vallie of Achan, or Achor (that is the Troubler,)
afterward, is made a Door of Hope, in the great day of Iezreel, the Seed of
God. Yet, so accursed it was, by prophecy, that He, that should but attempt to
build it again, was solemnly Cursed by Iosuah, the great Type of Jesus.

Yet in the Reign of Achab (the Brother and the Father, as the Name implies)
the guilty Man of the Kings of Israel; there rises up one Hiell (the Living
God:) and ventures to rebuild this Cursed City. Yet we read of nothing else of
harm to him, but only that he laid its groundwork in his Eldest Son, and
finished it, in his Youngest; which we may consider again.

But notwithstanding all the Curss, This Jericho, in a very few years, grew up
to be a Blessed School of Prophets; as we may gather from the History of
Elijahs taking up into Heaven. And to make the Cure yet perfecter the Citizens
bemoan themselves, before Elisha, that the situation of their City, was indeed
pleasant, but the Water Naught, and the ground so, that it caused to miscarry:
as some read the place. And he said, bring me a New Cruse, and put salt
therein; and he went forth to the spring (or very Fountain of the cursed
Waters;) and cast in the salt, and said, Thus says the Lord, I have Healed
these Waters; there shall be Thence, No more Death, or Curss, or Barrenness.
So the Waters were Heald unto this day.

That Elisha the Prophet, was in This also, a great Type of Jesus Christ,
Healing the Earth, and taking off the Curss thereof (as he bore away the sins
of the World;) I do believe the rather, because I find Our Savior thereabout
so often; with his Healing Wings also, to so many. That I say nothing of his
famous Parable of the good Samaritan, Journying toward Jericho.

Nor shall I now spend time to show, how all this, is also shadowed out, in the
very Heavens; by the frequent Changings of the Moon: although the Name of
Jericho might lead us to That also. Or that, as Jericho was the First fruits,
to the whole Land of Israel, So was Israel also, to the World. As we might
prove, by many Scriptures, besides That of Jeremy the 2. Where it is called the
First Fruits unto God, of All his Increase: and All that eat it (or in some
other places, all that touch it, to destroy it) are Offenders, and be guilty.
So also is our Savior himself called the First Fruits of the Resurrection.
Though but as the Barley Sheaf (or Barley Cake of Gideon) that was Heaved up
before the Lord, on the Third day, after the Passover was slain: as an Emblem
of the Resurrection on the third day, after his death. And This, is often
called in Scripture, (as in Genesis, Revelation, and St. John's Epistle and
Gospel; the Beginning of the Creation, and the Works of God: So here,) the
Beginning of the First Fruits. Which came after, on the day of Pentecost (when
also we received the First Fruits of the Spirit, in the 2 of Acts:) and those
first Fruits were Loaves of fine Flowr; and molded together, as a Type of the
Elect: (as the very name of First Fruits, in Hebrew, may intimate:) or of
Christ, in All his Members together; as before, it was Christ in his own
person: who was the First First Fruits; or Beginning os the First Fruits of the
Resurrection, and of all that slept. And the same Apostle tells us also, that
if the Root be Holy, the Branches are Holy; and if the First fruits be Holy, so
is the whole Lump. Which should be considered much: with all those places that
speak our Savior, and the whole Election of God, to be (as Israel to the whole
World besides) but as the First born, with the double portion: or the first
fruits of the Earth; as we may read in the Revelation, and diverse other places.
As the Barley Sheaf first, and Then the siner Loaves at Pentecost, were but the
first fruits of all the Increase of the Earth: which was not gathered All in,
till the end of all the Harvest, and Vintage also; about the great Feast of
Tabernacles, at the End of the year. Which yet is called (on the New account
from Exodus) the Seventh Month. Which also made every Seventh Month Holy. As
also, every Seventh Year was (especially the seventh Seventh, as we shall find
in the Jubilee:) and every seventh Week; or every seventh Day, or Sabbath; and
perhaps every seventh Hour also, in each Day. As we see, it makes a great Turn
in the Sun and Moon (beginning our reckoning from Sunset, as the Jews, and
many other Nations did:) which we see Daily attended also with a constant
Ebbing and flowing of the Sea, six Hours apiece, in the great Ocean: as we may
discourse more largely in the place of Times and Seasons.

I might add also, that although the Curse, that was due enough to Man, fell on
the Earth in general, our common Mother (crying to us, as Rebecca did to her
son Jaacob, Thy Curse be upon me my son;) yet there have been several places,
which in several Ages, have been especially under this Curse; and yet none of
them, lay so under it, but that they grew up to be Blessed again. Yea, it may
be, the more Blessed, because they were once so Cursed. For, it was not only
Micha's Mother, that blessed her son in the name of the Lord, because she had
cursed so before; but even God himself, does so earnestly Remember One that he
has spoken against (as himself says to Ephraim,) that his Bowels do the more
yern over him: and it may be, blesses them more, because they were formerly
cursed. That is, under Sorrow; as we find the Curse of God, so rendered in the
Lamentations; Give them O Lord, thy Curse, even Sorrow on their heart. And our
first Parents had sorrow, and sweat, and pain, for their portion; when the
Curse fell on the Earth: bearing Briars and Thorns, Thistles and Nettles, to
express this Curse or Wrath of God: as the very name of a Nettle in Hebrew may
import.

If there be any place in all the Law, more under the Curse, than the Land of
Canaan; it seems to be Idumea: one of the Neighbor Countries, which is
expressly called the People of my Curse: and threatened to Perpetual
desolations, when the whole Earth shall rejoice, Edom must mourn, and be so
cursed also, that it is the very Type of Hell, as may plainly appear, by
reading the 34. of Esaias. It being also the Land of Him or them that God so
Hated; as was touched before.

And yet I know not one word in all the Curse of Edom, that we do not also find
Inflicted, (and not only Threatened) on Jaacob and Israel: Whom, God himself
says, he had given, or devoted, to the Curse: by that very phrase, which is
used, in that place, where Edom is called the People of my Curse. And what more
frequent, than Jerusalem it self, to be a Scorn, Reproach and Curse: yea, a
Curse to all Nations? Yea, and Perpetual Desolations; never to be Built again,
or more Inhabited.

And yet we find That Ever, or Eternity, run out, at the end of seventy years
Captivity; in which, not only the Threatenings, but Curse also, was
accomplished, and powered out; as we find in that remarkable Prayer, left us in
the 9. of Daniel: (to be compared with That of the Apostle, Wrath is come upon
them to the uttermost:) and Then it is a Blessed Land again, and a Blessed
People: and a Blessing also to the World and Nations round about. For, It shall
come to pass, that As you were a Curse, to the Heathen round about, so shall
you be a Blessing; as we read in Zechary; yea and a Blessing to All Nations, as
the Promise is in Malachy (and diverse other Prophets:) who does not only show
them a way, how from a Curse, they should come to be Blessed, and a Blessing
also to All Nations: But in the very close of that Prophet, and so of the whole
Law, God himself provideth a Cure for the Earth also; Lest he should come, and
smite the Earth, with a Curse. Even the Earth; which was That, which God had
Cursed, so much more than Adam. Yet Elijah must come, lest That very Cursed
Earth, should be smitten with the Curse. And as the Jews repeat That verse of
Elijahs Coming (after the last verse,) lest the Scripture should end, in Curse:
so it seems, God also meant to repeat His Coming. Or to send him (or his
spirit) Twice. Or, before the latter Coming of Christ; as before the Former.
There being also Two days of the Lord There spoken of: One is called Great
(and so was his first Coming;) and the other Dreadful, or Terrible: which seems
the Epithet of his latter Coming, much rather than his former. And it may be
marked, that after John the Baptist was dead (even at our Saviors coming from
his Transfiguration: which was such a Type of his second Coming and Kingdom:)
He Then promises, that Elijah Shall first Come, and Shall restore All things.
Which is a Proverb with the Jews to this day: and was also the constant Belief
and Expectation of the Primitive Church of Christians; as may be showed by a
full Jury of Ancient Fathers, of the Christian Church.

And as John the Baptists Time was called the Dayspring from on High: So it
may be, Elijahs second Coming also, (before the second coming of Christ,) is
hinted in all those Scriptures, which speak of a Morning Star, to appear before
the Sun of Righteousness: which is also the phrase used by the same Prophet
Malachy, who promises the coming of Elijah. And the Revelation plainly
promises That Morning Star, in the dark time of Jesabel; and in Jesabels time,
Elijah slew her Prophets, and the Prophets of Baal: and so made that great
change both in Church and State, that in the Revel may be hinted, by a Power to
break the Nations. Though That phrase, reach up, as High as Josuab, breaking
the seven Nations: As the Manna, in the Church before, may intimate their
passing through the Wilderness toward Canaan. And that phrase of Breaking the
Nations, being coupled with that Promise of Elijahs coming, under the Notion of
the Bright Morning Star, may put us in mind of a speech of God himself to Job:
Have thou considered the Day Star, or the Dayspring: which I have made to
shake the wicked out of the Earth? They shall be turned as wax to the seal etc.
And when the wicked are cut off, Thou shall see, those Promises fulfilled, that
the Meek shall inherit the Earth: As we read in the Psalms, and in our Saviors
Blessings also; and the Revelation adds to That Blessing, that there shall be
no more Curse. No more Curse.

For, the very Leaves of the Trees, about the Waters of Life, shall heal the
Nations. And those Waters flow out round about; Even to the Dead Sea, or Lake
of Sodom (for, even Her Captivity must return again; as we saw in Abraham's
History compared with Ezekiel:) and where ever those Waters came, there was
Life, and Healing; and no more curse. Its possible also, that the Time of This
great change may be hinted, in the fourteenth year, or second Sabbath, of
Prophetical years (as David also was the fourteenth from Abraham, as the Number
of his Name imports:) after the four great Monarchies had Lorded it, Twelve
whole years: which may be also Prophetical years from Nimrod: Or from Abraham's
Time, or Promise.

And as Israel got off their Curss; and Gods goodness turned it into a
Blessing; (as our evil sometimes turns our Blessings into Curses; so does his
Goodness, turn his Curses in Blessings: whence it may be, the very same Word
in Hebrew, signifies both to Curse and to Bless; as we find in several places
of Job, and other Scriptures:) So did Edom also, cast off his Yoke, and his
Curse also it seems, and got a Blessing. As we see in his Fathers Blessing and
Prophecy. Which was also hinted by his Brother, when by wrestling he had got
the Name of Israel, a Prince with God; and had prevailed also with men: he
uses his Power for Edification presently (as the Apostle speaks) and not for
Destruction. And comes out in the Power and Spirit of that God, whom he had so
conquered: and does not only carry a Blessing to his Brother Esaw, and
entreats him; but with an Holy violence, forces him to take it. Receive the
Blessing, which I bring thee from God: and he urged (or forced) him, by
pressing on him, and he took it. And we read, how he cast off the Yoke of
Israel (even to this day:) at the time of Jehoshaphat, or the Lords Judgment.
Yea, he did not only cast off Isreal's Yoke, but came to rule and reign over
Israel himself, at the coming of Christ. As we find in the Herod's, and Agrippa
the King, from the Seed of Edom, hated, cursed Esaw.

Which we may consider when we read of Gods Shining out from Seir: Coming from
Teman, or appearing from Paran. And the Prophet Esaias, cries, Who is This that
comes from Edom, with Dyed garments from Bozra? I that speak Righteousness;
mighty to Save. And his Red Garments may allude to Edom, if it signify Red, as
many will have it: which may be rather a Glutton.

And though Balaam say, the Star of Jacob, or the Scepter of Israel shall smite
the Corners of Moab, and Destroy all the Children of Seth; and Edom shall be a
Possession (to be compared with Obadiah:) yet the Prophet Amos speaks of
Edoms Possessing the Tabernacle of David, when raised up. As we may Translate
the words, cited also in the Acts: where Edom also, is coupled with Those that
call upon, or are called by, the Name of the Lord. and in Dan we read that Edom
(with Moab and Ammon) shall escape out of the hand of the Destroyer, which some
make Antichrist, or the Turck: who to this day pays Tribute to those Arabs of
Edom, Moab and Ammon, rather then Rules over them.

Yet, as Babylon is threatened with perpetual Desolations, because he laid the
World wast, and would not open his Prison Doors to let his Prisoners loose, and
send them home aagain (which has been very comfortable when I have applied it
to Christ in prayer:)

So also, the great Curse, Threatened to Edom, was, because he forgot the
Brotherly kindness, and the Covenant that should have been between Him and his
Brother Jacob; and let his Wrath tear for ever. Which has also been sweet to
my thoughts, when I have applied it to Christ: and asked, whither He also,
would put himself under the perpetual Curse of Edom, by forgetting the
Brotherly Kindness, and Brotherly Covenant? and by letting His wrath also Tear
for Ever? God forbid.

Next unto Cursed Edom, Moab and Ammon may be well placed; the Incestuous
Children of Lot: which signifies a veil (or cloth) as God himself seems to
allude; when after Lot was Separate from Abraham (for Israel must dwell alone)
God said, Lift up now thy eyes and look, etc. And again in the Prophet Isa. I
will take away the Veil, or Lot (for, that is the Word in Hebrew) from the face
of all people: Even in that Mountain, where he will tread down Moab, who was
Son of that Lot, twice named There, in Heb.

Of Moab and Ammon, it is said, they should never come into the Church of God;
(one of the worst threatenings in all the Bible:) and the cause in Deuteronomy. and
Neh. is, because they met not their Brethren with Bread and Water; and hired
Balaam to curse them, but God turned his curse into a blessing; and so I hope
he did This Curse also, of Moab and Ammon. For, their Ever, or Never, is in
another place, limited by Ten Generations.

Seeing God himself has expounded ever, and never, (in the Case of Ammon and
Moab) by Ten Generations; Why may not we Take it so, in other places also?
Especially seeing it is often used, where it cannot be meant of Eternity. As
the Servant, bored in his ear, must serve for ever: which is but till the next
Jubilee: as we may find in the twenty fifth of Leviticus, and all the Jews, on
those places. And Christ also tells us, the Servant abides not in the House for
Ever. And how often is it said, Jerusalem shall Ever be desolate, and never be
built again, or Inhabited? (As we found in Idumeah) And yet it was built again,
after the seventy Years Captivity; and may be yet again, after all This. As we
find Ay, was built again, and inhabited, in the return of Nehemiah (the Lords
Comfort, or Repentance;) Though Josuah himself, that mighty Type of Jesus, had
made it so signally Desolate, and that for Ever also; a Desolate heap for ever:
As the very Name may intimate in Hebrew, Greek, and diverse other Languages. As
the Stones also placed by the same Josuah, are called a Memorial for ever. And
so are the Rites of the Passover, and the Shewbread: and Aarons Priesthood;
Yea, in the very Family of Phineas (though it was soon changed:) nay the very
Garments of the Priests, are a Statute for ever. And his Trimming the Lamps:
and Restraint of blood and fat also, for ever: and Circumcission is called an
everlasting Covenant in their Flesh. And Samuel was presented at the
Tabernacle, to abide There for ever. And David was chosen to be King over
Israel for Ever: and his Son Solomon says, I know that whatsoever God does, it
shall be for Ever. And I know not any Word, or Phrase, for Eternity, in
Scripture, that is not applied to Heaven and Earth, or other things, which pass
away: But Christ's Words shall Never pass away.

And for Moab and Ammon; As I live, says the Lord, the God of Israel (and the
Common Rule is, that Threatenings with an Oath, are never reversed:) Surely Moab
shall be as Sodom, and Ammon as Gomorrah, and Perpetual Desolation; as we read
in Zeph. And yet in Jeremy, God promises to bring back the Captivity of Ammon
(as of Sodom also, in Ezechiel;) and of Moab, in the latter days: or Time of
Messiah: as the Jews use to expound that Phrase of the latter Days.

And in the Tenth Generation, They also, may enter into the Church of God:
though it was threatened, They should Never enter. And as David was the
fourteenth Generation (and the fourteenth, seventy Years) from Abraham; so was
Boas the Tenth, or eleventh: who married Ruth a Moabite (who might be the Tenth
from Lot) who by a former Man of Judah; was Daughter to Naomy (Beauty) Wife to
Elimelech; who had two Sons, Mahlon (weakness) and Chilion (consumption, or
perfection, or Espousal:) who had Orpha (stiffneckednesse) who left her Mother,
The other, Ruth, who choosing her Mothers people and God, is led to a field of
Boaz, and is bid stick close to his Maidens; (O tell me where thou feedest, and
restest at Noon, for why should I stray?) and at length is bid, to lie at his
feet, and say, Thou art my Kinsman (as Solomon bids us say to Wisdom, Thou art
my Sister.) And Christ is both Iachin and Boaz, the Wisdom and Strength of God,
and so very near a kin to Elimelech (my God the King:) see the third of Esaias,
compared with the 7, 8, 17. 22. of the 23. chap. and see the Women of Moab and
Ammon married to Kings of Israel and Judah.

And David in his straits, carried his Parents, to the King of Moab; saying,
Let my Father and Mother be with you, till I know what God will do for me. Or
as Esaias, Let my Outcasts dwell with Thee Moab: be thou a Covert to them. And in
Mercy shall the Throne be established (as we found before in the Psalms and
Proverbs;) and he shall sit upon it in Truth, in the Tabernacle of David:
judging and seeking judgment, and Hasting Righteousness. And my Heart shall
Cry for Moab (O the Tender Heart of God!) Let his Fugitives flee to Zoar. As
his Father Lot did from Sodom to Zoar: which seems therefore to have stood in
Moab, on the East of Jordan; and not on the West, as the Tables place it. And
again, send ye the Lamb to the Ruler of the People, to the mount of the
Daughter of Zion; as alluding to the King of Moabs paying Lambs for Tribute to
the King of Israel. But about Ahabs Death, Moab and Edom also, brake their
yoke; and freed themselves from Iaacob; under Iehoram (the high Lord:) in the
days of Elisha (or God Jesus, as the Name implies:) who had a double portion
of the Spirit of Elijah the Lord my God.

And shall a Man be able to give a Double portion of his Spirit, (and That, at
his Parting and going away;) and shall not He that has the Residue of the
spirit (in opposition to shear Baser, the Residue of the Flesh, which is so
many times in Scripture Language, for near Kindred:) or He that has the Spirit
without Limits, or not by measure: shall not He, be able and willing also, to
give His Holy Spirit unto all that ask it? and a Double Portion unto All his
First Born? Who saw, and yet see, him ascending; and cry to him, my Father, my
Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof! And it may be, That
remarkable promise of the Spirit, unto all that ask it, may allude to. This
very History of Elijah, giving his Spirit to Elisha; crying, my Father, my
Father. As in Luke it is (not as some read it, your Heavenly Father, But) Your
Father, who is, Out of Heaven: or came out of Heaven.

And he took the Mantle of Elijah, and smote the Waters saying (as we may now
say, Here indeed is the Mantle of Elijah, O but) Where is the Lord God (and the
Spirit) of Elijah? and the Waters parted Hither and Thither. Though I do not
yet say, when they so parted (as before, at Josuahs coming over Jordan,) there
began an Other Generation, or a New Age of the World. As at first, dividing the
Waters, by the Firmament of Heaven; with the Waters above the Heavens: of which
in the Psalms, and diverse other places, that I speak not of Esdras,
Ecclesasticus, or Wisdom of Solomon.

And the Sons of the Prophets said, the Spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha: and
they bowed down, or Worshipped him: and afterward he enlarged their College,
and it may be, their Spirit also. The Hebrew Word Saul, used in That History,
puts me in mind How Saul cut off the Lords Priests: and How he fell, and How
the Jews say, He was Recovered aand saved: though I dare not say, by the
Mediation of Elias, or Elisha. Who, they say, must come and loose all knots;
or, as our Savior says, He must Restore All Things; yea and that, after John
the Baptist was beheaded.

And some other words, in That History, put me also in mind, How Elijah
destroyed the false prophets of Baal and Jezabel, and how Elisha did encourage
and enlarge the True Prophets: and at length, by one of the young prophets,
annointeth Jehu (which yet was given in charge to Elijah himself: One of the
best Texts I know for Deputations.) And Jehu destroys Jezabel, who had not
only Destroyed, and Corrupted, the Lords Prophets, and driven away Elijah and
Elisha; but had even quite stifled, the very Spirit of Prophecy, in the Seed of
God: as the Hebrew words, Naboth in Jezreel, may import. Which may be compared
with That of Jezabel, opposed by the Bright morning Star, breaking and
scattering the Dark Clouds, and bringing in, the Morning, and Our Rising and
clothing with White and fresh Linen in fourth and fifth Churches: and
th^slaying of the two Witnesses (with the Spirit of Prophecy) in the
Revelation. And the sixth Church of Philadelphia (or Brotherly Love) is plainly
the New Jerusalem (as Christ himself expresses, in his Epistle to that
Church:) before the General Judgment of the People, or Laodicea: as the Word
signifies. Which may also be compared with the latter part of the eleventh, and
also the four last Chapters of the Revelation. Where the great Judgment also
is Described, which the Prophets place in the Valley of Jehoshaphat (whose very
Name implies the Lords Judgment.) Which was also called the valley of Beraca,
or Blessing; When they had trodden down Moab and Ammon and Edom. Which we find
also cited in the Prophets, as foretelling somewhat, yet to be done, in the
Revelation.

And had it not been for Jehoshaphat, Elisha said, he would not have seen the
other two Kings (met against Moab also:) saying Nay, but has God gathered
these Kings (and their people also) together, to Destroy them? But as
Jehoshaphat smarted sorely, for joining with Ahab and his Sons: so They Got by
His good Company. In which, we may see, God pitying a Wicked man, and Hearing
his Cry and Prayer: as most remarkably after, he did the Prayer of Jehoahaz, 2
Kings 13. 4, 5, 6. 23.

How the Waters came at the morning Sacrifice; and How he multiplied the
VViddows Oil, that was like to lose her two Sons for bondslaves (which may be a
great Mystery:) and how he gave a Son to a barren Woman, and then raised him
from the Dead: and how he Healed the Pottage, when Death was in the Pot; and
fed a great Multitude with a few barley loves; and Healed Naaman the Syrian
Lepar: and struck Gehezy with Leprosy, for seeking things of the World, in an
ill time, or season. And How his dead bones raised a dead man: and many other
things, we might observe, in this great Type of Jesus Christ.

But especially His striking his Enemies blind, and then bringing them into
Samaria: and when the King of Israel said, shall I smite them my Father, shall
I smite them?

He said, Noe. Will thou smite them, whom thou have taken Prisoners, with thy
sword and thy bow? Set bread and meat before them, etc.

And I have often heard one say, he knew not, that he ever had a sweeter return
from Christ, then when once in great anguish, he could only say, Now show thy
Kindness to thy Poor Enemy; Whom thou have taken Captive, with Thy sword and
thy bow.

And the King of Isreal's Feasting Those Prisoners, (for, he made great
provision for them) may be more considered hereafter; and compared with That of
Solomon, if thy Enemy hunger, feed him, and the Lord shall not only requite,
but reward thee: and this History may be the more considerable, because it may
perhaps, be found the most desperate or most forlorn condition here on earth.
When a man Degenerates into a judicial blindness. Except it may yet be worse,
to come unto a Beastly Spirit and Nature. Which is, when after great, and
perhaps very long, Abusing Light and Love, (showed from God and Christ) a man
does not only disobey, but grieve and quench that good spirit, so much and so
long, that at length it leaves him to degenerate into a blind and seared
conscience, and a Brutish Nature: till he becomes as a Dog, biting and
snarling at all about him; and returning to his vomit; and as the Swine, to
wallowing in the mire; and also Turning and Tearing those that lay good things
before him. Who now tramples them under his feet, and offers despite to the
spirit of Grace, and accounts his Saviors blood, as unclean and profane.

This was It perhaps, the Psalmist so prayed against; not only when he cries
against Presumptuous sins; but Then also perhaps, when he prays so earnestly
to be kept from the Dog, or Dog-like Nature: of which he speaks diverse times.
And This it may be, is also, in the Revelation, under the Notion of Worshipping
the Beast, and receiving his character: where it is also said, that All the
world should so follow the Beast, but those that were written in the Lambs book
of Life; From the Foundation of the World. And I have sometimes inclined to
believe, that Christ is not only the True Light that lights every man that
comes into the world; but that he Truly loves every man, as he loves himself;
so long as he is a Man. But when he degenerates into the Nature and spirit of a
Beast, (and it may be, the evil spirits are in the species of Ravening Beasts,
as good Angels in others:) and when one so degenerates into the Beastly Nature,
Then one falls out of Christ's Neighborhood. Yea, and it may perhaps come so
far, that they may be no more warned, lest they Turn and Tear those that cast
such precious Pearls before them. And in such a forlorn case, it may be hard to
show, why they should, or how they can, expect any more favor from Christ, than
a Beast: or why so much. And It may be, This is, That Sin unto Death, of which
the Apostle speaks: when he adds also, that for such, He does not say, that
one ought to pray.

But yet he Does not say, One ought not to pray, even for such also. Which is
One of the reasons, why I pray for All I ought, and All I may, pray for. When I
am crying to an Infinite God, for All my Relations, (and Truly they are very
many, as I sometimes say to God: for, I am Related to the whole Creation of God;
and yet farther, than I can express:) and I know not, But I may, sometimes pray,
for some, That, I am not Tied, in duty, or by express Command, to pray for. But
I am still Tied, to Love my Neighbor as my self; and so is Christ also, I
Trust: or else I lose one of the sweetest pieces of the whole Bible: and
himself also brings the Notion of a Neighbor out so large, that it may not only
include Strangers, but Enemies also. And when a man's ways please the Lord, he
will make his Enemies, his greatest Enemies, to be at peace with him. And if an
Angel, or if God himself forbid a man to pray, for such or such a person, City,
Nation, or number of men: yet This, may be, but to draw him larger out: by
showing the danger of such persons. As we see in the Prophet Jeremy, and
others, that never prayed more sweetly, than when they were forbidden to pray,
for such or such: and yet they prayed Then most; because they saw, there was
most need. And Gods commands never do, never will, forbid us, to Love our
Neighbor as our self.

And that, No man may ever despair; we found Gods Love of pity and compassion,
so to reach to Beasts also, that his great Command is, that They also, must be
brought to keep the Sabbath, and to rest the Rest of God: and a good man (and
Christ is the Best of men) must be, and will be, Merciful to his very Beast
also. Yea to the Beast of his Enemy, and Him that hates him: as we see
commanded. And for Those also, that degenerate into the Beastly Nature, (lest
They also should at length despair:) not to speak how often men are invited in
the Prophets and the Revelation, to come back again from the Beast and out of
Babylon; which shows, they might return, Repent and live: we see How graciously
God dealt with Nebuchadnezzar; Though he so degenerated into a Beast; which may
be much worse, than to be made a Beast at first, and so born. How Wisdom also
cries unto Scorners; and How it is promised She Shall yet cry; even unto
Scorners: may be here again observed out of the Proverbs. To be compared with
the 48. of Esaias, sweetly calling, inviting, and wooing the most obstinate
sinners, and Treacherous Revolters. Yet for my Names sake; and again, for my
Names sake I will resrain: For, How shall I cut thee off? O that thou had, or
would yet, hearken: For, He speaks in the present Tence, I am yet teaching
thee etc. And how shall I give away the Glory of my Patience, and my Goodness?
Shall I be weary also of well doing? and having begun in the spirit of
Goodness, shall I also end, in a fleshly Wrath or Passion? God forbid.

The Psalmist also says, He received Gifts for Rebels also (even for Rebels)
as we saw before; the worst of sinners. And we see how gracious Christ was
also, to the Woman of Canaan; although she were as a Dog; or one degenerate
into a Dog-like spirit and nature. Yet the Dogs also enjoy Crumbs: and in great
Families (and Christ is Lord of All the Family in Heaven and Earth.) The very
Dogs have better Diet, than it may be, Children have, in other houses. And That
Dog-like Woman of Canaan, was received into favor, and had great Grace, and
Faith given her, though a cursed Woman: under the greatest Curse both of God
and Man. Noah cursed her; and God also cursed her so, that he commanded all his
people to hate and curse her Nation so, that they might neither Treat with
them, nor seek their good, all their days. Which we see how Christ observed
toward her; when he would not so much as Treat with her, or speak to her, till
his Disciples (as the Representatives of his Church) interceded with him for
her: or, it may be against her; for, the Text is somewhat doubtful. Yet by Faith
Her heart also is purified; and there is No difference between Jew and Gentile;
No not a Cursed Canaanite.

Which might also be seen, long before, when the high, and proud, and stout,
Gibeonites (some of the chiefest of those cursed Canaanites,) bowed down: and
though by a Wile only they got into a Covenant with Joshua, (a mighty Type of
Jesus,) yet they could never be cast off: No, by no means, by no means. But
when Adonizedech (the Lords Justice) King of Jerusalem, and other Kings with
him, would have challenged them back again, as to have brought them back into
the Curse again: Joshua must not only stand up, and rise early; Yea and march
all night, in defense of these poor (late accursed) Canaanites; but also the
Sun and Moon must stand still over Gibeon; and the course of Nature must be
changed: rather than Gibeon must be deserted, or so much as left into the hand
of Gods Justice in his own Throne: which is Adonizedech King of Jerusalem.

And Gibeon, is not only made, one of the greatest Scenes of Gods presence, a
long time together, (as we often find in Scripture, before it was Solomon's
greatest High Place: Where God also appeared to him, after such great
Sacrifices in Gibeon:) But also This very History of the strange Works of God,
in defending Gibeon, is made the Type of what God means to do (Hereafter also,
I suppose) for his People; and his Enemies also; When he shall rise up to do
his great and strange Work of Gibeon, or as he did at Gibeon; or Mount Perazim.
Where also, at David's coming up, the five great Lords of the Philistines, rose
up against him; as at Gibeon, the five great Kings of the Amorites or
Canaanites, against Joshua.

And about Gibeon also, the great Quarrel was ended between David, that is
Love; and the House of Saul, that is the Grave or Hell. Acted by Abner, the
Fathers Light or Understanding; and by Joab, his Will, or Affection, which were
here reconciled; and a New Heaven and Earth brought up. As afterward, the New
Jerusalem; when David beat the Jebusites, which had their name from Treading
down: for, the Holy City must be Trodden down, till the Times of the Centiles
be fulfilled. And a Type of This Fulfilling of Time, might be in That, when the
twelve men of Joab and Abner, ran through one another; as the twelve hours of
Day and Night; and there fell down, slain on Saul's side, 360. For, their common
Year had so many Days in it.

And though Saul himself was dead, cut off by God, because he sought to the
Devil, and would not seek to God, as we read in Chronicles, although he
complained that God would not answer him; But the Truth was, he would not seek
to God (who could yet have pardoned All; but he would not ask it:) and God
therefore cut him off; and for his sparing Amaleck, himself was slain by an
Amalachite; if at least, he Lied not to David; (who could not be quiet in the
Throne till he had also cut off the Amalachites, whom Saul spared:) even after
Saul's Death, His House and Family, was sorely punished (and David's Kingdom also
afficted with diverse years Famine;) for Saul's afflicting the poor Gibeonites;
though it were in Zeal to Israel. So much does God abhor All Cruelty, and hard
Usage of any poor men; though in never so much Zeal for God, or his Cause, or
any of his People. Which the Lord make me, and all mine, and all His, still to
remember, in all my Actions: lest I afflict some poor Gibeonite, in Zeal to
Israel; and thinking I do God good service.

By All which, we may also learn, that even Those that are most Hated or cursed
by God, as These Gibeonites and Canaanites were (and Children of Wrath and
curse, as much as any Nation or People we read of:) Yet they may come to be
Blessed and Loved, by the same God; who so hated and cursed them. And yet He
changes not himself, but Them; whom he first cursed, and so shut them up in
guilt, and sin, and sorrow; That their cries, (that is, His in them) might draw
out his own bowels, and compassions more to them, by how much more he had
cursed or afflicted them. Which is one of the great Mysteries of the Gospel,
running Through the Law (and the Prophets) and the Curses thereof. Which should
teach us not to despair, under the hardest and worst words, God does, or ever
will speak against us, while we live. O do not say, This Evil is from God, and
why then should I wait or Hope on Him? Yea rather, make have to bow down and
Worship, and seek his face, as the 3d Captain to Elijah: For the King of Israel
is a merciful King; He is a gracious God; and He delights in those that sear
him, and Hope in his goodness, Trembling at his Word. For it is still good for
a man to Hope and patiently wait for the salvation of God. Let me also tell
you, It is an honor that God will speak to us, though he do but chide us,
Threaten us, sharply rebuke, or chasten us: which himself and we may call
Hating or cursing us. But His Frowns, and Chidings, and Hatings, and Cursings
as we may interpret them, may be better than the Smiles, and Loves, and
Embracings, of the whole World besides. And we do not only read him saying, I
have forsaken the dearly beloved of my soul (as we see Christ himself was so
forsaken) but also, that he Hated Her: even the dearly beloved of his soul (as
we read in Jeremy:) and did not only strike her with an hard, and sore, and
Cruel stroke, as an Enemy; but even Curse her, and make her a Curse. As we know
he dealt with Christ himself, his dearly beloved Son; and as a Type of Christ,
with Israel: Because he knew them (and they should have known him) above All
Nations of the Earth: Therefore he would punish them, above All Nations: So
that he never did, nor ever would do, so Hardly, to any in the World, as to
Israel. As we read in Ezekiel. Daniel, and from Christ himself in the Gospel. And
yet This, was his darling people, and the dearly beloved of his Soul; a Type of
Jesus Christ, and All his Elect, or first sruits; or Blessed of the Lord; that
were to have a double portion, as his first Born. But it was both of shame and
glory. For, even These Darlings, and these dearly Beloved of his soul, are
often called the Forsaken, Desolate, Afflicted; yea, Hated, Abhorred, and
Cursed: Nay, Cursed with a great, and sore, and heavy, bitter Curse: as we read
in Malachy. Where yet to That very People, whom he so cursed, He presently
says, Yet Try me, Prove me yet, whether (notwithstanding all this cursing you,
yet if you will but do, that you may, and shall, by my Grace, if you will; and
He also gives to will;) you shall be Blessed; and be Blessings also, to your
Neighbors and Relations: yea and such Blessings, that the very Windows of
Heaven shall be opened, and pour down-blessings on you, Notwithstanding all the
Curses you lay under. So it was with Israel; so it shall be. For, In every
Every place, Where you were put to shame, you shall have Glory, and you shall
be a praise to All the Earth: and where it was said, Go you cursed and rejected
Loammi, and Loruhama; on whom I will no more have mercy; yet come again, ye
Blessed; for you are my People, and I will be your God: And you shall be
Blessed. So it was with Israel, and with Gibeon.

Yet it might be added, that This very Gibeon was one of the Cities to which
God forbid his People to offer Peace, or to show mercy, or to save any living:
but commanded them, utterly to destroy it, and to save alive Nothing that
breathed in it. And so it was with all the Cities of the Amorites, the Head of
All those Canaanites: or if you will, the Tongue, or Speakers of them All. The
Zamzummims or great Thinkers, were followed by Amorites, great Talkers: and
their great Lord was Sihon King of Heshbon: That is Meditation and Sighing.
Which are All conquered by Israel.

Which is also the more considerable, because These were Excepted out of that
general Law of War, which was given to Israel; and so to Christ also, who was
made under the whole Law; and was forbidden to kill; and commanded to save and
keep alive, as much, or more than Any. Being of the Seed of Abraham, which was
put under the Law, More than All other Nations of the World besides. So that it
may be better for us, that he took the Seed of Abraham, than the Seed of Any
other Man.

Now the General Law of War, given them in Deuteronomy, which they might not
transgress (being but a branch of the sixth Command;) was This, That when ever
they went against a City, or a People, (except only those seven Nations which
were so cursed by God, and devoted to extreme destruction:) They must first
offer Peace. For, the Man, and Men of God, must be Gentle; ready more to save,
than to kill, or to harm. Elijah called for Fire from Heaven, as it must come
on those that compass the Holy City, (for, the Promise to Abraham was, to Curse
them that Cursed Him,) and forty two children were devoured: though I do not
compare them with the forty two months in the Revelation. But Elisha was
generally of another Spirit, and especially called the Man of God. To which the
Apostle may allude, or to meek Moses: in That to Timothy. The Man of God must
be gentle. But when the Disciples-asked, If fire should come from Heaven, as to
Elijah? Christ answered, You know not what a sweet spirit you must have, and
be, if you will be Christians, or men of God, and bearing the Image of God and
Christ; who was the Man of God more than All the World, and gentle unto All;
even to the worst of Enemies; and those that did oppose themselves: taken in
the snares of Satan, and led captive by him at his will. Yet even to them, and
to All, the Man of God must be gentle. And when he must come to fight against
them, (as we see he threatens sorely in the Revelation; but yet closes
sweetly, I must come, except they repent; and yet again, Repent, lest I come
against thee with the Sword of my mouth; and whom I love, I chasten; and Behold
I stand at the Door, and Gate of the City, which I fight against: and first I
knock and offer peace: for so the Law of War commands.

And if it answer, Peace (and so His Ministers were sent to every House to
offer Peace; and Peace be to this House; For They, and He, are sent to Bless us
All, by Turning us from our sins, into the way of Peace;) and If the Son of
Peace be There; which the Law expresses, by an Answer of Peace, and coming out
to them: as the Prophet Jeremy entreated Zedekiah, to go out to the King of
Babylon, and to accept his terms of Peace. And Then, All in the House, or City,
must be kept alive, and may be put to Tribute. But they may not be destroyed.

But if it will, make no place with thee; but will, make war against thee:
(How much wilfulness, is expressed in this slighting Peace, and making War?)
If they will do so, thou shall besiege it: But yet so, that thou cut not down
so much as a Tree; any one Tree, that yields fruit for man's Life, or food to
preserve Life. And when the Lord shall deliver it into thy hands, (and thou
must be content to stay till thou be clear and sure that God has delivered it
into thy hands:) Then thou may destroy the Males, but thou shall preserve the
women, and the children, and the cattle. (So that the very Cattle must not be
slain or hurt) These must be kept alive. And still take heed, thou do not so
much as boil a Kid in his dams milk (take heed of all and every kind of
cruelty, besides all superstitious customs of some Eastern Countries which we
learn from some of the Karrait writers:) and thou must not take a bird with its
young ones; but must let the one or the other go free. And thou must not kill
the old and young, in the same day; no not for sacrifice: as Jacob cried to
God, Why shall he smite the Mother, and the Children, both in one day?

This great Law of war was also punctually observed by God himself and our Lord
Jesus, toward the women and children of the Edomites, which were hated and
accursed people, as any in the World; as a Type of the greatest Reprobation:
and yet even to them, when their males were to be destroyed, or at least so
threatened; yet Let thy fatherless children come to me; for I will preserve them
alive (as the Law commands) and let thy widows trust in me.

Gods inviting Edoms Widows and Children, with promise to preserve them alive;
(yea and Zelophehads Daughters sued for their Fathers Inheritance also, and had
it, adjudged, by God himself; Though their Father, died for his sin, or in his
sin; as we saw before;) may be compared with that Gracious Word in Moses, and
the Kings and Cronicles, and Prophet Ezekiel, That the Son shall not Bear (much
less Dye for) the iniquity of the Father. Though in other places, God declare
himself a Jealous God; Visiting the iniquity of the Fathers on the Children; to
the third or fourth Generation. But yet There also, showing mercy to a Thousand
Generations (for, so it is expressed in another place, to a Thousand
Generations) of Those that love him and keep his Commandments. Which from
Hence, Runs through all the Bible: and reaches up to our Good Father Noah. We
being all, within his Thousand Generations; and so also, within That Mercy,
which was sure to Him and His Seed for ever. Or, as it is There expressed, for
perpetual Generations: and an everlasting Covenant, with him and his Seed also.
For, God blessed him and his sons also; yea and they shall be Blessed: and God
made an Everlasting Covenant with them. so, that the Height of all the
Covenants afterward made with Israel, was but This, that it should be as sure
and Everlasting, as the Covenant with Noah; as we read in the Prophets. And
Manasses (notwithstanding all his many great sins, scarce to be named) Humbled
himself, or judged himself in prayer, (as the Phrase imports,) to the God of
his Father: and was Heard, and accepted in the Beloved.

And as Manasseh was the Son of good Hezekiah, so was he, the Son of wicked
Ahaz (yet at two years old, before his great wickedness.) And we may find some
of the best men coming from cursed parents. As Samuel, and the sweet Singers,
from Korah, though it is said, he went quick into the Pit, and All the men that
pertained to him: yet his Sons were preserved so, as to bring forth Samuel
from, Elkana (near akin to the jealous God, or God that begat him) Jeroham, He
will be very Gracious: and Elihu, He is my God: from Tohu, or the first Chaos
of Creation: which arose from Zuph, Honeycomb: or Root of sweetness and
goodness in the Heart of God: which also turned Korahs curse, into praises,
and Psalms of blessing: as we find in Heman, and other Kindred of Samuel.

We have showed How our Savior was made under the Law, for us; and we have
given instances of diverse particular branches of that Law, he was made under;
for the time would fail us to go over All particulars: there being yet very
many, that we have not so much as touched; but they may be applied, as we meet
them. So that we shall come to delight, to study the Law, and long to see it in
its fullest Latitude; and greatly rejoice to find some new duty in it, that we
never knew before; because we get a new Argument to press on Christ; on whom
the Law lies as much, or more then on any one of us: and so became the
groundwork or foundation of the Gospel; next to the Heart of God and Christ.

But there is One Particular which St. Paul makes the main end of Christ's
being made under the Law; to Redeem them that were under the Law: and were we
not All, under the Law? How else are we guilty of its Breach, or Curse? and if
we were all under the Law; Was not Christ made under it also, that he might
Redeem us all? Which we may also find, in diverse places of Scripture, where the
Lord complains of wicked men, a sinful Nation, and a foolish Generation, that
did not only forsake and forget him that made, or begot them: but also Him
that redeemed Them. So that the very word that signifies Redeemed, is also used
to express them that are most Polluted: as in that remarkable place of
Zephany, Woe to the Polluted City, or to Her that has been Redeemed: and in
many other places. As, for whom Christ dyed; and Trampling That Blood, by which
he was sanctified: which seems more then Redeemed.

And that Christ hash so Redeemed us, may be hinted in the very Law it self:
which, as it speaks to every One to whom it is given (even to the worst of
them all:) I am the Lord Thy God; so it adds also, which have Redeemed thee:
or brought thee out of Bondage, or the land of Misery: for so, Egypt, sounds
in the Original; and to this day; as of old also, called Mesrie, or Misre.

And the Law of Redemption, is One of the great things of the Law: and it may
be the greatest; if we consider it, as we ought. We find it in Leviticus 25.
with many other Scriptures.

First, for the Land in general, It shall not be sold for ever, Or be quite cut
off: or wholly alienated. For, the Land is Mine: and you are strangers and
sojourners with me. In all the Land of your possession, you shall grant a
Redemption; Either for Him that sold it, or for his Kindred. But does God take
care of Land? a little Clod of Earth? and of that Earth, which himself so
Cursed, as we saw before! will he not, yea does he not, more care for our
Souls, and Bodies also? O we of little Faith! Does he not so, in that very 25th
chapter and 25th. verse? If thy Brother be waxen Poor, and sell any of his
Possession (much more if it were his inheritance:) Any of his Kindred shall
redeem it: and in the 35th. verse, If thy Brother wax Poor, or fall into decay
with thee, Thou shall relieve him: yea a stranger, or a sojourner (For, thou
must love a stranger, as thy self, Levit. 19. 34.) Thou shall not compel him to
serve (or serve thy self on him) with hard service, or as a slave. But as an
hired servant, or a sojourner: and only till the Jubilee. And then he shall go
out, both He and his Children with him: To the Possession of his Father, he
shall return. For, they are my servants; and thou shall not rule over him with
Rigor: but shall fear thy God. And again, If thy Brother wax poor, and sell
himself to a stranger or sojourner, or stock of a strangers Family (and why
not, if he sell himself to sin, or Satan? are They not strangers? He may redeem
himself, if he can: Or one of his Kindred shall Redeem him. Or however, He
shall not be ruled over with Rigor; And he shall go out, in the year of
Jubilee: He and his Children with him.

May we not, and ought we not to apply all this to our Neighbor, Kinsman,
Brother, Jesus Christ? Was he not made under This Law also? a Branch of the
Second Table As we spoke of before the First.

The fifth command, which the Apostle calls the First, with Promise (and the
former are Promises, rather then commands) Though it speak only of Honoring
our Parents (which lay also upon Him, that was still held out for the Pattern,
of a Son of Man:) yet by the Apostles it is brought to All men; who must be
Honored and Loved also, as the Image of God our Father. And the Greater
Honor, must be Given, to the Weaker Vessel: even as God also has given it, to
That, which might seem the most uncomely. Which is an Argument that may be well
pressed on Christ; not only to bear with them that are weak; but to give them
the more Honor as the Weaker Vessel. And those commands, yea and Prayers also,
that we love and honor all men; speak more of the unspeakable love of Christ
(who is the Root of this Spirit in All) then can be Here exptessed by many
Words.

The sixth Command, Thou shall not kill, or thou shall do All thou may, to
preserve thy own Life, and thy Neighbors; lies also on our blessed Savior:
as the Text, commented by many Scriptures. Being by his Death, to bring in,
Life and Immortality; and to destroy Him, who had the Power of Death, the
Devil: and to redeem them, who through fear of Death, were all their life time,
subject unto Bondage. Even as that precious Psalm foretells; He shall save the
Children of the Needy, and shall break in pieces the Oppressor: He shall spare
the Poor and Needy, and shall save the souls of the Needy: He shall Redeem
their soul frrm Deceit and Violence (from force and fraud) and precious shall
their Blood be in his sight: He shall Live; and shall be tender of his
Neighbors Life: and how much more of his Neighbors Soul? which himself has
said, is so exceeding precious and unvaluable.

From whence come Wars and Contentions; Come they not from our lusts within us;
but the Wisdom from on high (and sure then more, as it is on high;) is Pure,
and then peaceful (for without Peace and Holiness, No man shall ever see God:)
Gentle and easy to be entreated. For, the man of God must be gentle; toward
All men; even those that oppose themselves; being in the snares of Satan, and
led Captive at his will. A very sweet place, when it is applied to Christ also;
who is the great, and good, and best Man of God; and therefore must be gentle
unto All. No striker; no quareler; but gentle unto All. The man of God must not
strive, or fight. Which also puts me in mind, of That, prophesied of him; He
shall not strive, nor Cry, or braul, in the streets; the bruised reed he shall
not break, nor quench the smoking flax; till he bring out Judgment to
victory, over all Lusts, and Pride, Passions, and Contentions. Seeing This, is
the great Rule, given us in the Psalms and new Testament also, that he that
loves Life, and would see long days (as Christ ever shall:) must refrain from
strife and guile; must follow peace and pursue it: and who will harm you in so
doing? when Himself also said (next to the Pure in Heart) Blessed are the
Peacemakers (which is much to be applied in our Prayers unto him;) for They
shall be called the Children of God: as if himself also came to enjoy That
Glorious Title of the Son of God, by being so Peaceful, and the Great
Peacemaker. To which also I may add David's Blessing of Abigael, and her
Council, saying, that when himself should rest from all his Enemies and
Troubles, it should be no Grief of Heart to him, or offense, that he had spared
his Enemies also, and had not shed their blood.

All This, or much more, lies in the sixth Command, and from Thence, is
branched out in diverse Laws, in Exodus, and other books of Scripture; which all
lie upon Christ, made under the Law, as much, or more, then any man: to Man
also, as well as unto God his Father. And we lose very much of the sweetness
of the Gospel, by not pressing the Law; Yea the whole Law, upon Christ, that he
may still keep it to us also, as to God his Father: seeing it is vain to talk of
Loving God, if he do not also Love his poor Neighbor. And who his Neighbor
is, we may see, by diverse places of the Law, and Gospel compared; especially in
those which are branches of these great commands, for loving our Neighbor as
our self.

He that smites a man that he dye, shall be surely put to death. As of old, to
Noah (the great Father of us all; and so the very Law of Nations or Nature;) He
that sheddeth Man's blood, by Man his blood shall be shed: for, in the Image of
God, he created Man. And that Image is still so continued, and preserved by
Christ, who is the Head of every Man, that the same Apostle calls Man, not
only the Image, but glory of God.

If a man smite his servant or his maid with a rod, that he dye under his hand,
he shall be surely avenged; Which should keep a man in aw, even to All under
him. For, the Man of God must be gentle, toward all, etc.

If an Ox (and by Consequence, any other Beast, or offensive Creature) be wont
to push with his Horn; and it be told his Owner; and He do not keep him in; the
Beast killing a man, or woman, shall be stoned; and his Owner also, shall be
Put to death. Which may be sweetly applied to Christ; who is the great Owner
and Master of Satan, and all other pushing Horns: of which, if we complain as
wont to Push, and goar us, or our Children; is he not bound to keep him in; and
set us at rest, from Him that pusheth at us? Which may be hinted also in the
Psalms, where we find some complaining of pushing Horns (as in the Prophets
also:) and of the tearing Lion, and Bear, and the power of the Dog; or other
Beasts of Prey: which, the great Owner, and Master, must keep in, upon
Complaint, that they were wont to push, yesterday, and the day before.

If a man dig a pit, or do but Open a Pit, dug by some other; and do not
cover it again; so that an Ox, or Ass, fall into it; he shall surely make it
good. How much sorer punishment, if a man, or his Child, fall into it and
perish? which we may happily come, One day, to press upon Christ also; least he
suffer us, to fall, into a Pit, of his own digging, or opening; or any other.

Ye shall not afflict any Widow, or fatherless Children; for if thou afflict
them, in any Wise, and they cry at all, (or do but begin to cry) to me; I will
hear, and surely hear their cry: and my wrath shall be hot, and I will kill you
with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your Children Fatherless.
The word used in Heb for an Orphan, is Jathom, He shall be made perfect, as
well as He is wanting. And the whole History of Jotham (the Orphan of Gideon)
should be often read in These and all Times: and the rather, because That of
Arma Gedeon, in the Revelation, may perhaps lead us to Gedeon. As that of
Sechem to Dina, or Judgment, as we touched before.

If thou^end money to any of my people (who are They?) the Poor that are by
Thee; Thou shall not press him with Usury; or be as an Userer to him; nor any
way Hard: for if he Cry unto me, I will Hear, for I am Gracious; and will God
Hear, when we cry, of a man, oppressing, or pressing us, and will he not hear
us, against the Devil also? and our spiritual pressors or Oppressors? seeing he
Fxecutes Judgment for All that are Oppressed: And His Word is as pure silver
seven times refined from Earth: sweetly applied to this very thing.

If thou meet thine Enemies Ox, or Ass, going astray: and in another place,
This Enemy is called a Brother: which may show us, how far, that Phrase of
Brother, or Neighbor reaches; even to an Enemy, and One that Hates us. As
also Christ shows us, in his Parable of the good Samaritan, and diverse other
places; Where he tells us, it is ^a little Love to love a Friend, or one that is
like us, or friendly to us, Thankful and Kind: which even sinners, and
Hypocrites, use to do, in Their Love. But his Children and Servants (and
himself also,) must love Enemies, and such as hate backbite, blasphem and offer
all despite: unkind and unthankful: and all this, that they may be like their
Heavenly Father. Who with love of delight, and complacence, loves only
himself, and his own Image; but with pity and compassion (which may be a
better, or a kinder, kind of love:) he loves, and is kind, and Merciful, to
his very enemies, and those that are unlike him, froward and unthankful. Yea to
their very Ox, and Asses also; even as the Law here bids in Exodus, [If thou
meet thine Enemies Ox or Ass, going astray; thou shall surely bring it back to
him again; If the sea the Ass of him that hates thee, lying under his
Burden; Thou shall surely leave thy business, or lay aside thy Garments, to
help him up, or help with him.

Which may be improved much in our addresses to Christ. For we may justly tell
him, Our poor souls, are as the very Asses of his Enemies, and those that hate
him: (nay yet worse; as the wild Asses Colt, as the Scripture expresses it;
and that is more unserviceable, then the Ox, or Ass, or other beast of burden
is;) I am Behemoth with thee; as the psalmist expresses it. But though I
stray, yet Thou have put thy self under That Law, which bids us help a straying
Beast; and much more, when he lies under an heavy Burden; under which he
cannot stir; much less come to Thee; as thou call, All that are heavy laden.

Now sherefore show thy pity and compassion to the poor Ass, or the poor
soul, the brutish Heart, of him that is thy Enemy, and Hates Thee. And I know
one that said, He never received a more sweet, and kind return, from our
Savior, then when in great anguish of spirit, he bowed unto him, crying, only
This, [Now show thy kindness to thy Poor Enemy! the Kindness thou have spoken
of, to a Poor Enemy! which is now at thy foot, and mercy! whom thou have taken
captive, with thy Sword, and thy Bow!] and while I am speaking Thus, I think
also, of That spoken by the Prophet, to the King of Israel; when he had so many
of his Enemies, at his Mercy, in the midst of his great City. Shall I smite
them my Father? shall I smite them? and the Prophet answered, [No, by no means:
will thou smite them thou have taken captive with thy sword, and thy bow: give
them to eat and drink, and let them go: and he prepared great provision for
them, and sent them away;] so overcome with this Kindness, that they could
hardly be drawn to come any more, as Enemies, against the King of Israel; who
was so Merciful a Prince. And Mercy does preserve, and establish, a Kings
Throne; more then any thing in the World; as Solomon shows; and David also, in
diverse places: and so it does, and still shall, establish Christ's Throne also.
Which is a white Throne, even when he comes to Judgment; and Mercy shall
still go before him, and be the stability of his Throne and Kingdom; and
blessed be they, that hear and know and believe that joyful sound: which is
sweeter then all the Trumpets or the Bells about the fringe of Aarons Garment.
Which yet had a better Ornament; even that sweet perfume of the Good Ointment,
a meek and quiet spirit, as Saint Peter expresses it (and the Psalmist
compares it to Love) which with God, is of great value: and it drencht his
beard throughout, even Aarons Beard (which was yet but an Excrement, and often
to be cut away) and ran down through all his Garments; even to the seams and
fringes also round about.

And as if, God had not yet enough provided for the Poor, through all the Laws
in Exodus and Leviticus; He repeateth, and adds in Deuteronomy. Thou shall
not harden thy Heart, or shut thy hand, from thy Poor brother. [As if all
shutting of hands, came from Hardness of Heart: and that This also, was
mainly, or only, against a poor man.] But thou shall open thy hand wide, and
shall surely lend him sufficient for his need, in That which he wants. Beware
there be not a word (or thought) in thy wicked heart saying, the seventh year,
the year of Release, is at hand; and thy eye be evil, against thy poor brother;
and thou give him Naught; and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be
Sin unto Thee. Thou shall surely give him (which before was lend him, but at,
or near, the year of Release, it was a gift, because to be forgiven then:) and
Thy Heart shall not be grieved, when thou give to him (a most sweet Command
and Promise;) because that for This thing, the Lord thy God shall bless thee,
in All thy Works, and in All that thou put thy hand unto. Which is the
great promise to the Reading and Observing, of the whole Law: so that love and
pity to our poor Neighbor, is rewarded, as keeping of the whole Law. As
Daniel also, to Nebuchadnezar (even when the decree was made against him:) I
council thee to break off thy sins by justice, and by showing Pity to the poor.
And when the people asked John the Baptist, What shall we do? He said nothing
but Pity the poor. And so our Savior also to the wicked Pharisees, Give Alms of
all you have, and All things shall be clean to you.

And lest All This, might yet, be too little, or too narrow; because it begun
with a Poor Brother; It concludes as general, as well can be expressed. Thou
shall open thy hand wide unto thy Brother, to thy Poor, and thy Needy, in the
Land. Which Phrase is remembered to Christ, several times in the Psalms; crying,
Thy Poor, and Thy Needy; and forget not the Congregation of Thy Poor etc. Where
it is also Kite (as the English sound the Hebrew (...), a Kite or Knite,) the
Beast, or Beasts of thy Poor, As alluding to the Ox, or Ass, or wild Asses
Colt, (for, such is man's heart; And So was Ishmael foretold to be, in the
Original:) as was touched before. And the 72. Psalm, and diverse other
Scriptures show us, how Christ also was made, under All those Laws, that
concern the Poor and Needy. And we should urge and press them All on Him. Yea,
especially to make us Poor in spirit, or rightly sensible of all our wants,
which indeed may be one of our greatest wants: and That for which Christ
especially, calls us to Him. As we may see, in that most remarkable Epistle to
the Church of Laodicea, in the Revelation: which shows us the Heart of Christ,
even unto those that are not senfible of their wants. But He sees them: and
remembers the Law, If thou see the Naked (in Esaias) or thy poor Neighbor want;
as we find in St. John and James. Yea though they do not weep, or word out any
of their wants: Yet if thou do but See them; and thou must not Hide thy self
from thy own flesh. Which have been exceeding sweet to me, in many cases, when
I could urge them on Christ also: and Tell him, he has said, a Brother is Born
for a day of Sorrow. And the very Sigh, by which God has taught us all to
express sorrow, (which is Ah Ah, in Hebrew, and most Languages I know) in Gods
Language is Brother, Brother: to which he seems to allude in Jer. 22. and
diverse places. As if he would have us in all our sorrow, cry out, Brother,
brother, Help us.

And Christ was not only sent, to Preach the Gospel to the Poor, (and to
comfort All that mourn;) but also gave That as the demonstrative Character (to
John's Disciples) that he was the True Messiah, That the Poor were Gospelized,
or Turned into the Gospel; As the Phrase imports. And himself read his
Commission, not only to Preach Deliverance to the Captives, (or opening of
prison to them that are bound) but also to Deliver, and set at Liberty, those
that are Bruised; which is less than Broken: with which he began, saying, he
has sent me to Heal the broken Hearted. Or the shivered, from the Heb. shiver
(as in English also) to break into atoms, or Moats; which is also an Hebrew
word. And though the Prophet speak of a Day of Vengeance, (where also, the word
is akin to Repentance and Comfort also:) yet Christ omits That, in his reading
it; and speaks not a word of Vengeance (though but a Day:) But the Acceptable
Year of Jubilee. O How Acceptable it is to God!

And the Poor, were so much upon Gods Heart, when he gave the Law, that he
begins all his Judicial Laws, in the 21. of Exodus, with the case of a Poor man
or woman, sold to be a Servant: As the Foundation of the great Law of
Redemption; which is the Gospel. And in the next chapter, he calls them His
People, with an especial Emphasis. If thou lend money to any of My People, the
Poor with thee. And again, If thou take thy Neighbors Garment for a Pledge; Thou
shall deliver it to him again by Sun set: For it is his Covering, and wherein
he sleeps: and if he cry to me, I will hear, For I am Gracious. For I am
Gracious. O how sweet is That, to a Poor Soul!

That also of Delivering the Pledge by Sun set, (which in the Repetition of that
Law is said should be their Righteousness before the Lord; a strange
expression!) may occasion us to remember, How the same God, also commanded,
that He that was Hanged up, (as a pledge of the greatest Wrath and Curse; as we
find in the Law, and in Christ; whom the Jews to this day, call the Tall, or
Lifted up, or Hanged person:) must be taken down by Sun set. As Joshua
practiced diverstimes, at the Going down of the Sun, To which it may be, That
also may allude, Let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath, nor give place to the
Devil, the Prince of Wrath and Darkness.

Which has also put me in mind, that the word Wrath in Heb signifies somewhat,
that (in God also, I hope, more than any man,) is to Pass away: and not to
Endure for Ever. Which is one of the first Articles God seems to hold out, of
our Faith and Hope in Him. Who is Wisdom it self (Pure and Peaceful,) Power and
Goodness. But Wrath rests only in the Bosom of Fools. And is their Weakness
also: As we read in Solomon. And the Prophet Micha says, I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him: till he return,
etc. And concludes, Who is a God like unto Thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his Heritage? He retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us: he will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast
Their sins into the depths of the sea. Thou will perform the Truth to Jacob,
and the Mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn unto our Fathers, from the
days of Old.

And the very next chapter in Deuteronomy, limits the punishing of a wicked
man. Which must not exceed forty stripes (though he that knew his Masters will,
may be beaten with many stripes:) but not above forty. And the reason is yet
better; Lest Thy Brother should seem Vile unto thee. And yet, stripes were for
the fools back, and for the vilest slaves: (they might not touch a Roman:) and
they are here appointed for a Wicked man; and yet, how careful is God, that a
Wicked man, even a Wicked man, (for, he is still a Brother, by this very Law,)
may not be made too vile, in the eyes of any Judge; and so of Christ also, the
great Judge; But made under this Law also.

And it is considerable, that this number of 40. is the Trying, Tempting,
Punishing number, much through all the Bible. Forty Days in the Flood diverse
times: And so for Purification, after a male child; and twice forty for a
Female. Forty years for Canaans Repentance, and Isreal's wandering in the
Wilderness: and Forty years for Judahs sin in Ezekiel: and forty days or
years of Nineveh; and of Jerusalem, (about our Saviors Resurrection, and
Ascension after forty days:) and the City stood but forty years after. And
Thrice forty years was the Trial of the old World; or their Day of Repentance.
And Then the Flood by forty and forty days. And though Moses make our
longest age, but twice forty, or eighty years; yet he lived Thrice forty
years: and Fasted Thrice forty days, it may be, Representing both Elijah and
Christ also, fasting forty days.

That which follows in the same chapter, of the Kinsmans raising seed to his
dead Kinsman: (For, it is not a Brother, only, in Hebrew; and we see it in
Ruth, at a greater distance:) may be applied to Christ also; for a spiritual
seed to God. Seeing the first Adam in us dies childless. Nor may he plead, I
shall mar my own Inheritance, or Family: I have a wife, or children of my own
already. Seeing in this case, Polygamy is not only permitted, but commended and
commanded. And Saul's wives were Given, it seems, by God himself, into David's
Bosom.

And the omission of this Law, of doing the office of a Kinsman, had a
perpetual brand of disgrace, By loosing the shoe, and spitting, to be added to
the blessed History of Ruth (or Truth, or Drouth, as a Saxon may sound it,) the
dry barren widow of Mahlon (that is Weakness) married unto Strength in him;
As Boaz signifies. But I am unworthy to unloose his shoo, That was here also
Typified. And the Reason of This Law, is, That his Brothers (or his Kinsmans)
Name, be not put out of Israel, or out of the Book of the Living; or blotted
out from under the Heavens of the Lord. Threatened to Amalech (a branch of Esau
by a Concubine) or others; when their Males were to be rooted out, as we
touched before. For the Male in Heb speaks Memorial or Remembrance. And yet,
Edoms Children and VViddows also, are called to Come and Trust in God; with
promise to be kept alive: Though all the Males were rooted out; or their
Memorial perished. Although I say not, that This was but according to This Law,
of marrying the Kinsmans Widow. But, However God abhorred Edom (for letting
his Wrath Tear for ever, and forgetting the Brotherly kindness and Covenant:)
yet, in that very place, where Israel is forbidden to seek the Peace of Moab
and Ammon, All their Days, for ever; They are forbidden also, to abhor an
Edomite: because He was, and still is, Thy Brother, as we read in Deuteronomy. 23. And
though the Lamentations say, that God will visit Edom (and accomplish the
Iniquity, or Punishment of Zion) yet Edom also is There bid to rejoice. And (as
alluding to the word Edom, which Job also uses for, I will be Dumb) he says,
it is good for a man to be Dumb, and quietly wait for the Salvation of God (as
Jacob also, on his death bed:) He sits alone, and is Dumb, etc. For the Lord
will not cast off for ever, (the very word used by David to Solomon:) or
Forsake, even for Adultery: being near akin in Heb.

And when God seems resolved to cut off Edom, or Moab; yet it is with such
regret, and so much tenderness of Heart and Bowels, as a most tender Father, or
Mother, going to chasten a dear child. O give wings unto them, that they may
flee away. Leave the Cities, dwell in the Rock; and be like the Dove, in the
Clefts of the Rock. O my Heart, my Heart shall sound for him. I will Howl and
Cry, and Mourn sor him. O Vine of Sibma, I will weep for thee: I will water
thee with my Tears O Heshbon. And again, My Heart shall Cry out for Moab. Let
his Fugitives flee unto Zoar. Take Council, execute judgment, Hide the
Ontcasts, bewray not him that wandreth. Flee ye, Turn back, dwell deep O
Inhabitants of Dedan, etc. As if he foresaw, That which Job or the Psalmist
speaks, when he shall have cut off, he will look in the morning, and see his
place empty, (as David's was before Saul;) and he will have desire to the work
of his own hands. And when David had conquered Ishbosheth, and all Saul's
Family, he melted, and said, to Ziba, Is there not yet any of the House of
Saul, that I may show the kindness of God unto him? The kindness of God! Even
toward dead Saul. And there came an halting Son of Jonathan (or Jaacob)
Trembling, and hardly believing the King would look upon such a Dead Dog. But
it was to show the Kindness of God, to an House he had cut off. And how sweetly
and solemnly did David celebrate Saul's Funeral? and bless the men of Jabez that
showed kindness to his dead body? Blessed he ye of the Lord, that have showed
this Kindness to your Lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him. And now the
Lord show Kindness and Truth unto you. And I also will requite you this
kindness, because you have done this thing. And the Kindness of Rispa to Saul's
Sons, that were Hanged, up before the Lord, for Gibeon, was not only told
David, but remains on Scripture Record, to all Eternity. And it also
occasioned David, to show new kindness to Saul and the Bones of his dead
children. And though Shimei cursed with a bitter heavy Curse, as if David had
been cruel or bloody to the House of Saul: Yet David bears it patiently,
saying, Let him Curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David: And
again, Let him Curse, for the Lord has bidden him. And again, at his Return to
his Kingdom, when Ahishai pressed, that he might die, who had so cursed the
Lords Anointed: David replied, You are Satan to me; Shall there a Man, he put
to death this day in Israel? For, do I not know, that I am this day King of
Israel? A saying so remarkable, and repeated so, that it may, not only, be
pressed on a King (especially when God has so restored him to his Kingdom, as
David, After banishment.) But on Christ also, I hope, when he shall come again,
and be restored to His Great Kingdom. Will he not Then also say, Shall a Man be
put to death This day? Am I not King of Israel? and the rather, because himself
seems to allude to This very saying of David to Abisai, when he said to Peter,
Get thee behind me Satan: Thou savorest not the things of God, but men; and
therefore art Satan; an Offense or Adversary to me. The very Phrase used by
David to Abishai, the Father of Jesse, or My substance. Does not Solomon allude
to This of Shimei also, when he says, Hearken not (and Shimei is Hearken;)
what thy servant says, lest thou hear thy self cursed: Or accuse not a servant
to his Master: and Thou know, that Thou also have cursed others.

I have yet said nothing of the Ceremonial Law (O what a Sea of Love!) under
which Christ was Made also, to Fulfill it. Time would fail us, but to fly with
the Be, and suck Honey from every Flower.

All the kinds of Sacrifice, seem hinted to Abraham, in the Vision, sealing his
Everlasting Covenant. Which preserved his seed, and all the Elect, Gentiles
also, as the Turtle Dove, and the Young Pidgeon, whole and undivided, or
unbroken, in the midst of the Heifer (Gods own Emblem of Egypt, Moab, Babylon,
or other Beasts, about his People;) the Ram, which in Daniel, is a Type of the
Mede and Persian Empire; and the Goat, in Him also, the Grecian Kingdom, (or
Aegeans, which with many persons, and places Thereabout, had their name from
Goats: As we read in diverse Authors:) or All men of the world, or Seed of the
Serpent. That is the head and chief of Beasts, that so signally pressed, or
oppressed, the poor Dove, which was also the Ensign of the Assyrian Banner (as
we are taught, from Semiramis, a Dove, or fed by Doves:) whence the Prophet
Jeremy cries, Flee ye from the Dove, coming out of the North. Though it may
be, from News brought by Pigeons; As in Those Countries, To This day. And Jonah
signifies a Dove, sent to Nineveh, as Israel to Assyria and Babylon.

When All, or any of These, were Burnt Offerings, or Sin Offerings for the
whole Church or Priest; They were All the Lords, consumed by Fire: as pledges
that the persons offending, were guilty of cutting off, or perishing for their
sins. But in particular Sin Offerings, or Trespass, (which were greater guilt
and Shame, as the Heb sounds,) the Priest had His; and in Peace Offerings, the
Offerer had also His, part to eat: besides the Blood poured out, and the Fat,
and Inwards, consumed by Fire, to the Lord. Which might not only be a Token of
Their Peace with God; (as the Apostle speaks:) but also, that God accepted and
pardoned Those, who were represented by such Offerings. Gods receiving, or
eating them (as himself expresses it) seemed an Emblem of his Turning them and
their natures, into His: As we daily do, to all we eat, and well digest. Or that
Christ (who was Typed out in All of them) was made All to All, or for All. As
Not only a Lamb for the Lambs, in the daily Sacrifice; (in which, God had his
Bread and flesh at morning, and Bread and flesh at Evening, as he allowed to
Elijah, and other persons:) But a Goat also for the Goats. At the change of the
Moon, and the solemn Feasts: especially the Feast of Atonement. About the end
of the Year, or Fullness of Times; (as the Apostle speaks:) which we shall
consider a little more distinctly.

As there is a measure of Syncerity, which the Scripture calls Integrity,
Perfection, or Fullness of Heart, (as Calebs Heart filled after God, and Sardis
Works were not filled up before God; And the Lord answered Abimelech, Thou
did it in the Perfection of thy Heart;) which yet is not Absolute Perfection:
So there are such, or such, periods of Time, which the Scripture reckons
Perfect, and calls Fullness of Time, or some kind of Eternity; which yet, are
not such Absolutely; but to man, So Long, or so uncertain, or Hidden, as the
word intimates, which is used for Ever or Eternity. Seeing God has so Hidden
some Times and Seasons in his own Breast, that the Son himself says, He knew
them not. Which yet, some interpret, as That saying, I pray not for the World:
as if he said, I do not now speak or manifest My knowing, owning, or praying
for them, till its proper season. And there were such seasons also, or
Revelation of Times and Seasons: as appears in the Revelation. And Blessed is
He that Reads That Book: Which is cleerer perhaps, for the great things of
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline also, than every eye sees, at one or two
readings. And may we not say with Job, Seeing Times are not Hidden from the
Almighty, why do They that know Him, not see his Days, or Times also? For,
That is the sense in the Original, rather than as some read or comma the words,
Thus, Why do they, that know him not, see his days?

As the Schools make Motion to begin from Rest, (as in Heb Resit, or Rest, is
the Beginning of Creation, and all Motion;) So the Jews, and other old Nations,
did begin to reckon Time, (which is the Measure of Motion,) from Night, in Heb
Nihat, Rest: which is as proper to Night, as Motion is to Day. As our Savior
also speaks, I must work (O happy necessity!) while it is Day; for the Night
comes, when No man can work. And again, Walk in the Light: and are there not
Twelve hours in the Day? And so many also, they made in the Night. Observing
perhaps, that the Moons mean Motion, was her own Diameter, Twelve times, to the
Suns moving One of His: and so twenty four, for his two breadths (of Day and
Nights Motion, round the Heavens:) which is also, the proportion which the
Ancients made, and kept, between their Sun and Moon, in Metals, Gold and Silver.

But on the Twelve sons of Darkness (as of Ishmael or Esau;) and the Twelve
sons of Israel, which are called Children of Light; We glaunced before, in the
twenty four Elders, and the Watches, or Watchers also. As in our Bodies are
twelve Ribs, on the one side, and twelve on the other; with such and such
distinctions, and Vertebres. And in either Jaw, or Pallat (like the two
Hemispheres of Day and Night) There are twelve Teeth, with their Watchers also,
which some call Dogs. And the common meetings of our Jaws (and signal Pulses)
are in many Languages called Times, or Tempora, the Temples. As the Jews also
called Teeth, by a word next akin to Years (and our Ears are near our Temples:)
growing up as Time and Years, did after the Creation; Changing All things, by
chewing and devouring them, (as Time and Saturn did with the Poets:) and so
Turning them into our own Natures. And the very Name of Year (as of Teeth
also,) in Heb intimates Changing: and its Numeral Letters make up Three hundred
fifty five, As there were Days in their Lunar Year: and Three hundred sixty,
in the Plural Regimen, as in their Solar Years, (as we touched before, at the
great Change of Time, in the last Battle between David and the House of Saul.)
And Their word for Year, has a double Plural, both Feminine, and Masculine; as
their Years were Lunar and Solar. And such periods of Exact meeting of Sun and
Moon (after such Courses and Motions) make up such, or such, a Fullness of Time,
or Perfection: which in Scripture Language may be called an Age, or Ay, or
Ever; or the like Phrase; by which they express the World also (which is usual
in many languages:) As, where some read, He has set the World in our Heart: it
is Eternity: or the same Word, which is so Rendered, in very many places.

And though it may be hard to determine what the Scripture means by Fullness
of Time, or Times: (which is so spoken, about our Savior Time especially, as
if it were the end of one World, and beginning of another. Or the end of that,
which was to answer to the first Night of Creation, (or the Time before the Sun
appeared in the World) and the beginning of Light or Day; as we may often read
in the new Testament:) yet, for some little Essay toward it; we may remember,
that the Hebrew word for Seven (or Sevang, as some sound it; the English Saxon
being much Hebrew;) is very near a kin to That, which signifies Fulness; and
their word for Ten, is also Riches; which turned backwards, makes their Rash
(or wrech, or Rich,) or Rushing, wicked and unquiet man: and by a little
changing of places, the same letters make a Goat, and a Devil also: to which
there may be frequent allusions in Scripture; which we may touch again.

Shall I add that All the Words, I now remember, in all the Bible, to express
such a Fullness, or perfection of Time (as is styled Age, or Ay, or Ever, or
Eternity) in their very numeral Letters (if no more) include Seven or Ten; or
some of their Powers; expressing Fullness, or Riches.

It would be almost endless to show how many Things, and Motions, in our
Bodies, do consist, or depend, on some of these numbers, of Seven, or Ten which
is visible, in our very Fingers and Toes; with their Nails, or Horns to be
compared with the Ten Horns in Daniel, or the Revelation. That I say nothing,
of the Ten Horns of the Law, or the Ten Sephiroth, of which the Jews speak so
much, in allusion to That of Horns, or Rays, coming round about the Lawgiver;
As the Ancients formed, Moses also, like the Sun, in his Rays of Glory.

I must not speak of the Seven Hours, Days, Weeks, Months and Years, the
Ancients observed in Conception and forming the Embryons Features: and its
several Ages and Changes, with ebbing and flowing, coming and going, of Hair,
and Nails, and Teeth, and many other things by Seven. Which is also the number
of the True Ribs, on each side; as they distinguish them: and of the Vertebres,
or Rackets of our Necks: as also they parted or paired out, our Nerves, by
Sevens. As if, in our Brain also, or the spinal marrow; were the Beast, out of
the Sea: or the Old Serpent, or Hydra, with Seven Heads also.

And as the Chemists find seven Metals, in the bowels of the Earth below,
answering to the seven Planets above; (the seal being stamped quite through,
the Wax or Wafer, as the Jews observe; so that all the signatures are also seen
below, which were made above:) so also, we have, our spleen, and Liver, and
Gall, and Reins, and Bladder, and other Members (as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, and other Planets, with their Armor-bearers also, round the Sun,) as in
our bowels about the stomach, or great Center of Sun-like heat and fire; in
That Lowest Region. As the very utmost Court of the Temple, had its Molten Sea
(like the Ocean, or Waters under the Earth, with its ebbings and flowings, like
the rowlings and yearnings of our Bowels;) and the Altar of burnt offerings,
burning and devouring all. And the middle Court, or Temple, had the Altar of
Incence and the seven Lamps, and the twelve Cakes: As our middle Region or
Breast has its Heart, or Altar of Incence also (compassed with its
pericardium, or purss of Water, and the Air of the Lungs) with the twelve Ribs
or sphers, or signs of Heaven. Separate with a Veil or Firmament also from our
Head, or Heavens above (or Waters above the Firmament, where are the first
Ideahs or Originals of All below:) that I say nothing of the Mercy Seat of our
Eye; and its Rainbow; representing the Throne of God (in the Holy of Holies) as
we find it described, in diverse places of Scripture.

Is there not also some resemblance between the Northern parts of the Earth,
and the Brain or Head? (As if the North were made to Rule; as may be hinted in
diverse Scriptures: for, Preferment comes not from the East or West, or South:
And from North, the man comes, that Headeth Kingdoms in the Prophets:) and
their likeness to our Lungs also, may be considered with their Winds and
Colds. Other parts are as Neck, Shoulders, Breast and Arms. The Midland Sea, as
the Midriff: or it may be part of the Pericardium, about the Heart, or Africa:
and Libiah signifies the Lords Heart. As the form is. And America the
back-parts: or the People a far off. The Great Sea below the continent, as the
Waters under the Earth, or our Bowels, and their Rowlings and yearnings: the
Chambers of the South, and as Waters returning in the South. Terra del fuogo
the Hips, and Nova Guinea Loins. Mael strom, the Nose or Mouth.

How by Eating all things, we turn them into our own Natures and spirits (as a
shadow how all things return To God, as they come From him) we touched before:
and may I add, that Christ gave his own flesh and blood, to be eaten by us, and
to be ours and us? and the twelve Tribes, were presented in the twelve Cakes of
shewbread (changed every Sabbath day) as to be eaten by God or the Priest, and
so to be turned into His Nature; as the Scripture also may intimate, in other
places, besides our Saviors discourse with Laodicea, in the Revelation. And
some make Shaddai to be All devouring: and our God is a consuming fire.

We might happily measure times and seasons in the great World, and changes
there of, much better then we now do; If we knew the exact Times of Circulation
of our blood, and other humors of our bodies: and how long the Chylus stays
in the stomach, or any other Receptacle, before it be separate and circuled,
for assimilation. What time in the Duodenum (there is somewhat in the very
name:) Jejunum, Colon, or Ilia: Which we should consider often, as the shadow,
that I say not measure, of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea. That I say
nothing of the Infinite Bowels of God, which are hinted out in Scripture, by
the many folds of our Ilia: six or seven times longer then Man. Nothing also of
the Caecum, which may speak somewhat Hidden, as the Hebrew word for the World,
or Age, or Ay, and Ever. Nor do I say the very Excrements return again, in
Grass and Herbs, which feed us, with the Beasts we eat.

Shall we come to the measures of Time (which is also the measure of Motion) in
the Heavens? The two faithful Witnesses (as the Scriptures intimate, like our
Eyes, in our Heads, or Heaven above: and some other things below, which so many
Nations call by the name of Witnesses: to be compared with Scripture also,
making such solemn Oaths, by putting the Hand under the Thigh:) the Sun and
Moon, were set in the Heavens, not only for Days and Years, but for Times and
seasons. Which are all made, by Their motions, through an Oblique Zodiac; That
crooked, or that crossing serpent: which in Hebrew has almost the very same
Letters and Numbers, with the word for Year. For, Shanah, is a Metathesis of
Nahash; the Serpent, and the Ammonite: which may be compared with Sampson (the
little Sun,) and Hercules.

And as Time began with Night before Day, so it may be, Winter was before
Summer; as Seed time, before Harvest; as the Scripture may intimate in diverse
places. Evening and Morning, are for sowing Seed: and so, the former and the
latter Rains, and the Harvest and Vintage, have their seasons. The Latter Works
of God, are ever the Better, and his last Wine is best; and he will ever show
himself better and better, till all Time be perfected, into Eternity: and God
be all in All.

How the Ancients might part their Day and Night into twelve hours a piece, we
show before. It may be compared with That of Moses. When the most high
separated the Sons of Adam; and (as St Paul expresses it) determined their
Times appointed, and bounds of their Habitation: He did it, according to the
Number of the Sons of Israel.

And Thus the first twelve hours of Time (from the first Creation) might
represent the twelve Months of the year; and the twelve great years, the World
was to serve the four great Monarchies, or watchers and watches: (of which
Daniel also speaks, as of those, that gave out the Decree (agreed by the
Watchers) against Nebuchadnezar; when he became the Beast. As we There also,
read of the Image, of the Beast (to be compared with the Revelation) of which
which twelve years serving the four Monarchies (as also the Restitution, and
Liberty, in the second Sabbath, or fourteenth Year) we first read, in the
fourteenth of Genesis.

The Jews had also, many other Divisions of Time, and Particles they called
Clakin; As the English Saxons also, in their Clackings, or Clickings, of their
Clocks, and Watches. But we now mainly consider their twelve hours of Day and
Night: which so many other Nations also, have still observed. But in Scripture
there is Half an hour, and silence in Heaven, about half an hour.

And those Twelve hours are most signally parted into six and six; and each six
halfed again, into the little Watches of the Night also: which in the Roman
times, and the New Testament, were Four also; as the great Watchers, or
Animals: or Angels, of the four Quarters, of Heaven, or Corners of the Earth.
Though some hints appeer also, as if the Old Jews had first but three Watches,
in their Nights. But Nature teaches us, to Halve and quarter things; and
Thence are made the sweet Chords in Music. For, a string of twelve inches (or
any twelve parts) makes a Diapason, to another of six, equally strained; and a
Diapente, Diatessaron, Epitrite, (a Fifth, a Fourth, a Third,) to others of 3,
and 4, and 8, or 9. which are the usual Chords of Harmony.

All These are in the 12. hours of Day and Night: and it may be, All measures;
used by the Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans, or other Nations that we know. All
their Weights, and Money also, rising up by such Proportions, as we are now
seeing, in the 12. hours of Day and Night. As might be easily showed, by any
that will compare the Twelves, and parts thereof, in the Roman Foot, and Assis,
Pound, and Ounces: with the Palms and Digits, Omers, Kabs, and Hins, Baths or
Ephas, with other measures and Weights, among the Jews, and diverse other
Nations.

Measure is an Hebrew Word; coming from That, which in the sky (an Heb word)
is shours (which is Hebrew,) and in us, Thoughts, the shours of our Heavens and
Brain, the measure of all measures (as the English use to say, a Thought more
or less;) or the Hairs of our Head; (as They speak also, to an hairs breadth:)
and on Earth Barley (that Hairy Seed) of all the quickest, Sown and Mowed, and
Moughed again, in 2 months or less, in hot Countries.

6 Hairs breadths, make a Barley breadth; and 6 of these a doit, (or Digit) 4
of which (or 24 of Those) made the Hebrew Tap, or Hand Breadth: and 12 Digits
made their span, or Hand stride (which is Hebrew:) made of 12 Doights, as the
Common Foot, of 12 Inches; and their Common Day of 12 Hours. To which, it may
be, David alluded, when he says, Thou have made my Days as a span, or Hand
breadths: And Esaias, of Christ, Spanning out the Heavens; parted as their common
span: or as ^oses expresses it, according to the number of the Children of
Israel: for, to Those Bounds, Paul adds Times also, in Areopagus. Famous for
Mars Tried There, by a Jury of 12.

24 Digits, like the 24 Hours, or 24 Elders (and they had 24 Books in their
Bible; and it may be 24 Letters, as many other Nations; and the Finals are but
as the VVatchers:) made the Cubit, common with Them, and all Nations. Though
some make their Sacred Cubit to be 7 Palms, to be considered with the Sabbath;
and the 4 new Digits may be, as the 4 Watches or Watchers, added to the 24
Elders: and the 28 Doights may be, as 28 days of the lesser month; and 4 Cubit
are a Man's Height.

6 Cubits, or 144 Digits (like the 144 hours, of the 6 sirst Days) made their
common measuring Reed, or Kane (which is also Hebrew:) of which we read in
diverse places of Scripture. And Goliath, was 6 Cubits and a span.

400 Cubits, or 2400 Palms, 600 Roman Feet, 240 Gressus, 120 Paces, made the
Greek stadium or furlong, shorter then the Roman, by 24 Foot, or thereabout.

1000 Cubits, or 2000 spans, 6000 Palms, 24000 Digits, made the Cribat; of
which we read, at Rachels death near Ephrata; with other places of Scripture.

2000 Cubits, or 12000 Palms, 48000 Digits, made their Sabbath days Journey,
or distance from their Camp, to the Tabernacle, as we may find in several
places.

10000 Cubits, or 240000 Digits, make a Common League (or an Hours way, in Heb
Leck) a Leash, of 3 Italian Miles; of which, each had 5000 Roman Feet, 2000
Gressus, and 1000 Pases: so that 3 of them made 24 Roman Funlongs; and about
1666 Heb. Reeds, or Kanes. Which may be considered with 666. and other numbers
in Scripture.

12 little spoons did make the Cyath Cup, and 12 of them the Hebrew Log, or 6
Eggs: and 24, the ^hoenix; which was the usual allowance for a Day, which has
24 hours.

24 Eggs made the Hebrew Kab, or 4 Logs; equal to the Common Chaenix in the
Revelation, or a Cubick Palm.

12 Logs made the Heb Hin; of 72 Eggs: and 24 Logs their Sea. 3 of which made
their Bath, or Epha, which was a Cubick Foot, of 10 Omers; but the tenth part
of an Homor, or Asses Burden.

24 Blanks make a Perit, which is also Hebrew; Part or Particle: and Perute,
Prute, is yet in use among the Eastern Coyns (as English call a little, pretty
thing) and 20 peruts make a Droit.

24 Droits make a Mite, and 20 mites a Grain; as coming from the Heb. Gerah: 20
of which made their shekle, which was their usual skale (which is Hebrew,
weight) of all weights or moneys. Shilling is in Heb Selang, which is yet used
among their moneys, 12 pence English.

24 Grains make a penny; 20 pennies an Ounce; and 12 Ounces a pound Troy, as
the English speak; or Brittans from Troy. But the Ancients had other weights
also, yet by 12 and 24.

As 12 Grains made their Obbol. 24 their scruple (which is 20 now, with some:)
3 scruples a dram, and 8 drams an Ounce, and 12 ounces a pound. Which with the
Romans was Aes or Assis. Which had still 12 parts: Though often changed, and
lessened, for great Reasons of State. Yet when least of All, it had still 12
particles; which some also called Unces. And of Unces.

12 Made their Aes or Assis, 120 their Denarius, which was io Era (as the name
imports) or 4 Farthings, which were Sestertii: of which 1000 made their
sestertium.

24 made the Hebrew Gerah [Grain or Groat] io of which make a draehm; and 2
drams [which were 4 Attick] or 20 Gerahs, made their shekle: half an Ounce.

24 Shekles, or 12 Ounces, made a Pound. But Mna (the mother to the Roman
Mina.) was 50. Shekles, as we read in diverse places.

12000 Attick Drams (6000 Hebrew) or 1200 Ducats, or 120 Attick pounds, or 60
Hebrew Mnas, do make an Hebrew Talent, Equal also to That of Alexandria; but
double to the Attick. Which (as in all other places) was but 6000 of their
Drams, and 60 pounds. And an Attick Talent of Gold, as the Sun, made 360 of the
Hebrew Mnas (or pounds) as there were Days in their Year, of Silver.

And generally 12 in Silver made but One in Gold. As we found the Moon moved 12
of her Diameters, in 12 hours while the Sun moves but One of His. So much
quicker is our Brain, than our Hearts Diastole and Systole: which are as the
Suns Day and Night, in Hebrew Nihat, Rest: as Darkness is Cassack (which is
Hebrew and English) but a Covering, or a Casing, or an Holding in, of Light,
and Motion also.

And that we may also glance upon the Sacred Number of Seven: (As Six, was
common to the World, and things and men thereof, as we touched in 666. and the
Image set up in Dura (a Province of Babylon) made up of 6 in breadth, and 60 in
height:) Let us suppose All Time beginning from the Evening Horizon, or
Sunsetting: as we may imagine, though there was no Sun appearing till the
fourth day. As also the great Sun of Righteousness appeared not, till after the
Night, or 12 hours, of the fourth Thousand Years: If we may so compare the six
first days of Creation with six thousand Years before the Great Sabbath; As
the Jews also teach us from a very old Tradition.

From the Evening Horizon to the Nadir (or the middle of the Lower Hemisphere)
there were Then, and so are still with Them, six hours Motion, of the Sun, or
of the Earth, about the Sun. And Then, six hours more, to the Morning Horizon:
and six more to the Zenith, or High Noon; and Thence, six more, to the setting
Horizon again, whence Time first began. So also, the Flowing and Ebbing of the
Sea, are by six hours apiece, in the open Ocean: and in all Rivers, Ebb and
Flood together, generally make up twelve hours. So that after every sixth hour,
there is a Pauze, or Rest, as it seems; and Then, a Turning, as it were
backward. For, from the setting, till Midnight, the Sun seems to go down, and
Then to Turn up again: and so from the other points also. And before its Turn,
it seems to Rest, and pauze; as all things do, before they Turn. So that the
same word (or very near) in Heb signifies to Turn, and to Rest. As if This were
still implied in That. And the Rest, or Sabbath of God, seems to speak some
Turning inward, or Reflecting on himself, and his own Image, in all he has
done: in which his soul rests, with unconceivable delight and joy. And
although the First of the following six hours, be as it were, wholly new, from
all the six before it; yet the Pauze and Turn, seem to be made between the
sixes, as it were by some other distinct Person or Body, that is watching at
those Cardinal Points, and There Turning That which moves. So that the
Seventh, is (as it were) more Holy, and Sacred, that is Separate (for, so the
word Holy, signinifies in Heb. and other Languages) distinct and separate from
all the other six; which are profane, in comparison of the seventh, standing by
himself, as wholly of another Nature. So that besides the twenty four Elders,
there were four distinct Watchers (as we may call them) as the Sabbaths to the
other four sixes. And every of the Four had six wings apiece (as we find in the
Prophets also:) and their Great Work seems to be Keeping of Sabbath Days.
For, it was the Lords Day, when St. John says, they ceased not, day and night
(being to watch in Both) crying Holy, Holy, Holy, (which is also Thrice
repeated in some Copies:) Though upon other days, They have other employment:
As we see in that they spoke and did, at other times, in the Revelation. Yet if
any will bring the Months from These four, with six wings apiece; as the Hours
from the twenty four Elders, I do not oppose it: but compare them also, with
the Watches with Four and sixes also, about the Temple in Solomon's Time, but
David's Institution: the 24 from Noah; As the 14 from Abraham, as we touched
before. But I have yet said nothing, How every Circle is naturally parted into
six equal parts, by its own Radius: and that Six equal Circles may touch it,
and each other, in their Circumference; or it may be cut into six Triangles; or
six Circles Touching one another, with their Centres all in the Circumference
of the seventh: as Children play with Compasses.

And as every seventh Hour, was sacred, or separate, from all the former six
Hours; so was also, every seventh Day and Year; which was also Sabbatical: and
so every Seventh Month, which had the seven solemn Days of the Great Feast of
Tabernacles. And the Seventh Month from That also, had 7 days of the
Passover: As the third from That also, the 7 days of Pentecost. And I know
not but This Harmony, between Hours, and Days, and Months, and Years, may be
intimated in That of the four Angels (as the four Watches or Watchers) loosed
at Euphrates: being prepared for an Hour, a Day, a Month, and a Year: As we
read in the Revelation. Which yet some compare with the four great Commanders
of the Turks, that brake out (near Euphrates also) about the Year of Christ,
1300. (when the five Months of the First Woe, of the Saracens, in the Roman
Empire, were ended:) about which time, Guns also came in use (at least in the
Western parts;) as the Fire and Brimstone, out of the mouths of those Turkish
Horsemen: which by that account should go down again before the Year, 1700.

I must not so much as glance at all the Harmonies that might be easily found
between Hours, Days, Months, and Years, in relation to 6 or 7, and 10. or some
of their powers. As 5 times 7 make 35, and 6 times 6 make 36. which may be
found to equal Sun and Moons Motions, more than the usual Golden Number. And
the 36th Hour brings up the Sun of the second Day. And those two Numbers of 35
or 36. drawn into 10. bring up the Sun of the second Year also, both Lunar and
Solar, among the Jews and other Nations. 7 times 7 make 49, and the 49 Hour
begins the third Nights Rest (that good Chord in Music) and the 49 Year brings
in the Great Rest, or Jubilee. And 480. Hours, bring up the third Sabbath, or 21
Day. Which from 480, runs out through 490 and 500 Hour. And we see great things
in Scripture, done in those Numbers. As the Temple built in the 480 Year from
Egypt. And Daniels Weeks make up 490 Years.

144 Hours bring up the First Sabbath; which begins from That Hour. Which may
be compared with That we read in the Revelat. of 12 drawn into 12, or squared.
And of 12 times 12000, or 144000 (like the Clakins which the Jews find in 144
Hours:) called the First Fruits of the Earth; as the Hours of the First Week,
were the First Fruits of Time; or of the World, before the Sabbath.

That also which the Revelation speaks of 666, as the number of the Beast;
which so many have believed to be an Epoch of some great Change in the World;
may be compared with the Changes of the Moon, and several Months, which both
Ancient and Modern have observed. And 666 Hours bring us to high Noon of the
fourth Sabbath or 28 Day. Which is the end of one Month, and beginning of the
Moons Changes and Months, from Thence to the 700 Hour, in the 30 Day. Which I
touch the rather, because That is the Number of the very Letters in the Hebrew
Olam, which is both the World, and also Ever, or Eternity; or the Hidden Time
of the Worlds Duration, or Great Change thereof: which it may be, still comes
out in 666 Years; or at most 700. As the Moons Changes, are in so many Hours.
And I know not any Nation or Kingdom of the Earth (as another Moon to the
Moon;) that has not felt great changes in That Revolution. And the very Phrase
of Olam, or Hidden, may perhaps lead us to the Moons Hiding in her Change:
whence she comes Alma; which in Heb is a Virgin, or an Hidden Beauty. As in
other Languages, Alma Virgo, Alma Matter, and the like. To be compared also with
the Wonder in Heaven, A Woman in the Sun, with the Moon at her Feet: Which we
touched before.

Moses makes 70 Years a Man's Age, or His Fullness of Time, or Millo. And the
Hebrew word to fill, is 70 or 71. in Numbers. And David's 70. Years was the
fourteenth 70. from Abraham's Birth; who as the Jews say, lived 58 Years with
Noah, (which in Hebrew is 58.) which should be considered by Those that make
him born 60 Years after Tharahs 70. which yet, is not determined by St.
Stephen: who says not, he went to Canaan, the same Year, but After his Father
died. Which yet the Samaritan Pentateuch makes just 60 Years Sooner than our
Hebrew Copies.

And as 70 Years (in Moses reckoning) make an Age; So the Hebrew words for Age,
or Ay, or Ever, and Eternity, in their very Numeral Letters, are about 70, or
some one or other, of its powers.

Ad (or Adg) the great word they use for Ever, or Eternity, which preyeth on
All; and some render it, sometime, by Prey: (As in the most famous place, Zeph.
3. 7. Where yet it may be also, to Eternity: Being of the great Judgment, as we
spoke before:) Makes 74 in Letters. As the Mazorites reckon, from Ezra (as the
Sound may mind us) the Helper promised in Daniel, (as his very Name implies;)
before Nehemiah the Lords Comforter: who followed him presently; As the Great
Comforter, the Great Helper, Jesus Christ. Ad, or Ed, is also the word used for
Witness or Testimony, Testaments, and (to be compared with the Two Witnesses,
of which before,) for the Congregation also, or the Church, or Elders thereof,
the Sanhedrin; which our Savior also named plain enough, but we lose it (as
many other things) by reading it Council. And They were the 70 Elders, as they
were usually called; though they were 72, or 73, or 74. of which* ^o often in
Scripture, old and new: that I speak not of the 70 Palms, and 70 Sons of
Gideon, and of Ahab; Or of the 70 Disciples; or any other 70.

The same word is often added also, (as the sound may intimate) to Olam: for a
Greater expression of Ever, or Eternity: which by This also, appears not to
be Absolute: For, Then it could not be Added to, or increased. When as Olam it
self has also a Plural, and is multiplied by many, in the Letter M: which is
ever 40, and with jod 50 (as they used to multiply by 10 and by 50: As we see
in diverse places:) But M final, as they call it, is 600, as we see in the
Mazoreth: and 600, was so usual, to express a Great multitude, that with the
Romans also, it became a Proverb, Et Sexcentis aliis etc. to be considered with
1666 also. Which are all the Numbers, which Their Alphabet did make: MDCLXVI.

And as Ad, adds 4 to 70; So Netzach (another Hebrew word for Eternity,)
doubleth Ad: and makes, in Numerals 148, which is Twice 74. And Dor, written
fully in Heb. makes 210, which is Thrice 70, the usual word for Age, or
Generation: And, especially repeated, for Eternity also. When yet Both Dors
make but 420 Years: or 60, of Daniels 70, Weeks or Sabbaths. Which is also
another great Ever. Yea, and That, multiplied by Ever also. For, One 7 times 7,
or 49, in the Jubilee, is very often called Ever, and for Ever (as we saw
before in the Servant for Ever, and otherwise:) How much more, when That Ever,
is also multiplied by 10, and made 490.

Which may also be Hinted in the Hebrew (...) or (...) or (...), their proper
word, for Time and season (which is English Yet,) 470, or 480, or 490: as it
may be written. And if Time and Times, and Half a Time, be to be reckoned Thus,
they may make a Number near to 1666.

But the usual word for Season (and for such a solemn Time, as Daniel calls
Time and Times,) is Moad: from Ad, or next akin to it. Adding 46 to 74. which
makes Thrice 40, or 120. a Number Famous, in the Age of Moses, and the old
Worlds Season for Repentance: And in Daniel himself, who (...) the chief of
three Princes, set to rule 120 Rulers; who were Thus parted, into Thrice 40.
Which we found before, the great Number for Temptation, Punishment, and other
things: that I say nothing of the 40 Weeks, of the Child, in the Womb; or of
the Time of Life, diverse times specified in Scripture. To be considered with
the Fullness of Time, in which our Savior also, came by Water (as at first
Creation, when they flowed, from the Womb of Eternity;) and by Blood also, for
the New Creation: as All Children come to Birth, in Their Months also. And the
affinity between our Life, and a Beast, in Hebrew, and in Solomon, may bid us
think again, and count the Number of the Beast also, which is Man. whose Life
is Brutish, or a Beast, as the Midwives told the King of Egypt: and that the
Heb. Women were as Beasts, needing No Midwife. Some read it Lively. And in
general, Life is unto Being, but as (...) to (...), by which it only differs,
in the Root. And (...) is the proper Character of Life, as (...) of Being; as
we may see in (...), and diverse other Hebrew words.

Kedem, is also used for Eternity, Before: as the Schools express it. It makes
144, if M be only 40. But if (...) (as the Mazorites do often reckon) makes
600; Then it may be (as we reckoned Olam) only 4 above 700. which is 10
Generations (or 10 times 70) as we found God himself expounding Ever, in the
case of Moab and Ammon. As Ruth also, the 10th from Lot, might be, married to
the 10th from Abraham: and about the 10th 70 Years; as David was the 14
Generation, and the 14th 70 Years: who also lived 70 Years. Though Christ
lived, but about half so many. Which may show us more, ere long, than that Man's
Age, was Then also shortened: As from the Flood, or other great Epochaes.

Ten times 70, may be expressed also, by the Hebrew (...) Ay: which is 70 with
Ten. Being also joined with Kedem, in Genesis 12. 8. to be compared with Joshua:
who made it a Desolate Heap for Ever; which is Ay, in Greek or many other
Languages. And yet it was rebuilt and Peopled, in the Time of Nehemiah, as
before.

And if Letters, may be so joined, for Multiplication, as well as Addition,
Then may (...) also, (their great word for Ever) be 4 times 70: or 70 times 70.
that is 70 squared. Which is the Great Power of 4 in Scripture Language
speaking somewhat Squared: as the very figure also of 4 in Heb. which yet is not
much unlike 7, or Seven, the Full number, and so often squared in Scripture:
that is drawn into 4. or so, as 4 is powerful in it: as it is, in Every Square.
Which is still made up of 4, and to be so Resolved. As Cubes also by 8. whose
Character in Heb. represents a Dye. Which is yet more visible in (...) their
final M. which is the Mystical Letter, as the Jews write, in Esaias 9. 7. or many
other places.

That God also did intend we should Multiply, sometimes, by adding Letters to a
word, may be seen in the Plural Numerals, we read in Scripture: which are Ten
times more than their Singulars, (and it may be, So were All Plurals: made by
Jod (only in Regimen) which is 10; and by im, which is 50, at length:) As of
Three, and Four, the Plurals are Thirty and Forty. And by the way, it may be
considered whether in the Second Command, it might not be read, Visiting
Iniquity, for 30 or 40, Days, or Months, or Years. Seeing 40, was the great
Number in Punishing; Theirs also, in the Wilderness: where they stayed 40
Years, in 42 Mansions. (As the 42 Months in the Revelation, for Treading the
outward Courts; and for the Reign of the Beast; As also, for the Woman's being
in the Wilderness though reckoned by 1260 Days, which make up 42 Months:) For
their Murmuring, and Worshipping the Beast also, or the Image of a Beast, as we
read in Psalm. 106.

And they have One word for Age, and the World also, which in Numerals is 42.
and That is (...) Eld, as Eng. Elder, and Old. Whence the old Weld, for World,
that is, We are Eld, or Old. And we do not reckon a Man Old, till over 40.

And if Final (...) with them also be but 40, Olam Then (without (...)) will be
but 140: or Twice 70. And so is Kum their word for Rising up, or Resurrection,
as with English Come. But if (...) be 600 (as the Mazorites;) Then both Kum and
Olam is 700: that is 10 Generations, or 10 times 70. as we saw before. Which
may be also, more considerable; If the Moons Hiding, or Covering, in so many
Hours, (the measure of All Ages and Changes;) might also intimate Gods Hiding,
or Covering, of Their Iniquity, which is employed also in Olam: And the Taking
off Their Yoke (which is also Olam) so often hinted in Scripture: as the great
Work of Gods Rest in Sabbath Days, and Years, and Jubilee. Which was the 7th
7th Year, or 49. a Number of Rest: as we found it in Hours, the beginning of
the Third Nights Rest. Yet it brought in, Great Motions and Changes also (but
for the Better still, which the Schools call Perfective, and not Corruptive
Motion:) So that the very Hebrew Mot, which is Motion, or Mutation, is in
Numbers 49. And every 3d. brought up a Change; as we found before in Night and
Day, Rest and Motion; as in Leaps or Hopping; and in all our movings, One foot
rests, while the other moves.

Mot Turned is Tom; and (...) turned into (...), Tam or Tom which (as we saw in
Jathom an Orphan) signifies Perfect. And in least reckoning is 440, (and their
Tamid, Ever, or the Daily sanifice 444, without Jod: or else, 454.) But if M
Final be 600, Then Tom is 1000: a very Perfect number, both in Years, or
Months, or Hours. For 1000 Hours, bring us to the Morning Sacrifice, of the 42
Day of Creation (or other Time:) which is the sixth Sabbath. As, 444 Hours,
bring us to the first Sabbath.

I may add also, that if M final be 600, in Hebrew words, we may find out many,
making up the very Number of 666, of which we spoke before; as the Number of
Change in the Moon; and all other great Motions, and Revolutions, in all
Generations.

For the very word Sum (which is not only Eng, but Heb. is just 666. As if
This, were the Sum of each Generation, or of every Age of the World; which is
called Age also, in many Languages. And in Latin, Sum, is the great Verb of
Being: As in Hebrew (...), or English Is: and Jessi is my Being, or my Essence.
Which is much, or most, or all, in the Heb Ish, a Man. Though not a vulgar,
low, and Weak man (which they called Adam or Enos:) but a great, or noble man;
or an Husband. As we see, in That famous place, Thou shall not call me Baali
(my Lord, or Master) but Ishi, my Man or Husband. They shall look, eye to eye:
Till they see themselves in my eyes: or Eishon ((...)) and Eyn, is the Heb
(...), an Eye, and a Fountain.

And among the Rabbis (or other Eastern Writers) Sum is not only the Sum,
but End, of all reckonings. As in Hebrew Soph. and Sophia, or Wisdom, is the
Lords Perfection, or his End. To which Solomon also seems to allude, in his
End of man, or End of All: written with such great Letters, in the Hebrew of
his Book of Wisdom, or Ecclesiastes the Woman Preacher. As the 68 Psalm and 11
verse, God shall give a Word (so it is in Heb) and Many shall be the Women
Preachers.

And as Sophia (in Hebrew, a metathesis of Joseph) is with the Grecians
Wisdom; so with them Foolishness, or Moria, is in Heb the Lords Teaching or
Death: or Mountain of the Lord (...). And when it is said, Let him that is
Wise, count the number of the Beast; And here is Wisdom; it might ocasion us
to think, how near Sophia, or Sophos, (which was the great word with them, that
called it, and their wise man, a Die; (for (...) turned backwards, also, is
still the same (...):) comes to that very number of 666. Which we find also, in
(...), as his Name may be written, who was so notorious in the West, with
Mahomet in the East, about the year 666. And although I cannot deny but
Ireneus, scholar to St. John, or his scholar, found That number in (...) (as
others also, in Romijith, and diverse other Words or Names:) yet Some interpret
That Phrase of the Number of a man, as if it were, a man's reckoning; or to be
counted only by Him, who of all the Creatures can only so Number Numbers. As
if man (an Hebrew word also) came from Mana, to Number. And Manath (or month)
is reckoning, and 490. As if That Solemn Number of 7 Sevenights (as we read in
Daniels VVeeks) were some way That, which in Gods reckoning was The Number, or
the Manath, or Month; and it may be (some way) in every month also.

And in Hebrew, manim, or minae, Pounds, or man's (or if you will men) are 700:
as mani, number; 100. And when Jacob complained that Laban had changed his
wages so many times, it is manim, in Hebrew: as the English also use many; and
for many also they use some; which is Hebrew also; as we found before in sum, a
sum, or end of number: and in numerals 666. as in Latin also Sexcenti for Many.

Shall I add also that as money (or Money) is plainly an Hebrew word, for
Numbering [as with English] so also Zemanins, which is Times, or seasons [as the
word soundeth] for every thing, as Solomon speaks; is but 7 added to 700.
That is monim (or numbering, or reckoning] by seven, as if all seasons were made
up of the number Seven.

And as the Hebrew Sum, is a kin to the Latin Sum, (and Turned backward, is
their Mus: as Sumus also turned backward is still Sumus: as if all our being,
and our summing also, were but mus, a mouse; and all our musing also, which is
English, and many other languages;) so also both sums are very near to the
Greek soma, by which they express our body. And it may be, some will so render
That phrase in the Revelation; For, it is the Number of a man: as if it were
not only of man's numbering, or of man's reaching, or bearing, or using: (as in
Scripture often, the Rods of a man, and the Cords of a man, and the pen of a
man, and the words of a man, and the way of a man, and the son of man, and
Children of men; and to speak, or walk, as a man; and Temptations of a man, or
common unto men:) But also some special Thing, in man's body, just of that
Number. And what if it should be That, which makes him a man? and yet so much,
and so often, to degenerate, into a Beast? For, as man, in the Image of God, he
was above all beasts, and made to Rule them all, with all his lusts and beastly
Passions; as we showed before, from Gods own words and great consult at man's
Creation. But lust conceiving, brought forth sin: and sin, complete, or grown
up, to be of age, brought forth Death; as we read in St. James: and in Peter
also, that fleshly lusts, Fight against the spirit; and that it is very
dangerous for any, that have once escaped the pollution of the world, which
came in by lust; to return with the Dog to his vomit, or the sow to wallowing
in the mire: in a word, to degenerate into a beast, or beastly nature. Which
is very much by lust, and that which causes lust, in our Bodies and Minds.
Which indeed is a strange kind of Beast, rising out of the sea, or our lower
Region, or Waters under our Heart, or Earth. Where also we found the 7 fleshly
heads, or Planets, answering also to the 7 above; and in our Brains also; the
heavens above; or the waters above the Heavens; as we showed before: where we
glaunced at the Serpent also, or Hydra, a strange beast, with 7 heads and 10
horns. Which are somewayes, in the worlds, both great and little also, which
they call the Microcosm; and in all its Regions also: and in All Generations.
Most of All perhaps, in That, or Those, which may be called the very Principles
of All, or every, Generation.

What in our Bodies, answered to the Two Faithful Witnesses in Heaven, was
hinted before. May I now add, that as Shemesh the Sun (in Hebrew, where yet it
is Feminine) is near akin to somewhat, we may scarcely Name (at least, As the
Rabbines often use that word:) So is Jerach, which is Moon (and Masculine) akin
to That, which the Scripture makes, so much, the Instrument of Generation: the
Thigh, or Jareck, whence the English Jerk, or Yerk, to strike upon the Thigh.
As we read also in Scripture.

And if the Latin Thorus, were but written in Hebrew or Syriack, might it not
be (...) or (...), which would also be Taurus, a Beast. And either of those
words, is just 666. And How near is Ferus (as in Greek also) Beastly, or
Fierce: to that Name or Number also?

May I not add, that Shimshon, or Samson, or Hercules in Greek stories,
signifies the Little Sun: (crossing the Crossing Serpent of the Zodiac, and
its 12 Signs; as the Labors of Hercules: where also the Hydra, or the Dragon;
or Beast, and Serpent with 7 Heads:) and that it may be 666 or 700 in its
numeral Letters also. Or How Samson Dallyed with Dallilah, till he was overcome
by Lust also; that cut off his Hairs (as the Rays of the Sun;) and at length
put out his Eyes; or the Two Witnesses, in one Region: which have Two also in
other places; called Testes, or Witnesses, by Many Nations. And they bring Fire
also from our Heavens, and do strange wonders in us All. But they must be Put
out; before That Great Change will come: which is so generally expected at 666.
Which He may understand perhaps, that knows, why Christ himself did no
Miracles, till (at a Wedding also,) he could say; Woman, what have I to do with
thee? and Then, she said to the servants, Do whatever He bids you. So that
Christ himself Did no Miracle, Till his Mother bid it also.

If one should ask a Jew, what makes Men to be Men? He might answer (...)
Their Weapons, or their Vessels. what they mean by those expressions, one may
easily know, that understands Paul's discourse to the Corinthians about
Marriage, and keeping their Vessels clean or Holy, or separate: As David also
spoke to Ahimelech:) in number 665, or 666. And so also is (...) in Heb.
Vessels. Yea, and the Reins also: or very near akin to (...) and That to Kalla,
or Kallath a Spouse: and somewhat else also, in Hebrew, or in English, calling
our Kall, about our Belly, by such a name.

Shall I add also, How often God commands his people to abstain from, or take
heed of, Kelaim. Though the word be hard enough, and never used, that I now
remember, but in Moses Laws, and once or Twice in Esaias, or Solomon, complaining
of a foolish people, that entangled themselves in Kelaim: which some translate
the Stocks. As Solomon speaks of a Fool hasting to the Stocks: till a Dart
strike through his Liver. Or his Reins be consumed, among many Witnesses: as if
he would allude to all the Hebrew words we are now speaking of. Prove. 5. 11,
14. and 7, 22, 23.

It is clear enough that Kelaim signifies some Mixed seed; and that not only in
Grains; but Beasts also: as it is plainly seen in Leviticus, 19. And This also
makes the very Number of the Beast, 666. as it is with the usual Article,
(...). And (...) is (...) turned Backward.

Is it not also, the very number of the Greek (...) which is not only, as the
Latin Renes, or the English Reins: which yet keep course enough with the Moon
in our Brain and in Heaven too. And taught David every Night, as the Heavens in
the 19. Psalm: and they may teach us, every Day also: which in Hebrew is (...),
and is just 666. As the Greek (...) which is also the Reins of our Brains (How
near is the sound to Reins, and Rains also: as we saw before in Showrs?) even
our very Secret Thoughts, or Fancies, which should be covered, as other Secrets
in Nature. Which are akin to (...), or our Shame in Hebrew: or the most privy
Secrets: whence the Latin Clam.

And Olam also may signify Their Iniquity, their Folly, their Yoke, their
Shame, or Hidden Secrets. As also Sodam, in Heb is not only the City Sodam, of
which also the Revelation: But also, their Secret. As Jacob speaks, of his
cruel Sons, Let not my soul be in their secret; in Heb Be Sodam. Where the very
word, in Numbers, (according to the old Mazorites) in 666.

Let me add also, that the word Beast, in Hebrew Letters is (...), which is
also Shame, (and (...) my Shame:) as being (...) in our seat, or in Natibus: as
the Jews also use that word. As the English also, in a Phrase not to be spoken.
And the Number of it is 700. And that Beast, or Bosht, or shame, is the Idol,
which God does so often complain of, in the Prophets. As (...) or (...), Their
Bush and Shame. That I say nothing, of That part, which the Jews call (...),
the Fools, or Beasts and Orion. But to return to Numbers. It may be like
enough, that every such Revolution, may bring up some Great Change (as in the
Moon:) seeing also many, if not All the 7th and 10th Persons, or Generations,
in Scripture, had some very signal Characters. As Enoch the 7th from Adam: Noah
the 10th. As Abraham was the 10th from Noah; and Moses the 7th from Abraham:
and David the second 7th or 14th: as we found in the very number of his Name,
and Years also. Though it be sometimes written by 24, as he was from Noah. As
the 24th hour of the New Day; beginning from Noah, that is Rest: as at first,
from the Rest of Night, or Nihat Heb. And perhaps David did not make, but
find, all things about the Priests, or Tabernacle, settled by 24. Which from
the Jews also, we may learn, to be the Number of Things, given to the Priests
by God. Some of which, themselves only might eat; Others their Children also:
and others were common to their very slaves, or sons of their Handmaids; if
born in the Priests Houses, or bought with his Money. So that it was a saying
common enough among the Jews, That the Priests Boys and slaves, had more
right, to Holy Meats, than All the Men of Israel. Which may be considered by
them, that deny the Sacrament to the Children of Professors, in the visible
Church: as Children born in the Priests Family, or sons of persons Bought, or
Redeemed: which might eat the Holy things that might not be eaten, by a man of
Judah, though Hired to work in the Priests Family.

Noah is said to be Perfect in his Generations (for he saw Two Worlds or
Generations:) coming up, at the beginning of the seventh great Week, as we may
call it: or, as many years, from the Creation, as the seventh Week, is Hours.
We see what a change there was in His Time, by the Flood; in the second
Thousand Years; As the Waters were Divided, in the second Day of Creation. What
it might Typifie out also, in These Days, we touched before. Jaacob is said
also, to be Perfect; which some read, a Plain man: but it is, as of Noah
before, a Perfect man. Which has made me consider, whither Jacob, might not be
the Close of His Generation, as Noah of His: and David of His; who saw the
Times or Periods, of the Kingdoms, or World about him: as we read in the close
of the first of Cronicles. Which the Jews call Words of Days. Which we may
understand Hereafter. David also brought up a New Jerusalem, and a New World,
as a New Heaven, and a New Earth: and bound up Satan, or Saul; for 1000 Years:
as we also touched before, in Saul or Paul. And Elijah also, and Elisha; with
Jehosaphat, the Lord Judging; (Though a good while, before Zedekiah, the Lords
Justice, or the General Judgment: As Laodicea, after Philadelphia the New
Jerusalem.) And Jehoram the High Lord, both in Israel and Judah. When also,
Moab and Edom freed themselves from the Yoke of Jaacob; as his Father promised,
in his Blessing Esau: so much and so often, supplanted by his brother Jacob:
though God own him, as a Plain man, without Guile.

And among diverse other things, we read no where, but in Esdras (of the Roman
Empire, and Christ also, who cites divens things of that Book) we are There
also told, that Esaus Heel, was the End of the World, and Jacobs Hand (on that
heel) the beginning of another. And as Jaacob was a Perfect man in his
Generation (one of a Thousand, as Solomon speaks, After Elihu in Job:) So his
Children, are the True Israelites indeed, in whom there is No Guile: As our
Savior speaks of Nathaniel. And They are Sons of Light, in opposition to the
Sons of Esau, or Ishmael, as sons of Darkness; As the 12 hours of Night, were
before the 12 Hours of Day, or Children of Light.

But there is yet more in it. For, although All the sons of Jacob, were
beloved, before Fsaus, in the Type; yet among Jacobs also, there was a Joseph
and a Benjamin, (Son of the Right hand;) and Those were Children of Rachel,
which signifies a Sheep. Who died also at Bethlehem Ephrata, or very near,
where Christ was Born. And at His Birth, was heard, Rachel mourning, and
weeping, with expressions near akin to Hell, and its Gnashings: As we read in
Matthew, and the Prophet Jeremy. (As the English use the word Rakell.) And it
may be marked, How she Died; As her Father and her Husband judged her, for
Having and keeping Idols. O that man would consider How Great and Powerful, His
Words also, might be, If he could learn the 39 Psalm: with the three Sons of
Ishmael; Misma, Massa, D^ma.

And it may be, Christ also may allude, to Rachels Children, which he calls
Sheep: and sets them at his Right Hand, as Benjamin, the Son of the Right Hand;
in comparison of Leahs, or the Left hands Children. Or of Esaus, that is,
Goats. For, Seir, or as the Saxon English sound it Sire, is a Goat; and very
near a Satyr in Heb, or a Devil. But may there be no Mystery, in That of
Jacobs Crossing his hands, upon the sons of Joseph also, or Rachel, before he
died? and That Benjamin was so often cut off: (As his Mother wept, because they
were not: but they must come in again, and she shall have Comsort, in the
latter days, as we read, Jer. 31.) As if the First should come to be Last, or
Lost, in comparison of Those that were Dead, or Lost, or at the Left hand: but
now found again, and made the First. For All their shame or Losses, they have
Double. O thou Prisoner of Hope! I now declare it to thee. How a Lamb was
offered, every Morning and Evening (Doubled also upon the Sabbath:) As it were
a Sacrifice for the Lambs, or Sheep, we touched before. And How a Goat, at the
New Moon, or every Great Change of the World, which they called Olam also, as
the Hidden, or the Hiding Time. As also the Hebrew Kesse (as the English Kiss)
was the Suns Embracing the Moon, or Covering her, with his Robes and Throne of
Glory: which they also called Kiss.

And a Goat was offered so, for a Public Sin Offering, at Every New Moon
(which the Jews called also Chodesh, akin to Kodesh, Holy, or New: As also the
Month following the New Moon:) And at All the Three Great solemn Feasts, at
which All the Males, were to appear, under pain of Cutting off. Which we may
call a great Arcanum of their Civil Government also. For by This, they did not
only meet and Feast (as a badg of greatest Peace, or Union, and Communion;) but
also, They must then, appear, to All Suits or Actions: which might else fall
Heavy enough on the Sheriff of each Tribe or County.

But as the feast of Tabernacles, was the Greatest of the Three: so it had more
solemn Attendants. A peculiar feast of Trumpets: especially, at the years of
Release and Jubilies (which, now began at That end of the year:) and the great
Day of Expiation, or Atoning or Covering: as the word Capher, or Cover,
signifies. And the Jews Tradition is, that Then, the very next Night, or
thereabout, the great God begins to sit in Judgment: on all the dead of
that year. Which they therefore attend, with great watchings, and Fastings,
with other solemnities.

But more to our present purpose, are the Goats, offered on That day: Double or
Treble to the sin offering, or Goats, of any day of the year, before That. One
of them also (the Escape Goat) was not only carried out, without the Camp, as
the great sin offering, for the people (whose blood was carried into the holy
place, as we see in Aarons great Failor at his Sons Burning; beside the Epistle
to the Hebrews:) but it was also carried out, and sent by a Fit Messenger, a
great way off, into the Wilderness: to go, as far as He would; abroad into All
the World. So that he might visit All Goats in All Countries: For, he was let
loose, to all the Wilderness, and all the World.

And now, it will be no great wonder, that All Nations, are so solemnly called,
and invited, to the following feast of Tabernacles (represented by all the
Fruits of the earth, Then gathered in) and that, under a great penalty, of
botches of Egypt, or of wanting Rain, or Water also. Unto which our aviour
plainly alludeth, in his standing out, on the last and Great day, of that
Greatest Feast; and crying, (while thy ran with joy to fetch Waters, from their
Siloam, or Well of Salvation, as the Prophet Esaias speaks:) O every one that
Thirsts, Come unto the Waters: and He that believes on me, as the Scripture
says (shall have such rain from Heaven, and such Water, that) out of his
belly, shall flow, Rivers of Living Water. Which he spoke, of the spirit, not
yet given, till He was glorified; and so received Gifts for Rebbels also: and
to Draw All men.

Shall we now wonder, that more Rams and Goats and Bullocks, were accepted on
his Holy Altar ('it is his own expression of Nebaioth, or Edom also:) in This
Month, or Moon, then in any, or it may be All, of All the Year besides? Which
we may see, even filling, an whole long Chapter: and from Gods own Mouth, in
Numbers. O that we could number it! and so we shall, in Gods due Time, and ours
also. Let his People say, Amen. It is Finished, and Done. Amen, Hallelujah.

Is there not a strange Twisting of Bullocks, Rams and Goats together: As in
the Tabernacle it self, with Rams skins dyed Red, and Goats hair? As they all
met once, in the Ark, as an Emblem of our Bodies also, and its Three Regions,
and beasts in it, as the Church. That I say nothing of the five sorts of Trees
also, to cover their Booths or Tabernacles: to be compared with Esaias 41. and
60. and Nehemiah 8. After Babylon: as also Ezechiels New Temple, and Sabbaths
were: to be kept in the Christian Church yea, in the New Jerusalem; or after
Their Babylon also. Is it not strange to the Jews, that of the Seventh Months
feast (of which also in Solomon's Time,) the Seventh day, is described by Seven
words, in one verse: And all the seven, end in (...) their M final, or Mystical
Letter, of which we spoke but now. And though I do not say, they may note the
40 Sevenights or Weeks of Life, as we spoke before: yet with St. Paul, I say,
Christ came out in the Fullness of Time; or in His seventh also; or in the
seventh Month, or to fulfill That Feast also: to be yet fulfilled, (O how Long!
How Soon!) at the End of the Year.

But when shall That be fulfilled, which our Blessed Jesus (of Natsareth, the
Branch also,) did but Begin, to say and do, of This Feast also, of Palm
Branches: which we touched before, in Tamar? Though he cried on the Cross, It
is finished; as the Scripture says, a Thing was fulfilled. Or indeed, there
may be Several fulfillings, according to the several Ages; which must All be
run through: and that perhaps also, by Sevens; As we find in the Revelation.

We have seen the Passover fulfilled in our Blessed Savior: And his Bones are
Whole, though his Flesh Torn (even to the Bone) in his Members: that are to
fill up, the measure of his susserings. As the Children of Israel, from Isaac
till the 430 years were fully out: and Then, and Then.

We have seen the First of First fruits: the Barley sheaf, first Heaved up, on
the Third day, after the passover was slain; as an Emblem of His Resurrection,
who was That Sire also. not only a Goat (as before) but Barley also; the rough
hairy bearded, Goatish kind of Seed: of which also before: and in Elijah, John
the Baptist, and his rough Garments, and his Mien. Seeming so Austere.

Yea and the first fruits also, the Biccurim: Elect of God; and the first born,
of which we spoke also at the Pentecost. But the promise is to you, and to
yours, and to All, that are afar off: even as many as the Lord (not only has,
but) shall call, through all Ages and Generations.

Does it not plainly lead us to the Feast of Tabernacles? For, Then, not only
They, and Their Children, but their strangers also: yea and all their
Neighbors round them; yea All Nations, were not only called, but Commanded,
to that Feast of Tabernacles. As the Jews observe it to this day, for building
their Booths abroad, in open air (as commanded;) not only receiving, but
inviting strangers to them. As we found also, in Zech. and diverse Psalms and
Prophets, (cited before;) with 31 of Devt and 12 verse, to be compared with the
29 and 16 Chapters. And least their solemnMeeting at Jerusalem should be
clogged with contests, or suits of Law; there is added also, at Close of That
Law of those Feasts, another Magnale imperii, (and their Politics were such,
that all Nations should say, they were wise, and had a wise God) appointing
both Judges and Officers: which were both, distinct from their Sanedrin, and
King. As we found the Power, of making Laws, Judging, and Executing Law (or
Governing by Law) to be distinct, and to be kept in Distinct Persons; as in
Esaias 33, and diverse places. And in All their Gates (or walled Towns) they must
have Judges; more then One; and never less then Three. As they all note, on
That of the Psalm, the Lord sits among the Gods: which must be Three at
least, they say; and rightly; for, their Plural is never less, or Fewer, then
Three. And why then may not This, also note a Trinity of Persons in the
Godhead also: seeing Elohim, is Plural? and as, Their Judges, must be Three,
at least: So their Church Meetings, must be of 10, at least. As they note also,
from the 10 Searchers, called a Church, or Congregation: and many other ways.
Yea, for Officers also, They had usually, Three Elders, and Seven Deacons: in
their Synagogs. And never less than three that I find, There also, to be
Judging Elders. As in all their Gates, Three Judges.

And now seeing we may fix one Foot of our Compass, on the Feast of First
Fruits at Pentecost, in the second of Acts: May it not be possible to stretch
it out to the Certain time of the Feast of Tabernacles also? which must be, in
the Fourth Month, after That. And if it be given in, from the Grace of God,
upon the Prayers of all his people, with the supply of the spirit of Jesus of
Nazareth: Why may it not be spoken also; or written, to some few? when we have
found a Private Character, to express our Thoughts, more speedily, and
secretly, then yet is Common? One of the many, greater things, our God is
doing; and now happly bringing forth also: for as Babylon falls, so will
Babbling also, and stammering tongues. In the mean time, why may I not say,
these few words more? That, whatever Changes, are yet to come, before that
last, and great, and good change, in the last (Seventh) month; or End of the
year: Or Feast of Tabernacles; at the great Harvest, or Vintage also; or In
gathering of All Fruits of the Earth; or Restoring all things; As our Savior
speaks: There are but Three New Moons; between the Pentecost, and Month of That
Great Feast, which we now speak of. And one of the Three, was very probably, in
That Great Change of Jerusalem, and its Polity, by the Romans. With Baalam,
Cittim: But he shall perish My Ever, or to Ten (Adi, 12 times 7:) And Jacob
shall destroy the Relics of the City: and in Daniel, Tsiim Cittim. And the
King shall Act his Will, by his own Reason (His common phrase, 8. 3. 11. 4. 16.
36.) and the very name of Rome, or Romans, may be hinted in the next word,
ending in Romem, or Romam. He shall not regard the desire of Women (to be
compared with the Doctrine of Demons, 1 Timothy 4.) nor Any God: but shall Exalt
himself above All (that is called God, or Worshipped, 2 These. 2.) But for God,
he shall honor Mauzzim: (5 times in this chap. for a Fort, a Maze, Mews, or
Muse:) a strange God. And the worst kind of Strangers. For, they were bid to
love a stranger (Ger, and Hager) as Themselves or Angels: But Avoda zara,
strange Service, is still forbidden, Cursed. And yet, This Here, is worse:
Being (...). As alluding to That Great and Fundamental Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Thou
May not set a Stranger (It is (...)) to Rule over thee: which is not thy
Brother. Of which we spoke so much before. And he shall prosper, till the Wrath
appointed (it is (...), and in Numerals 677) be finished. For, That which is
appointed, shall be Done. And, at the Time of the End; The King of the North
shall come against him, like a whirlwind; with Chariots, and Horsemen, and with
many Ships: and (as Jordan) shall Overflow. For, He shall plant the Tabernacles
of his Wrath, or Face, of Judgment, Between the Seas (and (...) do make 665.)
In the Mount of Goodly Holiness. A Phrase, no where else (I think) in all the
Bible. Were not Tsebi, used in This Prophet, and This Chapter also, for the
Pleasant Land (very probably of Israel;) I could suppose it here an Irony. For,
it may be rendered, Swelling or Goatish, as well as Goodly, Holiness. But if it
be of the Turk; As the Seas, give us the site of Constantinople (or New Rome,
with its 7 Hills also;) This Mountain of Goodly Holiness, may be That Famous
Hill Athos: (not far from the Great Port:) which in all Ages, was called The
Holy Mountain: As at this Day, Monte Santo. Yea, and some write, of so much
primitive simple True Honesty amongst the Kalloiries ((...)) of That very
Mountain yet, as may be worth more looking after.

But He, also, shall come to his End: and None shall help him. But This Casts
Him also, into the Arms, of God, and Christ. For, All Kings shall Worship Him,
and All Nations shall serve him. For, (This For, may change the World:) He
shall Deliver the Needy Crying (or from Crying) the Poor also, and Him that
has No Helper. The very Phrase Here in Daniel, and 2 King. 14. 26. from Deuteronomy.
32. 36. For The Mountains shall bring Peace, and the little Hills; with
Righteousness. They shall fear thee, with the Sun, (which is the Arms or God of
the Persian ((...)) who of old also Worshipped the Sun:) and before the Moon
(the Banner, and the Emblem of the Turk:) That Age of Ages, Dor Dorim (it minds
me of the old famous Doors and Dorians, Peopling All, or Many, of Those
Countries.) The Righteous shall flourish, in His Days, and abundance of Peace,
until there be No more Moon: Or any such Changings. The Kings of Tarshish (or
the Sea) and the Eyelands (Eijim and Tsijim; or the doleful Creatures, in Esaias
13.) All the Kings of Seba (in Arabia) and the Queens of Sheba (Meroe,) shall
cringe to him ((...)) with Evening Sacrifice. For, That, they especially called
Minha; the Phrase here used: which may lead us to the Evening of the World. As
God (and Angels) much appeared, through all the Bible, in the Cool of the Day;
or Evening Sacrifice; both in Old and New Testament: the ninth hour, or Time of
Prayer, or of Finding; as the Hebrew Morning, has its Name from Seeking,
(...). Once he came, at the Morning Sacrifice; to the three Kings against Moab,
the Fathers Waters: and he brought Waters; but they seemed Blood. Which yet
might represent His coming, both by Water, and by Blood: This might be for Red,
bloody Edom (who was at These Bloody Waters; and in Esaias 63:) As the Waters,
for Moab. For, so, the Psalm, we now cite, speaks. He shall come down as
Rain, upon the mowen Grass (and though it be cut down, it shall return again
and flourish, through the sent of Waters, as Job speaks:) and as the milions
of innumerable drops; as the Millions of Ephraim, (Dust, or Ashes with Water,)
flourishing by Water. As Hoseah may allude, to Joseph's fruitful Boughs, in his
Fathers Blessings, with his Right Hand: giving length of days; as his left
hand also, Riches and Honor. So good it is, to be at His Hand. For, they be
blessed, that may stand in his presence, and may see his wisdom; though, but
for One day; It will be better then 1000 years, in any other place: Or may come
behind him, weeping; as Paltiel after Mical, till Abner said, return again.
Which is an History, that will make us all weep, for joy, it is possible when we
shall understand it.

At the same time Michael shall stand up, that Great Prince, for the Children
of thy people. It may lead us to the sweet place, we spoke of, in Levit. 19.
Thou shall not avenge thy self; or reserve, thine anger, against the Children
of thy People: but thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Which he is
coming to fulfill, in the Time, here specified, in Daniel.

At the same time, which before is called the Time of the End: and in the verse
before, he shall come to his End. And five times, this Chapter speaks of End,
and the End. In Heb. Kets or Kats, (and Katsa is Half, Dimidium Plus Toto:) the
whole of any thing, or its Perfection. Being also, as we noted in Tom Perfect,
in numbers just 1000. Unto which also 666, is that sweet Chord in Music, which
they call a Fifth; next to a Diapason: 2 thirds, as near as may be, in whole
numbers.

The Hebrew word may also speak waking (as hinting a Resurrection;) and Summer:
which was the End of their year, beginning with Winter: as before, All time
began with Night, before Day. And that their Year ended at, or about, the great
Feast of Tabernables, is clear enough from many Scriptures. And that also
beside Exodus 23. 16. or Deuteronomy. 31. 10. And the very word Harvest, (which they
call Katsyr) may be Kats Year, or Years End. Or if you will (...) the End of
the Flood, or of Jaar. Which was not only a Month with them, and especial time
of Noah's Flood; But also, Flood in general: and often used for a River. So that
Jordan it self is but Jeor Dan, the River of Dan: a City, near its Fountain.
And Abraham pursued the Four Monarchs to Dan, and brought back the Captivity of
Sodom, from Dan, which is also Judgment: and may hint that Great Judgment at
the Katsyr, Harvest, or the End of Year, or of Jaar, that is a Month, or Year,
or Flood also. For it may be added, that the Floods were dried up, and the Rain
of Heaven restrained, at their Harvest. As we may find hinted in diverse places,
besides 1 Samuel 12. 17. and 2. 21. 10.

But there may yet be somewhat more in it. For, As the Spirit is moving, or
Hatching, (it being a participle Present in the Hebrew; noting a continued Act)
upon the Waters, of the first Creation: So it is also, still Dividing Them
below, from Them Above, the Firmament: which is also called by a Name of
Waters (...). Where, are Waters. And our Time, is Dropping of Waters, from
the Top of the Weatherglass (or Clepsydra) to the Bottom. And when All is Run
out, the Hour Glass is Turned; and a New Hour, or Day, or Month, or Year, or
Age begins: which you may call a New Generation; or if you will, a New World.

We glanced at This before, when Elijah parted the Waters of Jordane; As before
also, the same Waters were parted (and from Adam also:) As we read in Josuah,
3. 16. Where we are told that Jordan fills all its Banks in Harvest Time (as
alluding to That we spoke before:) And that the Waters ((...) in Numbers 665)
Coming down from above, Rose up in a great Heap, or Bottle; (or such a Motion,
as the English call a Nod, (...):) which came Far also From Adam (as some read,
from the Jews marginal Keri) But in the Text, it is In Adam, the VVatcher
(though some read it the City:) being the same word used by Daniel, in his
Discourse of 7 Times, On Nebuchadnezzar: driven out, or poured out, by the
Watcher. And again, the VVatchers in the same Daniel. Of which yet, we may
speak again. As we hinted before also, How the Watchers stood at the quarters
of Heaven, or Corners of the Earth, as it were to Turn the Glass, still, when
it is Run. As also, the great Waters Ebbing and Flowing, six Hours apiece (in
the Great Ocean) and Then Turned again, at the Seventh: which speaks Both
Rest, and Turning. Which is also noted in Joshua. First, the Waters stood
('it is said) and Then, they Rose, or were Turned up, by the Watcher. And Those
Running down to the Sea of the Plain, or the Evening (another pretty allusion)
were cut off, or Curted (which is Hebrew) and Perfected: so that All the People
((...) in numerals 670) passed over before, or over against Jericho. Which as
We touched before, signifies his Moon. As if it meant to teach us, How all
Changings, and Numbrings, are between the Earth, and the Moon; which as English
Money, is from Numbering and Changing, as Man also: the Great Changer, and the
Money Changer also. But take heed, he be not whipped out of the Temple, by our
Savior; Though by a scourge of small Cords.

So that the Moon and the Earth, are but the Two Round Glasses of the
Klepsydra: the Weather Glass, or Hour Glass. And as One Fills, the other
Empties. Whence the Tide is Highest, Fullest, Just as the Moon comes to the
Zenith, or Highest Point of Heaven, over such or such a Place, And As she goes
down again, the Earth goes up, and drops its Tide back again. And why our Seas
and Brains, and Reins (or Rains) are fullest, just at Emptiest Moon, we call it
Full; will be no great wonder. Except happily we should imagine the Sun and the
Earth are indeed the Two Globes of the Hour Glass or Clepsydra; and the Moon
the little Rundle, or the Firmament between them. Which seems more proper much
to the Earth, between Sun and Moon. And yet some, with great appearance of
Reason, make the Sun it self the Center of All the Planets: And the Moon
whirling about the Earth. Which we may touch again. And to This, of Moon, and
Waters (Above the Firmament) Dropping Through; to make All Time; I might add
the English Name of Shower, as if it were So Hour, or See Hour: But This also,
is Hebrew.

For, with them (...) are Shoures, and Watches, or VVatchers also. And their
(...) a VVatcher, a Porter, and a Gate, is but (...) which watches, or Gards:
as the sound also.

Though I may add, that the Watches, were more usually spoken of Nights (as in
the 90. Psalm, and elsewhere) As Hours, of Day. Which is Ha our, (...) Light:
And Thence Hour. As also (...): to show, and See. And so (...) may be He, that
shows the VVatch: (...).

And by This time, we need not wonder, that in Hebrew, Jom should be Day, and
Jam Sea, (which is Now, also, in Latin: As Olim Then, both to Come, and Past
also, Like the Hebrew Olam:) Jamim Days, and Jammim Seas: And All these but
(...) Waters. Only, in the gathering of Waters, which God called Jam, or
Jammim, Seas, there is a repeating, or adding, or multiplying M; the proper
Letter, sound and Character, of Humming Waters: and multitudes of Peoples also;
who are but Waters added together. Or Many Waters. As the Beast, rising in Many
Waters, or Multitudes of People, which is (...) Am, and Ammon in Hebrew: and
Ammi, my People; as Jam, a Sea. But in English, I am is a word of Being: and
very Rightly too; For we are All, but Water: Nay a Drop of Water. And All
Nations, are but a little Drop of the Bucket, or Well, whence they are Drawn
or Dropped. As Moab my Fathers Water. And to Create, in Heb is but to Bear, or
make Bare; a little change of Beer: a Fountain, or Well: still Bearing out. As
we see in Beer Lahairoi, and in Beershebang (the Well of Seven too, as well
as, of the Oath.) And so, Bar, a Son: and also to Bar out. And the Saxon
English Bearns, are Children; or Free Persons (or Barons:) As our Savior also
alludeth; in That of Tribute by strangers, and not of Children, or Sons; or
Barin, in his Language: that is, Barons, or Free born Bearns. As in another
place, he calls them Children of the Kingdom: that is Free Barons of Heaven,
or the Church.

I might add, that Bourn, is a River also, or Brook. Which is but (...) in
Hebrew: Or (...). From (...), or from (...), which is Jaar, a month, and Year,
and River also. For our Time, is Drops of Water Flowing. As we see also, in the
English Ye are, or Year; and we are, or were; and Jam (as the Latin Jam) for
present: and He is (or (...)) All are Heb. and Time, is but (...), the Sea, or
Imum: (...).

And all these parts of Time, are akin to Seeing: In Heb (...). Whence, are and
were, and ye are, and Jare, or (...), and (...), and Hour, and Our, and Your.
But Persons, in a Continual flux of Days (Jam) and Years, Ye are: We are and
Were, and Your. But the white sands, running, in the Hour Glass. Or, as God
expresses it, but as the Little Dust in the Balance. Which yet, is an Higher
Pedigree, than we may think. For, the Heavens in Heb are but the least and
lightest Dusts, (that Phrase is Hebrew also, from (...) to Thresh:) or as
Solomon, the Highest part of the Dust of the Earth. Which they call (...) and
(...) (that is Sky, or See High.) From a word to Shake into Dust, or Moats,
(...) or Atoms by Metathesis.

As a Damm, between the two Waters, stood the Earth. More stable and more firm
also, perhaps, than the Firmament it self. For It, that is, the visible
Heavens, must pass away, like a scrowl of Parchment before the fire. And They
must be no more: as Job speaks. When Man awaketh, that is Kaets: as To the
Resurrection; or the End of the world; or as Corn, in Summer; as we spoke
before. But the Earth shall abide, and Endure for Ever. As That, which God
called Erets; I will accept, or be pleased, and delight, in it: and in them,
that shall come out of Heaven, to Reign on the Earth. Even As the Rain, comes
out of Heaven, and Returns not Empty. As the Rivers come from the Sea, and go
thither again. So the Rain ((...)) the Yarn, or Rivers of Heaven, Go and Come.
As in our Bodies also, between our Heb Rin, and Brains, and Reins, and
Yearnings, etc. while our Heart or Earth, is in the Center, or Middle of our
Bodies, as the Lower Sun; which by its Fire, and Heat, and Clickins, makes our
Pulses, Times, and Circulations, through our whole Bodies. Yet, if any will
derive Erets (against that Etimology, we showed in Ezekiel;) from (...) to Run:
It is suitable to Water also; or the Water, Hour Glass. Or from (...) to Powder:
It may suit with That we spoke of (...) the Sky, or Dust of Heaven. As if
Those also must Turn Tables with us; or be Turned under us. When the Dust of
Abraham's Seed (and the Sand or Gravel, of His Sea also;) shall be made the
Stars of Heaven: yea of the Heaven of Heavens.

Thus then, the Earth came (that is (...)) or Rose up, as a Dam, between the
Waters. in Heb Adama. Whence Adam, and our Grand Dame, or Damm (or Parent, in
many languages, from Adam:) formed out of Earth, or Ground (that is go run, and
round, as in grinding: As Erets also, from (...):) but such Earth as was so
dried or baked, and made Red; and called Adama. As English made and Mead it,
into Mud (and Mad is but Dam, (Blood) Turned backward; or Mead: which is both a
Meddow, and Red liquor, from the Honey Comb, suph, akin to soph (or English sop)
and that also to Tohu, (Thou, and Tough, and Dough;) and Bohu, Bough, Bow, or
Bow (which is Heb (...)) to go Down. As we see, in the Suns Bowing (as the
Phrase is in Scripture;) which is read, his going down. And so Bohu Tohu, was
That, which went down lowest, or Bowing, Bo tehom or Bottom, of the yarn or
Waters, became Tough Dough. As bread unbaked. And at length Dried (as God
speaks) was a Damm, between the Waters: a Meadow; and Mead or Red Water. As
in Hebrew also, Dam is blood and Red: as all Waters grow, by standing and
baking in the Sun. As Bread also, in an Oven (or a Tann, as the Jews speak;)
and Mud is so, also, in English: as Mead, or Made, by That also, the Jews call
Debora, the speaker, and the Doer also, which devoureth all, but turns all to
sweetness. And so brings it from its bour or nest, or pit, and bore thereof,
as English speak: who also grace that little Miracle of being, with the very
name of being; calling it Be, and Dor. Of which again it may be, in the
Deboraes we find in Scripture.

This digression, also, will be pardoned I hope, when we shall see Daniel
himself, alluding also to this Flux of Time, or Rivers of Waters, or Drops;
which are yet as little ages: which is Dor, and Dorim. And, as if the English
Door, must be a kin here also, (as we noted of shaar a shore, and Gate of an
House, or Has (...); and (...) Asia, the House or Church of the Lord:) Their
Daleth or Deleth, is a kin to their Deleph, Drop, or Delve; or Dive, or Deep,
and profound, as Delphik Oracles. Whither it be nearer to the Hebrew, and
English Dale, for a Valley, or Brook: as the Heb (...), both to Draw, and lift
up (as also Tall and (...):) Or to Dall, Little, Poor, Broken, in Heb. (as in
English also, Deal, Dole*) we say not: but Hasten to Daniels End, and Rivers of
Pleasure in Eden; which is Time, in Him also. who was like to measure Times and
Seasons (for Judgment also) being the Man of Desires, or Delights, or
Affections also: As he is often called. And yet they did not hurt his
Judgment,; who was Daniel, my Judgment of God, or God my Judgment, or Judging
me.

At the same Time, shall stand up Michael; who is as God: and yet Man. That
great mixed Seed; and yet contrary to Chelaim: as we touched in (...) and
(...). That Great Sir; who is (in a present, and continued Act) still standing
up, or interceding, for the Children of thy People. As the Standers, or Men of
the Station; which were chosen, and sent, by the Tribes, to represent them
daily: when they were to lay on hands, or make confession; or for other
Service. And there was, or shall be, a Sore Yet ((...)) or Time: Such as never
was, since there was a Nation, to That Time. Does it not point, at the
Destruction of Jerusalem? shortly after Christ's Birth, or Resurrection, and
standing up? Seeing in the Prophets God says, he would deal with That People,
in That sore hardness, as he never did, or would, to Any other. And Christ
says in Matthew, Then shall be Great Tribulation, Such as was not, from the
beginning of the World, to That Time; No, Nor Ever shall be. Or, as Mark
expresses it: Such affliction, as was not, from the beginning of the Creation,
which God Created, unto that time; Neither shall be. Which may be Comfort, to
all the World besides: Yea in respect of the Great Judgment also: Seeing Christ
has assured us, it shall not be so Bad, or Sore, as That of Jerusalem. And How
then, can Daniel speak, of a further Time? when he says, There shall be a
Time, of such Trouble, as never was, till That Time? And, Is the Resurrection,
which he speaks of, Such only, as was at, or about, That Time also? When we
read, of some Raised, from the Dead also, about our Saviors Death: who yet is
called the First fruits of them that slept; and the First that Rose from the
Dead.

However, If the Olam, or Everlasting, there spoken of, in Daniel (for Honor or
Dishonor, Droan) Be absolute Eternity, How comes he then to add, some longer
Time to it, when he speaks of the Wise, and Their Ever? To which he adds an
Ad; Or Somewhat, That is Hard to render, but by Ever, and somewhat Added: or as
some, for Ever and Ever. Which is also spoken of the Earth, or other things,
not Eternal, or for an absolute Ever: as we showed before.

But Thou Daniel, stum (or shut) up the words, and seal them, till the Time of
the End, or Kets. As before, Jakitsu, They shall awake from sleep: and Sleep in
Heb, has the same Letters with a Year. (...). in Numerals 355. or in Plural
reg. 360. As Moses may allude in the 90 Psalm. 1000 Years in thy eyes, but As a
Day (cut off, or Circumcised) Yesterday, when passed: and as a Watch by Night.
Thou streamest them, (...); They shall be asleep: in the morning Chatsyr, (as
(...),) in the Evening, as Circumcised. The Days of our Years, in them are 70
Years. We may consider it again.

Many shall flow together, As Waters in a Flood. And Knowledge (that great Dea)
shall multiply; (Even As the Flood; or As Waters fill up the Sea: as we read in
the Prophets:) often compared to Waters; and Gods Teachings to the Rain of
Heaven. As Solomon also, Praying for Rain, cries, And Teach them also, the
Good way they should walk. Or as Esaias, Thou shall be as a Garden watered Every
moment: and a Water-spring, whose waters shall not lie: and God shall Guide
thee continually (which I choose for my Portion: and let all my Friends, say,
Amen.) And in other places, besides That sweet and elegant allusion, Esaias 28.
9. 10. Eth mi jore Dea, veeth mi jabin smua? Gemule mechalab, Attiki
misshadajim. Ki Tsav latsav, Tsav latsav, Kav la kav, Kav la kav, Zeeir some,
Zeeir some. I add not, that the Maschilin (wise men, spoken of, so much, in
Daniel,) are hinted to be such, as think themselves least Masculine, and most
Scallins, that is Fools, (...) and (...). So brutish am I, More than Any Man:
Nor Understanding, As a Man.

And I Daniel, saw Two Other, that is (...). How near is (...) Here to (...)
Years? which a little changed, is but (...), that is Women, and (...) Men. As
if Years, were but Men and Women; or For Them. Yea, and All visible Being,
Centers in Them, and Their Ages. Beings, is Aged Men. So that (...) and (...),
Being and Beings, are but aged Men. In numerals 610. 620. 660. 666. 670. But if
(...) be 600, Then they are 1220. 1230. 1260. And the Two Here in Daniel, seem
to be There, as Two Witnesses, to this great Matter.

One of them on This Lip (or sip (...); and (...) may be spit:) and One on That
Lip, of the River. And he said to the man clothed in Linen (his description
is like the Revelation) from above the Waters (or Days, of the flowing Year,
or (...)) To How long, is the End of these wonders? Mathai Kets afloat? and the
sound of Matthew There, makes me remember our Savior in Matthew, speaking of the
End; and Enduring to the End, that they may be saved. And when the Gospel is
preached, as a VVitness (a Witness!) to All Nations; Then, and not till then,
the End shall come. And presently cites the Prophet Daniel (in the very next
words to that End Coming:) for the Abomination of desolation. And then adds,
Learn a Parable of the Fig Tree: when you see it have Leaves (it should be
considered with the Fig Tree Cursed, because it had but Leaves:) You say,
Summer is near (as alluding to Kets, both End, and Summer:) Even so, when you
see those signs, of the Son of Man's Coming, etc. Know that It (which in Luke,
is the Kingdom of God) is near, even at the very doors. Amen I say, This (or
That) Generation shall not Pass, till All these things are fulfilled. He
brings his Judgment to Light, Every Morning, but the wicked will not see it.
And then adds, that most solemn saying; Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but
my words shall not pass away. And, in the same Matthew, 5. 18. Till Heaven and
Earth pass away, Not a Tittle shall pass away, till All be fulfilled, of the
Law. Not one Jota. Which, the old Jews also tell us, was the least Letter in
their Alphabet. And their very Talmud cites a great complaint against Solomon,
before the Throne of God, for cutting off a Little Jod, out of the Law. Which
should be considered, by those that believe the Samaritan Characters, for the
old Hebrew. In whose Alphabet, there is more Learning and Wisdom, than a
Volume can well express. Which may be Touched in a Discourse of Characters and
Language: If the Prayers of the Lords People, shall help to bring it forth. But
These are the Days of Vengeance, that All things written, may be fulfilled.
And where, are they written plainer, than in Daniel: whom He cites? Adding
also, That Jerusalem must be trodden down, by the Gentiles (as apocalypse 11.)
Till the Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Or the Fullness of the Gentiles,
Romans 11. from Jacob to Joseph: speaking of the Millions of Ephraim (as Moses
also, with Hosea, and others:) concluding, that His Seed, shall be, the Fullness
of the Gentiles. To be compared, with that in Jeremy, with other Prophets, of
Rachels Children, Coming in, and flowing together, in the Latter Days: so
strangely, that she also, (the Barren Woman,) shall not only sing for Joy, but
Admire: and Rapt with wonder, shall cry out, Who has given me, All These
Children? or whence do they come to me? Being yet lost among the Gentiles, Till
Their Fullness comes: and then, Even the very same Night (as out of Egypt,)
they shall come and know, and show their Enemies also; that Abraham, and His
Seed, was and must be, Heir of the World also. And must Rest ((...)) and
possess, where ever the sole of their foot trod: from Lebanon, the Mount of
Frankincense (or Moon) to Kassiah, Mount Cassius: Its Kasing or its Corners.
And from Euphrates, that great River of Eden (which in Daniel is Time, to be
measured in Shin aar, Teeth, and Years, of the Watch, or (...):) even to the
Evening or West Sea. All which Track of Land, was divided by Jordan, the River
of Dan, and Judgment. Making first the upper Waters of Marom: As those in our
Head (where our Judgment also) as in Heaven above. And then the Earth below:
Kinnerath; the Harp, and Heart also, which it is like. And Lastly, the Sea of
Sodam, (their Secrets,) or their Bowels, and the Waters under their Earth
also. Returning (as Waters in the South) till under the Earth also, they may
come again (as our blood and all is circuled) at Phiel, Gods Mouth; and Paniah,
the Lords Face. Where the famous Statue of the Syrophenician, kneeling to
Christ: If, for her Daughter; an Emblem of the Returning of Sodom, and her
Daughters. Of which we read in Ezech. 16. from Genesis 14. And of Melchizedeck
There also, through Grace, one may have more to say; but we hasten now to
Daniels End, and Numbers.

And I heard the Man clothed with Linen (Bad and Baddim, Bed and Bedding:
lieing and lying.) from above the Days, or Waters, of the River: Jear, Year.
And jaraem: May it hint also, jeare Rome? The Years of Rome also? which was
Then, to sack that Holy City, of which the Prophet speaks? And as the Jews
tell us, Egypt, or other Enemies, may be, in Rahab; So I know not why, Rome
also, may not be, in the Hebrew Rum or Rom, or High, and Hight; so much spoken
against, in all the Bible. As Ramim also, in Job, 21. 22. And in David's
Triumph, over All his Enenemies, and Sheol too. Both in the Psalms, and Samuel
also. Saying. From Rome ((...)) he took me: and Drew me (as Moses, so the word
sounds,) from a Rabble of Waters. He delivered me from 77, or 70 times 7,
Enemies ((...)) stronger than I. And again, Thou will save the Poor people (Am
any:) But thine Ein (an Hebrew word,) against the High, Ramim. Thou will Fell,
or shuffle ((...)) them Down. And in our Saviors Swan-like Song, or Pangs, upon
the Cross, Psalm. 22. 21. Deliver my soul from the sword: my Darling, or my only
One, from the Paw of the Dog. Save me from the Mouth of the Lion (Arie:) and
from the Horns of the Ramim: (...). Some read it Unicorns: as if These also,
had many Horns. But why not the Ramim Romans? or if you will, Their Rams also?
that Rammed down Jerusalem. May not They also, be hinted in Arie, or Aries, in
the Verse before? And why not English Ram, as Hebr (...)? Seeing also the
Scriptures allude, to the Medo-Persian Rams, of Elam, ((...) in Esaias: But (...)
in Daniel:) and the Caldean Rams also, Ramming their Walls (...) and (...): in
Many places, besides the 51 of Jeremy. O, I will Ride them down (Oridem) as
Lambs for slaughter, and as Rams with He Goats. Which yet may be Greater
Goodness, then we are aware: As in answer to That Prayer, Jeremy 12. 3.
Prepare, or Separate, or Sanctify, and Make them Holy; As Lambs for Sacrifice.
And God calls, those very Babylonian Rams, or He Goats, His Holy Ones, or
Sanctified; Esaias 13. To be compared, with That of our Savior: Whom the Father
has Sanctified, and sent into the World. And again, For This Cause, I
sanctify my self: That They also may be Holy. But of These again, in Clearing
our Prophet Daniel.

And he Lift up (Both Hands, but First) his Right Hand: which is Jamin; as from
Iam the South Sea. Or rather, Teman the South, is, The (which is Hebrew (...)
and (...)) Jamin, or the Right Hand. Which, as God sat, on the Mercy seat, in
the Holy place, was Southward: And his Face Eastward. Whence, as Bowing to his
Face, They Bowed Westward, always, in their Comings to the Temple, and their
solemn Worship. As Christ also (it is said) Bowed Westward, on the Cross: which
indeed, was on the West Side of the City: As looking to the western Gentiles;
which have since found the fruit of his Looks, and gracious Bows, and Tears
also. But it is not so clear, How his Face was placed on the Cross: which yet
we may Touch again. However, It is certain, in Ezechiel, God complains of
some Elders, Bowing to the East: with their Backs to him. And so putting, To
his Nose, That, I may hardly Name: though plainer in the Text, then as some
read it, the Branch (or somewhat of that word, or near it,) to Their Nose or
Mine. And so they are Bowing to Shames, (...), in Number 670. But Hezechia turned
to the Wall: Others, to the East.

But the Right Hand, Iamin, will number, and prefer: from the Hebrew Mana, to
Number, Divide, and Prefer also. As we find plainly in This very Prophet,
Daniel 1. 10. 11. of a Prince Preferred. And again, in Mean, Mean, Tekel. of
which we may speak again.

And Thus we see, Right Hand persons, still preferred, and so Blessed, more
than Others at the Left. As Solomon did place his Mother Bathsheba (the
Daughter of Seven, and of the Oath also) at his Right Hand. And Jesus, made a
Prince, and set, at his Fathers Right Hand. and yet, but as the Nasi, with Ab
din, the Father of judgment, in the Sanedrin. Where, Sitting at the Right
Hand, of the Throne, or Chief Speakers Chair, did not speak him above the
Speaker, or President; but only Next him: and above the Rest; who sat about,
in an Ovall form. As All things come from a kind of Egg. Even Man himself from
Eggs: in Hebrew (...) Bestim (Bestes, Bullocks,) to be added to That before of
The Beast, and 666, or 700, so near the number of (...) also. And That Ovall
sitting of the Sanedrin, with Their Scribes, or Watchers also, and officers in
the Middle (as the 4 Orders, of Priests and Levites within the Camp of Israel)
May be compared with the Throne, described in the Revelation: with its Elders
Round about; and the 4 Officers, in the Midst also. As before, we found the 4
Watches, and Watchers also, among the 12 and 24 Hours of Day and Night, (As we
have 4 High Teeth, between the other 24, in both Jaws, or Hemispheres of That
Heaven also, with their Shenim, Shining, and Shinnim also, in Hebrew.) And from
Those 4 Watchers, (from having Light with them, called (...), who, or where, is
Light:) the 4 quarters or corners are called spirits: in Hebrew (...), and
Winds* a Spirit being (...) Tender, (...) Most extended Matter, or Water in
Heb. Matter. Mother of All. And to That Form also of their Sanedrin, with the
Father of judgment (their usual expression;) Christ himself may allude: in
His Description of the Last, or Great Judgment. with His Right Hand (Jamin)
dividing, and Preferring also; As we touched before in Benjamin, the son of the
Right Hand; Who was also of Rachel, a Sheep in Hebrew; preferred before Leah
(Laeva, the Left Hand:) and also, before All the Goats: or Seirs, of Esau, the
Grandsire, or Goat, of All other Goats, of which again, anon.

And This Right Hand blessing, or Preferring, before the Left hand, was
observed much, by all the Jews, in their Coming into the Temple Court: which
was called Aezra: Help. a Present Help in Time of Need. There could be No case
they say, That might not be Helped There. Yea and That also, to Them that must
stand afar off (as our Savior often alludeth to Their Custom) and but Look over
the Rails of Hell, or (...), that kept them off. Nay, there were others could
not come to Touch that Helper: but Behind it, weeping, as the Sinful Woman,
came to our Savior. And in Mourning, They used to go on the Left side, of the
walks, in Those Courts: and Then, the Priests and People also, did not ask the
Matter, Why they Mourned, (which might often be very secret;) but as Eli to
Hanna, when he knew She Mourned (without asking why,) Lifted up Hands and Eyes,
Crying, He that Dwells Here, Give thee Peace; or send thee Help, according to
thy Need. An Expression, we found in the Law, before, of Lending, or Giving, to
a Poor man, in Want, according to his Need, How Great soever. He Fills the
Hungry: and will Satiate, Every empty soul.

Nay, in some kind of Cutting off, or Excommunication, you might see the
Mourners go softly, (as Ahab did,) on the Left hand, of the Court: and Then the
Other Blesing, Thus: He that dwells Here, Reconcile thee, and Thy Church, or
VVitness-meetings also. To which, That may allude, How God is in Christ,
Reconciling the World to himself, As He is reconciled. Their usual Capher (or
Cover, and Coffer, as before) whence it may be, the old Saxon English Capher
when they met in VValking: Though some sound it Gapher, or Gaffer. As the Jews
also called the Elders, who admitted, or Ordained, Fellows, in their Colleges,
or other Meetings, by the Name of Chaver, (...). which is also found in
Chavron, or Chebron: That famous Fellowship: of which we may speak more anon.
And of Laying Hands, for Ordination.

Yea, and though the Common people, might not come near the Holy place, on pain
of death; yet in Case, of extraordinary Danger, That-seemeth Dispensed with, in
Those that ran to the horns of the Altar, (as we are taught also, in the
Epistle to the Hebrews) As Joab and others did. And in such a case, they were
hardly ever stopped; but rather helped; as Those, yet adays, that run away,
for some great guilt. Or Those, that in case of Pure Chance Meadling (and for
no stroke, or stabbing, or any other kind of That, now called Manslaughter:
which I doubt, may lie very heavily, upon some Nations:) might have Refuge, to
the Cities of Refuge; and be There preserved (by the Judges in the Gates) from
the Kinsman, or Avenger of Blood: Till the Death of Him that represented our
great High Priest. And the 3 Cities of Refuge, on the Right side of Jordan,
were Higher than the 3 on the Left. which were also, out of Canaan, the Land of
Rest.

But we saw before, How Jacob Crossed his Hands, in Blessing the Sons of
Joseph; who lift up his Fathers hand, to remove it (but could not; and
afterward, put his Hand upon his Fathers Eyes:) which we may consider again.
With Eglon (the Calf, or Beast,) destroyed by Ehud; a man of Benjamin; or of
the Right Hand; but Turned Left handed: and Sodom also, set at Judahs Right
Hana; when her Captivity is Turned, in Ezekiel: Though she be, There also,
called the Younger sister. As Ephraim, was the Younger Brother, and yet (as
most, or all, younger Children in all the Bible) to be preferred, before the
Elder. And God owneth it also, saying, in the Prophets, Ephraim is my First
Born. And so, the Lost son also (among the Millions of Ephraim, who must make
the Fullness of the Gentiles) must have the Best Robe, and the Fatted Calf, and
be Preferred before his Elder Brother. In a word, the First shall be Last, and
the Last First: and you know not what you ask, when you speak of sitting, at
his Right Hand, or his Left.

Shall I add, that although the Right Hand, was generally Best, with the Jews:
Yet with the Romans (directly contrary, in This also,) the Left hand Thunders,
and other Auguries, were judged Better than at Right Hand. Was it because,
Their Left hand was nearest, or opposite, to Heavens Right Hand, or God, giving
them all their Blessings?

Or shall we say, that After the Temple, God himself seemed to Turn his Face,
Westward (As Christ on the Cross) and so, That was now, at his Right Hand,
which before, at his Left: and That Now, before him, which was formerly, behind
him. It is True, we read That Expression of Gods Turning: But in the 80 Psalm,
and many other places, it speaks His Turning of Us. Yet in a Right sense; As,
we cannot Love Him, till He Love us; so, we cannot Turn To Him, Till he Turn To
Us: or be Turned. As the Phrase is, of the Great Mystery of God in Christ,
Turning himself Toward us; and us to Him, Reconciled to us. Did the ancient
Christians also, that prayed Toward the East, do it, in opposition to the
Jews, still Bowing to the West, as we touched before? Or Believing God, or
Christ on the Cross, was now Turned, quite contrary, to the Posture, He was in,
before? Or supposing Christ (the Mercy Seat of the Divine Presence) to be
still, over the Mount of Olives; where he went up, into Heaven; and There
sits at the Right Hand of God, till All his Enemies are made his Footstool?
But if This were All; That Posture, or Bowing Eastward, becomes None, but
Those only, which are in the Western Corner, of the World. For, They that are
more Eastern than Jerusalem, must, on that account, Turn Westward; and the
Southern Christians Northward; and the Northern, Southward. O, but when shall
we come to believe and know, that Our Blessed Savior is In us (as his great
Prayer and Promise was;) As his Father is, in Him? and yet, when Here on Earth,
he lifted up his Eyes, and Hands, to Heaven; as his Fathers chiefest Residence.
And so, we also; Even Then, when it shall please God to reveal Him in us, As in
Paul: and to make him In us, the Hope, or Evidence of Glory. All the Elders,
bowed to the Lamb: with all their Vials, full of Odours; which are the Prayers
of Saints: as we read in That Blessed Book, which Blesses All that Read and
understand it.

But in our little Body, we have Hot and Cold, Moist and Dry; Muscles, pulling
up and down, drawing in and out: and yet, All Those, All other, contrarieties,
make excellent Harmony. So, in His great Body, the Church, of his First Born,
and the World also; much greater contrarieties (than we can well express) are
reconciled, and accepted also, by Him, who has purposed in himself to
Reconcile All things, Even All things! To Himself: in, and by, and Through, our
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and by the Blood of his Cross. Who is
God, over All, Blessed for Ever, Amen.

And to All, that are called to be Saints; or in Any place (for, it will be in
All places,) call upon Jesus of Nazareth, Their Lord, and Ours; I am bold to
say (because God has said it, and written it also:) Let Him that stands,
Take heed lest he fall. And there is No Temptation, on you, to you, but what is
common to man: But God is Faithful, who will not suffer you, to be Tempted,
above your ability; but with the Temptation, will also make a way to escape,
that you may (not run away, but) be able, to Bear it (However God may bear it
from you, or bear it with you, and upon you.) Wherefore, my Dearly Beloved,
flee from Idolatry. I speak, as to wise men, Judge what I say. And How, comes
in, This Wherefore? unless the Temptations to Idolatry, be of All, the
Greatest, and most dangerous? And of All Idolatries, That of our own Fancy; or
vain Imagination: that is, Image-making of our own Hearts; more dangerous, and
more provoking God to Jealousy, than All other Idols: As we touched before in
the second Command.

But who art Thou O man that judge another, or set at naught Thy Brother?
If in any thing we differ, God shall reveal This also. Yet a little while, and
we must stand before His Throne; who said, This is my Commandment, and yet
again, My New Commandment; that you Love One another: (and Take Heed, you fall
not out by the way:) and by This shall all men know, you are my Disciples; if
you love one another. And it must be also, Even as He has loved us. And by
This, we have boldness and confidence to pray, and hope, and believe he hears
us, and loves us, when we love one another. And to Brotherly kindness, Add
Love. And that your Love abound and increase to One another, and to All men. To
All men! Yea, and Honor All men. And the Time is coming, and already come (he
said) that ye shall worship the Father, neither at This Mountain, nor at
Jerusalem (but in every place) True Worshipers, shall Worship the Father, in
Spirit and in Truth; For the Father Seeks such to worship him: and such he
will Find.

O Thou that Hear Prayer, unto Thee shall All Flesh come: and to Thee, shall
the Vow be performed. Praise waits for Thee O God (who do both possess, and
inherit, All the Praises of Israel:) in silence. For, so the Phrase speaks,
and so the Jews read it. As, The Lord is in his Holy Place, let All Flesh be
Silent: and again, Let All the Earth be Silent before him. Let my Prayer be
directed as Incense; and the Lifting up of my Hands, as the Evening Minha, (of
which again.) And In Thy Name, I will Lift up my Hands. And in His Name, Every
Knee must bow. Which with Christians, was, As Lifting up Hands, with the Jews.
Who, in praying, Stood: and seldom Kneeled, or fell upon their Faces, or much
Bowed; except very Creat and Good, or as they speak, Righteous men. But
generally they Stood, Praying, and Lifting up their Hands. And so, Paul also
bids (though himself Kneeled on the sands: and Christ Kneeled, and fell flat
in his Agony:) I will that men pray, Every where (or in All Places) Lifting up
Pure Hands (as in the Prophets, Pure Incense) or Holy hands, without wrath and
doubting.

Yea and Christ also, lifted up his eyes to Heaven (as he bid us sav, Our
Father in Heaven) though he said, and knew, the Father was in Him. And yet,
when he lifted up his hand to swear, that it might appear, he owned none
greater than himself, he swear by himself, that every knee should bow to Him.
And yet (as the Apostle says) this also must be, to the glory of God the
Father: which is Reason enough, for granting all we can ask. For, (only For,)
Thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory.

Thus in our Prophet Daniel, Lifting up of hands, was a figure of Swearing. And
so, in that of Amalech, (a Branch of Esau, by a Concubine;) because his Hand
against the Lords Kiss, or Throne (or covering of the Moon,) the Lords hand on
his Throne, for War with Amalech, from Age to Age, Middor Dor: 448 (reaching to
David:) And blotting, I will blot out the memorial of Amalech from under
Heaven: Yet, but Under heaven! O how cautious, and how gracious God is, in his
lifting up his heavy hand! David was as keen against Amalech, as any we find;
remembering how Saul was cut off (and that by an Amalekite) for sparing Amalech.
Nor could David rest, till he had cut off Amalech (though we find Relics of
them in Hezekiahs time;) and yet the great end of all this, against Amalech
also, is, That they may seek the Pace of the Lord: and that they may know, that
thou JEHOVAH, art most High over all the earth. As we read, of Amalech also, in
Psalm 83: which may Comment, on all those heavy Prayers, against Edom, and
Moab, and Amalech, and all Gods Enemies also; not to destroy them for Ever, as
some think; putting men in little letters. The Text is plain enough, That They
may seek, and that They may know, etc.

So God lifted up his Hand in the Wilderness, to swear in his Zeal (it is often
cited) what? Not that they should not rest: But If, they enter into My rest!
How cautious! Yet I may add, That as there was a Second Month for such as
could not keep the Mood and Tense of the right Passover (and for such, The Lord
be merciful, though they be not according to the strictnes of the Sanctuary; as
good Hezekiah prayed, and the Lord heard, and accepted, and Healed:) So there
was also a Second Sabbath, and a Third; and yet an Olam, or a New Moon. Yea,
and after all the Changes of That year, there was a Sabbatical year also, and a
Jubilee; when All must rest, and come again into the possessions of their
Fathers. Yea and the very standing still of Joshvahs Sun and moon (and over
Gibeon also,) might intimate a Rest of Heaven; for some that had not kept a
Rest (or Sabbath) on Earth. And if That, were just so many Sabbaths of years
from the Creation, as there were Days in their Solar (or Lunar) year; Or just
so many Jubilies from the Creation, as there be Weeks in a year: it may be some
little Help to fix Chronology; which may be considered again.

And That sum of the Law and Gospel too, the 20th of Ezekiel shows us, How,
and Why, God made the Sabbaths for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath: As Christ
himself glosseth on Those words. Moreover (and above all the Law, and Statutes
also;) I gave them my Sabbaths, to be a sign between me and Them; That they
might know, that I the Lord, am still sanctifying Them. For it is a Participle
Present, noting a continued Act. And again, (in the same Chapter) That you may
know, that I am, the Lord your God. And There also, he often speaks of
Lifting up his Hand, to swear against them; and of That very Oath, of not
bringing them into Canaan; but adds (many times) Neverthelefs my Eye spared
them (and his Heart is better than his Eye) from destroying them: nor did I
make an end of them, etc. Yea, and after All their own and Childrens
Blaspheming of Him (That is the Word,) yet the sum of his Threatenings is, that
He would bring them, into the Wilderness of the People, and There I will (speak
kindly to them, in Hoseah, But Here) Plead with them, as I pleaded with their
Fathers, in the Wilderness. And I will cause you to pass under the Rod, and
bring you into the Bond of the Covenant: or Masoroth thereof. And then follow,
some of the sweetest promises, in all the Bible: for True Gospel Repentance,
and Remission of Sins.

And This, after they had forfeited, that Good Land of Rest; and God took the
Forfeiture, awhile; and drove them out: As Adam, out of Paradise. But Then,
followed Them, with Both Hands lifted up, to Bless them. When he went about to
swear against them, He lifted up but One Hand; and That also was pulled back
again: But to Bless them, he Lifted up Both Hands. As Christ also, in Healing
and Blessing All about him, in several places: to be added to Act. 3. 26. And
the Priests came Out of the Temple, Lifting up Both Hands, and opening their
fingers (as the Holy Windows,) Blessed Those might not come In. To which also,
the Psalmist may allude in That, The Lord Bless thee, Out of Zion; and send
thee Help, Out of his Holy Place. Out of it, though thou be not In it: but As
Jonah said, I am Cut off, yet I will Look toward his Holy Place. As Solomon
also Prayed, for Those that should so look toward it. As we find also, Our
Prophet Daniel, Looking toward it; from a Great Distance. And, That Saying,
Send thee Help, Out, As it plainly intimates, They were not There, but Out, at
Distance: So it may also allude, to the usual name they gave the Temple Court;
from Ezra: Help. As Eben-Ezer. And there was No Case so Bad, They say, But
There, might Help be Had. And so, They called it Help. As a Present Help, in
Time of Need.

There was One thing more, We must observe, in Lifting up of Hands, and That is
Numbering. In the very Name of Right Hand, Jamin: It shall Number, Order, and
Prefer. And as Right Hand Blessings, were the Greatest: So were their
Right Hand Numbers. At her Right Hand, Length of Days: As Riches and Honors
at her Left. Which was called Smol, (as English Small,) in Comparison of the
Right Hand Numbers: or other things. But smell, and smile, and similis, may
come from their (...) or (...). To which, That may allude, when Isaac smiled at
the smell, of his Sons Garments, and Blessed Him. But as English small, may
come from (...), So may the Latin Semel. While they reckoned All small
Numbers, Once, on their Left Hand Fingers, and Joints; As so many Places, for
Unites, Tenths, and Hundreds: Greater Numbers had their places, at the Right
Hand. Whence also they began to Write. As if That also, might allude to the
sound of Right, in English: Coming, as All other motions, from the Right Hand,
to the Left.

But As Christ, Lifted up, Both his Hands, in Blessing his People; especially,
at the Sunsetting, or Evening of the World, (which we may touch again) See
Luke 4. 40. and 13. 13. and 24. 39. 40. 50. So Here, in Daniel, the Man in
Linen, Lifted up, Both his Hands: in Swearing, and Numbering These Numbers.
Yet, when the Time to be Numbered, grew Less, as it was in the Revelation; Then
the Angel, Only Lift up, One of his Hands: to Swear, and Number it.

And Swear, by Him, that Lives for Ever. The Revelation adds (to This of
Daniel,) and Made the Heaven, and Earth, and Seas, or Waters under the Earth:
As all the three Regions, we noted before, in our Bodies also. And the Angel,
preaching the Everlasting Gospel, in the Revelation, puts so great an
Emphasis, on That of Fountains of Waters, also, (besides all the sea:) As if it
were One great Demonstration of an Insinite Power, in the Living God, to create
a Fountain, or Fountains of Living Water. Of which also, to Hagar, at
Beerlahairoi, where Isaak also first met his wife; (although it were Ishmaels
well:) Our Savior discourses sweetly, to the Woman of Samaria. Adding also;
If thou knew the Gift of God, and who it is, that speaks to thee, (and he
speaks, calls, wooeth, weepeth over, Us also) Thou would Ask, and He
would give Thee, a Fountain of Living Waters, ever flowing to Eternal Life: For
so, he says his Waters were. It minds me of the Psalmists saying, Who is
still Turning (for it is a present and continued Act of Turning;) The very
Flint, that great Magazine of Nature, into a Fountain of Waters. He that can do
it, has perhaps Dame Natures Key, to One of her richest Cabinets. And it may
be, I may tell you, it is Doable. He that understands the virtue of This
Vegetive Water, will not wonder the next words should be, Not unto us, Not unto
us, but to Thy Name, be All the Glory. Shall I add also that Jeremy says, Can
All the Gods of the Gentiles give us Rain? Which is Matter in Heb. As the
Mother, to the Works of Nature.

For a Time, Times, and Half. So it is rendered generally. But Moed, (the word
here used) and so also (...), in the Revelation, is Season, rather then Time.
Some certain, fixed, or appointed season: from a word to Fix, or appoint some
solemn Meeting, or the like appointment. And it may be, we can hardly render it
Better, then by the usual Grammar Phrase of Mood and Tense, of Acting all the
great Works of God. Whose Seasons are so reserved in his Own Breast (as Christ
hinteth,) that Man's Labor is Great under the Sun, because he knows not his
Seasons, or the Moeds, for All Actions: As we read in Salomons discourse of
Time and Seasons; yet much more to be considered.

For some little Essay toward This, Through the supply of the Spirit of Jesus,
upon the Hearts and Prayers of His Children and Servants; (For who is
sufficient for it?) Let us remember what was said, of Fullness and Rest, and
Turn, or Sabbath, in the Number Seven. And how Scripture and Nature also,
Teaches us to part all wholes, as much as may be, into Halves; as we touched
before, in Diapasons, and other Chords of Music. And this Three and an Half is
but just Half that Sacred Number of Seven.

The Word rendered Half, is fron Chatsa, to cut into parts, more or less. So
that their Chatsa Slosh, is to Cut and Slash into Three parts; as Jacob, and
David, at Mahanaim; Gideon and Abimelech, at Sechem. And the Grecian Kingdom in
Daniel, was cut or broken into Four parts; where yet the same Verb, is used;
But the Nown commonly speaks Half, from Halaph to change: as if their great
changes were by Halving things. So, The Heavens are Halved, but Thou changest
not. Where also the Psalmist says, O take me not away, in the midst of my
days; Or Half thereof: as it says, The wicked do not, fill up, Half their
Days. And in many other Scriptures, we read of Half, in the very same word,
here used in Daniel, for Half a Time; or Half a Mood.

That there be, but 7 whole Notes, in a Diapason, though it be called an Eight;
(yet, as the Last Head, in the Revelation, such an Eight, as is One of the
Seven also;) is observed by all; who make their different Cliffs, or Keys, or
Moods, or Scales, in Music, by their different placing That Half Note (which
they still find in every four Notes,) and call a Fa Flat, or Falling, to a
sharp, or Full. Till we have some other opportunity, to discuss the Reason of
This, in Nature; we may remember, what was touched before, of the Number Four:
which is the first of all square Numbers, and so the Measure of all the Rest:
which are All made, and resolved, by 4 (as Cubes by 8;) which has a Name in
Hebrew, akin to squaring. This may be some reason, why Nature has placed a
Pauze before it: Or between the sacred Number of Three (which are All simple
Numbers,) and Four, the First compound or square Number.

Thus also, in the very First Numbers, (we have yet found in Nature;) the 12
Hours of Night, are So parted into 4 Threes, or Watches. The whole, being first
Halved (as we spoke before, in our Discourse of 6 and 7:) which makes That,
the Scripture often oalleth Midnight: of which First, at the Last great Plague
of Egypt at Midnight: to be compared with That in Job, 34. 20. After he had
said: If he draw in, his breath; All flesh expireth: which we touched before.

And again, Each Half, was Halved, into Watches, which began at Night, as the
Laments tell us, and theGospel has the 4th. Watch of the Night (whatever the
Jews speak of 3:) So that after, Every 3 Hours, came the Watch; or Chatsa: with
such a signal pauze, and difference, as Chimes, or Changes; now in some places,
between the Watches: Which seem Then, of 3 Hours apiece; As each of the 4
sides, of that Great and square City, had also 3 Gates. If we may so again
reflect on the Hebrew Shaars: whence it may be, the English Sh^re, and Shears,
and Shire also.

I add not, that Watches, and Catches also, might come from the Hebrew Chatsa.
Which in This sense, is akin to their Kaets; to Watch or wake, out of sleep:
which is also applied to God himself; the Great Watchman of Israel. And what if
the Watchers, singing Holy, Holy, Holy; at every Watch; might allude to the
Three Hours, in Each of them, as well, as to, the 3 Persons, in the Blessed
Trinity? Though some ancient Copies, square the 3 also; and make it 9 times,
Holy, Holy, Holy, etc.

And seeing, All things, Here below, were but shadows of somewhat above, and
showed also, in the Mount; Why may not That Half Hours Rest, or-silence in
Heaven, of which we read in the Revelation, be As the Sabbath to Half Hours
(There being 7 Halves, in 3 and an Half;) As we found before, a Sabbath (both
in Rest, and Turning) in every 7 Hours, and Days, and Months, and Years also?

Or it may be, the Cardinal Watches, were distinguished by their Songs (as the
Temple Waits, or Trumpets: as David may allude, by, Rising at Midnight, to sing
Praises etc.) As the Others by Rest, or silence. Which we see, clear enough, in
2 of them; at the Morning and Evening Incense: while the People stood without,
Praying in silence (till the Priest came out and blessed them.) As we read in
That of the Baptists Father, stricken Silent also: And in all the Jews, upon
Those places, we touched before, in the Psalms and Prophets; The Lord is in his
Holy Place, Let all the Earth be Silent: and the Lord is Risen, Let All flesh
keep Silence before him. And I charge you, that you awake not my Love, till He
please.

And as Every seventh Day, was Holy, from the first Creation (As we see, by
diverse things, in the Flood, and many Scriptures:) So, was Every seventh Honr,
as we saw before, distinct or Holy (from the Six before it;) bringing in, some
Great change, of Midnight, or Morning, or Noon, or Evening, whence All Time did
first begin. And from That First beginning of Time, there were Three Days and
an half (or 4 Evenings, and Three Mornings,) before the Sun and Moon were seen
in the Firmament. Which, they were not, till the fourth Day of Creation, as we
read in the first of Genesis. So That, for the whole 3 Days and an half
(before That fourth Day) those 2 Witnesses of Heaven, lay Dead, as it were; or,
Asleep, in their Causes; as the Schools use to speak. And at the End, of Those
3 Days, and an Half, there was a voice, saying, Come up hither, and Be you
placed in Heaven; As my 2 Faithful Witnesses: So long as These Heavens, and
This Earth, shall Endure. And when These, are to pass away, and be renewed,
Then also 2 other Witnesses (that correspond to These) shall lie as Dead, or
asleep, 3 days and an half; (As These did, at first;) till a voice, place Them
also in Heaven; Crying, Come up Hither. And Then, shall be, such a spiritual
Earthquake, As at first a Temporal: that made the Rivers break out; and the
Hills rise up, or Valleys sink down: of which we read in the 104 Psalm, and
other Scriptures.

We cannot wonder that Daniels 3 Times and an Half, should bid us look to That,
or Those, set in Heaven, to make Times and Seasons, or Moeds also. And in
Hours; That Number may Express the Duration of an Eclipse. As in the Gospels,
we read of Darkness, from the sixth Hour to the ninth: and Then it passed off,
by Degrees, with diverse Cries; of which again.

And in Days (besides the three First, before the Sun) it may be, the Proper
Time of the Moons Hiding, under the Beams of the Sun; as Hours might be, under
his Body: and so long, the Sun may be Hidden by Eclipse: Or the Moon, rather.
And three Weeks, and an Half, make up the Time of Distance or Absence of Moon
from the Suns Rays. Or her Liberty, till she come under Them again: and so
draw nigh to a Change. And it may be added, that Three Weeks and an half, bring
us quite through 24 days, (as the 24 hours of each day:) to the very morning
of the 25th: which may be considerable, for other things, besides the square
root of 666.

And in Years; Our Daniel speaks of causing the Daily Sacrifice, and Minha,
to Cease in the midst of a Week. Which is generally taken, for three years and
an half, (that is, half a week of years,) in which onr Savior preached
publicly: and Then, by his Own Great offering of Himself, Once made, put an
End, in right, to All other Sacrifice, and Offerings. Though they were in Fact,
continued, till the Temple was also beaten down; about 40 years, after our
Saviors Death. And That very War Endured, just Three Years and an Half.

But three Moeds, and an Half, in Daniel, may speak Months, as well as Hours,
or Days, or Weeks, or Years. Though in All, and Each of them, there may be
some Correspondence; as we touched before. And when the Lights, (an Hebrew word
from (...)) were made at sirst; they were, for Days, and Years, and Moeds;
which are therefore properly, Neither Days, nor Years; but distinct from Both.
And as Days, and Years, in Scripture, are generally ascribed to the Sun; So
are Moeds to the Moon. As, he appointed the Moon for Moeds, and the Sun knows
his Bowing, (...): or his going Down: in that Great Comment, on the whole
Creation, (if rightly translated,) which we Cited but now; the 104. Psalm. And
the very next verse has (...) (as Job, and Solomon,) for Goats: as alluding
also, to the Solemn Goat-offering, at every Olam ((...)) or Hiding of the Moon;
which so made the Moeds.

How also, Man's Seasons, or Moeds, are made by the Moon, in Him, (as in
Heaven;) we may see, by comparing the third and twelfth Chapters of
Ecclesiastes, with other places of Solomon, and David: speaking of his Months,
and Hidden Times, or Allamim, or Allamuth; (As Paul also speaks of our Life
Hidden with Christ in God:) of which we read, in Other places, besides many
verses of the 89 Psalm, as in Hebrew.

And if we should render the Hebrew Moad, or Mognadh by Monach, (as in
Almonack,) we might easily show, their (...), to be made of N. C. As the figure
may hint; and more, the Number. 70 being made of 50 and 20. the number of their
(...) and (...). And where (...) begins a word, or syllable, the English sound
it much, by Cn. Gn, or Kn. But when it ends, by nc, nk, or ng.

And if we consider, Three Months, in General; They are to the Year, as Three
Hours to the Day, or Night: a Watch, or Season, as we call it, of Winter,
Summer, Spring, or Autumn. Which are All it seems, Some how, in every Day also.
As the very words of God, to Noah, may seem to intimate; saying, not only, that
there should be, Such Seasons and Changes, While the Earth endures; but also,
that All Days of the Earth, should be, Those Seasons, or such Seasons. As the
words in Hebrew, may be read: and we find it so, by daily Experience: that
every Day, has its Seasons, and its quarters, As the year also. And the Half
Month, added to the Three, brings us through the second sabbath of Weeks, or 14
Weeks: As before, we found Abraham's Tenants, and Others, in Sodom, freed from
the four Monarchs, or Monarchies, in the 14 year. And our Teeth, in Each Jaw,
are 3 times 4, with 2. Watchers.

But yet more especially; These Three Months, and an half, bring us from the
Pentecost, and Sack of Jerusalem, (That Great New Moon, or Change, beginning
the Month, following That Feast, of Pentecost, as we hinted before;) to the
very Time of that Last, and Great Feast, of Tabernacles. At the fifteenth Day
of the Seventh Month: and so just 3 Months and an half, after the month of
Pentecost; which was followed, by such a visible Change, of their Moon, or
Olam; when the Romans fired their City: and so made That Full Moon. And That
also, much about the middle of September; answering so much to their Seventh
Month, and Feast of Tabernacles. At which Time also, their Release and Liberty,
must begin again; as Thereabout it Ended.

And that their Coming in, again; with the Fullness of the Gentiles also
(promised to Ephraim as we saw before:) was to answer that Full Moon of the
Full Month (that is the Seventh;) and Great Feast of all, the Feast of
Tabernacles; Or In gathering All the Fruits of the Earth; may be clear, not
only from the very Reason, and Nature, of That Feast and Season; but also from
many places of Scripture which do so compare them together.

As the 102 Psalm (made as a Form of Prayer, for Him that is Afflicted, with
his soul overwhelmed, and pouring out his sighing ((...)) before the Lord
Jesus: As we find it cited in the first to the Hebrews.) I am withered as Grass
(cut down for Hay, in Summer: but He shall come down upon the mown Grass, in
Psalm. 72.) But Thou will arise, and have mercy on Zion: For, the Moed is come:
the Time and the Moed also. And Psalm. 75. I will judge Equities, when I receive
(or come to) the Moed. The very same word, used here in Daniel, and in many
Scriptures, for that Great solemnity of Tabernacles; which of all the Three
Moads, was the Moad of Moads, Or the most solemn and Greatest of All. And then
presently the Psalm adds, So, or Then, the heathen shall also fear thy Name,
and All Kings of the earth, thy Glory (as before in the 72 and diverse other
Psalms.) When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his Glory. He
will regard the prayer of the Destitute or Naked, and will not despise it. As
our Saviors Dying Words on the Cross, Ps. 22. 24. This shall be written for
the Generation to come; for he looked down from the height of his sanctuary, to
behold the earth, and hear the sighing of the Prisoners, and to loose the sons
of Death. When the Peoples (in the Plural) are Gathered together (as at that
Feast of Tabernacles) and the Kingdoms also, to serve the Lord.

That which follows, of shortning his Days, ((...)) may allude to Katsyr,
Summer and Harvest, Or the years End; When the Days Shorten: and their
Tradition is, that Adam quickly found the Sun declining, and the Days
Shortning. Which They should consider, that believe Him, and the World,
Created, at the Vernall Equinox.

So the 126 Psalm, In the Lords Turning the Captivity of Zion, we are, or were,
like Dreamers: Turn again our Captivity O Lord, as the streams in the South:
(we touched it before:) They that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy; He that went
Weeping, and bearing precious Seed, shall come with singing, bringing his
sheaves. Which is plainly of Harvest, and the Joy of Harvest: which we find
also, in the Prophet Esaias, coupled with breaking his yoke, and staff of his
shoulder, and Rod of his Oppressor, As in the day of Midian: so famous for the
Barley Cake of Gideon, (as alluding to the First Fruits) and the Lamps in
Earthen Pitchers: of which also Saint Paul to the Corinthians. And it ended at
Succoth, (or Tabernacles:) which were Taught, by Gideon.

Yet Plainer, in Hoseah, There is an Harvest set for thee, O Judah, when I
bring back the Captivity of my People. And again, I the Lord thy God from
Egypt, will yet make thee to dwell in Tabernacles; As in the Solemn Feast, or
Moed: of which also before, What will you do, in the Solemn Day of Moed? Or
That Solemn Feast, which is also the Solemn Day, or Solemn Feast, in Deuteronomy. 16,
15. 31. 10. Ps. 81. 3. Lament. 2. 7. with diverse other places. And in Zephany,
I will gather them that Moan, (it is Heb) The Solemn Moed: And at That Time, I
will get them Fame and Praise, in Every Land, where they have been shamed; and
at That Time, I will bring and gather you, and I will make you a Name and a
Praise, among all people of the Earth, when I turn back your Captivity, before
your Eyes says the Lord.

And the Last of Zechary, tells us, that All nations that fought against
Jerusalem, shall go up to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to keep the
Feast of Tabernacles. And again, the punishment of Egypt, and All Nations that
come not up, to keep the Feast of Tabernacles. And in that Day, On the Bells of
the Horses, shall be Holiness to the Lord; yea every Pot in Jerusalrm, and
Jndah, shall be Holiness to the Lord of Hosts, and there shall be no more
Cananite in the House of the Lord of Hosts. The Heb Canange may be Saxon
Change, Cunning, or Koning.

And in That Day there shall be One Lord, and his Name One: and the Lord shall
be King over all the Earth: and in That Day, Living Waters shall go out from
Jerusalem; and Half of them to the Dead Sea, or that of Sodom also: plain
enough, in the Text, and Ezechiel, both the 16. and 47. and in Joel also; Even
of that Great Day of Judgment in the Valley of Iehosaphat, (which yet was the
valley of Blessing, or Beraca:) Crying, Put you in, the sickle, for the Harvest
is Ripe. Yea, and the Vintage also, for the Press is Full. Which we read again
in the Revelation; where it runs out also, by the space of 1600 surlongs, which
we compared before, with Days and Years; to be added perhaps, to the Time of
Saint John's writing, about the 60th. year after the Ascension. And after All,
he Sees, the pure River of Life, with Trees, bearing Fruit every Month: whose
very leaves, were to Heal the Nations. And there shall be, no more Curse, (of
which before in Jericho:) And whosocver will, let him take the Water of Life
Freely. Which being compared with our Saviors words in the 7th of John lead us
plainly to the Feast of Tabernacles; and its Evening Songs, and joy for Drawing
of Water, as the Jews express it in their Talmud. Adding also, That He that
never saw That Drawing of Water, never saw Joy, in all his Life: for, more
could hardly be, expressed on earth, then was expressed There. And themselves
confess, it was to show the Pouring out of the Spirit, on All flesh, in the
Latter Days (which we saw beginning at Pentecost:) As the first Drops of the
Former Rain, was followed, by the great showrs of the Latter Rain. After That
Feast: to prepare the Earth for the Wheat, Then to be sown; As Barley, in the
Spring.

Yea the Prophet Zechary tells us, that the very Fast of the 7th Month, (How
solemn and How strictly commanded!) should be Turned into Joy and Gladness;
and Solemn Feasting. And Then, Many peoples (plural) and Inhabiters of many
Cities; Yea the Rabble (as the word sounds) shall Go and say, Come, and let
us Go, speedily, to seek the faee of God, the Lord of Hosts, (and the Lambs
Bride, and the Spirit also, will say) I will Go also. Yea Many People, and
strong Nations, shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts, in Jerusalem. Yea and
Damascus it self, shall become his quiet Rest (his Menu has) when the Eyn of
Men (or Mankind) shall be to the Lord; as All the Tribes of Israel. And He that
remains shall be for our God, Yea as a Governor in Judah.

And then, are Both Comings of Christ described (as before in the second
Chapter) First, on an Ass, the Foal of an Ass; of which before, on the Fourth
Command and other places of the Law. And then, he shall speak peace to the
Heathen, and have Dominion srom the River to the Ends of the Earth. (And to
Them afar off, in the Sea: Which we touched before, in America: And yet
Farther.) And, As sor Thee also, by the Blood of thy Covenant, I have sent
forth thy Prisoners, out of the Pit, where there is no Water! Turn ye! to the
strong hold, O Prisoners of Hope! even to day, do I declare, that I will render
Double to Thee!

And then, follows the Conquest of Turk, or Greece, etc. And Then, the
Lightning from the East (So shall his coming be) we must touch it again, in our
Discourse of Barak, the word here used. And Then the Feast of Trumpets, in the
Seventh Month: and so of the Year of Release; at the solemnity of Tabernacles:
As Moses expresses it. And the Jews bring it as High as Isaacs Release, for
the Ram: and Thence, they blow with Rams Horns (the Jobelin) alluding also to
the Turnings, and overturning of Jericho; that is, His Moon; before the Sun of
Josuah.

Then follow the Songs, and other solemn shoutings, of That Feast of
Tabernacles: of which also, Lament. 2. 7. and it may be, Psalm 74. 3, 4. Where,
Perpetual Desolations, shall be Ended. And the Chapter concludes, How Great is
his Goodness, How Great his Beauty! Corn shall make the young men speak or
sinq: and New Wine the Maids. A sure Character of That Feast, at the Great
Vintage: of which also before, in that chapter, and the next, and 12th also.
And in That day, I will make the Governors of Judah, like a Torch in a sheaf
(another Character of Harvest:) And the Lord shall save the Tabernacles of
Judah first (another Character,) that David, or Jerusalem, do not glory, or
exalt themselves against Judah. And I will pour, on the House of David, and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication; and they shall
look upon me (It is Jesus, who speaks This, and All,) whom they have Pierced.
Of which also St John, in his Gospel, and yet again (how often!) in the
Revelation. And we may touch Megiddon again, in our Paralels of Kings and
Judges. And in that day, there shall be a Fountain opened for Uncleanness. And
I will (...) off the Names of Idols. And then again, of Both Comings of the
Man, that is Gods Fellow. And of that Great Feast of Tabernacles: which himself
also cited, or remembered, on the Last and Great day of That Feast, as we spoke
before. And again, in Hosea, Great shall be the day of Jesreel; it signifies
the Seed of God. But I will first take away her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, in the
Moads or Seasons thereof; and will cause her Mirth to cease, her Sabbaths,
Moons, and solemn Moads. But I will allure her, into the Wilderness, and There
I will speak comfortably to her. And I will give her Vineyards, and the Valley
of Achor, for a Door of Hope (How Gracious!) and she shall sing There, as in
the Days of her youth, when she came out of Egypt and dwelt in Tabernacles, as
we read in That Prophet also. And in That Day thou shall call me Ishi (my Man
and Husband) and shall call me no more, Baali (my Lord or Master:) for I will
take away the Name of Baalim, or Lords, out of her mouth; and they shall be, No
more remembered, by Their Name. And I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear
the Earth; and This, the Corn, and Wine, and Oil; and All shall hear Jesreel.
But the children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a
Prince, and without a Sacrifice. But afterward, they shall return, and seek
their Lord and their God, and David their King; and shall fear the Lord and his
Goodness, in the latter days; or End of the Year.

And as, That greatest Feast of Tabernacles, was at the End of the year: so was
their Greatest Meal, at the End of the Day. Whence we read of the Lambs Supper,
and the Lords Supper, rather than Dinner; which with Them, was slight and
little, or nothing else but a Break fast. As the Ravens brought the Prophet,
Flesh at the Morning, and Flesh at the Evening. Yea and God also, had a Lamb at
the Morning, and another at Evening. And Blessed is the Land, whose Princes are
Noble: Offering Tamid before Break fast, and Minha before Supper. As the old
Targum, and other Jewish Writers on That of Solomon. And although there were 12
kinds of Minha; Yet That in Evening and Time thereof alone, was called The
Minha: Being offered at the End, or Evening of the Days. As we read in Abels
Minha, or ^ains, in Genesis 4. being just at the Time of the Evening Incense, the
Ketureth. As Abraham's Evening Marriage (if we may so call it) of Keturah,
brought him More sons, then his Morning Marriage of Sara. Let my Prayer come
like Ketureth; and the lifting up of my Hands, As the Evening Minha. And the
Priests of Baal, cried till Minha: Then, and not till Then, God showed himself
by the Prophet Elijah. Who was Then, As the Evening Star; Though in the
Revelation, compared to the Morning Star, scattering the dark Clouds, and
Nightbirds of Jesabels time; as we saw before, in the Fourth Church.

And Then, Elijah Treads Carmel, (or Cramel) the Vintage of God: (which from
Esaias 63, and other places, may lead us to That in the Revelation, Running out
1600 Furlongs; As before:) and putting his Face between his Knees, which we may
come to understand; After seven Returns of his Servant, A little Cloud arises,
Bigg enough to bring up another Flood: to End That Generation perhaps, As in
Noah's Time. And in Elijahs time we have Two Witnesses bringing Fire from
Heaven, Blood, and Water also, after a drought of three years and an half. To
be compared with That in the Revel: and with Daniels Moed, Moads, and Half.

Generally (through all the Scriptures) As the Morning has its name from
Seeking, (...); So the Evening, is the Time of Finding: And of Sweetning (as
its name imports in Hebrew:) or Composing thoughts and Wrath, which in Heb is
Passing; as at Evening. For, the Sun must not go down upon it: nor any Token of
Curss Hang up, any longer than the Evening. So that God himself, and the
Angels, did generally appear, in the Cool of the Day, or Evening-Tide; the
Evening Sacrifice: The Time of Prayer, in the Acts; but the Time of the Angel
to Cornelius, Daniel, with others.

And it may be, That Evening season, may be called Moed also. As to Pharaoh; To
morrow, At Moed, I will do it. And David's Pestilence did reign, from Morning
till Moed. And if Moed here, be the Time Appointed (which was Three full
days;) what need of fear, of any longer punishment? Or why was the Angels
Sword still Naked? till a Command to sheath it upon David's Sacrifice, at Moed;
or the Evening Minha? the Days Moed.

So in Gods proclaiming his Moads: with Sabbath, (which yet is often
distinguished from the Moads:) comes the Daily Tamid and Minha. Like the Two
Witnesses in the Temple; As the two Altars also; Like That at Jerusalem, and
That also, below Jordan (as in the lowest Court, by the Molten Sea;) which is
also called Ed, a Witness. As our Eyes in our Head, and the Eyes of Heaven
also; the Sun and Moon, of which we must speak again.

The first Command I have yet observed, for any such Ceremonial; was for their
Evening Lights, or Incense: As Time also began with Evening before Morning. And
so English also reckon by Nights (as the Jews) rather than Mornings: a
Sevennight, and a Fortnight. There is scarce any other thing commanded, but
only spoken: And the Lord said to Moses, Say This, and Say That. But for the
Evening Lights, or Incense, or Minha, They are commanded. And So also, for
giving Cities to the Levites: and Putting out Men (and Women also) that were
Unclean, by the Dead, Issues, and Leprosy.

Such a Command or Appointment, in Hebr is called Moed; for Place, or Time, or
Meeting.

The Grave, is called Beth Moed. And Job complains, as if God were cruel, in
not hearing Cries, or Cryers, from Sheol, or Moed, to All Living. As our
Savior also: For, to Him They All Live, though they be Dead.

The Tabernacle, almost ever, called, The Hall of Moed. Most of all, for that
Great Moed, of All the Moeds: which were Three in the Year. The Passover, at
the Moed of Evening also (which is Ereb, as Eber; Pass-out, as well as
Passover: For they passed out at Suns-set, as we read in Deuteronomy 16. 1. 6.) And
the Pentecost, at Evening also, to the Jews; But in the Morning, at the Third
Hour, Act. 2. Most especially the Tabernacles: at Evening. That Solemnity of
All Solemnities. The Moed of All Moeds. Yet a Type of That Greater Moed, at the
Evening of the World; when God shall come and dwell with Man in Tabernacles: As
we read in the Revelation. After the six Trumpets, of the six former Monhs
(which still began with Trumpets) were quite past; yea, and the Woes also were
past (for there were three months after Pentecost, that had No Solemn Moed, or
any such Feast to Bless them, but only Fasts; And when Those were Over also:)
Then comes the Seventh Trumpet, of the Full Month, the Seventh. First the Feast
of Trumpets; Then the Great Day of Atonement: when the Jews say, God sits and
judges All that Dye that Year. May it be Hinted by the Seven last Plagues,
before the Seven Great Days of Tabernacles? and then the Trumpet of the
Jubilee: when The Tabernacle of God is with men: as we read in several places.
From Levit. 26. and Ezekiel. 37. And God sball also persuade Japhet to dwell in
Those Tabernacles of Sem: that is, the Name of God himself: as Represent ing
Him, in whom, God placed his Name for ever. And he dwelt among us (and will yet
much more) in Tabernacles: in a Scene or Skeins (as Englisk speak) and Saint
John's Word intimates. And Saint Lukes Phrase, of Shepherds Watching their
Flocks by night, may hint That season of Tabernacles also: when the Angels
sang, Glory to God on High, and Peace on Earth, with Good will to men, or men
of Good will: For, the Angels shall Ascend, and Descend on the Sons of men;
when They also, shall be of Good Will, or a Willing People (as the Chariots of
Aminadab) in the Day of His Power: Or Chell, or Hell, or Hill. For we read
also, of the Hill of Moed, in the sides of the North (of which we may speak
again;) and of other places of Moed also.

And the very Cities of Refuge, are called Meuds also: as being so often
solemnly Appointed; by God, by Moses, by Josuah. For the three Moads and
Chatsa: On That side of Jordan, and on This. They began from Kadesh, and ended
in Kadesh. From Kadesh Barnea (the Holy Bar, or Bound of Wandering;) by
Beersheba, to Hebron, in the Hill of Judah.

Thence to Sechem, in the Hill of Ephraim: and Thence to Kadesh, which
(Kadeshu) They sanctified, in Mount Nepthaly; or Galile of the Gentiles. The
other three, with the other Chatsa, were on lower Ground. It may be considered
again:

As also, That all the six, were out of the 48 Cities, given to the Levites. As
they had 48 Courses, in the Temple, 24 of Porters, and 24 of Singers. As the
Standers also, had 24 Courses; and for Jerusalem 24000 (they say) as for
Jericho 12000. And the Priests also, had 24 Courses, and 24 things, given them
by God; who also received 24 things from them Daily. In their 12 Cakes (as also
the Shewbreads were 12.) broken into 24. 12 at Evening, and 12 at Morning. And
there were 12 kinds of Minha.

But as These, and all other Moads, might be from Appointing; so they may be
called Moeds, from Witnessing, or Witnesses, to all such Appointings: which
were All (as English men express it, very Happily,) Done with a Witness; which
in Hebrew is Ed: as we saw in the Alter Ed, and in Gileed, the Heaps of
Witness; of which again. So that indeed, the Revelation speaking of the
Witnesses, for three Days and Half, (or for any other Three times and Half,)
does plainly allude to Daniels Moeds. That is, the proper Times of the
Witnesses, or Witnessing. For, as Moab i^ from Ab a Father; so Moed, from Ed, a
Witness. And Moadim, the Months, or Moments, of the Witnesses.

Which in Heaven, may be Sun and Moon. But As on Earth, Josuah and Caleb:
Jerusalem and Jericho: Moses and Aaron: Elijah and Elisha: Or many other
things, or persons. Which through diverse Types, or Shadows; in Light and
Darkness, Day and Night, Summer and Winter, Man and Woman (with many other
things, which we hinted before, in the Temple; and the Land of Promise, and the
Body of Man; and the Ark, and Tabernacle of Witness also:) at length, All come,
to be resolved, into the Times of Christ and his Church, or Churches: his Two
Witnesses. The Dove, and the young Pidgeon.

As Adam, had his Lilith (they say) and then his Eve, or Evening, (that is
Lilith, also, Dressed in Night-cloathes:)

And Abraham had his Hagar and Sara, and Ketura: Jacob his Rachel and Leah.
David his Abigail and Ahinoam, carried captive from Ziglag, As Dead, Three
days and an half.

All which may be Types, or shadows of the Church and the World; the Jew and
the Gentile; under such and such Changes of the Moon, as it were, (with
Eclipses also:) or whatever else, God please to show us, in his Baths, (3 Seas;
in Heaven above, the Earth beneath, and waters under the Earth also.) Which yet
may be, but As Newmoon and Full; or Shegell and Sheleg; of which again: with
other forms, and motions, of those Heavenly bodies which are All measured on
Earth, (plainer then perhaps we think) by such and such Moeds; Times of
Witnessing, or Witnesses. Which may be Hours, or Days, or Weeks, or Months,
or Years, or Sabbaths, (in Days, in Years, in Jubilees:) and what else we find
of Time, in Scripture. which is generally, very much measured, by Three and an
half.

As, If we take it for Hours, it may show us how long the Moon, or the Earth,
may be kept from the Light of the Sun: which we call an Eclipse. But a Shadow,
of that Dark Horror, which our Savior, and his Church in him, felt upon the
Cross. (We find it in Heathen Records also: another Help, to fix Chronology.)
And His Eli, Eli, as in Greek, speaks somewhat of the Sun also. For, God is a
Shield, and Sun also. He will give, both Grace and Glory: Blessed are They,
that Trust in Him. Though they go through Baca (Bokim, weeping) and pass from
one Hell, to another, (for, the Phrase is (...), Hill, Hell, or Chel; by which
the Gentiles, and Unclean; were kept from the Temple:) So that, they may not
enter Moriahs Temple: Yet, they shall see God, in Zion. Give ear O God of poor
(flying, trembling, halting) Jacob: Look upon the Face of thy Messiah, in his
Pangs, on the Cross. That Psalm, (as the 15th and 24th) is of This Feast of
Tabernacles. And begins, O! How Amiable! are thy Tabernacles? O! How
Jedidoth! alluding, both to David, and Solomon (Jedidiah!) Keeping This Feast,
in such Glory, as should be touched again: in Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles.

The unclean Sparrow, (are not many, sold for a farthing?) and the Swallow
(Black, but Comely; O ye Daughters of Jerusalem!) the very Swallow, (but in
Summer:) She, may make her Nest; and lay her Young ones; in thy very Altans
(both of Sacrifice, and Incense also:) O thou God, of many feminine Hoasts
(499.) My God, and my King. This leads us to the Harvest also. For, we saw
before, that Our Savior never called himself a King; Till the End of the World;
which he calls Harvest. And the Son of man, shall send His Angels (They are
the Reapers: and till that Time, he calls them Holy Angels; and his Fathers
Angels; Now, his own Angels:) and They shall gather, out of His Kingdom, All
things that offend; and Those, that Do Iniquity. And then, the King, shall say,
to Them, at his Right Hand. A Phrase, often used, in the Psalms. At Thy Right
Hand, the Queen does stand, in Gold of Ophyr. And Look at the Right Hand, and
see (for, so, is the Text) Resuge fails me. And, at Thy Right Hand, are
Pleasures, for Evermore.

And yet, That very Psalm shows, that He was not afraid, of His Worst, or
Left Hand; neither. No more, than she, or They, that begged, to sit, at his
Left Hand also. And so, David is Placed There. Is it, because, He was Father,
to our Savior? (the Branch, and Root of David; and of Jessi, my Essence?) that
he places himself, at the Left Hand? and Christ at His Right Hand? (Mimini,
Bimini, Limini; Even as, Legatus a Latere, is sent a Limine.) And when Satan is
set, at Judas Right Hand, to accuse him (as, at Josuahs Right Hand also, to
Resist him;) with the Heaviest Curses, in the Bible: He concludes; Christ
shall stand, at the Right Hand also; to save the Poor (at His Left Hand) from
Him that would judge, or condemn, his Soul. his precious Soul! Fury is not in
me, But if he will set thorns against me, I will eonsume them: Or let him, lay
hold of my strength, to make peace: And He also, shall make Peace with me. Esaias
27 4, 5. And the next Psalm cries, My Judgment shall come from Thy Face: Thine
Ein, will behold, or consider Equities: (which to Justice, in Scripture, often
is, As The Chancery, to Rigor of Law,) O show the Wonders, of thy tender
Mercies (in the Plural;) O thou, saving those, that Trust (or hope in thy
Mercy,) From, or Before, them that raise themselves, or are raised, at Thy
Right Hand. That which follows, will reach our Times also. It should be
considered (with its Mysteries; A word, There used, for Secrets:) and All the
Scriptures speaking of Jemini (my Right Hand;) both in Saul, and Shimei Cursing
David: and Both again, in Mordecay; from Shimei, Kish, and Jemini. As we read
in Ester; the Mistress, of so many Great Mysteries, written in the Revelation;
and upon the Old Crown, or Myter, yet to be seen (perhaps) in Rome, as at This
day. And as Mister, is a plain Hebrew word, for Hidden, (as Olam,) or a
Mystery: So Mistress Hester also, with their usual Article (as Hadam, That Adam)
and so (...) and (...), makes, beyond dispute, exactly 666. of which again;
when we find The Mysterious Woman, sitting on the Beast (in Hebrew (...) 703)
in the Wilderness, where first the Woman was Hidden (Alma Matter) for a Time and
Times and Half a Time; as in our Prophet Daniel also.

The very next Psalm, of deliverance, from All his Enemies and Saul, or Sheol
also (both Grave and Hell, so often repeated,) cries: The Pangs of Death, and
Kables of Sheol, caught me: But (verse 35) The Shield of Jesus, and Thy Jemine,
shall uphold me: And thy Gentleness shall make me Great. As Psalm. 45. Ride on
prosperously because of Truth and Meekness (or Gentleness) of Righteousness:
And thy Jemine, shall teach thee wonders. For Ever and Aed; Thy Throne O God
(and yet This God, has a Father, and a God;) For, God, Even thy God, has made
thee Messiah, and has given thee His Spirit; Above thy Gaffers (or Teachers,
and Elders; who Ordained thee: As we touched before, in Chaver, and Chebron:)
and has anointed thee, with the Oil of Shushon. I cite it, the rather,
because it is, not only, To the most excellent Majesty (which we read, in this
Psalm, and in Daniel, and several times in Luke, and the Acts:) but a Song of
Jedidoth also; as the 84; and Both, are to the Bald, Cold, Frozen, Cracked, and
Croaking Sons of Korah; (Cursed, and swallowed up into the Pit; and yet His
sons became the Sweet Singers of Israel: as we showed before, in Asaph, Heman,
or Jeduthon, and the Genealogy of Samuel:) And also, upon Sushanim. Which may
Bring us to Shushan; and to the Gate of Shushan also, leading to the Temple:
from the Mystery and History of Hester. And (...), in lowest reckoning, is 700:
But, as the Mazorites, 1260. of which again, in Daniel and the Revelation.

Mor, (Myrrh, and Moriah;) Aaloth, Aloes and Tabernacles: Kassiah, (Mount
Cassius, or the End and Corner, of the Land of Promise:) Kings Daughters, be
Kirotheca, (for either Hand:) But at thy Right Hand, thy Bedded Wife. (...)
333: just half to 666. As the Full Moon is Half to the Change: Or the New Moon,
Half to the Full, which is made in 333. hours. As the whole Course of the Moon,
from the Sun, Thither again, in 666 Hours. Her stay, under the Rays, (on both
sides) May be 3 Days and an half: Under the Sun, or Shadow of the Earth,
(between her, and the Sun,) Three hours and an half: the Duration of that
Eclipse, (which operates, as many Months, or Years, As it was Hours, they say:)
and Her Wandering alone, from the Sun, Three Weeks and an Half. But of Months
and Years, we must speak again; and of All Prophetic Numbers in Scripture; in
a Private Character, If God please to enable. But why, is she called Shegell?
Even as Alma, (whence Olam) she was Hidden, Veiled, yea, and Captive, or Gaoled
also; Rouled, and Tumbled: So is the Moon: so is Israel: and so Shegell. But
Now, She is to Rejoice, with Joy unexpressable, and Glorious; because She
Loves One, She has not yet seen, or can see, being in Light Inaccessible.

All this, is (...) she which, (...) was: Led Captive, Gaoled, Veiled,
Unveiled, and Shorn also; (...) and (...), Glib, Glich, Lick, and Like: (...)
Smile, Simile, Sembled, or Dissembled: (as the English Guile, and Guild, and
Gilded also; and Gul'd, and Gulled:) and (...), Exult and Rejoice, or Glee, and
Glee'd, Glad. And (...), to Roll and be Tumbled, as Gallile of the Gentiles:
and Gilgal, where he rouled away the shame of Israel. Also, the Wheel, or Orb,
or Sphere, of the Sun, or Moon, or Heaven: And the Skull of our Head, (which we
often compared to Heaven;) as we see in Golgotha, the place of a Skull, in our
Saviors Crucifying. And Heaps of Sand, and Waves of the Sea; and Roulings of
our bowels: Which we compared, with the Sea; and the sprouts of the Earth, with
the Thoughts of our Heart. As, we found in the Bible, and Volumes thereof;
which the Jews also call, Gillajon, and Megilla. Especially the Five Volumes,
or Rolls; As they call the Little five pieces, (which they join to the five
Fifths of the Law, Or Pentateuch:) the Canticles, a Comment on This 45th Psalm;
and Ecclesiastes, the Great Turner and Rowler; Ruth also, with Lamentations;
but especially, the Megillath Ester: which I have seen, presented by them, in a
very curious Roll and Dress, as a Great Present. These five Rouls, have All,
the Rowlings, Vailings, and Revealings, or Revellings, and Rejoycings, of the
Church, and World also; the Body of Christ. Shadowed, in Heaven, by the Sun,
and Moon; in the Temple, by the Tamid and Minha: Or the Two Alters, Courts,
Testaments, and Churches of God, Jew and Gentile: Rachel and Leah. And in our
Bodies also; with our Eyes, and Ears of our Head (where our Tongue also, St
James unruly Beast: the Tatler, or (...) the Beast also.) And somewhat Lower;
As before. And yet again. Thus the Suns, Chaste Casing of the Moon, is called in
Hebrew Kiss, or Kese, (which the English sound, as Cheese, (and Cheesle, is
(...)) in Hebrew Geeven, as Heaven; Hie-even: and the Latin Caseus, may be
Hebrew.) As the Moons Casing, (...), in Numbers 80, 81, 85. As in three Days
and Half, are hours, seven times twelve, or twelve times seven, (the Full,
Number of Rest,) just 84. As in (...) Cased: a kin to their Chesed, or Chasid:
most Tender Mercy, and Gracious. (...) is 72 (6 times 12.) and (...) 82. As
coming from Chas, or Case (to Cover, spare, and Trust) Ed, which is Ever,
Witness, Cloud: in Heb (...) (as English Hide) and (...), both a kin to (...)
and (...). (As Hanna, and Anna of Penuel (as she with Peninnah) a Widow of 84,
after 7 years marriage: lived chastely at the Temple, day and night.) As the
Cloud in, and upon, the Tabernacle: whence Covering Sin, as a Cloud. Which may
be also (...), 42. the just Half of 84: as if only 3 Nights and an half. 3
times 12 and 6. which is just 6 times Seven. And although the whole Time of the
Moons Casing, or Covering, (under the light of the Sun; which in other Planets,
they call Combustion,) may be 3 whole Days and an half, or 84 Hours: Yet
seeing Night, is the Moons Walk, or Rule, rather then the Day; and, that 12
Hours, are so clearly signal, both in Day, and Night; one might believe, This
Cled, or (...), of 42 Hours, may be the 3 Moeds, and an Half, or 3 times 12 and
6. As a Measure to All the Rest. But we may begin much Higher. Yet, in whole
Numbers; there is none, till 7, that is made, of any, 3 numbers, and an half.
As, 3 times 2, and 1. we find it no lower, but in fractions: as 3 and an half.
But in whole Numbers, 7 is the first, so made, of 3 and an Half. Which is
therefore, Measure to all the Rest. As the Schools, rightly taught us, of every
First, in its kind (which is Min, in Heb. from Mana, to number, Mani and
Mina.) And, it may be, there is no Number possible, to be made of any 3
numbers, and an Half; But only Seven: and Those which are made, of 7. which
may happily, lead us, into the Powers of Numbers, more then we yet believe. In a
word, That Number, can be made of none, but Even Numbers: else in Halving, we
must fall to Fractions. What shall we say then? Are Odd Numbers, for Heaven (As
the very Poets taught us; Numero Deus Impare Gaudet: Being, the only simple
Numbers, as was touched before in 3:) And Even Numbers, for Earth? And 7 the
first Number, in which, Heaven and Earth, do meet, and are Reconciled? And the
first, made of any, Three whole Numbers, and an Half.

The next, is 14, (for, 10 and an half is a Fraction:) As famous for the
Passover, to Israel; as 7 for the Sabbath.

To Israel, I say; for when they did not enter His Rest, and keep His Sabbath,
(or first seventh) as they should have done: in great kindness, he prepared,
or sanctified the next Sabbath, for Them. Or the fourteenth day, of the first
Month, for their Passover. And for their Unclean, or Travelers, (which God
did own, and encourage, as in Strangers,) a second Passover, on the fourteenth
day of the second Month. But, in the New Jerusalem, or That, described in
Ezekiel 45, The Sanctuary is cleansed, and the Posts of the House, and Gates of
the Court also, (with the Corners of the Alters Settle) are sprinkled with
Blood; On the very first Day, of the first Month (So quick will he be, in
Cleansing his House!) And Then, on the very first Seventh Day, of the first
Month, a Sacrifice is ordered, and offered; for All, and every One, that
Erreth: As also Heb. 5. 2. And (least This, might leave out Any; He adds
also,) For Him, whoever, that is Simple, or Seduced (...) (Even as English use
the word Pity, and a Piteous simple Creature) which is just 490. [as in Daniels
Weeks.] from (...) [both in Greek and Hebrew] to lead one, in, or from, ones
Path: and (...) [as in Greek also,] the great Seducer. Which I may not English,
Though, a kin to (...), and (...), and (...), [both full, and foul, and fool:
as well as folly, and folium, Faba; sed abstinendum est a fabis:] and to (...),
and (...), and (...): Yea and (...) also: Though, it be often, used in a good
sense; as to pun, or pound, or ponder ones path: as Caleb was of Jephunne: much
a kin to (...) fane, and feign, and (...).

What ever Time, This in Ezekiel, may intimate; It seems to lessen the great
work of Aarons Family; and sets up the King, or Nasi: [Is it not the time of
Melchisedech?] who, he says, shall no more oppress the people: Yet, They shall
All be His, and for Him: and but an Offering, for him. And upon him, it shall
be, to order, or offer, All the Oles or whole offerings; and Minhaes; and Sack
also, (the Drink offerings) In the Haggings, or feasting days, and New Moons;
and Sabbaths; In All the Moeds of the House of Israel. He, shall Do, (cum
vitulo faciam,) the sins, and sin offerings, and the Minha, and the Ole, and
Solemn Salems, in the Ever, of the House of Israel. As if Jerusalem it self,
were but (...), Jeru Salem, They shall see peace. When the first stone was
laid, they cried Grace, grace; But now, Peace also: Grace and Peace. Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and Peace of God, that passes, All Passovers, and all
Pentecosts also; with All understanding; shall preserve and keep your hearts,
(first, and then) your Minds also; Through Christ Jesus: and no wonder Then,
the next words be, Finally my brethren. Yet a little while, and it shall be,
Eternally my Brethren. For, Your Fathers good pleasure is, to give you a
Kingdom. And you shall See Eye to Eye: Grace and Peace also. He has willed it,
and through His Grace, We will it also. Say, Amen; and say it Boldly: Yet with
Reverence. Kiss him also, but with Reverence. Concerning his Sons and his
Daughters, Ask him: (They are All Princes, and you must but Ask, of Them, or
for Them:) But concerning the Works of his Hands, you may Command. Be of good
cheer, He calls you. And stays for you.

Unaware I am carried Back, by the Hand, to the Number 14. For, just so many,
are in the Hebrew word, for Hand, which is Jad, (It shall Cast, and It shall
Bless: As in Juda.) The same letters and numbers, are in (...) Day, Sufficient
(for the Day, is the Bread, and Good, and Evil thereof.) And Shadai: who is
still Sufficient. And how near akin Jad is to Jah, (14 to 15:) we may come to
know, when we also see, how near, the Lamb or the Goat, of the 14th Evening,
was to the Lamb also, of the 15th Morning. And both, and All, to the Holy Lamb
of God, that bears away the Sin of (the Lambs?) the World! This was yet at
Bethabara, the House of Wrath, and beyond Jordan; but also, the House of That,
which must, Pass Over; yea and Pass away: (which is Wrath, in Hebrew,) Before
the sun go down: and the Cursed, Hanged Ones, must then be down also. The next
Day, and next, and third, He came also: But I knew him not; but had read in
Esaias, that the Spirit must Rest upon him, As a Dove (or Master of the Wing) on
a Branch, or Natsar: But, Now I saw, and bear Record. Here is is One Witness:
and when He was Taken off, Then Christ followed, for His three Days and an
Half also, (of which we ought to speak again:) and then comes Stephan (the
Crown, to the Conqueror:) and then Paul, a Witness with a Witness (or a
Martyr:) But after, Three Days, being as Dead, or Blind: and then recovered
by Ananias, the Lords Grace (But where is Poor Saphira? We may find Her also.
-- And thy Eyes from Tears; for there is Hope in the latter End.) And yet, All
this while, but Saul (1000 years after David:) and Ananias sent to the house of
Judas also, to seek Saul (as we saw before:) and Saul of Tarsus: a City Built
by Lascivious Sardanapalus: or by others in pursuit of Io, Turned to a Beast
they say: and now a Beast, must be recovered: As the sound may hint. As Tauros
(And Mount Taurus Thereabout began, to all the East:) which from (...) is
Syriac (...) or (...) (just 666.) As Tyrus, Tyras, Thrace and Threscos: how
near to Japhets Tiras (...)? who shall be persuaded yet to dwell in the
Tabernacles of Sem, in this Feast of Tabernacles. But Paul is now at Damsack:
Bloodsucking or sacking Damascus. Though it had sucked the Blood of Righteous
Abel (as they say, There slain:) yet It had also an Eliezer, my God Helping;
and a King, anointed by Elisha, God Jesus. For, Damascus also must be Menuha,
as we saw before. And the Prince, that carried the Heavy Doom to Babylon it
self; was Seriah, the Lords Sir, and Servant, Son of Neriah, the Lords Light;
Son of Maasiah, the Lords Trust and Refuge: And he went with Zedekiah, the
Lords Justice; to Babel, (which is Lebab, our Heart, Turned Backward:) in the
Fourth year, or after Three years and an Half. And this Seriah, was also Menuah
(from Noah, Rest,) a Meek and Quiet Prince. As Christ speaks, of Moses, and
of Himself. Rejoice O Zion, For thy Prince is Meek and Lowly: which with God,
is of Great Price and Value: As Saint Peter speaks. Who yet, struck down
Ananias and Saphira. But this Boanerges, must become a Barnabas (Ye know not
what spirit You must be:) And Barnabas Took Saul, and knit him to the Church of
Christ; who sent him back to Tarsus, (his Native Country: As Israel to
Babylon, the Hole, or Pit, whence they were taken, and called:) And then was
Great Peace and Comfort of the Holy Ghost (for, Jerusalem it self was
scattered) through All Judea, and Samaria, and Galilee of the Gentiles also:
the three Regions, of Heaven and Earth, and the little World also: as we have
touched diverse times. And Then, Peter also, must come down, to Lydia; [as
alluding to Lud, with Tarsis, and Ludi, and Lydia, [Saint Paul's Convert] of
Thiatire, Divine Tire, or the Sacrificer: For, Her Hire also, must be
Holiness, to God:] and Sarran, Tyrian, or Sharon; of which before, with
Carmel. For, That also, must bless Him: and Hermon, the Cursed Hill. And
Tabor, the very Navel of the Belly, or the Lower Waters. Here must Christ be
Transfigured (an Emblem of this Kingdom:) and Then must cast out the Foul
Spirit, which so Mastered All his Apostles: Till Himself came down, and found
the people, in a very hot dispute, with his Apostles, about a Devil, they could
not master. And yet, at his going up, He had given them Power over All Unclean
spirits. But This was Beelzebub, it seems, the Prince of Devils, with his
Legions: (Every one 6000, and 666 also, If a great Author besides Hesychius, do
not deceive us.) A strange spirit! with Three Epithites, in Three Evangelists.
As if Cerberus with his Tripple Throat. The Devil in the World, Or Utmost
Court; and Antichrist in the Church, or Temple: But the Old Man, in our Heart.
There the Dragon; Then, the Beast; and the Image of the Beast; and the False
Prophet also: directly opposite to God, and Man (who was made to Rule the
Beast) with the Image of God, in Man, or God-Man: and the True Prophet; the
Holy Ghost. See Ja. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 3. Romans 8. 6.

But How long? Ever since there was a Child. In the Waters Above: As the
Crossing Serpent; which we showed before, in Shemes, Samson, and his 12 Labors
also: through the Zodiak, full of Beasts: Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo; worse.

In the Earth Below, Even in Paradise: The Serpent, the most subtle Beast, and
Head of all Beasts. Turning Isha, into Eva, (...). Before whom, Adam only
conversed with Lilith, the Nights Darkness, and Dreams: which the Jews call
the Mother of Hobgoblins; and make a white Circle, with Chuts Lilith: Out
Night. In the Waters Below, Leviathan, and Tannin, the Dragon, in the Great
Depth, or Bottomlesspit; as Esaias, 27. with Job of Behemoth, Leviathan; and the
Revelation. But, He shall be cast out, of Earth also, as first he was out of
Heaven: Whence he fell, like Lightning. Though That, but as a Prophecy, before
Apoc 11 and 12. Which brings up the Kingdom of Christ with Casting out Satan.
As Christ also said; If I, by the finger of God, Cast out Beelzebub: Then know,
the Kingdom of God is very near you. But you must say, Let it Come on Earth, as
it is in Heaven. Where yet Satan came, among the Angels, to accuse and resist
the Brethren: as, we may find in Job, with Dan. and Zech.

But at our Saviors coming from the Mount; All the three Foul Spirits, shall
be cast out. Yet they may Tear us first, and leave us as Dead: But for Three
days and Half, and Then, Come up hither.

And the Father said, with Tears, Lord I believe, Help thou my Unbelief. Being
told, that All things; even All things! are possible to Him that Believes. The
same Works, Yea and greater Works: For I go to my Father. And a Grain of True
Faith, can remove This Mountain also: (where, I was transfigured; while Peter
would have built three Tabernacles.) Howbeit, This strange, and strong, and
last kind of Devils, go not out, but by Fasting and Prayer. Yet, They had Oil;
and so raised the Sick; and laying on of Hands, Cast out Devils. For it was,
and still is, and will be, and appear, a very Mighty Name, of Jesus of Nazareth.

And Peter at length coming to Japho, the old Town of Japhet, Who began it
before the Flood; (as hinted in Heathen Authors:) Having first healed Aeneas:
Aeneas! And after eight years. By the same Name, by which Himself, and John,
had cured the Cripple, at the 9th Hour, the Time of Prayer (As to Cornelius
also, the first fruits of the Gentiles:) He finds Tabitha, Dorcas, a Do, of
a Goat (which in Hebrew and Syriac is also Saphira (...):) and Raises Her also
from the Dead. A greater work, perhaps, than curing a Daughter of Abraham; whom
Satan had Bound, Lo, and Behold, these 18 Years. And another, with the Bloody
Flux (of which before,) for 12 years. And a Third (Talitha) 12 years old.

Here are three Twelves and an Half. And a man at the Pool of Bethesda (the
House of Chesed, Tender Mercy,) 38 Years. Here are three Twelves, and two also;
for a Che^si. Which I note (the rather) because, it was first showed Abraham
(in a Map) that his Friends, and Tenants of Promise, and Sodom also, must serve
the four Monarchs, 12 Years. And not be delivered till the second after the 12.
or second Sabbath, which is the 14th Year; (as Assyrians broken in the 14th
year of Ezekiah) as the 14th of Genesis. And the 14 Teeth of either Jawe, may
represent Years also; as we showed before, from Shinim, Teeth; and Shenim,
Years. Where we touched the Turtle, and the Pigeon, (as the two little
Witnesses) preserved undivided (which is their only way of safety,) between the
Divided Heifer, and the Ram, and Goat also: and All, of Three years old. And
Then, the Fiery Furnas, and Great Horror. But at Evening, or Sunsetting, God
speaks to him, in a Vision, which he saw not, till he had said, to the King
of Sodom; Thou shall never make me Rich. And After Those words, God came in a
Vision, and said, Fear not Abraham, for, etc.

And they brought him to an Upper Chamber (it is often spoken of, and should be
marked:) where the women were, and showed the Coats of Dorcas. For, she also,
loved us; and helped to build us a Tabernacle. As we touched before, in the
Curtains, or Coverings of Goats-hair, and Badgers-skins.

But He put the Women All out: (O Woman, what have I to do with Thee? And Touch
me not, for I am not yet Ascended!) Which he had learned also, from Him (that
so Acted, before Him, and James, and John; which were His three VVitnesses,
generally:) Who put them All out, and cried, Talitha Kumi. May it not be, Rise
up the Third, Day, or Year, or Moed? As They sounded the Hebrew (...), 630.
635. and (...) in least reckoning, 670. or 680. But as the Mazorites reckon,
1230. or 1240.

But Peter, prayed, and cried, Tabitha Kumi. And Tabitha, may not only
signify a Goat, or Beast; but may lead us up also to Tebeth, the Great Ark;
with All the Beasts in it (as in Peter's sheet,) with Fowls of the Air (which
at length snatched away, the Good seed of the Kingdom:) and Creeping things of
the Earth also. But the Fishes were not Cursed (that we read,) or drowned, in
the Flood: (I say not any kind of Angels, in the great Ocean, or Bottomless
Pit:) Though They are Threatened also, in Zephany; For, there shall be No more
Sea. But in the Flood, they were as safe, as in Noah's Ark, or Peter's Sheet;
Teaching Him To call no man Common or Unclean. Which leads him to Cornelius,
That Horn, or Beam of the Sun, with his Spire; or Spirall Line, called Italick;
or Latin: of which before.

May I add, That Japhet, the Great Japetus, coming to Japho, that Fair Heaven,
as it sounds; (before he shipped out his sons, to Kittim, and Rodanim, with
other places about Javan, or Jonia:) might leave such Characters of the great
Tebeth, or Arck, behind him; as might give occasion to this Name of Tabitha:
And also to that famous History (through all Countries; but England especially)
of a great Kings Daughter, There delivered, by a valliant Prince (that is old
enough to be Grandfather to their great George on Horsback) Killing the Dragon;
or the Serpent, that was ready to devour her. But the Earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed up the Flood (which the Dragon cast out:) and Helped the Woman,
who was Thence carried (with the Roman Eagles wings,) to the Wilderness; As out
of Aegipt, for a Time, and Times, and Half. Or 1260 days. Which we must touch
again, in the Cloud or Cheled (...) of 42.

And That, it may come up, to Dorcas also; Is there any History more famous
among the Eastern Nations, Then That of Semiramis: the Mother of Babylon, [or
at least the Nurse of] That Mother of Fornications; and Things offered to
Idols; and All Idolatry? Was not Her mother called Athera? Atera? Atra? The
Beast, in Greek and Syriac? As also Atargat, Adargat, Dargat, Darcat, and
Dercet, or Dorcet? (as in English also:) whence Dercas, Dorcas [and Draco, the
Drake] from (...) And the Poets made her Flesh, and Fish, [as the Mermayd] to
be Mother, to the Syrian God, or Goddess, Dagon: speaking a Fish, or a Gudgeon;
or a Dogfish; and a Cod, As the English call a Fish; and somewhat else also.
Though more modest, than Others, swearing Kadzo, Catzo, Cazza. Which, the
Italians understand.

But the Old Syrian Dercat, having lost her Basket of Flowers, and somewhat
else, they say at Joppa, threw her self into a Lake, [which they show at This
day; as also the Relics of the Monster that would have swallowed the Virgin:]
and There delivered of a Daughter, Nourished by a Dove; [the Assyrian Banner;
and the Syrian Goddess:] called Semiran: Or Semyrian: Kept by a Dove. As
Samaria; Kept by the Lord. But that Dove might carry her self with a Letter [as
the Custom still is] to Babylon, or Nineve, much sooner than Semiramis.

But who sees not in This also, somewhat of Jonah the Dove? from Ioppa, Tarsus,
carried to Nineve? With worse, and yet Better News, than the Dove brought to
the old Tebeth, or Noah's Ark. Which might easily be the Mother to Many of
These: and others that in seeking Mistress Io, followed a Beast so long, that
they left the Image, Name and Character of the Beast; where ever they came. As
at Thebes, in Beotia, and All the Thebes or Theves, in many other places. So
that England also, has its Beeves and Thieves, Thieve Mutton; and many other
Thieves; or Beasts: Of which I have yet much more to speak when I come to
Lilith, or Eeve, [as English call the Night, as Even to the Day:] which was
Eva, Lust, and Contention, [as God may allude] and (...) the Tatler, and Beast
also; or Woman on the Beast in the Revelation: called Chave, (...), the Mother
of All Animalls, or Beasts. And the Woman in the Epha; Isha, Eva, Epha, carried
to Babylon in Zechary.

But an Angel in the Sun (that great Cornelius) gathers All the Fowls of
Heaven, in the Revelation: But in Ezekiel, (after his promised Covenant of
Peace, and causing Evil Beasts to cease;) All the Beasts also are called to
devour Beasts; But Lambs also, as well as Rams, and Goats, and Bullocks. Yea;
and in Jeremy 12, All the Beasts of the Field are called to devour the Dearly
beloved of his soul. For, All Flesh shall perish: As, was cried by the Voice,
before the Flesh of Christ himself: Which Profited so little, that Henceforth,
He cared, to know it no more.

In the Revelation, They are bidden, to the Feast of Flesh; but only of Men:
and of No Beasts, but Horses. (which may come to be little useful ere long;
when Israel must cry, We will not ride upon Horses, but the White Ones, in
Revelation 19. 14.) And their King, was in special forbidden to Multiply
Horses. Which have often in Scripture, some Character of Wrath: as of Lust, and
crying Aha, to the Trumpets, and Day of Battle. That I mention* not the Horses
of the Sun; and Their Flesh, like the flesh of Asses (not accepted; but
Redeemed, or his Neck broken; till our Savior rode, upon the Asses Colt; of
which before:) and their Issue, like the Issue of Horses, in Ezekiel. Where
also, the conclusion is, You shall drink Blood, till you he Drunken; and eat
Fat at my Table (although all Fat, and Blood, were still forbidden to be
eaten:) But of Horses only (and no other Beasts:) with Mighty men; and All men
of War. All men of War!

And in the Chapters following, of the New Jerusalem, we have many Rams, and
Goats, and Bullocks, with Acceptance, at his Holy Altar. As we saw before, of
Kedar, Nebaioth, and Ishmael: As the Ram in the Thicket, instead of Isaac. And
the Passover might be of Goats, as well as Lambs. Every Master of the poorest
Family, might bring his Lamb, or his Goat: as well as the Richest. And the very
Romans learned to know, How many Men, were in Jerusalem, by counting 10, to a
Pascal Goat, or Lamb: as we touched before.

And as the first Altar was Dedicated, with 6 Wagons, 12 Oxen, 12 Bullocks, 12
Rams, 12 Lambs, and 12 Goats, for Oles: But for Salems 24 Bullocks, and 60,
both of Lambs and Rams, and Goats; with 12 Chargers, 12 Bowls, and 12 Spoons of
120 shekels:

So, As soon, as ever the New Altar is made, in Ezechiel, It is sanctified with
a Bullock, on the first Day; and a Goat, on the second: with another Bullock,
and a Ram, in the third place. Yea, and 7 Days together, with 7 Goats also;
for sin offerings! And on the 8th Day after, (as alluding to the Christian
Sabbath) and so forward, the Priests shall make the Oles, and Salems; and I
will accept you, says the Lord God.

Then comes up the Prince, the Prince! Above All the Priests! And He may Sit;
and He may Enter (only) where the Lord did Enter. And the great complaint is of
Strangers, Polluting the House, with Blood and Fatt. (See also, Chap. 34. 16,
17, 20, 25, 28.) And the Levites that ministered before their Idols, They must
stand at distance: and must not come near to execute the Priests Office: or the
Holy Place: But his Hand, is lifted up, that they shall bear their shame, and
their Abominations. But the sons of Zadock (the Righteous!) that kept the
charge of his Sanctuary; when Israel went astray; (and Jeroboam, made his
Priests, of the lowest Common People; and turned the solemn Moed, of the
Seventh Month, of Tabernacl^s, to an Hagging Feast of the 8th Month; and set up
Two Calves, for Aarons One:) They shall stand before me. As the Standers, or
standing Men, in the Present Tense (though Dan. 11. 2. may seem Future; but it
is Prophetic Language:) and They shall Offer, the Fat and the Blood. And They
shall keep, or watch, my Watch. And They shall teach my People, between the
Holy and Profane; and cause them to discern, between the Clean and Uuclean.
(How gracious a Promise!) And in Judgments, They shall judge, according to My
Judgment. And shall keep My Laws, and My Statutes; In all My Moads. And shall
Sanctify! My Sabbaths! Sure, at least, Christian Sabbaths: (if not even, in
the New Jerusalem.) As also, Nehemiah, and Ezra, very zealous for Sabbaths;
after the return from Babylon, to the Type of New Jerusalem; after the Babylon,
of the Revelation. And to the strangers also (of all Nations,) Esaias proposes
the Sabbath, as the great Seal or Character of the Covenant: by which they
should come to Delight in God, (How sweet a Promise!) and To Ride on All the
High Places! which so many stumbled at! And To possess the Inheritance of
Jacob: Even Jacob! Whose Blessings, were Above all the Blessings of his
Ancestors. Compare Esaias 56 and 58.

And ye stall give them, No Possession, in Israel: I am Their Possession; Their
Inheritance. But they shall eat the Minha, and the Sin and Trespass-Offerings:
and the Cream of Israel (or Cherem) shall be Theirs. And the First (or Resit)
of All the Biccurim, First Fruits of All. And every Heave Offering of all your
Heavings: or of all your Romings. For it comes from Rom, to Heave, or Ramp, or
Rome. As Nahor (by his Concubine, Reuma) begat Pride, and Slaughter,
Oppression, and Tax; a strange Beast. Genesis 22. 23. And as (...), So also, (...)
the great Heave Offering, is just 666. and (...) 1676. And the Resit of your
Heresis ((...) 1770:) You shall Give; to cause a Blessing to Rest upon thy
House, which will else Return away, If The Son of Peace, be not in it, The word
here used, is Tittenu, or Tithtenu. As before we noted, in the great Command,
of Giving to the Levites.

Though I say not, from Tenu, Tithtenu, may come both English Tithe and Ten,
and other Nethinims, or Gifts, (as Christ calls them) to the Altar. Which
they called Korbans; As Offerings to God: Whereas, they were but Gifts, and
must be Left upon the very Altar; till the poorest Brother, had forgiven his
Trespassers. A sweet word, to be pressed also, with Reverence, on Christ
Himself our Great Brother. Who said, You Tithe Mint (akin to Mind) and Cumin:
but neglect the Greater things (of the Law also;) Faith and Love. As a Proverb,
to the Jews also. In Nehemy, the people Sanctified to Levi, and He to Aaron,
paying Tithes: But, at the Rising of the two Witnesses; the Tenth (of that
City) fell. We need not Go to Rome: It may be the Tenth, or Tithes, of
Jerusalem; In that very Chapter, called, the Holy City. Yet, the Great City, is
Sodom also: (as Esaias 1. etc.) and Egypt, where also, Our Lord was Crucified:
and where also the Witnesses must lie dead, three Days and Half. Which may be
Compared with That Tenth, or Tithe, in Esaias 6. 13. That famous Chapter (cited
in the six first Books of the New Testament;) For the Jews Rejection, and
Return again; by the Holy Seed in them: called the Tenth, (as Uzziah was to
Zedekiah,) as alluding to the Tithes and first Fruits. Which will Then, be (as
it were) Rejected, and Fall: When All, the Fruits of the Earth, shall be
Gathered in, at the Great Harvest; Or Ingathering: of which before, at the
Feast of Tabernacles. Beginning at the latter end, of That 11th Chapter; at the
Seventh Trumpet: in the Full, 7th. Month: When All the Kingdoms of this World,
shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ, who shall Then Reign;
When All, his Enemies, are made his Footstool: and They Destroyed, that
Destroyed the Earth. And Then, and not Till Then; the Temple of God, is opened
in Heaven; and the Hall of Moed, with the Ark of his Testament, (or Witness)
shall appear; and God shall place his Tabernacle among men. As That Chapter,
with the 21. 22.

It may be added also, that Ezechiel has a solemn Feast of Tabernacles; with
its Bullocks, and Rams, and Goats for Sin Offerings, which he puts before
Burnt-Offerings, or Minha (which is here an Epha; where before, not Half so
much: And 6, for One before, in Oles; on Sabbaths, and New Moons:) But not a
word, that I find, of any Feast of Pentecost. Which was Over, and fulfilled
Then: As we saw before, in Acts the 2d. But the Feast of Tabernacles, yet to
come: which is one of many Arguments that persuade me Ezechiel speaks, of
Times After, that Second of Acts.

Then he brought me through the Entry into the Holy Chamber for the Priests,
looking Northward, as Those of Zadock did: as we see in diverse places. And in
the very first Tabernacle, as Here also; the Northern side, is accounted the
Best, Or Highest: Or First. As the South is called, by God himself, the Second
side. Whence also; I will go up to the Hill of God; To the side of the North.
And in the Psalms, On the sides of the North (or Sion, North to Moriah; more
perhaps, than Modern Maps make it:) And the Priest, in Offering the Ole, was
commanded to the North-side of the Altar. And yet, as in Ezechiel also; the
North was at Gods Left Hand: and South, at his Right. For, it is said, That
Here also the Face of the Holy Place, was still toward the East (as before:)
which should be considered by All those good Christians, (though never so Old)
that press for Bowing toward the East. Which (if it may be Lawful, in Ezekiels
Temple) yet, I dare not press.

And behold there was a Place in the two sides toward the West-Sea. (...).
1232. or 1242. For, the Mazorites note a Jod wanting. Then, by the four Corners
of the utter Court; In each a Court (with Chimneys, or Incense-Places: (...) or
(...) (from Keturah) 715 or 721:) Of 40 long, and 30 broad. 1200. And there was
a Tower ((...)) round, each of the four, and Boylers under the Towers or Tires,
Attires, (...) 630. But the Courts 100 long, and 50 broad, (as the old Tab.) to
be compared with the 5000, fed by Christ, (as after by Peter,) rancked by 100,
and by 50.

The front Eastward, as of Old, the Waters from under the Eastern Threshold, to
the Right hand, that is, Southward from the Altar. And he brought me out the
Track, [(...)] of the Northern Shaar, or Shore, or Gate, and brought me round
the Track without, to the outward Gate, the Track looking Before, or Eastward;
and behold, Waters running out from the Right side. And in the Man's going
forward with a Line in his hand, he measured 1000, in, or with a Cubit; and he
brought me through the Waters; Waters of the Ankles. (...). 191. or 751. and he
measured 1000, and brought me through the waters; Waters, Knees. (...). 272.
832. [As alluding to (...) Fishponds [as Acts 2.] and Blessings.

And he measured 1000, and brought me through, Waters of the Loins, (...).
540, 1100. And he measured 1000, a River which I could not pass over, for the
Waters were Gay, High, or swelling; Waters of Soaking, Sacking, or Swimming,
(...); a River which shall not be passed over. And he said, These Waters going
out to the Eastern Roll, and they go down upon the Plain, or Arabia. (...).
And they bow to the Sea, and going out at the Sea, the Waters are healed. And
again, They shall Bow to the Sea, and there shall be abundance of Fish; and
every thing shall live, where the River comes. And Fishers shall stand upon
it, Fishing from Ein to Ein, [As they shall see, Ein to Ein, or themselves in
my Eyes. And these Fishers, or Eins, shall be to Shoot, or Shut out, ((...))
Harms, or Charms, or Arms, (...), or Curses, or Nets, for such Fishers of Men,
and Souls from the Dead Sea of Sodom also.

And that it is the Dead Sea of Sodom, is clear, by comparing it with the Great
Sea, uers. 10. and by the places here named. En Eglaim, of the two Calves of
Aarons Cow [as the Jews speak] that first Calved Eglon, the little Calve; and
at length, the Great Eagles, that sucked, or sacked the Carkas, when it is
Spirit was Drawn out to Pella, or Piell, the Mouth of God. But they were bid to
say, Take away All iniquity, Receive us Graciously, and we will offer the
Calves of our Lips.

Engedi, The Famous Valley, where Moab, Ammon, and Goats of Seir, gathered
against Jehosaphat, the Lords Judgment. But the Valley of Jehosaphat, [in the
4th day] is called Beraca, the Vale of Blessing; as we read in the 20. of the
2. of the 2. of Chron. to be compared with the 3. of Joel. It signifies the
Fountain of the Goat, or Kid, as the English render (...). the place where Saul
saught David, among the Rocks of the Goats; But he was safe in a Sheeps Coat:
and Thence made the 57. Psalm. And Mical saved his Life, by an Image with
Goats, or Goats-Hair: And the Spouses Locks, are as Flocks of Goats, more than
once; as alluding to the Hebrew Seirs, both Locks of Hair, and Flocks of Goats,
as Seirits of Esau. She is not afraid of his Left hand, under her head; She is
bid to feed her Kids, (...). and in Engedi sindeth Copher. Some read it
Camphire; But it may allude to the Goats, of the great Day of Atonement, which
is also Copher, to Cover, All Transgressions; as Solomon speaks of Love. And
Noah's Ark was made of Gopher, and covered with Copher. And the very Mercy-Seat
was called Caphoreth, and the Veil (by turning it) Parocheth; whence perhaps
Parochie, Pariche, Parish. And the very Lake of Sodom, is famous for Copher.

The Prophet Joel closes his Discourse of Judgment, in the Valley of
Jehosaphat, with the Sun and Moon [or two Witnesses] being darkened; and the
Lords Roaring, and shaking Heaven and Earth, as in Amos and Haggai, and then
the holy Jerusalem, where no strangers, in Zachary Cananites, shall abide, or
pass through her, more. And than the Mountains shall drop New Wine, (the
Vintage, and Feast of Tabs) and the Hills Milk: and the Rivers of Judah shall
flow, as in Harvest, Jos. 3. 15. And a Fountain from the Lords House shall
reach through Jordan, and the Dead Sea, to Sittim. That notorious Vale of Peor,
where their Lust destroyed 24000, as the 24 Hours of the Day, and brought up a
new Race of Witnesses, both in Priests and Princes. For the old ones, were
hanged up, before the Lord, and an everlasting Priesthood, and Covenant of
Peace, settled on Phineas, for turning away the wrath of God by his Zeal, in
slaying Zimri and Cosbi. Lies and Treason. For, Had Zimri Peace, who slew his
Master? But Sittim also must be Healed by the Holy Waters; And it helped also,
to build a Synagoge, or an Ark, made of Sittim Wood.

And the Sittah Tree, must come to see, and know, and consider, that the Holy
One of Israel has Created it, as Esaias, 41.

In Zechary, Those Holy Waters are parted East and West, to both the Seas; The
great One in the West, and the Dead Sea of Sodom in the East; Which yet was
before the Face of God, as the Temple stood. And the Fire and Brimstone [as the
Lake of Soodm] in the Revelation, were before the Throne of God, and his Lamb.
As the Molten Sea, in the Temple. But it is said also, there shall be no more
Sea, (as no more Curse,) but as a Sea of Glass, (and Harping, which may allude
to the Sea of Cinereth, the Harp,) which is several times in the Revelation,
and the New Jerusalem, as Pure Glass; The last Resolution of Bodies. And He
that can makeit rightly Malleable, or can Manage the true Asbeston, or live on
Herbs, need not much soft Raiment.

But the Hie-places ((...)) and the Bushes, Vitches, or Witches, Bitches or
Beasts, (...): and such as shall not be Healed, shall be given for Salt: For
every one shall be Salted with Fire; and every Fire Offering [in the Law] must
be salted with Salt. Have salt in your selves (and let your speech be savoury,
seasoned with salt] and peace one with another.

And he caused me to turn [How Gracious!] to the Lip of the River. May it not
be Daniels River of Time, also? where we have both the Heels of Messiah, [as
David speaks, as alluding to Genesis 3. 15. and to Jacob, named from the Heel:]
and the Ancles also, the words used for the Ends of the earth: with the Knees
and Loins also.

In my turning, and behold on the Rivers Lip, a Tree, mighty, (...); on this
side and that, And he said unto me, these waters etc. And upon the River shall
come up, on this side and that, Every Tree for Food: [Are we not come to Eden,
as in Daniell also? Where Time is called Eden; whence perhaps, the English
Then.] His lease shall not fade, [as Ps. 1. and Jer. 17.] nor fruit ^e
consumed: For the Righteous shall be green, and flourish as Tamar, in the
Hezrons of God. They shall bear, in old Age, as Tamar did, [for Judahs Kid]
after she had stayed long for Shela, or till Shilo come. We track it in
Characters, from Joshuah's fixing the Ark at Shilo, till it was Captive at
Gath, Ekron, and other places; till David brought it in fear [for Uzziahs
Death] to the house of Edom; And his Servants also, Obed Edom, blessed by it,
or a Watcher and Singer to it; Till at length it came to be settled in Zion,
which God chose before all other places of Judah, and Jerusalem. As many
Psalms, speaking of a Temple also, before that of Moriah, which must be made as
Shilo: But Zion shall endure for ever, and in the latter days, shall be
exalted above All Mountains; And All People shall flow to it, as if it were
below them All. It shall be new, or first born, or First fruits, (...).
According to it is Moons or Months; which are therefore to be considered. For
his waters from the Sanctuary, they are still going: And all his Fruits shall
be for meat, and leaves for Medicine; and healing of the Nations also; as the
Revelation adds.

The Chapter ends with parting that holy Land, among Strangers also.
Strangers! All Strangers! that would come and stay There, till they had a
Child: and then themselves, and Child, and Children, must have a Portion of
Land also, for a Possession! that is little, For an Inheritance also, for ever;
as much, or as well, as the Children of Israel. In our Fathers House is Bread
enough, and to spare, and Land enough, and many Mansions: and it is a more
Blessed thing to give, than to receive. Amen. Halelujah.

And there shall be no more Curse: But the Throne of God, and of the Lamb shall
be in it. And his servants shall serve him, [and delight themselves in God, as
Esaias 58.] and they shall see his face. But O! His Heart! How sweet! How
Gracious! which no man ever did, or can see! But we may have the Mind of
Christ, and shall come to see eye, to eye, and know as we are Known.

And his Name shall be upon their foreheads. And the Sons of Aaron shall put my
Name upon the Children of Israel, and I will Bless them. Numb 6. And soon
after, they are called Men of name, [even Korahs Company: Whence the Sweet
Singers of Israel,] As the Sons of God, and his Children. And the Revelation
speaks of Names of Men, and 7000 Names, and Name of the Beast, and his
Character, or Badge and Livery; as of old on Servants, who yet had a note above
the Slaves. Which may be distinguished in Scripture.

But without are Dogs and Sorcerers, [to be compared with Ezekiels Caves,
(...), and Ditches, or Witches, or not healed] and Whoremongers, and Murderers,
and Idolaters; and whosoever loves and makes a Lie. As Cosbi slain by Phineas.

In the midst of the street, and of either side of the River, the Tree of Life
[as at first in Eden: Pleasure and Time, which Adam fell into, by falling into
pleasure, and must be recovered by Sorrow:] Bearing 12 manner of Fruits; or 12
Kinds, in Hebrew, Min. in Numbers 100. or 750. And Minim or Minnim, 140. 150.
700. and 750. And yielded fruit every Month, 12 by 12, 144. As his wall 144
Cubits. And Ezekiels Altar, is 12 by 12, 144 Cubits. But it is settle, 14 by 14.
3 times 4 and an half. That signal number in All Times: and first in Days and
Hours; as the measure to All other Measures. As the Cubit made of two Zereths,
or Spans; each of which had three Taps, of four Digits apeece. So that every
Cubit had 24 Digits, as the Day has 24 hours. And if the sacred Cubit had an
Hand-breadth more, of 4 Digits; than it will be 28 Digits in all, as made of
two Hands, or Jads: and Jad is 14, as we saw before.

And although the Jews counted their Night always Even, [as the English still
call it Even, and Evening] to the Day: Yet besides the neernesse of their
longest Night to 14 hours in Winter, they might ever have just 14 Hours,
between their Evening Minha, and their Morning Tamid: and 7 more from This to
That again. So that still 3 and an half; [which in whole numbers, are not less
than 7 and 14] made up the Moads of the Ceasing, Resting, Hiding, or slaying of
the Witnesses, both in Heaven and Earth: The Temple and it is Courts and Altars,
Sacrifice and Minha, with the Two Lambs: And in in our Bodies also, where our
eyes and ears, or other witnesses, are bound, or laid asleep, as Dead [in our
Sodom also, where our Lord is slain] for 3 and an half; during the Reign of the
Beast, of Night and darkness, rising as smoke, out of the Bottomless pit, and
slaying, or at least Laying, the Witnesses, for 7 or 14 hours [we speak of
Days and Months, and years, anon*] and then comes the End. That is Kets
(and Chetsi, my end, or half,) and also the Waking, or Rising and Resurrection:
as also the Summer, following the cold night of the Year, or 3 Months and an
half of Winter, And than comes Harvest or Ketsir, as before] as Christ
speaks in the Gospel, and Amos 8.

And did not All these meet in David? That fullness of time also in his
Generation! He was the 7th Son of Jesse, my Essence. As if God should say, in
every 7 My essence shall appear David, that is Love. And David was also the 14
from Abraham as the 14th. 70 years. And (...) is 14. and it may be also (...)
and (...), 4 and 4, or 8. and (...) is also a near Kinsman, as Love. And again,
He was the 24 from Noah, Rest and Love: As they shall Rest in my Love: and
(...) is 24.

And being the 24 and last hour of that great Day, he began another of 24 more,
and settled all the 24 Courses we have spoken of, in the Temple, But of All his
Times, and Turnings of his Hour-glasse, Nods and Neods also; that is Wanderings
and Bottles of water, in Characters, as God shall give to the Prayers of his
people, so much wished and valued.

In the mean time we may remember what a Rest, and turn, and change, we found
every 7, hour in the Sun, and Moons daily motion, from the Evening Horizon, to
the Nadir, Rising, Zenith, setting again. And as every 7 hour makes such
change in the day and night, so does every 7th day to the Moon, (the great
Hebrew Moneh, that is Reckoner of Time;) and every 7 Month, to the Earth under
the Poles, or places, that are most remote from the Sun: who is hidden 6
months from them, but returns in the 7, and abides 6 others with them, and
departs again for 6 more: and so goes and comes yearly, as infinite
wisdom has appointed.

And though there be a visible Change in the Moon, every 7 days, which we call
Quarters; yet it is more signal in 14. made of 3 times 4 and an half, as we
see in Full Moons, the Moeds of Passover and Tabernacles (that I speak not of
Pentecost,) as an Emblem of that great Change, on the world, when having served
the 4 Monarchies, Twelve great years, (as the 12 hours of Dark Night,) they
shall be freed, and lightened again, in the 14. as we find in the 14 of Genesis.
But by Abraham's Parting his Enochs by Night, As the Watches, and as Jacob also
parted His Troops: And David His, to recover his Wives, and other Captives,
after 3 days and a Night: and the two Spies of Jericho returned after 3 days
and a Night. And the Witnesses in the Revelation, and of Heaven, were not
there, till Three days and a night, or on the 4th. day, from the Creation.

And as 14 days make such a change in the Moon; so to the Earth also under the
Poles, the Moon goes and comes in 14 Days, or half a Month, as the Sun in
half a year: So that 2 Days in that Motion, are as a Month. The Moon moving 12
of her own Diameters, to the Suns moving One of his (as we touched before, in
parting the Day and night into twelve hours apeece) And as we find 666 hours in
the Monthly Courses of the Moon, so the word, for 2 Days in Hebrew, (...) is,
as the Mazorites reckon, just 666. And after 2 Days, he will revive us, of
which again in Hoseah.

And such darknings or lightnings of the Moons face, by the Sun, or the Earths
by the Moon, in 14 days, may shadow out somewhat of the 14 years, we spoke of
but now; which might also be carried much farther. For Jacob served 14 years
for his 2 wives; the other 6 for Cattle. And Jerusalem was freed from the
Assyrian, trodden down in the Holy Mountain, (as we read in the 14. of Esaias,)
in the 14 year of Hezekiah. who also broke the Serpent; and called it Nehustan,
as a Type of Him that was to break the Serpents Head; to which Esaias may allude
in several places, speaking of the Serpent; and the Child daring to grasp the
Serpent; and to play upon his Hole or Den. Yet that 14 year of Hezekiah, was
full 7 years, after the ten Tribes were Captive, after 3 full years seige of
Samaria, beginning in the 7 of Hoseah, which was the 4 of Hezekiah; or 3 year
and an half of his Reign, to be compared also with the seige of Jerusalem, and
all it is blows in the last of Jeremiah.

And Ezekiel had his great Vision of the New Jerusalem, in the 14 year, after
the old City was smitten; and upon the 10th. day of the first Month, when the
Paschall Lamb or Goat, was to be set apart, 3 days and an half before his
Offering at the Passover, on the 14 day, at Evening.

I have yet spoken little of St. Matthews 14 Generations (which I reserve for
our Characters;) or of Paul's going up to Jerusalem and into the 3 Heaven, in
the 14 year; or being freed from his terrible Tempest in his Sea-Voyage on the
14 day: when on the 3 day they lightened the ship, but lost the light of Sun and
Stars many Days, till the 14 Night. Act. 27. 27. 33.

I repeat not that touched before, of the Common Hebrew Cubit of 6 Taps, or 24
Digits, and the sacred Cubit, 7 Taps, or 28 Digits. As those that have fewest
Teeth, have 28: so that either Jaw has 14, parted by two watchers (which they
call Dogs) between 3 Fours. As the Hebrew Zereth or Span, was made of 3 Taps,
of 4 Digits apeece. As the old Watches they say, were 3 in the Night, of 4
hours apeece; although the Gospel, as the Romans reckon, 4, as of 3 hours
apeece: And the 4 sides of the Great City had 3 Shaars, or Watches, or Gates
apeece. And if the Sacred Cubit were 28 Digits; How like is their Hand, which
is Jad and 14, to be half their Holy Cubit? As That also which must be so
revealed, and stretched out, as we often read, to deliver his People, in the
14th day at night, or the 14 Great Year, (of which again;) As the Temple
Witnesses were restored again, in the 14 Hour, after the Dark Night os the
Bottomless Pit, had put them out, or slain them, or at least made them to
Cease, as our eyes also to Rest in darkness, till the Daystar chased away the
Nights Darkness, and brought it is Kets, or End, which is also the Waking or
Resurrection, as we found in Daniel, to be compared with Job, 38, Luke, 1. 78.
79. 2. Pet. 1. 19. Reve. 2. 28. and diverse other places.

From 14 we come to 21, the next number made of 3 and an half, in whole
Numbers. 3 times 6 and 3. or 3 Sevens: or 3 fourths, and half, of 24. bringing
us to the Evening Minha in every Day, beginning still at Sunset: and to the
Last Great Feast, of Unleavened Bread, after the Passover: and to the (...) or
Great Hosanna of the Tabernacles, the 21 Day of the Month; as an Emblem of
Their Liberty, after the 20 Years Bondage, under Laban, again under Jabin, and
the Arks 20 Years, so near the Philistines. That I say nothing of Solomon's
being 20 Years in building Gods House and his Own: and his Feast was 14 Days
in the 7. Month of Tabernacles: Or of his 20 Cities given to Hiram, or of 20.
smitten by Jephta; or of 20 pieces, the price of Joseph, as 30 of Christ: or of
the 20 Cubits of the Cursing Roll in Zachary; or any other 20 in Scripture,
which we may touch in Characters. As also, the 6 times 20, that great Moed of
God with man, 120, as (...) is just 120. Of which again: and of All the
Sevenths. As 28, and 35, and 42, Half of three days and Half; the first Chled
or Child of the Sun and Moon: or Her Calends (which may come from (...), as
well as Ides from (...):) or her Cloud, or Clade (which is also (...)) or her
Hour of Temptation. 42, being to 1000 (the Great Day,) or to 1008, the Jews
Clakins in each hour, as an Hour to a Day; just the 12th part. And 42 is 3
times 12 and an half, or 3 times 14, or 6 times 7, a great Moed of the
Witnesses. In Hours (besides the Sun and Moons meeting, or Beam, and (...) may
be 42) it is the Hour of Noon, in the 2d day of Creation. And in Days the Full
Moon, or Passover of the 2d Month, (for the Unclean, or Travelers.) In Weeks
it is near the Time of Life, or 40 weeks: Weeks of the Child in the Womb, as
before. And in Months it is 3 Years, and an Half; or 1260 days, of the woman
in the Wilderness; or 42 Months of the Beast, and thofe that Tread down the
Holy City. And Daniel says, All those things shall be finished, with the end
of scattring the power of the Holy People. And 1290 days in Him, are but 30
more than 1260 in the Revelation, and 45 less than 1235 in Daniel; which are
but 3 more than Twice 666. And if the Revelation, were 30 years after the sack
of Jerusalem, it will be no wonder it should speak 30 years less then Daniels
1290. Or that These also, should have 45 years added, for settling them: As 45
Hours brought up the Evening Minha, of the 2d Day: As the 45 years, ^aleb
speaks of, Jos. 14. Although they wandered in the Wilderness but 40 years, for
the 40 days of searching the Land (whence those 40 years might seem to begin)
answering to Ezekiels 40 Days, or Years, for Judah: and the 40 years of
Jerusalem, after the 40 Days of our Saviors staying on Earth, after his
Resurrection. As it may be, Nineve stood, but 40 years, after Jonahs 40 days:
a sign to That sinful Generation. And if there were just 42 Miles from
Beersheba to Jerusalem (that is, 20 to Hebron, and 22 from Hebron, to
Jerusalem, as we find in Jerome, with others:) That may be considered, with
the 42 Months; and 42 Mansions; and 42 Children, at Jericho; of which before.

From 42, the next of 3 and an half, in whole numbers, is 49. 3 times 4 and an
half, or 7 times 7: the first number squared. In Hours, it is the first Hour,
of the 3d Nights Rest. In Days, it is the 7th Great Day, of Unleavened Bread,
to the Passover of the 2d Month. In Weeks, it comes near the Weeks of the
Lunar Year, and but 3 short of the Solar. In Years, it was the Jubilie; That
Great Rest, and yet Motion, or Mutation, as we noted before in the Hebrew word
Mot, (...) 49. which is also the number of the common word for Measure, Midda,
(...), As if that number of 49, in their Jubilies, were the Measure of All
Measures: and 49 is also, in (...) (if (...) be but 40;) which we touched
before, in the Sun and Moons Beams of Meeting, and Bowing, or coming together,
weh is (...), from Bo.

60 Hours, bring us just to the Morning of the 3d Day, and 70, the Evening
Minha, of that 3d Day: which may answer to the Pentecost of the 3d Month. As
the first ^amid, of the 14th Hour, might represent the Passover of the 14th
Day, of the first Month. And the P^ntecost being 50 days, after the first
Sheaf waved, or Heaved (of which before) was near the 70th Day, of the year.
And the first Fruits, or Biccurim, of Pentecost, might represent their first
coming from Babylon, after the 70 years Captivity (as the Law was given at
their first Pentecost, after their coming from Egypt:) And That coming from
Babylon, was but as the first Fruits, or Feast of Pentecost, to that great
Feast of Tabernacles: of which, we have spoken so much.

And as 70, is made of 7 and 10 (the Full and the Rich number, drawn together:)
So it is also 3 times 20, and an half. As a Great Moed of the Witnesses. There
having also been, 3 times 20 years of Bondage, signal enough, before the 70
years Captivity: 20 with Laban, and 20 with the Philistines, and Kiria^l-jearim,
1 Samuel 7. and 20 with Jabin also: from whom they were freed by Barak, Lightning
(and the Son of man shall come as Lightning,) Son of Abinoam, the Fathers
Beauty or Brightness: on Mount Tabor, where our Savior shon as Lightning, or
Barak, from Kad^h (the holy City of Refuge) in Nepthali, Great Wrestlings* as
Rachel first, and Then Deborah notes in Her Song. Whence the willing people,
or Aminadab; and leading Captivity captive; may easily come to the 110 Psalm,
and 68. where also we read of Women Preachers, or Singers (a part of Prophecy;)
as we find in Miriam, and in This Deborah, Rising up, under Tamar (which is
also the Palm Tree) where the former Deborah, Rebecca's Nurse, was buried (it
seems,) in Genesis called, Allon-Bacuth, the Oak of Weeping, as some render it:
But in the Targum and Jerome another kind of Tree. And of All Trees, the Palm
is famous (as the Camomel in Plants) for Rising up, by Treading down. As we saw
before, in Their Great Hosannah, of the Greatest Feast of Tabernacles. And in
This Deborahs Song and Time, we may find Megiddon, and Horma; As in Gedeons
Time also, to be compared with Megiddon in Zechary, and Harmagedon in the
Revelation.

14 More added to 70, bring us to 84, which in Hours, is just 3 Days and an
Half, the Great Moed of ohe Moon, Covered or Cased, (...), As a secret (84. and
(...), 80, 81, 85.) Now she soaaketh, or sucketh, the sack of the Sun ((...),
and (...):) by which she becomes As a Sea, (...), Or a Great Measure of
Waters, which she pours on the Earth; and so becomes (...), white and sick,
as in Latin Sicca Luna, and Sitiens. And Whiteness argues Dryness; as white
Hayrs, and whited Cloth.

Being freed (Pad, (...), 84, 89:) she becomes White and Fair; which in
Solomon is Lebana, (...), 87. 3 Hours, and 3 Days, and an Half. And now being
Leavened by the Sun, she goes swelling on, (...), To her Child (and (...) may
also be the Time of her Full, as well as Change) Till she Wane, or Weane her
Child; After the Full: And then goes on to her Casing again. The Earth shall
be like the Moon in This also; bearing Fruit, every Month: as we saw before.
That I speak not of the Chemists Moon, impregnate with their Sun, which may be
in us also; though we throw away the Golden Sands and Rivers, which the World
contend for: because we do not know our selves, and what we may come to do.

As Lebana, or Levana Dea (the Romans Great Midwife) she is also the Queen of
Heaven: (...). As English call the Welken, and the Milken way: (And Milcha was
also near akin to Laban Genesis 22:) And They have Melcom also, Binghams Melcom;
and Melcom Regis, the Kings Kingdom. But she is not Lebana, till White, or
quite free from the Suns Rays, or Solomon's Hamma; (...). Which may mind us of
the Jews Tradition of Ham, with his Wife, in the Ark; as begetting all that
adustion and blackness, which we still see in the Moors, or others, under
Jupiter Hammon, Lord of Egypt, called the Land of Ham: and Misr^.

There also was Lebana, the Tile, or the Brick; called Lebena: 3 Taps long, and
Half so broad, as we may learn from the Talmud. Which may also persuade us,
that Solomon marrying a Daughter of Egypt, called his Spouse from That
Brick-hill, or Lebana. As Abraham had his Hagar from Egypt: Yea and Sara also,
was recovered from Pharaohs House, with great Riches, by many Plagues; as Types
of those, which afterward brought out Israel Thence, with great Riches also.

But when Solomon compares his Spouse to Lebano; and calls her from Lebanon;
may he not remember Jacobs calling, and carrying his Spouses from Laban? By
Lebanon, or the Head of Lebanon, Mount Gillead, the Heaps of Witness; and
Mispa; To Penuel, Mahanaim, and (...), (or, his Feast of Tabernacles, After his
Brother was Reconciled:) Seeing Solomon also, Names so many of those Places,
or Actions? And then cries, Return, Return, O Shulomith: as alluding, both to
Shelomith, the Blasphemers Mother, Levit. 24, and Shimeies Child, in
Chronicles; and Daughter also to Rehoboam, and to Zorobabel from Babylon: But
now called Here, as Spouse to Shelomoh. Return, from Babel, with Zerobabel; As
thou did Return with Jacob from Laban, at Padan (Their Redemption; as
alluding to his two Daughters:) To Mahanaim. For, so also, it follows. What
would you see in this Shulomith? What, but Mahanaim? Or, such a meeting of
Angels, as Jacob ^d, at Mahanaim.

And David coming to Mahanaim, in great fear of Absalo^ (As Jacob, of Esau,)
parted his followers into Three Bands; as Jacob did; and committed them to his
Fathers Good Will; which is Joab, Abishai, and Ittai the Gittite I^to, with
him. And Solomon cries, Itti Millebanon Calla, Itti (...). Itti, Ittai, Itto,
Ito, Ite, Gitti, get ye.

And His saying, Thou have Ravished my Heart; with one of thine Eyes, from
within thy Locks: And, Turn away thine Eyes; They overcome me: And, Thy Locks
are as Flocks of Goats, from Gilead; and again, Like a flock of Goats, on
Gilead; may not only allude, to the same Hebrew words, for Locks of H^ir, and
Flocks of Goats, which are Seirs: But to the Seirites also from Mount Seir; or
400 men of Sire Esau, coming to meet Jaoob; as he came from Gilead, with his
^oats also: and they surprised him, with unexpected Kindeness, and Love;
Ravishing his Heart; with Those Goats of Seir, more than All the Lambs of
Rachel, the sheep. As if These 400 Seirites, might also represent the 400,
which recovered David's Two Spouses also, (His Fathers joy, and Brothers Beau^y,
Abigael and Ahinoam, of Jezreel, the seed of God:) After Three Days, and a
N^ght of sorrow (as he often alludeth;) As also the Two Witnesses, that espied
Jericho, lay hid three days, and a Night. When Rahab tied the Scarlet Thread
of Faith (or (...)) by which she was saved; and All her House and Friends. As
Lydia (and her Husband, and diverse others) a seller of Scarlet also; as akin to
Rahab, and Her Scarlet. And Abraham also, divided his men, by Night. Even his
Catechized Enochs: 318, of his own, with those of Aner, Escol, and M^mbre:
which might make them up 400, also. As his See^ must serve 400 Years; and Then
3 times 400, and an Half also: perhaps; when we come to our Characters of
Daniels Numbers, and the Revelation.

Yea and David's Spouse also, Ravished his Heart, and saved his Life, and
conquered his Fathers Wrath (or at least blunted it) by Her Flocks of Goats; or
Locks of Goats Hair, (1 Samuel, 19) And Mical might represent the Goats also: For,
she is All, as her name imports; Who is All. The Younger Daughter of Saul, as
we All were, of Death and Hell, till married to David. And Then to Paltiel, God
my Deliverer; or saved by God: who followed her, weeping over her, (see Jeremie
31.) Till she also, came to Bahurim, the Elect, or Virgins, as Alemoth, in the
Chaldee Paraphrase. And when she was come to Bahurim, Abner, the Fathers Light,
or Understanding, (who must not look David in the face, till he bring in,
Mical) saying, to Paltiel, Return again, (again, O Son of man!) carried home
Mical: and delivered her to David, whom she Loved; though for her Mocks (and
Saul gave her for (...)) she is childlesse, which is a great mystery; besides
the saving of her children from Hanging. As Those of Adriel.

That is, the Flocks of God (who are made spectacles, to Men and Angels; as the
Great Catharmata; to bear the Curse, and scorn of others.) Who was the son of
Barzillai, (a famous name) of Meholah. And Abel Meholah, was the City of
Elisha, God Jesus, the Judge, or Son of Shaphat; and famous for Gedeous
victories, Judge. 7. 22. And in Solomans time also. As coming from Mahalah;
sister to Nebaioth, Ishmaels Daughter, married to Esau: As another Mahalah,
Grandchild to David, was afterward married to Rehoboam. But This Adriel of
Meholoth, marries Saul's Eldest Daughter (promised to David) named Merab; that
is, Before the Rabble: as we read of Nehemiahs brother, fearing God Merabim,
before many, or the Rabble: as English express the Hebrew (...) and (...)

But this Merab, the first born from Saul, becomes but a little weak Flock of
God, (Adriel Meholoth; As David may allude in all the Psalms that speak of
Mahalath:) But Fear not Little Flock; You are the First Born; and it is your
Fathers Pleasure, to Give you a Kingdom.

But Mical Loved David. Tell me Peter! Who shall love him most? or best? And
David is Love; And Love must Conquer All; and Cover All Transgressions: As
Solomon tells us, before the Beloved Disciple, or other Apostles.

But we are not yet come to show how David was also to fulfill That of Jacob,
with his two sister wives, the Daughters of ^aban. Yet They, who track him
Thence, to Bethlehem Ephrata, and see Rachel, Dying thereabout, will not wonder
at That spoken of Rachel, at Ruths marriage, and our Saviors Bir^h, as David's
also, at that very Bethlem ^phrata. And because they smote the Judge of Israel
on the Cheek, He gave them up, till She bring forth (the fullness of the
Gontiles as we saw before) who There traveled: so near to Bethlehem Ephrata.
Which, though it was but small among the thousands of Judah, yet was to bring
forth the Ruler, that was Typified by David; and by Both the sons of Rachel
also, Dying and Crying There, till Christ was Born. Who, as the Talmud and most
Ancient Jewish Authors teach us, was first to come as the son of Joseph, Ben
Joseph; and to be slain: and Then Ben David; who was to be a Glorious Prince,
and to recover them, as David did his two wives, and all his friends, carried
captive from Ziglag: as Jacob brought his two wives from Laban, by Mahanaim
also: of which before.

They that track him from Laban to Egypt, and back again, As Abraham from
Charan; may see the motion of the Moon, in her double state of New and Full,
crossing the Ecliptic, with North and South Latitude; attending the Sun also,
in all his Declinations, North and South, As Their Journeyings were.

In all places, the Spouse is Lebana: so with Laban; so at Lebanon; so in
Egypt; and so also, in Arabia: whose Frankincense was Lebona. And Solomon's
spouse had the smell of Lebanon, and Lebona. As alluding to the Temple
Ketoreth; of which before: or to Keturah, married to Abraham, about the Time of
Rebecca's coming from Bethuel, and Laban; so that she was also Lebana.

And when the Manna fell, they cried Man! or called it Man: being like the
Good, or Goat, seed of Laban. As the words may sound, (...) which yet some
render, As Coriander seed or Goid, in Dioscorides:) and it was White Alban, a
Methathesis of Laban: whose Goats also were White and streaked. And that of
Manna, and the white Stone, in the Revelation, may perhaps allude, to That
white Good Seed or Savior, which they also called Man (not knowing what it
was,) and the Seed of Gad, or God, whom they also call (...): And in Esaias, they
sacrificed to Gad, whence some bring Godt, and God, and Guide, and Good, and
Good Nese, the Good ^le, of Gades: the old Elyzian Fields, Hesperides, or
Fortunate Islands.

And as Man, is the great Reckener on Earth, as we touched before, from the
Hebrew Mana, to reckon; so is the Moon in Heaven; Moan, Reckoning, or the
Counter. And as she is called Lebana, from VVhiteness, so she is called
Jareach; As Reaking, like Incense, Lebona. Which in the Temple was a VVitness,
as the Moon in Heaven, to the Great Covenant which God made with Man, and
Mankind, in Noah; when he offered Sacrifice, at his coming out of the Ark: and
God smelt a sweet savor of Rest (which should be still remembered, all the many
times we read that Phrase:) and said in his Heart (However his Face, may seem
to frown, yet All the words of his Heart shall stand; and he said in his Heart)
I will no more Curse the Earth for Adam: For, or although, every would of his
Heart be Wrong, from his youth (or before his youngers:) neither will I add to
s^ite or Hack ((...)) All Flesh; or Any Flesh (As Any Work, in the 4th Command,
and diverse other places:) As I have done, etc. And this Everlasting Covenant
was made, when he smelt that sweet savor of Rest: which in Hebrew may sound,
The Moon a Reak of Night, or Rest. (...). As if the Moons Intercessions, betwee
the Sun and the Earth, might also represent the sweet Odours, of the Church to
Christ, and of Christ to his Father, who has made That everlasting Govenant
with man, for His sweet Odor of Rest; as sure as the Moon, a faithful VVitness
in Heaven; as the Psalms express it, speaking of the Covenant made with David,
and his Seed for Ever. As before with Abraham, and His Seed; and with Noah, and
His Seed for Ever. Which is made the measure of all other Covenants: So that,
If This, which God made with Noah, for Day and Night, or other seasons, can be
disannulled; Then also, may his Covenant with Israel: As himself speaks, in
the 33 of Jeremy.

And as Jareach may come from (...) to Reak, so also from (...), the common
word for Spirit: (as (...) the English Racket, a Fan, or Vane; But (...) is
Vain, (...).) Yet a little while, and God will pour out his Spirit, on the
Earth, as the Sun does on the Moon. He will give us the Upper and the Lower
Springs, as before in Achsa. The Precious things of the Sun, and Precious
things of the Moon; of the Heaven above, and the Deep Couching beneath: And the
good will of him that dwelt! in the Bush!

And when he saw, that Moses said, I will now turn aside, to see This great
sight, and that he turned aside to see; He called to him, etc. It is This
Moses, speaks so of Joseph, whom his Father also blessed, with the Blessings
of Heaven above, and the Deep below; the Breasts and the Womb. And These on
Him, that was separate from his brethren (see Prove. 18. 1. as in Heb.) And they
scorned him (as they Thrust out Moses also, saying, Who made thee a Judge among
us? But God exalted him; and so he did Joseph also, Sophie:) the Dreamer. And
Lo this Dreamer comes. And his Dreams were Sun and Moon, and a Crown of 12
Stars also. Rachel was the Sheep, but He the Shepherd, and the Stone of Israel;
to be compared with Dan. 2. and other Scriptures comparing Christ to a Stone.
And may we not find Three Tribes of Rachel, in Canaan; with an Half also
beyond Jordan? Or what if Rachels Two sons, should also be Stones of VVitness,
(As Jacob spoke at Gilead) parted also, or measured, by Three and an Half? As
we see they were: and the Lord, dwelling at their Shilo, and Mispha, Sechem,
and other Shoulders also. While the very Temple it self, or its Court, was
parted between the Tribes of Benjamin and Judah. That I speak not of the
Tabernacle settled so long at Gibeon, and the Ark at Kiriath-jearim, another
City of the Gibeonites (saved on the 3d or 4th day, in Josh. 9.) who yet were
Cursed by Joshuah; that is solemnly Devoted to God and His service; As the
Nethinims in all the Bible.

I have yet said nothing of the Candlestick in the Tem ple, parting it self
into three Branches, with three Bowls and three Flowers, and three Lamps, on
either side of the Great Lamp, in the Midst (as the Sun in the middle of the
seven Planets:) which yet so inclined to the West, that they commonly call it,
the Western Lamp: still burning, Day and Night. And measuring Time by Three and
an Half, on each side; or Seven in the Whole: while the 12 Cakes of Shewbread
lay by, and were changed also; every Sabbath, or 7th Day. And the Incense
offered at 7 and 14, as we showed before. With the other Altar, without, for
the Tamid: where the Fire was not quenched, Day or Night: And the Salt Frying,
as the Worm, never Dying. And the Spirit of God, as the Air, or Sulphur also
(which is (...), somewhat Divine;) as a River of Brimston, Kindling it. Yea, and
the Sea of Sodom also, before the Throne, as we touched before; in the Molten
Sea; so placed in the Outward Court, as the Lake of Sodom was to Jerusalem: On
the Right Hand South-East. As we may read in several places. How the Seas, and
Lamps, or other things, came to be multiplied by 10, in Solomon's Time, we may
speak in Characters, if God permit.

In the mean time, let me add, That He, that believes is Child of the Promise
with Isaac, and Blessed with faithful Abraham. Yea, He that is weak in
Jerusalem, shall be as David; and every one that Thirsts, receives His
Everlasting Covenant, and His sure mercies, or his Holy Things, in all things
Ordered and sure.

His seed shall endure for ever. His Throne As the Sun before him; It shall be
established for ever as the Moon, as a faithful Witness in Heaven: Selah. Then
follows the Laying, or slaying, of those faithful Witnesses. But How long! will Thou O Lord be Hidden? Here is the Great Nister (as the Jews call the 3d
Person, As Hidden) or Mister, as the English; or Mystery, we touched before:
and Lanetsach! And Cheled, the word here used: with others, leading us to Adam,
and Abel: Then to Enoch and Elijah. When we shall resolve that Dying Eclipse on
the Cross, in Hours, and Days, and Months, and Years; As we shall be enabled
by Him, whom to acknowledge, on all Occasions, is our Happiness and Glory.

What is the Proper Age of the Moon, (its (...), or (...)) when called Jareach,
may not be easy to determine. We found her before in her Casing, sucking the
Sun, as a Sea ((...) and (...)) till her Heat, as That in the Earth, and our
Heart also (the Cause of all motions and clicking Pulses) make her first Reak,
and then Boil, as a seething Pot, or a Boiling Sea. (...), Seath, Sees, as the
Greek (...). Spirit boiling up, as enflamed, by Heat within. And so the Moon,
and Sea also may flow, as we touched before; to be compared with Esaias 64, 1. 2.
Psalm. 147. 18.

In Numbers Jareach ((...)) makes 218. Which in Hours, is but 2 or 3 more, then
Three times Three Days. Or if you will, Three Nights: because the Moon is to
Rule the Night. And all the Nights of the week, make but 3 whole Days of 24
Hours, and an Half; before the Sun of the Sabbath Rises: As the Lamb of the
Sabbath Day; with his 144000 Virgins, following the Lamb of the Sabbath: as the
Jews Clakins, of the 144 Hours of the six Days before the Sabbath; as the
first Fruits to God and the Lamb; of which before. Of Days, and Months, and
Years, in Characters.

To 3 times 3 Days (each 3 is 72 Hours) adding6 Hours more, we are brought to
Midnight of the 10th Night; before the 10th Day: the time of Jerecho. In Hours.
222. the 3d part of 666. And Jerichos Walls mightr each to Heaven, or at least
to the Moon, as it signifies. Though we have not yet compared its Trumpets with
them in the Revelation. Or the Last Plagues of God, and the Last Woe. When it
is past, No more Curse: But as we saw in Jericho, though Cursed (as Gibeon
also,) yet built again by Hiel, the Living High God, from Bethel the House of
God, in the Days of Ahab, Brother and Father also; As we saw before

If we go forward to reckon the Age of the Moon, and the World together, we may
remember, that although the Jews Night, were in Winter, about 7 minutes more
than 14 Hours long; yet they always made, or accounted it Even, to their Day:
and so it was, (There and elsewhere) at the Equinox, in which they agree, the
World was Created. Let us a little compare it, with the first Month, in which
they came out of Egypt.

When the first Night of Time was past (as the Cubits first Span, of 3 Taps, or
Watches, of 4 Hours apeece, or 4 of 3:) 12 Hours, brought up, That great Change
of Light for Darkness. It is made of 3 (the Father of all Numbers; and Ab, in
Hebrew (...), is 3) on 4 the Mother: as 7, is 3 with 4; which we found the
first square Number, or Compound; as 3, are all Simples.

The 2d 12 Honrs, were All Children of Light, which we called the sons of
Israel; as the former 12 were sons of Darkness: or 12 sons of Ishmael the
Firstborn of Abram, the High Father.

The 25th Hour, brought in, the next great Change of Darkness for Light, and is
the nearest Root of 666, the Course of the Moon; that Eve of Night, as the Sun
is the Adam of Day; with his 12 also (as Apostles;) the Root of 144.

35 and 36, Brought in, the Second Change of Light for Darkness. As 350, and
360 Days, bring up the 2d Year, both Solar, and Lunar, which is, as the Day
Dawning, in the 35th Hour, before Full Light in the 36th: which is 3 times 12.
And the Half, being also added, makes 42, which brings up Noon, or perfect
Light, of the 2d Day. Which is ended, by 12, drawn into 4 (the first square
Number) bringing up the 3d Nights Rest, and great Change, beginning with 49, or
7 times 7, as the Jubilee: and Hebrew Midda, Measure of measures, (...) 49.

60 Hours, bring up the Morning of the 3d Day; and 66 its Noon: and 70, is the
Hour of its Evening Minha (had it been appointed:) to be compared, with the
Pentecost, and Return from the 70 Years Captivity; and many other 70 in
Scripture. It coming so up, in the 3d Day, which is also ended, with 72 Hours,
as the 72 Elders, of the Sanedrin: 6 times 12.

84 Hours, bring up the Sun of the 4th Day, and frees the Moon from the Sun: as
we saw before. So that Both those Witnesses, might Then, be seen in Heaven;
Where One, or Both, had yet lay hid, till the 4th Day; or after 3 Days and
Half (which is the Night of the 4th) the Moed of these Heavenly Witnesses; to
measure all other.

And as, the Sun of Righteousness, did not appear, till the 4th Great Day of
the World; so perhaps he came, in That very Hour (of the 1000 years) which
answers to the 4th Days Minha; or some other signal season, that may tell
us, both his Setting, and Rising again; when we shall consider all his Moeds
also, of 3 Years and Half, 3 Days and Half; yea, and 3 Hours, and Half, great
Eclips, on the Cross; of which in Characters, as God shall help us: with the
Prayers of his people, who must help the Lord against the Mighty Powers of
Darkness; that He may bring out his Mavelous Light, which is Dawning among us.

96 Hours, end the 4th Day. And 7 times 96, are but 6 more than 666. Whose 6th
part is III. in Hebrew letters (...), the Measuring Line; we touched, in Kav la
Kav, Sav la Sav. And (...), is also just 96, as (...) 106, and (...) 100 and 11.

120 Hours (10 times 12) bring up the 6th Day; in which man was Created: and
when he had fallen, and God grieved, or Repented, or resolved to change him,
(because he had made him on Earth, and not kept him in Heaven,) He said, My
Spirit shall not be a Don, or Dun, to Man for Olam (140, or 700,) in their
Erring, who is Flesh. But his Days have been, or shall be, 120 Year (as
English also speak, as the Hebrew, Year, for Years:) as there were 120 Hours,
before the Day of His Creation: which we may consider again, when Christ
himself shall grow up, to be a Perfect Man, in the Evening of the 6th Day,
before the Great Sabbath, of which again.

The Hebrew words, for 120, (...), may be just 666, if (...) be but 40: and if
it be 600, Then they make 1226, and with Vau, 1232, which wants 100 to make
1332, which is just Twice 666. How near to Daniels 1335? as the other, to 1260,
in the Revelation?

120, Then, is Gods great Moed, for Man: And Moed in Hebrew, (...), is just
120. 3 Times 120, is 360; 3 and an Half, 420; and three times 420, are just
1260. And 10 Moads, 1200, which may be in Moadim; which truly seems more than
Two Moads; as Slashim, and other Plural Numbers, are 10 fold to their Singulars.

140 Hours (Twice 70,) come up to the Evening Minha, of the 6th Day, when Man
was Created, and prepared for the Sabbath following (as our Savior also,
Rested in the Grave, after his Evening Sacrifice and Minha, on the Cross.) And
144 Hours (Twice 72) bring in that Sabbath, or 7th Day, beginning (as the
Christian also seems to begin, where the other ended,) in the Evening.

150, the Sabbath Midnight. 156 The Morning. 166, The Hour of That Days,
Evening Minha. 180 Hours, bring up the Morning of the 8th Day: 10 times better
then the Noon of the First Day, which was the 18th Hour. 190, That Evening
Minha; which generally began about the Ninth Hour of each Day. Which is
therefore called, The Hour of Prayer; as we saw before, in the Cripple healed
at the Beautiful Gate; and Cornelius also, by the same Peter.

214, The Evening Minha of the 9th Day. 222 The 10th Midnight, or Jerecho, (of
which before:) being the 3d part of 666. Which may therefore be 3 times worse,
as 3 times bigger, then Jerecho was to its Two Spies, or Witnesses, that were
hid, by the Woman, 3 Days and an Half. As we saw before. As also the 10th
Midnight might be 10 times as Dark, or worse then the first Night was.

For we are now come (in Hours) to the Time of Hiding, Slaying, or at least
Laying the Witnesses. Being the Black Dark Days of Aegypts Darkness, for 3
Days and an Half, (with the 3 last Woes, or Plagues, in the Revelation;)
before Isreal's coming out of Egypt. Or, if Those days of thick Darkness, to
be felt, were begun before This (which seems very little, if at all:) yet
sure, they might be Types; or at least, Warnings, to Israel; who had Then
Light, while their Enemies were in the Dark. As if to intimate, that all the
Darkness of the Worst Days, or Hours of Darkness (as our Savior speaks)
should fall on Egyptians only, (the black sons of Ham, as before:) and not at
all on Israel. Though to These also, it was a Great Hour of Temptation; As we
may see, when we come to their going out of Egypt.

Now also the Pascal Lamb, or Goat must be Tied up, as one of the two Witnesses
to be slain on the 14th Evening; but set apart, and separate, or sanctified
(the Phrase we saw before) on the Evening of the 10th Day, or beginning of the
11th Day: As 3 days and Half before its slaying.

240 Hours, end the 10th Day, and begin the 11th, whose Morning is 252. 260 Its
Evening Minha. 264, brings up the 12th Evening. 276 Its Morning. 285 Its Minha.

288, Bring up the 13th Evening, and 300 its Morning. 310 The Hour of Minha.
324 Bring up the next Morning, the 14th Day. 3^3, the 9th Hour of That Day, or
the Evening Minha; when the Two Lambs (or Witnesses) are slain: the Daily
Tamid, and the Passover, which might be a Goat, or a Lamb.

We are now, to look up a while, on the Moon; the Counter (as the Hebrew Moan:)
That Faithful witness in Heaven. She was White before, (from 3 Days and Half,
or 84 hours:) and Lebana, (...), 87, 3 hours, and 3 Days, and an Half. But Now
she is White as Snow (on Hermon;) which is Sheleg, (...), 333. She ligs, or
lies in, in White, as in Childbed: and she Lights, which is (...) (akin to
(...)) and Ligg is (...), Legit. As Lectus, and Electus. As Two in a Bed, the
One Elect, the other Left, to Lig and lie: Or left to the Left hand.

And Sheleg Turned, is Gelesh, Glass and Ice, in Hebrew (...). And Shegel, the
Bedded Wife, as before. Each is 333. Let the Full Moon then be Sheleg, and the
New Moon Shegel: As the Queen, at the Suns Right Hand, or South, or below him,
as we saw That Phrase. Or as Jericho stood to Jerusalem (this had 24000
Standers, and that 12000:) Or as Sodom; and the Molten Sea, in the Temple. In
Gold of Ophir. Ke Tem, As Perfect (just 1000,) or As Teaming: which is Hebrew
bringing perfect ones, and Twins; in Hebrew Teomim. As Esau and Jacob were
Twins, and Perfect also, in their Generation, as we touched before, with Jacobs
Hand, on Esaus Heel, in Ezdras.

Ophir also may hint her Fruit and fraught, which are Hebrew (...), from (...).
Free and Bear; as before in (...) and (...). For, Ophir is, I will be, or make
fruitful; as well as Gold of Peru, or rather Zeilan; as the Great Peleg
shows. And Solomon's Gold from Ophir, made up 666, Talents; As the Course of
the Moon, in 666 Hours. Or the Golden Image in Dura, 6 in breadth, and 60 in
Height: of which before. And though the Sun be as Gold, and the Moon as silver,
(with Chemists,) Yet This silver Sheling, is also Shegel, or Shekle, in Gold of
Ophir. As in Hebrew, the word for Sun, is Feminine, or Commune; and the Moon is
Masculine.

Shall she also, as Sara begat Isaac, that Sun of Laughter, when she is freed
from her Monthly Courses, or Changes; Then, be As the Sun? and the Sun seven
fold Brighter? Shall she Then be as Perfect Gold! Ketem Ophir? Or, as He that
is Perfect; as our Savior speaks! Or as the Canticles, Clear as the Sun; to
be compared with the 4th, and 60th of Esau? where also, Thy Sun (spoken to the
Church, Verse. 20, may be just, As the Sun, (...), 660. But if (...) be 500,
Then is Thy Moon (in the same Verse) (...), 718. But 52 Hours, Or Weeks of the
Year, more than 666: the Number of the Beast in the Revelation: And of the sons
of Adonikam, my Lord comes, or Rises; at the Return from Babylon, a Type of
That to come. As we see in Ezra 2. 13. the Children of Adonikam, 666.

And as 333 Hours, bring us to the 14th Evening, or Minha Passover; So 336, to
the beginning of the 15th: which is shut up with 360 Hours, as their Year with
360 Days. We are now in the Feast of Unleavened bread: and at Full Moon: As if
That, were to shadow out the Sun of the ^d Year, to be 10 times better then the
Light of the ^d Day, coming up in 36 Hours. And 360, is 3 times 120, Gods Moed
for Man; which is 3 times 40. 372 Bring up the Morning of the 16th Day; the
Wave sheaf of Barley; the first of First Fruits, Heaved up, as our Savior
Raised, on the Third day, after the Passover was slain. And from This Day, 50
Days, to Pentecost, are 1200 Hours. Added to 360, they make 1560, for the Moed
of Pentecost: Or Biccurim, the first Fruits. Of which, 420, bring up the Morning
of the 18th Day; or Crisis of Their Passing through the Sea: or end of three
Days and Half, their Hour of Temptation. Beginning from the Passover: though
they got not out, till the Sunset of the 15th Day, or Hour, 360, As a new
year. Deuteronomy. 16. 6. Nunb, 33. 3.

430, The Evening Minha of that Day; answering to their coming from Egypt, 430
Years, after the Promise, to Abraham, That very Night. 444 Brings up the next
Morning, with its Tamid. It is Two Thirds of 666. 450 the Noon of That Day. But
after Moses song, and the Lambs they wanted water 3 Days: and came to Marah,
Bitterness, till the 12 Fountains, and 70 Tamars.

480 Brings up the 21st Evening (As the Temple after Egypt: Though a very
Learned man would have it 580:) and 490, the Morning of That great Feast of
Unleavened Bread: as Daniels Weeks 490 Years.

500 To the Minha of That great Feast, or the 7th Evening from the Passover.
And 555, to the first watch of the 24th Evening.

600 Hours, are in 25 Days. 36 more, bring us to the Morning of the 27th Day.
By which time, the Moon begins to approach the skirts of the Suns Robe, or
Clamyd, in Hebrew (...); and Mantle, Mantle, is Hebrew (...), an upper Garment.
There, she becomes Gloomy, Glum, in Hebrew (...), 639; As the Sun is (...),
640. And the Hebrew Galum, is not only Glum, or sad and Glummed ((...)) but
also Turned or Twisted, as Galume Lace. And so the Moon in the Suns Rays; an
Hebrew word, as (...). Then she is Calm, and Clam, and Clammed, or Clummed, as
English use that Phrase; which is Hebrew, made to Blush, or be ashamed, as the
Latin Calumn: (...) and (...), 650, and 656. Which in Hours, brings us to the
Morning Watch, of the 28th Day, And 666 to the Point of Noon, in That Critical
Day, to the Moon, of 4 times 7, and 3 times 9, and 3 quarters. And her Cloud,
or Clade, or (...), of which before, makes up the perfect Olam: (...) and (...)
(so near the Morning of the 30th Day:) And Olam may signify their Hight, as
well as Hiding, or their Secret (as Sodom: and Let not my soul be in Their
seeret, or in Sodom, (...) just 666.) Or their Yoaking, or Childing, or
Fooling, or being Naught, as English use that word, akin to (...) Night and
R^sting, as we saw before. But Sleep may be frm (...) (which is to slip off
ones Clothes, and to sl^p a Flower. Psalm. 120, 6, 7, 8. and Ruth 2. 4.) or from
(...) to slop, or sloop, or throw down (as (...):) Or else from (...) Both
slow, and sloth (which is (...)) and Safe, or Salf, and Salve; as akin to
(...), to Slack ones hand, or to Pardon; and (...) (akin to (...)) to send out,
Siloam, and Shilo, As (...), in Jacobs blessing Judah; or Sh^lah, Judahs Son:
Of which before in Tamar. And what if Child, be Shiloed? As Birth, may be from
Bar, a Son (as Bara Create, and Bar Bare, sent out, or Bear) as also from
(...), a Covenant, which ever included Children; Through all the Bible: and
mainly for them. And Abraham's Berith Olam, much about the Burning of Sodom; and
from Beritus to Sodom, was the Length, and Cross Breadth of the Land promised,
in His Berith Olam. And the Flames of Sodom might possibly intimate the Ole, or
Whole, and Holy Burnt-Offerings as Seals of That Olam Berith. Especially at the
Change and Full; of every Moon; as flaming Fire: or as the World Burning, at
the End of the great Olam; when she shall be, As Gold afire, rather than Ophir.
Which yet, may be akin to the Greek Pyr, and English Fire; as (...)* as
alluding to Ur of the Chaldes, whence He was called: Or to Ire, Wrath; which
may be only (...), our Fear; and that Where no Fear needed. As the 90 and
other Psalms, tell us. But That Ketem Ofire, Perfect Fire of Love, shall cast
out Fear, and Curss, and Sorrow. As it did Gomorrah: the People of the Curss,
or Rebellion. The Spot, fixed on them, Gen 14: Though, but in Freeing
themselves from Tyrants or Usurping Monarchies. So little does God countenance
Oppression or Rebellion; or such Fighters: As Zeboim may signify. And those,
be the first Goats, (we read of, I think, in all the Bible:) For, so also does
Zeboim ^ignifie. (...) (as Zebaoth) Armies, or Militia; and Goats also, much
akin to (...) Woolves; and (...) Flies: as we see in Baalzebub, the Lord of
(wanton, lustful, fighting,) Flies. But our Jesus, by the finger of God, shall
cast him out: and even by Silence, shall destroy Babbling, and Babylon. He is
the Great Zerubbabel; and Jerubbaal also. And Solomon, That King of Peace, had
but One War (I remember;) and That was, only to destroy Lust, and Wrath, and
Rage of an Army: That is, in Hebrew, Hamath Zobae.

From Zeboim, we go to Admah; which are joined in Genesis, and in Hosea also. A
most Pathetical Scripture* He had said, Come, and let us return unto the Lord;
For he has Wounded us, and He will Heal us; He has s^itten, He will bind us
up. After Two days He will quicken us, (Here are Two Moeds:) In the 3d Day (or
3d Moed) He will Raise us up (As he raised Jesus: so he will Raise his
Witnesses:) And we shall live in his sight. Will he also, shorten the Time, for
his Elect (as Christ, or Esaias promised;) so, that he will prevent, the last
Moed? after the 3 are past? As he put up his Sword, before the last Moed: In
David's Pestilence? We shall know, if we follow on to know the Lord. His going
is prepared As the Morning (to the Evening; Or as the Evening; or Dark time:)
and he will come, as the Latter Rain (before) the Former. O but what shall I do
to thee O Ephraim! What O Judah! Your Goodness, or Mercy as a Cloud; as a
morning Dew, Passing away. Therefore (or because) I have ^ewed them ^y the
Prophets, and slain them by the words of my mouth: That (as the Latin Vt) thy
judgments might be Light, going forth; (as at first Creation, or in the
Morning:) For, I desired Mercy (Chesed) and not Sacrifice: and the knowledge of
God, before Burnt-Offerings. Though They passed the Covenant, As Adam. There,
they Clothed (or dissembled) against me. But (in the Close) He has set an
Harvest for Thee, O Judah: in my Turning the Captivity of my people. Which we
saw before, in the Moed of Tabernacles. In the next Chapter, Ephraim is, as
Jonah, going to Nineveh, or Assyria. But I will spread my Net ((...) my Rest:
As on That Whale, Vomiting Jonah, after 3 days:) and bring them down, as the
Fowls of Heaven: Orydem, Asyrem: as alluding to Assyria: By which, I will
Chasten them, according to the Report of their Witnesses; or Congregaton of
Witness. As alluding to the Law, and their constant Custom; That when any one
was chastened, There were Judges, and Witnesses standing by, to reckon, and
report, and record, the number of strips. That they might not exceed 40 (How
great soever the fault was:) He that had Many Stripes, might have but 40: Least
Thy Brother (Yet Thy Brother! Though, but now, a wicked man!) Left thy Brother
should be Vile in thy eyes: As we saw before. Bot woe unto them; Though I have,
or will Redeem them, Yet they speak lies against me. Or as Moses song, They
are Lying Children; forgetting their Father, that first made them, and then
also Redeemed them: saying, Surely, They are Children, that will Lie no more. I
will hearken; for, he will speak peace. That they may no more return to folly.
O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation!

I bound (or instructed, and at the same time) I strengthened their Arms; or
Strong Sowers, ((...):) But they Plotted Wrong to me. (...), as alluding to
(...), used before, for Binding up, (contrary to (...).) As (...) to Yoke a
Beast, and make it Tame, as a Lamb, which is also (...), and (...), or (...),
which is also Money, as stamped with it (or exchanged for it:) As of old
Pecunia from Pecus.

They returned (from Assyria, or Babylon,) But not to the High (it may be
(...), and Holy (...):) They are like a Deceitful Bow. Their Princes shall fall
by the sword, For the Rage ((...) 677) of their Tongue. Psalm. 12. 73 8. And
that we cited from Daniel 11. 36. (...). Till the Rage end: for, the Determined
must be done.

Then the Trumpet for Alarm, and the Roman Eagles: As our Savior also Comments
on it. Except it be the Caldeans, as Types of some other. And the very sound of
Samariahs Eagle (or Calf, as we touched in Eglon) may allude to those Eagles,
coming against them. Yea, and against the Temple, also, where the Golden Eagle
was a sad Omen.

And they shall say to the Mountains, Cover us; and to the Hills, Fall upon us.
To be compared with That in the Gospel, and Revelation. But how shall I give
thee up, O Ephraim? O Israel? How shall I give three up, As Admah? How shall I
put thee as Zeboim? My Heart is Turned (quite Turned) on me; My Repentings are
kindled together. I will not execute the ^ierceness of my Anger; I will not
return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God, and not Man* the Holy One in the midst
of Thee. And I will not become a Bear (...), or a Bruit Beast, Cruel and
Devouring. And yet, They shall run as Lacquies after the Lord, and he shall
show, or shout, as a Lion, Arie, (we touched it too much already, in Aries.)
Then shall the sons be afraid, or run as an Heard (yea and carking care or
charge, may be (...) As (...) flying to (...):) As Zippora, (the Bird, or the
Goat, or Saphira,) with Moses, from Egypt: and as Jonah from Assyria. I will
House them again in their own Houses, says the Lord. I will make them sit, or
Turn them again. (...). 1329. How near to Daniels 1335, or Twice 666? Is Judah
also, One of the Faithful Witnesses, in the next Verse? and Then, Jacobs Birth,
and Life, and Travels, and Weeping, and Wrestling at Mahanaim. And of Succoth,
Moed of Tabernacles, as before; with Labans service, and Lebana, and Egypt
again.

They shall be as a Cloud, and a morning Dew (Their sin, and their Punishment:)
and as Moats ((...)) from Grain (...). And as smoke: Ashan: as the English
Ashes, from (...). Yet I am the Lord thy God, from Egypt. And thou shall know
no God besides me: For there is no Savior besides me: made under all those
Commands also.

From the Hand of Seol (Grave and Hell, as St Paul's (...);) I will redeem them:
From Death I will ransom them. As Goel, the Kinsman, that had Right, and
Command of Redemption; as we saw before. And Gole, is also an English word, as
Goal. I will be thy Plague O Death, (to devour, or speak down, as before in the
Psalms:) O Seol, I will be ^hy Cut off: or most Deadly destruction. Being
promised to Break the serpents Head; to loose all his knots; and to destroy his
works, and Him that had the Power of Death, which is the Devil. Apoc. 20. 14.

Repentance shall be Hidden from me; Issater; 670. (with (...) it makes 1328:)
we touched it in Hester. As God himself, in Moses song, Esterah: (where also,
the (...) is final, as before, to make Hester just 666:) and again (...); in
the same song. It shall be a Mystery to you (a Promise, rather than a
Threatening:) As Paul also, going to cite This place of Hosea, says, Behold I
show you a Mystery; or* The Great Mystery.

With ^hee, the Orphan (shall be made Perfect (...):) shall find most t^nder
Compassions: (...), not only the Womb, or Bowels, but Their own Spirit also. I
will heal their Backslidings, (...). 1342. and with 1348. I will Heal: leads us
to Arpha^sad; I will loose, or dissolve, as the Destroyer: But also, I will
Heal, As Shaddai; the Almighty. I will be as Good, as Great, or Powerful. And
that for my Names sake. The son of Sem [the great Name; They that know it,
shall find Rest, or Noah:] Sem they say, was the great Melchisedeck; the King
of Righteousness, and Peace, which is Salem. But sure, he was the near Ancestor
of Selah, or Siloah, Rising up 35 years after his Father Arphaxad: and 3 and an
Half also. The great Reconciler of the Sun and Moons Motions: more perhaps than
19, or any other Number. Half 70, 5 times 7: And next to 6 times 6: perhaps the
just Age of our Savior, at his Death. In Hours, it brings us to the Light of
the 2d Morning, 36: As 360 Days, bring up the second Year.

I will love them freely. Though before, he had said, From my House I will
drive them, Agarsem: As Hagar from Abraham: and I will not add to Love them.
Oseph: As minding Joseph, sold to the Stocks, etc. All their Saras, are
Sorerim. Sorry Sirs. As the English Proverb to this day. They shall be Nodding
and Noddies* Among the Gentiles, Gogim: perhaps of Gog and Magog also. Both in
England, and other Northern Countries: As we find in Heathen writers.

But return O Israel, to the Lord thy God: Even yet, Thy God! As Jeremy 3. and
many other places. And the great Complaint in Zephany is, that the Polluted and
Rebellious City, would not trust in the Lord, Nor draw near to Her God. As
Manasseh (but a Type of their Return; though They thought themselves Forgotten;
as that name may intimate;) after All his sins; Yet Bowed to His God, and his
Fathers God; who Heard him.

Take words, and say; Take away All Iniquity: Not Ours only, but All. O let
the Iniquity of the Wicked (wicked also!) come to an end! And He, was Heard, in
what he prayed. Receive us graciously. This Tob, minds me of Tobiah, the Lords
Goodness. There are strange things in that Book; and of These Days perhaps, in
the true Hebrew Copy.

I will be as a Dew to Israel (yet the great complaint and punishment, was,
That His Goodness and Mercy was but a Dew.) He shall flourish as the Lilly: Or
as Shushan, of which before, and in Ester. (...) 661. Or as Susanna Recovered
by Daniel from the Elders: as Shushan by Ester and Mordecai. There is another
Mistress also. First, His Roots (under Ground, and out of sight) like Lebanon.
Then his little young Suckers, Yonikothau; (as Younger is, (...).) 66. 588. His
Glory (or Beauty, or Head, Hodo: As India (How like to Judea?) Hodi, in Ester
also. And in English, Hoddy, is joyful and glad:) As the Olive Tree: and his
Reak as Lebanon. Jasu^u, Joseve, Betsillo. And again, His memorial as the Wine
of Lebanon. From me, is All thy Fruit found. See Esaias 26. 19, 20. and Psalm
107. 40, 41, 42, 43, and 91. and 37. 34. with the close of This Prophet Hoseah.

In the Prophet Joel, we have a Form of Prayer prescribed, before the Spirit be
poured out, as There also promised. And Esaias 32. My Land shall be desolate for
ever, etc. Till the Spirit shall be Poured from on High: And then the
Wilderness shall be a fruitful Field; and That which is Now fruitful, shall be
accounted but as a Wilderness. And Then you shall sing, as in the Night of the
solemn Moed (Chap. 30.) to be added to that before, of the Feast of
Tabernacles. And Chap. 59. They shall fear the Name of the Lord, from the
West, and his Glory from the Sunrising; when the Enemy shall come in, like a
Flood (to end That Generation;) Then, even Then, the Spirit of the Lord shall
lift up a Standard against him. And the Redeemer (or Goel, and Kinsman) shall
come to Zion (or out of Zion,) and shall Turn away Ungodliness from Jacob. As St
Paul renders the words in Romans 11. applying it to the Fullness of the Gentiles,
(as the Resurrection from the Dead) when All Israel shall be saved. For, This
is my Covenant with them, when I shall take away their sins; My Spirit upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth [for, the word which I
Covenanted with you in your coming out of Egypt; and My Spirit is still
standing in you, Fear ye not, Hag. 2] They shall not depart from Thy mouth, or
from the mouth of Thy seed, or from the mouth of Thy s^eds seed, says the
Lord, from now, and for Ever. And though they Rebelled and Vexed his Holy
Spirit, so that he turned to be their Enemy, and fought against them; yet he
remembered the days of Old, Moses and his people, saying, Where is He that
brought them up out of the sea, with the Shepherd of his Fock? and where is He,
that put his Holy Spirit within him? And again, The Spirit of the Lord caused
him to Rest, etc- Chap. 63. And then follows a most sweet and pathetical
Prayer, for the time of their Captivity, to be Paraleld with that in Joel 2.
And Then, the Lord will be jealous for his Land [or for his Earth!] and will
pity his People. Yea, the Lord will answer and say, Behold, etc. And fear not O
Land, [Be not Tired, (...),] Be glad and Rejoice, For, the Lord has been
Great, to Do, or to work Great things. Be not afraid, ye Beasts of the Field.

Be Glad then O children of Zion, and Rejoice in the Lord your God: He has
given you the Former Rain for Righteousness; and He will bring the shower also
(the gushing waters; as (...) may sound in English:) the former Teaching Rain,
(...); and That also which fills up the straw, or the stalk, (...) as in the
first Month, or beginning of the year: which was also, the End of the year
before.

And you shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the Name of the Lord
your God, that has been so Mavelous for you: and my People shall never be
ashamed.

And you shall know, that I am in the midst of Israel: and that I am the Lord
your God, and none else: and my People shall never be ashamed. And it shall come
to pass Afterward, (Afterward!) I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, etc.
And I will show Wonders in the Heavens, and in the Earth: the Sun shall be
turned into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood (and may not (...) also be
(...)? before the Great and Terible Day of the Lord come: and it shall come to
pass, that whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord (Jesus, as is plain
by This cited in Romans 10,) shall be saved, or delivered. As Paul at Melita:
which in Greek may be Care, but in Hebrew, Cure and Deliverance. For, on Mount
Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be Deliverance (Here is also Pelitah, which we had
before in Paltiel:) as the Lord has said, and in the Remnant whom the Lord
shall call.

And Peter, by these words, proves that This was only begun in Act. 2. and
that the same spirit (of which They had Then, the First fruits, as Paul also
speaks) was promised to Them and Their Children, and to All (to All!) that
are afar off: even All the Lord shall call: of which we have also a most sure
Character, in our Hearing and Attending to Him; and Calling on the mighty Name
of Jesus of Nazareth: as we cleared before, out of 1 Cor. 1. Romans 10. and many
other Scriptures.

And That This was to reach, much beyond That Pentecost, Act. 2. may be cleared
from our Savior, speaking of the sack of Jerusalem, and their Great
afflictions, diverse years after That Pentecost: and then, says he, immediately
after the Tribulation of those days (and in Mark, After that Tribulation, in
those days; which in Luke, are called the Times of the Gentiles, Treading down
Jerusalem, the Holy City in the Revelation, 42 Months: and Then) shall the Sun
be darkened, and the Moon not give her Light; and the Stars shall fall from
Heaven, and the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken: and Then shall appear the Sign
of the Son of man in Heaven: and Then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn,
and they shall see the Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with Power and
great Glory. Which is also in Mark and Luke (though Both omit the Sign of him
in the Clouds;) who adds also (for the Jews, and not only for the
Apostles;) When These things begin begin! to come to pass; Then look up, and
Lift up your Heads: for your Redemption draws Nigh. Even in That Generation;
As summer, when the Fig Tree blossometh.

And those signs, There given by our blessed Savior (more by giving t^an
receiving,) are in the Prophet Zechary; with H^ggai, and Malachy, after
Babylon: and especially, in That place of Joel, with That very Pouring out of
the Holy Spirit (which was therefore not fulfilled in Acts 2d, but only begun,
before that Tribulation, and Horror there spoken of;) with signs in Sun and
Moon, and Blood, and Fire, and Pillars of smoke. For, Behold! In Those Days,
and in That Time, I will bring back the Captivity of Judah, and Jerusalem; and
I will gather all Nations into the Valley os Jehosaphat. Thither cause thy
mighty Ones to come down O Lord. Amen. Let the Heathen be Wakened (for, it is
Kets, both the End, and the Waking, or Resurrection, as we saw before:) and com
up into the Valley of Jehosaphat; For there will I sit to judge All the Heathen
round about: as before in that very Valley, as we found at Engedi and Beraca.
Put you in the sickle, for the Harvest is Ripe, and the Press is Full, etc. As
in Christ, of the Harvest, added to That of his Coming; and the Revelation
also, of the Vintage for 1600 Furlongs. And now, the Sun and Moon shall be
darkened, and the Stars withdraw their Light, and Heavens shake etc. Twice
repeated in this Prophet, and twice in Haggai, as also the Author to the
Hebrews: Again, and yet Again, I will shake: as at Jerusalem pulled down: and
again, at its setting up again.

And so the Prophet Esaias, 14, and 24 (as 24 of Matthew,) After all the Powers
of Earth shaken, and the Kings of the Earth, upon the Earth; who yet shall be
visited, even in the Pit also; as Zedekiah was in Babylon, Blind; Until I
visit him, says the Lord, in Jeremiah 32. with 27 and 29. And in the 24th,
They were carried thither for their good. Even as the Gibeonites were Cursed by
Josuah, (that great Type of Jesus;) but, for their Good also, though to draw
Water for the House of God: yet to be There, and Nethinims.

And so, here also, in Esaias, They shall be shut up, in Prison, in the Pit; but
after many days, they shall be visited, and Then the Moon shall be confounded,
and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem, and before his Ancients, Glorioufly. As those glorious songs, in the
two next Chapters: and the 27th, is of the Binding of Satan, (Leviathan, the
Dragon, or the Crossing Serpent.) As the Primitive Church did generally
understand it. Which may reach the Powers of Heaven, or the Zodiac which must
also be shaken, with its Beasts also; when the Sun and Moon, or two Witnesses,
are put out, or slain, for 3 days and Half: as ever, when there has been a
new World, or a new Heaven. And Solomon speaks as if more were still to
follow, than had gone before, to the Beth Moed.

We might Track it up to Moses also: as most things in all the Prophets. Then
will the Lord be jealous for his Land, (his Land!) and pity his People: which
Joel has, from Moses Song: That is Gods, given to Moses and Joshua (more
solemnly perhaps, than the Law it self) in the Tab. He will be jealous for
them, and moove them to jealousy: and Then, he will be merciful to His Land;
his Land! (even cursed Adama! As in Joel also:) and to His People. But when,
They are shut up, and none left to help them, as was rightly observed by the
Prophet Jonah, 2 Kin. 14. as we saw before in Daniel, and Psalm 72.

And lest This, might seem less Durable, because from the flitting Tab: we may
find it also, among the secret Councels of God, hinted to Moses, at his
private retirement, in one of his Three 40 days (as he lived Three 40 years)
on Mount Sinai: Though now placed in Leviticus 26. which may be the sum of the
Law, and the Gospel also. Yea, and the Fata Imperii, or Their Changes also; as
of the Moon in Heaven.

I will set my T^bernacle among you, and my soul shall not abhor you (which St
Paul applies also to the Gentile Corinthians:) and I will walk among you (as
if, the Ark did straiten him, as a Child in a Cradle; or in swathing bands:)
and I will be your God! I will be so! Yea, and I, will stretch out my Hands,
and feet among you, as one that swimmeth.

But if you will not Hearken! and will not! O! How much wilfulness, is still
expressed in it! And if you will despise my Statutes (changed on David
himself!) And your soul abhor my judgments, so that you break my Covenant.

Not a word of Threat, till sin came up so High, as could hardly be worse (one
would think:) And Then, I will appoint over you Terror, Consumption, and
burning Agues, to consume the Eyes (our great occasions of sin) and cause
sorrow of Heart: which the Lamentation calls, the Curse of God. And I will
set, my Face! (when they had set Their Heart) against you; and they that Hate
you, shall Reign over you.

And if you will not yet for All this, Hearken unto me, [O! how Tender!] Then I
will add to Teach, or Chasten you Seven, (...). And if you will walk with me at
adventure (Keri) and will not hearken to me: I will yet add stroke or plague,
Seven. And I will send the wild Beast [of Tooth or Teeth, as the Syriac in the
Revelation,] who shall destroy, the Tame Beasts, and the Children also. As
Molock did, in His fiery Claws; and Babel, in his fiery Furnace. And because
they bare the Tabernacle of Molock, instead of Gods; and the Image of the
Beast, and Dragon also, instead of Gods Image; Therefore he carried them beyond
Babylon: as the Prophet, and Stephen also.

And if you will not be instructed to me, by these things; but will walk Keri;
[may it allude to their walking by Tradition, rather then written Rule? As they
rejected the written Ketif, for the Keri.] I will walk with you, Keri: and I
will strike, or Hack you, Even I, Seven. And I will bring a Sword, avenging the
Quarrel of the Covenant [which they Brake, before His first stroke:] And when
you shall be gathered together [as to the songs of Asaph, the little Gatherer
of the people: as a Type of Shilo, the great Gatherer, promised, Genesis 49. 10.]
the Hebrew word wants 3 of 1200. I will send the Pestilence among you, and
into the Enemies Hand you shall be given up. As God gave up Job [the very
letters of the word here used for Enemie] into the hands of Satan the great
Ojeb, Ob, Pytho and Python. [see also Rev. 2. 10.] And in Micha we found They
shall be given up, till she that Traveled bring forth. As here, you shall be
Given up. Which may be more considered; and the rather, because the place is
clear enough, of the great siege of Jerusalem, and its Pestilence and Famine
also: with Women eating their own Children, as in the Lamentations.

And if you will not, for all This, hearken unto me, but walk in Keri, or
contrary to me: Then I will walk contrary to you, in Fury: Hamath Keri (as we
saw in Hamath Zoba) And I will correct, or instruct you, Even I, Seven: upon
your sins, or against them. (as twice in this Chapter: but once, Verse 21. it
is According to your sins.) And you shall eat the flesh of your Sons, and the
flesh of your Daughters, ye shall eat. And I will destroy your High places, and
cnt down your Hammons, and cast your Carkases, upon the Carkases of your Idols
(and all your Cities shall be waste, and the High Places desolate, That your
Altars may be laid waste, and made Desolate; and your Idols may be broken and
cease; and your Images may be cut down; and your Works may be abolished; Ezekiel.
6. 6.) And my soul shall abhor you. And I will scatter you among the Heat heu,
etc. And your Land shall keep her Sabbaths: (One great Reason of all this
Desolation.) And you shall perish among your Enemies, and their Land stall eat
you up. And they that are left of you, shall Pine away, in their Iniquity, and
also in the Iniquities of their Fathers with them, they shall Pine away. As
Ezekiel. 24. and Dan. 9. confessing their Fathers iniquity, says also, that Shame
belongs to their Fathers: As if their Childrens sins, should also be punished
on their Fathers. God be merciful to me, a great sinner, in others also.

But is there Hope in Israel, yet, concerning This also? Yea Verily, for, our
God, is the God of Hope, and of All Consolation; and the Father of Mercies,
(One with Christ, who is the Only Begotten of the Father.)

Now follow, some of the sweetest Promises in all the Bible: although the
former part of them is wronged much, by adding an If, before them, in some
Translations: (a Serpent, that may hazard Paradise again, and turn the Gospel
of Free Grace, into a Condition, Out of our Power more than Circumcision:) But
the Original, has no If: but a Promise, that they should be brought to
acknowledge (as Jer. 3. Only acknowledge) Their own and Fathers vileness, in
walking So to God, and He so to them: Or Then, their Uncircumcised Heart shall
be humbled, and Then, they shall Accept their punishment: And I will remember
my Covenant with Jacob, and my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with
Abraham! I will Remember! (How often repeated!) And I will Remember the Land!
For, the Land shall be left, and enjoy her Sabhaths: And they shall (How
sweet!) Accept their Punishment; because, even because, they despised my
Judgments, and their soul abhorred my Statutes.

And yet for All That, when they be in the Land of their Enemies (How
gracious!) I will not (I will not) cast them off, or despise them: (Psalm. 22.
24. Ioh. 6. 37.) neither will I abhor them to destroy them Utterly (Psalm 119.
8. Jer. 14. 19, 20, 21.) and to break my Covenant with them; For I am the Lord,
Their God. (a Reason strong enough, as we saw in Hosea, and diverse other
places.)

But for Them, or Their sakes (How strange is this!) I will remember the
Covenant of their Ancestors; whom I brought out of Egypt, in the sight of the
Heathen: (to this very end) to be to Them, for a God: I am Jehovah. These are
the Statutes, and Judgments, and Laws, which the Lord gave between him, and
between the Children of Israel, in Mount Sinai, by the hand of Moses. As also,
before, Chap. 25. Which two Chapters, deserve a Volume by themselves. But God
will Teach us; and make us wise and prosper, in All we do; If we would but
observe the Law of Moses: as the last of the last Prophet Malachy, and the last
speech of David to Solomon, (though now in the First Psalm:) from Gods own
words to Josuah, upon Moses Death. Jos. 1. 7, 8. And that great Arcanum
Imperii, Deuteronomy. 17. and 3 last Verses, which we discoursed before; as the best
p^ce I know, for Successive Monarchy.

And that Levit. 26, is such a gracious Promise (the foundation of the Gospel)
may be yet more cleared by that Letter, written by good Hezekiah, in full
Parliament of Lords and Commons: 2 Chronicles. 30. To the Ten Tribes, after their
Captivity begun: But they are invited to Return to That which was Sanctified
for ever, by a most gracious God (there described) In their Returning: ((...).
Which yet some render, If you Return:) citing that of Leviticus, and
Deuteronomy, with Exodus 34. etc.

And Nehemiah, citing these also, leaves out the If: (though some Translations
put it in, There also, but in little letters;) desiring God to remember, he had
promised Moses, that although he would scatter them for their sins, yet They
should turn again, and keep his Commandments etc. Compare the First Chapters
and 9th, with the 9th of Ezra, and 9th of Daniel. Which is not only in the
Hebrew Tobit, so remarkable; but in diverse places, as an Absolute Promise: else
they could not build upon it, as Assuring their Return: Except they came up to
that Condition. which they knew not that they should; Except It also, were
There promised, to be given them; even in their Enemies Land. Which is so
promised: and clearly in Ezekiel, several times; You shall-abhor your selves,
and Blush, and loath your own Doings, etc. (the most genuine and Gospel
Repentance) When you shall see me Pacified toward you, for All that you have
done. But not by your Covenant, or any thing you do, or can do; Be it known
unto you, O you House of Israel.

And Daniel, that Wise man, saw such a stress on This, that citing Moses, and
the fulfilling of his Threatenings so, that never was the like done under
Heaven, as at Jerusalem (nor ever shall be, as we saw before:) And yet, says
he, We have not sought the Face of the Lord, our God, to turn, or that we might
turn, from our iniquities, and understand thy Truth. And yet, according to all
thy Righteousness (a strange expression!) I beseech thee, let thy Anger and thy
Fury (in other Prophets and Psalms, Thy Hating, Loathing, Abhorring, Cursing)
be turned away from thy City! Jerusalem! the Mountain of thy Holiness! And
concludes, For the Lords sake: Or the Messiah; (as That Phrase, in their most
ancient Authors:) Or as himself expresses it clear enough, Because (Thou art)
Our Lord, Adonai. Their usual expression of That God-Man. As other Lords, only
by Adoni; or at most Hadoni. Their common Salutation, when they met: as we may
find in Plautus: sounding it much as the English, How don ye!

For, it is Christ he speaks to; Or the whole Trinity. Bow down thine Ear to
hear, and open thine Eye to see: Hear Adonai, Adonai Pardon, Adonai Hearken,
and Do, Defer not, for thy own sake, O our God! And not for our
Righteousnesses (which are as filthy Rags, even All of them, and worse:) But
for thy great Mercies. Which in other places, are also Manifold Mercies: as
manifold, and more, than All our sins. Or as his 9th. and 9th. To the Lord our
God belong Multitudes of Mercies, and Forgivnesses (in the Plural, as also,
cited by St Paul:) Though we have Rebelled, even Down Right, Rebelled against
him.

And Then comes out the Angel (at the Minha) with the 70 Weeks: and after, with
1290, and 1335 Days. Which may be also, in that 26 of Leviticus.

Where we read of 4 Sevens, and Chastning, or Instructing (which is the same in
Hebrew;) 4 times 7: which make a Month; or 28, in Days, or Hours, or Years, or
somewhat worth enquiring after. In general, it may Hint the 4, 7 Days, or Month
of the Moon, from the Sun. As if Here also, God would intimate, They should
return again after Those 4 Sevens, as the Moon to the Sun: as we saw in 4, 7
Days, or 666 Hours.

The word, Seven, is Hebrew (...), in Numerals, 372. which in Hours, is the
very Morning of the 16th Day of the First Month; or the great Heave Offering,
or Wavesheaf of Barley: the Resit, or First of First Fruits. In memorial of the
Morning after their coming out of Egypt; which was the 15th Day, at Sunset:
just in the 360 Hour, as their year came out, in 360 Days; and the 2d Morning
from Creation, in 36 Hours; as we saw before: and how this First Fruits, was
also a Type of our Saviors Rising up from the Dead (as this Sheaf of Barley
Heaved up) on the 3d Morning after the Passover was slain, on the 14th Minha,
333 Hour: or 40 (the 40 Hours of Christ in the Grave:) before 372, the Morning
of the Wave-Sheaf.

The morrow after the Passover, the 15th Day of the Month, or first of
Unleavened Bread, was a solemn Sabbath, or Rest, from servile Labor; and a
Feast of joy, as the Jews call it, because of the Peace Offerings then to be
offered and eaten; which they also called, the Feast of Passover. As in the
Gospel, They would not go, into Pilates Hall, lest they might be kept from the
Passover, or Paschal Feastings (for the Lamb was Eaten, on the Night before, as
we see, in our Savior; though some think he was before the Jews, in that
also:) of which Deuteronomy. 16. 2. 2 Chronicles. 30. 24. and 35. 7, 8.

But the next, or 16th Day, was for Offering the Sheaf, or Omer (both an
Handful, and a 10th part of an Epha (equal to the Bath, 3 Seas;) the 10th part
of an Homer:) gathered in the Dusk of the 15th Day (called the Sabbath after
the Passover:) yet by 3 men, saying, On This Sabbath, sabbath, sabbath; In This
Basket, basket, basket; with this Sickle, Sickle, sickle; the Men 3, and the
Baskets 3, and the Sickles 3, and they must reap enough to make 3 Seas: from
the Valley of the Brook Kidron (He shall drink of the Brook in the way; and so
lift up his Head.) Then they pass it through the Fire, that it may be Parched
Corn, and Ground also. For, it pleased the Lord to put him to pain, though a
Son: that he might learn Obedience; and by sufferings, be made perfect.

From this Sickle, they must count the 50 Days, as Deuteronomy. 16. 9. Which in Levit.
23. 15. are begun from the Morrow after the Sabbath (or First Day of Unleavened
Bread, after the Passover) or the Day of the first Sheaf; So that the morrow
after the 7 complete weeks, or 50th Day (as the Jews themselves call it,) was
the Day of Pentecost; and of Biccurim, the First Fruits, in two loaves of fine
Flour, leavened.

The Jews observe no Rejoicing commanded at the Passover (which must be eaten
with Bitter Herbs:) but at Pentecost, they sang the great Hallel Once; being
Once commanded to Rejoice; and Twice at Tabernacles (Double and more then
Double, or sevenfold to the joy of Pentecost:) As we may find in Deuteronomy. 16.
and 11th. for Pentecost; but 14. and 15, for Tabernacles, on the 15th Day of
the 7th Mouth: And thou shall observe the Feast of Tabernacles 7 Days (the
Pentecost but one;) when thou have gathered in thy Corn, and thy Wine: and thou
shall Rejoice in thy Feast (Thy Feast!) Thou, and thy Sou and thy Daughter, and
thy Manservant, and thy Maid servant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the Widow, that is within thy Gates. 7 Days shall thou keep a
solemn Feast, unto the Lord thy God, in the Place which the Lord shall choose,
because the Lord thy God shall bless thee, in all thy increase, and in all the
works of thy Hands: Therefore thou shall surely Rejoice.

They observe also, the Pure Unleavened Bread of the Passover, was a Memorial,
to endure for ever. But not that of the Pentecost, (being to fall, or be little
spoken of, when All was brought in; as we saw before, of Tithes and
First Fruits, in Ezekiel and Revelation:) And though the Passover and all its
Week, had only Pure Unleavened Bread (a Type of Christ, without sin;) yet the
Pentecost had both, Unleavened in its Minha, and Leavened also, in its two
Cakes, of Biccurim (...): and (...) the Elect, as we saw before in Bahurim.

And might not Those two Cakes, represent the two Churches of Jew and Gentile?
or the two Witnesses, to be Broken as the two Cakes? Or the Turtle Dove, and
the young Pigeon, in Abraham's Vision? Sara and Hagar, or Keturah (whom the
Jews account Hagar:) with Rebecca? or Rachel and Leah? Abigail and Ahinoam?
and diverse others, as before, and yet again: Types of the two Witnesses!

Those two Cakes, were attended, with 7 Lambs, and two Rams, and a Bullock, for
an Ole; a young Goat for a Chate; and two Lambs also, for the only Salems of
the whole Corgregation, which were most Holy: to be waved up with the two
Cakes, or Biccurim.

Which the Jews also may teach us, to be 7 Taps long (was it the Sacred
Cubit?) and 4 broad, and 4 high. As to represent a Month, of 4 Sevens, in that
26th of Levit.

If one of these Sevens, be 372 (as in (...)) and bring us just to the 16th
Morning of the Wave-sheaf of Barley; (which was just 372 Hours:) Why may not
the other 3 bring us to the Pentecost? Or 50th Day, after that Feast of Barley?

3 Times 372, make 1116. which are just 84, less then 1200, the number of Hours
in 50 Days, that make up the Pentecost, from That Barley sheaf. And 84, in
Hours, make up just 3 Days and an Half, for the Slaying, or Laying, of the
Witnesses: as we found, in the Sun and Moon (Hid in the Suns Beams, or Hamma,
(...), 53 or 93,) till she be first Malta, (...). just 84, and then Lebana,
(...) 87, in three Hours more: and Melit, or Melita, (...) 89 and 94: and
Malcha, Melcha, Milcha, (...) 95, and Sach, (...) 98. And so forward, to Sheleg
and Shegel, as we saw before.

I add not, That the Hebrew words, for that, we saw but now, in Levit. 26, You
shall be given up into the Hand of the Enemy, (...) either with (...) or
without it, make but 3 more, or 3 less than 1488, which are just 4 times 372,
the number of (...), 4 times repeated, in that Chapter, for their Chastisments.
But we may yet have a more sure Key, for That, and all other Prophetic numbers.

In the mean time, we may remember, that 222 Hours (the 3d part of 666,)
brought us to the 10th Midnight, before Jericho: And in Josua 4, 19, we read,
that they came out of Jordan, to Gilgal, the East border of Jericho, just upon
the 10th Day of the First Month: and the number of Jericho, is the Hour of Noon
in that 10th Day.

The Pascal Lamb, or Goat, began to be Tied up, or separate 3 Days and Half,
for the Passover, on the 14. As Paul's Tempest went off in the 14th Day; and
Then, he came to Melitah, or Malta (which has also been Deliverance, against
the Turks, many a time:) As Sodom was delivered by Abraham, in the 14th Year;
and Jacob served Laban, for his two Daughters, 14 Years; and Jerusalem was
freed from the Assyrians, in the 14th Year of Hezekiah; and Ezekiel saw his New
Jerusalem, in the 14th Year after the City was smitten; and in the 10th Day of
the first Month; just as the Lamb was to be Tied up: And Daniel had his great
Vision, of which we have spoken, on the 14th Day, after That Lamb, so tied up;
but not slain till the 14th Day, about the Evening Minha, or the 333d Hour,
just Half of 666.

But they came out of Rameses, on the 15th Day, Numb. 33. 3. and at Sunset,
Deuteronomy. 16. 6. just 360 Hours of the Month. As if now, they were to begin, a New
Year of 360 Days, 10 times as good as the 2d Days Light; Rising up, 36 Hours,
from the Beginning.

The Morning after was fixed, for Heaving up the Barley-sheaf: as Emblem of
their Rising out of Egypt; and our Lords Lifting up, on the Cross, and Rising
also, from the Grave, on the 3d Morning, after his Death; as the Sheaf; was,
the 3d Morning after the Passover slain.

In Hesekiahs time, they began to cleanse the Temple (polluted by Ahaz;) on the
first Day of the first Month; but they passed not the Porch, till the 8th Day;
nor the House, till the 16th Day (the Time of this Barley-sheaf:) which was one
of the Reasons why they could not keep the Passover, on the 14th of the First
Month; as commanded, on pain of Cutting Off. But Hesekiah rose early, and
called the Rulers of the City, and All, laid their hands on 7 Goats, for a
Chate; and the Priests killed them, and with their Blood, made atonement, on
the Altar, for All Israel, as the King commanded. And the King, and his
Princes, and all the Congregation, made an Act of Parliament, for the Passover,
on the 14th of the 2d Month; and then Hesekiah prayed, The good Lord Pardon,
etc, though not according to the Purity of the Sanctuary: or Laws thereof: And
the Lord hearkened to Hesekiah, and Healed the people. And the King spoke
comfortably to the Levites; and they kept the first 7 Days (as in the first
Month;) and the whole Assembly took Counsel to keep other 7 Days; and they did
so, with great gladness; as the like was not since Solomon's 14 Days also. And
the Priests, the Levites, rose and blessed the people, and their voice was
heard, and the Prayer came up, to his Holy Habitation, unto Heaven.

Pentecost, the 50th Day, from the Sheaf of the 16th, as in Levitieus; But in
Deuteronomy, from the Sickle; which was the Day before: and that, so strictly
maintained, against the Zadduces, as the Jews may teach us; that from Thence,
They cried Thrice, On this Sabbath, Sabbath, Sabbath (or the morrow after the
Passover slain, the 14th Evening:) with this Sickle, sickle, sickle; as we saw
before; as a beginning to the 50 Days of Pentecost, Deuteronomy. 16. 9. When thou put
test in, the Sickle.

In 50 full Days, there are 1200 Hours: to be compared with 12000 of a Tribe,
The First Fruits to God and the Lamb, in the Revelation. And Moadim are just
1200: if Moed be 120 (as we saw before) and Moadim be 10 Moads, as it may be:
For, the Hebrew Duall, is for Two; and their Plural for 3 at least; as we saw
in Elohim: and Plural numbers are generally 10 fold, to their Singulars; as we
saw, 10, a Congregation: As the least plural Regimen, is made with Jod, that is
10, and Im may be 50, or 610: and through all the Bible, we see numberings by
10, and by 50; and the least Captain, of 10: As also the English yet observe in
their old good Tithings, and Tithing men, with Headboroughs, and Constables of
Hundreds.

The 7 Weeks, were but 49 Days, as a foundation for Daniels 7 Weeks, of 490
Years: of which again. And though the Pentecost were the 50th, yet the
Biccurim, or first Fruits of the Spirit (Acts 2d) came on the 3d Hour, of that
50th Day. So that we may begin the 50 Days, or 1200 Hours, before the Barley
sheaf. And sure, it must be 12 Hours at least, before that Morning; else we
shall disturb the course of Nature; which began Time (as God does All) with the
Worst first; as Evening before Morning: and probably with Winter, before
Summer: That is Sowing time, before Harvest; whose last end, ended the whole
Year, and began another.

If 1200 be added to 333, the Minha Passover, or to 335 or 6, the last Hour of
the 14th Day; it makes 1533, or 1535, the number of Wrath and Fury, to be
Passed over, as Daniel 9. 16: (...), Aphek and Hamath; words ominous enough to
Israel, beaten so often at Aphek, (and as (...), is 5 times (...), so (...) is
5 times (...)) when the Ark was taken; and again, when Saul was slain, besides
all else: And though Solomon (as a Type of Jesus) conquered Wrath, and Hamath,
as we saw before; yet the King of Assyria, gloried in it, as His, and conquered
by Him: Whence also, he carried some to people Samaria (though they brought the
Wrath of God, and Asima, and Lions with them: O Ariel!) And the King of Egypt
Chained a King of Judah, in the Land of Hamath; as the King of Babylon, did
bind, and blind Zedechiah, in the Land of Hamath; as we read in Jeromy. And
the Prophet Esaias says, that God will set his Hand the 2d time to recover his
people from Hamath also; which in Zechary, must be joined to Damascus, when it
is Menucha, made Meek and quiet, as we saw before.

And though I may be out in Time, as well as Place, what if God shall show us,
All these Hours to measure Years, from Egypt, Onward? Thus?

480 to the Temple, in Solomon's 4th, who Reigned 40. Thence Ezekiels 390, to
the Temples End. Thence, 3 times 666, and an Half, may bring us to the Great
Tabernacles in the 7th Month; or just to 1666, after the 2d Temple was
destroyed.

And by This account, there may be just 666 Years, between the two great
Changes of Jerusalem (by the Chaldeans and Romans,) as the two Changes of the
Moon, under Hamath, the Heat, and Rays, or Rage of the Sun. That is, 70, and
66, and 490, and 40, from That Pentecost, Act. 2. To the Roman Sack of
Jerusalem; just 70 Weeks after the 2d of Darius Nothus (106, or measuring
(...), from the Captivity;) as That Pentecost (and Passion of our Savior,) was
70 Weeks, from Esraes Time, in Artaxerxes; 66 (or what if 70?) from the 2d of
Darius Hystasp: who restored the Temple (in Haggaies Time;) ending its 70
Years, and the Cities, 70; as Cyrus first ended Ezekiels 70; at his taking of
Babel: which was the first and last (as Lebab in our Body) of Oppression, and
Confusion, to the World, or Church of God, in most, or All the Monarchies. So,
to Nimrod, Belus, Belochus, Nabonassar, Nebuchadnezar, Nabonidus Darius the
Mede; Cyrus the Persian, Darius Hystasp: by Zopyrus; and Darius the last,
Pushed by the Goat, at Granicum, Thrown down at Issus; and Trampled at Arbela
(near Charan) as Daniel foretold of Alexander: who got the Empire, lost his
Manners, and his Life, at Babylon. As Seleucus after him, the Root of the
Seleucidae: till the Romans also, were poisoned, by swallowing, or gaping at
Babylon, which they could not swallow. Being the Fatal bound of their Empire;
several times, besides that shameful flur of Crassus at the foresaid Charan, of
Abraham and Laban, as we saw before. As a Parallel to Hamath; which to Haran,
is as Rage to Wrath; or as the Western Sun of the Afternoon, to the Morning Sun
of the East. As Charan lies to Hamath: and Both at Gods left Hand, or
Northward.

And as Jonahs 40 Days, might be 40 Years to Niniveh, As Ezechiels 40 Days,
to 40 Years of Judah; so the 40 Dais of Christ on Earth, to the 40 Years of
Jerusalem, after him; as the 40 Years in the Wilderness, to the 40 Days of
searching the Land: Or to the first 40 Days of Moses in the Mount; As Christ
40 Years in Heaven (after his 40 Days) and Then came down and brake the two
Witnesses of the Law; as Moses did the two Tables: But as Types of two other,
to be Broken and renewed again, as They were.

480 Years from Egypt to the Temple; may answer both to 48 Hours, in two Days
(beginning also the 49th of 7 times 7, as the Jubilee;) and to the first 480
Hours, of the Month, and of the Year (of 360, just the Time of Exodus; so that
it is much one, to begin There, or at the beginning of any Year;) and 480
Hours, bring us to the 21 Day; the last and Great Feast of Unleavened Bread.
And Solomon's 14 Days of Dedication, may point at the Tamid of That 21st Day,
with its solemn Offerings in the of That Day. 14th Hour.

The First 40, of the 480, bring us to Moses Death; at the 4th Hour, of the 2d
Morning: while he repeateth the Law, and 2d Covenant, in Deuteronomy. 29, and sings
his Swanlike song, and Blessings; Chap. 32, and 33.

41 Their Hour of Temptation, Passing Jordan (as the Red Sea, at the Exodus,)
and entering Canaan, much as the Lamb was to be Tied up, on the 10th Day; as we
saw before in Jericho. Yet, 41, and 42, the Number of the 2d Days Noon, Dines
them with that Country Bread.

Six Hours, or Years of War and Trouble, bring them at length, to quiet Rest,
in the Evening Minha, of that Day; ending in 48 (and 49: as the Root of
Sabattical Years and Jubilies) the 10th part of 480. In That Night, Josuah (the
Sun, of That Day) is taken from them. He had stayed the Sun, and was buried in
Timnath Here Is, Image of the Sun; as the Name speaks. And that Nights
Darkness, holds them 8 Hours more, in 8 Years Bondage, under the Blackmoor
Cushan, as akin to Cush, of Ham; the Father of Nimrod, Lord of Babel, as This
of Mesopotamia; where was Haran of Abraham, Laban and Jacob, their Ancestors.
So that Cushan seemed to call them back again, into their first Bondage. A Type
of Assyria, and Babylon; that were to be their first and last Enemies: For,
Rome never hurt them, till infected with Babylon. But I saw the Tents of
Cushan, in affliction; and the Curtains of Midian Tremble: As we read in
Habacuk.

This Hour of Darkness, as the other 5, of Moab, Canaan, Midian, Ammon,
Philistines, (as the 6 Hours to the first Midnight; or 6 Days, of the first
Week, before the Sabbath;) but as Parts of Their Days, who judged Israel, and
freed them from these 6 Hours of Darkness, in 8, 18, 20; 7, 18, 40; in all, 100
and 11: the measuring Line, or (...), we saw before; for the 6th part of 666,
the great Number of Darkness: or Course of the Moon, in absence, distance, or
opposition, to the Sun of Light. And These 100 and 11 dark Hours, being taken
out of 444, from Egypt to David in Abraham's Hebron, leave 333, or half 666:
which we may meet again.

Othniel (with Achsa, Both akin to Caleb,) is to show both the Time and Wonders
of God, as the name may hint. His 40, as Moses, swallow up Cusans, 8 Hours of
Darkness; and bring us about the first watch of the 5th Night. And then Eglon,
the Calf of Moab (an Heifer of three Years old, Esaias 15. 5. Jer. 48. 34. Genesis
15. 9.) comes up, to mind them of their Golden Calf; while Moses was in the
Mount, as many Days from the Law, as now perhaps he had been Years in Heaven.
And Eglon was destroyed by Josuah, 10, 34.

But about the Evening Minha, of the 6th Day, Ehud helps them: and Shamgar:
so, that they Rest, (from That Moed,) all the 6th and 7th, or Sabbath Day.
Which may be observed also, in all the Sabbaths, of those Days, or Years;
which we are now measuring by Hours, of the first Month.

Othniels 40, Ehud and Shamgars 80, make up 120 Years: the Great Moed for Man,
as we saw before. And 120 Hours, make 5 Days; which (added to Moses and
Josuahs, 2 Days,) bring us quite through the Sabbath, or 7th Day, into the
8th. And Then Jabin Instructs, or Teaches them to understand; as the word
may intimate, akin to the Hebrew Phrase we saw before, to Correct and Instruct.
As the men of Succoth, were Taught with Briers; made to Know: Judge. 8. 16. and
Jabins 20, bring us about the Morning watch of the 9th Day.

And Then, Awake, Awake Deborah; Awake, Awake (As there were 4 Hours to the
Morning;) Utter a Song, Arise, Arise, O Morning Star; or Bright and Light
Barak: Lead Captivity Captive. Let All thine Enemies fall O Lord, (as Saul,
with Lightning:) But his Lovers, be like the Sun in his brightness: For, This
Barak was also the son of Abinoam, the Fatbers Brightness or Beauty. As we saw
before, in glancing on That song, in Judges 5.

Barak and Deborahs 40, made them Rest, till about the end of the 10th Day. And
Then, the Lamb is prepared, for the Passover: As being Then tied up, by Midian,
oppressing them.

And now, comes out Gideons Fleece, as alluding to That Lamb; and his Lamps
also, in Earthen Pitchers (as St Paul remembers;) and the Barley Cake, rouling
in a Dream; at the Middle Watch; or soon after Midnight. For, the 7 Hours, or
Years, of Midian, came to Midnight, and an Hour after; And Then Gidion, (as a
little Kid,) Rising by night to destroy Baal (Lord of Darkness) is Jerubbaal,
and the Watchman of Israel, for That morning; and offers the 2d Bullock; yet
akin to Eglon that Calf: and his 40, gives them Rest, till the 11th Days
Evening.

There is more to be spoken of the Times of Sibboleth, and Shibboleth; and of
Abimelech, or King Father; and of Sechem and Dinah, Judgment: and Jotham, the
Orphan: If indeed you dealt kindly with my Father; for, he did deliver you;
Then, etc. But Quis talia!

Abimelech dwelt at Aruma, (from Rome, to Roam, and Ramp:) in Hebrew letters,
254: which may be, the very year of his Coming up; though others make it about
260. And so with (...) added, as Verse 31, it will be near 666, when he slew
his 70 Brethren: of which again.

His 3, and Tola's 23, and Jairs 22, make up just 48; as 48 Hours, of two Days
more: which bring us to the 14th Day, or 2d Sabbath* It had a very sad Night:
to parallel the Time when Angry Pharaoh said to Moses, Get thee from me, see my
Face no more; but Dye. So, God himself frowned on Israel (in that Night of
Darkness under Ammon, son to Lot, the Veyle, as we saw before) saying, Go and
and see my Face no more. Or, Go and cry to the gods, which you have Chosen; Let
Them deliver you, in the time of your Tribulation: For, you have forsaken me,
and Feared other gods (of whom I said, You shall not Fear them; as it is often
pressed, and given for the great Reason, of their final Captivity, 2 Kings 17.
from Judges 6. 10. and 10.) Therefore I will deliver you no more. As in Hosea,
I will no more have mercy on you; and you shall be no more My People, Loammi
and Loruhamah: and I will be no more your God. As bad, or worse, I think, them
That, I do (not yet) Pray for the World. Of which, so much before.

But the Children of Israel said, unto the Lord, (as Job says, it is still
meet to say, I have sinned, I will bear the Rod (till he turn, and have pity on
me: For, He will will Turn again, and have pity on us: and Who is a God, as
Thou art! that is, Micha!) Do unto us what seems good, in thine own eyes. If
he will; he can bring me back, and show me his Arck also, and the New
Jerusalem: but if not, and that he have no pleasure in me (which yet is worse,
much worse, than Brown bread, and my own Tears for Water:) Here I am; and by
his Grace, I will not worship the Golden Image; or of the Beast, slain with the
sword; but his Deadly wound was Healed, and the World all worshipped: but
Those, in the Lambs Book of Life. Let him do, what seems good, in his own
eyes. Father, if it be possible, and it is possible: Save me from this hour of
Temptation: But However, let Thy will (which is Holy still, and wiser, and
better also for me, than my own will:) Let Thy will be done, and not mine; in
My Earth, as in thy Heaven. So we Chatter as a Crane, or a Swallow (when we
cannot mourn as a Dove;) even. Then, when we reckon, at Morning, He will break
all our Bones.

And they put away the strange gods, from in, and among them; and served the
Lord; And his soul was grieved, sor the Misery of Israel. It shortened his very
Spirit, and Breath; as in us, when we would sigh, and cannot; O! how is our
Heart Burnt! as bound, and straightened in us! O! How am I straightened, till it be
Accomplished! we saw it before.

Then Ammon encamped in Gilead (thestones of Witness) and Israel at Mispa, the
Watch; (they prayed, and also set the Watch:) and we shall come to Mahanaim.
For, we are already at the times when Jacob said, The Lord Help me, and watch
over me: and Laban also, God is my Witness, and These also: (for, there be
Witnesses in Heaven, and They are All One; as on Earth, they agree in One:) And
to what? But That, Haran, or Wrath, shall pass away; but never Pass over these
Stones of Witness, to do me Hurt: and that I never pass These Witnesses, to
grieve thy Spirit; or to wrong thy Daughters; Though thou have changed my wages
10 or 12 times; as often as the Moon, or Lebana.

Now Jephta was a Mighty Valiant man, but the son of a common woman: which they
call an Harlot (though the greatest Norman Princes came from Arlott; the Mother
to That English word:) And Boaz also, that mighty man (of whom before in Ruth;
the Jews count him Ibsan the Judge:) was son to Rahab, the Harlot; as she is
called: but the mother of Christ, in David, so, that it is almost impossible
there should be 580 Years, from Egypt to Solomon, or Solomon's Temple: As that
great man will have it, from Acts 13, with other Arguments.

And God persuaded Japhet (or his Anagram, and Namessake Jephta,) to dwell in
the Tabernacles of Sem; and to Enlarge them also (as the word hinteth) by
freeing them from Lot (as Genesis 13. 14) And he will also take away the Lot, from
all Faces, As we found him speaking in Esaias.

Jephta's 6 years (as 6 Hours of the 14th Day) bring us so near the Moed of
Passover, that it seems possible, his very Daughter (How like Agamemnons, in
the Poets?) may represent the Lamb (or young Kid) to be offered, in the 4th
Day, from Hour 312, to 333.

And Jephta, came so near That number of Hours, or Years from Egypt, that he
sent Ammon word, that Israel had possessed S^hons Land, about 300 years; as
J^dges 11. 26. Yet 40 years, after their coming out of Egypt: that I speak not
of any former Conquest from Zippor, that Goat, or Seir also.

There is certainly some great matter in that of Jephta's Daughter. If she were
Devoted, Cherem (as Levit. 27. 28, 29.) she must Die: and could not be
Redeemed. And her Father vowed, He would make it an Ole Burnt-Offering: as the
Tamid, or the daily Lamb, which was also Burnt, at the Evening of the Passover.

That Law, is very Terrible; if it intimate the Cursed Reprobates: as it may
do. Even such, as the Son of Man himself, devoteth to the Curse: and will not
Pardon; as himself expresses of the Father, and the Son. So that, during His
Time, or Administration, (and I know not, that he ever speaks of more, or
longer;) Such, must be punished with Eternal destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power, when he shall come, or at His
Coming, in his glorious Kingdom; or during its Ever, or Olam. Such perhaps, as
by many Acts, have gotten the worst Habit, of sinning willingly, or wilfully;
and as it were, by Nature, or by their very Essence, ex ousias, as the word
Ecousios may intimate. And to such, Remaining So, Actually Rebelling, and
presuming, (as the words in Greek, and Hebrew also, of Deuteronomy. 29; being
Participles, and of present Time, not any Past:) There was no Sin-offering, or
Sacrifice (prescribed in the Law:) which yet, in that very Epistle to the
Hebrews, was so distinct from Burnt-offerings, that These might be Accepted,
where no Sacrifice was admitted, or at least, not commanded.

And although God required no Burnt Offering, of private persons, but in very
few cases: yet he prescribed Rules, if any would freely bring it: as they
might. Yea, and Gentiles also, in such cases, might ^read the Temple (...): as
may be also Promised, rather than Threatened, ^.

(...) by distinction (of Corban, or a Gift, for (...), a wa^ for Gentiles
also, to bring (...) although there be an express com^ (...) of their God, from
the Hand of (...). (...) Prayer, for Strang^rs also ((...)) (...), (...) such
access, and Courts (...) ((...) that (...) N^me, of Gentile Courts;) that we
may believe those gracious words of Christ in Esaias 56: making Them also Priests
and Levites; as the word Leviim, or Lovim from Loveh (whence the English Love
also) may plainly intimate. And in the Gospel also, he cites the Prophets
saying, My House shall be called, an House of Prayer; even to All Nations, and
Gentiles. And for all the Threatenings of Cutting off, the Jews will tell us,
Few were ever so Cut off, by Heaven, and (and why Then from Heaven?) If they
came in, and submitted to Stripes; which they say, prevented Cutting off, or
Death by the Hand of Heaven; as they used to speak: Adding also a Third step,
they called the Rebhels stroke: to which the Psalmist may seem to allude by
Gifts for Rebbels also. And in another place, he says, Let the Righteous
scourge me: etc. Even when he had deserved Cutting off. Or else, they might
come in, with Burnt-Offerings: which they tell us, confessed (as the Bringer
did over its Head,) that they had deserved, to be quite consumed, as That which
they call Ole, or Whole (as English also:) to be considered with Olam, their
Ole, or Whole also, as we touched before. And indeed, the very Face of the Moon
it self, at the Full, may put us in mind of their Ole, or whole
Burnt-Offering, set on fire, and flaming unto God. As the World, or Olam, also
must Do; at the like distance from the Great, or Good Flood; as Sodom did of
old, perhaps: Of which we may have more to speak.

And to This also the Hebrews may allude, in his Phrase of fiery Wrath,
concerning Actual Enemies: when after Light and (...) received, One sins
Willingly, There is no Sacrifice, by ^aw: but still for All that err, and are
simple; as that ^pistle from Ez^iel 4. 5, (yea, and the very Law (...)
sacrifice for Lying, and for Swearing falsely; (...) which Agur may allude in
Proverbs 30. 9. to be added (...) Syriack, of the Fourth Petition, in our Lords
(...):) But for Wilful sinners, No ^acrifice: But only that F^ery Sacrifice,
or Burnt-Offering (to which also, that may allude, of saved as by fire, or by a
fiery trial:) which might very justly (as acknowledged,) consume the Bringer
also: as the fiery Furnace did All those, that cast in the three Children, as
some call them: who were yet delivered from That fiery Furnace, by One, (in the
Kings eyes also, as Caiephas Prophesying;) like the Son of God. The Ram caught
in the Thicket: which was offered up for Isaac. Yea, and for Ishmael also, it
seems, by that gracious speech of God in Esaias 62, They shall come up, with
Acceptance, on my Holy Altar: And they flock, as Doves to the Windows. Which
were yet Goats of Seir, and Rams of Ishmaels Kedar, and Nehaioth: as we saw
before.

Nay, the Case might be so secret, or so desperate, that they durst not bring
any Offering at all. And David rightly observed, that God required No
Burnt-Offering; and yet (though he had despised the Law, as is charged;) yet he
found a way to be Accepted. So might others also, that they might Hear, and
learn to do, No more Presumptuously. As God graciously speaks; Hinting, that
Israel also, could do Once, or Sometimes, Presumptuously.

Yea, when their Burnt-Offerings also, might not be Accepted (as they tell of
some, that wilfully brake the sabbath Day; or did Apostatize from their
Religion; in which cases they speak, as if the Priest might not accept their
Burnt-Offerings:) Yet, when things were most forlorn and desperate; There was
a Sacrifice, by God (as some interpret That Chate, for Kain, a Sin-Offering)
brought, and laid at his very door.

For (besides That, which we cited but now, for every one that erreth or is
simple:) They had All a share, in the Daily Sacrifice, or Tamid, with the Meat,
and Drink Offerings thereof: which were, as Peace Offerings also. And there
were Public Peace Offerings, for the whole Congregation; to be yearly
offered. And in Public Charge, They All had part; in Lambs, and Wood, and
Salt, and Wine, and Oil, or other things; yearly bought by the Holy
Tribute-Money; Paid by every One, both Rich and Poor, for the Redemption of his
soul also: As God himself expresses it.

And they had their commune Representatives, or Standers (men of the Station,
as we touched before:) in which All persons were represented; as if All had
been Present. And the Jews say, There were 24000 of these Standers, for
Jerusalem; and 12000 for Jericho. Poor Cursed Jericho! Which yet grew up to be
the next to Jerusalem, As the Moon (to the Sun, in Heaven:) As the Name may
intimate.

This great Burnt-Offering also, in the daily Tamid, had This great advantage
over all others; That where, in private or particular Cases, they often stayed
long, in Guilt, or Fear, and Sorrow, till they could present their Sacrifice;
(which they seldom did, but at the 3 solemn Moeds) at Jerusalem: This was every
day, and Twice aday; so fixed and constant, that Wherever, or However, they
were Absent from God; Yet, He was still providing, and accepting, Their
Sacrifice (in which They All had share of Charge, and Profit; as we saw before
in that of Hezekiah, and diverse other Scriptures:) Yea, an whole
Burnt-Offering, by God himself, in all things Ordered and sure. As David
speaks of his Holy things, and sure Mercies, in which, All Thirsters, do
partake (as we saw before:) As sure, as if They were All actually present, in
Person, Laying on their own Hands; or confessing, their own secret sins, over
its Head. As the men of the Station, many a time, for Those that were Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping, Playing, or doing worse perhaps, at a great distance.

And besides the Ole Burnt-Offering, there was Daily Minha, with Incense, for
Strangers also: Or Aliens to Israel. Being as old as Abels Offering, and renewed
by Noah; as a Seal to the great Covenant with all Mankind: As we saw before,
when the Lord smelt, that sweet favor of Rest, and said in his Heart (his
Heart!) I will not strike Any Flesh, as I have done: etc.

And because the sweet Odours of this Incense, was to go forth, to so many,
that could not see it, (as the Spouse may allude in the Canticles:) Therefore,
before its offering, just with the Evening Minha, the Priests gave a great
Blow, on a Vast Bell (or Migrepha) that sounded so loud they say, that All
Jerusalem, or round about, might Hear, and know, Their Incence, and their
Interest, was then presenting to the Lord. And Then, the Standers hasted to
their private Charges also; being Trusted often for diverse particular Persons,
in their own private cases. And although they all stood silent without, and
Praying, it seemed, while the Priest offered Incence; Yet Then, he came, with
both Hands lifted up, and spread abroad, and his Fingers also, very wide they
say, to represent the Holy Windows of the most Holy Place (though some deny it
Light:) that so, the Blessing, might be more, and wider spread: on those
without, abroad at distance. As we saw before, on That, The Lord bless thee,
Out of Zion; and send thee Help, Out of his Holy Place. Out of it! although
thou may not come into it: but at a great Distance; and it may be farther,
than Those only kept out (in the Gentiles Court) by That Rayl, or Wall they
called Chell, or Hell, (...); as a Great Gulf, they might not Pass: as was seen
before.

I crave your Prayers, and Pardon, if in This, or ought, I go beyond my bounds,
or purpose to express, when first I thought to glance on Jephta's Daughter, or
Burnt-Offering. Which before, we found so near the Minha of the Passover, that
it might be akin, to a Type or Draught of that Great Sampler, which a Virgin,
might happily shadow out, as well, or better than a Man.

Was She than to shadow Him, or Her, (for, it was Israel also,) That God
himself so solemnly devoted, to the Curss? as himself speaks (even by that
very word of Cherem, used in Leviticus 27. 28.) As we read in Esaias, 42, and 43.
And yet, Fear not O Jacob, for I have chosen thee; and I have Redeemed Thee:
Though the Law be, that no Cherem (the very word there used,) may be Redeemed.
But they are all Bahurim, etc. As the words are, in the Hebrew of that 42. 22.
As (from the 39th forward) cannot be too much considered.

How Places, or Persons, forsaken, hated, abhorred, and Cursed; might be
Blessed again; we saw before: from the Law, Psalms, and Prophets, in diverse
places. Shall I add That also; Cut off thy Hair O Jerusalem, and cast it away,
Take up a Lamentation; For the Lord has Abhorred and Rejected the Generation
of his Wrath. Eth Dor Everatho. 1289. Coming just to Daniels 1290: to be
compared with Nehemiah. I contended with them, and smote some of them; and
Plucked off their Hair: a great Reproach. As Esay's Cheek, or Christ's, to them
that plucked off his Hair. And the Hired Rasor (for, they Hired Assyria, to
come upon them; as the Prophets often allude, to 2 King. 16.) to shave off, the
Hair of their Heads, and the Hair of their Feet also: Yet a greater Reproach:
As Ezekiels Hair, Chap. 5. But more yet to Women (as we may see in Ezekiel. 16.
7.) who must have Power (or a Veil (...) over them: Even because of the Angels
(of the Churches;) who judge their Reverence, by their Holy Mien; not Reaching
to our Hearts (as God;) but by our Looks and Gestures. And their Hair, was
given for a Covering, and Ornament; (though the Locusts also, had Hair, as
Women:) and a Woman's long Hair, is a Glory to Her; and if she will not be
Covered, in Churchmeetings, (where They sat apart, as yet, with the Jews;
David alone, and his Wives alone; Nathan alone, and his Wives alone:) Let her
be shaven. The great Reproach to that Sex. And so here, Cut off thy Hair, O
Jerusalem!

But O! the Kindeness! and the Goodness! of the Heart of God! May not This
Reproach also, give them an Hint, or Door, of Hope and Comfort? And that, not
only, as Strip thee, and make thee Bare; and lay aside thine Ornaments, that I
may yet know, what to do to Thee: But also, as the great Characters of
Leprosy, were taken from the Hair, and color of the Hair; So the means and
Hope of Cure, were still by shaving off the Hair. The Priest shall shut him up,
7 Days (For, if her Father spit in her Face, shall she not Blush, 7 Days?)
And Then, if the Priest see any Hope, He shall be shaven; But yet not the
skall. And Then, 7 Days more (As the Dove, in Noah's Ark, which may measure us
the Times, of the good waters in the Gospel also, and seasons thereof; as God
shall please:) and Then, if it spread, he need not look for Hair; But if it
spread not, and the Hair be Black, (as a Raven, in the Canticles; Anacreon, or
other Greek Poets:) He is Healed. Yea, Though the Hair fall off; He is Bald,
(or as Korah was) But, he is Clean. This in Skalls.

And the Leaper, to be cleansed, must shave off, All his Hair: and tarry 7
Days, and then he must shave again, his Head, and Beard, and Eyebrows, and
all his Hair; Lev. 14. 9. and Then, after Blood, and Oil, upon his Ear, and
Thumb, and Toe (in All the Three Regions of the Great little World:) He was
cleansed, by the Priest. O, what work he had to do! for the Poorest man! that
was Unclean! and could not bring the offerings prescribed! And for every House,
infected also; (Does our God take care of Houses! and of Clay! that Cursed
Adama!) The Hysop, Cedar-wood, and Scarlet (to the Hebrews;) and Two Birds, (in
Heb. nere akin to Goats) One killed in Earth, over Water (as St Peter on
Genesis, and Psalms, and 2d Command:) and the other, a Escape Bird, as the Escape
Goat. And the Plants, and Trees, and Fishes, and Fowls, and Earth, and Water,
and All, must Hear, and serve Israel, and Jezreel also: near, in Hebrew, to the
Leaper (as the Seed) of God! There was also, an other shaving, for the
Nazarite; when the Hair of his Separation is shaven; as we read in Numb. 6.
immediately before the Solemn Blessing, prescribed. As if This, had some
relation to the Nazarite, or Separate person; after his coming in again: And
the very word in Jeremy 7, 29, Nizrek, may allude to the Law of the Nazarite.

But yet, there was more Hope, and Comfort, in a Woman's shaving, than a Man's.
For, if Her Lord, bid her shave off her Hair; it might be a sign, he meant to
marry her. For, so the Law was: If thou lead Captivity Captive, (as Christ has
done) and see a Woman, that thou love; She shall shave her Head, and pair her
Nails: or Goatishness,) Sipharnea. We saw it in Saphira: the Goat: as also
Seir, is Hair, and a Goat.

Yea, the very Time, may be There Hinted perhaps (for, God is Infinite:) How
long Christ must stay, for his poor Captive Spouse; before he may be Married to
her: though she be prepared, and adorned (as Ester was,) in order for her going
in, to the King. As the Lambs Bride in the Revelation) comes down from Heaven:
As if There All the Saints departed, were but perfuming and preparing, to be
his Bride on Earth: and Reign on Earth: at the End of the Weeks. How Long?

Thou shall bring her Home, to thine House (and the souls under the Altar
cried, How long Lord!) and she shall put off her Captive Weeds; and shall
remain in thine House, and bewail her Father and her Mother (in their Enemies
Land, they shall confess their Fathers sins: we saw it before:) A Full Month,
or Moon of Days. And after That! Thou may be her Husband. And if afterward
she please thee not, Thou may leave her, to her own soul (which is the great
thing, to be feared, of a Backsliding heart from Christ:) But thou may not
sell her; because thou have Humbled her.

Jacob also stayed with Laban, before he asked his Daughter, a full Month, or
Moon of Days, Chodesh Jamim: but in the Law of Deuteronomy. it is Jerach Jamim. As
also, 2 Kings 15. 13.

May we not also compare That in Jer. 2. Thy own wickedness shall instruct
thee; thy backslidings shall rebuke thee: See and know that it is an evil and a
bitter thing that thou do forsake the Lord (and yet more) Thy God! For, of
old, I broke thy Yoke, and burst thy Bonds (Ezekiel. 16. and Epistle of Baruck:) I
planted thee a Noble Vine; wholly, a Right seed! How Then art thou Degenerate?
And How can thou say, I am not Polluted? A Wild Ass (as the Angel said to
Hagar; we are now There; with Ishmael, But God will Hear:) Taught in the
Wilderness, as Hagar was; and snuffing up the VVinde, or snuffing at the
Spirit, in the Lust of her own heart, or soul (the very word, we saw in Deuteronomy.
21. 14.) Who can turn her? All that seek her, will not weary themselves, to
find her: Or rather, Let them not faint or despair, For, in her Month
(Chodsha) They shall find her. Then; withhold thy Foot and Throat: But thou
said, It is Desperate. But can a Maid forget her Ornament, and a Bride her
Attire? Yet My People, (My people!) have forgotten me, Days without number.
But why do My people say, We are Lords, or have Power (Radnu) We will come no
more to Thee? But then follows the sweetest Chapter of the Bible; to an
Adulterous Spouse: Yet turn again: Yet Turn again [Return, return, O
Shulamith:] For I am Married to You, etc. Which at length melts her into Tears,
and sweet supplications: In the close of the 3d Chapter; and God answers in the
4th.

If a woman bear a son, she was Unclean 7 Days, as in her common separation
[not observing which, cut off, and spued out, the very Heathens; Levit. 18.
Ezekiel. 18. Esaias 30. 22. Lam. 1. 17.] and her son not Circumcised, till the 8th
Day, and Then, she must remain 33 Days [as the Moon 333 Hours:] and then she
may eat the Holy things, and come into the Sanctuary, with two Turtles, or
Pigeons [if she could not bring a Lamb:] which made them so dear, that the
Sanedrin altered this Law [it seems:] and our Savior scourged the sellers of
Doves also; which were brought by his Poor Blessed Mother. Who presented her
self, and Him also, in the Temple, at 40 days; [being the Sabbaths of his 40
Weeks in the Womb;] As at 40 Days, after his 40 Hours in the womb of the
Grave; He was presented to his Father, in his Heavenly Temple: 40 Years before
the Sack of Jerusalem.

But, for a Daughter, the Woman was Unclean, 14 Days [the 2d Sabbath; and the
Day of Passover;] and Then, she must not enter the Sanctuary in 66 Days. Which
is the very Number of Pentecost; or Feast of first Fruits; or 50th Day, after
the sheaf, which was the 16th Day of the Year. And as this, was 66 Days; so
the Moon, returns to the Sun, in 666 Hours.

And when any Woman [or the Church] is freed, from the Power, or Rule of the
Moon, and her Changes, or Courses [at the Jubilee of 49, or 7 times 7,] Then
she need not fear That, or any other separation; in common course.

And if she should be sick, so long, as the Woman in the Gospel, [spending all
her Substance;] yet she may be healed, if she come behind him, and but touch,
the Hemb, of his Garment: It is all Perfumed, with precious Ointments, as we
saw before, from Psalm. 133.

Jephtas Daughter, returned after Two Months, bewailing her Bethulia [which
again in Judith:] and the Daughters of Israel, went from Days to Days [a Day
for a year;] to lament the Daughter of Jephta, 4 Days in the year.

Jephta's 6, and Ibsans 7, Elans 10, and Abdons 8, bring us to the Sun of the
15th Day: with some Healing in his wings also; though but a little Sun, as
Samson may signify: with his 30 Companions (as their Month had 30 Days,) and
7 Days also, for the Week and Sabbath. Both his Eyes (or Witnesses) put out,
He pulls down the House; and more are slain by his Death, than all his Life.
And there was a great Earthquake, and the City fell, with 7000 Names, etc.

This Angel in the Sun, might Preach the everlasting Gospel, and Judgment
also: Bedan, In Dan: or in Mahane Dan: as the Hebrew of Judges 13. 25. 1 Samuel
12. 11. which may show us, He was After, That History of the Danites, Judges
18. 12. An Angel also appeared to Josuah; to Gideon; as now to Manoah: from
Noah, Rest. This man must give them Rest also: and carry them through the
Flood, of His Generation; As Noah did in His; and Moses in His. And as they
came out of Egypt, on the 15th Day, at Sunset, or 360 Hours; So this Sun also
set, about 360 Years, from Egypt, or the Minha of the 15th Day.

3 Times 40, make 120 (the Moed;) and 3 of these Moeds, make 360. 3 Times 40
more, in Elies 40, Samuels 40 (with Saul,) and David's 40, bring us to Solomon;
Peace, and the Temple; founded in his 4th Year, as the close of the 4th Moed;
or 4 times 120, (or 12 times 40) being just 400 and 4 score, Years from Egypt;
as we read in the 6th of the First Book of Kings. And 480 Hours, bring up the
last, and great Day of Unleavened Bread; the close of the Feast of Passover; or
21st Day of the Month: For Solomon's great Feast of Dedication. To be compared
with the great Feast of Tabernacles, in the 7th Month of the Year; As His Feast
was the 7th Month, of the 7th Year, of the Temple; when it was fully finished;
and 14 Days, as 14 Hours, we saw before.

And although the Tabernacle, was a good while at Gibeon of Benjamiu, As the
Ark at Kiriath-jearim, of Judah (as the very Temple Courts were parted, between
Those two Tribes:) Yet little Bethlehem also, became a great Scene of Action,
during these Times of the Judges. Thereabout was Rachel buried, with her Idols;
which we may find growing up Thence again; In Michaes (...); and the Falss
Prophet also: a poor Levite, of Bethlehem Ephrata. Spreading also to Dan, as a
Type of Jeroboams Calves (of Aarons Cow) to Dan also; with Jonathan, of
Gershom, of Manasseh (where the Mazorites observe a signal Character, to bid us
pause,) till the Captivity of the Land; as we read in Judges 18. Though it may
lead us also, to the Ark taken by the Philistines, at Elies Death.

And as Elimelech carried his Wife and Children, from Bethlehem, to the Land of
Moab; so did David also, of the same Bethlehem (and of Elimelech, by Ruth)
carry His, to the same Moab. And afterward also to the Philistines; where he
sojourned (as the Ark, and Abraham, and Isaak had done before him,) Days, or a
Year, and 4 Months. And so the Levites Concubine of Bethlehem also, played the
Harlot, and stayed Days, or a Year, 4 Months. In which places (as that also of
Rebecca, Let her stay Days, or a Year, or 10;) Days, in the Plural, seem to
speak a full Year: As Two Days (in the Dual) seem to intimate a Month. As
Numb. 9. 22. Days (or a Year) or a Month, or Two Days, (...), just 666. As
the Moon returns to the Sun, in 666 Hours: and to them at the Poles, in Twice
so many Days, as the Sun in Months: as we saw before.

We see how Idolatry, was followed with Adultery, (and Both from the same
Bethlehem:) as in diverse Scriptures. So, St Paul ranketh their sins, in the
Wilderness; by Idolatry, Fornication, Tempting of Christ, and Murmuring, (1
Cor. 10;) and Jesabels Charge, even in the Revelation, is, enticing to
Adultery, or Fornication, with Eating (but Eating!) things offered to Idols.
Both those Adulteries, were severely punished: (For, notwithstanding his
Infinite goodness; he knows How to punish the Ungodly; but especially those,
that walk after the Flesh, and speak evil of Dignities:) 24000 slain at Peor;
and about 66000 at Gibeah: which infected all the 12 Tribes (with the 12 pieces
of the Concubine;) and cut off Little Benjamin. All, but 600 men, that fled and
hid themselves 4 Months (and Elizabeth hid her self Five Months;) in the Rock
of Rimmon. As Saul, of that Tribe also, had but 600 men left him, after God had
rejected him (1 Samuel 13;) and chosen David: who had also, 600 men with him; and
parted also, as These 600, by 200 and 400, to recover Ziglag: and these 600,
were kept up, for his Guard, we see; in his flying from Absalon. As also the
Danites, that Sacked Laish, and set up Idolatry, were 600 men (as Shamgar slew
600 Philistines, with an Ox goad:) of which we may read in Hoseah; with other
Prophets. To be added to All before of 600, and 666.

And as those things in the Wilderness, followed Isreal's Vow, Numb. 21. So do
These in Judges, Jephtae's Vow; and the peoples also, for putting away their
strange gods. And as Serpents, seized on them There, so did Nahash, the
Serpent, Here also: till he was swallowed up by Saul: as Death and Hell, must
swallow up the Serpent also, in the Revelation.

Moses was bid to make a Seraph; as the Serpents are called Seraphim; the word
for Angels, in the 6th of Esaias. But Moses made a Nahash of Nehust: a mighty
Type of Christ, who only, can deliver us from the Serpent, as old as Paradise;
and the Dragon, and the Beast, and its Image also made by Aaron, or Micha, or
Babel, or any other. And yet Hezekiah durst destroy That Brazen Serpent; and
call it Nehustan, a little piece of Brass. So Dangerous, is a lawful,
expedient, or requisite, Matter of Worship also, when it degenerates to
Idolatry, or Superstition: As the sourest Vinegar, from the quickest, Best, and
sweetest Wine.

There was a strange Fate (may we say?) that followed Those Serpents: which bit
Jacobs Heel, so, that he Halted ever after: and their very next step was to
Oboth, Pytho's or Pythons. As from the Serpent to the Devil. And so also, in
Samuels time, They were bitten with the Serpent Nahash; and they murmur for
Saul, which is Hell. Sheol, Gods Scool, and Man's Soul, if God leave it; as he
did Israel here, till they chose and sought their Saul: As Samuel alludes, and
gives its Etymology, 1 Samuel 12. And when you saw Nahash, (the Serpent,) You
said, Nay but a King, shall Reign over us; when the Lord your God was your
King. And now behold the King whom you have chosen, and sought him, or Saultem,
(...), 1331, coming up to the double of 666, (the number of the Serpent:) just
1332. But 3 less than Daniels 1335.

And again, he threatens a sign, to make them see their great evil, in
rejecting God, to Saul them a King. Lisheol. Verse 17. And when they heard, the
great Thunders in Harvest, (which should be remembered, when ever so;) they
cried unto Samuel; Pray for thy servants, (Nay but a King; and now, Thy
servants:) Lest we Dye: For, we have dded to All our sins, This evil also, to
Saul us a King, Lisheol.

And then, comes One, of the sweetest places in the Bible; Fear not, etc. For,
the Lord will not forsake his People, for his great Names sake; because it has
pleased the Lord to make you his People. Moreover, as for me, God forbid that I
should sin against the Lord! in ceasing to pray for you: but I will Teach you
the good, and the Right way. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in Truth, with
all your Heart: as David's Dying words to Solomon; and Christ also: God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must do it in Spirit (as here, with All the
Heart) and Truth also; For, Such the Father Seeks to worship Him. And such he
will find. For, consider How great things he has done for you: But if you
will, still do wickedly, you shall be consumed, both you and your King.

There is yet much more, in That History of Nahash, of Ammon, of Lot, the Veyl,
which must be separate, from the face of all people: As at first from Abraham
(as we saw before, from Esaias, and diverse places.) And now Here also, he would
not only cover their Eyes, but put them quite out: or at least their Right
Eyes: and that also, must be, A Reproach for All Israel. Though This, was only
at Jabesh-Gilead; the Relics of that woeful business at Gibeah: which did not
only cut off Benjamin, but Jabesh-Gilead also, by 12000 chosen men of Israel
(as the first Fruits to God and the Lamb:) as we may see in Judges 21. Where
also, both Gilead and Mispeh, lead us to the Watch, and Stones of Witness, we
saw before, in Jacob their Father, and Laban: when Rachel was going to her long
home, at Bethlehem Ephrata, with this Benjamin, the youngest of her sons: for
whom she wept so much, and so long: because They were not. Joseph was not, and
Ephraim was not, (see 1 Chronicles. 7. 21.) and now they Take Benjamin also: All
these things are against her.

And yet little Benjamin, that had so ruined Jabesh-Gilead, must now save it,
by Saul, the first King of that Tribe; coming up, because of Nahash, besieging
Jabesh-Gilead.

And the men of Jabesh-Gilead said, Forbear us 7 Days; and if none can save
us, we will come out to thee. Then came Messengers, to Gibeah of Saul; That
very Gibeah, which had caused all the mischief, both to Benjamin, and
Jabesh-Gilead also. Then the people wept; and Saul yearneth over their Tears:
(so good it is, to go, or be, with a Mourning, weeping people of God: For, who
can tell, but their tender Eyes, may affect, and soften, our hard Heart!) and
Then, the Spirit of God came upon him; and remembering, that All the mischief
came by hewing a woman into pieces: He now slays the Beast, and heweth it,
into 12 pieces; and by Those, summons the 12 Tribes, as One man, with one
consent, or as the Prophet speaks, with One Sechem.

He had now 300000 of Israel, and 30000 of Judah, (a bad Omen, that they should
be so Divided:) and they must be Parted into 3 Bands, and by Night also; as
Abraham his 300, and Gideon his 300, and Jacob his, at Mahanaim, and Joshuah
his, at Gibeon, and David his, for Ziglag; and again, As Jacob at Mahanaim: and
in the Morning Watch, as before, in the Red Sea, and Barak, or Gideon, against
the Midnight Midianites; who though so near akin to Abraham, and Isaak, and
Moses; yet had been the Buyers of Joseph, in the Pit, and Sellers to Egypt; so
that Moses must not dye, before he had avenged God on Midian, and recovered
such a spoil, as possibly may help us to number all the Times, and Numbers, in
their Bondage ever after.

Now is Nahash defeated, and his Ammonites scattered, so that two remained not
together, while Israel was as One man: the only way to destroy the Serpent,
and to break his Head. And when also, They shall be, As a Beacon on an Hill,
the Lord will Wait, that he may be Gracious to them; and Therefore be exalted!
Therefore! That he may have mercy on them; and on All that wait for him. For,
the Lord is a God of judgment: Blessed are All They, that wait for him. As we
read in the 30th of Esaias.

How Jabesh-Gilead remembered, and requited, This of Saul, even to his Dead
body; we observed before: and How David also blessed them for it, when he
showed the kindness of God to the House of Saul, Dead Saul! And which is yet
stranger; even to this very Nahash, or his Son, or Namesake, King of Ammon
also: Till they so abused his Ambassadors. An History that may be more
considered.

And the people said to Samuel, Who is he, that said, shall Saul Reign over us?
Bring the men, that we may put them to death. But Saul said, There shall not a
man, be put to death this day; for, to day, the Lord has wrought salvation in
Israel. And David also, in his sweet Return, after his Banishment from his
Kingdom; would not slay Cursing Shimei; because he knew, he was That day, King
of Israel. As we saw before, with diverse circumstances.

Then said Samuel to the People, Come and let us go to Gilgal, and Renew the
Kingdom, There: Even There; where God in Joshuah, Rouled away the shame of
Israel. And now, They rouled away This shame also: of Nahash the Serpent; on
All Israel. Though I add not here again, how Circumcision it self, was a Type,
or Pledge, of their cutting off Nahash; or the Serpents Head, in every Age, and
World, and Region also of the little World; as we saw before.

How David, or any other of the Kings, cut off this Serpent, or Nahash also,
(in that remarkable History, 2 Samuel 10.) we leave for another season: as God
shall please. And though Solomon had but One War, as we saw before, with Hamath
Zoba (the Wrath of an Army; or fighting Rage, or Fury:) Yet These also, as All
within the River Euphrates, became his Servants, or his Tributaries. Even to
the River of Egypt, whence he married his Queen, as we saw before.

Of Solomon's Temple, I have little to add, to Those Excellent Books lately
written by English men also; of Both Temples; with That, of a very Learned man,
before the Great Bible (there also published;) That may never dy^ Or Those,
that did, or yet do, labor to perfect it. But I suppose Many, if not All the
Numbers we have spoken of, may be in those Temples also; with the Tabernacle,
and Noah's Ark; in proportion to a man's body, with its Three Regions also. 30
Cubits High, and 50 Broad, and 6 times as Long. 300 by 50, is 15000 (and the
Waters prevailed 15 Cubits, Upwards:) and that by 30, is 450000, filled up with
8 Persons and Beasts, Unclean also; with their Food, and Air, and other
requisites: of which again, as God shall help us.

The Tabernacle, 30 long, and 10 broad; that is 300 (as the Ark;) and 10 high,
3000. And its Court, 100 long, and 50 broad, 5000. As we touched before, in the
5000, fed by our Savior (as after by Peter) Ranked by 100 and 50.

Solomon's Temple, Double to the Tabernacle; 60 long, and 20 broad; but the
Height (without,) generally Treble to the Tabernacles; Equal to the Arks, 30
Cubits. So that its Length, was Double to its Height; and Treble to its Breadth.
Yet the Most holy Place (though without, it seemed Equal, in height, to the
other Temple,) was a perfect Cube, of 20 Cubits, every way. 400 by 20, 8000.

The Holy, 20, 30, 40. That is, 600 by 40, Or 1200 by 20, just 24000: for its
inward Area. But if the Walls, and Side-Chambers, were in This also, as
afterward; the length of the whole, may be just as the Court, of the
Tabernacle was, 100 Long, and 50 Broad.

The second Temples height, 60, Double to the First; and its breadth 60, Treble
to the first. But This, and Ezekiels (larger,) and Solomon's also (as Josephus
and others) on either side, had 12 Chambers in 3 Stories: All of them, were 5
Cubits high; and the lowest but 5 broad: but the Middle 6, and the Highest 7:
the Inward Wall decreasing, in its Thickness Upwards, a Cubit in 5.

And though Solomon made but Two Courts, and Both Square (about the Temple:)
Yet in Jehosaphats time, we find a New Court; or old one repaired and renewed:
Yea, and so parted also, before the Captivity, that in the Lamentations, Rocks
gush out, and Home and Hell also weep: that is, the Wall, (...), and the Gulf,
of separation, which they called Hell, (...): of 11 Cubits (as they make it)
before the Women's Court, 135, and the Priests (whose outer Verge, or Rails, was
for Men) 187: in all 333: just Half 666. Although, I never found, they ever
thought, of This Number.

From the Temple-Porch, to the Priests Court, 12 steps, of a span, or half a
Cubit. Thence 15 (for the 15 Psalms of Degrees) to the Outer Court: a square of
equal sides; and each, 400 Cubits: or 600 Grecian Feet (Olympic Stadium; as
much as Hercules could run, at a breath:) equal as thought, to the Roman
Furlong, or 625 Feet. Their Foot, being half an inch, less than Hercules, who
gave Those measures to the Grecians: and by Them, we measure the Furlongs in
the Revelation.

For which also, the Circumference of This Court, will be just 1600 Cubits (as
we read there of 1600 Furlongs:) just 2400 Grecian Feet. And Antonia, at
North-west, 1200 more. But about them Both, but 2000 Cubits, 3000 Feet, 4000
Spans, 12000 Taps, or 48000 Digits.

Each side of this Outer Court, had a fair Gate; and 4 constant Watchers: But
Shushan, the Front, or the Kings Gate, being Eastward, had 2 Watchers more than
the other Gates. And the Western side, next the City, had 3 little Gates, or
Wickets more; with two Watchers apiece: in all, 24. As all the Courses of
Priests, Levites, Singers and Porters, were 24; as we saw before.

The Western side, of the Inward Court, had No Gate at all (it seems,) though
in the Outer Court, More than its fellows: besides that stately Causey, or
Solomon's going up to the House of God; between T'eyls, or Elms, (...) and (...)
in Shalleketh; as we read, in Esaias 6; cited in the 6 first Books of the New
Testament: For That before.

The South side of the Inward Court, had the Higher; and Lower, or Watergate,
of Benjamin; and in His Tribe; directly opposite, to two other Gates, in the
North: the Upper Gate, of the House, (being just against the Temple, to the
North: where the Women sat, weeping for Tammuz:) and the Gate of the Altar,
which was just between it, and the Lower Gate, of Benjamin. But the Eastern
side, here also, had the most stately Gate, or Jothams new Gate: or the High
Gate, of Glory: For else, it was the Low Gate, for looking over it, from
Olivet: at the Ashes of the Red Cow; or at the great Day of Atonement, with the
Escape- Goat. The Gate of Nicanor, in the 2d Temple; leading up to the Front,
and Porch, of the Holy Place.

Which was very stately; but 10 Cubits, which added to the Temples 60, make it
70. The other side was, as the Temples breadth, 20. But in Height, the great
Moed, just 120. which is Twice 60, the length of all the Temple; Thrice 40, the
length of the House, before the Oracle; 4 times 30, the height of the House 6
times 20, its own; and the Temples breadth, as length and height also, to the
Oracle: 10 times 12, or 12 times 10, its own length from East to West.

Here stood the Mighty Pillars of Heaven and Earth (as the Psalms may allude)
much rather than the Poets Atlas. Each, was 18 Cubits High, and 12 about, with
a Coter, Crown, of Lilly-work, or Shushan (as before in Ester, and Susanna) of
4 Cubits; on the upper part of each Pillar; and a Chapter of 5 Cubits, on the
Top of each; If 6, (for the Pillars concave,) Then, each is 12 about, and 14 to
the Lilly-work, and 18 with it; and 24 in all. Else, but 23. As (...), the
Line, Here used, about it, just 23. Each had also 7 Wreaths or Chains, with
Chequer work (as All our life, with Day and Night, Black and White;) with Two
Rows of Pomgranates, in either 100: though 96 only, appeared out, from the
Wall, behind the Pillars. Sure, there was somewhat of consequence, in These; so
exactly described, many times, in both the Books of Kings, and Chronicles, and
Prophet Jeremy.

How Gopher, and Copher of Sodom, helped to make the Ark; and Sittim wood the
Tabernacle; with its Curtains of Seirs Goats, and Badgers-skins, and Rams of
Ishmaels Kedar, and Nehaioth, with Incense of Arabia! How Tire and Sidon,
helped Solomon, to build the Temple; with the Vines of Engedi, and Sea of Sodom
There; with Tamar, or the Palm Trees of cursed Jericho; so often called, the
City of Palm Trees: And of Moab and Ammon also, to enter, in the 10th
Generation; we have spoken much before.

But where are the poor Philistines? Or oldest Inhabitants of That Country?
Nothing for their Landlord! God forbid! Even That God, who bade him Ask, and he
should have, the Heathen, for His Inheritance, and the Utmost ends of the
Earth, for His Possession. And, though All the Gentiles are called Gogim (as we
touched before;) Yet that name, (as Barbara, to some place about the Red Sea,
(before the Midland) whence Rha barbarae, as well as Rha Pontic;) was in a
special manner, given to some wretched Gentiles, about the Sea of Sodom; as we
may learn, by comparing Genesis 14, with Jos. 12. 23. Or to the Neighbors of the
other Sea; which it seems, as Seamen to this day, were Gentiles, more than
others. These were Philistines: who yet were from Caphtor, or but a Remnant of
the old Caphtors; as we may read in Moses, Amos, and the Prophet Jeremy.

How often did our Fathers (as St Paul speaks to the Gentile Corinthians,)
sojourn at Gerar? and other places of the Philistines? That I say nothing, of
Abimelech, the just man, with a perfect Heart, as God himself grants, in a
Night-Vision, when he returned Sara, with Riches and Blessing, as before, from
Egypt. And a solemn Covenant made between them. Not only Abimelech (Healed by
Abraham's Prayer) but with Picol also, the Mouth of All; as saying Amen: to the
Covenant, and the Blessing also. For, it may be observed, how God himself, to
bring out a Great Blessing, will prepare the People, common People also, to
desire and expect it; and then, to confirm it, by saying Amen. So that Christ
himself, the Power and Wisdom of God, could do no great Work, till the People
did consent, believe, expect, or cry Amen. And indeed the Women, and the common
Law-Takers, are the great Lawmakers! Receive the Instruction of thy Father, but
the Law of thy Mother: As we touched before, in his Mothers bidding them Do,
whatever He bade them; before he did Any Miracle. And now also, though at the
Right Hand of God; and so, has Power, over All his Handy-works; (which he
says, we may command also; yea, and come to Do, as much, or more, than He then
did:) Yet, That Hand of God, is too great, for Him to weild, as a man; and so,
he pleases to Act to us; and not to Force us, but to Woo us: and he never
Wears us, till he win us fairly, by his Wooing us; as first by Power, he
conquered us, from Death and Hell. And so, He has None, till the Father, in
Them, give them up to him: which is also called, Their giving up themselves.
Till which, he Wooeth, or Weepeth; but unless the soul come to give it self, to
him; He sees that the Father, (for, He is the Son of man, or Every man) the
Father, does not give him such a soul: and so, the match is never made, but by
consent of Both.

But when once, his Thunders, or his Earthquakes, or his Fire, in the Bush, do
make us startle so, as to say, I will now turn aside (from the Noise, and Dust,
and Crowd of the world,) to see this Great sight; and to Do it: Then, he
quickly calls to us, as to Moses, with a little (...) (by which, they say, he
made the World;) with a soft, still voice, and a meek, quiet spirit: he begins
by Kindeness (he has Art enough) to conquer All our fears, and frowardness, so
much, as to begin to try, and then to mark, remember, and consider, All his
dealing with us; Till we come to Hope, and then to Trust his Heart, and Fathers
Heart, in Him: The work is done. And though, to try us, once or twice perhaps,
he may put on a Mask, or Veil, or seem to frown; yet when, once we begin to
know his Heart, we kiss him, when we Tremble, and with Reverence bow, and Pray,
and long to see him, More, and more, and yet still more; and do not fear his
worst: his Blackest Mask. His heart is good (O my want of words!) a thousand
fold much Better, than we ever heard (although it be a Good Report;) or can, as
yet, believe.

When we so know him, we shall quickly know (if we follow on to know,) and see,
and feel, he knows us; and knew us first, by Name. And now he will not leave
us, till we break off speaking to him; as Abraham, in his Intercession for
Sodom. The Oil will never cease, while we can Buy, or Beg, or Borrow Vessels
to receive it.

And it is yet plainer, that although God Bless us often, alone, by Himself, yet
he never Curses men, without themselves, not only to join with the envious
One, but even pull, or force it, on themselves, and cry Amen, when others wash
their hands: and say, Be it so, Let his Blood, be on us, and our Children also.
Poor Children! of Wrath and Curse! before they heard or saw! (O that we could
consider, what a Parents words may do, when we little think what we say! as
before, we saw, in Jacob and Laban, of Rachel. God did but, propose the Law it
self, and bade Moses ask, if They would take it. They accepted: This Enacted,
it a Law, to Them. And so its Curses: God proposed them, but so, that They must
say Amen, before they did, or could oblige, or hurt them. Deuteronomy. 27. and 30. 15.
etc.

And to Egypt, God put them not, till They put themselves There, in fear of
Famine: As in Abraham's time, and Isaaks. Only Joseph was carried against his
will: As Moses also, was thrust out of Egypt, as a Type of them, that were to
be thrust out Thence also: though they now cried, Who made thee a Judge among
us? But God exalted Both. And God never carried them to Babylon, or Assyria,
till they Hired, or called, those Rasors to shave them: and showed them, their
Treasures, or their Nakedness. So it was in Syria: So with Nahash the Serpent,
(as in Paradise also:) till they Chose a King, and Then, God gave him! and set
him Over them! But yet He also, even Saul himself, (or all the Sheols in the
world) could never Curse them, till themselves consented to the Curse, and
cried, Amen. As we see in the famous case of Jonathan: Whom the People Blessed
(and He shall be Blessed) though his Father, and the King also, Cursed, with an
Oath also.

So was That Covenant with Abimelech, confirmed, both with Picol, the Mouth of
All the people, and by an Oath also: Both with Abraham, and Isaak, afterward.
And for the Land also, in which they sojourned (as Genesis 21. 23.) Often,
remembered in Scripture: And we should remember it, as often as we read
Beersheba: the Well of Seven, and the Oath also: Madc at this Covenant with
Philistines.

And as David fulfilled that part also, of sojourning among the Philistines (as
the Ark had done before him:) So I doubt not, but he Blessed Them also; as
Abraham and Isaak did, according to their Covenant (for the Land also, which
God mentions so often; in which they sojourned;) and swear before Abimelech,
both King and Father; with Picol also; at Beersheba: That famous Bound, of All
the Land of Rest, and Hope, or Promise.

Blessed, and for ever, Blessed be my Rock; and Blessed be the God of my Rock;
who delivers me from the strivings of the People; and makes me the Head of
the Heathen. Strangers will submit themselves: As soon as they Hear, they will
obey. For, He will speak the People under me, by his Holy Word; As the English
singing Psalms, do rightly tune Tha tword, so often used by David. With his
Gittits also.

And his Mictam, of Aram Naharaim, and Zoba, as before, Cries, O Philistia!
Triumph over me! Nor, do I know, that Solomon thought it any Solecism, or any
scorn, or Irony, to set the Philistines, so near the very Top, of his
Triumphant Arch, or Pillars, in the Holy Temple Porch.

The Left hand Pillar, is called Boaz; as the Judge that married Ruth, a Root
of David's Jesse: Jachin is the Right. So weak a thing, is Strength it self, or
Boaz; when it is compared, or opposite to Prudence and Order. Wisdom and
Knowledge, shall be the stability of Thy Times; and Strength of Salvations: The
Fear of the Lord, his Treasures. Even Then, when Babylon, shall sweep away, All
other Treasures. As we read (in Esaias 33) as a Gracious Promise, to That Prayer,
in the 3d Verse; O Lord, be Gracious to us! We have waited for thee! Be thou
our Arm; Their Arm; Every Morning; Our Salvation also, in the Time of sorrow,
or the Sore Yet, (...): which we saw in Daniel.

Boaz was of Bethlehem Judah: Jachin both of Simeon (Hearing and Obeying,) and
of Levi, Love. A kind of Sacred Tenth, of Tenths. For, in Jerusalem, were men
os Judah, Little Benjamin, his Brother Joseph's Ephraim, and Manasseh (as the
1st of Chron. 9. Psalm. 80:) And of the Priests also (with other Levites, and
Nethinims of Gibeon;) Jachin, etc. in the 10th Verse.

And in the 10th Verse also (which is frequent in Scripture,) of the 11th
Chapter of Nehemiah, we find him again, among the Tenths, or First Fruits,
from Babylon: where we read Thus: The Rulers of the People, dwelt at Jerusalem.
For, upon All appeals, from any City Gate, where Judges must be placed by the
Law; He that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken to the Priest, or
unto the Judge, in the place which God shall choose, must Dye: as we read in
Deuteronomy. 16, and 17. And therefore the Rulers must live at Jerusalem.

And the Rest of the People cast Lots, to bring One of Ten, to dwell at
Jerusalem, the Holy City: and Nine parts, to dwell in Other Cities. But when
the Seventh Trumpet sounds, for the Seventh Month, and great Feast of
Tabernacles; with the great Release, and greater Jubilie, to follow That Feast:
When All the Fruits of the Earth be gathered in, before the joy of Harvest:
These Nine parts also, come in (with all the Fullness of the Gentiles,) to be
joined so, to the Tenth, of That Holy City; That this Tenth, shall Then, be
little thought, or spoken of; and so it is said to Fall, in the 11th of the
Revelation; as this Holy Tenth, is in the 11th of Nehemiah, with the 11th,
12th, and 13th of the 6th of Esaias; cited in the first 6 Books, of the New
Testament, as we saw before.

But the People Blessed them (As, the common People, and his very servants,
Blessed Ruth and Boaz:) who came freely in, and offered themselves, to Dwell at
Jerusalem, the Holy City. To be compared with That gracious Promise, to a
Levite, coming from Any Gate of Israel, with All the desire of his Mind, to
the place which God shall choose: in Deuteronomy. 18. which in Esaias 56, is made to the
Gentiles. And the sons of the Strangers also, that Leave themselves, to Cleave
to the Lord (as we may render Levim, touched before, and Loveh,) to Love the
Name of the Lord; to be His Servants; Every One that keeps the Sabbath, from
polluting it (which is often repeated Here, and Chap. 58. and pressed much in
Nehemiah also:) and takes hold of my Covenaut (in the Chapter before, and
59th:) I will bring them, to my Holy Mountain (as Chap. 4. and 33. and Psalm.
15. and 24:) and make them joyful, in my House of Prayer (or, Delight
themselves in God, as Chap. 58.) For, my House shall be, and be Called, an
House of Prayer, for All Peoples: And All Nations, and Gentiles, as our Savior
also cites it. The Lord God; which gathers the Outcasts of Israel (a very
small thing to raise Them up, as Chap. 49.) He says, I will yet (and yet, and
yet; for what he speaks Once, he speaks Ever:) I will yet, gather to him,
More, than yet, are gathered; Or others also. He has said it, He will do it.
And He will then appear in his Glory; and yet not despise the Prayer of the
Destitute: when the very Dust of Zion, shall be Pytied. Psalm. 102.

And among the Tenths of That Holy City, we find Jachin also, a Priest; and as
the Tenth, of That Tenth: in the 10th of the 11th of Nehemiah; and the 10th of
the 9th of the First of Chronicles.

On Jachin, and Boaz both, he set a Crown: and so the Prophet. Set a fair Mitre
on his Head; and bring forth Crowns for them of the Captivity: and especially
for Jeshuah the Priest. Who shall grow up in his place, and Build the House of
God: as Jachin. and the common People also (Gens Enthea) cried to Ruth with
Boaz, as Rachel and Leah, to Build the House of Israel.

And on Both, he set a Chapter: What if Caput Turris, Cap^tur, be from Caphtor,
a Pomegranate? which was the Form of the Chapter; or the great Fruit of That
place, which the Scripture calls, a Land of Pomegranates: which are also, Poma
Punica; or of Phenicia, to this day. And as the old Inhabitants were called
Caphtorim, from Caphtor, the Pomegranate; so the great God of Syria, Jupiter
Casius had his Temple in That Hill Cassius, (which was Katsi the Bound, toward
Egypt; where Pompey lost his Life; but left the name of Cassius, to revenge
him on Caesar:) where his Statue stood, with his arm out, holding a Pomegranate;
as a most Natural Emblem, of Heaven and Earth; which some later Princes
represented, by a Globe, or a Sphere, held in their Hand.

And besides Aarons Bells and Pomegranates, with Those, on These Pillars; the
Canticles speak often of Pomegranates, in, or upon, or for, the Spouse; and in
one Verse, may allude both to Rahabs Scarlet Ticket of Faith ((...):) and
Benjamins Rimmon also; or (...), a Flake of Rimmon: which is also a
Pomegranate: and its Rim, or Rimb, or Rind; which the Greeks call Rojan, as
the English sound Pomroy.

And as Solomon finds Pomegranates, in his Spouses Temples; so he places them
in His Temple: and it may be, for Times also (as our Temple- Pulses, which they
called Tempora, somewhat of Time, in so many Languages:) besides all else, that
He, might seal up, in His Pillars, from Those of Seth or Enos; Mothers to the
Chaldean and Egyptian Pillars, as much as These were to the Grecian Roman
Obeliscs. And though we should not find so many Cranes in a Granate, as some
made Havens, or Days, or Hours in a Year: yet there may be somewhat of Years,
in them, and their Number Here also. Especially, if we find them just 400
Years, from That of Benjamin; at Rimmon: which Josephus places so near to
Josuahs Time; and in Phineas, as Judges 20. 28.

And of Benjamin at Rimmon, just 400 men, were married to 400 Virgins; all the
Relics of poor Jabesh-Gilead: As of David's 600, only 400, could hold out, to
recover his two Spouses, or Witnesses, of Ziglag. As Abraham's 400, or
thereabout, to recover Lot, and Sodom also; from Dan: whence, God will judge
his People; and That Nation I will judge: but first, thy seed must serve, 400
Year.

Of the other 200 Rimmons also, or of Benjamin, from Rimmon; there is more to
be said: and of Their Dance at Shiloh; which of all places, is there so exactly
described, and compared, with Bethel, Sechem, and Lebonah. And to All before,
of Those places, Josuah called all Israel to Sechem, and there made that solemn
discourse in the 24th. And to Shiloh also (where Jacob places, the Gathering,
of All the People:) and There he casts 7 Lots, for the 7 Tribes, about the
7th Year (as very probable) from their entering Chanaan: as the Root, or, it
may be, the Center, of All Sabbatical Years and Jubilies. Which was also just
430 Years, before Solomon's Throne, As This was just 430 Years before his
Temples End in Zedekiah: And Their coming from Egypt, was just 430 Years from
the Promise to Abraham. Here are 1290. As in Daniel. With 45 also, to make up
1335.

And if that great Meeting at Shiloh, should be some few Years, after the 7th
Year; yet it may be just 430 Years, before the Temple; As the 7th Year, was
430, before Solomon's Reign. As if their setting up the Tabernacle, Then at
Shiloh, were to be a Type of the Temple Raised up, just so long after it, as
the Promise to Abraham, was before the Law, or coming out of Egypt. Which was
480 Years, before the Temple, founded in the 4th of Solomon: but not finished
till the 7th after. Was it so many Days, in Building, as there will be Years,
before the House of God finished, in the New Jerusalem? Of which again.

The Feast of Dedication, in the 7th Month, of the 7th Year; a Type of that
great Feast of Tabernacles; of which before: And of the Last and great Day of
Unleavened Bread, on the 21st of the First Month; beginning from 480 Hours: As
the Temple did, 480 Years, after Egypt.

At this great Dedication, 120 Priests, sounded with Trumpets (which were never
more than 120:) and when All agreed as One, in singing, He is Good, He is Good,
and his Mercy dureth Ever. Then the Glory of God came down, and filled the
House, so that the Priests could not tarry (and there was no need:) and Then,
Solomon bowed, saying, But will God indeed! dwell on Earth! See 2 Chronicles. 5. and
the like at Jehosaphats Valley of Blessing, 2 Chronicles. 20. 22.

Next to 48, is 49, the Jubilee: and ^om This great Feast of Dedication, 490
Years, bring us to the 2d Temple, in the 2d Year of Darius Hystasp. Or the
close of the 70 Years Captivity, of the City and Temple: As the first of Cyrus,
taking Babylon, ended the 70 Years of Ezekiels Captivity; just 490 Years from
Solomon's coming to the Crown. So that the Feast of Dedication is very near the
Center of Time from Egypt, and from Babylon, to the 2d Temple, which was just
490 Years, after That; which was but 2 or 3 less than 490, After Egypt.

Taking out 70 Years (of the City and Temple desolate;) there remain just 420
Years, from That Dedication, to the Temples end, in Zedekiah. Which was just
390 Years after Solomon, who reigned 30 Years after the Dedication, as the 30
Days of That Month.

420, Is 3 Moeds, and an Half; that is 3 times 120, and 60. As the 70 Years
Captivity, was 3 times 20, and an Half. And 120, is 6 times 20, or 3 times 40.
And the Great Moed for Man; as we saw before. The first of These 3, bring up
Athaliah, (which signifies the Lords Time, or Time for the Lord:) 120 Years
from the Dedication. There also begins Jehu, in Israel: which never so meets
with Judah; but in Rehoboam with Jeroboam.

And as Time devoureth All things, so did Athaliah (the Lords Time) destroy All
the Seed Royal. But Joash, even He that despaireth, is preserved, and brought
up again, in the 7th Year, by Jehosheba, the Lords Oath, or the Lords Seven:
Daughter of Joram, the High Lord, and Sister to Ahaziah, the Lords Possession.
But it was Jehoiadah, the Lords Knowledge, that brought him out, and made him
King, and restored the Worship of God. And when He Died, and Joash degenerates;
his son Zechariah, the Lords Remembrance, puts him in mind of his Duty; but is
stoned, crying, The Lord remember, or requite it. It seems the same with Him
(or His Type at least) of whom our Savior speaks in Matthew. 23. As slain
between the Temple and the Altar: or in the Court of the House of the Lord;
Though the People might not come to the Altar. But the Prophet Zechary, was
also the son of Barachiah (the Lord Blessed) and Zechary the Baptists Father,
alludeth to his own Name, and Elizabeth's, saying, The Lord remembered, his
Oath, etc.

Athaliahs 6, and Joash 40, and Amaziahs 14, make up 60, (just Half another
Moed of 120.) for the Sack of Jerusalem, by Joash of Israel, breaking down 400
Cubits of the City Wall, from the Gate of Ephraim, to the Corner Gate: To be
added to All before of 400; with Josephus, placing This in the 14th of Amaziah.
Now comes up the Prophet Jonah, and the 2d Jeroboam, who recovers Hamath and
Damascus, which must both, be joined, in a meek and quiet spirit; as we saw
before. And to make it yet more signal, That Sack of Jerusalem may be just 666
Years from Egypt; and 600 Years from the same Jerusalem taken and burnt, by
Judah in Judges 1. and 222, after David took it, from the Jebusites, (444 Years
from Egypt:) when he quitted Abraham's Hebron, for Jerusalem.

60 Years more (the other Half Moed) may bring us to Uzziahs Leprosy. And that
Israel might not insult, They fall into confusions after Jeroboams 40 (a 3d of
120:) and had no King, for diverse years. As we read in Hoseah, (the next
Prophet to Jonah) compare Hos. 3. 4. with the 10th and 3d. And 2 Kings 15. with
Joel and Amos, living in These Days. And then the Prophet Esaias and Micha;
toward the Latter end of Uzziah. That famous Time, for the Olympiads: and the
Birth of Romulus, who founded Rome, with his Brother Remus, Blood; Much about
Hezekiahs Birth, and beginning of the 7th Olympiad. And about 7 Years, before
the famous Era, of Nabonassar in Babylon.

Uzziah, the 10 King from David; and the 10th before Zedekiah: As a Type of
that Tenth, or Holy seed, that should yet be in them, and restore them; As the
Trees, in the stately Causey, of Shalleketh: as we saw in Esaias 6. But Israel
had 10 Families to Rule over them. Many are the Princes of a wicked People. But
the Witnesses were, that He should not pass those Stones in Wrath; Though he
had changed his wages 10 Times. And he will remember his Holy Covenant.

The other Half Moed, comes near that great Change of Isreal's Moon, after an
hard siege, about 3 Years and Half, for slaying Those Witnesses also: beginning
in the 7th of Hosea, (the same Name with the Prophet:) and Ending about the 7th
of Hezekiah. Or 777 Years from Egypt: But Cxi (as the measuring Line, or
(...), which Amos saw,) above 666. And So the Flood came at Lamechs End, who
lived just 777 Years: or 666 from Enochs Translation. Whose 365 Years, might be
to measure All Years, which have now with us 365 Days, and 6 Hours, with odd
Minutes Preter propter. And as He was, the 7th from Adam, (as Moses the 7th
from Abraham, the 10th from Noah, the 10th from Adam:) So he was born in the
7th Hundred, or 3d 7th Year, of that Hundred; or 621 or 22 Year, of the World.

Now is Israel become Loammi, and Loruhamah: Not my People; and I will not have
mercy on them. Yea, and God called to contend with Fire: But Amos prayed; O
Lord God, Cease I beseech thee (As before, spare and forgive,) by whom shall
Jacob Rise? for he is very small! And God repented of the Evil, and said, It
shall not be. And yet, when God had called the Fire, to devour, It must devour;
and so it did: But what? Even the Great Deep; or Abyss (which was the great
thing to be feared; and the Spirit of God also, to kindle the Fire:) but in
devouring the Deep, or the Devourer; it also devoured a Part of Israel, as the
words may hint, Amos 7. 4. And the word Clack; which we often saw before, for a
Click Clack, Clakin of Time, as in a Clock. And from a part of Time, it is also
used, for a part of other things: and may hint to us, How Time, and All else
below, may perish by Fire; Devouring the great Deep, or Abyss of Waters (the
same word used, Genesis 1. 2.) when there shall be No more Sea; As in the
Revelation (or Fishes, Zeph. 1. 8.) but a Sea of Glass, with Harpers, as on
Cinnereth: we saw before.

Amos also, saw a Tenth, reserved for Israel; 5. 3. to Help her up. Though his
doleful Ditty was, The Virgin is fallen, and shall Rise no more. Nafela, lo
Tosiph Kum, Bethulath Israel. Which the Jews say, should have been in the
Psalm of Praise, 145. (which gives Title to the Book of Psalms, in Hebrew
Praises) and there wants the Letter (...). But when David was bringing it out,
they say the Spirit stopped, and said; The Lord upholdeth All that Fall, and
Raises All that are Bowed down: As that Psalm.

We have now but One Moed more, to the 70 Years Captivity, in Ioachin. As if
God, would now give Judah, that Moed of 120 Years, for Repentance; as he gave
it, to the Old World, before the Flood.

Ahaz had hired Assyria (that sharp Rasor) to shave off Rezin, and Syria; but
he came to the Neck, and Throat also. And because This people refuse the Waters
of Siloah, that run softly, and rejoice in Rezin, and the son of Remaliah (the
Lords Height;) Now therefore behold, the Lord Brings on them, the waters of
that great Flood, the King of Assyria, and all his Glory; who shall overflow,
and reach to the Neck; and with his stretching Wings, fill the breadth of thy
Land, O Emanuel; a Type of Antichrist, to fill the Church, or Emanuels Land: As
the Wings of the Cherubins, filled the Breadth, of the Oracle. As Ezekiel also
speaks of a Covering Cherub (and Anointed also (...) 388, so near His 390:)
Or as the English George on Horsback: a Covering Cherub; and from Those parts
also; where yet, they show his Castle; or the Relics of the Dragon, which
from Thence might come to the Saxon standard; or from the Dragon seen in Heaven
also; (as so many great Historians speak) besides the Dragon in the Revelation,
so long before Merlins Dragon.

Hezekiahs Revolt from this King of Assyria (hired by his Father Ahaz,) is
called Rebellion, 2 Kin. 18. 7. And it cost him Dear; besides That humble
Confession (Verse 14,) with All his own, and the Temples Tresures. So little
did God, ever countenance Rebellion! Yet when Assyria becomes Insolent, and
sends Railing Rabshakeh (from Lachish, that Mother of Idolatry:) the Lord
rebukes him: while Hezekiah spreads the Railing Letter; having also sent to
the Prophet Esaias; It is a Day of Trouble, of Rebuke and Blasphemy; the
Children, etc. Now therefore lift up thy Prayer for the Remnant, left, after
the 10 Tribes; who first, parted themselves, from David (with Sheba etc.)
before God ever parted them.

In the Mount, God will be seen; Jehovah Jireh. And the Decree was, that
Assyria must be trodden down, in the Holy Mountain. And That also, but a Type,
of what God meant to do, in All the Earth: as we read in Esaias 14, 24 etc. So
that it may reach through All the Times of the Witnesses also; Till, That Fire,
came down, on Them, that compass the Holy City. As now, the Destroying Angel*
came down, on the Assyrians, round about Jerusalem: A story famous enough, in
Josephus, Berosus, Herodotus, with diverse others.

How This great Deliverance, was in the 14th year of zekiah; As Abraham freed
his friends, and Sodom also, in the 14 year: and Joreph was freed in the 14th
year (being then 30 years old, when he stood before Pharaoh; and but 17, when
he was sold; as Genesis 37. 2. 41. 46.) we saw before. With many other things of
14: being the 2d Number, made of 3 whole Numbers, and an half; as 7, is the
first.

The next Half Moed, may carry Menasseh to Babylon; As a Type of Judahs
Captivity, and Return also: As Manasseh returned; and Zedekiah was visited in
Babylon it self; and Jeconia freed; and advanced above All the Princes with
him. And How, after All, his horrid sins; Menasseh judged himself, and Bowed,
greatly, praying to His God! O the man's confidence! and to his Fathers God (a
Blessed thing, to have a Fathers God!) and How, he heard, and Bowed down to
Hear; we saw before. And though God brought him to his Throne again; (as also
Nebuchadnezar:) Yet, the Blood he shed, is often brought, as a great Cause of
the following Captivity. Yea, and That also, although Josiah was so good a
King, and made so great a Reformation. Yet God sent him (even Him!) This
Message. My Wrath shall be poured out on This Place: and shall not be quenched.
Yet, it was so quenched, that from This also, a poor soul may learn, how to
interpret, All Gods Frownings, and Threatenings, on it.

So also the Prophet Zephany, concludes his most terrible Threatenings (in the
time of Josiah.) I will gather them that sorrow for the solemn Moed, etc. I
will undo them that afflict thee: (As to Abram, They that Curse Thee, shall be
Cursed.) I will save Her that Halteth, and Gather Her that was driven out: and
I will get them Praise and Fame in every Land where they are put to shame. For
I will make you a Name and a Praise, among All people of the Earth.

Their Last 40 years (as the 40 from Christ, or his Baptism, to their End:)
beginning with Jeremy, in Josiahs 13, or his solemn Covenant and Passover, a
while after: run out with Ezekiels 390, for All Israel: from the great Schism
in Jeroboam. As their sister Sodoms Flames were 390 years, from the Great
Flood; 365 hefore the Promise; 370 (as in Salem) before Melchisedeck met
Abraham. 372 (as in Sheba) before his ^nant, at Beersheba.

The 70 years Captivity, beginning with Daniel, at the End of Jehojachim (or in
Jehojachin, but 3 Months after) was Ezekiels, and That, he so often calls,
Our Captivity. And after 70 years, God promised to visit Them, with Jechoniah;
in the 29th: As in the 24th of Jeremy, they are called, the Good Figs, in
comparison of Zedekiahs Captives: Eleven years After.

And as Assyria, was brought on Israel, and Babylon on Judah, like the Waters
of the Great Flood; So, they must be Dried up. I will Dry up her Sea, and make
her Springs Dry: Which was, to the very Letter, fulfilled, by Cyrus; Turning
away their great River, and cutting it out into as many Streams, as Days in
the year: and so he brought in his Army, when and where, they little expected
it; in a time of great Feasting and jollity; as we read in Heathen Authors.

And so also, the same 51 Chapter of Jeremy (by that meek and quiet Prince, we
saw before,) sent this Heavy Doom to Babylon: In their Heat, or Humming
jollity, I will set (ashite, in Hebrew;) on their Feastings, I will make them
Drunk: (So it is first said, Pharaoh Hardened his own heart; and then, that God
hardened it: and so here, God will make them Drunk:) that They may Dance; and
sleep a perpetual sleep; and not Wake: says the Lord. So in the 39th Verse;
and so again, in the 57. I will make her Princes Drunken, and her wise men;
(her wise men!) her Captains, and her Rulers, and her Mighty men: and They
shall sleep, a perpetual sleep, and not Wake; says the King, whose Name is the
Lord of Hosts.

Which we see, fulfilled sadly; in the 5th of Daniel: When the Man's Fingers,
writing on the Wall, made their King, and all those Drunken Feasters, quake and
tremble so, that the Kings Countenance (or Brightness) was changed; and his
Thoughts pierced him so, that the joints of his Loins were loosed: and his
Knees smote him, and themselves also; that should have been otherwise employed
than in drinking Healths, or Carousing Praises to the gods of Gold and Silver:
as the words may intimate.

But how sudden, or in English Hebrew Phrase, How soon, That Evening came? with
its most sad Catastrophe? Thou Fool! This night, They shall take away thy
Glory; and thy soul also! Thy precious, and Immortal soul! And then, whose will
All these things be?

As our blessed Savior, speaks; as alluding, not only to the History of
Nabal, that is, a Fool; when his Heart dyed in him, and became like a stone, in
his Drunkenness: But also, to This in Daniel: and That also of Nebuchadnezar
(an Empty Pitcher, sealed: or, His Prophecy, as of a Treasure:) They shall take
away thy soul, and They shall Drive thee out from men; and They shall make thee
eat grass as an Ox: alluding to the Psalmists Image of a Beast, eating grass as
an Ox.

Adam lost the Image of God, and became as a Beast, (...), in, or with, his
wife; harkening to her; after the Serpent (who was Head, of all the Beasts;)
had possessed her; or as it were, filled her with His Spawn; which she got, by
Hearing, and Believing, That Beast; whence from Isha, she becomes Chavah, the
Beast; yea, the Mother to All Animals, and Beasts.

This was at Eden, (both Pleasure, and Time;) in Shinaar, the Teeth, and Years,
of the Watch, of Time in Babylon. Thence it came, with Abraham also, through
Haran, (that is Wrath) to Canaan; and Egypt, and Back again, to the
Wilderness: and There, it came out, in the Image of a Beast, eating grass as an
Ox, as the Psalmist says. And then it was set up in Dan (that is judgment; as
Dinah before) and Bethel also, the House of God. And He that built Jericho,
came out of Bethel, the House of God. For, Antichrist must sit As God, in the
Temple of God.

At length, It goes to Babylon, whence it first came: and So, the Prophet
Zechary sees First Isha, (So, the Woman was before she fell:) and then Eve (or
Lilith, as before;) or a woman in an Epha, or Eva: with an heavy Risk of
wickedness ((...)) carried by two women also; with the wings of a Stork, Piety,
and seeming Holiness. Alluding plainly to the Hebrew (...), a Stork, and
Holiness also; yet such, as may be the greatest Wickedness; or (as (...) also)
the very Root, of All Uncleanness, or Fornication. And those two Women, with
the Storks wings, carry it between Earth (which Here is set Before) Heaven:
into the Land of Shinaar; whence it first came. And there, it becomes, Mother
of All Fornication (as Revelation 17, 5.) And there, it was settled, on her
Base. Vehunnicha shame, al Mekunnatha. And the Angel added, This is their Ein,
or likeness, or Image (or Type of that Image of the Woman Beast,) which must
be, in all the Earth also. For, All the world Worship the Beast, which was
First and Last at Babylon.

Being come to Babylon, It is again (as before in the Wilderness,) turned into
the Image of a Beast, eating Grass as an Ox. First, the King of Babylon makes
an Image, of 60 High, and 6 in Breadth: (360, as Days in their Year; till at
length, it comes to be 666:) and sets it up in the Plain of Dura; That Age, or
Generation: As it will be, in every Dor, or During, of every Generation. Till
Babylon it self perish, like this Talent of Lead (Kiccar is both a Plain, and a
Talent) or as a Millstone, in the great Deep. And so did the Prophet Jeremy bid
that Meek and Quiet Prince Seraiah, to say; O Lord, thou have spoken against
this Place (This Babylon) to cut it off, that none remain, either Man, or
Beast; but that it shall be desolate for ever: (as in Esaias 13 also: So that
now, we only say, it was near That City, they now call Bagdad; but cannot
tell, where; but in old Rubbish, and ruins, found, at many Miles distance:)
And when thou have made an end of Reading this Book; Thou shall bind a stone
about it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates; and thou shall say, Thus
shall Babylon sinck, and shall not Rise, etc. The Text, to very much in the
Revelation.

But when the King of Babylon had made an Image, and set it up, to be
Worshipped (De Te, narratur fabula:) Then Himself, is turned, into the Image of
a Beast, Eating Grass as an Ox.

And they shall Drive thee out, from among men; and they shall make thee eat
Grass as an Ox; They, Even the Watchers, as Himself said, he heard the voice of
the Watchers; and the Holy Ones, saying, Let his Heart be changed from a Man's,
and let a Beasts Heart be given him: and 7 Times pass over him, till he know
the Most High (called afterward, the Heavens, as the Jews speak at This Day:)
Rules in the Kingdoms of Men; and gives it to whom he will, and sets up
over it, the Basest, even the Basest, of men. As, a Vile Person reigned, in the
same Daniel; and a Base Kingdom in Ezekiel; Yea, and the Basest: As the Psalms;
the vilest men are exalted. Which may Humble Any Prince; and keep Wise men from
Ambition, to be Rulers over others; least as Solomon says; They that be Higher
than others, be more Highly punished, by them, that are Higher, than They. As
the Priest, that often cried on his Deathbed; O, Bury me in the Belfry, I
pray, in the Belfry.

Government, is a great Ordinance of God; and to be Helped to be Born, with All
our Hearts, and Prayers. None can Envy it, that know it. As the Grecian said,
to the great Persian, Thou seem not to have Heard of Liberty: For, He that
knows what Liberty is, cannot but value it, Above the Persian Empire. And
Dioclesian, being once quit of the Roman Empire, and invited again, Cried, No,
I will Drink no more Poison.

But thy Kingdom shall be Sure (which is Hebrew also:) After those 7 Times,
which, in That place, are expressed, by somewhat of (...) also: And yet sure,
they did not last Ever. Nay, but 7 Years; or 7 Months. And they began, at the
end of 12 Moons (as the Text speaks;) just as he was saying, After All his
Warnings, Is not This, My Babylon, etc?

And then, the Voice (as the Jews yet call it, Bath Kol the Daughter of the
Voice: As in the Gospel also, There came a Voice, and they said, It Thundered:)
The Voice fell down from Heaven: (Is not this, the Image, that fell down from
Heaven? Of which, They have more to speak, that know Iconium, also, had its
Name from such an Image.) saying, They say, to thee, Thy Kingdom is Added: as,
it was Increased, after This; with more Excellent Majesty; as in Luke and Paul,
we read, Most Excellent, given also to Men of lower Rank, than a Sovereign
King; who is a God, on Earth; I said ye are Gods: And Jacob Bowed to the Earth,
before the King of Egypt. Religion does not take us off, from any Duty to
Princes, and Kings; as Supreme; and Governors under them: but preserves, and
increases it. But some read, Thy Kingdom is Passed, or Departed from Thee.
Where yet, is the Verb of Ad ((...), as in English, Yed, or Yet, also:) by
which, we may plainly see, that it means no Eternal Ever; but somewhat Passing
away. And So may the English Ever also; (However it be used:) for it is plainly
the Hebrew ((...)) Ever; or as some sound it, Heber. Who had also Two Sons: the
Greater, to Rule the Day, from whom came Abraham; and the Less, to Rule the
Night; and from Him, Jerach, the Moon; and Hasermaveth the Court of Death; and
Hadoram, Their Age, or Generation; and 10 other Sons: to make up 12 M. w^h the
Moon.

And the very Name of Heber, with the Jews, notes Passing Over (as They
think,) the River Euphrates. Where about, it seems He lived. If at least, Ur,
of the Chaldees, be Ptolomies Urchoa; and not rather Ura, in the March of
Xenophon. or of Crassus; nearer Charan much (where He was also slain) Then the
Out-lets of Euphrates, into the Red Sea (for, So, it is called There also, in
diverse ancient Authors:) where about they now place Ur. Very far from Charan:
which is much out of the way, to Canaan: but in the way, or near the way, from
Ura. And the Holy Watchers cried, Let his Heart be changed, from Man's; and let
a Beasts Heart be given him: and let Seven times Pass over him.

Heart, is Lebab ((...)) and being turned backward, it is Babel ((...)) where,
this King Reigned: and the Beast is called Eeva ((...).) As if it would mind
us, of our Mother Eeve, who first made us become as Beasts.

She is called (...) (near akin to This (...)) Chaveh, the Living Beast; as
before. But they sound it Eeve: which may be Hatred (as God says, I will put
Eiva between Thy Seed:) and it may be Lust also; which is Truly Eeva (from
(...) or (...)) and it may be a Beast: (which is also (...) and (...) and
(...).) As the English, yet call a Beast, Beeve, and Beef, and Theeve (which is
also to play the Beast:) And so, Theves, or Thebes,: the Cow City, in Beotia;
or other places. As in Egypt; for Their Apis, and Sorapis: Whence They learned
to make the Golden Calf: which the Psalmist calls the Beast, in the likeness
of an Ox. They worshipped the (molten) Beast, and turned their Glory, which was
the Image of God (in which, and by which, They should have Ruled over All the
Beasts: As God himself Expounds it, in Genesis 1. 26.) Into the likeness or Image
of a Beast, eating Grass; As Nebuchadnezar also did. How just is it with God,
when we will first Turn our own Glory, into the Image of a Beast, to Turn us,
Really, into the Shame of a Beast! As it Here was, with Nebuchadnezar. I say
not also with Adam: which yet Turned, or a little changed, comes to be Dama,
and Edom, which was also Seir (or Sire) a Goat, a Buck, a Satyr, a Devil. And
I must not add, that All this came in, by Eeva (or Lust,) which made Him so
dally with Her, till he became in Hebrew Beast, or (...), In his Wife. And now
I wonder not, that in All their Sacrifices, God ever required (...), the Woman,
or the Wife also; as well as Fire-Offering, to be consecrate with Salt (as Lots
Wife,) and Then to be offered to God also; or Devoted; which our Savior may
express, by Hating a man's own Wife. Whom yet he must ever love, and cherish, as
Christ does the Church: For it is a Circumcision not made with Hands, that
makes Eunuchs for the Kingdom of God. Who promises such a Name, much better
than of Sons and Daughters! Shem (or Shame) Olam, that shall not be cut off.
But the (...) that was cut off, may lead us to That Skin, (or (...)) which God,
put on our Parents, when they had fallen in to such Beasts, as Then He Clothed
them with. And our Lords Conclusion is, Let him that can; Receive it.

Yet the Woman also, shall be saved by bearing a Son: But she must be Sileut
(in opposition to One of the sounds of Chaveh: to which also Psalm. 19. may
allude:) For as, at first by Hearing the Serpent, and Tatling with him, she
believed him, and was Great with him, to This Day: So if she be Slow to speak,
and Swift to hear (Him that comes not, in his own Name;) by Faith, she may
also Conceive, that is Understand, which is proper to the Female, or Passive
Understanding: As Knowing, in all Languages, is given to the Male, or Active
Intellect:) and the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head. Who is
also, the Head of the Beast, and All the Beasts of the Field (as we read in
Genesis 3. to be compared with the Revelation, in diverse places.) Which yet were
not so subject to Adam; (though he had a Command, rather than Power or
Knowledge how to use it;) As to Noah: who had All the Beasts, delivered over,
by God, into his Hand (as Job was into Satan's) with Permission, and Commission,
and a Promise also, that God would keep them under with Fear (renewed also in
Hos. and other places:) Only Spare their Blood, that is their Soul: (as also
God said of Job:) For, a Goodman is merciful to the Soul of his very Beast, as
we read in Wise Solomon, who yet says, He, and We, and All, are Beasts.

So also, was God, and our Savior, merciful to his poor Beast Nebuchadnezar: A
great man, and yet greater than we may imagine. First, a Man, and So a little
God; and on Horsback, a Cherub; Covering Cherub: As they Picture George on
Horsback over the Dragon (of great Worship among the old Saxons, or English:)
and He hovered so long, till he received also, the Dragons Power, and seems to
Conquer Him! But O! by This Power, He becomes a Serpent, and bites the Horses
Heel, till his Rider fall Backward also (Lebab turned into Babel:) and bow to
the Beast.

But He that made Leviathan, can cause his Sword (his Great and sore, and
strong, and long, Sword) to approach him! And shall visit the Crossing Serpent,
and slay the Dragon in the great Deep: And Behemoth also; the Great Beast: the
Feminine Plural Beasts, Mother of Beasts, and Fornication; even Great Babylon:
Of which in Job, the Psalms, Prophets, and Revelation in diverse places.

And All shall worship the Beast, whose Names are not written in the Lambs Book
of Life, from the Foundation of the World. For, All Tongues and Nations, and
Kindreds, are under his Power (and the Dragons, that gave Power to This Beast:)
Are they not, the same words, that are spoken of Nebuchadnezar, in the Prophet
Jeremy: Chap. 27?

But He that leads Captive, shall be led Captive, and He that slays with
the Sword, shall be slain with the Sword. (Here is the Faith and patience of
the Saints!) And He, that will not, open his Prison Doors, or visit his
Captives, shall be Bound himself; and not visited, for a long season. And He
that makes Others worship the Beast, or Image of the Beast (in Dura; or any
other Province of Babylon;) shall himself be Turned into a Beast, and eat grass
with an Ox. He would be a Beast; he played and Acted the Beast (the Roaring,
Tearing, and Devouring Beast:) and He, that Gives every thing, the desire of
his Heart, Gave that Beastly Man, a Beastly Heart.

But How Long, Holy and True? Remember how short my Time is: Why have thou made
All men so Vain?

Seven, and but Seven, Times ((...) or Then) shall pass over Thee. As if Here
also, God would intimate, that All Time and Times (and all their Ever also)
Pass, and shall Pass, quite away. As we noted before in (...), and (...) also,
or Wrath, (For, so the English sound (...) also by W: as, in With, For (...):
or many other words.) As Esaias Cries, Hide thy self a little moment, till the
Wrath be Passed. Or as Jonathan, said to David, Hide thy self, till my Fathers.
Wrath be over: Till the Morning, or to morrow ((...), much as (...) 666.) For,
The sun must not go down on Wrath: and if Sorrow, last All Night, Joy shall
come with the Morning Sun.

But what are These 7 Times? They are said to be Years. But These are Masculine
and Feminine, Solar and Lunar. Yea, and as Shanah, a Year, in the Singular; is
very near akin to Nahash, a Serpent (as we noted:) So is Shanim, Years, but
Nashim, Women also, by a Metathesis; which yet I name not, Aversa Venus: as
some of their Poets may.

Jeremy tells us, that All Nations must serve Babel, yea and Tongues also,
(must Babble, As at the Tower of Babel;) for 70 years: As they tell us of 70
Nations, that rose up at that Babbling. And if Then, the King of Babylon
himself, become a Man again; and be restored to the lost Image of God; from the
Image of the Beast; Is it not possible, that All Tongues and Nations also, may
be restored with him?

But in That Gospel, which I cited so much already, Levit. 26. Our Savior
tells them, that If they will not hearken unto Him, but despise his Statutos
(as Nathan charge on David himself:) and their soul abhor his Judgments, and
quite Break his Covonant [or, be Uneircumcised:] He will Then, Then! [What not
till Then? and All That Will not? and Despise, and Soul abhoring, and All
Covenantbreakings?] He will Then begin to consume their Eyes [we touched it
before in Sampson.] and cause sorrow of heart [fair warnings] and they shall
sow their Seed in Vain. And I will set my Face [my Face! but not my Heart]
against you. And They that Hate you, shall Reign over you. And if you will not
yet Hearken, unto me, I will punish you Seven [as we saw before.] And if yet
you will walk Keri, etc. I will yet Seven more. And I will also send the Beast,
as alluding plainly to that in Genesis 3. Where the Serpent is more subtle
[(...), used of Adam and Eve, in the Verse before:] Then Any Beast of the
Field: the very Phrase, here used in Leviticus.

But yet, I will yet, remember my Covenant: as we saw before. And there was
much need of This Memory in God, and His Remembrance of his Holy Covenant, at
this Time of Babylon. And as Hezekiahs Queen, was Hephzibah [to which Esaias 62.
4. may allude:] So his Mother was, My Father, Abi, of Zechariah [the Lords
Remembrance] slain, it seems, between the Porch and the Altar. Though they
Acted this again, after our Savior also, in another Zechary of Baruch also, as
we may learn from Josephus. And though Manassehs Name may hint, that He forgot
his Duty; yet the Lord still Remembered his Covenant, and his Promise to
Remember it. And although he had now cause enough given him by Ammon, the
people also, to Despair of their Amendment: which may be Hinted in Josiah, the
Lord Despairing: Yet his Mother was Beloved, Jedidah [as Solomon was Jedidiah;
and Jedidoth we saw before, in the Psalms:] and the Daughter of the Lords
Eternity, Adaiah.

And he gave Josiah 4 Sons. First Johanan, the Lord Gracious. And then
Jehojachim, the Lord will Raise again: And Zedekiah, the Lords Justice, Shallum
Satisfied; or Pacified. As in another Zechary, when the white Horses, had gone
out, after the Black, he said, My Spirit is Quieted, even toward the North; or
Babylon, Haran, Hamath, and other Places, or Persons also, at my Left Hand,
which was Northwards, as we saw before. And then presently follows, Go to them
of the Captivity, even of Cheled; my Age, or Cheled; and Tobiah, the Lords
Goodness; and Jedaiah, the Lords Knowledge: and of All These, Make Crowns, for
Jeshuah: and for Zorobabel also: For, He is bid to go to to the House of
Josiah, in the North, or Hidden Secret of the Lord; which is Zephaniah. As
alluding, to the Prophet Zephaniah; who was in the Days of Josiah, as we saw
before. And now also, the House of Josiah, was in the Lords Zephaniah, Secret
Councels, of the North; or if you please, in the Holy Spleen of God. As our
Spleen, is at our Left side: As Babylon, and All of Spleen, or Wrath, is at the
North, or Left Hand of God: which is also the Hidden Secret; as the Hebrew word
intimates. And the Temple North Gate Tedi, was named from Hiding; as Hidden, by
Antonia; or by the Hill Bezetha.

From This House of Josiah, Hidden in the North, came first Jeconiah, through a
Northern Gate of the Temple, called Jeconiahs Gate; and Then, Zorobabel, a
Nephew of Josiah; by Jehojachim, who begat this Jechoniah, the Cursed Man in
Jeremy 22. They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my Brother, [(...): as we
saw before.] As I live says the Lord, If Coniah were the Signet on my Right
Hand, yet would I pluck thee Thence [to put him on his Left!] But Do not his
Bowels begin to yearn already? In that pathetical Question following? Is this
Coniah, a Despised broaken Idol? Is He a Vessel of no Pleasure? Good for
Nothing? Why is he Driven out? etc.

Hear, O Ear^h, Earth, Earth; Not a word of Heaven! What? Write you [For, He
must be written in the Dust, as Jer. 17. 13.] Or esteem and reckon you, This
Man Ariri [as akin to Arur, Cursed,) As Childless. But yet he was not
Childless: As This very Text may show us. For, it Asks before, Why is he cast
out, and his Seed also? to a Land they know not?

And to put it out of Doubt, the very Gospel tells us, that After his carrying
into Captivity; He begat Zalathiel; in the 1st Chron. 3. Shealtiel; that is, I
Sought God; the son of Jehojachin Assir, or Bound. As Psalm. 146. The Lord
Raises them that are bowed Down; He opens the blind Eyes [as Christ was sent
for these ends, and] He loses the Prisoners; Assyrim: and so Here, Assyr, the
Prisoner. And his Name was Jehojachin, the Lord will Establish: both Jachim, He
will Raise; and Jachin, He will Establish. And so, we have Jachin a Prince, as
before, Jachin a Priest. Two Witnesses. Jeshuah, salvation, or Jesus, the son
of Jozedek the Lords Justice; so near akin to Jachin the Priest: and
Zerubbabel, the stranger or Fan of Babel; from Jachin the Prince also: but in
Bonds, Assyr; he Bowed and besought the Lord it seems (as may be sweetly
promised in Jeremy 22. 22. Compared with Ezekiel. 16, and 37.) and so was freed
also from his Bonds, and set above, All the Princes with him. So gracious is
God, in afflicting us; as we saw before in Menasseh, and many others.

So he calls this son of his bonds, (as Paul's Onesimus, alluding also to That,
Is Jechoniah a Vessel of no profit?) Shealtiel, I sought God. As alluding also
to Saul (as if He, were Here, come up again:) who Dyed, as we read, 1 Chronicles.
10. because he would not seek God, but Ob, or the Devil; Lisheol: As alluding
to His Name also, as we saw before.

And that God heard Him also, may be Hinted, in His Sons Hosama; which is, He
was Heard; and Pedaiah, the Lord Redeemed. Who begot Shimei (that Cursed
David?) and Zerubbabel, and Shelomith; as we saw before, on the Canticles. By
which (and other things,) we may see, Solomon had also a Prophetic spirit,
when he cried, Return, Return, O Shulomith; Return, Return: And That of
Mahanaim also from Padan, may allude to Pedaiah, Their Redemption. And His
Right Hand Pillar, Jachin.

Yea, and what, If his 400 Pomgranates, might look Forward also, as well as
Backward? Seeing from His works finished, There were very few years, if any
more, than 400, to this Jachin, we are now getting out. And, as we touched
before in Jachins Tenth; So also, by Ezra 2. we may see, there returned but a
Tenth, and scarce a Tenth, of those that came from Egypt. Whence were above
600000: and Here not 60000 (12 years old, as in Esdras:) Though He reckons the
very Servants, and Handmaids also (not a Pin, must be lost, of the whole
Tabernacle:) and the Vessels, in full tale: Yea, and the very Camels, Mules,
Horses, Asses (and the very Hairs of your Head) are All Numbered. As remembering,
that we saw before, in the 4th Command: Thy Servant, and thy Handmaid; Yea, and
the Son of thy Handmaid (often urged by David) Thine Ishmael: Thy Ass, and thy
Ox, must Rest, and be refreshed also, or New Souled.

All their Sons, and all the Congregation, were but 360 (as Days in their
Year: and 12 years old, as Hours in the Day:) above 42000. As alluding to their
42 Mansions in the Wilderness, as 42 Months in the Revelation: and 42 Children,
by Elishas Bears. To which, God may allude, in that of Hoseah, I am God, and
not a Bear (or (...)) to devour you. Yea, I will give you 42000 from Babylon,
for Chose 42 Children devoured; and the Years also, or Women, Eaten by the
Cankers, and the Locusts (that had Hair as Women:) in the Prophet Joel, and the
Revelation.

Being returned to Jerusalem, with 12 Elders (Neh. 7. 7.) as the 12 Hours of
Day: and Adonikam also, (My Lord Rises, or Comes,) with 666 Sons, as Ezra 2.
13. They set up the Altar in fear, 3. 3. and Offered the Daily Tamid, etc. From
the First Day of the 7th Month (the Great Month we seek;) and kept the
Tabernacle Feast; before the Temple Founded in the 2d Month (as Solomon's;) in
the 2d Year, as Moses Tabernacle Raised, Ex. 40.

And Then, they sung, and sounded Trumpets with great Praises; but others wept:
and yet God Accepted Both (though there is a way He Best accepts, and That he
will teach the Humble:) As in our Bodies, Hot and Cold, Dry and Moist, Up and
Down, Draw in, and Thrust out; Yet All good Harmony. So, in Israel; So, in the
Body of Christ. Even After Babylon also. Some Weep and Pray, when others Sing
Praise (and with, Musickalso:) and yet Both I hope, for a good End, and from a
good Heart; and God accepts our calling him Father: As a Child calling
Dappo; Though we know not why, the Child so calls Him; or whom it means,
by its words perhaps, but by its signs, and looks, or sighing; somewhat else. O,
the Heart, and Kindeness of God our Father! Do but go forward; or if you cannot
go forward, Do but stand still quietly, and you shall see the salvation of God.
O, the Heart of God, which cannot be seen! but you shall see, the Face of God.
But, Do not fall out, by the way: Nor be Afraid, with any Amazement. Love, will
cast out Fear.

And Ezra called them; Even All His Company, to Ahava [How near to Love in
Hebrew?] There they Fast and Pray, and seek a way, for Themselves, and for
their Little Ones: For, he was ashamed to ask of the King, because he had
spoken, saying, The Hand of our God, is on All for Good, that Seek him, [Davids
dying words to Solomon] but his Power, and Wrath, on All that for sake him.

We are now come to one of the hardest Knots of Time; Daniels Weeks. And though
it may not be so easy to fix Their beginning, Or their End, as it is, their
Number, of 490 [that is 7 times 70] years: Yet for an Essay, as God shall
enable us.

Esaias says of Cyrus, He is my Shepherd, and shall perform, All my Pleasure!
Saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be Built! and to the Temple, Thy Foundations
[only,] shall be laid. And in 45. He shall Build My City, and let go My
Captives. And Ezra 4. 12. Be it known unto the King, that the Jews are come
from Thee to Jerusalem, Building the Rebellious City, etc. And the King
returned, Cause the men to cease, from Building the City; Or, that it be no
more Built, till farther Order. So the work ceased, till the 2d of Darius. Then
stood up Haggai, saying, Is it time for you to dwell in Cieled Houses, and This
House lie waste? And again, Verse 9. Ye run, every man, unto his own House.
This was the First of the 6th Month; and Then, They came, and wrought, in the
24th of that Month; but so slowly; that he spoke again, on the 21st of the
Seventh Monrh, the Last and Great Day of Tabernacles; and again on the 24th of
the 9th Month: And now I pray consider, from this Day and Upward, from before a
Stone was laid upon a Stone, in the Temple of the Lord: But consider now from
This Day, and Upward, from the 24th of the 9th Month, from the Day the
Foundation of the Lords Temple was Laid. etc.

By which it seems plain enough, that They had leave to build the City, and had
Will enough to Build it, and to Ciel their own Houses, rather, and much sooner,
than the Lords. Which by Esayes words, was only to be Founded by Cyrus; when
Jerusalem should be Built. And so Ezra found it, plain enough; and Nehemiah was
told indeed, that the Remnant of the Captivity, were in great affliction and
Reproach; and that the Wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the Gates burnt
with Fire. Which yet may seem some Later matter, then That Sack, in Zedekiah;
which sure was known enough to Nehemiah, That he needed not be told of That.
But now, he heard some late, or New affliction, and Reproach, upon the Remnant,
that had built the City, up again, after their Return. And when Himself came
up, He did but only Repair the Walls, and set up the Gates. And There also the
men of Jericho, repaired next to the Very High Priest. Of so great repute was
Jericho (the cursed City;) even in Those days, and Returning from Babylon
also: being as the Jews say, the 2d to Jerusalem. Or as the Moon (as it
sounds) to the Sun. Yea, some observe, that in the very Hebrew Letters of
Jerusalem, there only wants (...), of All in Jericho, and Salem, its first
Name.

It may not, therefore, be said, but That Cyrus also, gave forth a Word, to
Return, and Build Jerusalem; as we read in Daniels Weeks. Which were given out
to Him, in the very first Year of Darius the Mede; which seems also the First
of Cyrus the Persian (though not in Babylon:) and at the very beginning of his
Prayer, the Word went out: as the Angel tells him, Verse 23. with the very same
Phrase, in the 25th, From the Going sorth of the Word, to Return and Build
Jerusalem.

But the Phrase Motsa, does not only note, the first Going out, of a Word or
Thing, but a Continued Motion; and going on, or growing up, or constant
flowing; As, in a Spring of Water, Esaias 58. the growing up of the Grass, Job
38. Or a Mine of silver, or other Metal, Job 27. Or Sunrising, and going
forward, Psalm. 19. Or the East it self, Psalm. 75. And, His going, is prepared,
as the Morning; (we found in Hoseah:) And his Goings forth, from Eternity, the
Days of Old, in Micha. Where we still read, the same Phrase; and in many other
places. So that Here, also, in Daniel, we may not tie it up to the First word
of Cyrus, (or any other) to return or build: but to the Whole Matter (as Dabar
signifies, as well as a Word, or Command:) or full Process, and Progress of
That Business; with All its full Execution (which is Motsa also;) the End,
Issue, or finishing of a Matter, as well as its first going out.

So that if the Word, or Command of Cyrus, were in Doing, or delaying, very
many Years; yet it was still so going forth, and going up, as the Sun from East
to West. And so Cyrus may signify in the Persian: or in Hebrew also; being a
Vessel of Fire, as the sun is, or at least seems. And there is a famous
Record of Cyrus seeing the Sun at his Beds Feet (as Joseph, and others perhaps,
have seen it, as Bowing or coming toward:) And his Catching at it Thrice, was
Thrice 10 Years they said, of his Reign. And the Sun also, was the Persian
Arms or God.

And the Prophet brings him up, from the East, like the Suns Rays upon the
Temple, and Jerusalem. And though, the Sun stood still, for one whole Day, in
Josuah; and went backward in Hezekiah; (So, that some that had fixed Nabonasses
Era, in Babylon, came to enquire of That VVonder, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31.) yet it went
forward again, and got ground perhaps, by staying: So did Cyrus also; For
Darius did but Build, on Cyrus Foundation, and the Decree of Cyrus. So, that it
may be said, of Him, as of Zerubbabel, His Hand began, and His Hand finished.
And I will make thee a signet on my Hand also; for I have Chosen thee: As I
threatened to Cast off thy Grandfather; Though, a signet on my Right Hand.

How long this City, or this Temple should be in Building, by That Decree; may
be very hard to determine, from the Scripture: which yet, must determine All
great matters of Faith and Doctrine, and other things also, of great moment;
before we can much rest, and be confident in them. Which is One, of many
things, I so much love, in the Chain of Scripture Chronology, by T. A. So
industrious in clearing Scripture. which I am loath to leave, in This, or any
thing else; in which we differ.

But for This also by Scripture. That Israel, and Judah, (those two
VVitnesses,) were now slain; or lay, as Dead, in That Captivity; and that Judah
returned, but in Childebed; and newly Delivered: Is so clear, from Mich. 4. 10.
that it needs little other proof. And but of a Daughter, the Daughter of
Zion; For, the Man-child, was not yet Born; Though, before she Traveled, her
last Thraws; she must bring forth a Man-child also. As some of the Jews cite,
for the Messiah to be born before Their last Sack of Jerusalem; though He lie
hid, they say, in Rome; or other place.

Now, when a Woman was delivered of a Daughter (as Here; where God, by Cyrus,
delivered this Jewish Church, or woman:) she must stay, 80 Days, before she
may eat the Holy things; or come into the Sanctuary: as we saw before. And that
the longest Hiding of the Moon, is about 80 Hours, or at most 84; which is 3
Days and Half: when slowest motion: Or else, much shorter; but 40, or 42. As a
Woman's Days also, for a Man-child.

But That also by degrees, of 7, and 33 Days, for a Son (as 7, and 33 Hours in
the Moon) and 14, and 66, for a Daughter: which is now, our Case in Hand. And
so, from Cyrus Decree, to the Temple finished, in Darius Hystasp: were at least
14 Years. First, 11, answering to the 11 first of the Captivity, from
Johojachim, which was Daniels; or Jehojachin, Ezekiels; to Zedekiahs last, or 11
Year. And so many there were, from Cyrus Decree; to the 2d of Darius.

As the Utmost Court of All Israel, about the Temple, which they called Chell,
or Hell, was 11 Cubits Broad: and Then, 5 steps more (of 5 half Cubits; as the
Woman came not up, till the Morning after the 14th Day:) into the VVomens
Court; as they called it, in the 2d Temple: which we are now going here to
Build, in its Times and Seasons. So, it was not finished till the 6th Year of
Darius, Ezra 6. 15. And there may be somewhat said, to End the 14 Years, sooner
also: and yet So, that there may be 14 Years from Cyrus First, to Darius 2d.
But However; from the first 14 Years, after Cyrus Decree, the next 66, will
reach to Artaxerxes, sending Ezra, or Nehemiah. Darius Reigned 34, as some, but
36, as others; and Xerxes 21. Artabamus, not a Year. And the next, Artaxerxes,
in whose 7th Ezra, and 20th Nehemiah, went to Jerusalem: with those gracious
Decrees we find in them.

And from the 7th of Artaxerxes, to our Saviors death, there were very near
490 Years. So that Ezra, might well live, within 400 Years of Christ: as we
read in 2d Esdras, 7. And if Daniels Half Week be, as some believe, to reach 3
Years and Half, below his Death: As its first Half, from his Baptism, to his
Death; yet, it may very well answer to the Temple finished, in 3 Years and an
Half, after the 2d of Darius: Although Scaliger, Calvisius, Helvicus, and other
Great men, begin the Weeks, or 490 Years, from the 2d of Darius Nothus. Whence
also, to the Roman Sack of Jerusalem, there may be very near 490 Years; if they
were to end with the City, and not with our Savior; which I think more
agreeable to Scripture and Reason, in many things, besides the Age of Ezra,
Josuah, Zerubbabel; with All that saw Both Temples: as we see in Ezra 3. 12.

And besides All for This before; and the great Harmonies between the Times in
the Law, and the Gospel also; with the Temples, and the Cities: It may be
remembered, that we found the Day of Pentecost, to begin, just from 1536 Hours
of the Year. For, 333, brought us, to the Evening Minha, of the 14th Day of the
Month; or Evening of the Passover: Which ended* just in 336 Hours. 50 Days
more, make up just 1200 Hours; coming to the Day of First Fruits, or Pentecost:
50 Days from the Sickle (as we saw before:) and Therefore, it began just in
1536 Hour of the Year; which as we saw before, was to be Reckoned from their
coming out of Egypt.

Whence, 480, brought us to Solomon's Temple; 36 more to Solomon's Death: and 390
more to the Cities End and Temples. If we There begin the 70 Years Captivity;
and Then add the 14, and 66, and 490, we last spoke of, They make 1546. But
beginning the Captivity Ten full Years before the End of the City and Temple,
as before; we have than but just 1536: which is the very last Hour, before the
Day of Pentecost: and so, those Years bring us just to the great Pentecost in
the 2d of Acts, being the same Year of our Saviors Death and Resurrection, and
Ascension also. So that, In This One Year, were All things fulfilled, that were
before That Pentecost; from which, we are to Reckon, to the Feast of
Tabernacles.

And if Any yet, will bring the Captivity; or the 2d Temple, any lower; or
begin Daniels VVeeks, at Nehemiahs going in the 20th Year, rather than Ezraes,
in the 7th; There may yet be greater Harmony. For, although the 50th Day, or
Pentecost, began from 1536 hours of the Year; Yet the Sun of that Day, rose not
till 12 Hours after, As Nehemiah, came up 12 Years, after Ezra. This, was an
Helper; as our Savior; but Nehemiah, the Lords Comforter; as the Holy Ghost,
coming in the Morning of the Day of Pentecost.

And there may be yet, somewhat more in it, to be cleared also, from the
Scripture Numbers, or Measures of This Temple, and its Courts; which we shall
therefore yet, a little more consider, with Herod's also; as we did, that of
Solomon.

However it was, in His first Temple, It is clear enough, there was at the
Second, from Babylon, an Hill, an Hell, an Help; before the Altar, Porch, and
House, or Holy, and Most Holy Place, or Oracle. Which had All, their several
Measures, and Degrees of Holiness; to which God himself seems to allude in
diverse Places: As in that; I will bring them to my Holy Mountain: and Then, I
will make them joyful in my House of Prayer. And, I will accept them on my Holy
Altar. And, Send thee help, out of the Holy Place. And, An House of Prayer to
All Gentiles, etc.

The Walled Hill, a square of 2000 Cubits: the Distance of the Camp, from the
Ark; Ios. 3. 4. and a Sabbath Days journey, as we may learn from the old
Chalde Paraphrase on Ruth. Each side being 500, may be compared with Ezekiels
Sanctuary, 500 long, and 500 broad (as the Suburbs 50 Cubits about:) Taken out
of 25000. Chap. 45. As 42, speaks of 500 Reeds. I need not add, the Cubit was
2 Spans, or 6 Taps, of 24 Digits, as Hours in a Day.

The Wall was generally 24, or 25 Cubits High: and the Gates 30. 15 Broad (but
the Doors 20, 10:) Only That at the East, was lower than the Rest, by 4
Cubits: That the Priest, might look over it, from Olivet, at the Red Cowes
Ashes; or other Reasons before.

The East Gate, in memorial of their Captivity, and Deliverance at Shushan, in
Ester; had the Name and form of the City Shushan: by command some say, from the
Persian King at Shushan, the Royal City, for about 34 Years, after This 2d
Temple was Built. Which yet, was a more lovely, or Holy Prospect, than Solomon's
House for Chemosh, and Moloch, in Tophet, on the Right Hand also, from This
Gate, to Olivet. But the whole Valley of the Dead bodies, and of the Ashes (in
Tophet, and Gehinnon it self) must come in, to be Holy, as Jerusalem; A
Gracious Promise in Jeremy, 31.

The Gatehouse 12 Cubits: As Ezekiels also; a Reed of 6 Cubits without, and 6
within the Gate: in the 6th of the 40th Chap. And now we are come, to That,
which (in our Saviors time also,) was called Solomon's Porch: We found it
Square; 400 Cubits: every side a Double Walk, of 30 Cubits Broad, and covered:
with 3 Rows of white Marble Pillars, of 24 Cubits. And the South, or Right Hand
walk, was Treble, with 4 Rows of Pillars: which Josephus calls the Royal
Stoe, or stateliest Walk, the Sun yet ever saw. Round about This Square, were
Benches (against the Wall;) which the Jews call, as the English, Seats, or
Stays, (...). All This Hill, or Mountain of the House, they called also the
First Temple; or the Outer Temple (where our Savior found the sellers of
Doves, or other things:) and Court of the Gentile^.

From This Hill, They came into Hell, or (...): for so they called the next
Partition, of 11 Cubits broad: though some make it but 10; (and the Porch 11:)
But All agree, behind the Temple, on the West, there were 11 Cubits: however
you will call them.

The Wall about This Hell, they called Sorg, or Surge, or Scurge: a common
Wall, was Home. To this, they went up, by 14 steps, as Josephus; or 12, as the
Talmud: Half Cubits. At every Gate (against the other Gates,) were Pillars,
bidding strangers keep their distance, at their Peril: As if Hell, were only
for Children of the Kingdom. Yet it had but low Walls of 3 Cubits; with
Latices, for Children also, to look through. As the Canticles: He looked through
the Lattess, from behind Our Wall, and cried, O my Dove, that art in the
Clefts of That Rock; and in the secret of those Stairs.

And 5 steps more, led out of Hell, to the first Help; or the New Court, of
which before. The Outer Court, in Ezekiel 46. In either corner a little Court,
of 40 Cubits long (from East to West) and 30 broad. The Northeast, or Left
Hand, was for Priests with blemishes; who were yet clothed in White (while
others in Blaek; not of the Right Line:) and wormed the wood, their brethren
kindled: and for That, might eat, the Holy things, with their Fairest, Wholest
Brother.

The Northwest, for the Leapers Shaving, and Bathing; till he might be
presented, in the next Gate, leading to Isreal's Court, and the Priests. The
Southwest, for Wine, and Oil, at Minha. And the Southeast for the Nazarite, who
might shave his Hair in any place, (as Paul at Cenchrea;) but must Burn it
Here, under the Boylers of Salems (as before, upon Ezekiel. 46:) Except his Vow
were not out: and then, it came not Hither, though he might shave it every 30
Days: As Absalon, did once a year; although they call him a Sampson Nazarite;
which in This, of not shaving, was more than a Perpetual Nazarite.

This was the Women's Court: (who yet might go, with a Sacrifice, into the
Inward Court of ^srael:) A perfect square of 135 Cubits, every way. Here was
the great Meeting (where also, the King, or chief Magistrate, read the Law, as
commanded, Deuteronomy. 31. 10.) with Dancing also, at the Tabernacles, both of men
and women; Till some lightness ocasioned Galleries (on all sides, but the East;
which was next the Temple:) And in These, the women, were above the men: Which
is the Jews custom, in their Synagogues, where the women sat apart; but
looked down through Latteses.

Here were the 12 Korban Chests: 11 for Free Will Offerings, and others: But
the 12th for the yearly Tribute, or half Shekle; which begat the Money Changers
(which our Savior overturned!) and their Gain was a 12th also. Some add a 13th
Chest, for the Last Years Duties. There were Korban Chambers also, in diverse
places, and for Silent Righteousness; or such as was not Seen, but Done, for
maintenance of Poor, etc. To which Matthew. 6. 1. may allude.

Here it was, our Savior Sat, and saw the Widows Mites: For, in the Court of
Israel, none might Sit, but Kings, of David's House. As is rightly observed by
Doctor Lightfoot, in his Learned, and Excellent Discourses, on This, and many
other subjects. And with Him, a Mite weighed Half a Barley-corn; the same with
a Perut (of which before:) and 8 Peruts, made their Issar; two Issars a Pond:
two Ponds a Gerah (16 Barley-corns:) 6 of Those, made their Penny; 24 their
Shilling, (...): And to This, at length, they brought their Shekle: which yet
God fixed, at 20 Gerahs, in Moses and Ezekiel, several Times.

From the Women's Court, 15 steps in a Semicircle; For the 15. Psalms of Degrees
(sung Here, in the great Feast of Tabernacles) bring us up, to the Middle Gate,
with other Names, but commonly Nicanor; a devout Jew; or the first Syrian King,
their great Friend; or an Enemy, slain at That Gate, as some; or near
Jerusalem, as others, and 1 Machab. 7. In This Gate, the Women were Purified
(with Lepers also:) and Here they drank the Bitter water: and did All, required
of Israel, before the Lord. For Here, the Priests might stand, in their own
Court, and reach, to the Leapers Thumbs and Toes; and Those, that might not yet
enter the Court of Israel: within This Gate: which, as themselves confess,
opened of it self (though others speak it, of the Women's Gate, of Corinthian
Brass;) 40 Years, before the Temple was burnt by the Romans. As, to let out,
the Divine Presence (or his service) which had 10 Flittings, they say, from one
place to another; as their Sanedrin also, from that 40th year, had 10 several
places, or changes: and from These 40 Years also, the Skarlet Thread (of which
before) never turned White, on the Scapegoat; which themselves owned, for a
sad Omen, that their sins were not forgiven.

Their Highest Sanedrin (in Gazit, over Hell, but joining to the south of this
court) were chofen from the Sanedrins of 23, (which were only in Towns of 120
persons of quality, fit for Magistrates: as Those of 3, were for 10 such; as we
saw before:) whereof, the Lowest 23, for Jerusalem, sat in the Gate Shushan;
and the Higher, in This Gate of Nicanor. Unto which, they brought Appeals from
That of Shushan (as from All Lower courts, to Shushan:) and, Here not
Determined, They went to the Highest Sanhedrin in Gazit: Where yet, none might
sit, that were very Old (least too Morose;) or had No children: For, they
thought a Man could hardly be meek enough, to be a Judge, in such a court; till
himself had Children. Psalm 103. 13.

The Length of this court from East to West, was 187 cubits (and its breadth,
as the Women's, just 135:) equally parted by 3 Gates (as Josephus; and the New
Jerusalem had 3 Gates on a side) at the South, and North; but Nicanor only at
the East; and None at the West: as we saw before. One of the South Gates, was
called the Watergate (as Ezekiels Waters also flowed from the Right Hand, or
South of the Altar: in Benjamin; the Highest of That Land they say: whose
Borders ever Go up, in Josuah; never Down.) and an other was the Gate of the
Firstlings, which may be of use ere long, to determine its Place, and Times
also; as God shalldirect us.

The 11 Outermost Cubits of This Inward court, were Rayled in, for the clean
men of Israel: Level with the Gate Nicanor. The 11, next (going up, by one
cubit, and 3 half cubits:) where the Levites stood singing, (in their VVainscot
Ducan, on the Highest step;) were for the Priests: who had no Bar, from the
Altar, but a Row of Pillars; Supporting the covering. Moses Altar, of
Sittim-wood, and its Plates and Grate of Brass; 3 Cubits High, and 5 square.
Solomon's Brazen Altar 20 square, and 10 High. Ezekicls 12 by 12. Which yet they
interpret, a square of 24. As 12 from the middle, to either side. And so, the
Altar of the 2d Temple was: Yet so, that its bottom (of a Cubit hight and
breadth) was a square of 32 Cubits. Only they cut off the Southeast Corner,
that All of it might be in Benjamin; who was to be the Ravening Wolf, on the
Lambs: But in the Morning, to devour the Prey; and in the Evening; to Divide
the spoil: As we saw before, in the Morning Seeking, and the Evenings Finding.
As Job also; In the morning, Thou will Seek me, (O, but Do it Heartily:) And in
Hoseah, They will seek me in the Morning.

From a Cubit Height (where each side was 32) it Rose Up to 5 Cubits, at 30
Breadth: One more, at 28; (called its Circuit:) And One more, at 26, brought up
the Horns; from a Cubit Base, to a Cone, bending outward at a Cubit Height: and
Thence, One Cubit Higher, brought it to 24. and so, it was at the Top. Which
from the Circuit Upward, (being 4 Cubits) was called Gods Hill, on Gods Lion;
Or Harel on Ariel: as Ezekiel. 43. 15. But they went not up, by those, or any
other steps, (which was forbidden, even at the first giving the Law, in Exodus
20:) But by a slopeing kind of Causey, at the South side; which they called by
a Phrase, somewhat near the English Cabesh; but nearer to the Hebrew Lamh (and
to make Tame as a Lamb: we saw it before:) As if God, would intimate, a
Lamblike spirit, was the best way to Tread on a Lion (as they called That part
of the Altar;) As the 91st Psalm, Thou shall tread upon the Lion, and the
Serpent. The Young Lion, and the Dragon, shall thou Trample under foot. Because
he has set his Love upon me, I will deliver him: and I will set him on High,
because he has known my Name. Which I choose, for my Portion; rather than the
World: and desire my friends to beg it also.

Ezekiels Altar, has other particulars, which deserve more notice; as God
shall give us opportunity. And That also, The whole Mountain, and its limits,
round about, shall be Most Holy: as we saw before in Jeremiah, reaching to
Tophet also; or the very Ashes, of the Children, burnt to Moloch in Gehinnon.

From the Altar to the Porch, were 22 Cubits (as the Porches Floor, was Higher
than the Floor of Shushan Gate, by 22 Cubits:) that is, Twice 11. And if the
Altars Bosom, as the Prophet calls it, were Thrice Eleven, the Court will be 7
times 11. or 77, to the Porch.

12 Steps, or half cubits high (but whole cubits broad, besides half paces
every 3d step;) Led up the Priests; and Down again from Thence, to Bless the
People, after Incense; as we saw before. With the Migrepha, between the Porch
and Altar; with the great Laver also (as the Sea of Sodom still before the
Lord) at the Right Hand, Southeast: As Solomon's molten Sea, at the Southeast
corner. Of 3000 Baths (or about 24000 Gallons; which we may consider again:)
although 2000, filled it up, to the usual coks, or Pipes; at that distance, as
might best suit Their Bathings; which could not be, when the Sea was Full: of 5
cubits Depth. 1 Kings 7. 26. 2 Cron. 4. 5.

The Porches Gate, was 40 cubits High, and 20 Broad; without a Door; being
always Open (as a Type of That within, that must be ever Open also: As the
Gates of New Jerusalem. Esaias 60. 11. Apoc. 21. 25. The Front was as Gold, to
the Eye; with curious work: Full 70 cubits High; and 25 Broad.

The Breadth of This Open Gate, was equal, to the Inward Breadth of the whole
Temple, which was 20 cubits: As before in Solomon's; which was Double to the
Tabernacles Breadth. But the whole Breadth was Treble, to Solomon's Inward House;
and Double to the whole, with All its Side chambers. And its Height, Double
also, (but in the Porch, which, in Solomon's also, was 120 cubits:) As Cyrus
commission. Lay its Foundations strong (as we saw in Esaias:) 60 Cubits High, and
60 Cubits Broad. So that Their weeping, at These, was not for quantities (which
Here, were Greater,) but qualities, and loss of the cloud, and Holy Fire, and
Ark, and Urim, and the 5th perhaps yet Greater (though the Jews made it less
than the Holy Ghost;) The Spirit of Prophecy: hinted they say, in (...) (which
is 5) wanting in (...), I will be glorified, and will Take pleasure in it.
(...). Hag. 1. 8. Where we may also find the Etymology of Erets, as we saw
before, Ezekiel. 20. 40.

30 side-chambers, 6 cubits Broad (and so, were the 8 at the West End; but
There, the Two Uppermost were longer than the other 6:) but 12 long. With 4
Out-doors, on either side, (between the 5 Chambers, of 5 cubits Height in 3
Stories) with Enteries, 7 or 8 cubits broad; and Stairs, to the 2d Story:
besides the great winding stair Case, at the North-East corner, to the Top of
All, and Bothside Galleries, of 3 cubits, before all the Chambers (but the West
End, which had only their Entries and stairs:) of each story, on either side.
But the Southside Galleries, were called The Conduits. As (curiously laid) from
the Rock Etam (or Nepthoah:) seeming the Highest place of that Land, or the
World. Whence Water came, to the Watergate; or Well, at the Southside (as
Rivers turn in the South; and Ezekiels waters, in the South:) and Thence they
came to the Great Laver, etc. So that Water could be brought up, for Bathing or
other uses, to the Top of all the Gates and Buildings: Which we may shortly
understand, without much charge and Cruelty to Horses.

The Length of All the Porch, and House, and Oracle, within, was 70. But the
Walls about, made 70 broad; and 100 Long, from East to West: And so, the Porch,
they say, from South to North, 100 cubits. And the Height of Herod's Temple, was
100; As the Middle Isle of a Church; between the Side-chambers. As the Middle
walk of this Royal Stoe, we saw before, was Double to the other two, in Height,
of 50 cubits; and above 30 Broad, as both the other Walks, about the Square:
Though the East Only, or Mainly, were called Solomon's Porch. Of Stones of 20
cubits Long; with Pillars, on Pillars, Arched, with a great Vault under; As the
whole way to Olivet: That no Grave might defile them, at the Red Cow, or other
ocasions.

And by this Length of all the Temple Courts together, from East to West (as
the Daily Course of Heaven or Earth, is from East to West: and So they came,
into the Temple; and so, from Captivity:) Why may not God show us, how to
measure Times also, of that Temple; and of That to come the New Jerusalem; yet
more then we now believe: Seeing it is clear, their Cubit was so like a Day
(with its 24 Digits:) and by consequence a year also. As we found, Days for
Years, in diverse places, besides the Prophets.

Of Solomon's 400 Rimmons, we have spoken before: and how Janus-like they looked
Two ways. And if That great ^iatriba Chronologica, Johannis Marshami, do
evince, Ezekiels 390 Years, were but the Temples Age, or Era, to His
Captivity; Then it should stand, in all, but just 400 Years, to its last in
Zedekiah: For the 400 Pomgranates; and 400 cubits also; both in Solomon's Porch,
and in every side of His Outer court, about his Temple; as we saw before.

But we are now looking Forward, on the Times followlng that Temple, and the 70
years captivity, from Babylon, or Shushan: As we saw the Jews express it. And
How Solomon called his spouse from North to south, and from East to West, in
Shelomith and Lehana, we saw before! We might add Jonah (from Assyria:) For, so
His Dove is called: and Susanna also: As alluding both to Susanna, freed by
Daniel; and to the Jews Return from Shushan: As they name the first Gate of
the Temple.

May I add, that Jonah (which we found in Hoseah also) is, in Hebrew Letters,
but 71, As the very year of their return from That Assyrian captivity: Which
Jonah also might Typifie, as well as our Saviors Rising from the Dead. And
Solomon's Jonathi (my Jonah, my Dove,) makes 476. As there were just so many
years before him, from Egypt; and after him, to Their Return from Babylon: and
Building This 2d Temple in Darius Hystasp. Or from the End of his Buildings, to
their First Return, in the 1st of Cyrus. And if we look Forward, there may be
just 476 Years, from the City finished, in Nehemiah, to our saviors Death, or
Baptism. As 490 from Ezras Coming, to his Death. And if Xerxes should prove to
be Queen Esters Husband, as so many thought; there may be Thence, 476 Years, to
our saviors Birth.

And for That, of Ester also; and Susanna, at Sbushan; there may be a mystery
in it, as the very Name imports, from Satar, to Hide, Whence Nister, Mister,
Mistress, Ester, As we saw before. And Solomon's spouse is also in Ester, or in
Seter, the secret place: so near 666, the Number of Years between the two great
Sacks of Jerusalem. And the Hebrew letters of Susanna (as in the Canticles
also) make up the very same Number that is in Ester; so near the English
Easter, or our Saviors Passover, which did fulfill so many great Mysteries.

But we may have clearer Arguments: Yea, and it may be, from the Temple
Measures also. The Outer court of the Hill, was 500 cubits square; and so we
may begin at any Gate. As that of Huldah, So they called it: as remembering the
Prophetess (in good Josiahs Time, so near the Captivity:) who also was Buried
in Jerusalem: as never Any, but the House of David. And it may be, from (...),
which we saw before, for Time, or Age of the World: and a very learned man
reads (...), As if, Heither Common, and and now Holy Ground begins.

But we shall rather begin from Shushan; an Emblem of the Royal City of the
Persian Prince that freed them: whose Pedigree, may be cleared, from Aeschilus,
the Poet of those Times.

From Shushan, to Coponius, the opposite Gate, 500 Cubits: As there were just
500 Years, between Herod and Cyrus, ending their Captivity, at Babylon, by
Tygris, Distant from His Shushan, just 210 Furlongs (in Herod: with Diod:) As
This was just 210 Years, from the Babylonian Era, of Nabouassar; or it may be
Salmanassar, who Sacked Samaria, as another had done Galilee (which was Then
made Gentile, or of the Gentiles;) much about 210 Years, before This of Cyrus
Taking Babylon. As it was also taken by Alexander, much about 210 Years, after
this of Cyrus: which was just 500 Years before the year, in which Herod took
Jerusasalem; when Canidius Gallus was Consul with Agrippa: In Olympic, 740, and
of Rome, 716. And of Nabonassar, 711. and 276 from Seleucus Nicanor in Babylon,
of which the Maccab^s: and from Their Rule, upon Nicanor slain, after Epiphanes,
Cxi, the Measuring Line, of which before: and This being out, The Scepter
departed, as a sign of Shilo's Coming: Genesis 49.

And though the length of the Outer Court, between Shushan and Coponius, were
but 500 Cubits; As 500 Years from its first founding, to Herod's Taking
Jerusalem; Yet if we measure all the steps to the Porch Floor, 22 Cubits Higher
that Shushan, as we saw before: We may come to the very Year of This in Herod.
Who having lost his great Mark Antony (whose Name remained in Antonia, the
great Tower at the Temples North-west) from the great Battle at Actium, he was
now to make new Friends with Augustus; to whom he consecrated his New Samaria,
by the name of Sebaste, or Augusta, about his 14th year; and Then begins his
great Cesarea, in his 16th Year; and in his 17th meets Augustus coming to those
parts. And that the Jews might tell no Tales, or to atone the blood of their
Great Sanedrin, whom he had slain, All but the President Hillel, and
Vice President Shammai (the only man that plainly Voted against him before he
was King, for killing Ezekias, etc.) He promises to build the Temple New: and
so he did, in 7 or 8 years space (as many years, before our Saviors Birth;)
and so we come to Coponius: who was General of the Horse, when Cyrenius was
Governor of Syria (as we may learn from Josephus;) and afterward, Coponius
was also Governor of Judea, in our Saviors Time. And the Gate Coponius stood
in the place of Solomon's Causey, or Shalleketh, as a Pledge of that Gracious
Promise, Esaias 6. 13. to be still fulfilled to them.

Entering Shushan, the first 14 Cubits, through the Gate and Pillars (as the
first 14 Days, of the first Month, to the Passover; or 2d Sabbath; and the
first 14 Days, of a Woman in Childe-bed, of a Daughter; as the Jewish Church
was now Delivered of the Daughter of Sion;) Brought them to Solomon's Porch: And
so, the first 14 years from Shushan, brought up the Prophets Haggai and
Zechary; with a Decree, ere long, from Darius Hystasp: to build the Temple on
Cyrus Words; but Solomon's Works: as we may find in Josephus (adding the City
also, to Cyrus Grant, though Ezra speak but of the Temple;) Telling us also,
that This East side (repaired after by Agrippa) was 400 Cubits Long, of fair
white Stones, of 20 Cubits Long, and 6 Broad (or High) of Solomon's Work; and
Thence called Solomon's Porch: and Shushan the Kings Gate. Though the Jews say,
Both were Helped by Ezekiels Measures, which they Both, followed, as much as
they could.

And for the distance of These Courts, we may consider that the Royal Galleries
Walks, were above 60 Cubits Broad, with their Pillars. And although That south
Piazzo, were Broader than the Rest, yet to make up good Proportions, between
the outer square of 500, and the Courts within This; whose very Area made 333
Cubits (as we saw before) besides their Walls: we need not doubt Their Truth,
who limit the space, between these Courts, by 66 cubits.

And 66 Hours (besides all we saw before in the Course of the Moon;) bring us
to the Noon of the 3d Day (as we are going to the 3d Wall:) and added, to the
14 before, they want but 4, of 84, the great Number we saw, of 3 Days and Half;
for Hiding of the Witnesses: As the Sun and Moon, did not appear, till 3 Days
and an Half, after the Creation; the 84th Hour, or Morning of the 4th Day. And
84 Days, make up just 3 Months, or 12 whole Weeks.

And when the Woman's first 14 Days were over, for her Daughter; yet, she must
tarry, 66 more; before she might come out, (of the Gentile, or Unclean Court)
to Any Holy Place of Israel. As, for a Manchilde, 40 Days; As Isreal's 40
years, in the Wilderness: (for Israel my son, my First born.) And the very Day
of Pentecost, or Biccurim, the First Fruits of Holiness to God, Closed the
65th, and broughtin the 66th Day of the Year.

So, the 66th year, after the Temple so begun, in Darius Hystasp: or 80, from
That of Cyrus, brings up Ezra, in the 7th of Artaxerxes Long: As Josephus and
so many others.

And that there were just 490 Years, from This 7th of Artaxerxes, to our
Saviors Death, is so cleared by the Great Capellus, and diverse others; that
Helvi^us himself yields, they were praecise 490 Years; although he begin them
rather, from the next Darius, to the Roman Sack. which yet is due to the
Infinite Wisdom of God; so ordering, that the 70 Weeks, may either End with the
Temple (from the 2d of Darius Noth:) Or with our Savior, the True Temple; from
the 7th of Artaxerxes: where I rather fix; for all the Harmonies, we have, and
are to see.

And that from Cyrus taking Babylon, to Artaxerxes 7th there were just 80
Years, is so cleared by the Old Canon, and Eclipses also, recorded by diverse,
of those times, (as we may see in Lansbergius Vranometry, and Chronology; with
the great Petavius, though so great an Enemy to Scaliger, who must not Dye, for
all his faults:) that I yet know not what may be said against it. The main
difference in Helvicus, or any I remember, being, in giving Cyrus Only 3 years
(as Daniel names 3; and yet, it may be 3 times 3, before Babylon:) when as,
his very Works and Wars, may show us diverse more; as Lively, and others Evince,
although they had not Ptolomies Canon, as now published; such a Pillar of
Times, next the Holy Scripture.

And that Daniel also might be led to Ezraes Times, with Nehemiah, I might cite
his Naming Ezra, in That, some read, They shall be Helped with a little Help:
Or Ezra. But if That, rather speak of the Times after Ezra; yet his very words
of Returning to build Jerusalem (Asib and Tasib) may be found in Eliasib (God
shall return) beginning to build, or repair the sheep-gate, as his proper cure:
Being High Priest. As Jehoiada the Old Gate; and next, the men of Gibeon,
cursed Gibeon; and of Mispa, to the Throne of the Governor: Which may be more
considered; with 1000 cubits, between the Dung-Gate, built by Malchiah, the
Lord the King, and the Valley-Gate, Repaired by Hannun, He that is Gracious;
which may give us the Site of Jerusalem, with many other things, of those Times.

And that the Prophet Jeremy also spoke of those Times, and of their Returning
to Build, is plain, by comparing his words, with the Dedication of the Wall;
when they Sought for All the Levites, to purify themselves and the People, and
the Gates, and the Walls also (as Neh. 12:) when All the Princes were upon the
Wall, and parted to the Dung-gate, on the Right Hand, when Nehemiah himself
(the Lords Comforter) went After the other company, that were sent to the Left
Hand: when also, they came singing from Gilgal (where he rouled away the shame
of Israel, by Circumcising them that were Baptized already, to Moses also, in
the Cloud, and in the Sea; Through which, Our Fathers passed (as St Paul, to
the Gentile Corinthians; to be considered by them that deny Baptism to
Children:) and from strong Death (Azmaveth) and Netopheti; which yet I render
not My Patients in Tophet, though it be near that sound in Hebrew. And the High
Priest himself (Eliasib, God will return,) Sanctifying Tophet, or Gehinnon, or
the Valley of Dead bodies, or Ashes; the places in That Prophet named, as we
saw before; and joined with the Places named Here; and the Tower of Hananeel,
which was also sanctified, by this High Priest; as we read in Neh. 3. to be
compared with the 12th: and Jeremy 31. Adding also, that It should, no more be
plucked up, for ever: Which we may consider.

But again to the Temple-Courts (which may yet lead us to the City also, ere
long, I hope; and the New Jerusalem, That perfect Cube, As the Most Holy
Oracle, of which again) The Suburbs of the Holy Courts were called Hell (for
so, in Proper names, the English use to sound the Hebrew Heth, by H:) and so,
(...) is Hell. As if none could go to Heaven, but through Hell; as its Suburbs:
And as if Hell, were only, or Mainly, for Israel, or Children of the Kingdom:
For, None other might go through it, or come into it, but with a Sacrifice, as
we touched before.

Yet if any will sound it rather by Chel, it may suit the English Kill and
Kell, for a Brick-Kill, and a Lime-Kill, and a Kell for drying Malt, etc. The
Phrase of (...) is never used, that I remember, till the Lamentations, as we
saw before: But the Thing is agreed to be, as a Gulf of Partition, between
Israel and the Gentiles; that might only look through its Grates or Lattisses;
behind Our Wall (as the Spouse speaks most properly; as being so near the
Women's Court:) Made, or at least Settled, by Ezra himself: coming up just, at
the Year, or Cubit, where this Court began. And making it, his great work, to
Separate the Jews from the Gentiles, as we see, Ezra 9. and 10.

And the 2d of Chronicles, written by Him, they say, or about His Times (as may
be clear enough;) gives the very Name of Azra, or Aezra, to These Courts; or
the Great Court, in distinction from That of the Priests, or men of Israel:
which yet, with the lower part of the Altar also in Ezekiel is called by the
same name of Azra, or Aezra; as we saw before, when we called it Help; and send
thee Help, from his Holy Place, etc.

Which grew up to Comfort also, in Nehemiah (the Lords Comforter) coming after
Ezra the Little Helper, as the great Comforter in the Gospel, came after our
Savior, the great Helper.

These Subburbs, and the 5 steps, through the next Wall, to the Women's Court,
as the 12 Years and Half, between Ezraes first coming, and Nehemiahs (for, the
Court of the Gentiles, was All plain, till they rose up, into Chell, by 14
steps; as the 2d Passover, answering to the other 14 Cubits, through the Gate
and Pillars of Shushan, to Solomon's Por^h:) And Nehemiahs great work, was to
perfect This Separation; and from Women also; that were left below; while Those
of Israel, that were Purified, came in to This Ezra, of the Women's Court: after
their 80 Days, and 12 Hours (of the Night) answering the 80 Cubits, and 12
Steps, as before.

And comparing Ezra and Nehemiah together, it is clear enough, that their great
work, was in This Women's Court; where they read the Law (as we found before in
Deuteronomy:) and There, the great Covenant-makers ((...) 670, or 1230), with the
Oath, and Curse also, against Unlawful Women (the proper work of This Court:)
and for the Sabbath Day, (although the Covert of the Sabbath; or to Rest in,
while the King entered to worship, or on other ocasions, was above or before
This:) And for the Chates or Goats, to make Atonement for All Israel; and for
the Tenths; as we saw before; with First Fruits: and How, the People sanctified
to Levi, and Levi to Aarons Sons: and many other things.

But especially the solemn Feast of Tabernacles; and Palm Branches, with the
great Hosanna; Not only as Types of That great Feast of Tabernacles, we are
seeking, in the Times that are to answer These from Babylon (the Last, and
great Babylon, in the Revelation:) But also the Proper work of this Court of
Women; in which were, the Psalms of Degrees, the Great Hallel every day, with
Dancings, and other Unexpressable Rejoycings, at That great Feast of Pouring
waters out; as a Pledge of the Holy Ghost, to be poured out on Men and Women,
Sons and Daughters also, (that might not go Higher, than This Women's Court, but
on some special occasion, for their Sacrifice:) As the Latter Rain, in This 7th
Month; which yet, was the First, on other account; as we saw before, from
places of the Law, to be compared with Joel 2. 23.

And as That perfect Cube, the Oracle, might note our Saviors Kingdom, in the
Perfect Cube of the New Jerusalem, as in Revelation 21. 16. So might the Best
Estate below it, be shadowed here, in this square Court, of Men and Women
together; which was fittest for their greatest Meetings; so capacious; being a
perfect Square, of 135 Cubits.

And as before, we saw, the first and 2d Passover, shadowed in the first and 2d
14 steps, or Cubits, distinct from the rest before, or after them; and the
Pentecost also, in the 66 cubits; as That brings in, the 66th Day of the
year; (and then comes up the First Fruits, of Holiness to God, in the first
Distinction from the Gentiles; which they called Chell, or Hell:) So here, in
This square, of 135 Cubits, may be represented, those 135 Days, from the
Pentecost, to the Great Hosanna, at the Last and Great Day, of the Feast of
Tabernacles.

For, from the Pentecost (which was ever the 65th Day of the Year, and the
Minha, between the Evenings, in the Scripture Language, shutting up the 65th,
and beginning the 66th Day; As 66 Hours, come up to Noon, or the 3d Days
Dinner; as 14 Hours, brought up the first Days Breakfast:)

There were still 113 Days, to the Feast of Trumpets; by a constant Rule, we
see, in their Calendar, published by Munster, and others: and then 10 more,
brought up the great Day of Atonement; and Then 5 Days more, began the Feast of
Tabernacles; and the 8th Day after, was the great Hosanna (for, they sang
Hosanna, Daily, all the Feast, but now 7 times about; as 7 times about
Jericho:) the last and Great Day of the Feast: of which John 7. 37. and John 9.
7. sends the Man born blind, to the Fountain Siloam; from which Well of
Salvation (as Esaias 12.) they Drew Waters, with Joy; to pour them out, with
Singing, and Dancing, with Music, all the Night (almost,) Ezcept the Nights
before any Sabbath, in that Feast, or the 8th Day, which was, As a Sabbath.

We have yet said Little of the great Release; the Solemnity of Release, as
Moses expresses it, Deuteronomy. 31. In the Feast of Tabernacles, at the End of every
7th Year. Which we refer, to our Glances, on the Mysteries of Ester, the Hidden
woman (Daughter of Abihel, the Father of Hell, and Kill, and Heal, and Hill,
and Power also: the near Kinsman to Hiel, the Living God: and Mordecay the
Living One, that was Dead, or in Bitterness, or seeming Rebellion: (of Shimei,
and Kish, or Sheol, of Jemini, etc.) She was married to Ahasuerus (our Brother
and Root; who also Hasted, but with silence, to be Poor, to make us sure, and
Rich, and reign) with All his Provinces, 12 times 10, and 7. As This, was in
the 10th, of the 12 Months, of the 7th Year of his Reign: and being Then
Married, to his Jewish Spouse, that had been in preparing, 12 Months; He made a
Great Feast, even Esters Feast, to All his Princes and Servants also: and Then
he made a Release, a Great Release, to All his Provinces, from India, to
Aethiopia; and besides the Release, or Forgiving Debts; he gave Gifts also;
Gifts for Rebbels: and they were according to the state and Glory of a great
King.

But we are yet, with Ezra and Nehemiah, at the Feast of Tabernacles: That end
of the Law, and the Temple also: which began, with a Tabernacle, and will End,
with the Tabernacle of God with men: keeping this great Feast of Tabernacles:
as we read in the Revelation.

And to make it up, yet nearer, to Daniels Motsa; the End, or Issue of the
Temple Built; or its Going out; As Ezekiel was to show them its Motsa; Goings
out, as well as Going in, 43. 11. The very Place where they used to gather
Branches for the Tabernacles, near Kidron (of which before;) was called Motsa;
the Spring, or Goings out, of the Waters, or Willows also: as we may learn from
the Talmud it self, of These very Tabernacles.

And that its Place at the Temple, was This Women's Court (as they call it) of
135 Cubits: as in Hours, the Morning of the 6th Day, when Man was Created; as
he fell they say, on the 6th Day; and so, our Savior born, or crucified, on
the 6th Day. But in Days, it may be the Time of Ezraes coming Hither: the
first Day from Babylon; But at Ahava fasteth, and chooses his 12 Apostles or
Elders; on the 12th of the first, going Thence to Jerusalem on the first of the
5th Month; and stayed 3 Days, and Then, to the Great Feast of Tabernacles, in
the 7th Month. As also, in Cyrus; at the 7th Month, they came as One Man; and
kept the Feast of Tabernacles, as it was Written; But the Temple was not
founded (Ezra the 3d) much less come to that End, or Motsa; of which Ezra 8. 9.
and 10. with Neh. 8. 9. 10. which may also lead us from the 7th Month to the
10th in Ester; and in Maccabes also, for the great Dedication, which our
Savior himself pleased to Honor, with his Presence in John, though not
required by God; but by the Jewish Church: As also That of Purim, which they
keep with great Solemnities, to this day.

I have not yet said, that These great things done in the Women's Court, might
be but shadows of That, yet to be Done, by Them also: when he shall pour his
Spirit on their Daughters, and Handmaids, also: and They shall Prophecy. And
God shall give a Word, and great shall be the Feminine Preachers: And so he
cries, Receive the Law of thy Mother. That I say nothing of Miriam, Deborah,
Sampsons Mother, or Lemuels; Hannah, and Anna, with Elizabeth, and our Saviors
Mother, with Priscilla, Lois, Eunice, and the British Claudia, (in a better
Calender than Martial:) with other Women Prophets, or Writers of Scripture.

From the Middle Gate, Leading into the Women's Court, 135 Cubits, to the Gate
of Nicanor: and 135 years, from Nehemiahs coming up, in the 20th of Artaxerxes;
To Seleucus Nicanor, the Jews friend, and His Greek Era, so much used in the
Maccabes. And if you please to turn again (as they often did, in this Court)
135 Years more, bring us to That Little Horn (or Great Type of Antichrist, or
Antikeimenos;) Antiochus Epiphanes: from 137 of That Era, to 145, he confirmed
the Covenant (as the Learned Diatribe) for That Week; or for 2300 Natural Days:
But Then, Profaned the Temple, for 1290 Days; although there be not so many,
from the 15th of the 9th, of 145, to the 25th of the same Month 148, when it
was cleansed; as we read, 1 Match. 1. and 4. Yet the Weeks may be just 62, to his
coming up, if we grant them to begin (70 Years before Cyrus) in 140 Nabonassar:
and Epiphanes in 573: 7 more, for the next week, make 580, and 3 Years more,
and as many Days, as from the 17th of the 4th Month, in which they fast, for
the first Temple; to the 25th of the 9th Month (in which they Feast for the 2d,
cleansed by Judas Machabeus,) make up near half another Week, in the year 444,
after the first Temple; which may make it the more considerable, because it is
2 Thirds of 666, of which again.

But if Ezekiels 390 Days, of the last siege of Jerusalem, from the 15th of the
3d Month, to the 9th of the 4th (in the next, and last year of Zedekiah; as the
Great Primate of Learning, and Religion, has observed;) were as Types of those
390 Years, from the great Schism, to the Temples End: Why may not these also,
in Antiochus, be Types of Years in Antichrist, and All Defiling of the Temple;
to its clensing? Seeing Daniel himself, is bid, to shut, or Seal them up, being
for many Days, or Years to come; (as that Phrase of Days, is in many places
we saw before;) Even Then, when the Angel speaks of Evening and Morning; the
usual Character of Natural Days: Which we may consider again.

But first, we may note, That as first This Gate of Nicanor might remember the
first Nicanor, their Friend; so it might not forget Nicanor their Enemy; slain
Here, as Some: or near Jerusalem; As 1 Machah. 7. by the same Judas; about the
End of the 64th Week, from the Captivity: Or 151 of Sel^ucus, soon after
Antiochus. And from this Last Nicanor Then slain, to Herod's Samaria finished,
or Caesarea; Or the Temple begun; may be just 135 Years: As from Epiphanes
first, to Herod's first, 135 Years: As 135 Cubits, from the Middle-Gate, to
Nicanor.

From which Gate of Nicanor, began the next Court (of Israel and the Priests)
being 187 Cubits: as there were 187 Years, between That Nicanor slain, and our
Saviors Baptism: Or Pontius Pilate, that put him to Death. As also from the
Death of Antiochus the Great, Dan. 11. 19, to our Saviors Birth, 187 Years.

And if we look on Hours, as Years: The first 7 Hours, make the first Rest, and
Turn of the Sun; from the Nadir, toward the Morning Horison; and 7 Days, make
the Sabbaths Rest, and the first 7 Days of a Woman, before her Son Circumcised.
The first 14 Hours come up to the Morning Sacrifice (when it was appointed) and
their longest Night was 14 Hours; the Hiding, Resting, Slaying, Sleeping of the
Witnesses. And 14 Days brought up the Passover. The first 40th Hour, is the 2d
Morning Tamid, or their Breakfast: As 40 Days, the Woman's first coming to the
Sanctuary, after a Son: As their 40 Years, before Canaan; were for a Son, the
firstborn Son; For, Out of Egypt have I called my Son, my Firstborn. 49
Hours, begin the Third nights Rest; as 49 the Jubilee. 65 Come up to the Third
Days Noon, or Dinner; as the 65th Day is the Pentecost. 72 Hours closed the 3d
Day, as 72 their Sanedrin. 80 Hours, the 4th Morning Watch, and 84 Sunrising;
as the 4th Day from Creation, brought up Sun and Moon, as the two Witnesses of
Heaven, measure to All other Witnesses on Earth. 120 (the number of Moed in
Hebrew letters) the Hours in 5 Days, before Man and Woman Created: If about the
Tamid Hour of the 6th Morning, it might be in Hour 135: As the Men and Women's
Court, 135 Cubits.

144 Hours, the square of 12, close the 6th Day, and begin the 7th, or the
Sabbath: and their Clakins, or Jewish Minutes, of 144000, as the First Fruits
of Time, to God and His Lamb; shadowed by the Lamb, of the Sabbath; distinct
from the Daily Tamid.

240 Hours, close the 10th Day: And from Egypt, the Pascal Lamb, was Tied up,
from the 10th Day of the Month; as 3 Days and Half, before he was slain; in
Hour 333: the Evening Minha of the 14th Day, Ending in 336 Hours. But they went
not out of Egypt till the close of the next, or 15th Day, at Sunset; which was
Hour 360: as Days in their Year. And so, Years from This Exodus out of Egypt,
are reckoned as Hours, from the beginning of their Year, to the Passover,
Pentecost, Tabernacles, and All their Feasts.

1200 Hours in 50 Days, between the Passover, and Pentecost: Whose Morning,
was in 1548 Hour of the Year. And so the Great Pentecost, Acts 2d, might be
1547, or 48, Years from Egypt. If there were 70 Years, between the first
Temple, and Cyrus, taking Babylon; in 210 of Nabonassar.

That is 480, from Egypt, to the Temple, in Solomon's 4th (1 Kin. 6.) who
reigned 36 more: and thence 390, to the Cities End, and Temples; make 906.
Thence 70 to Cyrus; and 80 to Ezraes (7th of Artaxerxes;) and 490, Thence, for
Daniels Weeks; to the Month of our Saviors Passion; make 1546, or 47. So that
the Passover, at which he suffered; and the 3d Day following, for the 16th
Morning, or Barley-sheaf, the first of All First Fruits (to be Heaved up,
before the Lord, as our Savior Rose from the Dead, upon the 3d Day, after his
Death;) and then his Ascension, 40 Days, After the Grave: As he was presented
in the Temple, 40 Days, after the Womb; (by his Mother, coming to the
Sactuary, 40 Days, after her Son was born:) And Pentecost, the 50th Day, from
his Resurrection; might be All, in the Year 1547, or 48, From Egypt.

But if the 70 Years, ending at Cyrus, did begin at Jehojakim, which is
Daniels; or Jehojakin, Ezekiels; (often called Our Captivity;) as many Great
men, begin them: Yet, in some respects, there may be Greater Harmony.

For Then, abating 11 years, from 1547, or 1548, there will remain 1536, or
1537, the very first Hour, of the Day of Pentecost (beginning from the
Evening:) and allowing 12, or 14 more, for Nehewiahs coming after Ezra, to
finish the Cities Walls, and Government; we come to the very Tamid of That Day
of Pentecost, when the Holy Gho^ came down, in the Third Hour of the Morning:
Acts 2d.

But However, 1536 Hours, bring us just to the Beginning, and 1548, to
Sunrising, of the Day of Pentecost; the 65th of the Year. As 65, or 66 Hours,
bring us through the Tamid of the 3d Day, to Noon, or Dinner time.

To 65, 135, make just 200: which in Hours, bring us quite through the 8th Day,
on which the Son was Circumcised: And in Days, they bring us quite through the
Feast of Tabernacles; and conclude the 8th, or Last, and Great Day, of That
Feast, which they call, the Great Hosanna. Which may also intimate, that as a
new Year began, from their coming, out of Egypt, at 360 Hours; So also from
the First Day of Tabernacles, which is the 15th of the 7th Month; as That was
the 15th of the first Month. And now, we may begin all our Acounts, from This
7th Month; As from the First: and from the First of Tabernacles on the 15th of
the 7th; as from the First of the First: Seeing 15 Days, in either, make up
just 360 Hours: As Days in their Year.

From 65, the Day of Pentecost, taking out the Days, before the Passover; we
leave but 52, as Weeks in the Year (and so many just there are, between those
two Holy Courts of the Temple, 135, and 187:) But 65, out of 135, leave 70 for
the Area, of the Porch, Temple, and Oracle; As the 70 Elders, and many other
Seventies in Scripture.

And as 65 with 135, brought us to the great Hosannah; So 187, the Length of
the Priests Court, in Hours, bring us just past Noon, or Dinner of the Day of
Circumcision (or the 8th Day:) So in Days, they bring us just, to the great
Day of Atonement, or the 10th Day of the 7th Month: which, as we saw before,
was by a perpetual Rule, 123 Days, from Pentecost. And as Pentecost did respect
All the People, who were All to bring, and All concerned in the First Fruits,
(which might not be offered, before Pentecost, or after the Dedication;) so the
Priests, were in special, concerned in Circumcision (though it might be done by
Others;) and yet more, in that of Atonement: which yet, concerned All Israel
also: And so, the same Court, of 187 Cubits (coming up just to the Day of
Atonement) was for the Priests, and the People also; that were Clean men of
Israel; standing in the same Court, about the Altar (as we saw before) with
little Rails. And the Standers also, came within the Rails; and so did All,
that laid their Hands upon their Sacrifice. And though Only the Elders, and
Watchers, said those words, in the Revelation, Thou have Redeemed us by thy
Blood; and have made us Kings and Priests to God; and we shall Reign upon the
Earth! Yet they said it, As the 24 Orders of Standers, for All Saints: for so,
it is said, They had Viols full of Odours (to the Lamb also) the Prayers of
Saints. And at Solomon's great Dedication, in the 7th Month also; we found the
Cloud, so filling all the House, that the Priests could not enter, but stood
without, among the Common People; as if Then, there should not be, or need, Any
such Dictinction, as there yet must be observed w^reverence; lest we fall into
the great, and proper, crying sins, of the Last Times, and Last Days also
(which St Paul distinguished:) And those are Corahs Rebellion, and speaking
Evil of Dignities: Of which St Peter and Jude also: with This Addition, that
God knows How to punish such, Sinners in the Flesh; and against the Spirit:
which the Lord forgive, in me, and All his People; Healing us: and let his
People say Amen.

I must not omit One more Harmony of Numbers, and in These Courts also: And
that is, the famous Number 666, with All its Parts; but especially 333, its
Half; and Half the Moons Course from the Sun; or Full Moon; Or Hour of the
Minha Passover, 333 of the Year. And All the Courts of Israel, made up just 333
Cubits, from East to West: as we saw before, in the Chell, before 135 of the
Women's, and 187 of the Priests and People: All concerned in the Full Moon; and
Passover, of 333: Just Half 666, which is but 3 times 3 less than 135 by 5,
the steps up to it! and 5 times 135, make just 675.

^ut if we begin at the bottom of Those 333 Cubits, where the first steps
began: if those were 12, as Some say: Then 333 by 12 (as the Full Moons, and
Changes in every Year,) want only 4 of 4000.

But the 12 are but Half Cubits, or 6 Wholes; and 333 by 6, make 1998, which
want but two, of 2000. And Josephus an Eyewitness, reckons 14 steps, of Half
Cubits; or 7 whole; which may be more suitable, to all we saw before, of 7 and
14. And so 333, by 14 Halves, or 7 wholes, are just, 3 times 666, and an Half:
or 2331. Which in Hours, bring us into the 98th Day: and 98 Days, make just 3
Months, and an Half: So that This, may be the 3 Moeds, and Half, for the
Witnesses. If God so please, to help us reckon it.

The rather also, because with All, we found, of 7 before; we saw it, the very
first Number, that was made of 3 and an Half, in whole Numbers: and now, by
these very Measures, of the Temple-Courts, we are come to a Number, made of 7,
and of 3 and an Half: Which may contain the Fates (as they speak,) of the
Jewish State or Church; or if you will, of Benjamin and Judah; or of Israel and
Judah: that is indeed both Jew and Gentile: (For we saw before, that Ephraim
must make the Fullness of the Gentiles:) Or what ever other two Witnesses we may
find, to be measured, by the Sun and Moons Times of 666. So that 3 of These,
and an half, or 7 times 333; or 3 Months, or Moeds and Half; may bring us to
the End of all the Numbers, yet fixed, in the Prophets, and the Revelation.

And the rather also, because we find the Sun and Moons 333 and 666, so Signal
in Jerusalem (as the Sun to his Moon or Je^icho:) As All the Fulls and Changes,
of the Moon, in all the World also.

We saw before, that Enoch lived just as many Years, as there are Days in a
Year: and that from Him, 666 Years, come very near the Flood; and that there
wanted but 3 times 3, of 4 times 333, which is 1665, in 1656, the Year of the
Flood. And from the Flood, as many years, as Enoch lived, bring us to the
Promise; made to Abraham, near about 3 Moeds, of Gods fixing, before the Flood:
for, Three times 120, make 360; 3 And an Half, make 420; 3 of these, 1260 in
the Revelation: written 30 years after the Sack; or beginning of Daniels 1290:
which is just 3 times 430: 45 more, make up Daniels 1335. The very Number of
his Fellow-Witnesses, or Princes; in Hebrew letters, (...) (1335) the Noble
Princes: As the Fruitful Branches (as Jacob said to Joseph;) or coming from
Perat, or Euphrates, found in Dan. 1. 3. and Ester 1. 3. and 6. 9.

1335, Are but 3 more than Twice 666, or 4 times 333; which come to the Evening
Minha of the Passover, but want 3 Hours (which Daniel supplies,) to the End of
the 14 th Day: the Day of the Lords Passover, and Passing away of Wrath; as the
2d Sabbath also; and 14 Days of the Woman for a Daughter: and the Moon
returns to them at the Poles, in 14 days: And Paul was freed from his storm,
in the 14th day, and went up to Jerusalem, or Heaven, in the 14th Year. And
Abrams Lot and Sodom were freed, in the 14th year: and Joseph was Born in the
14th year of his Fathers, and Freed in the 14th year of his Own Bondage. As
Jerusalem in the 14th year of Hezekiah. And 1335 is 35 within the 14th Hundred
Year.

Again, 1335, is but 45, above 1290; that is, 3 times 430. First from the
Promise, to their coming out of Egypt, 430, and 45 more, to Calebs settling in
Canaan with Josuah (the two Witnesses;) as Jos. 14. 10. Twice more 430, or 860
(making up 1335,) bring us to the last Siege of Jerusalem in Zedekiah.

Now Daniel is a Captive, bemoaning those Desolations; as he often calls
them, in Chap. 9. 2. 17. 18. Perpetual Desolations, Psalm. 73. 79. 80. Threatened
(as before,) Levit. 26! And now, the Daily Sacrifice was taken away, and the
Place of his Sanctuary, Thrown down; which was not so, or at least, so much, by
Epiphanes: who Polluted it, but did not Throw it down; as now it was, by the
Chaldeans; and afterward by the Romans. So that, Daniel speaks of Both These
great Desolations, rather than that Little Short one by Antiochus: who yet
might be a Type of the great Antichrist, or Antikeimenos; who was to defile and
profane the Temple, Rather than cast it Down. As First the Chaldeans did, and
Then the Romans; or the Jews themselves, and their Factions; While the Roman
Eagles and Armies, overflowed them also, with a Wing of Abominations, making
desolate; as Daniel, and our Savior speak of those Times.

And yet, I suppose, the Days of Antiochus, might be Types, or Shadows of the
Years of this Desolation also: Seeing besides the days specified in Daniel, the
word for He stamped on them (the Stars of Heaven, as the Dragon did, against
the Jewish Woman, or Jacobs Wife, with Joseph's Crown of 12 Stars, Apoc. 12.)
(...) is above 1300, as his Numbers; First 1290, and then 1335.

Yea, and 2300 Days, in the 8th Chapter; Though so many Natural days, of
Evening and Morning, as the Phrase is; Yet must be shut up, or Sealed, for Many
Days, or Years; as we saw before.

This was in the Third year of Belshazzar, and 31 years from Zedekiah: For, in
37th of Jeconiah, Evilmerodach was King; but reigned only Two years, in
Berosus: So that the 3d of the next King, (Belshasher;) was but 31 years, from
Zedekiah, Though 41; or 42, from Jeconiah.

Daniel, is Then at Shushan (where our Temple Courts and Numbers do begin:)
And There, about the Midst of the sad Desolations both on Israel and Judah, He
hears One Saint asking of Palmoni, the Wonderful Numberer (as the Wonderful
Councellor, Esaias 9:) How long, the Vision of the Tamid, and Transgression
shaming, or making desolate; to give both the Sanctuary and the H^st (of Heaven
before) to be as Mire, or Mirmas. To this Question, (as perplexed almost, as
That of the Temples End, and the Worlds; with our Saviors Coming; Matthew. 24:)
He said to Me (not to Him that asked the question) Ad Ereb Boker (648:) Until
(or as long as) Evening Morning; 2300: and the Sanctuary shall be Cleansed.

Beginning with This great Desolation, of the 70 years Captivity (in which He
Then was;) and taking 31 years (of that Captivity, to the Time they were
speaking;) out of 2331, the Number which we found before (of the Holy Courts,
or 333, by 14 steps, or 7 whole days or Cubits;) there remains just 2300. As
another Argument, we are not wholly out in pitching on That Number, as the
Temple measures lead us. As if those Holy Courts must be Trodden Down, as many
years, as there were steps, so multiplied, on them. Which answer also to the 7
Days of the Week.

And yet 2331 came short of 2400. As if all these Desolations, should be
shorter than the Hours of a Great Day: if we allow 100 Years for every Hour,
which is not far from Moses reckoning, Psalm. 90. Where the Day (as God also
made it,) is distinct from Night, or Watches by Night. Yet if the whole Day, be
but 1000 years; Then 2331, is as the Morning of the 3d Day: in which he will
revive them; in Hoseah: After Two days; of which the Hebrew letters make 666,
as we saw before in (...).

The first 666, ended just, in the End of their Temple and City, by the Romans.
That is, Twice 70, to Ezra, in the 7th of Artaxerxes (as we saw before;) and 7
times 70, Thence, to our Saviors Death; and Half 70, Thence, to the year, in
which it was Sacked. After a War of 3 Years and half; as answering to the 3
years and half, of Christ's public Preaching, after his Baptism: and his 3 Days
and Half, from his Passover, to his Resurrection: or 3 Hours and Half, Eclips,
and Suffering upon the Cross: As the 3 Days, or Years and Half, of the
Witnesses in the Revelation. which we found also shadowed in the 3 days and
half, of the two Witnesses, hidden by Rahab; or Those, Recovered by Abraham, or
by David, after Ziglag; and other things before.

How the Flood came about 666 years after Enoch, we saw before. We may add
Noah, born 666, after Mahaleel, and 666 before Eber, the Father of the Hebrews,
and of Time, or Ever, as we saw before. 666 Years from the Flood, bring us to
the Night of Israel in Egypt, after Joseph's Death: And as many, from the
Promise, to Gideons famous Victory over Midian, Oreb and Zeeb, Zeba and
Salmunna, so often spoken of, in Scripture.

444 Years, from Egypt, bring up David, from Abrams Hebron, to Jerusalem; or
Jebus, Trodden down, by the Jebusites. His 7 Years, and 6 Months, at Hebron,
may help us to measure, Other Times also, besides Solomon's 7 years, and 6
Months, in building the Temple.

521, bring up Sesack (from Aegypts Pyramids; in Learned Greaves:) the 5th of
Rehoboam.

666, bring up Joash, sacking Jerusalem; in the 14th of Amaziah. 666 more, may
be just the time of Antiochus: And then, His Days, in Daniel, may be just 1290
Years, from their settling in Canaan, Jos. 14. 10. and 1335 from Egypt: Dying
at the end of 3 years more than 1332, or Twice 666. And as Antiochus Days may
also be a Type of Antichrists Years; so may Macchabeus be a Type of Christ, or
Michael: And Michab, (in His Banner,) may allude to Michael, in Daniel; or Mi
el camocha, in Micha; as well, as to, Mi camocha baelim, in Moses song. 777, To
the Sack of Samaria: And from Assyrias first coming on Israel, to Pompeys Sack
of Jerusalem, may be 666 Years. As from its great siege by Senacherib, in the
14th of Hezekiah; or his Great sickness; to the Temple, Sacked by Crassus
(slain at Abrams Charan) 666. As from Hezekiahs Death, to the Parthian Sack; or
Jerusalem taken by Herod, which is also the very year (or next to the Head,) of
the great Era (so common in the Councels and other accounts,) of Spain;
Conquered by the Romans, or Taxed by Augustus, or Receiving the Julian Year,
but 8 Year old, from Julius Caesar to That in Augustus.

Rome, was Born with Hezekiah (very near his Birth:) about Cxi years (the
measuring Line,) before Josiah: 222 before the Jews return from Babylon (as
many reckon:) 333, before the 70 Weeks; if they End, in the Roman Sack. 444,
Before the first Nicanor, and his Greek Era, in the Maccabes (Olympic. 470.)
555 to their seizing Asia, from Antiochus the Great. 666 to Tigranes; who was
conquered by Pompey, sacking Jerusalem: 777 to Pontius Pilate, who crucified
our blessed Savior; about 1536 years from Egypt; as the Pentecost began from
1536 Hours of the Year.

And if we multiply 70, the Jews great Number, for their Elders, and years of
Captivity; and the whole Area of the Temple (Porch, and House, and Oracle;) by
any 22 we found before, in their Alphabet, or number of High Priests, before
the Captivity; or the Cubits of the Priests and Peoples Court, before the
Al^ar; or between it, and the Temple; or its Floors Height, above the Gate of
Shushan; or any other 22; the sum will be 1540: But 4 more than 1536, the first
Minute of the day of Pentecost: As the great Pentecost, in Acts 2d, was from
Egypt, 1536 years.

And adding so many, as may make our Saviors Birth just 70; or his Baptism 40;
before the Last Sack of Jerusalem; we come just to 666, from the Chaldean Sack;
and so near to 1666, from Egypt, or 1670; that This last great Roman Sack,
after our Savior, may be just the Center, or Middle Point of Time, between
Egypt, and the End of Babylon; with All the Times thereof, in the Prophets, or
Rev.

For, as between the two Great Sacks, there are just 666 years (as Hours
between the Changes of their Moon, or visible state;) So, afterward, there
were, but twice 666; or Two Months more, between the Month, begun, at that
great change (or Roman Sack, after the Pentecost, Acts 2d:) And the Month of
Tabernacles. Till which, from Pentecost, there were no more Feasts at all, but
Fasts, as 3Woe Months in the Jewish Calendar: as an Emblem of that Long time, in
Hose^, (now fulfilled;) while they must be, without the good, of a King, or
Prince, or Sacrifice, or Ephod; as the bad, of an Image or Teraphim.

From That Month, so begun; Two Moeds more, of 666, or 1332, come to the 7th
Month: Beginning with the solemn feast of Trumpets; or the 7th Trumpet of the
7th Month: Which we may Reckon Thus:

240 Hours, or Years, make up the 10th Day (of Atonement, as before:) or Great
Affliction of the Witnesses, or Congregation; and Tabernacle of Witness (as the
Jews called it:) Then mourning in Sackcloth and Ashes, as Apoc. 11. 3. And
they lie dead (as we saw before,) for 3 days, and and an half; or 84 Hours:
which end in Hour 324; the Morning Sacrifice, of the 14th Day: whose Evening
Minha begins in Hour 333: which added, to 1332 (the other two Moeds, or
Twice 666;) comes just to 1666; the Evening before the Feast of Tabernacles:
when also, The Tabernacle of God shall be with men: If we have reckoned Right.
Which may yet be more cleared by our Tables, and Characters, if God so please.


