A MOST EXCELLENT Eloquent Speech, MADE, NOT BY An Irreligious, Rebellious,
Improbous, Impious, Seditious, Pestiferous, Pernicious, Factious, Flagitious,
Vicious, Vafritious, Mischievous, Malicious, Mutinous, Luxurious, Letcherous,
etc. NOBLE PEER; BUT BY A most Noble and Wise, Pious and Virtuous EMPEROR,
(VIZ.)

Alexander Severus, To the Common People of ROME, Assembled before him in
POMPEY'S THEATER.

With the CAUSES, as likewise the EFFECTS thereof, which were an Humble and
Real Cordial Verbal ADDRESS, to His Imperial Majesty, of all their Lives and
Fortunes; Being a Rare Pattern of Pagan Piety and Obedience.

Made English out of the Greek.

With a few Quintessential Queries and Remarques thereupon. Calculated for the
Meridian of the Famous City of LONDON, but may prove of singular Service and
Infallible Use to all the Atheistical, Dissenting, Disloyal, and Phanatical
Subjects of His Sacred Majesty of Great-Brittain, France, and Ireland, etc.
without the least Preceptible Error or Mistake in the World.

Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
Virgil. Principilus summum rerum Arbitrium Dij dederunt; subditis obsequij
Gloria vero relicta est.

Tacit. 4. Annal. Printed for W. Davis, in Amen-Corner. M.DC.LXXXIII.

A most Excellent and Eloquent ORATION, etc.
BEfore I come to this Incomparable Speech it self, you are to be acquainted
with something concerning the Cause thereof, according to promise, which in
short was this following.

This good Emperor one day looking out at his Palace Window, The cause of this
Speech.
chanced to see certain Gentlemen Exercising themselves in Wrestling, Running,
Leaping, etc. To whom there happened to come a certain number of Common People;
who, without any sign of Reverence or Respect, or so much as saying by your
leave, intruded themselves into the Gentlemen's Society; and Malapertly
undertook with arrogant and presumptious saucy Language, to contend with them
about those their Recreations; Now the Gentlemen being therewith offended, bad
them be content with their own Degree and Stations, and go and associate
themselves with their Companions and Equals. But these Commoners taking this
Reproof as a grand Affront; with sturdy stubborn Countenances, proudly made
this Reply; viz. That every one of them was able to live, and had more store
and plenty wherewith to follow their Pleasures than the best of themselves.
Insomuch, as if the Emperor's Guards had not intervened in season, the Commons
had fought with the Gentlemen, and, in all propability, had worsted them, being
more by far in number than they.

Now the Emperor viewing these passages, was perceived to be put into such a
passion thereby, as was observed never to have been seen in him, during all his
past lifetime; and thereupon caused the said Common People to be secured,
every Man of them, and strictly commanded, that not any thing that had passed
should be taken notice of in the least, until his farther Will and Pleasure
were made known concerning the same: And immediately thereupon sends for the
Governor of the City and Tribunes, and commands them to send their Officers,
to Summon all the Men Commons of Rome, to appear in Pompey's Theater the 2d.
day following; where the Emperor in his own Person would also be present, and
declare unto them some things of very great Weight and Moment, concerning the
most Important and Perilous Affairs of the State of the Weal-Public.

The Emperor's Commands were accordingly Executed; and an High Place Erected on
purpose at the end of the Theater, where the Emperor himself should sit in his
Majesty, that all the people might plainly behold and perfectly hear him.

Now the Theater was made in form of a Bow that has a great Bend; A
Description of Pompey's Theater.
and in all the round part thereof, were many Benches, one behind another, and
over one another, (for it was narrowest below, and upward grew larger and
larger) and there sat all the Common People; and at the straight end, which was
to the other part, as the String to the Bow, were the Seats for the Senators,
and behind them sat the Gentlemen.

At the time appointed, the People being in the Theater according as they were
commanded, the Emperor came in Person, accompanied only with the Governor and
Tribunes, leaving all his Guards at the Theater Gate.

At his coming all the people rose, and Saluted him with most joyful
Acclamations; but he, good Man, contrary to his accustomed Custom, passed by
them with a displeased Countenance: whereat they were not a little amazed, and
with hearts full of dutiful, loving dread, and general constant Silence,
prepared their Ears to hear attentively what the Emperor would say; who, after
he had long viewed them, with a Grave Countenance and full of Majesty, spoke to
them as hereafter follows.

The Emperor Alexander Severus's Speech to the Common People of Rome.
WE wot not how to begin to speak unto you, for we know not by what Name we
shall call you; for if you were our Senators, then we would call you Fathers;
if you were Gentlemen, then would we call you our Friends; and if you were, as
you ought to be, good Commoners, then would we call you our good People of
Rome, as you know we were wont to do. But since Election has not made you
Senators, nor Birth made you Gentlemen, nor your Merits good Commoners, we be
in no small doubt what we shall call you; For should we call you Romans, we
fear least Romulus, from whom proceeded that Name, (if he be Deify'd, as you
suppose he is) being therewith offended, should be avenged as well on us as on
you, for abusing his Glorious Name on such People, which go about to dissolve
this Noble Empire, destroy this City which he first founded with his most
excellent Prowess and Wisdom; and what worse is, if any thing can be worse,
utterly to Extingush the most Honorable and Glorious Fame of this City and
People thereof, which has pierced the Clouds, flown over the high Mountains,
passed the perilous Seas and large Rivers, ran through the vast Deserts and
Wildernesses, and touched the farthermost Bounds of the World: We will
therefore omit to call you by any Name, until we can find out a proper one, and
according to your deserts.

Perhaps at our coming, you beholding our Countenance toward you more strange
than it was formerly wont to be; you thought, I say, it may be, that we were
moved by some private Displeasure, for something touching our particular
Person; or that we were altered from our former Temperance to Tyranny,
conceiving some Suspicion of our Nature, by the remembrance of that Monster in
Nature, our late Predecessor Heliogabaius, forasmuch as we both came from one
Lineage, which I deny not: But truly if this be your fantasy, we will soon
acquit our self thereof, and set all your minds at Liberty.

We will then say thus much to you; As touching our Person and Family, no Man
by Words has offended us; no Man has taken any thing from us; no Man, that we
know, has gone about to betray us, or conspire against us: Nor is there any
other thing privately acted to our Detriment, that has displeased us: And as
for our accustomed Manners, which so well liked and contented you, we shall
assure you we have not altered, neither intend we to alter them: For Tyranny,
as we have ever had it in extreme detestation; so do we now most fervently
abominate and abhor it. The Corrupt Nature of our Predecessor had never place
in us. One Garden at one time brings forth deadly Poison, and wholesome
Medicine. We see that one Woman, which by one Man has many Children, of them
some be fair and personable; some ill-favored and Deformed; some be Ingenious,
and apt to receive good Learning; others we see be Fools and dull-witted; one
we see is Courageous and Hardy, another is a Dastard and a Coward; this Child
is gentle and inclined to virtue, that is fierce and full of Vice. Now this is
no new thing, but in daily experience: and if this diversity and varity then
happens to be in one Garden, and in the Generation of one Father, and also of
one Mother, then I hope we may well escape the cause of this Suspicion. We and
Heliogabalus had several Fathers and several Mothers, and they as different in
their Conditions, as you your selves can bear witness; who have known and seen
experienced the Chaste living, Sanctity and Prudence of our Reverend Mother;
and in what virtuous Discipline She has nurtured us, and brought us up, unto
the time that we were called to this Dignity by God; and this ought certainly
to suffice, as well to persuade you that not any thing concerning our self,
has moved us to displeasure toward you; as also to Exclude all suspicion of
Tyranny out of your minds: and now shall you know the real cause why we be at
this time discontented with you.

Although we said at the beginning that you went about to dissolve this Empire,
destroy this City, and extinguish the Glorious Fame thereof, which indeed is
the cause of our displeasure and heaviness; yet in those general Words, you
perceive not I suppose, what we mean thereby: wherefore be attentive and take
good heed, and you shall hear it more particularly declared unto you.

After Romulus had Built this City, Romulus.
he, by his Divine Reason, considered, and, as I doubt not, in the time of the
Building, Experience declared, That in a confused multitude of People, and they
being of diverse Wits and Conditions, if Order were wanting, there would be no
perpetual Concord; but the People of necessity, would be compelled, by
continual variance and discord, either to abandon the City, and, dividing
themselves, to seek for sundry places to inhabit in, or else, abiding there in
continual Sedition, would shortly and easily be subdued or destroyed by their
Neighbors dwelling about them: Wherefore he proceeding from a Gentile and Noble
House, excelling the residue of the people in Noble Courage and fineness of
Wit, first devised and established this Order; viz. That the Company which he
had Assembled, as well of them which he had brought unto him, as of those which
he, out of diverse parts, had allured with him, should generally be called by
the Name of Romans, for ever: and that of them should be Three States or
Degrees, every one of them necessary for the Weal-Public of his Noble City, in
their sundry Administrations, Stations, Duties, and Exercises.

For the first State he chose, out of the whole Congregation, an hundred Men,
Ancient in years; which, in Moderation of Living, Soberness of Manners, and
sharpness of Wit, were the principal Personages of all that number. Of these
he Estabished a Council, whereby the Affairs of the City and the Appendices
thereof should be Ruled and Ministered; and these Counselors, for their Age,
should be called Senators, Senators
(for Senes in Latin signifies old Men) notwithstanding, being saluted or
spoken to, they should be named Fathers: as also the College or Company of
them, was Incorporate by the Name of the Senate.

Moreover, out of this College should be Elected the chief Judges and Officers
in the Weal-Public, to whom should be committed the determination of Justice,
the Execution of Ceremonies and Solemn Sacrifices, and other Authorities which
belong to Government: Wherefore he would that in this State there should be a
Majesty, which, of all other Men, should be had in singular Honor and
Reverence.

Now as this State was ordained for Counsel and Government; so likewise he
Elected, out of the redsidue, which were Lusty in years, Valiant, Hardy, and
Courageous, a greater number; whom, because in Wars they should be on
Horseback, he called Equites; Equites. Equestris.
and the other he called Equestris, to them should chiefly pertain the defense
of the City against the Invasion of Enemies, with other small Administrations
about the necessary Provisions and Ornaments of this Noble City.

And this State also would he have Honored of the rest of the People; and to
the intent they should be known from other Men, he assigned them to wear a
Ring, and to bear Javelins in their hands; from whence afterward they were
called Quirites, Quirites.
which in the ancient Tongue of this Country, signified Spear-Men. Out of this
State should be Elected the Senators, when the just number of the Senate
decayed,

The third State was of the base People, The Commoners.
or Commoners, to whom severally should not be Committed any Authority, but
should employ and busy themselves in their proper Occupations, and be ready at
all times to Execute the Statutes and Ordinances made by the Senate; Note, That
Romulus was none of the three States.
as also to be obedient to the chief Officers in what pertained to the
Weal-Public: And moreover when Wars required, that they should go forth, then
were they to be obedient and diligent at the Commands of their Captains and
Leaders.

This Order being Established by Romulus, as long as, in every degree, it was
duly observed, how marvelously did this City prosper? yea, how wonderfully did
a few Romans, in respect, not only defend this little Territory, against the
great number and vast Puissance of diverse and sundry people, confederated
against them, but also beat them back to their own houses; entered into their
Cities, despoiled them of their substance, and also compelled them, not only to
desire perpetual Peace, but moreover, at the last, to become their Subjects and
Tributaries? And when this good Order began to be broken, your Common State
aspiring to Government and Rule, where they were ordained to obey only; What
Year, I pray, can ye find free from Sedition and Discord among you? Who can
number the Romans which have been slain in Civil Wars and Commotions? Who
could, without tears, The Ld. Russel would call these but Stirrs.
write the dolorous State of this City in the time of Cinna and Marius, whom,
for disdain that they had for the Nobility, you Elevated to the highest
Dignities? By this your Disorder, sundry Calamities befell this City: you chose
Caligula to be your Emperor, and where could there be found a more horrible
Tyrant? in the which Name he so much delighted, that often, looking in a Glass,
he would most exactly form his Visage to the most terrible fashion: Also in
recompense of your kindness, he wished that all the people of Rome had but one
Neck, that he might strike it off at one stroke.

I Am ashamed to rehearse my Predecessor and Kinsman Heliogabalus, that
detestable Vessel of Abomination: but you ought rather to be ashamed that vou,
setting apart so great a number of Honorable Personages, as were then in the
Senate, for their Experience, Wisdom, and Prowess, worthy every one of them to
be Emperors, chose the said Heliogabalus, a Stranger born, a Boy in Years, a
Fool, in respect of their Wisdom, to be your Sovereign Lord; who brought you to
the most vile Subjection that any people were in the World? For is there any
thing in Mankind so vile, as to be under the Condition of brute Beasts? What
Beast can you name, that will suffer, in his presence, another Beast to Occupy,
in the act of Generation, her whom he has chosen for his Mate and Companion;
but to his power will resist and fight with him? Heliogabalus held you in such
Slavery, that, partly to avoid his displeasure, partly to Flatter him, and get
somewhat of him, you not only suffered him to abuse your Wives and your
Children, such as best liked him; but also increased your Brothel-Houses, and
with open eyes let your Wives and your Children daily and nighly haunt 'em; and
openly in the Streets, which I abhor to rehearse, pick up Men and provoke them
to Lechery.

I omit, for shortness of time, many such other Elections, which have proceeded
from your gross and presumptuous Wits, after you had transgressed the Order,
wherein Romulus left you, and exceeded the bounds of your Office and Dutys;
which at last was perceived by you, as I supposed, when you, being tedious of
that Beastly Liberty and License, which that Beast Heliogabalus gave freely to
you, had slain him, and took me to be your Emperor; although with all my power
I refused that burden, until I was, by the Senate and you, constrained to take
it upon me; and then did you desire me to reduce the State of this City to its
first Order. About which I have labored these 8 years, with not a little
pains, study, and labor; beginning at mine own Household; to the intent, that
as well by the example of my Servants and Officers, you and others being under
my Rule, might the sooner reform your selves; as also that you might the better
perceive and be less offended with my Severity.

And because I saw much ill Example proceed from the Senate; and also that you
were oppressed with the Pride and Corruption of Judges and Officers, I, using
much diligence, weeded them out, and discharged them of their Authorities; nay,
they went not unpunished according to their deserts.

I purged also the State of Gentlemen, from Ribalds and Riotors, and advancing
others thereunto, I caused them to be daily exercised in Acts of Prowess; or
else to hear Lessons in such matters of Doctrine, as thereby they might acquire
more Wisdom, to be Officers or Counselors in the Weal-Public: only the State
of the Common People I did not visit, saving in punishing of Thieves; forasmuch
as I judged, that they had least Liberty to do any great evil, being, as I
said, oppressed with Tyranny. And that those Vices which were among them, like
as they were taken by the Example of their Superiors; so I trusted that by
their Punishment the said ill manners would be forsaken: and by the virtuous
Example of such honest Men, as I have put in their places, good Manners should
be as gladly embraced.

But now I perceive all has happened contrary to my expectation; for the
sparing of you and the correcting my own Servants, with the sharp Reformation
of the Senate and Gentlemen, has brought you to such a height of Presumption
and Arrogance, that you contend and strive to be equal with the Gentry, using
no form of Reverence unto them; either because you think and imagine that I
fear your Puissance more than I favor their Honesties; or else that your
Riches make you so proud; which you abusing in excessive Usuries, have
therewith devoured the Patrimonies of many young Gentlemen, and have made them
Beggars: or, by the severity of the ancient Laws of this City, taken them in
Bondage and slain them in Irons. And by such colorable Rapine, you have bought
great Possessions in Greece, Sicily, Spain, etc. whereby you accumulate
Treasures and Pleasures like to great Princes.

If you think me to be afraid of your Puissance, your opinion is false; for,
above all things, I most desire to dye for the defense of the Weal-Public of
this Noble City: And indeed, rather will I dye than see the Calamities which
needs must ensue thereupon, if Order be not kept, as I have before declared.

At that word all the People cried out with one voice, pouring out tears from
their eyes; Live most Noble and Gracious Emperor, he that would your death, let
him dye, let him be rent into pieces; our Puissance shall never annoy you, but,
unto death, shall defend you; you have restored us unto life that were dead*
unto Liberty that were in Captivity; unto Honor that were dishonored. Live
long virtuous Emperor, and what you find amiss and faulty in us, reform it, and
we shall obey you; and he that shall offer to resist and Rebel, let him be
slain, and drawn with an Hook through the City, and thrown into Tiber. You are,
in Government, our Father, whom we chiefly will Honor; in Age you be our most
dear Son, whom we will favor more than our own Lives; and they often cried
out, Live most gentle and Righteous Emperor.

Hereat the Emperor relented, and with much ado kept the tears from flowing
from his eyes; and after he had settled his Spirits and Countenance, he then
speak to them farther, after this manner; I am glad that you have declared,
that there is yet in you some portion of Loyalty; which gives me hope that
neither the Noble Renown of this City, began by Romulus, and augmented by other
Honorable Governors; nor my labors in restoring thereof, when it was decayed,
and likely to perish, shall prove of none effect: But if you be constant, in
this Affection, I trust that very shortly the Public-Weal shall flourish, and
that this City and People shall be in as much estimation, as ever it was in the
time of any of our Progenitors.

And now have I found again your old Name whereby I will call you; the Children
and Successors of the virtuous Romans, I say, you most Victorious People,
Branches of Romulus, Subduers of Realms; Samplers of Virtue, and Prowess to all
the world; mitigate your covetous Appetites, expel from you Avarice, vale your
high Courages; I mean in exceeding the bounds of your Popular State; and
comparing your selves with your Superiors; be Charitable and Merciful to your
own Countrymen, where their necessity may be relieved with your plenty: Be
ashamed that People of other Countries, People rude and barbarous, should
condemn you of Cruelty for destroying your Gentry; the chief Ornament and
Defense of this Noble City: That they should reproach you of Rudeness and
Pride, in omitting to do Reverence to them that do in Order excel you.
Remember, that as if the State of the Senators decays, such of the Gentry are
Elected into the Senate, as are virtuous; so you that shall be found equal to
them in virtue (for your Substance and Riches only cannot make you Gentlemen)
shall be advanced to the State of Gentlemen, according to Reason: And then
consider with your selves, if you would not then your selves require to be
preferred in Reverence? For nothing certainly shall cause a Man more willingly
to do his duty, than to think what would require of him that is inferior to
him: and it has been said of Wise Men; That he that would be a Ruler, should
first learn to be a good Subject: for truly a proud and covetous Subject, will
never make a mild and temperate Governor.

And now have I no more to say unto you; but that you apply your selves with
all your hearts, to restore this City to its former Ancient and Laudable Order;
as I shall endeavor my self by Example and diligence, to bring e're long to
its perfect Perfection.

The Effects of the foregoing SPEECH.
THus ended this most Noble and Wise Emperor's Oration; and so he departed, the
Effect whereof was, besides what you have heard already, that all the Common
People followed him home with these loud Acclamations; The Gods Immortal
preserve and defend you, most Noble Emperor; you are the Crown of our Glory, of
our Wealth and Prosperity; hated be he of the Gods and of Men, that would you
displeasure; do you with us what best likes you, and so the Immortal Gods
defend you.

And now Reader, having laid before thee an almost incomparable pattern of
Common Pagan Loyalty and Obedience of Subjects to their Superiors, I wish it
may have the same Effect on them for whom it was now publishd, as it had on
them for whom it was first made. And I would only be resolved in a few very
Important Queries, by our unnatural ungrateful disloyal, and hypocritical
Prig-Prince Presbyters of these times, and all other their Seditious, Factious,
Rebellious, Fratres in malo, Brethren in Iniquity, but chiefly of Jack
Presbyter, because I look upon him, in my weak opinion, always to have been,
and at present are, and ever will be, if not prevented, the most dangerous and
formidable Enemy to Monarchy and Hiearchy of any within His Sacred Majesty's
Dominions; and so I shall conclude.

1st. then let me ask you whether you don't imagine that these Dutiful and
Loyal Pagans shall one day rise in Judgment against you for your damnable
Disloyalty and Rebellion, against two so good, so gracious, so mild, so
merciful mirrors of Majesty, Father and Son, and to be acknowledged, by all
true Subjects, Gods Anointed and our Terrestial God? And whether it shall not
be more tolerable for Tire and Sydon, etc. in that Day than for you
And whether it do not exactly resemble the Lucifero-machy and Giganto-machy of
Old? which if they would but consider, may one day prove somewhat available to
them, toward their Eternal Happiness and timely Repentance, and preventing
their future Eternal Damnation.

Secondly, What Account they will, one day, be able to give Almighty God, for
not only, as this good Emperor complained of in his Common Subjects, their
Cruelty and Barbariety in destroying their Gentry, the chief Ornament and
Defense of their City, etc. And that Rude and Barbarous people should reproach
them of their Rudeness and Pride, in omitting only to do Reverence to the
Gentry their Superiors; etc. I say, what Account will they be able to render at
the last dreadful day, for their not only contemning and destroying their
Nobles and Gentry, but the very Fountain of Nobility and Gentry, viz. King
Charles the I. and Subverting all Order, and endeavoring to make his Son, like
his Father, viz. a Glorious King. For in that Cursed Trial of King Charles the
I. you will plainly see the Common People Condemned and Murdered their King; for
there you have 1st. An Act of the Commons, etc. for Erecting an High Court of
Justice; etc. Then the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, according to
the Power and Fundamental Trust reposed in them by the People, etc. in behalf
of the Commons of England and all the People, etc. in the Name of the Commons,
etc. the Rights and Liberties of the People, etc. and on the People behalf,
etc. He Levied War against Parliament and People therein represented, etc.
caused Thousands of the Free and Good People to be slain; etc. much Innocent
Blood of the Free People spilt, etc. against Public Interest of the People,
etc. And again on behalf of the People and Commons thrice, etc. then, this
Authority requires you in the Name of the People, etc. in behalf of the
Commons, etc. in the Name of the People, etc. in behalf of the People, etc. by
Authority of the Commons, etc. Sir, the VOTE of the Commons in Parliament, is
the Reason of the Kingdom. By Authority of the Commons: on behalf of the
Commons; We show you there the Commons make War against the Parliament and
People; and in desiance of the Parliament, and in behalf of the People; and the
House of Commons the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom; and in the Peoples
behalf, and in behalf of the Commons, and in the Name of the People; and the
Powers and Supreme Authority of the Commons; And lastly, in that Satanical
Sentence of Death you have the Commons, etc. where you may find the Words
Commons, People, Parliament, named Alternatim, and Vice Versa about some 37, or
38 several times; but from such Parliaments, People, and Commons; Good Lord
deliver good King Charles and his Loyal Subjects: So that you may see this
damned Idol and Oracle of the Rebels, Vox Populi, is often, if not always, Vox
Diaboli: For was it not Vox Populi cried up Rebellious Absalom against his King
and Father? Was It not Vox Populi cried Crucify, etc.

Then let me ask the People whether our present Dread Sovereign, has not,
under God, restored them to life that were dead; and to Liberty that were in
Captivity, and under the greatest Tyranny, as this good Emperor did his? And
whether they have not as great Reason to Echo as they did, Live long, etc. and
Address their Lives and Fortunes to his disposing: Whose Father indeed dyed in
defense of the Liberties and Properties of an ungrateful Generation of Viperous
Commons, The Ld. Russel's Word.
and he, now living, whom the King of Kings long has hitherto defended, and
continue among us, etc. Sero abat in Coelum; would not infallibly no less
suffer himself to become a Victime for the Rights of his Liege-People, etc. as
this good Emperor said he was ready to do: And God grant he may Principiis
obstare as to all his Disaffected and Rebellious Subjects; as this Noble
Emperor did; Amen, Amen.

As for what is said about the Citizens, there is an Old Verse for them. O*
Cives, Cives, querenda Pecunia primum,
Virtus post Nummos, etc.
Caveat Emptor.

Then lastly, since mention is made of Tribunes, note they were those
Magistrates that were chose to Preserve the Rights, and ascertain the Liberties
of the Common People, against the Puissance of the Nobles: they were Instituted
soon after that Notable Discord between the People and Nobles, which was
appeased by Venenius Agrippa, who wiselly United the Commons seperating
themselves from the Nobles that commanded them, and retiring to the Mount
Aventine, complaining of excessive Imposts laid upon them, by moralizing this
following Table. The Members of the Body, says he, would one day separate
themselves from the Belly, and denied it their Assistance, under pretext that
they were in continual labor to furnish it with Provisions for its Gluttony,
etc. This Discord lasted till the death of the whole Body ensued: Even so shall
it happen to you the Commons, says he, if you separate your selves from your
Nobles; for thereby you will ruin the whole Body Politic; for though it seem to
you that your Nobles live in Delights, Gluttoning themselves with the best of
your Goods, etc. Yet must they Communicate thereof to you in a short time, and
so couserve you; As the Belly distributes to the other Members, of the
substance it formerly received from them, and so maintains the Body in perfect
Health. These Tribunes at last with the People became Insolent; and committed
many Disorders, to the prejudice of the Nobles, etc. So that they were
sometimes called the Pest of the Weal-Public.

FINIS.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.


