THE English Statesman THE PROTESTANT ORACLE, BEING THE Earl of SHAFTESBURY's
Famous Speech.
Mortuus loquitur Viva Voce.
ALL good Protestants, and true Englishmen are greatly obliged to that noble
and generous Soul [whose famous Speech you have here reprinted] for those Laws
of the Tests, of the Habeas Corpus Bill, of the Statute against Quartering of
Soldiers, and for abolishing the Writ de Haeretico comburendo, for detecting
of the horrid and hellish Popish Plot in the late King's time, who with
undaunted Courage exposed himself unto extremest Hazards whilst he alarmed the
Parliaments and Kingdoms of the imminent Danger of Popery and Slavery from the
Contrivances of the then and still detested Ministers of State, and Pensioners
of France, in conjunction with Jesuited bloody Papists, and in his endeavors
to preserve the Protestant Religion, and the English Government, whereby the
Liberties and Properties of the Subjects are most happily provided for and
secured; had it not been for this Great Man, the Papists had found a much
easier Task to have effected their Devilish Design, and our Total Ruin;
therefore those who adore the Eternal Majesty of Heaven, and highly honor the
glorious Instruments he uses for Restoring our Religion and Laws, cannot read
this Speech without reflecting with delight upon the Memory of this Wise and
Great Peer and Patriot of this Kingdom, and her little Sisters: Of this Noble
Statesman, the Non-such of his Age, it may truly be said, No man deserved
better, and no man was ever worse requited by many of his Countrymen; but they
have, or will change their Opinions and Characters of him, if they consider
this amongst other the Monuments of his true worth, of his own erecting, which
time nor malice can never ruinate, whose Epitaph may properly be, Virtutem
incolumem odimus, sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi: For those who whilst he
lived (whose mistakes time has rectified) were his severe Enemies, now he is
dead, with Reason and Justice, are and will live and die his grateful Admirers.

The Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftesbury's Speech in the House of Lords,
March 25, 1679.
YOu are appointing of the consideration of the State of England to be taken up
in a Committee of the whole House, some day next week. I do not know how well
what I have to say may be received, for I never study either to make my Court
well, or to be popular; I always speak what I am commanded by the dictates of
the Spirit within me.

There are some other Considerations that concern England so nearly, that
without them you will come far short of Safety and Quiet at home: We have a
little Sister, and she has no Breasts, what shall we do for our Sister in the
day when she shall be spoken for? If she be a Wall, we will build on her a
Palace of Silver; if she be a Door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.
We have several little Sisters without Breasts, the French Protestant Churches,
the two Kingdoms of Ireland and Scotland; the Foreign Protestants are a Wall,
the only Wall and Defense to England; upon it you may build Palaces of Silver,
glorious Palaces. The Protection of the Protestants abroad, is the greatest
Power and Security the Crown of England can attain to, and which can only help
us to give check to the growing greatness of France. Scotland and Ireland are
two Doors either to let in Good or Mischief upon us; they are much weakened by
the Artifice of our cunning Enemies, and we ought to enclose them with boards
of Cedar.

Popery and Slavery, like two Sisters, go hand in hand, sometimes one goes
first, sometimes the other, in a-doors, but the other is always following close
at hand.

In England, Popery was to have brought in Slavery; in Scotland, Slavery went
before, and Popery was to follow.

I do not think your Lordships or the Parliament have Jurisdiction there. It is
a Noble and Ancient Kingdom; they have an Illustrious Nobility, a Gallant
Gentry, a Learned Clergy, and an understanding worthy people; but yet we cannot
think of England as we ought, without reflecting on the Condition therein. They
are under the same Prince, and the Influence of the same Favorites and
Councils: when they are hardly dealt with, can we that are the Richer expect
better usage? for it is certain, that in all Absolute Governments, the poorest
Countries are always most favorably dealt with.

When the Ancient Nobility and Gentry there, cannot enjoy their Royalties,
their Shrevaldoms, and their Stewardies, which they and their Ancestors have
possessed for several hundreds of years, but that now they are enjoined by the
Lords of the Council to make Deputations of their Authorities to such as are
their known Enemies;

Can we expect to enjoy our Magna Charta long under the same Persons and
Administration of Affairs? If the Council Table there can Imprison any Noble
man or Gentleman for several years, without bringing him to Trial, or giving
the least reason for what they do; can we expect the same men will preserve the
Liberty of the Subject here?

I will acknowledge, I am not well versed in the particular Laws of Scotland;
but this I do know, that all the Northern Countries have by their Laws an
undoubted and inviolable Right to their Liberties and Properties; yet Scotland
has outdone all the Eastern and Southern Countries, in having their Lives,
Liberties and Estates subjected to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of those
that Govern. They have lately plundered and harrassed the richest and
wealthiest Countries of that Kingdom, and brought down the barbarous
High-landers to devour them; and all this almost without a colorable pretense
to do it: Nor can there be found a reason of State for what they have done; but
that those wicked Ministers designed to procure a Rebellion at any rate, which,
as they managed, was only prevented by the miraculous Hand of God, or
otherwise all the Papists in England would have been Armed, and the fairest
opportunity given in the just time, for the Execution of that Wicked and Bloody
design the Papists had: and it is not possible for any man that duly considers
it, to think other, but that those Ministers that acted that, were as guilty of
the Plot, as any of the Lords that are in question for it.

My Lords, I am forced to speak this (...) plainer, because, till the pressure
be fully and clearly taken off from Scotland, it is not possible for me, or any
thinking man to believe that good is meant us here.

We must still be upon our guard, apprehending, that the Principle is not
changed at Court, and that those men that are still in Place and Authority,
have that Influence upon the mind of our Excellent Prince, that he is not, nor
cannot be that to us, that his own Nature and Goodness would incline him to.

I know your Lordships can order nothing in this; but there are those that hear
me, can put a perfect Cure to it: until that be done, the Scottish Weed is like
Death in the Pot, Mors in Olla. But there is something too, now I consider,
that most immediately concerns us, their Act of Twenty two thousand men to be
ready to invade us upon all occasions. This, I hear, that the Lords of the
Council there have treated as they do all other Laws, and expounded it into a
standing Army of Six thousand men. I am sure we have reason and right to
beseech the King, that that Act may be better considered in the next Parliament
there. I shall say no more for Scotland at this time, I am afraid your
Lordships will think I have said too much, having no concern there; but if a
French Nobleman should come to dwell in my House and Family, I should think it
concerned me to ask what he did in France; for if he were there a Felon, a
Rogue, a Plunderer, I should desire him to live elsewhere; and I hope your
Lordships will do the same thing for the Nation, if you find the same cause.

My Lords, give me leave to speak two or three words concerning our Sister,
Ireland: thither, I hear, is sent Douglas's Regiment, to secure us against the
French. Besides, I am credibly informed, that the Papists have their Arms
restored, and the Protestants are not many of them yet recovered from being the
suspected Party; the Sea-Towns, as well as the Inland, are full of Papists:
that Kingdom cannot long continue in the English hands, if some better care be
not taken of it. This is in your power, and there is nothing there, but is
under your Laws; therefore I beg that this Kingdom at least may be taken into
consideration, together with the state of England; for I am sure there can be
no safety here, if these Doors be not shut up and made sure.

LONDON, Printed by F. C. in the year, 1688.


