Delenda Carthago. OR, The True Interest of England, in Relation to France and
Holland.
AS the Happiness of our Situation secures us from the Invasion of any, who
are not our Masters at Sea: The same Reason makes it altogether against the
Interest of England, to seek to enlarge her Dominions by Conquest, upon the
Continent: For the Charge of Transporting, besides the Accidents of the Sea, is
such Odds, as she can never wage an equal War.

The Truth of this will appear to any who shall read the Wars of England in
France, the vast Expense of Blood and Treasure, the many Hindrances and
Disappointments in sending our Reliefs by Sea; and, after the most prosperous
Successes, the little Effect and Final Loss of all.

Which indeed proved our greatest Benefit, by sending us to live at Home. And I
think it very plain that the loss of Callice, and ridding our Hands of all the
Seeds of War, the Garrisons we had in France, was exceedingly for the Advantage
of England: We called them Bridles upon France, but they proved Sponges to us,
and drained more Money from us (and sometimes Men) than, if employed upon the
Fleet, would have enabled us to bridle France, and the Seas, and to have
extended the Privilege of the Flag to both Worlds.

The Fleet are the Walls of England. To Command at Sea, not to make Conquests
by Land, is the true Interest of England.

And the same Reason makes it the Interest of France, not to meddle with us. He
can extend his Conquests with fifty times less Expense and Hazard upon the
Continent. Nor does he desire more of England than not to hurt him.

Accordingly we find that France has always endeavored to live well with
England; and indeed they have courted us, and always showed a more particular
Kindness to the English Gentry, than to any other Nations, who traveled
thither for their Education.

And when we were lately obliged to declare War against them (for we began with
them) yet it was not for any Injury they had done to us, nor had we one to
instance.

And by the Issue of all the Wars that England ever yet had against France, it
plainly appears to be the Interest of England to have no War with France; at
least never to carry our Arms into France.

For suppose the best, the utmost you can propose, even to conquer France, as
we did once before: How shall we keep it; What Armies of English must we always
have there to prevent their Rebelling? Would transplanting of all England serve
the Turn? Sure such a Conquest would drain and ruin England, as the Indies
have Spain.

But suppose we had it and could keep it: Our King would make his Residence in
France, and England would become a Province like Flanders, when their Earls
came to be Kings of Spain; Or as Scotland is now to England, which was wisely
foreseen by Hen. 7. when he, for that very Reason, married his Eldest Daughter
to Scotland, and his Younger to France; thinking it much more the Advantage of
England to have the Accession to Scotland than of France; the Greater always
swallowing up the Less, as Rivers are lost in the Sea.

What then is the Interest of England as to France? Surely, to grow great at
Sea, and command the Trade, which is our Greatness; but, by all means, to let
alone their Continent; where a Conquest would prove our own Destruction.

Let us now look how our Interest stands as to Holland.

It is Interest that governs Kingdoms. Nations do not fall in Love with one
another, as particular Persons do for their Beauty. The Public still moves by
Interest, and that will never lie.

The Interest and Life of Holland, all the World knows is Trade. It is
Advantageous to others; but it is N^c^ss^ry to them. Their Continent cannot
make them live: Therefore whoever rivals their Trade must be irreconcilable to
them; nor can they ever be true and hearty to such.

England has been their only mighty Rival for the Trade of the World: Whence
that wise Chanc^llor of England, the Earl of Shaftsbury, in his Speech to the
Parliament, 5. Feb. 1672. lays it down as a Maxim never to be forgot in
England. Let this be remembered (says he) The States of Holland are England's
eternal Enemy, both by Interest and Inclination: And he gives the Reason,
because we are their only Competitor for Trade and Power at Sea, and who only
stand in their Way to an universal Empire, as great as Rome.

Then he shows how true they have been to their Interests, in working all the
Miscief they could to England, not only by violent, but false and treacherous
Ways: And he instances in their Breach of Treaties, both in the Surinam and
East India Business; and their height of Insolence, to deny us the Honor and
Right of the Flag; and that, though it had been owned by them in the Treaty of
Breda, yet they disputed the King's Title to it in all the Courts of
Christendom, and made great Offers to the French King, if he would stand by
them against us.

Lastly, He compares them to Carthage; and us to Rome, that is, that it was
impossible both should stand upon a Balance; that if we do not master their
Trade, they will ours. They or We must truckle. One must and will give the Law
to the other. There Is no Compounding, where the Contest is for the T^ade of the
whole World.

No Treaties, no Alliances will, or ever did bind them to us, longer than till
they could make an Advantage by us. After a firm Treaty in 1619, ensued the
Murder of the English at Amboyna in November 1624, and other Depredations in
the East Indies. You may see a whole History of their Breach of Treaties, and
most Barbarous and Perfidious Cruelties upon the English, By Dr. Stubbe,
Printed in 1673.

Since K. James the First (says he) reigned in Great Britain, they have neither
kept any League in reference to Trade and Commerce: That rich Trade we had into
the East Indies, at Japan, Amboyna, Banda and the Moluccoes, is totally ruined:
Our Islands of Poleran, Palaway, Lantere unjustly seized into their hands; and
the Damages we suffered there are computed in 1653, at 1656233 l. 15 s. and we
are now totally excluded those Seas by these Hollanders -- Their Usurpations
there have been accompanied with Barbarities and Outrages -- Besides the
Cruelties of Amboyna, they exercised innumerable others, as appears by the
Depositions from 1616 to 1620: Printed at London A. D. 1622.

The English Ships being taken and their Goods confiscated, the Captains,
Soldiers, Factors and Mariners were made Prisoners, clogged with Irons, kept
in Stocks, bound Hand and Foot, tied to Stakes, haling and pulling them with
Ropes about their Necks, spurning them like Dogs, throwing them headlong down
Rocks and Clifts, murdering some, and starving others to death: Some were
landed among the Indians, where they found better Usage among the Paynims, than
the Protestants of Holland: Some were so lodged, that they were forced to
tumble in their own Excrements, not being permitted to go forth to ease
themselves. Lawrence Ryall, the Dutch General caused Grates and Cages to be
made, and carried the English therein fettered, and showed them triumphantly to
the Indians, at every Port, saying, Behold and see, here is the People of that
Nation, whose King you care so much for; no^ you may see ho^ kindly we use his
Subjects. They have robbed the Indians under English Colors, thereby to
incense them against us, and to destroy our Trade there. They have
counterfeited the Coin of other Nations, and then def^med the English for it.
The Tr^fftick of Ch^na and P^rfi^^ etc was ruined by their seizing and
destroying the ^^p^ of Sir Wm. Court^^n and his Partners. We did by our
Ambassador S(...). John's, dem^nd ^atisfaction for all these Damages, and
charged them with the Blood of the English that had ^een slaughtered by them in
the K^tharin^ and Dragon, (...) S. Speech of Mr. St. J^^^s. See also the
Printed Acc^unt o^ Joh^ D^v^ll, A. D. 1665.
in these words. Though ^e cannot p^si^^vely prove, yet by good Circumstances,
we can make it appear, that you did d^stroy the Ships Dragon and Katherine,
though the Ships and M^n were never heard of, yet the Guns and Goods of those
Ships have been found in your Country, which does give us some confidence to
believe you did destroy the Men and Ships.

And we are informed that some of your own Countrymen when they lay on their
Death Beds, The Remonstrance of G. Carew, Esquire Printed 1662.
did make Confession of the Cruel Murders and Seisures: How that they met them
going to the Cape of Good Hope, and and after a friendly Salutation, the Dutch
invited the English Commanders aboard; and after they had been feasted, they
told them, that it was sitting They should drink Lustick, as well as eat
Lustick, and causing them to be tied back to back, they were cast into the Sea.
And in the Evening when the English expected the Return of their Commanders and
their Crews, the Dutch with their own and English Boats, went aboard the
English Ships, and served every Man in the same manner: and having taken out
what Goods and Guns they thought fit, the Ships were sunk by them; the which
were worth according to the Invoice, had they come to the Port of London,
170000 l. In Guiney and Brasile we have been treated with the same Usage: And
the Dutch have been always either acting Open Hostilities, or, which is worse,
destroying the Honor and Renown of our Nation in Spain, Italy, Russia, and all
places whither a Dutchman trades Therefore we were then convinced, That the
true way to advance the English Trade, was to reduce the Hollanders to greater
Moderation.

Much more to the same Purpose you will find in the abovesaid Author, and in
many others of the English Nation.

But above all things the most astonishing and down right Diabolical, exceeding
even the Treacherous and Bloody Massacre of the English at Ambiyna, being done
in time of Peace, and the chief Actors thereof justified and preferred by the
States, when Complaint was made against them, and Justice demanded: But it
exceeds all this, and all that ever was heard of any Nation which bore the name
of Christian; the Wickedness of all Nations is exceeded by what the Dutch did
and still continue to do at Japan.

They incensed the Government there against the Christians who traded thither,
representing them as People of dangerous Principles, as to ^overnment, and
plotting of Insurrections: Whereby they procured the miserable Slaughter, with
horrible Tortures and Torments, of above 400000 Christians in that Kingdom, and
denying themselves to be Christians (wherein some think they told no Lie) they,
by that means, ingross the Trade of that wealthy Island to themselves.

And if they can dispense even with their Christianity, to promote their Trade;
what Obligations can we but upon them that will make them false to their
Supreme God, Interest?

But we need not go so far as the Indies to find Instances of the Designs of
Holland to ruin England. There is a surprising Passage in the London-Gaz^tte,
30 th of April 1666, which is verbatim as follows.

At the Sessions in the Old Baily. John Rathbone, an old Army Colonel, William
Saunders, H^nry Youcker, Thomas Flint, Thomas Evans, John Myls, William Wascot
and John Cole, formerly Officers and Soldiers in the late Rebellion, were
Indicted for conspiring the Death of his Majesty, and the Overthrow of the
Government; having laid their Plot and Contrivance, for the Surprisal of the
Tower, the killing of his Grace the Ld. General, Sir John Robinson Lieutenant
of his Majesty's Tower of London, and Sir Richard Brown, and then to have
declared for an equal Division of Lands, etc. The better to ^ffect this Hellish
Design, the City was to have been fired, and the Portcullis to have been let
down, to keep out all the Assist^nce, the Horse-Guards to have been surprised
in the Inns where they were Quartered; several others having been gained for
that purpose. The Tower was accordingly viewed, and its Surprise ordered by
Boats over the Moat, and from thence to scale the Wall; one Alexander, who is
not yet taken, had likewise distributed Sums of Money to these Conspirators,
and for the carrying on of the Design more effectually, they were told of a
Council of the Great ones, that far frequently in London, from whom issued all
Orders; which Council received their Directions from another in Holland, who
fate with the States; and that the 3 d of September was pitched on for the
Attempt, as being found by Lilly's Almanac, and a Scheme erected for that
purpose, to be a Lucky Day, a Planet then ruling which Prognosticated the
downfall of Monarchy. The Evidence against these Persons was very full and
clear, and they accordingly found guilty of High Treason. These are the Words
of that Gazette; and let me only mind the Reader, That the City was fired the
very Day which was there mentioned; that is, the Fire began about 12 at Night,
the 2 d of September 66, or early on the 3 d, which was the first Day of the
Fire

This makes it a Demonstration, that the DutSh Plot, mentioned in that Gazette,
could be no Contrivance of the Government, in Odium to the Dutch; if that could
be so much as suggested, or so base an Imputation laid, not only upon the Court
but the City it self, which, in her Sessions, should take away the Lives of Men
for any such Sham Plot: I say nothing of this can be possible, unless you will
suppose, that the Government and the City both designed the burning of the City
upon that Day (and if so they would not have told it); or otherwise that they
had the Spirit of Prophesy, to foretell the burning of the City five Months
before it came to pass.

But these Conspirators had laid their Design, and would not slip that Lucky
Day, the 3d of September, on which Oliver conquered first Scotland, at the
Battle of Dunbar, and after the Loyal Party in England, at Worcester Fight;
both which happened to be upon the 3d of September, which Oliver reckoned to be
his Lucky Day; and it held so to him to the end: For on that day he brought the
greatest Blessing to England that ever Subject did: On that day only he
verified what he had so often promised, to relieve England from Tyranny and
Arbitrary Power, and to open the way to a Glorious Reformation, all this he
performed, for on that day, on his own Lucky Day, he died, or, as his
Enthusiast Banditi boasted, was carried, like Elijah, to Heaven in a Whirlwind;
whither that carried him, or whence it was sent, we will not examine; only we
may take notice, That he who raised Rebellion to cure Superstition, observed
his Lucky Days; and these Conspirators of whom we are speaking, were some of
his Godly Army. These gained with Dutch Reformers, not only observe Days, but
cast Schemes and go to Fortune Tellers, any thing -- go to the Devil himself,
for the Good Old Cause! The End sanctifies the Means.

How far the Devil's Chain may reach, I cannot tell. But if there be such a
thing as Spells, to cause Men Love or Hate; most certainly the Dutch h^ve made
us drunk with it: Not only to Love and Dote upon them, who, at this very Day,
use all our Men like Dogs, who go over thither to fight for their Country
(which they will not do themselves) and Clip our Money publicly, which, when
they have done, they pay to the English only (for no other Nation will take it
from them) by the Coin, and will receive it from them only by the Weight; which
is proclaiming us for Fools to our Faces: And as such, they have begged us. To
fall in Love with these Dutch, who use us ten times worse, when we fight for
them, and take less care of our Sick and Wounded, than the French against whom
we fight! And yet to hate and abhor the French, the more they court us! As if
it were the Nature as it is the Character somewhere given of an Englishman, to
be won by Injuries, and provoked by Civilities, comparing them to their own
Country Mastiffs.

What is it else can make us have such an unaccountable Hatred to the French,
for which we can give no Reason, they having never done us any hurt, but when
we began, and forced them to it, as at present? And yet, to dote, as
unaccountably, upon the Dutch, who never yet did us any Good, or neglected
doing us all the Mischief they could, when it was in their Power?

If the like Evidence could be produced against the French for the Burning of
London, as what is here brought against the Dutch? --

But whether it were French or Dutch, London is now filled with them both, and
there have been more Fires of late in London than usually has been known. There
were no less than five Fires in it upon Sunday 18 Feb 94. And if there be False
Play, it must be English, French, or Dutch. But the Dutch will never do us
Hurt, as surely as they never did; we must not suspect them: There is some
Witchcraft in this!

Is it for their Religion that we love the Dutch? I wish Religion, of any sort
had so much Power in England! But can they be true to Religion, who are
content, as in Japan, to renounce their Christianity, to promote their Trade!
Or, which is near the same, to License all Religions, for the same Reason, as
in Holland! To give Mammon the upper Hand of God!

It is their Mammon, their Interest (and they have ever been true to it) to
ruin England.

It is neither the Interest of England or France to Invade or Conquer one
another; and they are not the Aggressors.

Yet we are irreconcilable to France, and unalterable from Holland! As Men
blind to their Interest, and bent upon their Ruin! Like the Jews against the
Romans, obstinate, though un-equal to the War! It proved Their Destruction;
and, if we will not open our Eyes, it must, without a Miracle, be Ours too.

We are trying the Experiment how many Losses will Ruin us. And extol the
super-abundance of our Riches, but not of our Wisdom, in bearing up against a
continued Series of Ill-Success, without any other Rational Prospect, but of
its growing worse and worse, 'till there be no Remedy.

I think I have been a True Reasoner: I wish, in this, I may be a False Prophet,

LOUP SKELLUM.

FINIS.

