THE CASE Of the Present Afflicted Clergy IN SCOTLAND Truly Represented.

To which is added for Probation, The Attestation of many unexceptionable
Witnesses to every Particular; and all the Public Acts and Proclamations of
the Convention and Parliament relating to the Clergy.

By a Lover of the Church and his Country.

Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. Luke 23. 34 Ye know not
what manner of Spirit ye are of, Luke 9. 55. Rejoice not against me, O mine
Enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a
light unto me, Micah 7. 8. LONDON, Printed for I. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1690.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
THE following Narrative was writ in a Letter several Months ago from Scotland,
by a Person of great Moderation and Integrity, well acquainted with the Humor
and Constitution of Scotland; it has been read and approved by Persons of the
best Quality both in the Church and State i^ England, and is now at their
desire published, because it represents shortly and impartially, the various
Methods under which the Church of Scotland suffered since the late Revolution;
That thereby all good Christians, especially the most charitable church of
England, may See the sad Effects of Rampant Presbytery, Pity their Brethren
that have so severely smarted under it, Consider the fatal Consequences of
Papal Supremacy in a Protestant ^irk, and speedily bethink themselves how to
quench those Flames in their Neighbors House, which so visibly threaten
Destruction to their own.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Some say, and I hope it is true,
that there are many Moderate Presbyterians to be found abroad in the World,
although with us they have been all ever bent to Persecute when they had Power,
and think they do God good Service when they Murder Bishops, and quite raze
out their Adherents in Church and State, as is too visible by the late and
present Proceedings of that Party amongst us. Dr. Burnet now Bishop of
Salisbury, in a Sermon at the Election of my Lord Mayor of London on the 29th
of September, observes very well. Some Plead now (says he) for Moderation, tho
they have forgot it shamefully where they have Power, as the Congregations now
in New England, impose under the pains of Banishment and Death in case of
return, not only the Religion of the State, but many speculative Points in
Opinion, and other things that are certainly indifferent. The Presbytery in
Scotland imposed the Covenant under the pains of Excommunication; upon which
followed a Forfeiture of the Personal Estate, and a Sequestration of the Real;
he might have added, and sometimes Death or Banishment to the Person, but he
goes on, and this Covenant all Persons, Men and Women, (he might have said,
Children too) were forced to Swear, tho few could understand it; and one
Particular was not far from an Inquisition, Fourth Article of Covenant.
that every one should discover all Malignants and Enemies to their Cause, in
order to bring them to condign Punishment, by which every Man was Sworn to be a
Spy and an Informer. The following Book shows in part what Gospel like Methods
that Party now use to have the same Principles and Practices again revived in
the World, and from it I wish these Moderate Presbyterians which they say are
abroad, to beware of that Poison that has made the Brains of their Scots
Brethren so Giddy, that their Zeal against Episcopacy may not run them quite
out of their Christianity, as it is too palpable with us it has done to many.

Any Moderate Man will certainly think the difference between our Scots
Episcopacy and Presbytery not worth the Heat or Danger of a Dispute, For First
as to the Doctrine, both Parties are agreed, the Confession of Faith made by
Mr. Knox and ratified in Parliament by King James VI. and revived again in the
Test Act by King Charles II. this, together with the Westminster Confession,
(both agreed on by the General Assembly of Presbyters) are owned next to the
Word of God by both Parties, as the Standard of the Doctrine of our Church.

Secondly, As to the Worship, it is exactly the same both in the Church and
Conventicle; in the Church there are no Ceremonies at all enjoined or
practiced, only some Persons more reverent, think fit to be uncovered, which
our Presbyterians do but by halves even in the time of Prayer; we have no
Liturgy nor Form of Prayer, no not in the Cathedrals, the only difference in
this Point is, our Clergy are not so overbold nor fulsome in their extemporary
Expressions as the others are, nor use so many vain Repetitions, and we
generally conclude one of our Prayers with that which our Savior taught and
commanded, which the other Party decry as Superstitious and Formal; Amen too
gives great Offense, tho neither the Clerk nor People use it, only the Minister
sometimes shuts up his Prayer with it. The Sacraments are Administered after
the same Way and Manner by both; neither so much as kneeling at the Prayers, or
when they receive the Elements of the Lords Supper, but all sitting together at
a long Table in the Body of the Church or Chancel. In Baptism neither Party use
the Cross, nor are any Godfathers or Godmothers required, the Father only
promising for his Child: The only Difference in this Sacrament is, the
Presbyterians make the Father Swear to breed up his Child in the Faith and
Belief of the Covenant or Solemn League, whereas the Orthodox cause the Father
repeat the Apostles Creed, and promise to breed up the Child in that Faith
which himself then professes.

Thirdly, As to the Discipline it is exactly in our Episcopal Church (if it may
be so called) according to the Model of the Presbyterian Mother Kirk at Geneva,
for conformable to the Consistory direction, (not Rubric, for that is a
Superstitious word) we have in every Parish a little Court which we call the
Kirk-Session, composed of the Minister or Ministers, if there be two belonging
to that Church; and some Lay men which we call Elders and Deacons too forsooth;
the business of this Court, is to enquire into and punish Scandals, and to
collect and distribute the Money which good People are pleased daily to offer
at the Church-doors for the Poor: This Court or Session is liable to the
Inspection and Jurisdiction of the Presbytery, who may visit the Sessions,
inspect their Records, and receive Appeals from them upon occasion. By
Presbytery we mean again a Court of Presbyters inferior to the Synod, for every
Synod or Meeting of the whole Diocies belonging to a Bishop, is divided into
several Classes or Presbyteries, in each Presbytery there is about eighteen or
twenty in some twenty four Ministers, who with the consent of the Bishop, chose
their own Moderator or President, they meet ordinarily once every Month, or
oftener if they think their Affairs require, for they have power to adjourn and
meet at their own Discretion: As the Sessions are subject to the Presbyteries,
so are the Presbyteries to the Synod; which meets always at set times twice
every Year, there the Bishop himself pre^ides, or in case of his necessary
absence, one commissionated by him, and all things are carried by the Pl^rality
of Votes, and the Acts made that way, are the only Canons or Rules we use for
Discipline: As the Presbyteries are subject to the Synod, so the whole Synods
of the Nation are to the General Assembly, where by Law the Archbishop of St.
Andrews is always to pre^ide; and if I be not mistaken, has a negative Voice,
tho he was never known to use it.

Now I leave the impartial World to judge, whether Presbyterians that had any
Moderation, would not be well contented, and live quietly under such a moderate
Episcopacy, where indeed except the Power of Ordination (which is always to be
performed with the consent and assistance if the Brethren of the Presbytery)
and the Title of Lord, which the King is pleased to confer upon them, the
Bishops are truly but Constant Moderators, which the Presbyterians themselves,
because of the great Divisions, which often happened among them at the electing
of Moderators, were at length necessitated to sit down with. Now then let any
moderate Presbyterian abroad say, whether indeed it be matter of Conscience or
Humor, that makes Presbyterians with us, separate from a Church so Constitute,
or whether the difference between our Church and their Kirk be such as can
justisie Men in raising so many public Rebellions, and drawing so much Misery
and Confusion upon the Nation and themselves, as our Zealots have often done;
and whether their own Consciences can plead Not Guilty at the last Great
Tribunal, where they must answer for all those Murders and Butcheries, all the
Cries and Tears of Widows and Orphans and ruined Families which will then
testify against them? Or what can they answer now to the World, for the many
late Barbarities they have committed against their Protestant Brethren,
themselves knowing not for what; and therefore being ashamed of their
Practices, they are fain to conceal and deny them abroad: But to prevent their
endeavors that way, and that they may appear to the World in their true
colors, I have here, for the proof of this Modest and Impartial Narrative,
inserted some few Particulars of the Sufferings of our present Episc^pal
Clergy, attested by their own Hands, and by the Hands of Gentlemen of great
Integrity, who were Eyewitnesses to the Proceedings, many other of this
Parties more cruel Practices against the Clergy, might and may hereafter be
published, and attested by the Hands of the most significant Gentry in the
several Parishes where the Ministers were persecuted, only here these are
singled out now, because all these Papers, as they are attested and here
published, were showed in the original authentic Copies to most of our
Governors, both in Scotland and England; and the greatest part of them sent by
a particular Commissioner to King William then Prince of Orange in the
beginning of our Troubles. The public Acts and Proclamations are also added,
that Men may not be deceived by thinking, as some would represent it, that the
Persecution proceeded only from the Rabble, and that in a Iumble of the Times,
when the Government was not in a condition to protect the Leiges; and by the
fourth Collection of Papers I think it is plain, that the most fatal Blows were
all given by the Scots Presbyterians who were and are at the Helm, and that
without countenance from these, the Rabble durst never have attempted what they
did against all the Laws of the Kingdom, Religion and Humanity; which plainly
shows that Presbyterians, howsoever dignified or distinguished are all of a
piece.

Considering all this, one would be apt to think that the present Episcopal
Clergy in Scotland needed as much the assistance of the Prayers and charitable
Collections of the Church of England, as either these Protestants in Piedmont,
France or Ireland, especially since there seems to be something harder in our
Case than in any of theirs; for in those foreign Parts, if a Man complies with
the Commands of his Superiors, (which I confess would be sometimes most
irreligious in him to do) then he would have the same Protection and Benefit
that other Subjects of his quality are allowed to enjoy: But with us it is far
otherwise, for as it plainly appears by the third Collection of well attested
Papers, let men comply never so much with the Commands of their Governors, yet
they are in the same sad Case with those that do not in the least comply; for
nothing less than the utter and universal ruin of Episcopacy being according
to the Covenant designed; the Superstructure as well as Foundations must be
destroyed, and the Presbyters as well as the Prelates quit rooted out, like
Philistines from the holy Land; And is this nothing to you, O all you that pass
by? give Peace in our time, O Lord, because we have none other that fights
for us but only thou, O God.

Advertisement to the Reader.
BEcause the Public Papers in the Fourth Collection have not been printed in
their due Order, therefore the Reader is desired to take notice, that upon the
Margin of the second Page of The case of the Present Aff^icted Cl^rgy, etc.
instead of Vide first Paper being a Declaration from the Prince, read Vide
Declaration by His Highness the Prince, etc. in the fourth Collection of
Papers, and on the Margin of that second Page, for Vide second Paper being a
Proclamation, read Vide a Proclamation from the Convention in the Fourth
Collection: and at the foot of Page six on the Margin, for Vide first
Proclamation, read Vid^ Declaration by His Highness the Prince, etc. in the
Fourth Collection. Some other Errors have escaped the Pres^, because of the
Authors great dis^ance from it, he living in Scotland; but those being not very
ma^^rial, it is hoped the Reader will be pleased to excuse and correct them
himself.

THE CASE Of the Present Afflicted Episcopal Clergy in Scotland.
SIR,
AS nothing but a Charity agreeable to its Divine Original, could move you, to
be so solicitous to know the present Afflicted State of the Episcopal Clergy in
Scotland; so nothing but your. Command could have obliged me to this short, and
plain account of it.

Upon what Ground the present Parliament of Scotland have thought ^it to
abolish Episcopacy out of that National Church, I will not at present strictly
enquire into: Only I may be allowed to say, without offense, That since this
Parliament has not judged convenient to abolish it, as a Government either
Antichristian, or contrary to reason, or Scripture, or Antiquity, or the
Universal opinion of Protestant Churches abroad, or Learned Men in all Ages;
but only as contrary to the Inclination of the People, and (as such) a
Grievance. It may be considently hoped, That when Presbytery, or the Usurped
Authority of Presbyters without Bishops, shall become a Grievance to the
People, (for what has been so heretofore, may be hereafter) and so contrary to
their Inclination, that then, and in that Case, Episcopacy may for the same
reason by Authority of another Parliament be restored again. This is no new
thing, for before this Revolution, Episcopacy in Scotland has been abolished
twice by Act of Parliament, but so was also Presbytery; It Is now abolished the
third time, and so Presbytery may be. But with this difference, That Presbytery
was never settled by Law in Scotland, but when either our Kings were involved in
Intestine broils, or when the Civil Government was under some great convulsion
occasioned most ordinarily by the practices of that Party, which put them under
a kind of necessity, (not choice) to allow it. But no sooner did either our
Kings, or the Government reassume their just freedom, and vigor, but as soon
was Episcopacy both restored and established by Law. So that Episcopacy having
been always settled in our Church in time of peace, or at the Restoration of it,
May it please God to restore peace to the State, that order in the Church may
be it is happy effect. And may we make better use of these two blessings, then
we have done hitherto.

But as for the inferior Clergy of Presbyters, who were received into the
protection of this Government, Vide. First Paper being a Declaration from the
Prince.
first by a Declaration from the Prince of Orange in January 1688/9. And in
April thereafter by a Proclamation of the Convention of Estates. By which
Proclamation and Declaration all persons whatsoever were strictly forbid upon
the highest pains to molest, Vide. The Second Paper being a Proclamation from
the Con^ention.
disturb, or by any manner of way interrupt or hinder the Clergy in the
exercise of their Ministry, and peaceable possession of their Livings, They
demeaning themselves as it became peaceable and good men. As for them, I say,
to be turned out of their Churches in so great numbers, may justly make
strangers think these men guilty of heinous villainies and crimes, which have
provoked the Government against them, and obliged it to turn them out of their
Livings, and forbid them all exercise of their Ministry, to declare their
Churches vacant, and to order themselves and families to remove from their
dwelling-houses in the middle of winter.

To Set then this matter in its true light, it will be necessary to look a
little back upon some things which happened before the proceedings of the Privy
Council against the Episcopal Clergy.

Be pleased therefore to know, that there have been Ministers turned out and
deprived since the beginning of this Revolution, by, and under a threefold
Authority.

The first turning out was by the Authority, or rather Violence of the Rabble
in the Western and Southshires only.

The Second was by a Committee of the Convention of Estates during the Interval
betwixt the Convention and turning it into a Parliament.

The third was by the Privy Council since the first Adjournment of Parliament.

As for the first t^rning out by the Rabble, it being executed in a time when
the Government of the Nation was in a manner quite dissolved, there is less
wonder, that disorders of that kind fell out, then it is accountable why they
should not be redressed now, upon this Governments assuming its Authority, and
having Power to make it self obeyed.

But before I give you the true matter of fact of this highly presumptuous, and
unparalleled attempt of the Rabble upon Ministers, It will be first convenient
to set before you the then State of those Western Shires in matters of
Religion; What was their behavior toward the Clergy Established by Law, as
also how they stood affected to the Presbyterian Ministers then Tolerated by
King James to hold Meeting Houses.

And first, Though it must be confessed that the Western Shires of Scotland have
been, and are, the most disaffected Party of the Kingdo ^ to Episcopal
Government, and have suffered much for the Rebellions which their prejudices
against it occasioned; yet it is as true, that before the last Indulgence
granted by K. James An. 1687. they were Universally in a good Understanding
with their Ministers, though not in that degree as the Relation betwixt Minister,
and People does require it, being more in show then affection. For though they
came generally to Church, and owned that they had overcome their Scruple of
Conscience of not having freedom to hear them Preach, yet they still separated
themselves from partaking of the Holy Communion when offered: Making it a
greater matter of Conscience to receive that Sacram^nt from their hands, then
the other of Baptism for their Children.

It is also to be presumed, though not much to their credit, that there was more
of constraint, for fear of Penal Laws, then a willing mind in this little
Conformity they yielded in coming to Church, all which soon appeared.

For in the next place, upon K. James his Declaration of ^^dulgence, or
Tolleration to Dissenters, the People in those Western Shires run immediately
into it, accepted of it, and (...) agreat zeal to build Meeting Houses, to call
Presbyte^ian Preachers to these Meeting Houses, and to contribute for their
Maintenance.

With this State of Affairs they seemed so well satisfied, that they made
Addresses of thanks to King James, in terms, which were no less acceptable to
the then Court, than Scandalons to all Judicious Protestants in both Kingdoms.
Vide. The ^resbyterians Address to King James. In the Fourth Collection.
*But these Addresses having been Printed and Published in Gazetts, I shall
take no more notice of them.

They were often told by wise Men, that they were running a course in accepting
of that Tolleration, most destructive to the Interest of the Protestant
Religion, and that it would be much safer for them to continue in their
Parochial Churches as by Law Established, since every thing that weakened that
fence, tended to the letting in of the Popish Party, which in time might
destroy us both; that Tolleration being granted in both Kingdoms in order to
bring in Popery, and by the means and favor of Papists at Court obtained and
managed.

Though many, yea most of the Inferior People of these Western Shires at the
first went into this snare, yet the Persons of greatest Quality and interest
among them, did not so soon comply: And for the other Shires in Scotland, in
some there were not above two Meeting Houses in the whole Shire, in others none
at all, which, by the by, is a kind of demonstration, how little fond the
Generality of the Nation was then of that way, and how the inclination of the
People was then set, now so much talked of.

But next, to show you how the Presbyterians stood affected to one Another, and
among themselves, be pleased to know: That there was a Presbyterian Party then
in the West, of the meaner sort of the People indeed, truly Acting more
consequentially to the Presbyterian Principle and Practice in former times, who
(for all that was done) would not accept of this Tolleration given by King
James; But did openly by their Sermons and Pens declare their dislike of it,
and said much more bitter things against their Indulged Presbyterian Brethren,
who had accepted this Toll^ration, than against the Clergy Established by Law.
Wherever these Preachers came, they carried gre^^ numbers of the People after
them, and would Preach neither in Church nor Meeting House, but in the open
Fields, for which they were called Field-Preachers.

This boldness the then Government found it self obliged to take notice of, and
they fell upon a Method to suppress it, which in all appearance had done it
effectually, if the Scene of Public Affairs had not been changed by this
Revolution. It was, by giving Commissions to such Gentlemen in each Shire, as
were reputed leading men of that persuasion, or at least much favoring that
way, To hold Circuit-Courts within their own districts, and upon seizing any of
these Hill-Men, or Field-Conventi^lers, to punish them as the Law ordained.
This was a Stratagem of the then Statesmen, to cleave that Party with a wedge
(as we say) of their own Wood. But that nothing was effectually done is to be
attributed to this great change of our Affairs.

Now to return to the Account of the Ministers being turned out by the Rabble.
Upon the certain News of the Prince of Orange's landing in England, King James
called all his standing Forces in Scotland to his Standard in England. This did
directly break our Government, it le^t the Nation without Defense, and gave all
discontented People a favorable opportunity to execute their resentment, as
their passions and Interests moved them, and none having greater and more
violent then these Hill-men, or Field-Presbyterians, they prosecuted them with
equal fury and disorder.

The First Commotion that appeared was amongst these Hill-Men, or Cameronians,
(so called from one of their Leaders, and a Preacher, Cameron) They Assembled
themselves in the Night time, and sometimes in the day, in small bodies armed.
And in a hostile way went through the Countries, forced their entry into
private Men's houses, against whom they had any private quarrel, but most
ordinarily into Ministers Houses, Vide. The First Collection of some Papers,
relating to the practice of the Rabble before the Convention met.
where they with tongue and hands, committed all outrages imaginable against
the Ministers, their Wives, and Children; where having eat and drunk
plentifully, at parting they used to carry the Minister out of his House to the
Churchyard, or some public place of the Town, or Village, and there expose
him to the People as a condemned Malefactor, gave him strict charge never to
Preach any more in that place, but to remove himself and his Family out of it
immediately; And for the conclusion of all this Tragedy, they caused his Gown
to be torn over his head in a hundred pieces, of some they spared not their
very clothes to their Shirt. When they had done with the Minister, they called
for the keys of the Church, locked the doors and carried the keys with them;
And last of all they threw the Ministers furniture out of his house in many
places, as the last Act of this barbarous Scene.

This was the most General Method when the Minister was found at home, but in
case he was absent, they entered his house, made Intimation of their Will and
Pleasure to his Wife and Servants, bidding them tell him, Vide. Summons left in
every Parish by the Rabble in the first Collection of Paper.
to remove from that place: if they found not a ready obedience, they would
return and make him an example to others.

This course went on in the Months of December, January, and February, 1688/9,
by which were turned outword of their Livings all the Ministers of the Shires
of Air, Ren^rew, Clidsdale, Nidsdale, and most of Annandale and Galloway, to
the number of about two hundred.

The news of these great disorders coming to the ears of the Prince of Orange,
who by this time had accepted the exercise of the Government of Scotland,
until the sitting down of the Estates of that Kingdom, which met on the 14th
of March, 1688/9. As also his Highness was humbly applied to by the oppressed
and miserable Clergy of these Shires; by one of their number Commissioned and
sent up with a full information of their Case, and therewith a Petition to his
Highness for his help and protection in this their sad distress. In the mean
time the regular Gentry not willing to be altogether run down by this furious
rabble, began to bestir themselves for their own and the Clergies defense, So
the Lawyers there are called.
particularly the members of the College of Justice at Edinburgh (to their
eternal glory) took up Arms and formed themselves in such a body as soon
daunted the Phanatick Rabble ^t Edinburgh. Vide. First Proclamation
This occasioned the publication of a Proclamation commanding all Persons to
lay down their Arms in that Kingdom, and therewith their Animosities, and
cruel Resentments, ordaining also that all Ministers thus violently ejected
should return to their respective charges, and so continue without Molestation,
until the settling of the Government by the Convention of Estates, and in a
word, that all things of that nature should be restored, as they were in the
month of October preceding.

Upon this Proclamation the Gentlemen of the College of Justice (not knowing
what it is to oppose the least shadow of Authority) laid down their Arms, and
all the good people in the Kingdom (especially the Ministers) looked for
nothing but a dutyfull compliance with so just and seasonable a command: But to
the astonishment of all men, this did not allay our troubles, but by accident
did increase them, which fell out after this manner following.

When the Magistrates of Gl^sgow had ordered one of their Ministers to preach
before them upon the Sunday immediately following the publication of the Prince
of Orange's Proclamation, The Rabble of that City got first into tumultuary
Assemblies on the Streets, Vide. The Second Collection of Papers relating to
the practice of the Rabble and the Council after the Princes Declaration, etc.
and then to arms, surrounded the Church, when the Minister was in the Pulpit,
fired in upon the best and most respected Inhabitants of the place, and at
length violently broke open the Church-doors, which they within had shut upon
themselves upon their approach, and when they had forced their entry into the
Cathedral Church, they beat many, wounded some, and dispersed the whole
Congregation without making distinction of Age, Sex, or Quality.

An account of this so high contempt of Authority, and against Laws, both
divine, and humane, was sent up to the Prince of Orange, by the Magistrates of
Glasgow, with their information of the affairs, attested by their
Subscriptions: but no remedy could be possibly applied at that time, V. V^
supra.
for the Diet of the meeting of Estates, drawing so near, upon which meeting
the Prince's exercise of the Government ended, and nothing being able to
repress these disorders committed by an armed force in contempt of that
Authority, except a greater for^e, and the shortness of the time, as was
pretended, not allowing that to be sent down, all was referred to the meeting
of the Estates, who being met, instead of calling these Hill-men to an account
for the disorders committed by them upon Ministers, these very men coming armed
to Edinburgh, were admitted as guards to that meeting, and had the thanks of
the house given them for their good Service, Vide: The Paper containing the
thanks of the Convention to the Rabble. in the Fourth Collection.
and are still a part of the standing forces of that Kingdom.

Upon all this, the afflicted Ministers saw clearly there was nothing left for
them, but to suffer patiently the good will of God, which they have done,
without the least public complaint, waiting with all Christian submission for
a reparation of their wrongs from the justice of God, and till those in Power
shall be graciously pleased to commiserate their condition, since they and
their poor Families are in very hard and pinching circumstances, having been
turned out of their Livings, and Properties in the midest of a hard winter, and
suffered not only the spoiling of their goods, but some the loss of their
Children, and many marks and bruises in their own bodies; and now are in a
state of desolation, not knowing where to lay their heads, or to have bread for
themselves or their Families.

This their Case ought the rather to be commiserated; there being no Authority
upon earth, that can be so much as pretended, by which they suffer, except that
of the Rabble. They were never since that time either cited, accused, or
condemned before any Judicature for any fault or crime, so that in common
Justice they have still a right in their Persons to those Livings of which they
had quiet and Legal possession, before these troubles, and if the wisdom of the
Nation in the next Session of Parliament shall judge it either ^it or
convenient to remove them from these their Livings, That Law determining this
affair, if any such shall be made, can only take place from the date of it, it
cannot look back, and make men guilty before it was Enacted, so that still it
must remain without controversy, that whatever may be determined to be done
with the Ministers for the time to come, they have still a just and
unquestionable title to their Livings, until a Sentence pass against them which
is not yet done.

This being their Case, it is not to be imagined that there will be found any
man of reason, or ordinary quality, who will so much as open his mouth, in
favor of these violent, and Illegal extrusions in the next Session of
Parliament, for it is well known to all, how at the time, when this Tragedy was
acted, none of these Presbyterians, who are now in Power, did either avowedly
own, or openly countenance these proceedings, but did publicly condemn them,
so that what was morally evil in its original, time cannot make good, nor
will good men either desend or countenance. Whatever may be said for some
inconveniences which might have happened in that Country, so fermented with
passion and prejudice, if these Ministers had been ordered to return to their
charges there by the present Government, yet it is certain when men are
innocent, they ought not to suffer, and therefore as was just now intimated
until the wisdom of the Nation shall determine this matter, they ought to be
looked upon as Legal possessors, though violently extruded.

But that which no doubt will seem very extraordinary to any unbyassed thinking
man, is, that these Presbyterian Preachers, who so heartily thanked Kind James
for the liberty of their Meeting Houses, Vide. Presbyterians Address to King
James, in the Fourth Collection.
with extraordinary and fulsom strains of flattery, thereby approving the
dispensing Power without reserve, (which was the Style of our Scots
Tolleration) And did disown these cruel proceedings against the Episcopal
Clergy, yet they would never consent to Preach against such disorders, though
often desired so to do, by wise and discreet men; yea, which is more, these
same (as they called themselves moderate) Pres^yterian Preachers, in a little
time after, very confidently took Possession of the Churches of the Orthodox
Ministers thus thrust out of their dwelling houses, and Glebes, without the
least Title, or right to them, except what flowed from the consent of some
Phanatick People who owned them, and their Meeting Houses, which was a
Notorious Encroathment, not only upon the Property of the Legal Incumbents, but
also upon the right of Patrons, not as yet taken away by Law.

For when the rest of the Episcopal Clergy who were in quiet possession of
their Churches, and in good Understanding with their People, were Alarmed,
with the hard usage of so many of their brethren thrust out in the midst of a
severe Winter by this yet greater and more violent storm in the West, with
their Wives and Children, to seek shelter from these their brethren.

This gave such a damp, and raised such a just apprehension in their Spirits,
what might be the sad and Tragical event of unparalleled proceedings; that
it is no wonder many of them were provoked to think that the great design of
some within the Kingdom, who appeared so zealous for this Revolution, was more
to destroy the Clergy and the whole Epis^opal Order, then to settle the Kingdom
upon its Just and Ancient basis, or to preserve our Religion, Liberties, and
Properties as by Law then Established.

This Apprehension grew yet more strong when they saw that the Convention of
Estates, Vide. A Proclamation from the Convention in the Fourth Collection.
did not take the Ejected Ministers of the West into their Protection, by their
Proclamation, which was extended only to those who were in the Actual Exercise
of their Ministry; By which it was plain enough, that all those Ministers, who
had been violently turned out by the Rabble in the Western-shires were still to
be kept out, and the advantage the Privy Council has taken from that
Proclamation, Vide. An Act of Council in the Fourth Collection.
of late, to stop the course of Justice, from giving them access to their
Tithes and Stipends due to them, is a sufficient Indication, how some incline
to treat them, if the ensuing Session of Parliament be not more savourable.

This was the prospect of Affairs, and the temper men's minds were in toward
the Clergy, when the Convention of Estates, having for faulted K. James,
declared K. William and Q. Mary, King and Queen of Scotland.

This great business being over they next Emitted a Proclamation bearing. Vide.
A Proclamation from the Convention in the Fourth Collection.
That whereas K. James had for (...) his right to Govern that Kingdom, they
therefore forbid any public Prayers to be made for him, and Ordai^^^ that in
all time coming, the Ministors should pray for K. William, and Q. Mary, as King
and Queen of Scotland, ordaining also that this Proclamation be read, upon the
next Sunday after Publication by all the Ministers of Edinburgh, and in all
other parts of the Kingdom on such certain Sundays, as are therein appointed,
with certification, that who-ever should not read the said Proclamation and
pray for the King and Queen as therein designed, should be deprived of their
Churches and Benefices.

Upon the not Obeying of this Proclamation it is, that all the Ministers of
late, have suffered, and do suffer at this day, and therefore that falls next
under Consideration.

And first of all, it is here more especially to be remarked, that this
Proclamation being Published in Common Form at Eleven a Clock in the Forenoon
on a Saturday, did not appear in Print till about Seven that Night. So that
the Ministers of Edinburgh who were required to read it to their People after
Sermon next Morning, had no notice, nor Copies of it given them, until about
ten at Night upon Saturday, or Eight in the Morning on Sunday; which in a
matter of so vast moment, as to translate Allegiance formerly sworn to one
King, and in so short a time, to resolve to preach it due to another, without
so much as knowing the reasons and grounds upon which the Convention had
proceeded to for fault King James, was to require a piece of blind obedience,
which with so much reason, we abhor in Papists, neither had King William and
Queen Mary then accepted of the Crown. So that what the Convention required
could not be supposed, so soon and easily done, by Men who either make
Conscience in taking such an Oath, or resolve to keep it.

Here to this purpose, I cannot but give you an excellent Passage, which I sind
in a Paper bearing for Title, A Vindication of the Procedings of the Convention
of the Estates in Scotland. They are the very first words in that paper. The
Dethroning of a King (says that Author) and the Settling the Crown upon the
head of a new Sovereign, is certainly a Matter of so great weight, of such vast
importance and concern, that it requires the most serious and deliberate, the
most calm and imprejudic'd minds to determine it; a hasty and undigested
resolution, if in any case dangerous, would unquestionably in this prove fatal
and remediless: Thus he very judiciously: Now if this be reasonable, as surely
it is, then the requiring so hasty and precipitate obedience from Ministers in
this point, cannot but appear very hard, and therefore if this Author had been
consequentiall to his own rule, he had certainly said something in favor of
the Scots Clergy, upon whose skirts he has lately sit so hard.

There is another Consideration in this Case which ought very much to
alleviate, if not excuse the supposed guilt of Ministers in the Country, who
did not read the Proclamation; and that is, it was not delivered to most of
them in due time. Not the first, for the Sheriff-clerks who (I remember well)
were ordered to send them to the respective Ministers in their several
districks, did not for the most part deliver these Proclamations till the day
appointed for reading them, was past. How universal this neglect of those
Officers was, I will not positively assert; but sure I am, most of the
Ministers turned out by the Privy Council had this Legal defense for
themselves, that they received it not in due time to read it; and that it was
not in the second place delivered in due form is also clear, for whereas in all
times preceding, such public Papers which were to be read after Divine
Service, were allways transmitted to the inferior Clergy by their respective
Ordinaries, and the order of Bishops not being then abollished, but still a
third Estate of Parliament, they were not obliged in law to take notice of a
public Paper which came not to their hands in the accustomed Legal manner.

Moreover it is well known how in England the strongest heads and pens have
been employed of late to clear this point of Allegiance as now required. And
how many several Topiques have been made use of to prove the Subjects
discharged from their first Allegiance, and yet how many in England eminent
both for Character and Conscience are still doubtful of the point, which
sufficiently shows, that the matter deserved and required a considerable space
of time for deliberation. Which not being given in Scotland, to the Clergy
there, any one may easily judge what anxieties, doubtings, and uncertainties
such a weighty affair would create in the Spirits of honest and well-meaning
men. Surely though this has not, it se^ms excused, in rigor of Justice, it will
surely much alleviat^ their supposed crime, in the judgment of all ingenious
and good men, who make the measures of their dealings with others, such as they
would that other men in like cases should take with them.

But to make the matter yet more favorable of their side, There are some, who
though they did not read the Proclamation, yet have prayed for K. Will and Q.
Mary conform thereunto, whereby they answered the ends of it to all intents:
yet these have been condemned to the same ^ate, with those who out of
Conscience refused to do either. Vide. Third Collection of Papers, containing
the suffering^ of those Min^sters who complied
Which proceedure is not a mark of any tenderness or charity to reclaim men,
who are supposed to be wrong, but looks rather like a design to ruin them in
spite of their Compliance.

But now we come to give account, how the Proclamation, and the certification
therein was executed by the Government against the Delinquents. Vide. A
Proclamation from the Convention in the Fourth Collection.


No sooner were the Commissions sent up by the Convention of Estates to make
offer of the Crown of Scotland to K. William and Q. Mary, but they adjourned
themselves. Having first appointed a Committee of their number to sit at
Edinburgh till their return, and they having received Information from the
Presbyterian party, in and about Edinburgh, that some Ministers had not read
the Proclamation upon the day assigned, and had not prayed for K. Will. and Q.
Mary, which was no great wonder, considering what is said before, what Scruples
so great a point, as translating A^^egiance was apt to create, and that they
had so little time to be clear^d of them, yet an Order was Issued forth, to
cite them to appear before the said Committee, who being cited, did appear, and
though they pleaded Scruple of Conscience and want of time, yet were by formal
Sentence of the said Committee deprived of their Livlngs, and their Churches
declared vacant immediately without any regard had to their just defense.

As this fell out upon these who lived in Edinburgh or places next adjacent, so
some of them were deprived before King William and Queen Mary had accepted of
the Crown, or taken the Coronation Oath, which the claim of Right required as
Indispensibly necessary in order to their being owned as Sovereigns: This one
of the Recusant Ministers Dr. Strachan the Learned and Pious ^ro^essor of
Divinity, and one of the Ministers at Edinburgh.
urged at the Bar in defense of himself and Brethren, but to no purpose.

This course continued until the Convention was turned into a Parliament,
which makes up the Second Period of depriving Ministers proposed in this
discourse, viz. those that were turned o^t by the Authority of the Convention
of Estates.

The Third, and last Period, is, of those who have been turned out by the
Aut^^rity of the Privy Council since the first Adjournment of Parliament.

A stop having been put to any further Prosecution of the Ministers by the
Committee of Estates, and as they with joy were willing to believe, by King
William's Order and Command, this whole matter of depriving was laid aside, and
men began to think themselves happy, or lucky, who had escaped the first
trial, hoping there was to be no further enquiry made after such a
disobedience which had so many Circumstances to alleviate the guilt, if not
quite extinguish the Memory of it, they hoped at least that the favorable
things in their Case, would have been proper grounds for a new King to forgive
what had passed before his Entrance upon the Government; and the lenity and
tenderness showed to Persons obnoxious enough in other trusts under him about
the same time, inclined the Episcopal Clergy to expect the like, when their
case should come to be dnely and impartially represented; for seeing his mercy
extended to Outlaws and Criminalls of the Grossest Sieze, they who are Gods
Ambassadors doubted not to partake of it, their escapes, if such they may be
called, being only in points very dubious and material.

And for a good time they seemed not to be mistaken of their hope, for during
the whole Session of Parliament, no mention was made of any further proceedings
against them. Yea, one thing gave no small encouragement: That when the Act of
Parliament passed for obliging all persons in Civil and Military Capacities to
take the Oath of Allegiance, the Clergy were not comprehended in that Act, and
though it were once moved in the house, that the Oath should be put to them as
well as to others, yet did not obtain; This made many believe that Peace and
Settlement were really in their prospect, and that all designs of ripping up
the old quarrel for not reading the Proclamation, were quite laid aside, and
more tender measures to be used, which are certainly the most effectual in
such Cases.

But there are some who thought, the true reason why at that time the Clergy
was not ordained to take the Oath of Allegiance, was more out of respect to the
Presbyterian Preachers, than the Episcopal Ministers: for those of their own
party in the Parliament, who best knew their inclination that way, had reason
to fear, they might Scruple at the same Oath, not upon the grounds which others
went upon, but because their Model of Church Government was not settled by Law,
Vide. A Proclamation from the Convention, and the Observation upon it, in the
Fourth Collection.
they would not come under Allegiance to this King till first he had done their
business. And it is presumable enough, by what many of them have since dropped in
their S^rmons and other discourses; if this Oath had been put to them as to
others in Secular trusts, they had discovered more of partiality to their
Interests, then of Loyalty to K. William: for it may by the Covenant will be by
some required to be renu'd, before they think their Allegiance either due, or
right placed.

But no sooner was the Parliament adjourned and several of the Chief Nobility
gone to the Country, then a Proclamation was emitted, (Surprising enough
because not expected) by the Privy Council, which did in express terms, to use
the words of it, Vide. Proclamations anent the Miisters in the Fourth
Collection.
Invite and Allow Parisbioners and other hearers, to inform against Ministers
who had not read the Proclamation of the Estates, and prayed for King William
and Queen Mary, for the one could not serve without the other.

This General Invitation coming from such an Authority to a hot sort of People,
had a very ready Obedience paid to it; For one or two of the meanest of a
Parish, and sometimes the Agents of the Faction in several Places, borrowed
Men's Names without their knowledge, to fill up their Citations, and either of
these were thought sufficient to accuse their Minister, upon which, Vide.
Summons to the Ministers of Kelso in the 4th Collection.
Summons were issued out to cite them to appear at Edenborough within 6 or 10
days, before the Privy Council. Whereupon has followed the depriving of such as
came before them, and had not read the Proclamation. And this has outed almost
all the Parochial Clergy in the Shires of Marsh, Tiviotdale, Vide. Proclamation
from the Convention. in the Fourth Collection.
the three Lothians, Fife, Striveling-shire, Perth-shire, and some in
Aberdeen-shire, Murray, and Rose, amounting (as I am credibly informed) to the
number of above two hundred, which was all they could possibly dispatch in so
short a time.

Their whole Process went upon two Points. The first was, whether they had read
to their People on the day Appointed the Proclamation Emitted by the Convention
of Estates? The Second whether they had prayed or did pray for King William and
Queen Mary?

As to the first, their defenses were, that they never received it, or that it
came not to their hands till the day appointed to read it was passed: Or
lastly, that it was not Legally delivered to them as the Order for Public
Prayers used to be, viz. by Orders from their Ordinaries. But none of these
defenses were sustained in their Case.

As for the Second point of Indictment, Vide. Third Collection of Parpers
containing the suffering of those Ministers who complied.
viz. whether they prayed for K. William and Q. Mary, all cited were not
Guilty, for there are several Instances of Ministers who had prayed and
promised to pray for K. Will^am and Q. Mary, who yet were turned out of their
Livings, and continue deprived to this day.

It Is not denied that there are very many who cannot come this length, being
still under the power of their former Scruples in the matter of Allegiance. As
for these, though they are persons of peaceable principles, and practices, and
are ready to submit to the will of God, and the Command of Superiors, yet all
that is pleaded for them is only favor and Indulgence: And if a delay for some
longer time to consider Maturely upon these matters could be allowed, it would
be very acceptable, and very becoming these to grant, who have so loudly
exclaimed against Persecution for Conscience sake, and cry^d up so much
moderation, and thanked King James for Tolleration. But what may they expect,
Vide. Presbvterians Address to K J. in the Fourth Collection.
when others who were willing to obey and did acknowledge the present
Government in all that is required, were yet turned out of their Places and
Properties by the Rabble, to whom no redress is made, though humbly supplicated
by those Sufferers. In France it self, if a man renounce his Religion, Vide.
Third Collection of Papers containing the sufferings of those Ministers who
complied.
he saves his Life and fortune, (though that be indeed a base bargain) yet the
mercy of this severity is all that is desired here.

Oh! when will these things be seriously considered and effectually redressed
by the Government? And when shall such a temper be happily fallen upon, as may
quiet the minds and secure the persons of all good, pious, and peaceable
Protestants?

I thought to have ended here, and given you no further trouble upon this
Melancholy Subject, but that I hear of a plausible pretext given out to you in
England, for this sharp handling of the Scots Clergy, which is, that there is
no advantage taken of any Minister who is willing for the time to come to pray
for King William and Queen Mary, if he be otherwise of approved integrity in
life and Doctrine: But that the strictness used is only against Scandalous
persons, and so by this means they are more easily turned out of the Church
than they should be by a Legal Trial upon such an Accusation And since this
preten^e is made use of in England to their disadvantage, where the truth of
this matter is not yet so well known, I must needs say something to it.

And first, it is not ordinary for Men of vicious Lives, or loose Principles in
the Church, (as they pretend the deprived Clergy to be) to make great scruple
in disputable matters, especially when the Penalty is the loss of their
Estates, they being generally too forward to comply with what is uppermost, and
prosperous.

But Secondly, I dare confidently averr that after enquiry made, it will
appear, that there are many of as great Integrity, Piety, and Learning as are
in the Church involved, without distinction, in that Common fate. And I dare
appeal to the whole Nation to make good against them such Scandalls, as their
Enemies have thought fit to blacken them with, in places where they are not
known. The Original of all this clamor about the Immorralities of the Clergy,
at first arose from the too hasty Planting of Churches in the West, upon the
Restoration of the Government in Anno 1662. by which many Young, Men were
preferred, for whom the prejudiced People could not be brought to have that
Veneration and respect, that they had had for their old Preachers which were
deprived for Nonconformity. This prejudice, together with the Imprudent Conduct
of some of these young Men begot a contempt of them, which was carried by far
much too high, for Universally these Ministers were complained of, as the
occasion of the Western Peoples withdrawing from their Churches. But upon
Bishops Leightons coming to the Sea of Glasgow, and bringing with him to those
parts some very good Men and choice Preachers, against whom the People could
have no Objection, an Experiment was made to remove, if possible, that
Exception, yet he found this also ineffectuall: The Aversion being more rooted
in the Interest of a Party, then in the supposed Immoralities of the Clergy.
And therefore by his singular Example of Piety and Devotion, of Humility and
Acts of Charity, by his frequent Visiting and Preaching in Country Churches,
thereby taking occasion to converse more intimately and conveniently with the
Ministers, he sowed a blessed seed in their hearts, gave them juster Notions of
the Duties of the Pastoral Charge, and thereby through the blessing of God
became a burning and shineing light in those parts, the Impression whereof
remains upon the Consciences of many to this day. But passing this,

It had been a far more fair and Equitable way, and as much to the Honor of
the Government, as the disgrace of the guilty to have Invited People to Accuse
their Ministers upon the head of Scandal, and after Evidence thereof, (if they
had found any) to have Proceeded and deprived, rather than Promiscuously to
have Condemned the Righteous with the wicked. It is true their Libells were
generally stuft'd with a great many Scandalous and vicious practices alleged
against them, (a malicious design to expose them to the present Age, and to
blacken them upon Record to the future) but it is as true that when the
Ministers came to the Bar, the Scandalous and Immoral part of the Libell was
wholly omitted by their Judges, although the Ministers themselves craved for
their Vindication in those Points to be particularly Tried upon them, but the
Sentence passed against them upon the two heads before mentioned, and yet in
the Accounts they sent to Court, the Immoralities of the Ministers Lives, which
were only pretended in the Summons, but never spoke of in the Trial, were
represented as the great Grounds of their Deprivation; but it were far more
easy to give the true reasons, for truth tells best, and its this.

The Presbyterian Preachers in Scotland of the old Standing who only can
pretend to be owned in any Church-Meeting, (if the Government should think fit
to call one) are but very few in Comparison of the Episcopal Clergy now in
Place. It was highly debated amongst them, what should be their behavior if
the Parliament restored them to their Churches, from which they were put out in
the year 1662. They could not think it advisable to meet in Presbyteries by
themselves, since in some Presbyteries, they would make but two in number, and
in some but one, in others none at all. So that if they should join with the
Regular Clergy in such Presbyteries, they might reckon to be out-voted in all
businesses, and so signify just nothing, Nay, if a National Synod should be
called, they would be at the same loss, for the Members thereof Chosen by
Presbyteries behoov'd to be Episcopal Men, the Plurality by far of Voters being
of that way. So to take off all difficulties attending this matter. It seemed
to be the most plausible and effectual way, to make as many Vacancies as was
possible, and that also before the meeting of the next Session of Parliament,
least other measures should then be taken, And for this design the praemunire of
not reading the Proclamation seemed next to Rabbling, the fittest and shortest
Expedient.

I call it shortest, because it was not possible to make greater dispatch for
Vacancies, then it occasioned, for a dozen of Ministers were ordinarily turned
out in a Forenoon, and as many more, sometimes, in an Afternoon. So that this
Method made clear way for the Presbyterian Brethren to be the greater part in
all Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and by Consequence to carry any thing they
please there. Hereby also they have a fair opportunity of setting out young
Vagrants to take possession of the Vacant Churches, by which the number of
their Preachers daily encrcase.

Thus you have the Present State of the very much Afflicted Clergy in Scotland
represented faithfully, and with as much brevity as the matter will allow, for
though much more might be added upon this Subject, yet since you desired no more,
but a plain and general Narrative, I here give it according to my Ability.

However it shall please Divine Providence to order Affairs in our National
Church, this you in England may be assured of, that her Enemies, are yours
also, and it is some comfort to us that those of that way are not like to
prevail so far over you, as they have done already over us. And therefore that
God may prosper and preserve the Church of England, restore ours to some Order
and Decency, And Settle the Three Kingdoms upon such Righteous Foundations as
may Establish our Temporal and Eternal Peace, is the daily Prayer of,

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant.

First Collection of Papers.
Relating to the Practice of the Rabble, before the Convention Met.
A Just and True Account how sadly the Regular Ministers within the Presbytery
of Air have been Treated since Christmas Last.
UPon Christmas day about Ninty Armed Men forced the Minister of Cumnock out of
his Chamber into the Churchyard, Anno 1688.
where they discharged him to Preach any more there under the highest Peril
they took upon them to Command him to remove from his Manse, or dwelling House,
and his Gleib, and not to uplift his Stipend thenceforth; after which they rent
his Gown in pieces over his head: they made a Preface to their discourse to
this purpose; that this they did not as Statesmen, nor as Churchmen, but by
violence and in a Military way of Reformation.

In this manner, in the same place, and at the same time used they the Minister
of Authinleck, who dwells in Cumnock.

From Cumnock the foresaid day they marched to Machlin, and missing the
Minister, were rude beyond expression to his Wife, and finding the English
Liturgy burnt it as a Superstitious and Popish Book: thereafter they went to
the Churchyard where they publicly discharged the Minister from his Office
and Interest there.

Upon the twenty seventh of December the more considerable part of the foresaid
number went to Galston: where they apprehended the Minister, and taking him out
of his house into the Church yard they rent his Cloak missing his Gown, and
thereafter forced him to wade upon and down through the water of Irwine for a
considerable time in a severe Frost.

Upon the said day they went to Rickarton: whence they brought the Minister of
the place to Torbolton: where they kept for a whole night the Ministers of
these two Parishes under a Guard: and next Morning brought them to the
Churchyard of Torbolton where they rent the Minister of Torboltons Canonical
Coat, and put the one half of it about each of the Ministers necks, commanding
the Church Officer of the Place to lead them thereby per vices as Malefactors,
discharging them from all Exercise of the Ministry, and from their Houses,
Gleibs, and Stipends under the highest peril.

Upon the Eleventh of January 1689. The First Minister of Air received a
written Paper, Commanding him and all his Brethren to leave their Mini^tery
against the fifteenth under the pain of death: and because he did not regard
this, there came to his House upon the fifteenth about Eight of the Clock at
night Eleven Armed Men of them, who Commanded him under pain of Death to Preach
no more in the Church of Air till the Princes further order. And at the same
rate did they treat his Colleague that same night.

Much about the same time these Armed Men with their Associats went throughout
all the Ministers Houses within that Presbytery, and di^charged them any more
to Exercise their Ministry, and appointed them to remove from their Manses, or
Parsonage Houses and Gleibs, and discharged them to meddle with their Stipends
under the penalty aforesaid. So that now the most of the Clergy through force
and Violence have left the Country; none in it undertaking their Protection;
but all the Rabble of it in Arms against them. And to Complete their Miseries
those who are Indebted to them resuse to pay even so much as may carry them to
places of shelter: which exposes them to the greatest hardships Imaginable.

To obviate the Impudent denial of these things the under Subscribers are able
and shall (if called) in due time produce sufficient Proof of the whole, and
that both by writing and Witnesses. Given under our hands at Edinburgh upon the
Twenty and Sixth dayof January One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty Nine years.

-- Gregory, Parson of Air. Will. Irwine Minister at Kirk Michael. Fran.
Fordyce, Parson of Cumnock.

An Account of the Grievances of the Presbytery of Dunbarton.
IMprimis, Upon the twenty fifth of December last, Anno 1689 a Party of
Dissenters about 9 a Clock at Night, entered vio^entl^ into the House of Mr.
Walter Stirling Minister of Badernock, threatened most Barbarously his Wife and
Servants, (himself being from home) saying that they would cut off her Papish
nose and rip up her Prelaticall belly but by a good Providence they were
hindered by the coming in of some Friends.

2. They having Assaulted Mr. Will. Duncan Minister of Kilpatrickeaster several
times before, did on the Sixteenth of January instant, come to his House about
the number of Thirty Armed Men, some whereof were his Parishioners, and
violently took from him the keys of the Church, struck and abused himself,
broke down and overthrew all his Furniture and did cast all out of doors, so
that he and his Family were forced to go elsewhere and live upon the Charity of
Friends.

3. On Sunday last being the 20 Instant, a little before the time the Sermon
should have begun, about Thirty Armed Men came to the Church of Boiall
threatened the Minister who was to Preach (Mr. Will. M'Kenzie Minister of that
Church being of a long time dangerously sick) most barbaro^sly saying that he
should lose his life if he should offer to Preach there, or any other sent from
the Presbytery to supply his Place. And on the morrow thereafter, about
fourscore armed men, some whereof were his Parishinoers, came to his house,
abused his Wife by reviling and beating her, (the Minister himself the night
before for fear of his life having gone out of the way) spoiled some of his
Furniture, and threatened to throw all out of doors if he and his Family would
not go away from Church and House within Eigh^ days.

4. Each day adds new ground of Complaint, most part of the Brethren fearing
that before the next Lords day they shall be thrust from their Churches and
Houses by Armed force, for they have been often threatened to that effect.

This Account was sent to the Prince of Orange (for then he was no more)
attested by the hands of the Presbytery of Dunbarton. Feb. 1688/9.

A true Account of those Abuses and Affronts, that were committed upon the
Person of Mr. Robert Bell Parson of Kilmarnock, by a Party of the Presbyterians
now in Arms in the West of Scotland.
MAster Robert Bell Minister of Kilmarnock, being desired by his Neighbor
Minister at Richardtown, to celebrate the Marriage of two Persons at that
Church, in the Ministers necessary absence, as he was walking thither, was
seized by two Armed Men, who came from a great Party which he saw at some
distance; one of them as he came near to him, presented a Musket to his Head;
whereupon he told him, he was his Prisoner, and would go where he had a mind to
carry him: He having recovered his Musket, and placed him betwixt himself and
his Fellow Companion in Arms; in this posture he was brought to the Minister of
Ritchardtown's House, where he was commanded to pluck off his Hat, they calling
him Rogue and Rascal, and treating him very rudely. But as soon as he perceived
they had filled their Bellies with the Meat, that the good Gentlewoman had set
before them; and their Passion and Rancour was thereby a little assuaged; he
began to ask the Commander of the Party, by what Rule and Law they proceeded,
in their appearing thus in Arms: He told him, By the Rule and Law of the Solemn
League and Covenant, by which they were obliged to extirpate Prelacy, and bring
all Malignants to condign Punishment. Mr. Bell replied, they would do well to
take care that those their proceedings were justifiable by the Word of God, and
conformable to the practice of Christ, his Apostles, and the Primitive Church
in the propagation of the Christian Religion. He answered him, That the Doom of
all Malignants is clearly set down in the Word of God, and their appearing thus
in Arms, was conformable to the Practice of the Ancient Church of Scotland.
From this House the Minister was carried Prisoner to Kilmarnock, and in his
Journey thither, there was a Gentleman the Lord of Bridgehouse, who having
come to meet him, took the courage to tell the Party, that their appearing in
Arms, and abusing the Clergy in this Hostile manner, were but insolent outrages
against all the Law of the Nation; and that they would do well to remit their
Illegal forwardness, together with their pretended grievances unto the
Parliament, that was now very quickly to be assembled, by the care and
affection that his Highness the Prince had of all the Subjects of this Kingdom.
They answered him, To stand off and forbear giving Rules to them, for they
would take none from him nor any Man, and that they would not adhere to the
Prince of Orange, nor the Law of the Kingdom, any further than the Solemn
League and Covenant, was fulfilled and prosecuted by both. By this time they
were come near the Town, and they commanded the Minister to pluck off his Hat,
which he obeyed, yet at the same breath they threatened to throw him in the
River: And coming to the Bridge, they met the whole Body of the aforesaid
Party, returning from the Market place; where they had caused the Church
Officer to deliver up the Keys of the Church: And they discharged by way of
Proclamation the Minister, whom in an opprobrious manner, they called Curate of
Kilmarnock, from all intromission with the Benefice and Casuality of the
Church, or the least exercise of the Ministerial Function. As Soon as they saw
Mr. Bell, and understood that he was the Parson of the Parish, he could see
nothing in their Faces, but the most insulting joy; nor find in their
discourses, but the most reproaching Language, that ever the greatest Criminal
in the World was treated with. After a long Consultation amongst themselves,
one of their chief Commanders came, and asked him, if he had a Book of Common
Prayer: the Minister desired to know of him, why he asked the Question. He
answered, That sure be could not want that Book since he was educated at
Oxford, and trained up to all the Superstition and Idolatry of the Church of
England. The Minister told him, perhaps he had half a dozen of Common Prayer
Books; he commanded him, to produce one of them, for that would do their
business. From this place they carried him back to his House; and there
compelled him to deliver unto their hands the Book of Common Prayer of the
Church of England, after this they led him as a Prisoner bare headed, betwixt
four Foiles of Musketeers, through a great part of the Town unto the
Marketplace, where the whole Party was drawn up in Battallia: Which appeared
to be about the number of two hundred well Armed, with fire Lock Muskets of a
very large size, most of them had also a pair of Pistols but all of them one.
In Kilmarnock, after the fashion of most Market places in Scotland, there is a
Cross erected, unto which one goes up by steps on all sides, after the form of
a broad Starecase, with which it is environed. It was on the uppermost step,
that these rude Guards placed the Minister, two of them on the same step, one
on both hands; and so on every step as you go down from the Cross, they ranged
themselves before him: After this they called for Fire, which was brought, then
one of their Commanders made a Speech to the People, that were gathered
together in great numbers from the Town and Country. He told them, That they
were come there to make the Curate of the place, a Spectacle of Ignominy, and
that they were obliged so to do, by virtue of the Solemn League and Covenant;
in Obedience unto which they were to declare here their abhorrency of Prelacy,
and to make Declaration of their firm intentions and designs, to fulfill all
the ends of that Oath: The propagation of the Discipline of the Government of
the Church of Scotland, as it is expressed and contained in the foresaid Solemn
League and Covenant. And all this they attempted to do, not by virtue of any
Civil Power nor Ecclesiastical Power, but by the Military Power, and the Power
of the posture they were now in. These are the very words of this Speech. After
this another of their Commanders taking the Book of Common Prayer, reading the
Title Page of it, and extending his voice very high, he told the People, That
in pursuance of the forementioned League and Covenant, they were now to burn
publicly this Book of Common Prayer, which is so full of Superstition and
Idolatry; and then throwing it into the Fire, blowing the Coals with a pair of
Bellows, after that catching it from amidst the flames, they fixed it on the
Spear of a Pike, and thence lifting it up on high, far above the top of the
Cross. Which Elevation was attended with Shouts and Acclamations, down with
Prelacy Idolatry and Superstition of the Churches of England and Scotland.
After all these indignities and impudent reproaches, offered to the most
reformed and best constituted Churches in the World, they turned themselves to
the Minister again, and rudely in a very menacing manner, asking him, if he was
an Episcopal Prelate's Man, and of the Communion of the Churches of England and
Scotland; he answered, he was, and did there confess it to the whole World.
Then they tore his Gown, one of the Guard first cutting up the Skirt of it with
his Sword, and throwing it amongst their feet, telling him, It was the Garment
of the Whore of Babylon. One of them bid him promise never to Preach, nor
Exercise the Office of a Minister any more; but he refused, telling them, that
such a Promise lay not within the compass of his own will, and could not be
extorted by force, and that tho they should tear his Body, as they had done his
Gown, they would never be able to reach his Conscience. Well, well, (says he)
do it at your Peril; the Minister answered, that he would do it at his Peril.
And so they gave over troubling him any more, only asking, what he had to say
to them, he told them, he was extremely sorry to see Protestants, so
ingratefully exasperated against the best Protestant Church in the World, that
had done such Eminent Service to our Common Religion and Interest against
Popery: And withal praying God to forgive them, and not to lay these things to
their Charge.

So the Minister was dismissed, they telling him, he was an ignorant and
obdured Curate and Malignant.

This is a true Copy of that Account, of those indignities and affronts, that
were done unto me Robert Bell, by the Presbyterians now in Arms in Scotland.

Glasgow, Ian. 8. 1689. Robert Bell:

Disorders and Outrages done upon the Persons and Families of Ministers, within
the Presbytery of Hamiltown, upon 27 and 28 days of Dec. 1688.
IMprimis, Mr. John Dalgleishe, Minister of Ebandale, was taken out of his
House by a Company of Armed Men, was carried to the Kirkyard style bare-headed,
and after being surrounded by these Armed Men, and a great many of the People;
and one of them in a Speech, having railed against him with many opprobrious
imputations, commanded his Beadle to tear his Gown over his Head, which when he
refused to do, threatened to kill him, and did beat him in a most i^humane
manner with their Swords, till the Minister commanded him also to do it: They
likewise expressly prohibited the Minister to preach any more, or to reside in
that place, otherways it should be to his peril. Mr. James Crightoune Minister
at Oilbrige was treated the same way, only with this difference, that the Gown
they tore was a Nightgown, and with this addition, that they caused him to
deliver up the Keys, and all the Utensils of the Church, and engaged him to fly
and remove all his Goods and Plenishing within eight days, which he did, his
Wife was beaten so that she immediately miscarried.

Mr. Angus Mc. intosh Minister at Stenhouse, being from home when these Men
called at his House, they took his Gown, and after they had discharged their
pieces in it, next they trod it under their feet, and then tore it and burnt it.

These Presents are testified by Doctor Robert Scott Dean of Glasgow, Mr.
George Lesly Minister at Blautire, and Mr. John Dennistowne Minister at
Glasford, all within the same Presbytery.

Ian. 23. 1689. R. Scott G. Leslie I. Dennistowne.


Some account of the Outrages and Cruelties committed upon the Ministers and
their Families in the Presbytery of Irwin, who own the Protestant Religion as
it is established by Law.
THE Ministers in Irwin Presbytery since the beginning of December, have been
so sadly and miserably persecuted by the Violencies of a rabble of armed Men
and furious Women, who have joined together in a most barbarous Confederacy
against them, that they have been forced to fly and lurk so secretly, as that
they are incapable to meet together in such full number as that they can
particularly represent all their Grievances which are still daily increasing,
only three or four who have with much difficulty got together at the concerting
of this, do from their own proper knowledge of what they have felt, and from
certain accounts from the rest of their Brethren declare, that all of their
Houses have been invaded by these armed Men, not only in the day time, but for
the most part under silence of night, and so many of the Ministers as did not
secretly escape, were most disgracefully taken to the Market Crosses and other
public Places, and their Gowns torn in pieces over their Heads, and
discharged, with greatest Threatenings of Cruelty ever to enter the Churches and
preach again: They have also turned many of their Wives and Children out of
Doors, and are still proceeding to do so to others, exposing them to the
Extremity of the Winter Cold, and to perish for want of Bread, when the
Ministers themselves durst not come near them for their relief. The particular
Instances are so Lamentable, and the Circumstances of them so many, as that it
would be a long work to enumerate them particularly, only this in the general
is so well known over all the Country, that there needs neither particular
Evidences to prove it, nor more to be said to move the pity of any that are
capable to remedy it, and we under Subscribers are content to prove what is
here said: Witness your Petitioners at Edinburgh, Ian. 25. 1689.

Charles Littlejohn Minister of Large. Alexander Laing Minister of Stewartonne.


A Brief Representation of the Sufferings of the Regular Clergy within the
Presbytery of Glasgow.
TO omit the Violences have been threatened them, the Contempts have been cast
upon them, and the innumerable Discouragements they have generally been i. e.
Happened to them.
trysted with, from Papists on the one hand (some of them having been in great
hazard of being turned out of their places for preaching against the
Corruptions of Rome, as were easy to instance) and from Presbyterians on the
other, these several years bypast, tho they had Law on their side, and have
still in their Stations endeavored to maintain Truth, Peace and Order.

Upon the great Revolution that has happened lately (notwithstanding His
Highness the Prince of Orange has declared his great Undertaking to be for the
securing Religion, and establishing our Laws and Liberties) the Dissenting
Brethren have wreckt their Malice upon the regular Clergy, and in the manner
following.

On Christmas day Anno 1688. under cloud of night, about five and ^orty Men in
Arms (all his Neighbors, to the most part of whom he had done special acts of
Kindness) came to Mr. Gabriel Russel's House the Minister of Govean; they beat
himself, his Wife and Daughter, carried away all the Utensils of the Church,
and the Keys of the Doors, discharging him to preach there any more under the
highest Perils.

The same night another Party came to Mr. Robert Tinnic's House Minister at
Calcheart; not finding himself at home, they turned his Wife, Family and
Furniture out of the i. e. Parsonage House.
Manse, and tho it was about Eleven at Night, with great difficulty they
suffered the said Mrs. Tinnie to stay in the Stable all night with her small
Children; of which Children three have since been at the point of Death,
through the Fear and Cold to which they then were exposed. The next Lords day
the indulged Preacher in that part, possessed himself of the Pulpit; they were
his own Parishoners who treated Mr. Tinnie so. The same Night, and much after
the same manner Mr. Robert Bail Minister at Carmunnock was treated.

On December 27. Anno 1688. Mr. Hugh Blair Minister at Rutherglen, had all his
Furniture turned out of his House, the Keys and Utensils of the Church taken
from him, etc.

About the same time Mr Gilbert Mushat Minister at Cumernald was treated much
after the same manner.

Much about the same time a Party came to Mr. David Milne Minister at Calider,
and had ri^led his House but that they were interrupted.

But all this time the Ministers in the City of Glasgow suff^red nothing, only
Letters were sent to them to forbear the Exercise of their Ministry, and their
Houses were searched for Arms, etc. till Ian. 17. 1689. being Thursday, on
which it is usual for them to have public Worship and Sermon, a great Multitude
of People, for the most part Women, came to Church, with a design to have
dragged the Minister out of the Pulpit; but he (by the advice of some of his
Brethren who were there) forbearing to go into the Church, and endeavoring to
retire without Noise, was fallen upon most barbarously, beaten, and had his
Gown and other Clothes torn in many pieces, although he had been one of the
Ministers of the said City twenty four years, and lived most Christianly and
inoffensively.

The same day the same Rabble went to the House of Mr. Alexander George
Minister of the Barony Church of Glasgow, broke his Doors with great Hammers;
and notwithstanding he was at that time tied to his Bed by a very dangerous
Sickness, they thrust into his Chamber, and had undoubtedly dragged him from his
Bed, and perhaps murdered him, had not the Provost of the City, with eight or
ten Men, come to his relief.

On the Lords day thereafter, being the 20th of January. there was no Sermon in
any of the Churches of the City. On the 22th. a Copy of a Letter was sent to
each Minister in the City, the Tenor whereof follows.

We are credibly informed that our pretended Provost Walter Gibsone, and his
Malignant Associates, are upon a design of having you restored to your
Churches, sometime this or the next Week, but if you will take advice and
prevent your own Trouble and perhaps Ruin, do not listen to their Motion, for
they are but laying a Snare for you, without reflecting upon their own being
taken in it themselves: Therefore consider what you are doing, and if you
desire Safety, forbear to attempt any thing suggested upon that head, for
assure your selves, that it will not be now the Female Rabble you have to
engage with, but must resolve in all time coming for such a Guard as will be so
sufficient and diligent, as to protect you, not only in the Church (which even
we doubt of) but also in your Houses, and that both by night and by day; if you
take this warning, you will both save your selves, and prevent the Effusion of
much Blood, but if not, stand to your peril, which in all probability will be
more formidable than that of Mr. Milne. Let this be a sufficient warning to you
from those who by this desire to exoner themselves.

We doubt not but there are other Instances of the foresaid Violence within our
Bounds before this time; but because of our present Dispersion we cannot give
any more particular accounts, only as to the Instances abovenamed, we can make
them fully appear when called to it: In Testimony whereof we subscribe their
presents at Edinburg, Ian. 26. 1689.

Al. George Minister of the Gospel at the Barony Church of Glasgow. John Sage
One of the Ministers in the City of Glasgow.


An Account of the Insolences and Outrages committed upon the Ministers in the
Presbytery of Pasley, Glasgow Jan. 22. 1689.
Imprimis. UPon Saturday being the Twelfth instant, about three of the Clock in
the Afternoon, there went several of the Inhabitants of the Town of Pasley
(accompanied with a numerous Rabble to the Beadle, who is a Man above Seventy
years of Age, and in his own House, treated him barbarously, wounding him and
taking the Keys of the Church from him, which they still keep, whereby they
hinder the Ministers there to exercise their Office.

Item. Upon the Thursday thereafter the 17th. a company of armed Men came to
the Ministers House, requiring him within two days to get him thence, and to
Transport his Family, certifying him, if he should offer to preach any more
there, or should not That is, leave his dwelling House.
void the Manse, it should be on his utmost Peril.

Item. On Sunday the 13th of the said month, Mr. Honstown one of the Mountain
Preachers (as they are called) usurped the Pulpit of the Parish Church of
Eastwood, several times formerly the Minister had been required by armed men to
remove.

Item. Upon Monday being the 14th instant, about 200 Men and Women came at
eight of the clock at night in a Tumultuary manner, to the Minister at
Kulbarchan House, with Battoons in their hands, made that same day for the
purpose, whereof three only entered, the rest standing without doors, and the
Minister himself being providentially from home, they treated his Wise most
opprobrlously, and commanded her instantly to remove her self and her Family
from that place, certifying her, otherwise it should be at her utmost peril.
And to omit more particulars, all the several Ministers in the abovementioned
bounds, are now forced for the safety of their Lives, to fly from their several
Habitations, and to leave their Wiv^s and Children exposed to their Cruelty;
and to add to their Calamity, their Parochoners (a very few discreet Persons
only excepted) refuse to pay them any part of the stipend, Or the bypast years.
or any other Debts they owe them, by which cru^l usage many of our number are
reduced to extreme necessity.

Io. Fullerton Moderator. I. Tailor Minister in Pasley Commissr.


A Letter concerning the Persecution of several other Ministers.
Reverend Sir,
SInce our last we received yours; and for a return, you are to understand,
that our Circumstances are still worse, and the opposite Party more Insolent,
Cruel and Barbarous. The Particulars are as follows, 1. That Party invaded the
Minister of Balantra's House in open day, before many of his own People, beat
to the ground his Wife big with Child with the butt end of a Musket, dragged
himself to the Churchyard and back again to his House, tare his Clothes to his
Shirt, wounded him with a small Sword, and for warding off the Thrust, beat him
severely with Cudgels, and then commanded him under the pain of Death, never to
preach any more in that place. 2. Six of the Meeting House Men came to the
Minister's House of Kirk Michael (himself being at Edinburg) beat, battered and
bruised his Manservant, commanded him (after they had lain two days and three
nights upon him) to go immediately from the House with all that belonged to his
Master therein. 3. They have possessed the Churches of Straton, Ochiltri^,
Cumnock, Torboltown, Galston and Sorn. 4. They have ejected the Minister of
Rickarton's Wife, Family and whole Furniture. This is the account of the
Presbytery of Air.

In Irwin Presbytery both the indulged and Mountain-men have possessed several
of the Churches, have gone to the Ministers Houses, given them their last
Summons of removal, with all the effects thereof under pain of death.

In Pasley Presbytery they have outed the whole Ministers (as they have in all
the West of Scotland) they have particularly ejected the first Minister of
Pasley's Wife and Family, burnt his Gowns and Hat at the public Cross, and
thrown all his Goods to the open Street. From that they went to Renfrew (where
the Ministers Wife was but nine days lain in of a Child) pulled her out of the
Bed, threatened the Families present ejection, had not one Cranford of Corsburn,
who being occasionally there, prevailed with them for ten days respite: the
Ministers Wife upon this cruel usage, fell into an high and dangerous Fever,
under which, according to our last information, she yet labors. The whole
Presbytery of Dunbarton are banished from their Charges. In Glasgow the
Ministers are not secure of their Lives, for some nights age they beat Mr. Miln
in the Street the second time: They went to the Minister of Calders, rent his
Gown in the Churchyard, himself being from home, and commanded his Wife and
Family to be gone immediately under the Penalty aforesaid. Sir, We who are
here, are patiently waiting for the effects of the Princes Declaration, which
was solemnly proclaimed over this Cross on Wednesday last. If it quiet the
Country, we are resolved to return to our Charges, a little time will inform
us. We had almost forgot to tell you, that on Sunday last the Meeting House
Preacher at Diglass caused them to break open the Church-doors there, and went
in and preached. We have wrapped up things in as narrow a compass as was
possible: We have written nothing but truth in matter of Fact, and which upon
legal trial shall be made good by

Reverend Sir, Your affectional Brethren to serve you George Gregory Fran.
Fordyce William Irwine Minister of Kirk-Michael Ia. Hoge Minister of Ochiltrie.
Edin. Feb. 14 1689.
Sir,
Besides all this, they have robbed the Minister of Straton's House and left
him nothing. And they have carried away the Minister of Kirk-Michael's
Presentation, Decree of Locality, and all his other Papers, with the Communion
Cups.



Information of the abuses done by the Presbyterians, who frequent the
Meeting Houses to the Ministers of Leving-Widtalder, Bathgate, and Westcalder;
in the Presbytery of Levingstonne.
UPon the 22th. of Dec. last, about six a Clock at Night, about Thirty Men in
Arms came to the Kirk Town of Levingstonne, and having set a Guard to the
Ministers outer Gate, a Party of them came to his Hall-door, which was shut,
and pretending that they were come to search for Arms, rudely craved to have
entrance into the House, offering, that if the Door were not opened, they would
set fire to it, and shoot in Musket-ball through it, to kill those that were
within, and forced the door with such violence, that the double bar which held
it securest, being quite broken, the Minister was necessitated to make the door
patent, thereupon about eight of them entered the House, with great noise and
Swords drawn (the Ministers Wife having been brought to Bed, only six days
before that time; which was not unknown to the Assassins) and after a great
deal of rough and opprobrious Language, and unchristian carriage toward the
Minister (which so affrighted his Wife, that she apprehending her Husbands life
to be in danger, rose from her Bed in great consternation, and having put on
only a Nightgown, did on her naked feet interpose for his rescue) they
compelled him to go through the Rooms before them; with a lighted Candle to
guide them in their search for Arms; one of them being so uncivil, that he
offered to turn his Wife out of the Bed; whereinto she had again betaken her
self, and with much difficulty was by the Minister dissuaded from that Cruelty.
This done, they carried away such things as they thought fit, together with the
said Ministers Horse, but the Horse being quite spoiled returned the next day:
They also went to the Church Beadle's House, and robbed him of his Horse, and
other things belonging to him, but the Horse returned also the next day. The
names of these Assassins for the most part, and of the Gentleman that hounded
them out, are well known. 2. Upon the 27th. of Ian. last, there came Nine Armed
Men to the Church of Levingstonne (it being the Lord's Day in the Forenoon) and
the Church doors being made patent to them, by one of the Ministers Servants*
because they had threatened to break them up, they searched all the Seats of the
Church for the Minister, and not finding him there* they went to his Mansion
House, and disbelieving his Wife, who told them that her Husband was from home,
they went through the House searching for him most narrowly; and compelled his
Wife to go before them with a lighted Candle, belching out terrible Speeches
against him; and they not yet finding him, departed, and told some of the
Ministers Neighbors, who live in the Kirk Town, that if they had got their
Curat, they would have ducked him in the water of Almond, and that albeit they
were disappointed at that time, they were resolved to be full of his Flesh. 3.
Upon the first of Feb. instant, about sixty Armed Men came to his House, and
delivered to his Wife a Summons of removal, the true Copy thereof is hereafter
inserted, and having called for the Ministers Gowns (with a purpose (as they
declared) to tear them) and for the Keys of the Church door, the Church Bible,
the Communion Cups, Records of Session, and all other Utensils belonging to the
Church of Levingstonne; they got the said Keys and Bible (all the rest having
been put out of the way) and these they delivered to John Wilson in Long
Levingstonne, to be by him kept, and so departed. Follows the tenor and true
Copy of the Summons.

We belonging to the Parish of Levingstonne, having now groaned under the
insupportable Yoke of Prelacy, and having suffered a continual tract of
manifold Cruelties and Oppressions many years, upon the account of not owning
and submitting unto the intrusion of Episcopal Curats, This is the form of
Summons left by the Rabble, in most of the Ministers Houses ejected by them.
with all being touched with such zeal for the House of our God, that we cannot
endure any longer, to see it made and continued to be a Den of Thieves; who
have not ventered in at Christ's Door, but the way of Man's Usurpation,
remembering the indispensable obligations of our Solemn Covenant, to endeavor
the extirpation of Prelacy, being resolved to prosecute it by all approved
means to the outmost as the Lord shall enable us; to prevent other Tumults we
warn you to surcease and desist from Preaching, and all other Ministerial
Actions, in the Kirk of Levingstonne, and to depart from the Care and Benefice
thereof, under certification, that if you refuse you shall be forced to do it.

This Summons is not subscribed by any of the Parishioners of Levingstonne, who
never had cause to complain of the Ministers oppression and cruelty, and did
all except a few, cheerfully submit to Mr. Honeymans Ministry, until the
Meeting Houses were set up. The verity of all which premises, I the said Mr.
George Honeyman am able to prove by many Famous Witnesses, as Witness these
presents written by Mr. John Park Clerk to the Synod of Edinburgh, and
subscribed at my Hand at Edinburgh the 23 of Feb. 1689.

George Honeyman, Minister of Levingstonne. Jo. Park, Clerk Syn.


Mr. William Man Minister at Bath-gate, informs, that upon the first day of
Feb. instant, there came about the number of fifty Men in Arms to his dwelling
House, about twelve a Clock at Noon, and having entered his House, they made
search for him with drawn Swords in their hands, and violently broke up three
doors; and not finding him, who supposing him to be at the time in the Lady
Kirktown's House, which is situated very near to his Mansion House; they went
to the said Lady's House, whose Gate being shut, they endeavored to force it
up with great Stones, and the help of an Ax, which they had purchased from some
of the Neighbors; and when all failed, they set fire to the Gate, and the Gate
being thereupon made patent by the Gentlewoman, they in manner aforesaid,
searched all the Rooms of the House for the said Mr. William, and not finding
him, they went thereafter to the Town of Bathgate, and found him in the House
of Mr. John Cala, in the Company of two Gentlemen, who are Justices of Peace,
viz. Thomas Sharp Lord of Honstown, and Thomas Hammiston Lord of Boghead; and
the Captain of the Company, having called him forth in presence of the said two
Gentlemen, they required him with their Swords drawn, and Guns presented to
deliver up to them the Communion Cups, the Records of his Kirk Session, the
Church Bible, and the Keys of the Church of Bathgate, to which he having
answered, that there were none of these things in his custody, they went to the
Beadle, and caused him to deliver the said Keys to them, the which they
committed to the Custody of John Harvy, Inn-dweller in the said Town, charging
him not to deliver them to the said Mr. William, as he would be answerable,
unless he were forced by a greater Power so to do; and they being informed of
the place where his Gown lay, they went and took it out, and having carried it
in Procession to the Cross of Bathgate, they caused his Beadle to tear it there
before his Eyes; and this done, they being entreated by the said Justices, not
to lay violent hands upon the Person of the said Minister; they delivered a
Summons to him to flit and remove, and this they did before several Persons in
the Town of Bathgate, whom they addu^ed to Witness the deed. The Summons is in
omnibus the same with that, which the Minister of Levingstonne, received the
said day, and is not signed by any of the Parishioners of Bathgate, who never
had cause to complain of Mr. Man's cruelty, and did all except a few,
cheerfully submit to his Ministry, till the Meeting Houses were lately set up.
The verity of all which premises, I the said Mr. William Man, am able to prove
sufficiently, as Witness these Presents written by Mr. John Park Clerk to the
Synod of Edinburgh, and subscribed with my Hand at Edinburgh, Feb. 23. 1689.

William Man Minister of Bathgate. Jo. Park, Clerk Syn.


Mr. Normand, Mr. Kinney Minister at Midcalder, informs, that upon the 27th. of
Ian. last by past, being the Lord's Day after Sermon, Eight men with drawn
Swords and Firelocks, came to his House, but got not entrance, in regard that
the Lord of Calderhall, the Lord of Pompherstonne, with diverse other good
Neighbors, disarmed some of them, and put the rest to flight; in which
encounter one of the Assassins was wounded in the Face, and two were wounded
that appeared in the said Mr. Normans defense, viz. William Elphingstonne,
natural Son to the said Lord of Calderhall, and James Nemo Butcher in
Midcalder, and the said Assassins having got back the Arms taken from them upon
their promise to be gone, they accordingly departed, threating that before they
slept, they should cause several Persons in the Town of Calder to sleep in
their Shoes, for what they had done in defense of the Curat, farther averring,
that nothing was designed by them to be done to that Curat; but what and much
more was done this day at Edinburgh, to the outing and disgrace of all Curats
there. 2. That upon the 1st. of Feb. instant, a considerable Company of men in
Arms, came to the said Ministers House early in the morning, pretending, that
they were come only to search, whether he were at home or not (although after the
search, they confessed, that they knew he was not there, because sufficiently
informed, that he had taken Journey on the Monday preceding, and did not carry
his Gown with him, which they resolved to have if possible) and in a most
barbarous manner, forced up a Window at the foot of the Bed, where the said
Minister Wife was lying with her sucking Child, and thrust in their Swords and
Firelocks at the Window, which so affrighted her with the apprehension of
present death; that she begged them for God's sake, that if they intended to
murder her and her Family, they would but allow her the favor to put on some
Clothes, and to recommend her Self and Family in Prayer to God. This they
nothing regarded, but continued forcing up the Hall-door, until the Lock and
bolts being broken it was made patent; whereupon sixteen of them having entered
the House, with Swords drawn; they conveyed the said Ministers Wife, with her
Suckling in her Arms to the Kitching, and placed a man with a naked Sword
beside her, whom they commanded not to suffer her to stir from that place, and
in the mean while the rest of them with their Swords in their hands, searched
all the House, and brought down Goods that were hid in the Cieling, declaring,
that they behoved to see all the said Ministers Obligations, that he had of his
Debtors, and all his other Papers; and in particular, one of them viz. Thomas
Levingstonne there said, he behoved to have a gripe of his Fathers Bond,
granted to the said Minister for a certain sum of money, which he owes to him;
and after exact search, they not finding any Papers or Bonds (the Minister
having conveyed them away before that time) they went away, carrying with them
the Communion Cups, which they committed to the custody of Walter Iohnstonne in
Calder, and leaving behind them a Summons of removal, in omnibus the same with
these before mentioned, and withal, they declared to the said Ministers Wife,
that if She and her Family should neglect to remove within ten days next,
thereafter, they would return and eject her and her Children, and all the Goods
in the House; or make a Bonefire of all the plenishing. i. e. all the furniture.
The foresaid Summons is subscribed by none of the Parishioners of Middle
Calder, who never had cause to complain of their Ministers oppressing them, and
did all of them except a few submit to his Ministry, till the Meeting houses
were lately set up. The verity of all which premises; I the said Mac Normand,
Mac Kinney can prove by many famous Witnesses, as Witness these presents
Written at Edinburgh, by the said Mr. John Park, and their subscribed with my
Hand Feb. 23. 1689.

Norman Mackinney Minister of Calder. Jo. Park Clerk Syn.


Mr. George Robertsone Minister at Westealder, informs, that upon Dec. 23. last
by past, being the Lords Day, several Persons in Westcalder, invaded his House
betwixt Eleven and Twelve at Night, and searched for Arms, but found none but
an old two-handed Sword, which they carried with them and departed, averring,
that they were to go to their Company. 2. That upon the 1st. of Feb. instant, a
Summons of removal was left at his House by some in the Parish; the which
Summons is in omnibus the same with these beforementioned, and is not
subscribed by any of the Parishioners of Westaalder, who never received any
wrong from the Minister, who having been but lately settled there, most of the
Parishioners submitted to his Ministry, till the Meeting Houses were lately
set up, all this I the said George Robertsone am able to prove sufficiently, as
Witness these presents. Written by the said Mr. John Park, and subscribed with
my Hand at Edinburgh Feb. 13. 1689.

George Robertson Minister at Westcalder. Jo. Park Clerk Syn.


The Second Collection of Papers, relating to the Practice of the Rabble, after
the Prince's Declaration against some Ministers who were afterward deprived by
the Council.
A true Account of that Interruption that was made of the Service of God on
Sunday last being the seventeenth of February 1689 at the Cathedral of Glasgow,
by the Presbyterians, both from the Hills and the Meeting Houses, to the
Contempt of the Princes Declaration.
AS soon as His Highness the Prince of Orange's Declaration was proclaimed at
the Market Cross of Glasgow, for the Preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom,
and the Maintenance of the Free Exercise of Religion, as it was established in
October last: The Magistrates and Ministers of the City assembled themselves,
in order to the laying down such fit and united Methods as would give punctual
Obedience to His Highness's Declaration, and procure the public and
undisturbed Exercise of their Religion, which has now been interrupted these
four or five Weeks bypast, by the illegal unchristian Outrages of the Rabble
in this place. And after a prudent Deliberation about the present State of
Affairs, it was the result of their Counsels, That the Service of God should be
restored on the Sunday immediately subsequent to the Publication of the
Prince's Declaration, being the Seventeenth of February, according to the usual
and legal Methods by ringing of Bells, and the public use of all other
accustomed Solemnities. But for the greater Security of the Exercise of
Religion, and the Preservation of the Peace of the Town, the Magistrates
thought themselves obliged in Conscience and Honor, to go to Thomas Crawfurd
Younger, Merchant, being then Captain of the Guard at that time, and one of the
Chief Commanders of that Party in this place (that keep up themselves in
Contempt of the Law of the Kingdom, and the Prince's Declaration, to the (...)
the Magistrates and all good and peaceable People in (...) to require the said
Thomas Crawfurd to lay down his Arms and dismiss his Company; which accordingly
was performed by Baillie James Gibson, he (being the chief Magistrate in
absence of the i. e. Major.
Provost) telling him at the same time, That he would provide for the Peace and
Security of the Town in Obedience to the Prince's Declaration. Upon the
absolute refusal of Obedience unto this command by the said Thomas Crawfurd,
Baillie Gibson took Instruments in a public Nottars hands, how far he had his
duty to the Law of the Kingdom and the Prince's Declaration, and how far the
said Thomas Crawfurd, the pretended Captain of the Guard, did despise and
contemn them both. After this Intercourse between the foresaid Baillie and
Thomas Crawfurd, both those Parties of the Presbyterians, that go to the Hills
and the Meeting Houses, began to whisper about their illegal and bloody Designs
against the Ministers of the Town, and that great Body of the People that keep
still very steadfast in frequenting the Assemblies of the Church, threatening
publicly all kinds of Persecution unto them in the legal Exercise of their
Religion. On the Sunday morning the Promiscuous Rabble gathered themselves
together upon the Streets, and hindered the ringing of some of the usual Bells
for calling the People to Church. Yet the Magistrates thought fit to connive at
the first Insolence, being willing upon any Terms to have the Exercise of their
Religion, and give Obedience to the Prince's Declaration. But the more
moderation the Magistrates showed on this occasion, the more the Rabble were
enraged, publicly threatening the People as they went to Church, to pull them
out by the Ears. And particularly, they seeing a certain Minister going to
Church, they pursued him with Sticks and Clubs, but he taking a House escaped
their Fury. When the Magistrates were come near the Church, they found it
surrounded with a promiscuous Rout: Upon this they desired the rude People to
go home in peace, but they returned Scolding and Bloody Language, and flinging
from them their Cloaks and Plaides, that is Mantles, they gave the Assault with
Staves and Battoons in their hands unto the Magistrates; and particularly one
of them giving a severe blow to John Bell, one of the late Bailies, and at this
time in company with the Magistrates. Upon which unsufferable and scandalous
Attack, the Magistrates gave order to the Towns Servants and Officers, to clear
their way to the Church, and beat off the Rabble; which being effected, the
Magistrates, together with all the People, entered peaceably into the Church,
seating themselves according to their Ranks and Qualities in the usual postures
of Devotion* in which the Service of God is performed in our Church. After
Prayers were ended, toward the middle (...) of the Sermon, the forementioned
Thomas Crawsurd, the pretended Captain of the Guard, came into the Church, and
cried aloud to the People, That the Town was in Arms. He was answered, That
five or six hundred People of the best Quality in Town were assembled in
Church, to the Service of God, according to Law and the Prince's last
Declaration, That they were naked Men without Arms or the least intention to
make any resistance: And if the Town was in Arms, he was more concerned to look
to it than they, he being the pretended Captain of the Guard. And likewise he
was told, That if the People in Church had designed any opposition to such as
might disturb them in the Exercise of their Religion, they would have appeared
in an armed posture (which out of a due respect to the House of God and the
Prince's Declaration they did forbear to do;) and then he should have found
them too strong for any* Party that durst have assaulted them: But they came
not thither to fight, but to serve God. The Parson continued Preaching until he
finished his Sermon. Toward the latter and of the Prayers after S^rmon, the
Meeting Houses being dismissed, and joining the Hill Party that appeared by
this time in Arms upon the Streets, and together with the Company that was upon
the Guard, they formed themselves in a great Body, and then marched off under
the Conduct of the Lord of Carsland, taking their way straight to the
Cathedral Church; when they came to it, they fired both upon the People that
had fled to the Pinacles and Buttr^sses of the Church, and through the Door,
where there was a little Boy dangerously wounded on the Face; but at last they
broke open the Doors of the Church, and searching diligently for the Parson
they found him: They were disired by the Magistrates to dismiss the armed Men
and go in peace, but they refused it, telling, They would have out those People
that beat off the Women and the Men from the Church-door upon the first Vpr^ar.
They were answered, That the Disorders were begun by the Rabble against the
Prince's Declaration; and that the Magistrates could not, without doing
infinite injury to the Service of God, the Honor of the Prince, and the
Authority of Government, forbear commanding the Officers and Towns Servants to
beat off the Rabble that opposed their entry into the Church. And to this it
was subjoyned, That if they would lay down their Arms, or go home in peace, and
forbear the encouraging and protecting of the Rabble in those Vproars, they
could return in the same peaceable way from the Church that they came into it.
But this they absolutely refused to do, telling us, They could not desert their
Sisters the Women, that by this time were assembled in great numbers upon the
Streets and in the Churchyard. After this they took up the Names of the People
of the best Quality in Church, and then they hurried us out by Fives and Sixes
at several Doors of the Cathedral, and so exposed us to the Fury of the Rabble,
which we had escaped if they had p^rmitted us to go out in a Body. Others of us
they pretended to conduct by Guards, but carried us no further than into the
very mid^le of the Rabble. The whole Congregation being thus maliciously
dissipated, very few of them did escape without Wounds or Blows; and
particularly the Lord Boyd was rudely treated, and had his Sword taken from
him. Sir John Bell had above a hundred Snow-balls thrown at him: The Lord of
Borrowfield and his Lady, together with his two Brothers, James and William
Walkinshawes, were five or six several times beaten to the Ground: James
Corbeit was very dangerously wounded in the Head with the stroke of a Sith.
George Graham, one of the late Bailies of the Town, was d^eply cut on the Head
in two places. Doctor Wright and his Lady, and together with them her Mother
and Sisters, and several other Women, were very roughly handled and beaten.
Mrs. Anna Paterson Daughter to the Archbishop of the Place, Mrs. Margaret
Fleiming, and several other Gentlewomen were cruelly pinched after their
Clothes were torn off them. There was Scores of others severely beaten and
bruised, which would be tedious to make m^ntion of here, but only this we must
observe, There was a certain Carpenter, who was so dangerously wounded (so that
he lies now beyond hopes of Recovery) by four armed Men that promised to
conduct him through the Rabble, and to whose protection he innocently committed
himself. This is a true Account of what passed upon Sunday last, being the 17th
of February 1689. which I, as M^gistrate of Glasgow in absence of my Lord
Provost, give under my Hand as Truth.

James Gibsone.
For the further Testification of the Premises, we under Subscribers attest the
same Io. Gillhagie. Patrick Bell.


The Sufferings of Gideon Brown.
Sir,
TO obviate all Misrepresentations of my Treatment at Smelholm, I give you this
true and impartial account according to your desire.

Upon the first Saturday of February 1689. George Dickson Cottar to the Lair of
Smelholm a professed Cameronian, brought to me an unsubscribed Paper in the
presence of my Family, in the which he, in name of the Parochine, ordains me to
cease from the Exercise of my Ministry there, pretending in it, that I had no
call from the People, and that I was an Intruder, and had brought Troopers
among them; with this certification, that they would force and compel me to do
it. This much troubled me, to be upbraided for that of which I was never
guilty, and that by Persons whom often I kept from the lash of the Law, and who
had constantly heard me till the late Toleration, and frequently taken the
Sacrament from me, but from the consideration of our Saviors Treatment from
those to whom he was ever doing good, I comforted my self, and resolved
patiently to bear and undergo this present Disaster, and whatever might follow
thereupon. This being represented to the Lord Smelholm, he advised me for a
day to cease from Preaching, and withdraw, which accordingly I did: The next
Lords day I returned (laying aside all Fears, not willing so easily and
suddenly to be put from the Exercise of my Ministry) and it pleased the Lord to
grant to me, and to continue with me, a safe Exercise of my Ministry without
disturbance, until the fourteenth of April hereafter, which was the Lords day,
on which day the Scum of that People, most of them not above the quality of a
Servant, yet all dwelling under the Lord of Smelholm, except two, and newly
ins^igated by one George Dickson Preacher in a Meeting House near by (as I am
credibly informed) did assemble with Staves and Battoons (having, on Saturday
before, warned me by a second Summons, and taking away the Bell-rope) to oppose
me that day; the Lord of Smelholm being acquainted by me, of the said intended
Uproar, at the ordinary time of convening, came to the Churchyard, I following
with my Family, and after some communing with the said Rabble, his Tenants, who
had been there from six a Clock in the morning, prevailed to make patent Doors,
and having enter^d the Pulpi^ and begun to Pray, immediately the said George
Dickson (having received the Hire of eighteen Pence from the rest, as he
himself confessed afterward in my Beadles hearing) approached furiously to
draw me out of the Pulpit, which a Son of mine (of sixteen years of Age)
observing, stopped him before he came near me; upon which there came t^n about
the Boy, pulling the Hair off his Head, tearing his Hat, Cloak and Neckcloth,
which extorted from his Mother these words in the midst of the Church, Murder!
Murder! and forced me from the Pulpit, at length the Lord quieted them. Upon
all this I took Witnesses, and withdrew with my Family, to the Neighbor
Church, ever after that they put Cattle of all sorts into the Church,
frequently threatened my self, watched every Lords day for my coming, to Church,
not to Hear me but Harm me: O the Sin of Stoning of the Prophets, which brought
sad Judgments on the Guilty of Old, is now frequently among us practiced, the
Lord grant Amendment. This forced me to Preach in my own House, while after
Whitsunday, and then it being reported to me by some, that if I preached any
more in the House, the said Rabble would eject me and my Family, I ceased
there, and preached in some Neighbor Churches: At length they caused cite me
before the Council, Sept. 28. where for not praying for K. W. Nominatim, in my
House, and not reading the Proclamation there, I was deprived by the Council,
and appointed to remove from my i. e. Parsonage House.
Manse at Mertimas, to which I gave Obedience at the time (the Lord assuring
me that he could not keep his People off me, and that some had sworn to him,
that they would eject me, be the event never so Hazardous) and came to the City
of Edinburg with my whole Family, intending there the Education of my seven
Children at College and Schools: This is a true Narration of what befell me at
Smelholm, among that People, who kindly received and joined with me in all the
parts of my Ministry, until the said Dickson and others of that Persuasion had
conversed with them and frequently preached among them; yea, I am credibly
informed that this George Dickson on a Saturday night as he came from Edinburg,
lighted in a Change House, and then the People desiring him to preach to
morrow, he answered, He would preach no more until they put away the Curate
from among them.

Sir, I doubt not but what I have here written, will find credit with you on my
single Testimony, yet to this the Lord of Smelholm, with many others, can bear
witness, I rest (wishing the Lords Grace and Mercy ever to attend you)

Your humble Servant G. B.

The Persecution of Mr. William Bullo, whom the Rabble hindered from giving
Obedience, and yet was deprived.
MR. William Bullo Minister at Stobo in Tweddale, was all the Winter over most
barbarously used by the Rabble, they having many times, not only in the day
time, but even under cloud of night, with drawn Swords and Guns in their Hands,
entered his House, broke open the Doors thereof, and s^arched the same for
himself, and thereby did so affright his Wife and Children, that they took
Sickness through fear, and he himself for fear was forced to lie out in the
Fields in the coldest Winter nights: And after he had endured a great many of
their Onsets, about the beginning of April last, as the said Mr. Bullo was
coming home from the accompanying the Corpse of a Gentleman, they lay in ambush
for him by the way, and riding through a little Village in his own Parochine,
where there was a Meeting house erected, and where was the Dwelling House of
the Preacher of the Meeting House, out of which House there broke out upon him
a number of the Rabble (among whom was the Preachers Servant-man) and with
drawn Swords in their Hands, offered to stobb him, and charged him to stand,
and he putting the Spurs to his Horse rode for it, they firing their Guns after
him; and at last two of them mounted themselves on Horses and pursued him, and
chased him farther than his own House, until at length the said Mr. Bullo's
Horse gave over riding, and so they apprehended him, and told him, they would
instantly shoot him, and commanded him to his Knees; and he desiring for a
little time to pray; they told him, he had lived too long; he answered, that
was to quarrel with God, and he wished them to consider what they were saying
and doing, For, said he, you are in passion: You Damned Rogue, said they, do
you take on you to admonish us, we'll shoot you presently through the Head:
Then said he, Since you will do it, God have Mercy on my Soul, and God forgive
you, and now, said he, I have done: Then they laid many strokes on him, with
the broad side of their d^awn Swords, and told him, They would forbear his
Execution that night (it being then late of the night) and would take him
Prisoner to his own House, and guard him there until the next day, and
pronounce Sentence on him in sight of the whole Parish, and would do further as
they thought fit: And accordingly all this was done, for to morrow morning they
sent through the whole Parish, and convened all that would join with them
against the said Mr. Bullo, and entered his House in a most Hostile manner with
their Arms, and commanded his own Manservant to tear his Gown; and after many
Altercations betwixt him and them, they discharged him to preach any more upon
the peril of his Life: He told them, that he would receive no orders from them,
he came in by Authority and would not go out but by it. And about a Fortnight
or twenty days after this, they came upon his Family (he being from home) and
most cruelly threw out at doors his whole plenishing and Furniture of his
House, and locked up the Doors; and upon the Lords day, whereupon he should
have read the Conventions Proclamation for making Prayers for King William and
Queen Mary, and upon the day of Thanksgiving, they set Guards in the
Churchyard, lest he should have given Obedience. And thus was he violently
forced away from his Church, and is since deprived by Act of Council, for his
not Reading and Praying.

The Names of these honest Gentlemen who offered to attest the Truth of this
matter by their Oaths, when Mr. Bullo was deprived, are so well known to the
Council, that it would be needless here to insert them.

The Persecution of Mr. James Little.
MR. James Little Minister of the Gospel at Ti^dace, was warned by six Men,
whereof two were Cotters and four Young men, all Parishoners, to desist from
the Exercise of his Ministry at the Church of Tindace and Trailflatt annexed to
Tindace: he enquired of them by what Authority they did that; they answered,
What they had done they would stand to it: He enquired at several Parishoners,
If they had any Commission from them for the same; they answered, Not; so he
continued for two Lords days thereafter doing his Ministerial Duties without
Interruption: upon the third Lords day he goes to the Kirk of Trailflat, where
he is obliged to preach once a month, and there when he was going to perform
his Duty, there meets him to the number of fifty Women and upwards, with
Cudgels in their hands, and enters the House where he used to go in, and came
there and most violently abused his Person, without giving any reason why, and
teared his Cloak from his Shoulders, and hauled him out of Doors; which being
done, they compassed him about and beat him most severely with their Cudgels,
so that some Persons who was come to hear a Sermon, cried out, Will you Murder
a Man? and after they had torn all his Clothes (his Shirt not excepted) and
inquired how he durst come to preach there this day, being warned before to
desist, he answered, That they could not be ignorant of a Proclamation issued
out in name of the Prince of Orange, which was publicly intimate from the
Cross of Drumfries the Wednesday preceding, that all their Violencies and
Injuries should surcease until the Meeting of the Estates: They answered, That
they could not obey Man's Laws, but their King of Heavens Laws. He said likewise
unto them, Why do you put your selves out of that Frame and Temper that is
suitable to the Lords day? They answered, That in doing to me what they
pleased, they could not offend their King of Heaven. After this he desired them
to allow him some covering for to defend his Head from the cold, after they had
cut his Hat in pieces, and trod the same, with the rest of his Clothes, in the
Mire; all which they denied. After all this they required the Key of the
Kirk-door; he cried for the Beadle, who lived half a Mile distant from the
Kirk, who was not as yet come; upon which they sent two of their own number for
it, and the Man being out of the way they returned without it; so that the
Minister was necessitated to send again for the Key, which then came; during
which time, which was more than an hour and a half, he stood naked: Then they
compassed him about four at each Arm, others of them beating his Head and
Shoulders with their Fists, others of them Scratching and Nipping his bare
Back, and leads him along first to the Kirk-door, and after entering into the
Kirk, they required of him that he would there confess all the Wickednesses he
had done, as the Preaching under a Popish Tyrannical King, and delating those
who did not keep the Kirk: To which the said Mr. James answered, God Almighty
forgive you and me all our Wickednesses, and if you will have the patience, I
shall preach a Sermon to you, wherein I shall show you, upon what Ground you
and I may build the Forgiveness of all our Wickednesses, because every one that
asks Forgiveness does not obtain it. After which they came upon him with their
Cudgels over again, and lent him upon the Head and Shoulders, and said, Will
you preach to us: After all this they dragged him out of the Church, and caused
him to deliver the Key to one of them, and others of them cried, Come all here,
that we may all be alike in this Business: Immediately after they fastened four
to each Arm, as before, and leads him out of the Churchyard until they bring
him to a Mire, where they go about the Mire, and takes up handfuls of Dirt;
which made those who had him by the Arms, to part from him, and threw the same
handfuls of Dirt upon him, and after they dismissed themselves. This I am ready
to prove by many unexceptionable Witnesses.

I. L.
The Persecution of Mr. Archibald Ferguson Minister at Kirkpatrick.
SIR,
SInce you are so earnest to hear from me a true account of the Barbarities
committed by the pretended Godly Presbyterians here, upon the Person and Family
of Mr. Archibald Ferguson Minister at Kirkpatrick, in the Stueartry of
Annandale, where I live; as I am able so I am willing to satisfy you in this
matter to the full, for I was an Eyewitness to some part of the Tragedy, and
had the rest from some very honest Persons who were Spectators of the whole:
The matter of Fact in short was this; Upon the Festival of Easter last (a day
observed with much Religious Reverence by all the Christi^n World, except our
Presbyterians, who seem to have separated from that Catholic Society) eight
Men in Arms with about an equal number of Women, much in the same posture, came
to the Ministers Dwelling House early in the morning; and having forced open
his Ga^e, the good Minister, who was then busy in preparing himself to serve
God and his People in the Church, surprised with the extraordinary noise, and
hearing them ask so furiously for him, came calmly to them, and modestly asked
what business they had with him; Whereupon one of them took him by the Gorget,
commanding him to surrender himself up to them as their Prisoner: He asked them
what he had done for which he should be made Prisoner, and by what Authority
they made him theirs: He was answered by a severe blow upon the Head with a
Pistol, the stroke knocked him flat to the ground, and the Wound it made, would
in all probability proved mortal, if his Head had not been gaurded by a thick
Velvet Cap, which by kind Providence he had then upon it: The Miscreant who
wounded him, ordered him immediately to be dragged out from his Gate, which two
of his Blood-thirsty Accomplices as readily performed, beating him afterward
down into a nasty Puddle; his poor Wife (then so big with Child that she
expected every day to be brought to Bed) running out to save, if she could, her
Husbands Life, was, at her first Appearance, knocked down with the Butt end of
a Musket; she received many merciless blows, and had her Head and Body severely
bruised among the Stones where she was beat down. Then James Harcannass their
noble Captain at this honorable Expedition, gave the word of Command to his
Female Janissaries, which was, Strip the Curate (for they think this a most
Disgraceful App^llation, and therefore they apply it to all Episcopal
Ministers) the order was no sooner given, than these Amazons prepared to put it
in execution, for throwing away their Plaids, ( i. e. loose upper Garments)
each of them drew from her Girdle a great sharp pointed Dagger, prepared, it
seems, for a thorough Reformation. The good Minister lying panting and
prostrate on the ground, had first his Nightgown torn and cut off him, his
close Coat, Wastcoat and Britches ripped open with their Knives; nay, their
Modesty could not so far prevail against their Zeal, as to spare his Shi^t and
Drawers, but all were cut in pieces and sacrificed to a broken Covenant: The
forementioned Captain gave the finishing stroke himself, with a great Reforming
Club, the blow was designed for the Ministers Head or Breast, but he naturally
throwing out his Hands to save those vital parts, occasioned it to fall upon
his Shin-bones, which he had drawn up to cover his Nakedness; the blow was
such, as greatly bruised both his Legs, and made them swell extraordinarily
after; however the Captain thinking that they were broke, and finding it
uneasy for himself and his Companions to stand longer in a great Storm of Wind
and Snow which happened to fall out that morning, he drew off his Company, and
left the Semi-Martyr, who afterward by the assistance of his Servants, crawled
home to his Bed, and but a little after, the whole Herd of his Persecutors
broke in again upon him, and told him, They had treated him so, because he
prayed for the Tyrant York, (so these People ordinarily called King James, tho
he was too kind to them) and because he had presumed to preach, and visit the
Parishioners as if he had been their Minister, which they had formerly forbid
him to do; they required him also to be gone from their Covenanted Lands, under
pain of death, before that day Sevennight, and never again to meddle with the
Ministry. And tho^ Application was afterward made by some who might have been
supposed to have had Interest with that Crew, yet nothing could prevail to
obtain so much as but a delay till his poor Wife should be brought to Bed, and
himself a little recovered of his Wounds: So that he was forced to fly for his
Life, from his Parish, Wife and Children, without any hopes of returning, till
it shall please God to bring some order out of our present Confusions, to open
the Eyes of blind and fiery Zealots, and to stop the Fury of our ungoverned
Rabble: I may say, that our Judgments begin at the House of the Righteous, for
this Man is a Person of extraordinary Parts and Piety: I think it not strange,
that some Men with you are so unready to believe the Fanatic Practices here,
since few Men can suppose any People so Barbarous as our Bigots indeed are, but
I admire that these ill Instruments about Court, who give Encouragement, Life
and Motion to the Faction here, should so impudently deny the Matters of Fact,
which themselves know to be but too true. If this particular Passage should be
contradicted, I am ready and willing my self to attest it, and to prove it by
several other unexceptionable Witnesses; and tho it be dangerous to have
particular Men's Names published, the Faction we have to deal with being
Merciless and Bloody; yet if nothing else can serve, I allow you to use my
Name, but do it no further than the Cause requires, and with all that
Discretion and Caution that is expected from you by

SIR, Your sincere Friend and humble Servant G. M.

The Third Collection of Papers, containing the Sufferings of those Ministers
who complied.
The Persecution of Mr. William Hamilton Minister at Irwine and Kirknewton.
MR. William Hamilton, a Man for the Integrity of his Life, Purity of his
Doctrine, Knowledge and Gift of Preaching beyond Exception, was first Minister
at Pemicooke in Midhotham, where he served in the Ministry for several years
with great Reputation: In the Year 1681. the Clergy being required to take the
Test, he was one of these Ministers who scrupled to take it, and so was laid
aside, he lived privately and peaceably, following his Studies, till he had
again access to the free Exercise of his Ministry, which was first at the Town
of Irwin in Cunningham in the Wes^; the People there are for the most part
Presbyterians. The Exemplariness of the Man's Life. The first Character I have
given of the Man already, one would have thought must have conciliate all
Respect and Kindness to him amongst his Neighbors, he treated them with all
Discretion and Civility, upon all Occasions, yea, at such Occasions as he was
not to preach at himself, he went to hear him who preached in the next
Meeting House, and went frequently to visit him, but all this prevailed not;
for about the end of Ian. 1688/9. these People attacqued him, some of them came
in the morning, and kept him Prisoner all the Forenoon, till their Accomplices
met, to the number of about Fifty or Sixty, when they were all convened, five
or six of them seized him, and carried him through the Town to the Cross,
making a Show of him, and here were none of all these People of his own Parish,
but only two, but almost the whole Inhabitants were looking on, and saw their
Minister, who deserved so very well of them, thus rudely treated, without
rescuing him. When he was brought to the Cross, they tore his Gown over his
Head, and told him, That that was their Testimony against Episcopacy; they took
upon them to discharge him to preach there again, and to command him to depart
from the i. e. Parsonage House.
Manse and Glebe, which he the more readily promised to do, because he was
weary of living amongst them, and had an Invitation to a Charge where he
expected more Comfort and Success in his Ministry, tho less Stipend. From Irwin
he came to Kirknewt^n seven Miles from Edinburg in the Presbytery of Edinburg:
About the end of February he exercised his Ministry there peaceably until the
18th of April, at which time a company of armed Men came to his House, about
Nine of the Clock at Night (none of them were his own Parishoners) and
commanded him in King William's Name to preach there no more. He had complied
with the first, to the present Government in all things required of him, he
made his Application to the Committee of Estates then Sitting, who granted him
an Order to preach at Kirknewton, forbidding any Person to disturb him, or
wrong him in his Person or Goods. But notwithstanding this, in June another
armed Company came about six of the Clock one Night to his House when he was
absent, and ejected his Wife and six small Children, one of them very Sick; at
this time the Act of the Meeting of Estates in the Ministers Favor was
produced to these People, they read it, and dropped and trampled on it, and said,
they valued it not, tho it had been under King William's own Hand, this being
again represented to the Committee of Estates, they sent out Sir John Maitland,
one of the said Committee, to enquire about such unsufferable Insolences, who
came to the place, bespoke some he heard were most accessory, and took a List
of their Names: Notwithstanding of this, not long after five Women assaulted
the Minister, who had been reponed and preached again.

His Servant and Horse coming from the Coal-pit, and the Servant-man's Daughter
coming out to her Father's defense, was ill hurt by them, she fell in a Swound
at this and at the ^ight of a Fellow who came with a drawn Sword to assist
these Assassins.

July 19. Yet again came a company of armed Men at nine at Night, the Minister
being occasionally absent, and were yet more Outrageous, and again cast out of
the House his Wife, Children and Servants; at this time also they cast out his
Furniture, broke much of it, took away several Books and other things he could
ill spare. Mr. Hamilton, at his return, finding his Wife in a Coal-house, and
being informed how badly his Family had been used, concluded it ne^dless to
struggle any longer with the Humor, and did not attempt to preach. His Sick
Child died before the last Assault. He afterward finding it needful for him to
take Physic, and having no convenience for that in the Coal-house, on the
first of October he entered the empty i e. Parsonage House.
Manse, and set up a single Bed, caused carry into it one Chair and
Candlestick; on the fifth of October that Rabble returned and broke the Bed all
in pi^ces, so that afterward he burnt it for fuel, it being rendered otherwise
useless; they cast out the Clothes into the Puddle; spared not the Chamber Pot,
but beat out the bottom of it with Halbards, left not his walking Cain
unbroken. They not finding himself in the Manse, they went to search for him in
the Coal-house; so narrow was the search they made, that* they left not
Feather-beds and Bolsters and Chests unpierced with their Swords, crying, Come
out Dog, (so they called the Minister) two and twenty of them, all known
Persons, after they had left the Cottage in which the Minister then lived, met
his Servant with two Horses coming loaded with Coals to his House, they carried
them back two Miles after they had come six, and compelled the Ministers own
Servant to bring forth kindling to make a Bonefire of the Coals, which was done
just before my Lord Torphican's Windows who lived in that place. The Minister
happened at the time to be in a House in the Town in which one of the Heretors
of the Parish lived, with a Friend, about his business. These People who had so
abused his House and his Servant, got notice of his being there, and came to
the House and would needs see him. The Master of the House and his Wife, being
his good Friends, and stout-hearted People, hindered these People from breaking
open the door, which they attempted to do. They threatened to shoot a pair of
Balls through the door upon the Minister; at length they promised to do him no
harm if he would come forth to them. Upon this he came out, and when they saw
him they had little to say to him, but that he had no right to go to the Manse,
it belonging to the Kirk, and he had no right to that: He said he had returned
thither not to dwell, but only for a day or two to take Physic, he having no
convenience for that in the Coal-house he then lived in, he behaved himself
with that Caution and Moderation, that they could not find the least color to
do him further Injury, they only vented some foolish and impertinent Words
against him. All this I can prove by the Attestation and Oaths of Famous
Witnesses.

W. H.
Instruments in favor of the Heritors and Ministers in Colingtown, who gave
all Obedience to the Conventions Commands.
At Colingtown the Eighth day of September.

THE which day in presence of me Notar Public, and Witness under subscribing,
compeired personally Patrick Porterfeild of Comistown, and passed with me and
several others to the Kirk of Hailes, where we were resolved to hear a Sermon
(the Minister being at home intending to preach, but waiting till the Bells
should ring) where we were no sooner come, but there appeared several armed Men
within the Kirk-yard, at whom the said Patrick Porterfeild for himself and in
name and behalf of the rest of the Heritors of that Parochine, and of Mr.
Samuel Nimmo present Minister there, asked from whence they were come, and to
whom they belonged, and if they were come to that place of design to interrupt
the Minister to preach: Who answered, That they belonged to the Earl of Angus
his Regiment, and were come there designedly to hinder him to preach, and that
he should not preach there take his part who would. To which it was answered by
the said Patrick Porterfeild, That King William and Queen Mary and their
Council had taken his part, and authorized him to preach; and that accordingly
he was ready to preach and to read the Proclamation for the Fast if they would
not hinder him. To which they replied, That they disowned all such Authority,
and that the Minister should not preach there. Whereupon the said Patrick
Porterfeild took instruments in the Hands of me Notar Public undersubscribing.
This was done within the said Kirk-yard betwixt the hours of Nine and Ten in
the Forenoon, Day Month and Y^ar of God abovementioned, In presence of Mr. Hugh
Durie Writer in Edinburg, and William Bole Tailor there, with saveral other
Witnesses to the Premises d^sired and required.

Ita esse ut praemittitur ego Joannes Gourlay Notarius Publicus in praemissis
requisitus assero testantibus his meis manu and Signo.

William Bole. Hugh Durie.


Mr. William Selkrig's Treatment.
MR. William Selkrig Minister at Glenhome in Twiddale, read the Proclamation
and prayed for King William and Queen Mary Nominatim, with the very first, and
continued in the Exercise of his Ministry till the middle of June, at which
time twenty of the Rabble, Shepherds and Cowherds and such like, came from
Crawford Moor and Tweedmore to his House, and threatened to cast his Wife and
Children and Plenishing out of Doors, if he would not engage to surcease from
the Exercise of his Ministry and remove from the Manse: This he refusing to do,
they cast out all, the Minister assuring them he would complain to Authority:
They answered him, They cared not for Authority, and they would be doing: Upon
which he desired they would allow him a Fortnight to remove; and with great
difficulty he obtained that: His Parishoners did not appear against him but
owned him. Upon a Proclamation of the sixth of August went back, made offer to
return to his Ministry and conform to the Proclamation. Two Fellows, one
whereof had kept the Church till he had given satisfaction for a Scandal, the
other never kept the Church: These two had put on another Lock on the
Church^door by their own Authority. Upon which Mr. Selkrig went to the Sheriff
Depute with another Brother to crave his assistance conform to the Pr^cl^mati^n
to ^ake the Church^open, ^e pr^mised to cause the Church door he made patent
against a day they agreed ^n. The Minister came on that Saturday and found it
not done, but received from the D^puty a Letter of excuse, That he would
understand what had been done in other Shires. Mr. Selkrig th^n went to the two
Fellows with a Notar, and required the Key of the Church-door according to the
Proclamation, that he might return to his Ministry. They acknowledged that they
were accessory to the putting on the Lock but that they had not the Key: He
repli^d, That either they had it, or knew where it was; and ^p^n their refusal
to make the Church-door patent, took Instruments of his willingness and their
refusal to deliver the Key, protesting for reparation of Cost, Skaith and
Damage, as the Ins^^ument at length b^a^s; and upon this ^eturned to Edinburg
where he and his Family live still. The instr^ment and acco^nt of this, was
produced by the Minister under the hands of the public Not^ary and several
Witnesses, to persons in Authority, but no redress was made.

The Persecution of Mr. Burges a Complier.
SIR,
It Is like you are d^sir^us to be informed how Affairs go with me; I am one of
these who have given Obedi^nce to the Meeting of Estates, but I met with no
P^otecti^n from them: Upon the Lords day, immediately after the rising of this
Current Parliament, Tumultuously, tho without A^^s, the Rabble came and
possessed then selves of the Church, being sent from one Mr. Walker who
preaches in the Meeting House by the connivance of Mr. M^^at (whom I suppose
you know) who sometime was Minister there, but is now Old and therefore unable
(as they say) for which they have cast him ^ff; all this time they came not
near me, nor ^^quired aft^r me; and I no wise doubted (in the mean while) but
that Act of Parliament, anent their Establishment, had passed unto a Law, so
^oved not abroad from my House that day; the next I preached as formerly,
without any Inter^uption, the Reason was (as I knew afterward) that the
Heritors and the old Presbyterian Ministers were offended that the young Man
should have invaded upon Mr. Mouat's Right; whereupon my officious Helper has
ever since retired himself and discontented with his former Conven^icle:
However they are resolved, I mean the Rabble, that I shall no longer enjoy
peaceable possession, notwithstanding my Compliance: In order to this, there
comes in a considerable number of Fellows with Arms and beating of Drums to my
House, and asked for me upon the Tu^sday following, I was not at home, but they
challenged my Wife how I dared to preach after they had possessed the Church:
She told them, What I did was by the Authority of King William: To which they
replied, King William, we care not for that Authority: At which she smiled, and
thanked them for their Dis^^etion. Some of them threatened very rudely, that if
I preached any more there, it should cost me my Life; others spoke more
discreetly, and only advised I should not do it, lest I brought my self to more
trouble. However, when I came home, I prepar^d for preaching, but upon Sunday
morning there assembled in my Churchyard, and about my Gates, two hundred
Fellows with Guns Staves and Swords; when I judged it near the ordinary time of
going for Church, I sent forth my Reader to know from them, why they were
assembled at so unseasonable a time, since they came not to hear Sermon from
me; and withal, That they would by some few of their number, let me understand
the same. Accordingly they commissionated four to speak with me, who told me
^iatly, Our Will is, y^u preach no more here, and you shall preach no more. I
was indeed a little startled to hear Cowards speak in such a Sovereign Style,
and opposed the Authority of King William to Counterballance theirs, but to no
purpose, for they told me they cared not a Rush for that, they would do as they
pleased. I have not preached there since, save in my own House. They guarded
the Church for four or five Sabbaths, and this is all I have to trouble you
with, only I entreat your Prayers in behalf of

SIR, Your Brother and Servant I. B.

The Persecution of Mr. David Spence.
ABout the beginning of January 1689. between fifty and sixty Men, all
Strangers to me, came in an hostile manner to my House, and searched every part
of it for me, with drawn Swords in their hands, and not finding me, appointed
my Wife to tell me, that they discharged me to preach any more there, or
require any more Stipend, under the highest pains; and thus notwithstanding
more than a whole years Stipend was unpaid to me; but I continued in the
Exercise of my Ministry until the Twentieth day of April, at that time a great
number, some Strangers, some my own Parishoners, came to my House armed with
Muskets and Swords, that was the day on which I was appointed to have read the
Proclamation of the 23d of April, and the cause of their coming then was, they
feared I might comply; they resolved to pr^vent that, and took away the Keys of
the Kirk-door, and also the Mortcloth (tho part of its price was unpaid to me)
thus I was incapacitated to obey the Order of the Meeting of the Estates: Upon
this I applied my self to the Committee of ^states then Sitting, showing, that
whereas I was willing to give Obedience to the Law, yet I could not have
Liberty for the Rabble which excluded me from the Church; the Committee gave me
a Protection and Warrant, and required the Heretors to put and keep me in the
peaceable ^xercise of my Ministry, and secure such Persons as should disturb me
in my Ministry. I showed the Protection to all the Heretors, but Kirkurd, one
of them, and who was most concern^d, said it was not in their power to protect
me, tho they were chiefly his Tenants that opposed me. Afterward in September
they cited me before the Privy Council, which deprived me and declared my
Church vacant, only because I did not read the Proclamation in my own House,
which the Law did not require: They consid^red not the Protection I had from
the Committee, nor my willingness to obey if allowed, but tre^ted me as if my
Non Obedience had been the most free choice in the World; which I can prove by
Witnesses. This, Sir, is a true account of my Case. I am

SIR, Your most obliged humble Servant D. Spence.

The Persecution of the Presbytery of Stranrare who complied.
SIR,
YOU are desirous to have an account how the Ministers of the Presbytery of
Stranrare were tr^ated by the Rabble. In the first place you must know, that
all of them had read the P^oclamation, and prayed for King William and Queen
Mary, except one who was in Edinburg at the time; notwithstanding of this they
were not secure from the Rabble, but on the contrary their greatest Troubles
then began, most of them continued preaching till Whitsunday, at which time
small Parties of these People who came over from Ireland for shelter, were
employed and conduced to go to several Ministers Houses to discharge them to
preach any longer, adding Threatenings if they continued in the Exercise of
their Ministry there; they put on new Locks which they brought with them on the
Church-doors, and kept Guards there and in the Churchyards, to hinder the
Ministers from ent^ring. All the Ministers of this Presbytery were ^jected out
of their Manses. Mr. Ramsay one of them, dwelt in an hired House which did not
belong to the Church, but he was not spared more than the rest, these People
came and drowned out his Fire, cast out his Goods* and otherwise badly
entreated his Family, frighted his poor Wife and Children, he was forced to
flee to Ireland for shelter, from whence these People had come. These People,
when demanded by the Ministers why they who pretended to flee from Pers^cu^ion
themselves, and were Protestants, should at such rate persecute Protestant
Ministers, who obeyed the Law, and expected rather Protection, but on the
contrary had showed Hospitality toward them, according to their Ability. Some
of them being confounded at this, said, That they were pressed, yea, hir^d to
what they had done; yea, some of them vowed they should never go such an Errand
again. I believe Necessity had moved th^se poor People for a little Money to do
that which otherwise they abhorred, but when some would not go they found
others. The Ministers, after they were cast out of their Manses, they lived in
the Barns of the Manses for some time, but they were not suffered to con^inue
long there but were ejected; then they took shelter in the Barns and Stables of
Countrymen who ^avoured them always, till they themselves were menaced and
threatened for receiving them. One of them, Mr. James Cameron, a very worthy
Man, was forced, with the Man who reset him, to betake themselves to the
Fields, to save themselves in the Nightime from the Rabble who were come to
assault them. This came upon the hon^st Country man, merely because he
shelter^d his Minister whom he loved. These Furious People meeting with the
Ministers Servant, did beat him so till he fell to the Ground deprived of all
signs of Life. The^Rabble came to a Ministers Wife of Glenluce when her Husband
was absent, and enquired for him, and when they found him not, they began to
cast out his Goods into the Closs, and the Ministers Wife had caused put on a
Pan on the Fire for to make some Breakfast for a Sucking Child, but their Fury
could not allow them to forbear drowning out the Fire till the Child's Meat
should first been made. This is all the abrupt Information that now in haste
can be given, but you may have a further account afterward.

Mr. John Maubray Minister at Vphall did comply with all that was required of
him by the Council, yet the Rabble came upon him, did cast out his Plenishing,
tore his Gown, aff^ighted his Wife so that she died shortly after. Being thus
violently thrust from his Wife, he came to his Patron Lord Cardrose, one of the
present Privy Council, and desired that his Lordship would allow him but to
shelter himself in some Chamber of his Lordships House of Kirkhill, till he
provided himself of some other place; but my Lord denied his request: He then
adventured again to lodge in the Manse to preach to his People, but the Lord
Cardrose commanded him to forbear, and when he would not promise to abstain,
his Lordship did take from the said Mr. John the Keys of the Church-doors, so
that he has excluded him the Kirk. This can be proved by many famous Witnesses,
as is now attested by

W. S. I. M.


The Persecution of Mr. Francis Scot.
MR. Francis Scot Minister of the Gospel at Tweedmore, was ejected by the
Rabble, and his whole Family turned out of doors, (his Wife having been
delivered of a Child four days before) tho he complied in all Points.

Mr. William Alison Minister of the Gospel at Kilbocho was ejected about the
same time by the Rabble, to wit, the middle of Summer, they holding Pistols to
his Breast, having given all Obedience to the Laws, yet was cited by his
Parochioners before the Council, and was absolved and warranded to return to
his Charge; after a number of Women in his own Parochie, rose up and went to
his Manse, wherein he had some plenishing standing, and threw it out and broke
it all in pieces, and drove away his Cows that was pasturing in his own Glebe,
and destroyed all his Corn; and now a Meeting House Preacher possesses
his-Church, preaching in it daily, albeit he be authorized himself by
Authority, and after all this no care is taken to repossess him. Witness our
Hands

F. S. W. A.

A Letter to the Lord E -- ne.
Airth October. 14. 1689. May it please your Lordship,
WE your whole Neighbor Heretors concerned in the Parish of Airth, considering
the Vacancy of our Church through the removal of Mr. Paul Gellie our Minister,
by the rash Depositions of two or three insignificant Persons, and the great
Insolences of the Rabble thereupon, without Law or Order, in abusing and
violently possessing the Church; conceived our selves obliged to entreat your
Lordship to see what may be done for the Redress and Satisfaction of orderly
People. And seeing we have nothing to object against the Life or Doctrine of
our Minister, who is well beloved by the whole Body of the Parish, whose
Loyalty and Painfulness in the Ministry, your Lordship knows: It is our ^arnest
desire, that you interpose your endeavor to get him repossess'd again in this
Church, if possible, in doing of which, you may be instrumental for promoting
the good of this place, and not only oblige the whole Body of the Parish, but
particularly us who are

Your Lordships humble Servants, Alex. Bruce Ia. Bruce of Powfouls. Jonas Bruce
of Letham. Al. Elphinstone as Tutor of Stone-house. Rob. Rolls of Panhouse. I.
Wright of Kersie. I. Forssithe of Polmais Taillertowne.


A Letter to the Right Honorable the Lord E -- ne at London.
Barnton October. 17. 1689. My Dear Lord,
YOUR Lordship knows how Mr. Paul Gellie, your Minister, has deported himself
in his Ministry at Airth, and has gained the Affections of all the Parish,
except three or four of the very worst of them, and how he was removed from his
Charge upon the Depositions of two flagitious Fellows, who had resolved to Damn
themselves to get him out of his Ministry. If your Lordship can get his Cas^
fairly represented, and him reponed to his Charge; I hear that the Hail
Heretors, and the most substantious Tenants, will take it as a singular Favor:
And albeit I have no Interest, but as a Tutor to Airth, I will esteem it for a
singular Kindness. My most humble Service to my Lady, and I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant, To. Mylne.

A Letter to the Lord E -- ne in London.
Edin. Nov. 19. 1689. My Lord,
I Have sent the Testimony of the Heretors of your Lordships Parish, with
Barnton's in my Favors, hoping your Lordship on their Testificat, with your
own Knowledge, may procure an Order of Reinstallment from His Majesty to me,
especially considering, that to your certain knowledge I have given full
Obedience to the Government, and have in my Custody the Testimonies of an
hundred and fifty Heads of Families subscribed by them, ready to depone the
truth of my Obedience, and Innocence of what these two infamous Persons
witnessed against me: Yea, I have a subscribed Testimony of honest Men,
offering to prove these two Witnesses (by whom I was deposed) really perjured,
and before credible famous Witnesses one of them has confessed his Perjury. And
if His Majesty be informed of the manifest Injury done me by two perjured
Persons, contrary to the Testimony of the whole Parish, I doubt not of an Order
of Reinstallment; and truly the Falsehood, Malice and Cruelty of that Party in
your Lordships Parish, is so known to the Presbyterian Ministers themselves,
that scarcely any one will come and preach to them; for tho they violently
possess the Church, which they have greatly abused, they had not a Sermon these
diverse Sabbaths: So that our People not only want the preaching of the Gospel,
but likewise the Ordinances of the Lords Supper and Baptism. If I were present
I am assured to prevail, and if you judge it expedient, send me word by a Line,
and with the help of God I shall come on my own Horse by Land, for I am afraid
to venture by Sea. I would have sent the Testificat of the whole Parish
contrary to these two false Depositions against me, but I am afraid they may be
miscarried, and it would be hard for me to recover them again at this juncture
of time, but I think your Lordships own Testimony will be sufficient with what
I have done. My Lord, I need not use motives to persuade your Lordship to move
herein, all are confident you both may and will prevail for an Order from His
Majesty for my Reinstallment, which will be for your Lordships Honor, who is
Patron, and for His Majesty's Interest, as well as my Advantage. I shall add no
more, but pray for the Blessing of God on your Lordship, Lady, and the whole
Children, which shall ever be continued by,

My Lord, Your Lordships most faithful and Obedient Servant, Paul Gellie.

The Fourth Collection of Papers containing Proclamations, Acts of Convention
and Council.
A Proclamation against Owning of the late King James, and Commanding Public
Prayers to be made for King William and Queen Mary.
THE Estates of this Kingdom of Scotland having proclaimed and declared William
and Mary, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, to be King and Queen
of Scotland; They have thought fit by public Proclamation, to certify the
Leidges, that none presume to own or acknowledge the late King James the
Seventh, for their King, nor obey, accept, or assist any Commissions or Orders,
that may be Emitted by him, or any way to Correspond with him; and that none
presume upon their highest Peril, by Word, Writing, in Sermons, or any other
manner of Way, to Impugn, or Disown the Royal Authority of William and Mary,
King and Queen of Scotland; But that all the Leidges render their Dutiful
Obedience to their Majesty's; And that none presume to Misconstrue the
Proceeding of the Estates, or to Create Jealousies or Misapprehensions of the
Actings of the Government; but that all the Ministers of the Gospel, within the
Kingdom, publicly Pray for King William and Queen Mary, as King and Queen of
this Realm: And the Estates do Require the Ministers within the City of
Edinburgh, under the pain of being Deprived and losing their Benefices, to Read
this Proclamation publicly from their Pulpits, upon Sunday next, being the
14th instant, at the end of their Forenoons Sermon: And the Ministers on this
side of the River of Tay, to Read the same upon Sunday thereafter, the 21st
Instant; And those Be-north Tay, upon the 28th Instant, under the pain
foresaid: Discharging hereby the Proclamation of the Council, Dated the 16th of
September 1686. to be read hereafter in Churches. And the Estates do Prohibit
and Discharge, any Injury to be offered by any Person whatsoever, to any
Ministers of the Gospel, either in Churches or Meeting Houses, who are
presently in the Possession and Exercise of their Ministry therein, they
behaving themselves as becomes, under the present Government: And Ordains this
Proclamation to be published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, with all
ordinary Sol^mnities, that none may pretend Ignorance. Extracted forth of the
Records of the Meeting of the Estates, by me

To. Mckenzie.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
The Reader is desired to take notice, because omitted in the Narrative, that
tho the Presbyterian Preachers, whom it is certain the Convention thought
Gospel Ministers, were obliged as much at least as any others, to read this
Proclamation, and had it for that purpose sent them; yet they were never called
in question for their neglect of it, tho that was sufficient to turn out the
Orthodox Clergy, which to play the Pedant for once, amounts to this in Latin:
Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura columbas.
In Scotch.
Show me the Man and I Will show you the Law.


The truth is, the Governors knew that many of the Meeting House Preachers
could not be induced to do any thing in favor of any King, until he had first
declared for Presbytery and renewed the Holy Covenant, and this is the true
reason, why no Oath of Allegiance is yet put to any of the Clergy in Scotland,
either of the one Persuasion or the other; This Proclamation was not published
till Saturday April 1^. 1689. and sent to the Ministers at Edinburgh late that
night, and to some of them not till Sunday Morning, and yet upon that short
Advertisement, all were to satisfy their Scruples of Conscience against next
Morning, about Translating their Allegiance which they had Sworn to one King,
to another who had not then declared that he would accept the Crown upon such
Conditions as it was offered with; otherways they were to be deprived; This is
pressing of Conscience with a witness; and it is plain from the latter part of
this Proclamation, that Men might offer what Injury they pleased to Ministers
of the Gospel, who were not then in exercise and possession of their Ministry;
that is indeed, to all the Orthodox Ministers in the West, who had been some
months before drawn from their Possessions by the Rabble.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Address of the Presbyterian Ministers in His Majesty's Kingdom of
Scotland.
May it please your Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, the Ministers of the Presbyterian
Persuasion in your Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the deep Sense we have of
Your Majesty's gracious and surprising Favor, in not only putting a stop to
our Long Sad Sufferings for Nonconformity, but granting us the Liberty of the
public and peaceable Exercise of our Ministerial Function, without any H^zard;
as we bless the great God who has put this in Your Royal Heart, do withal find
our selves bound in Duty to offer our most humble and hearty Thanks to Your
Sacred Majesty; the Favor bestowed being to us, and all the People of our
Persuasion, valuable above all our Earthly Comforts: Especially since we have
Ground from Your Majesty to believe, That our Loyalty is not to be questioned
upon the account of our being Presbyterians; who, as we have amidst all former
Temptations endeavored, so are firmly resolved still to preserve an entire
Loyalty in our Doctrine and Practice, (consonant to our known Principles, which
according to the Holy Scriptures are contained in the Confession of Faith
generally owned by Presbyterians in all Your Majesty's Dominions:) And, by the
help of God, so to demean our selves, as Your Majesty may find cause rather to
enlarge, than to diminish Your Favors toward us: Thoroughly persuading our
selves, from Your Majesty's Justice and Goodness, That if we shall at any time
be otherwise represented, Your Majesty will not give Credit to such
Information, until You take due Cognition thereof; And humbly b^seeching that
those who promote any Disloyal Principles and Practices, (as we do disown them)
may be looked upon as none of ours, whatsoever Name they may assume to
themselves.

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty graciously to accept this our humble
Address, as proceeding from the Plainness and Sincerity of Loyal and Thankful
Hearts, much engaged by this Your Royal Favor to continue our fervent Prayers
to the King of Kings, for Divine Illumination and Conduct, with all other
Blessings Spiritual and Temporal, ever to attend Your Royal Person and
Government; which is the greatest Duty can be re^dred to Your Majesty, by

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Subjects.
Subscribed in our own Names, and in the Name of the rest of the Brethren of our
Persuasion at their desire.
At Edinburgh the Twenty first day of July, in the Year One thousand six
hundred eighty seven.
To the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
The humble Address of those of the Presbyterian Persuasion in the City of
Edinburgh and Canongate.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
WE cannot find suitable Expressions to evidence our most humble and grateful
Acknowledgments for your Majesty's late Gracious Declaration, by which we are
happily delivered of many sad and grievous Burdens we have long groaned under:
And (all Restrainsts, to our great Joy, being taken off) are allowed the free
and peaceable public Exercise of our Religion, a Mercy which is dearer to us
than our Lives and Fortunes.

Could we open our Hearts, Your Majesty would undoubtedly see what deep Sense
and true Zeal for Your Service, so surprising and signal a Favor has imprinted
on our Spirits; For which we reckon our selves highly obliged (throwing our
selves at Your Majesty's Feet) to return Your most Excellent Majesty our most
humble, dutiful, and hearty Thanks: And we desire humbly to assure Your
Majesty, That as the Principles of the Protestant Religion, which according to
our Confession of Faith we prof^ss, obliges us all the days of our Lives to
that entire Loyalty and Duty to Your Majesty's Person and Government, that no
difference of Religion can dissolve; So we hope, and through God's assistance
shall still endeavor, to demean our selves in our Practice in such manner as
shall evidence to the World the Truth and Sincerity of our Loyalty and
Gratitude, and make it appear that there is no Inconsistency betwixt True
Loyalty and Presbyterian ^rinciples.

Great Sir! We humbly offer our dutiful and faithful Assu^ances, that as we
have not been hitherto wanting in that great Duty which our Consciences bind
upon us to pray for Your Majesty; so this late refreshing and unexpected Favor
will much more engage us in great Sincerity to continue still to offer up our
desires to the God of Heaven, by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice,
to bless Your Majesty's Royal Person and Government; And after a happy and
comfortable Reign on Earth, to crown You with an incorruptible Crown of Glory
in Heaven, which is most ardently prayed for, by,

Most Dread Sovereign, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Loyal, most Dutiful,
and most Obedient Subjects. Subscribed in our own Names, and by Order of those
of the Presbyterian Persuasion within Your City of Edinburgh and Conongate.

There is another Address that I have seen from the Pastors and People of God
As they call themselves.
in the West of Scotland in and about Glasgow, which for high Strains of
Flattery and vast Promises of Duty and Compliance, far out-does the two that
are here inserted, yea, and that high-flown one of your Godly honest Alsop in
England, it is to that Address of Glasgow which could not now be bad, that the
Author of the Narrative more particularly relates: by these two that we have
found, Men may see how ready that Party was to comply with a Popish Prince, and
how faithful they are to their greatest Promises of Duty and Allegian^e,
appears by their Practices since.

The Viscount of Dundee's Letter to the Convention.
Dudhop, March 27. 1689. May it please your Grace,
THe coming of an Herald and Trumpeter to Summon a Man to lay down Arms, that
is living in peace at home, seems to me a very extraordinary thing; and I
suppose will do so to all that hears of it. While I attended the Convention at
Edinburgh, I complained often of many peoples being in Arms without Authority,
which was notoriously known to be true, even the Wild Hill-men; and no Summons
to lay down Arms under the pain of Treason being given them, I thought it
unsafe for me to stay longer among them: And because some sew of my Friends did
me the Favor to convey me out of reach of these Murderers, and that my Lord
Levingston, and several other Officers took occasion to come away at the same
time, this must be called being in Arms: We did not exceed the number allowed
by the Meeting of Estates: my Lord Levingston and I might have had each of us
Ten; and four or five Officers that were in Company might have had a certain
number allowed them; which being, it will be found we exceeded not. I am sure
it is far short of the number my Lord Lorne was seen to march with. And tho I
had gone away with some more than ordinary, who can blame me, when Designs of
Murdering me was made appear? Besides, it is known to every body, that before
we came within sixteen Miles of this, my Lord Levingston went off to his
Brother my Lord Strathmoir's House; and most of the Officers, and several of
the Company, went to their respective Homes or Relations; and if any of them
did me the Favor to come along with me, must that be called being in Arms?
Sure when your Grace represents this to the Meeting of the States, they will
discharge such a groundless Pursuit, and think my appearance before them
unn^c^ssary. Besides, tho it were necessary for me to go and attend the
Meeting, I cannot come with Freedom and Sa^ety, because I am informed there are
Men of War and Foreign Troops in the Passage; and till I know what they are,
and what are their Orders, the Meeting cannot blame me for not coming. Then, my
Lord, seeing the Summons has proceeded on a groundless Story, I hope the
Meeting of States will think it unreasonable I should leave my Wife in the
Condition she is in. If there be any body that, notwithstanding of all that is
said, think I ought to appear, I beg the favor of a delay till my Wife is
brought to Bed, and in the mean time I will either give Security, or Paroll,
not to disturb the Peace. Seeing the Pursuit is so groundless, and so
reasonable things offered, and the Meeting composed of prudent Men, and Men of
Honor, and your Grace presiding in it, I have no reason to fear further
trouble. I am,

May it please your Grace, Your most humble Servant, Sic subscribitur, DUNDEE
Postscript.
I beg your Grace will cause read this to the Meeting, because it is all the
Defense I have made. I sent another to your Grace from Dumblein, with the
Reasons of my leaving Edinburgh: I know not if it be come to your Hands.



This Letter sent from Dundee the Great, to the Convention, will somewhat serve
to discover the humor of the Times, and the impartial Justice of that
Convention, the Rabble and Wild-hill Men went together in Arms in formidable
Multitudes both in the Country and City, and the Thanks of the Convention was
made to them for their good Services; they affronted the Viscount of Dundee
daily upon the Streets, and sometimes on the Night attempted to Murder him in
his House; all which was made evident to the Convention, and no notice taken of
it; but because my Lord Dundee and some other Gentlemen, not willing to lie
longer under those Dangers, retired to their Country-houses only with such a
Guard as was sufficient to secure them from the Violence of the Rabble, which
the Convention it self allowed to Noblemen and Gentlemen when they traveled
on the Road; upon this account he was attainted of High Treason, and a Herald
and Trumpeter sent to Summon him upon that account to appear and answer for his
Life and Fortune; by their own Messengers he sent back to them the preceding
Letter, and by the Tennor of it, I leave the World to judge who they were that
first begun the War in Scotland, which is not ended there yet, nor like to do
in haste, and has cost the Nation so much Blood and Treasure since.

An Act of Council.
At Edin. Dec. 24. 1689.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, considering that by the Act of the
Meeting of Estates of the Date the Thirteenth day of April last, there is a
difference made betwixt the Ministers then in possession and Exercise of their
Ministry at their respective Churches, and those who were not so. And that the
Case of the Ministers who were not in the actual Exercise of their Ministerial
Function the Thirteenth day of April last, lies yet under the consideration of
the Parliament; and lest in the mean time they may call and pursue for the
stipend (alleged) due to them, or put in execution the Decreets and Sentences
already obtained at their instance for the same before the Estates of
Parliament can meet and give these Determinations in the Points. Therefore the
said Lords of Privy Council finding that the Case foresaid depending before the
Parliament, is not obvious to be cognosced and decided upon by the inferior
Judges, but that the same should be left entire to the Decision of the
Parliament; have thought fit to signify to all inferior Courts and Ministers
of the Law, that the matter abovementioned is depending before the Parliament,
to the effect they may regulate and govern themselves in the judging of all
Process to be intented before them upon the said matter, or in executing
Sentences already pronounced thereupon, as they will be answerable.

Sic subscribitur, Crafoord. J. P. D. S. Con.

Was ever Justice (to speak modestly) stretched so as in this Act; because the
Government in the Proclamation of the Date April 13. had left the Ministers of
the West, who were forced by the Rabble from their Possessions, out of their
Protection, which was all the difference mode by that Act, was it therefore not
just to allow them any Tithes or other Debts due to them for several years
before, and for which they had obtained fairly Decrees and Sentences in Courts
of Judicature, surely these Preachers, who by the Violence of the Rabble had
possessed their places, had no legal or just pretense to any part of the Tithes
or Stipends for which the others had served. With what face then, or pretense
to common Justice could this be called a Case depending before the Parliament.

A Proclamation anent the Ministers.
At Edinb. August 6. 1689.
WHereas the Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, by their Proclamation
dated at Edinburgh, the Thirteenth day of April, 1689. did Command and Require
all the Ministers of the Gospel within the Kingdom of Scotland, publicly to
pray for King William and Queen Mary, as King and Queen of this Realm, and to
read that Proclamation from their Pulpits upon the several Lords days therein
expressed; as also, the Estates of the Kingdom did prohibit and discharge any
Injury to be offered by any Person whatsoever, to any Minister of the Gospel,
either in Churches or Meeting Houses, who were then, viz. on the Thirteenth of
April last, in Possession and Exercise of their Ministry, either in Churches or
Meeting Houses, they behaving themselves dutifully under the present
Government. And it being most just and reasonable, that the foresaid
Proclamation be fully performed and obeyed, as most necessary for the Security
of the Peace of the Kingdom, and that such Ministers who gave Obedience should
be Secure under the Protection of the Law, and that the pain of Deprivation be
inflicted upon all those Ministers who have Disobeyed the Proclamation.
Therefore the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, in their Majesty's Name and
Authority, Do strictly Command and Charge, that none of the Leidges take on
Hand to do any Violence or Injury to any of the Ministers of the Gospel,
whether they be Preaching in Churches or Meeting Houses, and that all such as
were in Possession and Exercise of their Ministry upon the Thirteenth day of
April last, be allowed to continue undisturbed, and that such Ministers as have
been removed, dispossessed or restrained without a legal Sentence in the
Exercise of their Ministry, since the Thirteenth day of April last, shall be
allowed to return, and Exercise their Ministry without Disturbance. And ordains
the Sheriffs and their Deputs, Stewards, Baillies, and other Magistrates,
within their respective Bounds, to give their Assistance for making the
Premises effectual; As also, that such Ministers who have not read the
Proclamation, and prayed for King William and Queen Mary, according to the
Tenor thereof, may be deprived of their Benefice, and restrained to Officiate
in their Churches. The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council do invite and allow
the Parochioners and Hearers of such Ministers as have neglected and slighted
the reading of the Proclamation, and praying for King William and Queen Mary,
to Cite such Ministers before the Privy Council; and grants Warrant for citing
and adducing Witnesses to prove the same, that such Ministers as have
Disobeyed, may by a legal Sentence be deprived of their Benefices, and that
none of the Leidges at their own hand, without a legal Sentence and Warrant,
presume to meddle in this matter. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and
published by Macers of Privy Council, and Messengers, at the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none may pretend Ignorance. Extracted
by me

Gilb. Eliot, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
In this Proclamation it is visible that the Ministers who were outed by the
Rabble before April 13. as almost all the Ministers in the West and South were,
are again fairly excluded from the Protection of the Government, as if the
Cruelty and Barbarities of the Rabble were to be applauded by the Governors,
and all these who suffered under them to be condemned as Criminals and Traitors
to the State: And to make short work on it with these Ministers who were yet in
the Possession of their Livings, the Rabble and all their Enemies without
distinction are here invited to be Evidences against them for their immediate
Deprivation; and the effect was Quod non fecere Barbari, secerunt Barbarini.

This Proclamation was issued out to shorten the Form of Process which that of
the Sixth of August obliged the Accusers and Pursuers of Ministers to observe.
A Proclamation for Citing Ministers who have not Prayed for Their Majesty's.
Edinb. August 22. 1689.
WHereas by an Act of Council, of the Sixth of this Instant, in Pursuance of an
Act of the Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, of the Thirteenth of April
last, the Parochioners and Hearers of such Ministers as have neglected and
slighted the Reading of the Proclamation therein mentioned, and the Praying for
King William and Queen Mary, are invited and allowed to Cite such Ministers
before the Privy Council, which Act of Council grants Warrant for Citing and
Adducing Witnesses; And forasmuch as the Design of the said Act, is, that such
Ministers who have Disobeyed the said Act of the Meeting of the Estates, may
conform thereto by a Legal Sentence be Deprived; Therefore that the said Act of
the Meeting of the Estates, and the Act of Council pursuant thereof, may attain
their intended Design, and Effect, with the greater Expedition, and least
Expenses to the Leidges, The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, in their
Majesty's Name and Authority, do invite and allow, not only the Parochioners
and Hearers of such Ministers as have Disobeyed, but also the Heretors of these
Parochines, and the Sh^riffs or their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs
Respective, and the Members of this Current Parliament, within their Respective
Bounds, to cause Cite such Ministers before the Privy Council, and hereby
grants Warrant to Messengers at Arms, for Citing them, and such Witnesses as
are necessary, they delivering a Copy of these Presents, either in Print or in
Writ, Signed by their Hand, to each Minister that shall be Cited by them to any
Tuesday or Thursday six days after the Citation, for all on this side the River
Tay, and Fifteen days for all beyond the said River, That such Ministers who
have not given Obedience to the said Act of the Meeting of the Estates, may by
a Legal Sentence be Deprived according thereto; and Appoints the Returns of
these Executions to be Enrolled by the Clerk of Privy Council, and called
before the Lords at their respective days of Compearance; Declaring that these
Presents are but prejudice of any Citations already given, or to be given,
either upon the former Act of Council, or upon Warrands from the Council Board.
And Ordains these Presents to be printed, and published by the Macers of Privy
Council at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, that none may pretend Ignorance.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
I John Dickson Macer, by virtue of the above-written Proclamation and Warrant,
Summond, Warn and Charge you Mr. James Gray Minister at Kelso, to Compear
before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council at Edinburgh, or where it shall
happen them to be for the time upon the Third day of September next to come, in
the hour of cause to answer at the instance of Sir John Dalrymple Younger of
Stairs, his Majesty's Advocate for his Highness's Interest, and John Laidlaw
Tailor in Maxwel-heugh, and John Laidlaw Wright in Kelso for themselves, and in
Name and behalf of the Parochine of Kelso, to the effect and for the cause
above written, with Certification conform to the above-written Proclamation and
Warrant direct to me their anent.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Consilii. DICKSON Messenger.
This is the Form of the Summons appointed by the Council to be given to the
Ministers, or left at their Houses if they happened to be from home.

A Declaration by His Highness the Prince of Orange, for the keeping of the
Peace, etc. in the Kingdom of Scotland.
William Henry, by the Grace of God, Prince of Orange, etc.

WHereas the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Scotland met at Whitehall at
our desire, to advise Us what was to be done for Securing the Protestant
Religion, and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of that Kingdom, have desired us
to Call a Meeting of the Estates in March next, and in the mean while to take
upon Us the Administration of public Affairs both Civil and Military, the
Disposal of the public Revenue and For^r^sses, and the doing every thing
necessary for the Preservation of Peace. We being desirous to omit nothing that
may tend to the public Good and Happiness of that Kingdom, have (in pursuance
of the said Advice) issued forth our Orders for Calling of the said Meeting of
the Estates; And to the end that in the mean time the public Peace, and the
Fortresses may be secured, and the Revenue collected, we do hereby Will and
Require all Persons, being Protestants, that are at present in the Possession
of the Offices of Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Marshals of Burghs, Bailies of
Regalities, Stewards of Stewartries, Governors or Lieutenants of Fortresses,
Keepers of Prisons or Prisoners, or in the Possession of any Inferior Offices
and ^aces of the like Nature, and likewise all Persons, being Protestants, that
are in the Possession of any Office or Employment, in Collecting, Receiving,
Managing or Ordering of the public Revenue, to take upon them, and to continue
in the Exercise of the said Offices and Places respectively, doing and
ordering every thing, which the Trust reposed in them, according to the Nature
of the said Offices, requires to be done, and ordered in the usual Manner,
Form and Method: And we do in a particular Manner Authorize, Empower and
Require, such of them to whom the Care of Preserving the Peace and Quiet of the
Nation belongs; to use all diligence for Suppr^ssing all Routs, Tumults,
Disorders, Violencies and such other unwarrantable Practices as are contrary to
it: And we do hereby expressly prohibit and discharge all Disturbance and
Violence upon the account of Religion, or the Exercise thereof, or any such
like Pretense, and that no Interruption be made; or if any has been made, that
it cease, in the free and peaceable Exercise of Religion, whether it be in the
Churches or in public and private Meetings, of those of a different
Persuasion. Requiring, like as we do hereby require all Protestants, as they
love the good of their Country and Religion, and are willing in their several
Stations and Capacities to concur with Us, in our Endeavors to bring Matters
to a happy and desirable Settlement, that they will live peaceably together,
and without disquieting or molesting one another; Enjoy their several Opinions
and Forms of Worship, whether according to Law or otherways, with the same
Freedom, and in the same manner, in which they did enjoy them in the month of
October last, till such time, as by regular and legal Methods, a due Temper may
be fallen on, for composing and settling those Differences: And to the end,
that the Peace may be the more effectually secured; We require all Men, or
numbers of Men in Arms, by virtue of any Order or Authority, and under any
Title and Designation whatsoever, whether they be standing Forces, or Militia
Forces modelled into regular Troops, and kept on foot, as standing Forces, to
separate, dismiss and disband themselves; Likewise we do hereby Disband them,
and appoint them to retire to their respective Dwellings, with full assurance
to them, that care shall be taken in due time for their having their Pay, if
any shall be found due to them. And we do farther prohibit and discharge, all
Persons in time coming to take Arms, or to continue in Arms upon any pretense
whatsoever, with a Commission or express Order from Us. Excepting from what is
above written, likeas, we do hereby except the Garrisons of the Fortresses, and
the Company of Foot entertained by the Town of Edinburgh, for the Guard of the
said Town, whom we do appoint to continue in the Exercise of their Duty (they
being Protestants) in the said Garrisons and Towns. And whereas several Roman
Catholics have been, and are still in the Possession of the Places and Offices
abovementioned; We do hereby require them to leave the said Offices and Places,
and to retire to their several Dwelling-houses, where we forbid and discharge
all Persons to disquiet, disturb, or molest them any manner of way; and we
appoint the next immediate Protestant Officers in the Fortresses, where the
Governors, Deputy-Governours, or other Officers are Roman Catholics, to take
upon them the Custody of the said Fortresses, and in the same manner, that the
Protestants concerned in the Collecting and managing of the Revenue and the
keeping of the Peace, do supply by their diligence, the Vacancies that are or
may happen to be in places of the like Nature, This our Declaration to be of
Force, and to take effect till the said Meeting of Estates in March next; and
to be without prejudice to any other Orders we may think fit to give to any
Person or Persons, for the ends abovementioned; And we do farther order this
our Declaration to be printed and published at Edinburgh, and printed Copies of
the same to be given, or sent to the Sheriffs and Stewartry, Clerks of the
several Shires and Stewartries whom we do hereby require to publish the same
upon the first Market day after the receipt thereof, at the Crosses of the Head
Burghs of their respective Shires and Stewartries, in the due and usual manner.

Given at St. James's the Sixth day of February, in the Year of our Lord
1688/9. W. H. Prince of Orange.

The Effects of this Declaration were, that these Gentlemen who had taken Arms
to defend themselves, and the Regular Clergy from the Fury of the Rabble,
disbanded and laid down their Arms as the Declaration required, whereupon the
Phanatick Mob became much more Insolent and Outrageous, despising the
Declaration, and destroying all the Clergy they could reach, for which they had
the following Act of Thanks.

An Act approving of the good Services done by the Town of Glasgow, Shire of
Argyle, and other Western Shires in this Conjuncture, with a return of the
Thanks of the Estates to them.
AT Edinburgh, March 28. 1689. The Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom,
taking into their Consideration, that by the sending of the standing Forces
into England, the Estates were destitute of that Guard and Defense, which was
proper and necessary in this Conjuncture, and that several Persons, well
affected to the Protestant Religion, at the Diet of the Meeting of the said
Estates, having repaired to this City of Edinburgh, from Glasgow, the Shire of
Argyle, and other Western Shires, did at the Desire, and by Warrant of the
Estates, put themselves to Arms, and since have so continued Watching and
Warding, under the Command of the Earl of Levin, and demeaned themselves
Soberly and Honestly, and been Active and Instrumental to prevent Tumults, and
to secure the Peace and Quiet of this Meeting, and Place; and there being now
some Scots Regiments arrived here, under the Command of Major General M^cay,
The Estates do therefore hereby declare, That what is past, was good,
acceptable and seasonable Service, and do approve the same; and hereby gives
Order to the said Earl of Levin to Disband them, and allows them to return with
their Arms to their respective Homes, and do return their Thanks to the Persons
who have been employed. Extracted out of the Records of the Meeting of Estates,
by me

Ja. Dalrymple, Cls.
This is the Act, that in the Narrative is called, An Act for Thanks to the
Rabble; The Persons to whom it relates, being these Zealots (who contrary to
all the Laws of Religion and Humanity, contrary to the Laws of all Nations, and
particularly to the standing Laws of this Kingdom, and contrary to the Prince's
own Declaration, Feb. 6. 1688/9.) convened and continued in Arms, till they
drove out all the regular Clergy in the West, and many in the South, and being
in number about 8000 or above, overawed and threatened those concerned, to elect
Members for the Convention; and at the Meeting of Estates, rushed in a
Tumultuary and H^stile manner into Edinburgh, planted themselves, without any
public Order or Commission, about and in the Parliament house, where, at every
turn, they railed at, threatened, baffled and affronted the Bishops; nor were
the ancient Nobility and G^ntry; who generally adhered to the ^pisc^pal Cause,
better treated by them; the Terror whereof made many of the most eminent
Members never come near the House, and made many who came at first, soon after
desert it; all this was considerably, before the Earl of Levin was, by the
Convention, appointed to Command them: This being Matter of Fact well known to
the Estates. I leave the World to judge how well these Men deserved this Act of
Approbation.

A Proclamation for a General Fast.
At Edinb. August 24. 1689.
Present in Council,
E. Crafurd P. M. Douglas. E. Southerland. E. Leven. E. Annandale. L. Rosse. L.
Carmichell. Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder. Sir James Montgomerie of Skelmorly. Sir
Arch. Murray of Blackbarrony. James Brody of that Ilk. Sir John Hall L. Provost
of Edinb.
FOrasmuch as the great and long abounding of Sins of all sorts amongst all
Ranks of Persons, with the continued Impenitency under them, and not Reforming
therefrom; The falling from their first Love; and great Faintings and Failings
of Ministers, and others of all Ranks, in the hour of Temptation, in their Zeal
for God and his Work; and that although there be much cause to Bless God for
the Comfortable Unity and Harmony amongst the Ministers, and Body of Christian
Professors in this Church: Yet that there are such Sad and Continuing Divisions
amongst some, is also matter of Lamentation before God; The great Ingratitude
for his begun Deliverance of this Nation from Popery and Slavery, and
unsuitable Walking thereunto, The Contempt of the Gospel, not Mourning for
former and present Iniquities, nor turning to the Lord by such Reformation and
Holiness, as so great a Work calls for; The many Sad and long continued Tokens
of Gods Wrath, in the hiding of his Face, and more especially in his
Restraining the Power and presence of His Spirit, with the preached Gospel, in
the Conversion of Souls, and Edifying the Converted; And the Lord's Threatening
the Sword of a Cruel and Barbarous Eenemy, in the present great Distress of
Ireland, by the prevailing of an Anti Christian Party there, and Threatening the
Sword of the same Enemy at Home, and the great and imminent Danger of the
Reformed Protestant Religion, not only from an open Declared Party of Papists,
Enemies to the same, but from many other professed Protestants, who Join Issue
with them in the same Design, besides the sad Sufferings and Scatterings of
Reformed Churches Abroad; Having Seriously and Religiously moved the
Presbyterian Ministers, Elders and Professors of the Church of Scotland, Humbly
to Address themselves to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, for a
General Fast and Day of Humiliation, to be kept throughout the whole Kingdom.
The said Lords Do out of a Pious and Religious Disposition, Approve of the
said Motion, as Dutiful and Necessary at the time; And therefore in His
Majesty's Name and Authority, Do Command a Solemn and public Fast, and day of
Humiliation, to be Religiously and Sincerely Observed throughout this Kingdom,
both in Churches and Meeting Houses, as they would avert Wrath, and procure and
continue Blessings to this Kingdom, and that all Persons whatsoever may send up
their Fervent Prayers and Supplications to Almigh^y God, That He would pour out
upon all Ranks, a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, that they may Mourn for all
their Iniquities, and more especially, that God would pour forth upon King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY, and upon all inferior Magistrates and Counselors, a
Spirit of Wisdom for Government, and Zeal for God, His Church, and Work in this
Land, as the present Case of both do call for, and that God may preserve Them
for carrying on that great Work, which he has so Gloriously and Seasonably
begun by Them; and that God would Countenance, and Bless with Success the
Armies by Sea and Land, Raised for the Defense of the Protestant Religion; and
more especially, that God would pour forth a Spirit of Holiness upon them, lest
their Sins and ours, may provoke God again^ them in the Day of Battle; and that
he would Bless all Means for the Settlement of Church and State: That God would
Bless the Season of the Year, and give Seasonable Weather for Cutting Down, and
gathering in the Fruits of the Earth, that the Stroke of Famine, which God has
frequently Threatened the Nation with, may be Averted. And the said Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council, do, in Name and Authority foresaid, Command and
Charge, that the said Solemn and public Fast, be Religiously and devoutly
performed, both in Churches and Meeting Houses, by all Ranks and Degrees of
persons within this Kingdom, on this side of the Water of Tay, upon Sunday the
Fifteenth day of September next to come; and by all others be-north the same,
upon Sunday thereafter, the Twenty second day of the said month of September:
And to the End that this part of Divine Worship, so pious and Necessary, may be
punctually kept upon the respective Days abovementioned, They Ordain Sir
William Lockhart Sol^icitor, in the most convenient and proper way, to dispatch
and send Copies hereof to the Sheriffs, their Deputs, and Clerks of the several
Shires of this Kingdom, to be by them published at the M^r^at Crosses of the
Head Burghs, upon receipt thereof, and immediately sent to the several
Ministers, both of Churches and Meeting Houses, that upon the Lord's Day
immediately preceding the Fast, and upon the respective Days of the public
Fast, and Humiliation, the Ministers may read, and intimate this Proclamation
from the Pulpit, in every Parish Church and Meeting House; and that they Exhort
all persons to a serious and devout performance of the said Prayers, Fasting
and Humiliation, as they regard the Favor of Almighty God, and the Safety and
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and expect a Blessed Success to the
carrying on of that Great and Glorious Work of this Nations being delivered
from Popery and Slavery, so seasonably begun; and as they would avoid the Wrath
and Indignation of God against this Kingdom, and procure, and continue mani^old
Blessings to the same: Certifying all these who shall contemn or neglect such a
Religious and necessary Duty, they shall be proceeded against, and published as
Contemners of his Majesty's Authority, Neglecters of Religious Services, and as
persons disaffected to the Protestant Religion, as well as to Their Majesty's
Royal Persons and Government. And Ordains these presents to be printed and
published by Macers or Messengers at Arms, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and other places abovementioned, that none may pretend Ignorance.

Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
Some of the sad Effects of this Canting Proclamation were particularly felt by
Mr. Ramsay who preached in the Forenoon in the old Church at Edinb. a Man of an
unblameable Life, a judicious and accurate Preacher, gave Obedience in all
things, to the Act of the Meeting of Estates of the Thirteenth of April, read
the Proclamation, prayed in express Terms for King William and Queen Mary the
very first day these things were enjoined to be done on, but that availed
nothing, for the design was to remove all the Episcopal Ministers from the
Pulpits in Edinburgh at any rate, and upon any pretense how little soever. Mr.
Ramsay gets a Citation to appear before the Privy Council. By their procedure
against his Brethren he knew what would be the event of this; and therefore it
being his turn to preach on that day he was cited to comp^ar on, and many of
his Elders and Parishoners being present, he delivered some Advices and
Exhortations which made the Sermon look somewhat like a valedictory one; after
Sermon his Elders attended him to the foot of the Stairs of the Council
Chamber. Mr. Ramsay is called and interrogated if he did read the Proclamation
of the 13th. of April, he answered, I did read it: Again he is questioned if he
prayed for King William and Queen Mary, naming them, (for it was not enough to
use such Expressions as were only to be appropriated to William and Mary) he
said, He had prayed for them by Name. But (says the President) you only prayed
for them as Declared King and Queen, not as those that were really such. Mr.
Ramsay replied, That he had prayed for William and Mary, whom the Estates of
the Kingdom had Declared King and Queen, and since they had no Liturgy, and
they had given to them no Form of Prayer, he thought, being he had prayed for
William and Mary, no more was to be required; and as for the words Declared
King and Queen, he had taken them from one of their own Proclamations; which
when denied, he desired the Proclamation might be produced, which was done, and
then it appeared he was in the right. When he could not be reached in this
point, then the President, the Earl of Crawfurd, said, But, Mr. Ramsay, you
pray for the late King James. My Lord, said he, I p^ay in these words, Lord
Bless William and Mary wh^m the Estates of this Land have Declared King and
Queen, and Bless all the Royal Family Root and Branch, especially him who is
now under Affliction, Sancti^ie it unto him while he is under it, and when it
seems good to thee, deliver him from it. This, says he, is the Form I made to
my self, for you prescribe none; and is it not a sore matter, that when nothing
is left to King James in Reversi^n of Three Kingdoms, but the Prayers of poor
Men, that you should deny him those. They then ordered him to remove, and
consulted by what other way they might reach him, for yet they could not find a
pretense against him sufficient to deprive him. At last they called him in, and
the President said, But Mr. Ramsay, you did not read from the Pulpit the
Proclamation for the Fast. Now, my Lord (replied Mr. Ramsay) you have nicked
me, indeed I did not intimate that Fast. But why did you not? For many Reasons,
my Lord, said he. But pray, said my Lord, let us hear some of those Reasons.
Excuse me, my Lord, replied he, it is sufficient that I confess that I did not
read it. (But according to the method of their Inquisition of Screwing out Men's
minds, and provoking them to speak, that they might get occasion against them)
they pressed him to name some of his Reasons, he said, being they urged he
would give them one, That it was against the Practice of the universal Church,
and primitive Canons, to Fast on Sunday: And he said, Tho there were no other
Reasons but that one^ he could not intimate that Fast. He gave this Reason, as
that which he thought would give them least Offense. They ordered him to remove
till they had deliberated what to do with him, and then cause call him in, and
deprived him for not reading the Proclamation for the Fast. Dr. Gardner a Man
of great Parts and Piety, and one of the Ministers of the Tal^^ooth Church in
Edinburgh, was deprived upon the same account of not intimating that Fast, tho
he had complied in every thing else which they demanded.

A Proclamation Discharging the Payment of the Rents of the Bishoprics to any,
but the Persons named by the Council.
At Edinburgh, September 19. 1689.
WHereas the Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, in their Claim of Right,
of the Eleventh of April last, Declared, that Prelacy, and the Superiority of
any Office in the Church, above Presbyters, is, and has been a great and
insupportable Grievance to this Nation, and cont^air to the Inclinations of the
Generality of the People, ever since the Reformation; And that their Majesty's
with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, have by their Act of the
Date the Fifth day of July last bypast, abolished Prelacy, and all Superiority
of any Office in the Church above Presbyters: And His Majesty considering the
prejudice it may be to His Interest, if fit Persons be not appointed to look
after, and receive the Rents and Emoluments, particularly those consisting of
Ti^hes, which formerly did belong to the Bishops, Has therefore signified His
Royal Pleasure, That the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council should give
Warrant to Alexander Hamilton of Kinkell, for Drawing and Upli^^ing the Tithes
and other Rents of the Archbishoptick of St. Andrews, he giving sufficient
Security for his Faithful performance of his duty in the said Office; and has
also left it to the Council to appoint fit persons for Drawing and Uplifting
the Tithes of other Bishoprics for this present Cropped and Year of God 1689.
that none concerned suffer prejudice: Excepting the Bishopric of Orknay, which
His Majesty is resolved to have Uplifted with the Rents of the Lordship. And
the said Lords of Privy Council having in Obedience to His Majesty's Commands,
Nominat and Appointed fit and qualified persons for Drawing of the Tithes, and
Uplifting of the Rents formerly belonging to the Bishops, Deans, or any other
person of superior Order and Dignity in the Church above Presbyters; And least
before the time that some of them can be able to come to this place, and find
Caution for their faithful discharging of that Trust, and make Intimation of
their respective Commissions to Uplift the said Rents for the said Cropped and
Year of God foresaid, to the persons liable in payment thereof, The Teinds and
other Rents of the Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, and others foresaids may be
Imbazled and Introm^tted with by persons who have no Right thereto; Therefore
the said Lords of Privy Council, in their Majesty's Name and Authority
foresaid, prohibit and Discharge all and sundry Heretors, Fevers, Li^erenters,
Tax^-men of Teinds, Tennents and others whose Teinds were formerly in use to be
drawn, and who were lyable-in payment of any Rent or Duty to the said late
Archbishops or Bishops, or others foresaids, to draw or suffer their Teinds to
be drawn, and from payment of any Rental-Bolls, Feu, Blench or Tack-Duties, and
other Rents, Casualties and Emoluments, formerly payable to the said late
Archbishops, Bishops, and others foresaid, except to such persons as shall be
authorized by the said Lords of Privy Council for uplifting thereof; with
Certification to them, if they do any thing in the contrary hereof, they shall
be liable therefore, notwithstanding if any pretended Discharge that may be
Impetrat or Obtained from any other person or persons for the said Cropped and
Year of God foresaid. And Ordains these presents to be printed and publish^d by
Macers of Privy Council at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and by Messengers at
Arms at the Mercat-Crosses of the He^d^Burghs of the other Shires within this
Kingdom, that none may pretend Ignorance.

Per actum Dominorum Secreti Consilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Secreti Concilii.
God Save King William and Queen Mary.
This Alexander Hamilton who is here appointed to uplift the Rents of St.
Andrews Archbishopric, was taken in actual Rebellion at the time of Bothwell
bridge Rebellion, and by the Clemency of the Government then, had his Life
spared, although he was always a great Ringleader of that Rebellious Rout, which
so much plagued the Nation before and since that time.

A Draught of an Act for Establishing the Church Government.
Presented by his Majesty's High-Commissioner, July 22. 1689.
FOrasmuch as the King and Queens Majesty's, and the Estates of Parliament, by
their Act the Fifth of July instant, Abolishing Prelacy, and the Superiority of
any Church Officers above Presbyters in this Kingdom; did declare, That they
would settle that Church Government in this Kingdom which is most agreeable to
the Inclinations of the People. And considering, That the Church Government by
General, Provincial, and Presbyterial Assemblies, with the Sessions of the
Kirk, as it was established by the first Act of the Twelfth Parliament of King
James VI. holden in June 1592. is most agreeable to the Inclinations of the
People: Therefore the King and Queens Majesty's, with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Revives and Renews the said Act of Parliament in the
whole Heads, Points, and Articles thereof, (with this express Declaration, That
the necessity of occasional Assemblies be first represented to His Majesty by
humble Supplication:) And Statutes and Declares, That it is, and shall be
lawful to the Presbyters of this Church to admit Ministers upon Presentations
from the lawful Patrons, or Iure de voluto, which shall happen hereafter; or
into Churches which fall not under Patronages, but were Mensal and Patrimonial
Churches belonging to the Bishops; sicklike and as freely as they did or might
have done of before by the foresaid Act of Parliament in the Year 1592. and to
do all and every thing which before pertained to Presbyteries, and were
exercised by the Bishops. And Ordains all the Ministers in this Kingdom to
submit and conform themselves to the Church Government established by the
foresaid Act, and to take the Oath of Allegiance, under the pain of being
deprived of their Churches, and losing their Benefices. And it is Declared,
That all Ministers that shall submit and conform to the foresaid
Church Government, and to take the Oath of Allegiance, without being obliged to
take any other Oath, shall enjoy their Churches and Benefices, and shall not be
deprived of the same, except for Scandal or Insufficiency. But in respect there
are several Ministers that were put out of their Churches and Benefices since
the year 1662. for not complying wi^h, and conforming to Prelacy; and others
since the year 1681. for not taking the Test: And now seeing Prelacy is
Abolished, and all Acts relating thereto, it is just and reasonable that these
Ministers that went out, and were laid aside, for not conforming to, and
complying with Prelacy, and for not taking the Test, should be restored to
their Churches and Benefices; Therefore the King and Queens Majesty's, with
Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, do Ordain the said
Ministers that went out, or were laid aside, upon the account foresaid, to be
restored and reponed; and do hereby repone and restore them to their respective
Churches and Benefices. And the King and Queens Majesty's, and Estates of
Parliament, declares, That they will take care to provide these Ministers that
are now serving the Cure at the said Churches, with other Churches and
Benefices, as occasion shall offer; they submitting themselves to the
Government of the Church established by this present Act, and taking the Oath
of Allegiance, and being sufficient and qualified for the Office of the
Ministry, and without Scandal. As also it is Declared, That Intrants to the
Ministry shall not be holden or obliged to take any other Oaths at their
Admission, but the Oath of Allegiance, and the Oath de fideli. And in regard
that much trouble has ensued unto the Estate, and many sad Confusions and
scandalous Schisms have fallen out in the Church, by Churchmen meddling in
matters of State: Therefore their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, do hereby discharge all Ministers of the Gospel within
this Kingdom, to meddle with any State Affairs, either in their Sermons or
Judicatories, publicly or privately, under the pain of being holden as
disaffected to the Government, and proceeded against accordingly. And declares,
That the Jurisdiction of the Church consists and stands only in the preaching
of the True Word of Jesus Christ, Correction of Manners by Ecclesiastical
Censures, and the Administration of the Holy Sacraments, conform to the 69th
Act James 6. Parl. 6. And to the effect there be nothing treated or concluded
in the Church-Judicatories, that concerns the Affairs of S^ate, or Civil
Matters; it is declared, That Their Majesty's, if they shall think fit, may
have always one present in all the Provincial and Presbyterial Ass^mblies (as
well as They have Their Commissioner present in General Assemblies) that in
case any Affair that concerns the State, or Civil Matters, that d^es not belong
to the Jurisdiction of the Church, shall come in before the said Assemblies,
the said Person appointed by Their Majesty's shall inhibit and Discharge the
Provincial or Presbyterial Assembly to proceed in any Affair that concerns the
State or Civil Matter, before Their Majesty's and Their Privy Council shall be
acquainted with the same, that They may declare Their pleasure therean^nt. And
because there are many things to be settled in relation to the Policy and
Discipline of the Church, therefore Their Majesty's declare, That They, by the
Advice of the Estates of Parliament, and Judicatories of the Church, will enact
such Rules concerning the Policy, Discipline, and other Matters to be observed
by the Church, as shall tend most to the curbing of Vice, the Advancement of
True Religion and Piety, and the Preservation of Unity and Peace amongst the
Subjects. And Their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of
Parliament, R^^^inds and Annuls the first Act of the 15 Parl. K. Ia. VI. anent
Ministers provided to Prelacies should have Vote in Parliament; and the second
Act of the 18 Parl. Ia. VI. anent the Restitution of the Estate of Bishops; and
the eighth Act of the 19 Parl. Ia. VI. anent the Commissario^s and
Jurisdictions given to the Archbishops and Bishops; and the first Act of the 21
Parl. Ia. VI. anent the Ratification of the Acts of the Assembly of Glasgow, in
the year 1610. and the first and second Acts of the 22 Parl. of K. Ia. VI^ in
the year 1617. anent the Archbishops and Restitution of Chapters (without
prejudice always to the Ministers serving the Cure, of any Emoluments allowed
to them in part of their Stipends) and the first Act of the 23 Part of K. Ia.
VI. in the year 1621. anent the Ratification of the Articles of the Assembly
holden at Perth. And rescinds and annuls all and whatsomever Acts, Laws, and
Constitutions, in so far as they derogate and are prejudicial to the
Church Government, by General, Provincial, and Presbyteral Assemblies, and
Kirk-Sessions; and in so far as they are conceived in favor of Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbot, Priors, and other Prelates or Churchmen whatsomever, their
Dignity, Title, Power, Jurisdiction, and State in this Church and Kingdom, or
in favors of the Civil Places or Power of Churchmen, or of whatsomever sort
allowed or disallowed, for their Ruling, Sitting and Voting in Parliament,
either as Churchmen, or the Clergy, or in name of the Church; or as
representing the Church, either in regard of their Ecclesiastical Titles,
Offices, Places and Dignities, or in regard of the Temporality or Spirituality
of Ecclesiastical B^nefices, or other pretexts whatsomever, with all Acts and
Constitutions of Convention, Council or S^ssion, or other Judicator
whatsomever, and all Practices or Customs whatsomever, introduced in favors of
the said Offices, Titles, Benefices or Persons provided thereto; and all other
Acts, Statutes or Practices which are contrary and prejudicial to, or
inconsistent with this present Act; and declares the same to be void and null
in all time coming: And seeing by the abolishing of Prelacy, the is at present
no Meeting of the Presbyteries, or Provincial Assemblies, and it being
necessary that there be a time and place appointed for the first Diet of
Meeting, therefore Ordains the Ministers of the several Presbyteries on the
South Side of the River of Tay, to meet and convene upon the second Tuesday of
August next, at the ordinary places where the Presbyters are in use to meet,
and these Ministers of the Presbyteries on the North-side of the River of Tay,
to me^t and convene upon the first Tuesday of September thereafter, at the
ordinary places where the Presbyters are in use to meet; and appoints these
Ministers that shall meet in the respective Presbyteries, to choose their own
Moderator; and ordains the Moderator first to take and subscribe the Oath of
Allegiance himself, and then administrate the said Oath to the rest of the
Brethren, that they may take and subscribe the same; And ordains the Moderator
of the respective Presbyteries to return the said Oath so taken and subscribed,
to the Clerks of Privy Council betwixt and the first of October next; and
orduins the first Diet of Meeting of the several Provincial Assemblies of this
Kingdom to be upon the second Tuesday of October next, at the ordinary places,
where the Syn^ds and Provincial Assemblies were in use to meet: And ordains the
Church-Sessions to be el^cted and chosen, both in Burgh and Landward, at the
ordinary times, and after the ordinary manner.

Tho King William desired the Presbyterians to pass this Act for the Settlement
of their Government in the Church, yet because it seemed to restrain them from
controling the State when they pleased (as they had been always wont to do when
in power) for sometimes the Parliament and General Assembly flatly contradicted
one another, as in the year 1674. when King Charles ^. was kept Prisoner at the
Isle of Wight, the Convention of Estates voted that an Army should be sent (as
it was) under the Command of Duke Hamilton, to relieve His Majesty, but the
General Assembly passed an Act at the same time, flatly contradicting that, and
accordingly after the King's Forces were defeated by the Rebels in England, the
Kirk, to show their absolute Supremacy in the State, forced the Nobily and
Gentry, who were Officers under the Duke, to make their Repentance before the
Congregations publicly in Sackcloth. I say, because this Act seemed to
restrain them from meddling in State Affairs, as they had been wont to do,
leaving them no power in the State, and the King some power in the Church, as
that they could not call a General Assembly without acquainting him with the
necessity of it, therefore this Act was rejected with great Contempt and
Indignation; and the Presbyterian Minister who was then in Quality of a
Chaplain in the Parliament, said, that they would, rather than admit of such a
Mangled Mungril Presbytery, beg back the Bishops again; and that it was
Nonsense not to allow the Clergy to impose other Oaths as well as that of
Allegiance.

The Conclusion.
SOme may perhaps think it an unkindness done to the Nation of Scotland, thus
to expose the public Acts of the Kingdom which were never ridiculous or afraid
of the light, but only when some Men Gov^rned, who are indeed the far least and
most inconsiderable part of the People, otherways why should they so violently
now oppose the Dissolving of this Parliament and the Calling of a new one;
since it is certain that the Humor of the Nation cannot be so well known by a
thin Conv^ntion, which was called in an extraordinary Hurry, in a great
Confusion and Fermentation of the People, and which proceeded with equal Heat
and Precipitancy? Others may think, that by publishing the Names (as is here
done) of some few of these good Men who have suffered, they shall be thereby
dangerously exposed to the Fury and Violence of these Zealots, whose greatest
Mercy is Cruel^y: Indeed there is too much Ground for this Conjecture.

But our Enemies have put us upon this Necessity, for the late account that was
given, in some Letters, of the present Persecution of the Church in Scotland,
tho it was exactly true in all the Matters of Fact relating to that
Persecution; yet in England where these things are not so well known, some Men
being ashamed of these Barbarities, to which they gave all the Life they could
at such a dist^nce, have industriously represented by their Tongues and Pens,
that account as altogether False and Fabulous, although even themselves are but
too well satisfied that it contains sad Truths.

Their Mercurius Reformatus, as he styles himself, wanting Advertisements, and
good News from Ireland to fill up his Weekly Papers, stuffs two or three of
them with Reflections on that former account of our Persecution: First, He
doubts the Matters of Fact are not true; and it is something strange, that one
who has conversed so intimately with, and been most of his Life bred up amongst
Scotch Fanatics, should so much question their natural and customary
Practices. Secondly, He imputes all the Mischief (if, says he, there has been
any) wholly to the Rabble, and wonders that any part of it should be charged
upon the Godly Patriots to whom the Government of that Kingdom is now
entrusted: But now if the Matters of Fact so fully att^sted in this Book, and
the public Acts so faithfully transcribed, do not satisfy him, and those few
whom he may have led into these his willful Mistakes; they must be allowed to
doubt on till one come from the Dead to inform them, if even that can persuade
them to believe.

But Thirdly, which shows that he is indeed but a new Observator, he seems to
grant what he would deny, for acknowledging the Persecution, he says, That it
was occasioned by the Severities wherewith the ^piscopal Party had treated the
Presbyterians in the bygone Reigns; as if their new Gospel could adopt Revenge
into a virtue, and as if all the Punishments inflicted upon Rebels by the State
for its own Security, were to be charged only upon the Church, and revenged now
upon the Clergy, the poor helpless Prelates and their Curates.

Fourthly, He Is confident that the whole Book is but a malicious Design to
Bespatter the present Government; if the Government be bespattered when the
true account of their open Proceedings is fairly published to the World, then
the faultlyes originally in that Government, not in the Historian: It Is a
strange Severity in any Government, not to suffer Men to groan under Burdens
because it imposed them, and to knock Men in the Head for but clattering those
Chains wherewith the Government Fetters them.

Fifthly, He quarrels at the Style of the Letters, for the Authors, he says, do
no where express any thing of duty or Allegiance to the present Governors, but
according to Mercurius's own Principles of Policy, there is time enough for that
when they find themselves according to the Articles of the pretended Original
Contract, and many fair promises, secured in their Religion, Liberties and
Properties, for now it is a received Axiom it seems, that Protection and
Allegiance are reciprocal: Again, He Is offended at the Sharpness and Severity
which he discovers in the Expressions, then he runs out in many Rhetorical
Commendations (by way of new reformed Observation) upon Moderation, and
recommends it from the great Example of a famous Roman Catholic Prince,
whereas at another turn he will not allow either Popish Prince or People to be
capable of the least Moderation, merely because they are Papists. It Is hard to
think why this Gentleman should be so much offended with the Style of those
Letter's; it is not, I hope, for the Scoticisms in them, for that is a Fault that
neither he nor we can so easily help in our Writing; perhaps he is angry that
he, as a Scotch Doctor, was not entrusted to purge out their sharp Humor,
before they were allowed to take the open Air in England.

When the new Observator upon March 26. last, published my Lord Crasurd's
Letter dated Edinburgh March 16. 1690. he might have observed, that in that
Letter my Lord fairly owns, that the Council did at the same time that they
proceeded against Ministers for not praying for King William, take probation of
Crimes of another nature also against them; tho the Cognizance of them did no
way belong to the Council; these are the very words of the Letter, for if this
be true, the Proceedings of the Council against the Ministers must be
acknowledged not to have been fair and legal; for the Observator himself who
once pretended to an inferior kind of Practice in the Scots Law; knows I hope
so much, as that no Court ought to hear probation of Crimes whereof they have
not the Cognizance, nay the best of Men may be abused by such Proceedings, for
if the Court be not competent, the Defendants cannot be admitted to object
against the Insufficiency of the Probation, and so the worst things may be
proved against the most innocent People.

But of all them that have written or spoken against the Account given in those
Lettert, we owe the most Thanks to one downright true thorough-paced
Presbyterian, who writes a Pamphlet against it, called, A Brief and true
Account of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland, occasioned by the
Episcopalians since the year 1660. The Book is indeed worth the reading because
in it the Author has fairly pulled off that Mask which others more Cunning but
less Honest, love to act under.

I shall not here hazard the turning of the Readers Stomach, by repeating any
of these his most fuls^me Expressions which he liberally strows in every Page
of his Book; only this I must say, That it is not possible for a Devil to bring
more Railing and false A^cusations against the Brethren, than this pure
Presbyterian does against our Clergy and Statesmen; he has learned it seems of
his Friend Matchiavel to calumniate boldly, hoping that if he throw a great
deal of Dirt, some of it may stick; but his Mallce is too large to be confined
to Scotland, and therefore he opens foully against the Church of England too,
for he says, Page 30.
That Dr. Oats (a modest Man like himself) did the Nation more Service than
the seven Idolized Stars, so many of whom are now turned Dark-lanthorns.
Neither must the Complying Bishops escape his Fury, for of them he says, Page 8.
That as they have the Dishonor of being the Mother of that Hel^ish Monster
Possive Obedience, they have also the Ignominy of being the Murtherirs of it,
having new basely cut its Threat, as Harlots use sometimes to do with their
spurious Breed. What Ground there is for this Asp^rsion, does not concern (...)
in Scotland, who still adhere to that our former Doctrine, for which we now
cheerfully Suffer.
Then as for the English Clergy in general, he says, Page 7.
That let their Hyperbolical Pretentions to Zeal for Religion and Loyalty be
what it will, yet if the King put forth his hand and touch them, they will
Curse him to his face, and rather than part with on inch of Superstition, or a
Swinish Lust, will as the Party have always done, lay a Confideracy with Hell
and Rome, as times past and present do evidence beyond Contradiction, from the
Reformation to this day: In another place he says, Page 28.
That their daily Prayers are, that God would pull down the Antichristian
Hierarchy also in England; and why (says he) may we not do it, as well as the
English Prelates and Clergy Plot, Drink and plead against the Scotch
Presbytery. Then he soretells the Downfall of the Church of England,
Notwithstanding their Sessions (as he Page 27.
speaks) at the Devil to prevent it, and for the fulfilling of this his fatal
Prephecy, he declares War against them, and bids them blame themselves for it,
if another Invasion from Scotland prove as fatal to them now as it did in
Bishop Laud's time; and that the Godly Women will with their Folding-stools
once mere arm against them as they did in King Charles I. time. This is a true
Specimen of the Love and Charity that the Scotch Presbyterians have to the
Church of England, and it is but a little part of that Fire and Slaughter which
our Author breaths out against them: Further yet he condemns all the orderly
Churches in (...), for says he. All those who use Set Forms of Prayer are
Strangers to the Power of Godliness. So that neither the Presbyterians
themselves in Holland, nor in France, no nor in Geneva, must escape the Lash of
our Scotch Reformers, until they be purified according to the Pattern in the
Mount, the Covenant Standard.

But that I may not rake any longer in this Dunghill, our Author is as far from
Truth in the Points of History he relates, as his manner of Expression is from
the Spirit of Meekness and Charity; and his whole Discourse is as inconsistent
with that, as his beloved Doctrine of Resistance, is with the Thirteenth
Chapter to the Romans; and that they who shall please next to draw their Pens
against us who are already suffici^ntly persecuted by their hands, may find
some Matter as well as Words to fill their Weekly Papers. I shall take leave of
them in some few plain Queries.

First, Considering the Great Charity which the Scotch Presbyterians have for
the Church of England, as you have heard; and their Intention of visiting them
again (which the Author has threatened) as they did in the year 39. when Plate,
Jewels, Money, Houshold-goods, Cattle and all Movables were declared
Malignants; and they grew witty in their Zeal, and told, they came for all
their Goods. And considering that they are more Numerous now than they were
then; and if they be established by Law, will be much more Formidable, because
all will be forced to join with them or suffer their utmost Persecution; for
they have declared Toleration to be A^tichristian. And considering that their
Solemn League and Covenant obliges them to root out Episcopacy in England and
Ireland, and never to desist till they have effected it. I say considering
these things, and what they have formerly done upon the same Principles, Query
whether the Settling Presbytery in Scotland be reconcilable to the Securing
Episcopacy in England?

2ly, Whether even King William can secure himself in the Monarchy against
those who formerly refused to Dissolve at the King's Command in the Assembly of
Glasgow in the year 38. who preached the Subjects into a furious Rebellion, and
to the delivering up the King his Grandfather to be murdered, who by Act of
their General Assembly in 48. declared his Negative Voice inconsistent with the
Liberty of the Subject, and who since himself was made King, have risen twice
in Arms, once to the number of some Thousands, who threw out the Episcopal
Ministers by their own Authority (which our Author says, was Page 22.
Deservedly enough) Beating, Wounding and Tormenting them. Another time a more
formidable number in a hostile manner, made an Address to the Council, telling
them, That they would not lay down their Arms till the Council had discharged
all Judicatures to pronounce any Sentence in Favor of the Episcopal Ministers,
which the Council was forced to do. Neither of which Matters of Fact this
Author has remembered to answer, tho it was the Subject of the whole Book
against which he wrote. To speak modestly, it seems to have no very good Aspect
to the present Government, and it is but a small A^gument of their Inclinations
to live peaceable long under it, that they have voted King William out of the
Supremacy of the Church, and that they have now so soon after usurped it to
themselves, having already without his leave either asked or granted convened
all at Edinburgh, and voted themselves into a free legal general Assembly,
where they draw up daily Instructions for regulating the Parliament, and meet
and adjourn at their own pleasure; and in their Sermons before the present High
Commissi^ner, my Lord Melvil, who is of their own Professi^n, they roundly tell
his Grace, (if that be not a Superstitious Arch-prelatical Title) how he must
build the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, only by such true b'ue
Israelites as can well Edisie, with the Truel in one Hand and the Sword in
another, and that none of these Samaritans who are addicted to the
Superstitions and Idol^tries of England, must be concerned in this thorough
Reformation. By those Practices one may easily conjecture why they so
scornfully reject the Act for establishing Presbytery offered by the late
Commissioner.

King William would likewise consider how many Thousands of them have and do
own, That the Covenant (which is again voted the Standard of all pure Religion)
is the Fundamental Contract 'twixt God, the King, and the People. And because
K. C. 2. broke it, therefore they declared that he had fallen from his Right to
the Crown; and because K. I. 2. never took it, that therefore he had no Right
to the Crown, and by public Proclamations declared it lawful to kill them, and
all who adhered to them; and accordingly killed several of their Soldiers and
Servants in this Quarrel. From all which the Query naturally arises, What
Measure King William must expect if he will not take the Covenant; and
consequently Swear to root out Episcopacy in England.

3ly. Query, What Loyalty he can expect from those who think him to be an
Idolater, as they think all to be who communicate according to the Church of
England, whose Liturgy they call the Mass in English?

4ly. Considering their Number in the North of Ireland, how easily they may
carry their Covenant thither, and all its Consequences?

5ly. What Danger there may be of it, even in England, whose Dissenters have
already learned to pray for the Scotch Presbyterians as their Mother Church?

6ly. Query, Whether it be fit for King William and the Parliament of Scotland,
to set up those who think it a Sin to grant any Toleration, not only to
Episcopacy, but to Anabaptists, Independents, or any but Presbytery? Which the
General Assembly declared to be a Sin, Anno 48. and Addressed to the Parliament
of England to concur with them in doing the like.

Lastly, Whether any Presbyterians, considering their late Practices and
Demands, be more Moderate now than when they formerly invaded England without
any Pretense, but their Obligations to the Covenant, and to reform the Kingdom
of England according to that Model.

FINIS.

