THE Fundamental Charter OF Presbytery, As it has been lately Established IN
THE Kingdom of SCOTLAND, Examined and Disproved, By the History, Records, and
Public Transactions of our Nation. Together with a PREFACE; Wherein the
Vindicator of the Kirk is freely put in mind of his Habitual Infirmities.

LONDON, Printed for C. Brom, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1695.

THE PREFACE.
THis Article, which I have now examined, was no sooner Established, in our
Scottish Claim of Right, than I turned serious to satisfy my self about it. I
thought it concerned me as a Scottish man to understand, as well as I could,
That which made such a Figure in the Original Contract between King and People.
I thought I was no less concerned as a Christian, to be Resolved about its
Merits: I perceived it might readily affect my practice; And tho I abhor, as
heartily as any man, all breaking of the Churches peace, for Rattles or
Nutshels; Yet I could not but reckon of it as a matter of Conscience, to me, to
Endeavor to be sure that I built neither my Faith nor my Obedience, in a
matter of such Consequence, as I take the Government of the Church to be, on a
Deceitful bottom. Perhaps I was bound to be inquisitive by some other
Reduplications, not needful to be Named.

I had not spent much Application about it, when I was satisfied; and thought I
had Ground to hope, the Wisdom of the Nation, after more Deliberate Researches,
might find it Reasonable, either to Restore to the Church, Her Ancient and Just
Government, or settle the New One, on some (at least) more Specious Basis. But
I was Disappointed. For

Three Sessions of Parliament are now over; And the Article is so far from
being either Retracted or Corrected* that, on the Contrary, It has been still
insisted on, and Deemed sufficient to support very weighty Superstructures.
Each Session has Erected some new thing or other, upon it.

This, with the importunity of some Friends, at last, Determined me to Enquire
more fully and minutely into the value of the Article; And the Work has
swelled to such a bulk as you see.

I confess I cannot Apologize sufficiently for my adventuring to Expose such
ane ill Composure to the public view; Especially Considering how Nice and
Critical, if not Picq't and Humorsome an Age we live in.

I ever thought that much of the Beauty, as well as of the Vtility of Books,
lay in Good Method, and a distinct Range of Thoughts: And I cannot promise that
I have observed That, so punctually, as Clearer Heads might have done.

I have less Reason to be Confident of the Style. It Is hard for most Scottish
men to arrive at any tolerable Degree of English Purity. Our greatest Caution
cannot prevent the Stealing of our own Words and Idioms into our Pens, and
their dropping thence, into our writings. All things considered, I have as
little Reason to think I have Guarded, or could Guard against them, as any
Scottish man: For not only have mine opportunities, all my life, been none of
the best; But, for finding Materials for the following Papers, I was obliged to
Read so many Books written in Right Broad Scotch, and take so many Citations
from them, that it is little to be wondered, if my Book abounds with
Scotticisms. I thought my self bound to be faithful in my Citations: (and I can
promise I have been that* I could not Reason from the Authority of these
Citations, without using the Terms and Phrases which are in them: This no
doubt, makes the Scotticisms Numerous: And I shall not deny that my familiar
acquaintance with these Books, together with the prejudices of Education,
Custom, and Constant Converse in the plain Scottish Dialect, may have
occasioned many more.

Neither shall I be over Confident, that, where I have adventured to Reason any
point, I have done it to every man's Conviction. I may have been (as other men)
apt to impose on my self, and think I have advanced just propositions, and
drawn fair Consequences, when I have not done it. No doubt, most men have such
a Kindness for themselves, as, too commonly, inclines them to applaud their own
thoughts, and judge their own Reasonings Just and Solid, when they are but
Coarse enough; And others may very easily discover where the mistake lies: Yet,
this I can say for my self, I have done, what I could to Guard against all such
prejudice and partial Bias.

Sensible of these infirmities, I entreat the Readers favorable and benign
Censures. This I can tell him ingenuously; If I could have done better, I
should not have Grudg^d him the pleasure of it.

But, perchance, that which I am more concerned to account for, is, what
Assistances I had for what I have advanced, in the following Sheets. And, here,
I must Confess, I had not all the Advantages I could have wished. Such are my
present Circumstances, That I could not Rationally propose to my self, to have
Access to the public Records, either of Church or State; And, no doubt, in
this, I was at a Considerable loss: For he who Transcribes from Authentic
Records, Does it more Securely, than he who has things only from Second hands.

Yet, I don't think this Disadvantage was such, as should have entirely
Discouraged me from the Attempt I have made: For some of my Authors had Access
to the public Registers; And I am apt to believe there was not much to be
found, there, Relating to the Controversies I have managed, which they have not
published; So that, tho it is possible, I might have been better, yet I cannot
think I was ill provided of Helps: I cannot think any of my Presbyterian
Brethren can be provided much better.

The principal Authors from which I have collected my Materials, are these;
Buchanan's History published at Frankfort, Anno 1594 Ieslie's History, at
Edinburgh, 1675. King James the Sixth's Works, in English, at London, 1616.
Archbishop Spotswood's History of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland, at
London, Anno 1655. His Refutatio Libelli, etc. Land. An. 1620. The True History
of the Church of Scotland, etc. said to be written by Mr. David Calderwood,
published An. 1678. Mr. Petrie's History of the Catholic Church, etc. Tom. 2.
printed at the Hague, Anno 1^62. Sir James Melvil's Memoirs. The Old Scottish
Liturgy. The Lord Herbert's History of the Life of King Henry 8. Doctor Heylin
and Doctor Burnet's Histories of the Reformation of the Church of England.
Calvin's Epistles printed at Geneva, Anno 1617. Beza's Epistles till the year
1573. Acts and Monuments by Fox, etc.

I have likewise considered our printed Acts of Parliaments. The printed Acts
of the General Assemblies, from the year 1638. And as many Pamphlets as I could
find, Relating to the Matters on which I insist: It Is needless to Name them
here: You may find them named, as Occasion required, in my Book. There are two
Books which I must insist on a little.

One is A Manuscript Copy of the Acts of our Scottish Assemblies from the year
1560 till the year 1616. Our Presbyterian Brethren may be ready to reject its
Authority, if it Militates against them: I give My Reader, therefore, this
brief account of it.

It was transcribed in the year 1638. when the National Covenant was in a
flourishing state; For I find, at the end of it, the Transcriber's Name and his
Designation, written with the same hand by which the whole M S. is written; And
he says, He began to transcribe upon the 15th day of January 1638. and
completed his work on the 23d of April, that same year. He was such a Reader
as we have commonly, in Scotland, in Country Parishes.

It is not to be imagined, it was transcribed, then, for serving the Interests
of Episcopacy; For, as Petrie, and the Presbyterians, generally affirm, The
Prelates and Prelatists dreaded nothing more, in those days, than that the Old
Registers of the Kirk should come abroad: And it was about that time, that Mr.
Petrie got his Copy, from which he published so many Acts of our Old General
Assemblies: Nor is it to be doubted but that, as several Copies, then, were, so
particularly, that which I have perused, was transcribed for the Ends of the
Good Old Cause. This I am sure of, the Covenant as required, then, to be
subscribed, by the Green Tables, is set down, at full length in the Manuscript.
Besides,

The Style and Language testify that there is no Reason to doubt, That the Acts
of Assemblies, which it contains, have been transcribed, word for word, at
first, from the Authentic Records: And if Calderwood's or Petrie's Accounts of
these Acts, deserve any Credit, My M S. cannot be rejected, for it has all
they have published; and, for the most part, in the same Terms, except, where
these Authors have altered the Language, sometimes to make it more fashionable
and intelligible; sometimes to serve their Cause, and the Concerns of their
Party.

It has Chasms, also, and Defects, where, they say, Leaves have been torn from
the Original Registers: And I have not adduced many Acts from it, which either
one, or both these Authors have not likewise mentioned in their Histories.

Calderwood has indeed concealed very many, having intended, it seems, to
publish nothing but what made for him; tho, I think, even in that, his Judgment
has not sufficiently kept pace with his Inclinations. Nay,

His Supplement, which he has subjoined to his History, as well as the History
it self, is lame, by his own Acknowledgment: For these are the very first words
of it: I have in the preceding History only inserted such Acts, Articles, and
Answers to Questions, as belonged to the Scope of the History, and Form of
Church Government; Some few excepted touching Corruptions in the Worship of
God, or the Office and Calling of Ministers. But because there are other Acts
and Articles necessary to be known I have SELECTED such as are of greatest Use;
passing by such as were TEMPORARY, or concerned only TEMPORARY OFFICES, etc.

Here is a clear Confession that he has not given us all the Acts of
Assemblies: Nay, that he has not given all such as concerned Temporary Offices;
and, amongst these, we shall find him, in the following Sheets, more
confidently than warrantably, reckoning Superintendency and the Episcopacy
which was agreed to at Leith, Anno 1572.

I have mentioned these things, that the World may see, it cannot be reasonable
for our Presbyterian Brethren to insist on either Calderwood's Authority or
Ingenuity against my Mss. How ingenuous or impartial he has been, you may have
opportunity to guess before you have got through the ensuing Papers.

Petrie has, indeed, given us a great many more of the Acts of General
Assemblies than Calderwood has done; as may appear to any who attends to the
Margin of my Book: But he, also, had the Good Cause to serve; and therefore,
has corrupted some things, and concealed other things, as I have made appear:
However, he has the far greater part of what I have transcribed from the Mss.

Spotswood has fewer than either of the two Presbyterian Historians; yet some
he has, which I find also in the MS. and which they have both omitted. In
short,

I have taken but very few from it, which are not to be found in some One or
More of these Historians: Neither have I adduced so much as One from it, nor is
One in it, which is not highly agreeable to the State and Circumstances of the
Church, and the Genius of the times, for which it mentions them: So that,

Upon the whole matter, I see no reason to doubt of its being a faithful
Transcript: And I think I may justly say of it, as Optatus said of another MS.
upon the like occasion, Vetustas Membranarum testimonium perhibet, etc. (
optat. Milev. lib. 1. f. 7. edit. Paris 1569) It has all the Marks of
Antiquity and Integrity that it pretends to; and there is nothing about it that
renders it suspicious.

The other Book, which, I said, required some farther consideration is, The
History of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland, containing five Books,
etc. Commmonly attributed to John Knox, by our Presbyterian Brethren. That
which I have to say about it is, chiefly, That Mr. Knox was not the Author of
it.

A. B. Spotswood has proven this by Demonstration, in his History, ( page
267.) his Demonstration is, That the Author, whoever he was, talking of one of
our Martyrs, remitteth the Reader for a farther Declaration of his Sufferings,
to the Acts and Monuments of Mr. Fox, which came not to light till some twelve
years after Knox's Death. Mr. Patrick Hamilton was the Martyr; and the
Reference is to be seen page 4. of that History I am now considering. Besides
this, I have observed a great many more infallible proofs that Knox was not the
Author. I shall only instance in some 3 or 4. Thus

Page 447. The Author, having set down a Copy of the Letter sent by the Church
of Scotland to the Church of England, (of which, more, by and by) Tells how the
English Nonconformists wrote to Beza, and Beza to Grindal Bishop of London;
which Letter of Beza's to Grindal, he says, is the Eight in order, amongst
Beza's Epistles: And in that same page, he mentions another of Beza's Letters
to Grindal, calling it the Twelfth in Number: Now, it is certain Beza's Epistles
were not published till the year 1573. i. e. after Knox's Death.

It may be observed also that he adds farther in that same page, That The
sincerer sort of the Ministry in England, had not yet assaulted the
Jurisdiction and Church Government, ( which they did not till the year 1572. at
which time they published their first and second Admonitions to the Parliament)
but only had excepted against Superstitious Apparel, and some other faults in
the Service Book. From which, besides that it is Evident, Knox could not be the
Author, we may Learn from the Authors Confession, whoever he was, That the
Controversies about Parity and Imparity, etc. were not so early in Britain as
our Presbyterian Brethren are earnest to have the present Generation believe.
Again

Page 449 The Author, Narrating how Henry, Queen Mary's Husband, etc was
buried. Adds, in Confirmation of his own Veracity, Thus. If there had been any
Solemn Burial, Buchanan had wanted Wit, to Relate otherwise; Seeing there would
have been so many Witnesses to testify the Contrary: Therefore, the Contriver
of the late History of Queen Mary, wanted Policy, here, to convey a Lie. Thus,
I say, the Author vouches Buchanans Authority; And it must be Buchanans History
that he Refers to; For there is not a Syllable, about Henry's Burial, to be
found in any of his other writings, Now,

Not to insist on the incredibleness of Knox's running for Shelter to Buchanans
Authority, concerning a matter of Fact so remarkable in its self, and which
happened in his own time, in that very City in which he lived and was Minister:
Not to insist on this* I say, Buchanan himself in his Dedication of his History
to King James 6th, Clearly decides the matter.

He tells his Majesty there were two Considerations which chiefly put him upon
writing his History. First, He perceived his Majesty had Read and Understood
the Histories of almost all other Nations; And it was incongruous and
unaccountable that he, who was so well acquainted with Foreign Affairs, should
be a Stranger to the History of his own Kingdom. Secondly, He was entrusted
with the Kings Education: He could not attend his Majesty in that important
Office, by Reason of his Old Age and Multiplying infirmities; He applied
himself, therefore, to write his History, thereby, to Compense the Defects of
his Non-Attendance, etc.

And from both Reasons it is evident, that Knox was Dead before Buchannan
applied himself to the writing of his History: For Knox dyed Anno 1572. K.
James was, then, but Six years of Age: And is it Credible, that at that Age he
had Read and got by heart, the Histories of almost all other Nations? Indeed
Buchanan survived Knox by ten years; And, for a good many of them was able to
wait, and actually waited on the King; So that it is clear 'twas toward the end
of his days, and after Knox's Death that he applied himself to his History. And
it is very well known, it was never published till the year 1582. But this is
not all

The Author of that which is called Knox's History, adduces Buchanan's
Authority for Convelling the Credit of the Contriver of the Late History of
Queen Mary, which was written, I cannot tell how long, after Buchanan was Dead,
as well as Knox. Further,

Page 306. The Author discourses thus, The Books of Discipline have been, of
late, so often published, that we shall forbear to print them at this time.
Now, there were never more than two Books of Discipline; and the Second was not
so much as projected till the year 1576, i. e. 4 years after Knox had departed
this life. Once more,

Page 286. We read thus, Some in France, after the sudden Death of Francis the
Second, and calling to mind the Death of Charles the Ninth, in Blood, and the
Slaughter of Henry the Second, did Remark the Tragical ends of these three
Princes who had persecuted Gods Servants so cruelly. -- And indeed the
following Kings of France, unto this day, have found this true, by their
unfortunate and unexpected Ends. Now

Charles the Ninth died not till the 30th of May, Anno 1574. i. e. 18 Months
after Knox. The following Kings of France who made the Unfortunate and
unexpected Ends were Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth: Henry the Third was
not Murdered till the year 1589. Henry the Fourth, not till May 1610. The
former 17, the latter 38 years after the Death of Knox.

From this Taste it is clear, that that History at least, as we now have it,
was not written by Knox. All that can be said with any Shadow of probability,
is, that Knox provided some Materials for it. But Granting this, how shall we
be able to separate that which is Spurious in it from that which is Genuine?
All I can say is this.

It Is plain to every one that Reads it, That he has been a thoroughpaced
Presbyterian, who framed it as we have it: By Consequence, its Authority is
stark naught for any thing, in it, that favors Presbytery, or bespatters
Prelacy: And if it ought to have any credit at all, it is only where the
Controversies about Church Government are no ways interested; or where it
mentions any thing that may be improven to the Advantages of Episcopacy; just
as the Testimonies of Adversaries are useful for the interests of the opposite
party, and not an A^e farther: So that, I had reason (if any Man can have it)
to insist on its Authority, as I have frequently done; But no Presbyterian can,
in equity, either plead, or be allowed the same privilege.

I could give the Reader a surfeit of instances, which cannot but appear, to
any considering person, to be plain and notorious Presbyterian corruptions, in
it: But I shall only represent One, as being of considerable importance, in the
Controversy which I have managed in my Second Enquiry; and, by that, the
Reader may make a Judgment of the Authors Candor and Integrity in other things.

The English Non-conformists, zealous to be rid of the Vestments, and some
other Forms and Ceremonies retained by the Church of England, which they
reckoned to be scandalous impositions, wrote earnestly (as is known) to several
Reformed Churches, and Protestant Divines, beseeching them to interpose with
the Church of England for an ease of these burdens. It seems they wrote to some
in Scotland also; probably to Mr. Knox: He was of their acquaintance; and they
could not but be secure enough of his inclinations, considering how warm he had
been about these matters at Francfort.

However it was, the Church of Scotland did actually interpose. The General
Assembly, met at Edinburgh, December. 27. Anno 1566, ordered John Knox to draw a
Letter to the English Clergy, in favor of those Non-conformists. This Letter
was subscribed and sent. Now, consider the Tricks of the Author of the History
attributed to Knox.

The Inscription of the Letter, as it is in Spotswood, Petrie, and the
Manuscript Copy of the Acts of the General Assembly's, is this:

The Superintendents, Ministers and Commissioners of the Church, within the
Realm of Scotland, To their Brethren the Bishops and Pastors of England, who
have renounced the Roman Antichrist, and do profess, with them, the Lord Jesus
in sincerity, wish the increase of the Holy Spirit.

Thus, I say Spotswo^d has it; ( page 198.) And the MS. and Petrie ( Tom. 2.
p. 348.) have it in the same words; only where Spotswood has [ wish] they have
[ desire] which makes no material Difference. But the spurious Knox has it
thus. ( page 445.)

The Superintendents, with other Ministers and Commissioners of the Church of
God, in the Kingdom of Scotland, To their Brethren the Bishops and Pastors of
Gods Church in England, who profess with us, in Scotland, the Truth of Jesus
Christ.

Now consider if there are not Material Differences between these two
Inscriptions. By the Inscription, as it is in Spotswood, Petrie, and the MS.
the Dignity and Superiority of the Scottish Superintenden^s, above the rest of
the Clergy, is clearly preserved: By the other account it is sadly obscured;
and they are made (at least very much) to stand on a level with other
Ministers, etc.

By the Inscription as in Spotswood, etc. The Sentiments Our Scottish Clergy
had, then, about the English Reformation, and Constitution, are very plain,
genuine and charitable: They were satisfied, that the Bishops and Pastors of
the Church of England had Renounced the Roman Antichrist, and that they
professed the Lord Jesus in SINCERITY; And they had for them, suitably, the
Christian and Brotherly Charity, which the Orthodox and Sincere Christians of
one Church, ought to have for the Orthodox and Sincere Christians of another
Church: They wished, or desired to them, The Increase of the Holy Spirit. How
highly this was agreeable to the sentiments of the then Protestants in
Scotland, I have made fully appear in the Discussion of my Second Enquiry. But,

To the Pseudo-Knox, it seems, it looked highly scandalous, to own, That the
Bishops and Pastors of England had Renounced the Roman Antichrist, or that they
professed the Lord Jesus in sincerity: How could these things be said, so long
as they retained Antichrists Hierarchy, or had so many Romish Mixtures? And
therefore, to wish them the increase of the Holy Spirit, was too bold a prayer;
It was founded on a false hypothesis: It supposed they had the Holy Spirit
already. How suitable is all this to the Presbyterian temper and principles?
And, by consequence, is it not evident that these alterations were not the
effects of negligence or inadvertencie, but of the true Spirit of the party?
But this is not all.

In the body of the Letter, as recorded by the Pseudo Knox, there are several
other Corruptions: I shall only point at one, but it is a considerable one.

The General Assembly which sent the Letter, after a Digression concerning the
care that ought to be had of tender Consciences, etc. Resume their main
purpose, thus, We return to our former humble supplication, which is, that our
Brethren, who, amongst you, refuse these Romish Rags, may find of you, who are
the PRELATES, such favor as our Head and Master commands every one of his
members to show to another.

So it is not only in the MS. Spotswood and Petrie, word for word, but also in
a virulent Presbyterian Pamphlet, called Scotidromus, directed to all Noble
Scots and kind Catholics zealous for the Romish Religion; written Anno 1638,
to cast dirt, at that time, upon Episcopacy, and render it odious to the
People; which Pamphlet I have by me, in Manuscript: But

The Supposititious Knox has it thus, Now again we return to our former
Request, which is, that the Brethren, among you, who refuse the Romish Rags may
find of you (not the PRELATES, but) who USE and URGE them, such favor, etc How
unfit was it for the world to know that a Scottish General Assembly had owned
the Bishops of England as PRELATES? It was scandalous, no doubt, to the Godly:
It was expedient, therefore, to falsify a little, and foist in more useful
Epithets; to call them, not PRELATES, but USERS and URGERS of the Ceremonies.

I have insisted the longer on this Book, because our Presbyterian Brethren are
so earnest to have the world believe that it was written by Knox: Particularly
G. R. (in his First Vindication, etc. in Answer to Quest. 1.. 8.) where, too,
observe by the way, how extravagantly that Author blunders. His words are, [
Anno 1559. The Protestant Ministers and People held a General Assembly at St.
Johnstown, says Knox, Hist. Lib. 2. p. 137.] Now there is not so much as one
syllable of a General Assembly in the Text. Upon the Margin, indeed, there are
these words [ The first Assembly at St. Johnstown] But no Presbyterian, I
think, (unless he is one of G. R.'s kind) will be so impudent as to say that
all that is on the Margin of that Book was written by Knox. And that Meeting
which was then at Perth, was nothing like that Court, which we call a General
Assembly: But enough of this.

To conclude, though I am firmly persuaded that Knox was not the Author of this
History, yet because it passes commonly under his name, I have still cited it,
so, on my Margin. The Edition I have used, is that, in 4 to, published at
Edenburg, Anno 1644.

The other Treatises attributed to Knox (and I know no Reason to doubt their
being his) from which I have cited any thing, are in ane Appendix to the
History.

I have not made it my work to cite Acts of Parliaments, and represent the
favorable countenance Episcopacy has had from the State, so much, as to
consider the sentiments of our Reformers, and those who succeeded them, in
their Ecclesiastical capacity; partly, because the Acts of Parliament have been
diligently collected before; Particularly, whosoever pleases may see a goodly train
of them, from the year 1560 till the year 16^7, in the Large Declaration page
333, etc. Partly, because our Presbyterian Brethren, are in use to insist more
on the Books of Discipline, and the Acts of General Assemblies, etc. than on
Acts of Parliaments.

One advantage, (amongst many disadvantages) I think, I have, it is, that the
Authors I have most frequently cited, were Presbyterians, by consequence,
Authors whose Testimony's can, least, be called in Question by my Presbyterian
Brethren.

I do not pretend to have exhausted the subjects I have insisted on: Any Reader
may easily perceive I have been at a loss as to several things in History.
Perchance, I have sometimes started some things New and which have not been
observed before. I wish I may have given occasion to those who are fitter, and
better furnished with helps, for such Enquiries, to consider, if they can bring
more light to our History. In the mean time, I think* I have said enough to
convince the Reader, that our Presbyterian Brethren have not reason to be so
confident, as commonly they are, for their side of the Controversies I have
managed.

Yet, after all this, I am not secure but that they will endeavor to have my
Book Answered; for all Books most be Answered, that militate against them; and
they can still find some G. R. or other who has zeal and confidence enough for
such attempts.

Upon the supposition, therefore, that I must have ane answer, I do, for once,
become ane earnest suitor to my Presbyterian Brethren, that they would employ
some Person of ordinary sense and discretion, to Answer me, and not their
common Vindicator of their Kirk, G. R. for I have got enough of him, and I
incline not to have any more meddling with him.

Whosoever reads the following papers, I think, may find such a sample of him; such
a swatch (pardon the word, if it is not English) of both his Historical and his
Argumentative Skill (a talent he bewails, much the want of, in his Adversaries)
as may make it appear just and reasonable for any man to decline him. But lest
he is not represented, there, so fully as he ought to be, so fully as may
justify my declining of him, I shall be at some farther pains, here, to give
the Reader a fuller prospect of him

To delineate him minutely, might, perchance, be too laborious for me, and too
tedious and loathsome to my Reader: I shall restrict my self, therefore to his
four Cardinal Virtues, his Learning, his Judgment, his Civility, and his
Modesty: Or, (because we are Scottishmen) to give them their plain Scotch
names, his Ignorance, his Nonsense, his Ill Nature, and his Impudence.

Perhaps I shall not be able to reduce every individual instance to its proper
Species: It Is very hard to do that, in matters which have such affinity one
with another, as there is between Ignorance and Nonsense, or between
Ill Nature and Impudence: But this I dare promise, if I cannot keep by the Nice
Laws of Categories, I shall be careful to keep by the Strict Laws of Justice: I
shall entitle him to nothing that is not truly his own. So much for Preface,
come we next to the Purpose. And in the

1. Place, I am apt to think, since ever writing was a Trade, there was never
Author furnished with a richer stock of unquestionable Ignorance for it. To
insist on all the Evidences of this, would swell this Preface to a Bulk beyond
the Book.

I omit, therefore, his making Presbyterian Ruling Elders, (as contradistinct
from Teaching Elders) of Divine Institution; his making the SENIORES, sometimes
mentioned by the Fathers, such Ruling Elders; and his laying stress on the old
blunder about St. Ambrose's testimony to that purpose, (vide True Represent. of
Presbyterian Government prop. 3.) These I omit because not peculiar to him.

I omit even that, which, for any thing I know, may be peculiar to him; viz.
That his Ruling Elders are called Bishops, and that their necessary
Qualifications are set down at length in Scrip. e. g. 1 Timothy 3.2. and Tit. 1.6
( ibid. Prop. 3.4)

I omit his Learned affirmative, that Patronages were not brought into the
Church till the 7 th or 8 th Centurie, or Later; And that they came in amongst
the latest Antichristian Corruptions and Usurpations (ibid. Answ. to Object. 9
th)

I omit all such Assertions as these, that the most and most Eminent of the
Prelatists acknowledge that by our Saviors appointment, and according to the
practice of the first and best Ages of the Church, she ought to be, and was
Governed, in Common, by Ministers Acting in Parity (ibid. Prop. 12.) That
Diocesan Episcopacy was not settled in St. Cyprian 's time (Rational Defense of
Nonconformity, etc. p. 157) That Diocesan Episcopacy prevailed not for the
first three Centuries, and that it was not generally in the 4 th Centurie
(ibid. 158.) That the Bishop S. Cyprian all along, speaks of, was a
Presbyterian Moderator (ibid. 179.) That Cyprian, Austine, Athanasius, etc.
were only such Moderators (ibid. 175, 176, 177, 178.)

I omit his insisting on the Authority of the Decretal Epistles attributed to
Pope Anacletus, as if they were Genuine (ibid. 202.) And that great Evidence of
his skill in the affairs of the Protestant Churches, viz. That Episcopacy is
not to be seen in any one of them, Except England (ibid. p. 10.) Nay,

I omit his nimble and learned Gloss he has put on St. Ierom's Toto Orb
Decretum, etc. viz. That this Remedy of Schism, in many places, began, then,
(i. e. in St. Ierom's time) to be thought on; and that it was no wonder that
this Corruption began, then, to creep in; it being, then, about the end of the
fourth Centurie, when Jerome wrote, etc. (ibid. 170.)

Neither shall I insist on his famous Exposition of St. Ierom's Quid facit
Episcopus, etc. because it has been sufficiently exposed, already, in the
Historical Relation of the General Ass. 1690. Nor on his making Plutarch,
Simonides, Chrysostom, etc. Every Grecian speak Latin, when he had the
confidence to cite them. These and 50 more such surprising Arguments of our
Authors singular learning, I shall pass over; And shall insist only, a little,
on two or three instances, which, to my taste, seem superlatively pleasant. And

1. In that profound Book, which he calls a Rational Defense of Nonconformity,
etc. in Answer to D. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of the separation from
the Church of England (page 172.) He has Glossed St. Chrysostom, yet, more
ridiculously than he did St. Ierom. The passage as it is in Chrysostom, is
sufficiently famous and known to all who have enquired into Antiquity, about
the Government of the Church. The Learned Father having Discoursed concerning
the Office and Duties of a Bishop ( Hom. 10. on 1 Timothy 3.) and proceeding, by
the Apostles Method, to Discourse next of Deacons (Hom. II.) started this
difficulty. How came the Apostle to prescribe no Rules about Presbyters? And he
solved it thus, (...). St. Paul, says he, did not insist about Presbyters,
because there is no great difference between them and Bishops: Presbyters, as
well as Bishops, have received Power to Teach and Govern the Church: And the
Rules he gave to Bishops are also proper for Presbyters; For Bishops excel
Presbyters, only, by the Power of Ordination; and by this alone they are
reckoned to have more Power than Presbyters. Vide Edit. Savil. Tom. 4. p. 289.

Now, it is plain to the most ordinary attention, That in the Holy Father's
Dialect, (...) signifies the Power of conferring Orders, just as (...) and
(...) signify the Powers of Teaching and Governing: Consider, now the Critical
Skill of G. R.

Bellarmine had adduced this Testimony, it seems, to show that there was a
Disparity in point of Power, between Bishops and Presbyters, and had put it in
Latin, thus, Inter Episcopum atque Presbyterum interest fere nihil; quippe and
Presbyteris Ecclesiae cura permissa est: and quae de Episcopis dicuntur, ea
etiam Presbyteris congruunt; Sola quippe Ordinatione Superiores illi sunt. So
G. R. has it: I know not if he has transcribed it faithfully: It Is not his
custom to do so: Nor have I Bellarmine at hand, to compare them. Sure I am the
Translation does not fully answer the Original: But however that is, go we
forward with our Learned Author. These are his words.

What he (Bellarmine) alleges out of this citation, that a Bishop may Ordain,
not a Presbyter, the Learned Fathers expression will not bear: For Ordination
must signify either the Ordination the Bishop and Presbyter have, whereby they
are put in their Office, to be different, which he does not allege: Or, that
the difference between them was only in Order or Precedence, not in Power or
Authority: Or, that it was by the Ordination or appointment of the Church, not
Christ's Institution: But it can never signify the Power of Ordaining. Are not
these pretty pleasant Criticisms on (...)? But the best follows. He gives a
Demonstration, that Ordination as mentioned by Chrysostom, can never signify
the Power of Ordaining, For, then, ^says he) Chrysostom (who was sufficiently a
Master of words) would have said (mark it beloved, he would have spoken Latin,
and said Potestate Ordinandi, not Ordinatione. And have we not our Author, now,
a Deep-learn'd Glossator? I cannot promise a better instance of his Criti^al
Skill: But I hope the next shall not be much w^rse.

2. Then, in that same Rational defense, etc. p. 199. Sect 4. He undertakes to
prove the Divine institution of Popular Elections of Ministers. His first
Argument he takes from Acts 14.23. The word (...) must needs do it. Now, it is
none of my present task to prove, that that word cannot do it: Whosoever has
considered how it is used in the New Testament, may soon perceive that; and if
our Author had but Read the Book called Ius ^ivinum Ministerii Evangel^i,
written by a Provincial Assembly of his own friends, he might have seen, that
even they were Confident it could not do it. Nay, He himself, in that same 4 th
Section acknowledges, it cannot do it. I deny not (says he) that this word is
some times used figuratively, for potestative Mission, the effect or consequent
of Election, and that by one Person, without suffrages, as Acts 10 41. And I
think, after this, it was pleasant enough to make it do it, for all that: But,
as I said, it is none of my present business to debate the force of the word
with him: All I am concerned for, is to represent his superfine Skill in
Critical learning. For,

He tells us gravely, The word is most commonly used in his sense, viz. as it
signifies to choose by suffrages: And he proves it, but how? These two ways. 1.
Of all the instances that Scapula, in his Lexicon, gives of the use of the
word, not one of them is to the contrary. Twenty disparate significations, you
see, would have imported nothing: And who can doubt but Scapula's Lexicon is
ane Uncontroverted Standard for the Ecclesiastical significations of words? But
our Author proceeds: 2. It cannot be instanced that ever the word is used for
laying on of hands: Lifting up, and laying them down, being so opposite, it is
not to be imagined that the one should be put for the other. And what needed
more after this? Yet, lest this was not profound enough, our Author plunges
deeper: He will needs have both the suffrages of the People and the Imposition
of the Apostles hands, to be signified by the word (...), in that same Text
Act. 14.23. The Apostles appointed, by Ordination, Elders for the People, upon
their Electing them by Suffrages. And then, in the close of the Section, I
conclude, this being done (...), in every Church, the People Respective choosing
their Pastors, and the Apostles ordaining them, it is clear to have been,
generally, the practice of these times, and so the Institution of Christ.

I told when I began with him, there might be Instances, I might have occasion
to adduce, which it might be difficult to reduce to their proper Categories;
And I am afraid this is one: The truth is, it is very hard to determine whither
Ignorance or Nonsense can plead the better Title to it: For my part, let them
share it between them. I shall only insist, a little, on one thing more.

3. Then, one of his Adversaries, whom he took to task in his Second
Vindication of his Church of Scotland (the Author of the Second Letter) had
used the Phrase [ Christian Philosophy] when G. R. thought he should have said
[ Christian Divinity] but, if I mistake not, G. R. when he wrote his Answer,
thought it had been for that Authors credit to have foreborn using such a
Phrase: For never did Cock crow more keenly over Brother Cock when he had
routed him, than G. R. did, over the Letter-man, on that occasion.

He told him (2 Vind. ad. Let. 2.. 24. p. 62, 63. Edit. Eden.) He thought the
Commendation of a Minister had been rather to understand Christian Divinity,
than Christian Philosophy, but we must not wonder (says he) that men so
strongly inclined to Socinianism speak in the Socinian Dialect. -- For indeed
that which goes for Religion, among some men, is nothing but Platonic
Philosophy put into a Christian dress, by expressing it in words borrowed (some
of them) from the Bible: And the Preaching of some men is such Morality as
Seneca and other Heathens taught, only Christianized with some words, etc. In
short, he pursued the poor Epistler (as he calls him) so unmercifully, that he
never left him, till he concluded him ane Ignorant Talker, for using that
Phrase. Now,

Judicious Reader, was it not, indeed, a Demonstration of Deep thinking, and a
penetrating wit, to make such a plain discovery, of such a prodigious Spawn, of
Heresies, crowded into one single Phrase consisting of two words, or rather in
one Solitary Vocable? I say one Vocable, for it was the word [ Philosophy]
which was the Lerna: I cannot think the word [ Christian] was either Art or
Part. Socinianism, Academicism, Stoicism (consistent or inconsistent, was all
one to our Author) all thronged together in one so innocent like ane
expression! Sad enough! How sad had it been for sorry Epistler, if there had
been a greater confluence of such -- isms in our Authors learned Noddle when he
wrote that Elaborate Paragraph? Had they been in it, it is very like, they had
come out. However, even these were enough, especially, having, in their
Society, the fundamental Heresy of Ignorance: And yet after all this,

I am apt to believe the poor Epistler was Orthodox and Catholic in his
meaning: I believe he looked on it as a very harmless Phrase, and intended no
other thing by it, than that which is commonly called [ Christian Divinity.]
It Is twenty to one, he used it, as having found it used before him, by very
Honest men, who were never suspected of any of these Dreadful Heresies: The
Ancient Lights (I mean) and Fathers of the Church, who had scarcely another
Phrase which they used more frequently, or more familiarly. Of this I am sure,
If it was not so, it might have been so, with him.

My present circumstances do not allow me to Cite them so plentifully, as might
be done; yet I think, I can adduce the Testimonies of half a dozen, whose
Authority might have stood between the Epistler and all Hazard, e. g.

Iustine Martyr in his Excellent Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, not only asserts
the insufficiency of the Platonic, the Peripatetick, the Pythagoraean, the
Stoic Philosophies, etc. But, expressly, makes the Ancient Prophets who were
inspired of God, the only true and infallible Philosophers ( Just. Opp. Graec.
Edit. Rob. Steph. Lutet. 1551. p. 36.) And having told how he himself came to
the knowledge of Christianity, he subjoyns (p. 37.) (...). I have found
Christianity to be the only infallible and useful Philosophy, and, on its
account, I own my self a Philosopher.

Photius in this (...). Discoursing of the same Justin, as may be seen at the
beginning of Iustin's works, Describes him thus, (...). He was a man of our
(that is, the Christian) Philosophy.

Origin, in his Learned work against Celsus (Edit. Cantab. 1658. p. 9.) tells
him, if it were possible for all men, laying aside the cares of this life,
(...), to apply themselves to the Study of true Philosophy, what a blessing
would it be to the world! And the very next words Declare what Philosophy he
meant: (...), etc. For there may be found (says he) in Christianity, most Noble
and Mysterious disquisitions, etc. Again,

Page 144. Celsus had alleged that the Christians took pains to Proselyte none
but young People, Ignorants, Idiots, etc. And Origin Replys, it is not true:
They call all men (...), wise and foolish, to the acknowledgement of Christ:
And what evil is there in instructing the Ignorant? Do not you Heathen
Philosophers the same? (...); Or is it allowable in you O Heathens to call
young men, and servants, and ignorant people to the Study of Philosophy? But we
Christians, when we do the like, must be Condemned of inhumanity? Once more

Page 146. Celsus had objected that the Christians taught privately, etc. And
Origin Answers, they did not refuse to teach publicly, and if people would
come to them, they would send them (...), to be taught Philosophy by the
Prophets of God, and the Apostles of Jesus. Whosoever pleases to peruse that
Excellent Apology for Christianity, may find much more to the same purpose. Nay
farther,

St. Chrysostom, one of G. R's good acquaintances, has this Heretical Phrase,
ane hundred times over: e. g. In the page immediately preceding that in which
the Testimony is, which his Learn'dness Glosst so singularly; the Holy Father,
zealous against such as were Christians in profession, only, without a suitable
practice, Argues thus, what can one say (...), etc. When he sees us, not in
works, but in words only, pretending to be Philosophers? Or (for all is one
with Chrysostom) to be Christians?

In his sixth Hom. on St. Matt. He says, God permitted the Jews, for a time to
offer Corporal Sacrifices, etc. (...), i. e. That by degrees he might lead them
to the Elevated (i. e. the Christian) Philosophy. And does not the same Father
in the same Homilies on Matt. call our Saviors Sermon on the Mount (...), The
Top of all Philosophy?

And in his 4 th Hom. on 1 Cor. He discourses elegantly how Christ by the
Doctrines of the Cross, and Evangelical Polity, and true Godliness and the
future judgment, etc. (...), has made all men, Rusticks, Idiots, etc.
Philosophers.

Neither is this Phrase less frequent with the Latin Fathers: I shall only
instance in two, but such two as most men use (at least ought) to Read, who
have a mind to know any thing of Antiquity. St. Cyprian, I mean, and Vincentius
Lirinensis.

St. Cyprian in ane Epistle to Cornelius, the 57 in number, (if I remember
right according to Rigaltius; Characterizes Novatianus to this purpose, Magis
Durus Secularis Philosophiae pravitate, quam Philosophiae Dominicae lenitate
Pacificus: And in his Excellent Sermon De Patientia, Nos autem, Fratres
Charissimi, qui Philosophi non verbis, sed factis sumus, etc. We Christians who
are Philosophers, not in words but in deeds, etc. And

Vincentius in the 30 th Chapter of his Commonitorium admires the Coelestis
Philosophiae Dogmata, the Doctrines of the Heavenly ( i. e. the Christian)
Philosophy. Indeed,

Some of these primitive Glory's of the Church, give us a Solid Reason for both
the Orthodoxy and the Propriety of the Phrase. I cannot tell what notion G. R.
has of Philosophy; But I am pretty sure, according to S. Iustin's and St.
Augustines notion of it, it is a most proper name for our Holy Religion.

Justin (ut sup. p. 33.) tells Trypho, thus, (...). True Philosophy is the
Richest and most Honorable possession in the sight of God. It Is that which
brings us near, and commends us to him: And they are all truly holy, who apply
themselves seriously and heartily to the practice of true Philosophy. And (page
34. he defines Philosophy thus, (...). Philosophy is the Knowledge of God and
the acknowledgment of the Truth (i. e. of Christ, as I take it) and happiness
is the reward of this wisdom and knowledge. And,

St. Austin, (with whose works G. R. should have been well acquainted, when he
adventured to give him the Commendation of being the great Light of the Latin
Church, as he does in that same 24. Sect.) in the first cap. of his 8 th Book
De Civitate Dei, Discourses thus. Cum Philosophis est habenda Collatio quorum
ipsum Nomen, si Latin interpretemur, amorem Sapientiae profitetur: Porro, si
Sapientia Deus est, per quem facta sunt omnia, sicut Divina Authoritas,
veritasque monstravit, verus Philosophus est Amator Dei. The word Philosophy
(says he) signifies the Love of Wisdom: But God is Wisdom, as himself has said
in his word; and therefore a true Philosopher is a lover of God. And,

In the ninth Chapter of that same Book Philosophari est amare Deum -- Vnde
Colligitur tunc fore beatum Studiosum Sapientiae (id enim est Philosophus) Cum
frui Deo Coeperit. i. e. To Philosophize is to love God: One is then a true
Philosopher when he begins to enjoy God, etc. Nay,

Tho G. R. should reject the Authority of these and twenty other Fathers, who
have used and justified the Phrase, it were no difficult task to find enough of
Modern Writers, who have used it, though they were neither Stoics, Platonists
nor Socinians; But I shall only recommend to him two who were his Predecessors
in that same Chair, which he, now, so worthily possesses. Doctor Leighton I
mean, in his Valedictory Oration, lately published, and Mr Colvil in his
Treatise about Christian Philosophy. And now,

Let our Authors Ignorance and his Ill Nature debate it between them, to
whither he was most obliged when he so fiercely scourged the poor Epistler, for
talking so Heretically of Christian Philosophy. By this time, I think, the
Reader may have got a sufficient Taste of our Renowned Vindicators singular
Learning. Proceed we now

II. To his next Cardinal Virtue. Profound Learning, such as our Authors, is a
teeming Mother, and commonly produces Congenial Brood, plentifully. Indeed,
never was Author's more Prolifick. His Learning has produced crowds of
Mysteries; But such Mysteries as plain speaking people, commonly, call
Nonsense.

It were Nonsense, indeed, to insist on all instances of this nature, which
beautify his writings: Such as his pretty position, That all Ceremonies of Gods
worship are worship themselves ( Animadv. on D. Still. Iren. p. 30.) His
pleasant Fetch about Ceremonies that stand in the place of the Competentes or
Catechumeni, ( Rational Defense, etc. p. 72.) His Judicious Conclusion, That
the Affirmative part of the Second Commandment, is, that we ought to worship
God in the way prescribed in his Word, ( ibid. 125.) His sublime notion about
the Unity of the Church in the Case of the Lutherans (ibid. 148.) We shut not
out the Lutheran Churches (says he) from all possibility of Union with them; We
can have Union with them, as Sister Churches; But we cannot partake in their
instituted parts of worship. His surprising proposition, viz. That the two
Governments (Presbytery and Monarchy) of Church and State, have suited one
another, many ages, since the Nation was Protestant (2 Vind.. 11. p. 14.

It were to Vie with him for his own Talent, I say, to insist on all these, and
many more, such, which are to be found in his Matchless writings. I shall,
therefore, mention only three or four of his most Elaborate Mysteries. And

1. Our Judicious Author wrote Animadversions on Doctor Stillingfleet's
^renicum, and you may judge of the Metal of the whole by this one Specimen,
which you have not far from the beginning.

D. Still. (p. 2.) had laid down this Foundation, that difference of opinion
about a point, and probable Arguments brought on both sides, by wise and able
men, if it be not a matter of necessity to salvation, gives men ground to think
that a final decision of the matter in Controversy was never intended as a
necessary means for the Peace and Unity of the Church.

Against this position G. R. Reasons thus (p. 5.) If any things not necessary
to Salvation, be so Necessary to be clearly revealed, that we are to look upon
them as not Christ's Truth, if there remain a Controversy about them, managed
with specious Arguments, on both sides, among wise and able men, much more,
things necessary to Salvation must be thus clearly revealed, so that there is
no truth in them, if they be so Controverted; but the consequent is most false
and absurd. Ergo, etc. Let the Reader try his skill on this Mystery, and fathom
the depth of it, if he can.

2. The next Mystery I thought to have insisted on, is that grand one about the
Decrees of God, (2 Vind. p. 66.) viz. That God has a Decree that is Praeteritum
as ane Act of Sovereignty, and a Decree that is Praedamnatum, as ane Act of
Justice. But I am told, this has been sufficiently represented already: And
therefore I shall say no more about it, but this, that there is no Reason to
think, it was a Typograhical Error: For, after it was thus Printed in Scotland,
it was Reprinted in England without Alteration or Correction; So that there is
all the Reason in the world to impute it to the Author: But, if so, was he not,
at best, a Mysterious Theologue? But

3. The next I shall produce, though not sounding so directly toward blasphemy,
is every whit, as good Mystery. The Story is this.

Doctor Stillingfleet, in his Unreasonableness of the Separation from the
Church of England, forbore to sustain the Lawfulness of Liturgies, etc. Because
Doctor Falk'ner had done it so well before: But our Author had made some
Collections on the subject ( Ration. Defen. etc. p. 222.) And it was pity they
should be stifled; And therefore they behoved to be published. I am not to
insist on every thing that is Mysterious in that Learned Disquisition on the
subject of Liturgies, with which he has blessed the Island. One thing shall
suffice.

In his burning zeal against Liturgies or Set forms, he advances this
proposition (among many others) That it is Unlawful to worship God by a frame
of service, that is not warranted in the word, both as to its Matter and
Manner. (page 226. Sect. 8.)

This I prove (says he) 1. From Christ's Condemning the Traditions of men, as
vain worship, Matt. 15.9. They taught these Traditions, i. e. (says Lucas
Brugensis in Locum) they followed them, and taught others to follow them. The
same Author calls these Men's Traditions, that are so, of men, that they are
not of God, or are devised by man; ibid. So also, Vatablus, Erasmus, Maldonate,
Tirinus, Piscator, Calvin and Chemnitius, say, Here is meant whatever is
brought into Religion without the word: Now it is Manifest that a frame of
Divine service not warranted in the word falls under this General Head. Thus
you have all these Gentlemen, Lucas Brugensis, Vatablus, Erasmus, etc. (though
some of them were Papists, some of them Lutherans, and not one of them but
owned and used Liturgies) strong against Liturgies, if not directly, at least
by plain consequence. But our Author proceeds.

Secondly, The Lord condemns all worship offered up to him, that he has not
Commanded, Jer. 7.31. (turn to the Text and try if it is not pertinently
adduced) Where not being commanded, but devised by men, is made the ground on
which that practice (though otherwise evil also) is Condemned: And Jeroboam 's
Frame and way of service is Condemned because Devised ( Heb. Created) of his
own heart, 1 Kings 12.33.

Thirdly, Even Reason teaches that God ought to choose how he will be honored,
or worshipped by his Creatures. He best knows what will please him: And his
Sovereignty in all things must especially appear in this that himself is so
nearly concerned in. This is a principle so rooted in nature, that among the
Heathens, they that contrived their Liturgies, or ways of worship, behoved to
pretend Revelation from their Gods, to guide them in this. It was never heard
of among the more Religious Heathens, that Religion, or the manner of
worshipping their Gods was enjoined only by Man's Authority, and divised only by
him. Yea, in the so much magnified Rosary of the Virgin Mary, It is alleged
that Saint Dominicus had it revealed by the Virgin her self, that this Form of
service was most acceptable to her; And it is added, That she was fittest to
choose what way she would be worshipped. I hope they (the Papists) and such as
symbolize with them, (those of the Church of England) in ordering of the
worship of God, will give us leave to say the same of her Blessed Son.

Fourthly, For the Matter of worship, I think, it will not be Questioned,
whither that must be appointed by God, or not; -- But even the FRAME, COMPOSVRE
and MODE of Divine worship should have Divine warrant, otherwise, it is not
acceptable to God, etc. Now,

Not to make much needless work; Consider 1. our Authors great business was to
prove the Unlawfulness of Liturgies, or Set-forms of Prayers, etc. in the
public worship. Consider 2. that he (as his Sect, generally,) is against using
the Lords Prayer, the only Prayer I can find of Divine Institution, in the New
Testament, as to the MATTER, FRAME, COMPOSURE and MODE of it. Consider 3. that
our Author would be very angry, and complain of horrid injustice done him, if
you should charge him with Quakerism, or praying by immediate inspiration: For
who so great enemies to Quakers, as Scottish Presbyterians? Consider 4. if his
Arguments can consist any better with Extemporary Prayers, which are not
immediately inspired, and, by consequence, cannot be of Divine Institution, as
to MATTER, FRAME, COMPOSURE, and MODE, than with Set-forms which are not of
Divine Institution as to MATTER, FRAME, COMPOSURE, and MODE. Consider 5. in
consequence of these, if we can have any public Prayers at all: And then
consider 6. and lastly, if our Author, when he wrote this Section, had his zeal
tempered with common sense; and if he was not knuckle-deep in right Mysterious
Theology. But as good follows: For

4. Never man spoke more profound Mysteries, than he has done, on all
occasions, in his surprising accounts of the Church of Scotland. He tells us of
a Popish Church of Scotland, since the Reformation, and a Protestant Church of
Scotland.

He tells us, (1 Vind. Answ. to Quest. 1.. 10.) Presbyterians do not say that
the Law made by the Reforming Parliament, Anno 1576, took from them (the Popish
Bishops) the Authority they had over the Popish Church -- but it is Manifest,
that after this Law, they had no Legal Title to Rule the Protestant Church.

This same, for once is pleasant enough: The Reforming Parliament, while it
defined the Church of Scotland (and it defined it so as to make it but one, as
is evident from Act. 6. which I have transcribed word for word in my Book,
allowed of two Churches of Scotland, two National Churches in one Nation. But
this is not all:

He has also subdivided the Protestant Church of Scotland, into two Churches
of Scotland: The Presbyterian Church of Scotland, and the Episcopal Church of
Scotland.

He insists very frequently on the Presbyterian Church of Scotland. Thus, in
his Preface to his First Vind. of his Church of Scotland, in great seriousness,
he tells the world that, that which is determined concerning all them that will
live Godly in Christ Jesus, that they must suffer persecution, is, (and has
long been) the lot of the PRESBYTERIAN Church of Scotland. And in his Preface
to his 2 Vind.. 7. I have, in a former paper pleaded for the PRESBYTERIAN
Church of Scotland, against ane Adversary, etc. And in Answer to the Hist.
Relat. of the Genesis Ass.. 12. his Adversary had said, that, General Assembly was
as insufficient to represent the Church of Scotland, as that of Trent was to
represent the Catholic Church. And G. R. readily replys, but he cannot deny
that it represented the PRESBYTERIAN Church, and was all that could be had of a
PRESBYTERIAN Assembly.

He is as frank at allowing ane Episcopal Church of Scotland: Thus, (in True
Represent. of Presb. Governm. in Answ. to OB. 10.) The Ministers that entered
by and under Prelacy, neither had, nor have any Right to be Rulers in the
PRESBYTERIAN Church -- Whatever they might have in ANOTHER Governing Church (
i. e. the Episcopal Church) that the State set up in the Nation, etc. And more
expressly, in Answ. to the Hist. Relat. of the Genesis Ass. 1690.. 3. Again (says
he) though we own them (the Prelatick Presbyters) as Lawful Ministers, yet we
cannot own them as Ministers of the PRESBYTERIAN Church: They may have a Right
to Govern the EPISCOPAL Church, to which they had betaken themselves, and left
the PRESBYTERIAN: yet that they have a Right to Rule the PRESBYTERIAN Church,
we deny.

By this time, I think, the Reader has got enough of Scottish National
Churches, and their distinct Governors and Governments. The Popish Clergy
(even since the Reformation was established by Law) have Right to Rule the
Popish National Church of Scotland: The Protestant Episcopal Clergy have Right
to Rule the Protestant Episcopal National Church of Scotland: The Protestant
Presbyterian Ministers have only Right to Rule the Protestant Presbyterian
National Church of Scotland. By the way,

May not one wish, that he and his party had stood here? For if the Episcopal
Clergy have Right to Rule the Episcopal Churh, and if it was only Right to Rule
the Presbyterian Church, which they had not, why was their own Right to Rule
themselves taken from them? Are not the Presbyterians unrighteous in taking
from them all Right to Rule, when they have Right to Rule the Episcopal Church
of Scotland? But this (as I said) only by the way: That which I am mainly
concerned for at present, is, that the Reader may consider if there is not a
goodly parcel of goodly sense in these profound Meditations. Yet better follows.

After all this laborious clearing of marches between Scottish National
Churches, particularly, the Episcopal and Presbyterian National Churches of
Scotland, He tells you, for all that, they are but one Church of Scotland: But
in such Depth of Mystery, as, perchance, can scarcely be paralleled. Take the
worthy speculation in his own words. (True Rep. ad OB. 10.) Let it be further
Considered (says he) that though we are not willing so to widen the difference
between us and the Prelatick party, as to look on them and our selves as two
distinct Churches; Yet, it is evident, that their Clergy and we are two
different Representatives, and two different Governing Bodies of the Church of
Scotland: And that they who are Members of the one, cannot, at their pleasure
go over to the other, unless they be received by them. Well!

Has he now Retracted his making them two Churches? You may judge of that by
what follows in the very next words. For thus he goes on. These things thus
laid down, let us hear what is objected against this Course (the Course the
Presbyterians were pursuing with Might and Main, when he wrote this Book, viz.
That the Government of the Church, might, prima instantia, be put in the hands
of the known sound Presbyterian Ministers, etc.) First, this is to set up
Prelacy among Ministers, even while it is so much decryed; That a few should
have Rule of the Church, and the rest excluded: Answ. It is not Prelacy, but a
making distinction between Ministers of one Society, and those of another. Though
they be Ministers, they are not Ministers of the Presbyterian Church; They have
departed from it, we have Continued in the good old way, that they and we
professed (for who can doubt that all the Scottish Prelatists were once
Presbyterians?) It is not then unreasonable, that, if they will return to that
SOCIETY, they should be admitted by it, etc. Now,

What can be plainer, than it is, hence, that they must be still two Churches?
He makes them in express terms, twice over, two distinct SOCIETIES: He makes
one of these Societies, the Presbyterian Church: Of necessity, therefore, the
other must be the Episcopal Church: And is not this, unavoidably, to make two
Churches? Yet, neither is this the true yolk of the Mystery, as I take it: That
lies here.

That the Episcopal Clergy and the Presbyterian Clergy are two different
Representatives, two different Governing Bodies of the one Church of Scotland.
I remember, our Author in his Rational Defense of Nonconformity, etc.
Exercised Dr. Stillingfleet to purpose for talking of something, which, he
thought, looked like two Convocations in England ( viz. the Upper and the Lower
Houses) He seems above (says G. R.) to make such Convocations, and so there
must be either two Churches of England (and why not, as well as three of
Scotland?) Or the one Church of England must be Biceps, and so, a Monster.

Thus our Author, there, ( p. 195.) I say, and it seems he was mindful of it
when he wrote his True Representation of Presbyt. Governm. For he was careful,
indeed, to avoid the making of his one Church of Scotland, Biceps, and made it
something else: But what thing? Your pardon for that: I have neither Latin nor
English name for it: I thought once, indeed, on [ Bicorpor] But I found it
could not do: For he makes not his one Church two Bodies: What then? I told you
already, I can find no name for it: But, if I have any Idea of this his one
Church, she is such a thing as this; A Body Governed by two different Governing
Bodies, without ane Head.

That she is a Body, I think, cannot be Controverted, for all Churches are
commonly owned to be Bodies.

That she is Governed by two different Governing Bodies, is clear from the
Text: For thus it runs; We will not so widen the difference between us and the
Prelatical party, as to look on our selves and them, as two distinct Churches;
Yet it is evident, that their Clergy and we are two different Representatives,
and two different Governing Bodies of the Church of Scotland.

That she is Governed by these two different Governing Bodies, without ane
Head, is likewise evident, for there is not so much as one syllable about ane
Head in the Text: And there is all the Reason in the world for it; For, besides
the difficulty of joining one Head, conveniently, with two Bodies; to what
purpose, ane Head for her, when she is so well stored of Governing Bodies? Are
they not received maxims, that, Non sunt multiplicanda entia sine necessitate,
and Deus and natura nihil faciunt frustra? The Definition, then, is
unquestionable. Well!

Perhaps the Reader may be curious to know how G. R. came by this super-fine
Idea of a Church. I have had my conjectures about it; And the most probable
that offered was this.

No doubt he is wondrously well acquainted with Plato, otherwise, how could he
have made the singular discovery, that Socinians and Stoics were Platonists?
Now Plato, ( Conviv. p. 322. Edit. Lugd. 1590.) as I remember, has a pretty
story about a certain Species of Rational Animals which were early in the
world, and which he calls (...), as if you would say Man-woman, or so: This
Creature had two Faces, two Noses, four Hands, etc. in a word, it was a round
Body, which contained both Sexes in it, Man and Woman, as it were, united by
their backs: It was a vigourous, sturdy kind of Animal, and Jupiter turned
afraid of it, and therefore, to weaken it, and make it more toward and
subdueable, he took ane Ax or some such sharp instrument, and clave it from top
to bottom, in the very middle, as if you should cleave ane egg into two equal
halves; And then, being (as you know) a nimble Mountebank, he drew together the
skin, on each back, in a trice; and applied some Sovereign Medecines; and both
backs were made sound immediately; and the divided parts of the (...), being
now (...) and (...), Man and Woman, and having the felicity to look one another
in the face, they fell in Love with one another: And this was the Original of
Love, and Courting, and Marriage, and all that. Now, I say,

The most probable conjecture I can make of the way how G. R. came by his
surprising Idea of the one Church with the two different Governing Bodies, is,
that when he Read this story in Plato, it made a deep impression on his
imagination, and he laboring to out do Plato at nimbleness of design and
invention, fell upon this stranger and more surprising Notion of a Church. But
however this was,

I think our Author had Reason to say ( Animad. on Iren. p. 51.) That a Church
is a singular Society, and of another nature than other Societies, and
therefore she ought to have a singular Government. For sure I am, he has given
the one Church of Scotland a Government which is singular enough. One thing is
certain.

At this rate, she wants not Government nor Governors; And, of all the
Churches in the world, she is likest to have the best Canons and the justest
Measures prescribed to her: For if the one Governing Body prescribes wrong, the
other must readily prescribe right; For never were two Governing Bodies of one
Society in greater likelihood of contradicting one another. It Is true, the
Governed Body may be sometimes puzzled about its obedience, and reduced to a
state of Hesitation about the opposite prescriptions, whither of them it should
follow: But that is but a small matter; Our Authors invention is not yet so far
decayed but that I can promise for him, if he pleases, he shall as easily
extricate it out of that difficulty, as he can give ane intelligible account of
this his one Church, with the two different Governing Bodies. Only one thing
thing more I add.

Our Learned Author tells us in his Preface to this his Book, in which he has
this Mystery, that, it was a work not undertaken at first, of his own private
motion, and that (before it was published) it passed ane Examen Rigorosum of
not a few Brethren. Now, if he spoke truth, here, as I am apt to believe he did
not) the world may judge of the accuracy of some men's Rigorosa Examina. And so
much for a Taste of our Authors second Cardinal Virtue. Proceed we now to

III. The third, which (though it looks as like Ill Nature as ever egg was like
another) in compliance with our Authors generous inclinations, I am content
should pass under the name of his Excessive Civility: I allow it this name, I
say, because our Author himself has so Dubbed it.

For thus he tells us (2 Vind. Pref.. 6.) I have treated the Adversaries, I
deal with, as Brethren; Desiring rather to EXCEED, than come short in CIVILITY
and fair dealing with them.

Never was Author more plentifully furnished with this Ingenuous Quality, than
G. R. Take a Specimen of it, from his Second Vindication, etc. Edit. Eden. Anno
1691; And consider with what Excess of Civility he treats his Adversaries.

The Author of the first of the four Letters, that Military Chaplain (p. 14.)
that man of a vain mind (p. 19.) was Guilty of the Height of Disingenuity: (p.
9) And it was the highest Impudence and Sawciness for a stranger (such as he
was) thus to reproach the representative of a Nation, where he was so civilly
treated. (p. 12.) And yet the whole Nation knows, the Gentlemen had asserted
nothing but Truth, when he met with this Civility from our Author.

The Author of the second and third Letters, was blinded with Rage. (p. 22.)
Was guilty of shameful Hypocrisy twisted with Malice. (p. 23.) His words were
full of Monstrous Hyperbolies, if not plain forgeries. (p. ^) He exposed his
own folly, malice and silly credulity. (p. 42.) Was guilty of the highest
efforts of Malice, blinding the mind, and depraving the apprehension of things.
(p. 45) His ignorant malice not to be answered but despised. (p. 52.) Judas
Iscariot was his Predecessor. (ibid) He was a Choleric Momus, whose Patron was
Rabshakeh. (56) He Vindicated the Prelatists fron being Persecutors, with a
confidence in asserting Falsehoods, and denying Known-truths, beyond any degree,
that any sort of men, except Jesuits, have arrived at. (67.) He told things
absurd above measure. (69) G. R. can convince the Reader (if the Author of this
Letter was the Person whom he guessed) of his most absurd and habitual lying,
known to most of the Nation, even to a Proverb. (71.) But I am apt to think he
guessed wrong; But whoever he was, he wrote in such a violent and insolent
style as deserved ane answer of another nature than a Paper-Refutation; i. e.
the Gallows, as I take it.

The fourth Letter was not inferior to any of the rest in abominable lies and
reproaches: (p. 81.) the most bitter invectives that could be invented, filled
up this Authors few pages. (ibid.) What he wrote, was not to be refuted more
than the words of a mad man, or of one raging in a Fever. (ibid.) In a word,
this Letter was so unexaminable, so full of virulent reproaches, and so void of
any thing that was Argumentative, that it was impossible for any man to Answer
it, except his Talent for railing, and his conscience to say what he would,
true or false, was equal to that of this Gentleman's. (ibid.)

The Author of the Case of the afflicted Clergy, etc. spoke rage and fury, (84)
was a malicious Calumniator, (89) a common liar, (101) most petulantly
reproached the Government. (110) Twenty more such excessive Civilities he paid
him.

The Author of the late Letter, I think, had done well, to have saved himself
the labor of writing it; for, if he got not his share of G. R's excessive
Civilities, G. R. himself was mistaken. This piece was behind none of the rest
in effronted and bold lies, and to say this might be a just Refutation of of
the whole Book; (117) This Author spoke broad-faced lies; (ibid.) Impudent and
broad lies, gross and malicious lies; bold Calumnies; (118) shameless lies;
slanderous forgeries. (119) He maliciously belyed his Nation: (ibid) Spate
venom: (121) Lying and misrepresentation were familiar to him; (122) He most
impudently obtruded upon peoples credulity; (125) was perfrictae frontis; (126)
Nothing, though never so certainly and manifestly false, could choke his
conscience. (ibid.) He spued out the most spiteful venom that could lodge in
ane humane breast. (136) Forty more such Civilities he paid him: And it was
reasonable to treat him so, for, The impudent accusations of this Scribbler,
and the obligation that lay on Persons and Churches to necessary self defense,
constrained G. R. to treat him thus Civilly. (137)

The Author of the Memorial (though I am apt to think G. R. knew he was dead
before his Second Vindication was published) got Civilities paid him, of the
same stamp, and out of the same repository: For, the Memorial was a print full
of bitter and unreasonable invectives, (137) full of malicious insinuations.
(ibid.) 'Twas nothing short of the rest for most gross falsehoods, in matters of
Fact, and most injurious representations of the Presbyterain way and
principles. (ibid.) The Moral Qualities of the Author might be seen, by his
Book, to be none of the best. (ibid.) It was a parcel of false and malicious
History as ever was written in so few lines. (ibid.) It began and ended with
lies and railing. (ibid.) A man who took Liberty to slander, at that rate of
impudence, deserved rather chastisement than ane Answer. (138) The writer was
but a Scribbler. (139) He wrote neither like a Christian, nor like ane
Historian. (140) He wrote perfect railing. (ibid.) He accused the
Presbyterians, with a bloody mouth, of what has been a thousand times refuted
as ane horrid lie, viz. That the Scottish Presbyterians did perfidiously give
up their King to the English, who murdered him. (ibid.) Now, if there was
Reason for being at the expense of such ane excessive Civility, on this
occasion, let the world judge: And, indeed, it is a most surprising Defense G.
R. made for his Scottish Presbyterians in that matter, why? He was the King of
the English (forsooth) as well as theirs, and they could not withhold him from
them. So that the whole matter was no more than if ane English Ox had strayed
or been stolen, and falling into the hands of Scottish Presbyterians, they had
restored him, and got so much for reward; At most, it was not the Oxes price,
it was only black meal as we call it. But to proceed, this Author of the
Memorial advanced assertions beyond what Iesuitical Impudence it self has ever
arrived at* (142) And, which is worst of all, worse than any thing that ever
proceeded from the mouth of Platonist, Stoic, Socinian or Jesuit, He most
wickedly reproached the Covenant. (146)

The Author of the Annotations on the Presbyterian Address, etc. Quibbled more
like a Buffoon than a Disputant, (147) and wrote so pure railing, as admitted
of no other Answer, but to brand the whole of it with this Motto, that it was
void of Truth and Honesty. (150)

But God a Mercy on the miserable Author of the Historical Relation of the Genesis
Ass. etc. What ane Heterogeneous piece of the Creation was he! The most fit
Refutation of this Pamphlet, were, to write on the margin of every page, LIES
and CALUMNIES. (150) This Author spoke broad lies; (151) Was a delicious
Scribbler; (156) His fancy was tinctured with malice and prejudice; (161) He
advanced whole Fardels of lies and malicious representations; (162) He gave no
proof of either sense or learning in his Book, but many Demonstrations of spite
and railing; (165) His tongue was set on fire of Hell -- and his kind respects
to any man, were indeed a reproach to him. (166) He had abandoned all Reason
and good nature. (ibid.) Had a brazen forehead. (ibid.) Nothing could escape
the lash of his virulent Pen. (ibid) His tongue was no slander. (168) He was
nothing but a Sciolist; (169) A Choleric Scribbler. (170) His Paper was laden
with lies. (ibid.) He was not ashamed to tell lies in the face of the Sun.
(171) He had so inured himself to the foulest lies and calumnies, that he could
hardly speak or write truth. (175) He was a Reviler; (182) A railing Scribbler
who Censured and Condemned all Presbyterians without wit or discretion. (114)
In short, He was a snarling curr, (191) and a spirit of lying had possessed him.
(192)

Thus, I think, I have given a Taste of our Authors excessive Civil^ties to the
Adversaries, he Answered in his Second Vindication: What a formidable Author
had he been if he had suffered himself to have Treated his Antagonists with
such just, (not to say excessive) severities as they deserved! What Authors
have these been, to whom such Treatment was nothing else than excessive
Civility? So strangers might think who were not acquainted with G. R.'s nature.
His nature, I say, for, indeed, it seems to be natural to him, to exceed thus
in Civility toward all the Authors he ever dealt with; at least, so far as I
can learn by such of his Books as I have had the luck to be Edified withal.
Thus,

In his Preface to his first Vindication, he discharges thus against the Author
of the Ten Questions, etc. Now when their (the Prelatists) hands are tied that
they can no more afflict her (his Presbyterian Church of Scotland) their
Tongues and Pens are let loose to tear her without mercy, by the most virulent
invectives, and the most horrid lies and calumnies that their wit can invent.
And in Answ. to Quest. 4.. 2. He adorns him with the honorable Title of
Controversal Scribbler. And the first words of his Answer to the 6 th Quest.
are singularly complemental. It may be observed from this Authors conduct (says
he) in his Pamphlet, what it is to be fleshed in bold averring of what all the
world knows to be manifest untruths: some by boldness and frequency in
telling lies have come at last to believe them as truths, etc.

I have also seen two Books written by him, against D. Stillingfleet; One
against his Irenicum, another against his Unreasonableness of the Separation,
etc. In both G. R. is excessively Civil to the Dr. after his wonted manner.

In his Preface to Animad. on Iren. he says the Dr. exposed himself between
principle and preferment. In the Book, he calls him ane Abettor of Skepticism.
(p. 5) For the most part he does nothing but magno conatu nihil agere. (18) He
evidently Contradicts himself, and G.R. wonders to meet with Contradictions, so
often, in so Learned ane Author. (22) Contradictions are no Rarities in him.
(27) It was impudently said by the Doctor that our Savior kept the Feast of
the Dedication. (124) His propositions are such Reflections on Scrip. that any
but a Papist may be ashamed of. (132) These and twenty more such Regular
Civilities he pays him.

He is more Civil to him, yet, in his Learned Answer to the Doctors
Unreasonableness of the Separation, etc. The Doctor wrote unexpected
incoherencies: (p. 4) Used wonderful considence. (9) Ieer'd the zeal and warmth
of Devotion, (16) was blinded with passion. (20) a Taunter. (21) Advanced
fallacious, if not false History. (41) Would have things so, and so, in
despite of History. (50) Woe to the world if such false and partial History
carries the Day! (52) (Just the same upon the matter with his woe to posterity
if the lying stories which some have printed, and, with bold impudence,
avouched, pass with them for Authentic Histories. Pref. to 2 Vind.. 1. So that
the Readers of that Vindication need not be much amused with such Cant: It
follows of Course with our Author.) But to go on with his Civilities to Dr.
Still. the Doctor used Ratiocinations that would better become Pharisees. (68)
Asserted things so rashly and falsely, that G. R. had no name for such
Assertions. (69) His prejudices darkened his understanding. (85) He made a mad
exposition of the Second Commandment. (125) Stretched and forced Scripture.
(126) Spoke things beyond comprehension. (148) Made unbecoming Reflections on
the word of God. (189) Used sorry shifts, etc. (204) Outfaced plain Light.
(206) Wearied not of writing beside the purpose. (210) Advanced Conceits
unworthy of a Divine, and only fit for Simon Magus. (214) He did not Act the
part of a Disputant, or a Casuist, but of somewhat else, our Author thought
shame to name. (275) These and God knows how many more such wonderful
Civilities he paid the Doctor: Particularly two, for which, no doubt, G. R.
stretched his invention. D. Still. had said something concerning the English
Ceremonies ('it is no great matter) what it was) and G. R. Replys, wittily, (p.
55) This is so indigested a notion that it does not well become the Learning of
Doctor Stillingfleet, though it be good enough for some to rant with, over a pot
of Ale. How many good glasses of Forty-nine ( alias, good Sack) has our Author
got for this! Again, the Doctor had said that the Cross in Baptism was a
Ceremony of admitting one into the Church of England. But I doubt (says G. R.)
it will prove but a Mouse brought forth by the long labor and hard throes of a
Mountain. Was not this a pure Flight! a lofty Paraphrase on Parturiunt Montes!

Thus we have seen a sample of his excessive Civilities to such single persons
as had the Honor to be his Adversaries. What a pity had it been, if such
Civilities had been only dispensed to half a dozen of Individuals! Our Author,
no doubt, was sensible of this, and therefore, he has even thought fit, when he
had occasion to extend them to whole Churches, particularly, the Episcopal
Church of Scotland, and the Church of England. Indeed,

The whole Body of the Episcopal Clergy of Scotland have got a large share of
his Civilities: Take this Specimen, only from his Second Vindication, etc.

Presbyterians are all Jacob's, and Prelatists, Esau's. (Pref.. 1.)
Presbyterians, the seed of the Woman, Prelatists, the seed of the Serpent.
(ibid.) The Prelatists are a spiteful and clamorous sort of men: (. 5.) Men
enraged by being deprived of the opportunity they had to persecute their
Neighbors. (Book p. 1) Their course is Diametrically opposite to Moderation.
(p. 2) They are men of mean spirits and Mercenary souls: (4) Unfaithful men:
(17) Men who use Unmanly as well as Unchristian shifts. (25) Most of them who
were put out (i. e. thrust from their habitations and the exercise of their
Ministry, since the beginning of the late Revolution) were put out by their
own Consciences. (36) Arminians. (60) Socinians. (61) The contempt of the
Ministry came from the Atheism and debauches of the Clergy. (64) Their immoral
men may be counted by hundreds. (65) They are generally liars. (70) Men who
exposed the Nation to the reproach of Barbarity. (24) Men of a restless temper,
embittered in their spirits by what inconveniency they are fallen into, from
the ease and dominion over their Brethren, which they lately had. (84) Men,
justly loathsome and a burden to the People. (99) Instead of feeding their
Flocks, they worried them. (103) Inciters to and Abettors of Persecution. (126)
A Faction that indulged debauched men in their immoralities. (166) Hundreds of
their party guilty of gross immoralities, for one Presbyterian. (166) Their
debauchery tempts people to count all Religion a sham. (173) Generally
favorers of Popery. (passim) Men who are wiser than to comply with the present
Establishment of the Church, from which, it is like, they would have been
excluded for their immoralities or errors. (5) And God knows how frequently he
makes them, generally, Ignorant, or Erroneous, or Scandalous, or Supinely
Negligent. This I think may serve for a Trial of his excessive Civilities to
the Scottish Clergy. Well!

But is he as Civil to the Church of England? Take a Proof from his Rational
Defense, etc. Those of the Church of England, seem wiser than Christ and his
Apostles, from whom they do manifestly and confessedly differ, in the things
Controverted, between them and the Nonconformists. (p. 71) They are either
strangers to England, or strangely biased, who see not cause to complain of
the Ignorance, Idleness, and Vicious Conversation of the English Clergy. (40)
It Is the spirit of the party still to Create trouble to the Church. (63) They
are ane imperious Superstitious Clergy, that will be Lords over Gods
inheritance, in despite of the Apostle. (80) And how often does he call them,
Liars, Misrepresenters, Calumniators, etc.? (vid p. 66, 274.275, 276, etc.

I shall only mention one instance of the English Episcopal Knavery which G. R.
resents very highly. You may see it page 276. I have met with another instance
(says he) of Episcopal ingenuity, for exposing the Presbyterians among the
Foreign Churches. It is in a Letter of the famous Bochart, dated Nov. 2. 1^80.
in Answer to a Letter from Doctor Morley, wherein the Doctor represents the
Presbyterian principles in three positions, whereof the third is a GROSS
CALUMNY -- The position is, Reges posse vi and armis a subditis cogi in
ordinem, and si se praebeant immorigeros, De Soliis Deturbari, in Carcerem
Conjici, Sisti in jus, per Carnificem denique capite plecti. i. e. That
Presbyterians maintain, that Subjects may call their Sovereigns to ane account
by Force of Arms, and if they are stubborn, incorrigible Sovereigns, they may
cast them in Prison, Judge them Sentence them, and order the Hangman to give
them a cast of his craft. And now, kind Reader, judge impartially, was not this
a Gross Calumny? What impudent lying Rogues must these English Prelates and
Prelatists have been, who so Grossly Calumniated such Eminently Loyal Subjects,
such True Friends to Monarchy, such unquestionable Pass^ve-obedience, and
Non-resistance-men? But, return we to our Author.

One thing may be pleaded in his behalf; It is, that this his Rational Defense,
etc. (as he says himself was written about the time that K. I. came to the
Throne, i. e. some four years before the late Revolution; and at that time it
was excuseable in him to tell his mind freely about the English Clergy;
Because, he was, then, a Nonconformist in England, and suffering under their
Yoke: But now that Presbytery is Established in Scotland, and he has got a Post
there, in which he can live to purpose, his temper is become a little sweetened,
and he will not any more be ane Enemy to the English Clergy. Nay, has he not
published so much, lately, in his Second Vindication?

True! He has: More, he seems to have promised, at least, professed so much,
not only for himself, but for his whole party. He has told the world in his
Answer to the first of the Four Letters,. 12. That Scottish Presbyterians are
far from interposing in the Church of Englands affairs: that they are not bound
by the Covenant to Reform England, but to concur, when Lawfully called, to
advance Reformation. That it is far from their Thoughts to go beyond that
Boundary: That they wish their Reformation; but leave the management of it to
themselves. And in his Answer to the Case of the Afflicted Clergy, etc.. 1. he
goes a farther length. The Author had said That the Church of England should
bethink themselves how to quench the flames in Scotland, etc. And G. R.'s
Answers, Thus, they sow discord among Brethren, and animate England to concern
themselves in the affairs of our Church, when we do not meddle in their
Matters. Here, you see, he owns the English Clergy, for no less than his
Brethren: Are they not Cock-sure, now, that they shall never have more of his
excessive Civilities? Well! I cannot tell what may be, but I can tell something
of what has already been.

This same Loving Brother to the Church of England published his Rational
Defense, etc. Anno 1689, i. e. since the beginning of the late Revolution: And
it is evident, his Preface was written since, likewise; For therein he
Discourses Rhetorically, How God, by the late Revolution, has made us like
them that dream, and done exceeding abundantly for us, above what we could
think, outdone our Faith, as was foretold Luke 18.8. Now,

In that same Preface, he owns, he published his Book, then, because he thought
it a fit Season, and it seemed allowable, if not necessary, that each party
should put in their Claim, and give the best Reasons they could for their
pretensions. Which, how it consisted with designs for the peace of the Church
of England, let herself consider. This I am sure of, if his excessive
Civilities could be helpful for unhinging her, she got them in that Preface,
with a witness. Take this for a Taste.

He not only exhorts his Readers to purge the Church of England, of bad Men,
ane Ignorant, Scandalous, Heady and unsober Ministry. But he farther
Discourses thus, God will not be at peace with the Church, while such are
countenanced; and good men cannot, with any satisfaction, behold such scandals
to Religion, and such effectual Instruments of the ruin of Souls continued in
the Church: -- while some effectual course is not taken to remove them; The
Church is like to have little peace, either with God or in her self: Let all
then contribute their endeavors to have the unsavory salt cast out -- if this
piece of Reformation be endeavored, all ranks must put hand to it: The People,
by discovering such, where they are; And not calling nor countenancing them
when they want a guide to their Souls: And Magistrates, by endeavoring the
Regulating of such Laws, as do, in any wise, open the door to such men to
enter. And again, Church Reformation must also truly be endeavored by us, if
we would have Church peace. It is no token for good when sinful evils, images
of jealousy which provoke the Lord to jealousy (such as Episcopacy, the
Liturgy, Ceremonies, Holy Days, etc.) are in the Church; and yet all agree in
these ways, none lament them, nor reprove them, nor take care to keep their
Garments clean from the Corruptions of the time, etc. Now, that all this is
directly intended against the Church of England, is evident from the whole
Contexture of that Preface.

By this time, the Reader, I think, has got enough of G. R.'s excessive
Civilities to all Persons and Churches he has been pleased to take notice of.
Proceed we now to the last of his Cardinal Virtues, viz.

IV. His singular Modesty: And here a vast field opens; for, except the
aforesaid three, there is scarcely another of his Qualities, good or bad, that
makes any considerable appearance. But so it is, that generally, the greater
lights obscure the lesser. Nay such ane Awkward Quality is this in our Author,
that one would think, It has been at feud with it self, and had designs for
obscuring its own Luster; For you no sooner have found ane instance which you
may be apt to apprehend, is the very brightest Impudence; than instantly
another casts up, twenty times more splendid, and before you have got through
them all, you are at a loss again, and you cannot tell which was the most
surprising. But I shall only give a Specimen of this Virtue as I have done of
the rest.

1. Then, the blot of impudence might have been charged upon him, though he had
said no more than what he has said concerning the Prelatical Scribblers, (Pref.
to 1 Vind.) viz. That they used a piece of cunning, in spreading their Books in
England, only, where the things contained in them could not be known nor
examined, but there was never one of them to be found in a Booksellers shop in
Scotland, where most Readers could have discovered the falsehood of their
Allegations. And his Brother Mr. Meldrum in his Letter subjoined to G. R.'s
Second Vindication, insists on the same ingenious Speculation. And yet both of
them could not but know very well, that these Prelatick Scribblers might have
attempted to have pulled a Star from the firmament, as plausibly, as to have
got any thing that made against the Presbyterians printed in Scotland: One
thing I can assure G. R. of; his True Representation of Presbyterian Government
had not seen the light, many days, when a License was sought for publishing ane
Answer to it; But it could not be obtained: And how many innocent Pamphlets
have been seized by the Government, since the beginning of the late Revolution?
Did not both these Gentlemen know this sufficiently? And was it not Impudence
in them, especially in G. R. considering the Post he had, to publish such a
Calumny, as that it was the Conscience of the falsehoods were in them, that made
his Adversaries publish their Books in England?

2. Another instance of his Impudence might be, his so frequent insisting on
the Loyalty of his party: Believe him, and no men can be more Loyal than
Scottish Presbyterians. Nothing but malice can make any think that Presbytery
is ane enemy to Monarchy. (1 Vind. ad Quest. 2.. 2.) Our Obedience to
Magistrates in all their Lawful Commands, and our peaceful sufferings of unjust
violence are notour to all that can behold us with ane unprejudiced eye. (True
Rep. ad Ob. 1.) None maintain more Loyal principles toward Kings than
Presbyterians do. (ibid. ad Ob. 2.) They always abhorred Rebellion. (2 Vind. p.
63) Yea, it is manifest, it is not their principle to bargain with their Kings
about Allegiance. (ibid. p. 99) Our principles are known, that we owe Loyalty,
and have paid it, even to ane Idolatrous King. (i. e. K. J. ibid. p. 115) Who
can deny now that Presbyterians are true Passive-obedience and Non-resistance
men? Or rather who knows not that this is Bantering the Common sense of all
Britain?

3. There Is no less Impudence in the large Encomiums he makes on the
Harmlesness and Innocence of his party: It Is true, and it is much, he
acknowledges sometimes, They are men; They have infirmities; They have been
guilty of Excesses, etc. But try him to the bottom, and you shall never find
him descending below these Generals: You shall not find him acknowledging that
any particular instance, wherein they exceeded, was not very excusable. Thus,
he cannot endure to hear that they were, ever, Persecutors or Rebels.

Not Persecutors, for if they had been Persecutors, it is not to be doubted that
the Prelatists had felt it. But what have they ever felt? Hear him in his Pref.
to 1 Vind. It may be thought strange that the men with whom we have to do,
should make such Tragical outcries about their sufferings, when it may be made
appear, that, in the late times, when Presbyterians suffered from their hands,
any one of many, who may be instanced, suffered more hardships and Barbarous
Cruelty, than all of them have endured. I must confess, these men who suffered
so, have suffered to purpose; For, I think, it was pretty severe for one man to
suffer the deprivation of 5 or 600 livelihoods and have 5 or 600 families,
perchance 4 or 5000 persons to maintain on nothing. I know not how far our
Authors skill in Algebra may reach, but, I think, in this, he was hard enough
for Common sense. But this is not all;

Hear him again, in that same Vind. (ad Quest. 3.. 1.) All unbyassed men who
know and have observed the way of the one, and the other, while they
Alternatively had the Ascendant, will say, that the little finger of the
meanest Prelate and his underlings was heavier than the loins of the greatest
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church. What Sir, no not the Ass. 1645, nor 1648,
nor 1649 excepted? And 2 Vind. p. 23. The sufferings of the Prelatists are but
fleabites in comparison of the bloody lashes that others suffered. And p. 45.
Their sufferings are but scratches of pins, etc. And you know, even the
tenderest nurses (such as our Presbyterians are to Prelatists) cannot
constantly preserve their dearest nurselings from such accidents. Who can say,
now, that ever Presbyterians were Persecutors?

Believe him, and they were as little Rebels. Episcopacy (indeed) raised a
Tumult in K. C. Ists time which ended in its own ruin. (1 Vind. ad Quest. 2..
3.) And yet in Answer to that same Question. 5. It Is true they (the Prelatists)
raised no Tumults: For if there is a difference between raising Tumults, and
raising no Tumults, yet it is certain, that they are only Abstracts which raise
them, and Concrets do not raise them. Well! were the Concrets, the
Episcopalians innocent of Tumultuating? Consider what follows, They did what
they could to raise a war for continuing on the necks of the People, that Yoke
that they had wreathed on them, and did effectually draw on a bloody war, etc.
But what did the Presbyterians on that occasion? Why? How far were they from
being Rebels! For, thus says our Author (2 Vind. p. 140) These things
(whatever the Presbyterians did) were done by the Body of the Nation, met in
the most orderly representative that the time and case could permit; And I deny
not that they were EXTRAORDINARY ACTINGS. Nothing, in these times like Perjury,
or Treachery, or Treason, or Rebellion committed by Presbyterians, you see; All
were EXTRAORDINARY ACTINGS. In short, Presbyterians are beyond reproaches in
the Consciences of all that know them, and do not hate them. (2. Vind. p. 37)
Now,

'Twas none of my designs to render the Presbyterians peculiarly odious, by
adducing these instances: I know these Crimes are not peculiar to them. I doubt
not, many of them are not violently inclined to Persecution or Rebellion: I
doubt as little many of them will be ready to acknowledge they are peccable as
other men; and things have been done by many of their party, which, such as are
Ingenuous will not offer to Apologize for: That which I was mainly concerned
for, was our Authors Impudence: For who ever saw greater Impudence than there
is in these Ridiculous Defenses he has been pleased to publish in Vindication
of his party?

4. Another instance might be his making his party, so frequently, the only
Protestants in the Nation; The only men that resisted, or could resist, or were
willing to resist Popery. Thus, the Author of the Ten Questions had said (and
said truly) That the Presbyterians accepted and gave thanks for ane Indulgince,
notwithstanding that they knew that all the Designs of the Court were for
advancing Popery. How our Author Justifies their Thankful Addressing to K. J.
for such a favor, shall be considered by and by. That which I take notice of
at present, is, his Apology for their accepting of that Indulgence. It had been
a strange thing (says he, 1 Vind. ad Quest. 8.. 2.) if they should have been
backward to Preach and hear the Gospel when a door was opened for it, because
some men had a design against the Gospel in their opening of it. (The Gospel,
you know, was neither Preached nor heard in Scotland before a door was opened
for it, by that Indulgence: But this by the way.) Surely their silence and
peevish refusing on that occasion, had been much to the hurt of the Gospel;
For, then, Papists (who would not fail to use the Liberty, for their part)
should have had the fairest occasion imaginable to mislead People without ANY
TO OPPOSE THEM: On the contrary, their using that Liberty was the great mean by
which (with the blessing of the Lord) so very few, during that time of Liberty,
were perverted to Popery, in the Nation. Now who should doubt, after this, that
all the Prelatists were silent Encouragers of Popery? And that the
Presbyterians were the only People who Preached against it zealously, and
opposed it boldly? Here is such a Masterpiece of our Authors main talent, as I
am confident no other Presbyterian in the nation will offer to extenuate, far
less, justify.

He insists on the same Theme, in his 2 Vind. p. 91. where he tells, That wise
men thought that the best way to keep out Popery was to make use of the Liberty
for setting the People in the right way, etc. As if there had been no
possibility of keeping them from turning Papists, but by making them
Presbyterians.

5. Near of kin to this, is that other Common Head he sometimes insists on,
viz. That all are Papists or Popishly affected, who were not for the late
Revolution. Thus, in his 1 Vind. ad Quest. 9.. 4. in Answer to that Allegation,
that the Presbyterians denied the Kings prerogative of making Peace and War,
etc. He tells the world, If this his Argument can cast any blame on
Presbyterians, it is this, that there are Cases in which they allow the States
and Body of the Nation to resist the King so far, as to hinder him to root out
the Religion, that is by Law Established among them: And one should think that
he might have been, by this time, convinced that this is not peculiar to
Prebyterians; But that all the Protestants in Britain are engaged in the same
thing. And in his True Represent. (ad Ob. 2) He has these plain words, what was
done (in removing K. J. from his Throne) was not by us alone, but by all the
TRUE PROTESTANTS in the Nation, who were indeed Concerned for the safety of
that Holy Religion. Now,

It Is none of my present business to justify or Apologize for such as were, or
are, against the late Revolution. Let Iacobitism be as great ane Heresy as our
Author pleases to call it: Let him rank it with Platonism or Socinianism, if he
will: Only, I dare be bold to say that it was ane odd stretch of Impudence to
make it Popery.

I mentioned, a little above, his Apologizing for his party's Addressing so
thankfully to K. I. for his Toleration. And truly his performances that way may
pass,

6. For another instance of his having a good Dose of Brow, as himself commonly
calls his own prime Accomplishment. For it was such ane Arrant mixture of
Flattery and Hypocrisy, especially when enlightened by their subsequent
practice, that no Sophistry can palliate it, so, as to make it seem innocent:
But it has been so frequently tossed already that I need not to insist upon it:
Far less, am I at leisure to examine all the ridiculous stuff our Author has
vented about it. Only one thing I shall propose to the world to be farther
considered.

Whosoever has Read any of our Authors Vindications of his Church of Scotland,
cannot but have observed that, even to loathsomeness, he was precise in
pursuing his Adversaries, foot for foot, on all occasions, when Impudence it
self could afford him any thing to say: Yet one thing of very great
consequence, was alleged by the Author of the Second Letter, to which he has
Answered nothing. What else could move our Author to this sinful and
unseasonable silence, but the Conscience, that it was not fit to meddle with it?

The Matter is this: The Author of that Letter, having Discoursed how amazed
the Presbyterians themselves were at the Dispensing Power, upon the publication
of K. I.'s first Proclamation for the Toleration; How little forward they were,
at first, to accept of it; And how they complied not with its designs, till
they got a Second Edition of it, etc. Offered at conjecturing about the Reasons
which might have induced them, afterward, to embrace it so thankfully and
unanimously as they did. Amongst the rest I find he insisted on this as one,
viz. That they had got secret instructions from Holland, to comply with the
Dispensing Power in subserviency to the ensuing Revolution: And he added, that
for this, he knew there were very strong Presumptions. Now, G. R. I say, passed
this over, in a profound silence; which, to me, seems a considerable
presumption that there was some truth in the matter, and the Epistler had
gues^ed right: But if it was so; I think the Presbyterian Address to K. I. for
the Toleration, may now appear in blacker colors than ever.

I am earnest not to be mistaken: I do not Condemn their keeping a
Correspondence with the Court at the Hague, on that occasion: Let that have
been done dutifully or undutifully, as it might: All I am concerned for is
this, that, If they kept a Correspondence there, at that time; if they got
encouragement or Advice, thence, to comply with the Toleration; If they were
instructed to comply with it in subserviency to the ensuing Revolution; If
these things were, I say, then, what a villainy was it in them to Address to K.
I. in such a manner?

If they had known nothing of any Designs for setting him beside his Throne; If
they had been privy to no intriques against him; If it had been nothing but a
surprise occasioned by such ane unexpected Liberty, that prevailed with them to
Address to him in such Terms, as they did on that occasion; something might
have been pleaded to extenuate their guilt, at least, though they had complied
with the Designs of the Revolution, afterward, when they saw it prevailing:
Their Ignorance of Intrigues, and the Politic Designs were then on foot; and
the possibility of their having been sincere when they Addressed so, to him,
might have been pleaded in Alleviation of the Dishonesty of their not
performing what they promised in their Address; And it might have passed on
with the common crowd of infirmities which usually surprise men of weak
resolution in such Critical junctures. But to be on Plots and Intrigues against
him; To snatch at his Concessions that they might be in a condition to ruin
him; and in the mean time, to make such protestations to him; to flatter and
cajole him at such a rate, merely, of Design to wheedle him into a deep
security, that they might the more expeditely and effectually supplant and
ruin him, was such ane instance of iniquity, of Antichristian craft, of rank
and vile cheatry, as can scarcely be paralleled in History. And so I leave it.

Thus I have given half a dozen of instances, which might be sufficient, in all
reason for exposing our Authors goodly Impudence: And yet they may be reckoned
amongst the most innocent of many scores that might be collected in his
writings. But it is not my present purpose to pursue him in all his wild
careers: I shall therefore, insist only on three or four things more, which, as
I take it, may be sufficient to give the world a surfeit of him. The things I
am to to take notice of, are some Impudent shifts he has betaken himself to,
for extricating himself, when, at any time, he or his Cause was put to it, by
any present difficulty. In such Cases, no Rule obliges him; no Law binds him,
no Equity bounds him, no Shame bridles him, no sense of Reputation over-aws
him. Thus, e. g.

7. Before he shall be forced to yield in his Argument, or seem to be
non-plus't he shall not fail to furbish his Talent, and make it keen enough for
combating the Common sense of the whole Nation: It were ane endless work to
trace him through all instances he has of this Nature.

What possessions have any (of the Episcopal Clergy) been deprived of, unless
for Crimes against the State? (2 Vind. p. 6.) now, who knows not that more than
300 who were outed by the Rabble, were deprived of their Possessions, and that
by ane Act of Parliament, without so much as being Charged with any Crime or
tried by any Court? Again,

The Author of the Second Letter had called it K. I.'s Retirement, when he left
England, and went to France: So he Terms (says G. R. 2 Vind. p. 23) that
which the Parliament called King James's abdicating the Government. Now his
Author was a Scottish man, and writing upon Scottish Hypotheses, and about
Scottish affairs, so that, if G. R. spoke sense, he spoke of the Scottish
Parliament: But I am satisfied, that the world reckon me as Impudent as G. R.
is really, if there is so much as one syllable, or any thing that looks like
ane intimation of King I.'s either Abdicating or Deserting the Government, in
any Scottish Declaration, or Law, or Claim of Right; In any public Deed done
by the Nation. Again

2 Vind. p. 36. He says, That most of them who were thrust out by the Rabble,
were put out by their own Consciences: But after this, what might he not have
said? To trace him through all such instances, I say, would be ane endless work:
I shall therefore confine my self to two; One a Matter of Fact: Another, a
Matter of Right; or rather a mixed matter, in which both Right and Fact are
concerned.

The Matter of Fact, shall be that story, he so frequently insists on, about my
Lord Dundee's 2000 men, etc. in his Second Vindication. About the time the
Convention of Estates was to sit down, a Design was discovered (framed by the
Viscount of Dundee and others) to surprise and seize the Convention, and for
this end had secretly got together of K. J. 's disbanded Soldiers and others
about 2000 strangers in Edinburgh. (p. 11) This Plot did our Author a great
many services: It occasioned those of the West to gather as many into Edinburgh
to oppose them and secure the Convention. (ibid.) Mark here, they were those of
the West who Gathered the Rabble into Edinburgh, and this Gathering was only
occasional, and of their own proper motion; Mark these things, I say, and
compare them with what follows. Again,

That there was a Design to fall on the Ministers of Edinburgh, is affirmed on
no ground, and without any Truth; Or that the College of Justice Armed in
their Defense: It was rather on the same Design on which the Viscount of Dundee
had gathered forces into the Town, and it was for opposing of them, and not for
Assaulting the Ministers of Edinburgh. (ibid. 39) And (p. 40) The thanks the
Rabble got was for their zeal in Defending the Convention from that opposite
Rabble, viz. the 2000 men Dundee and others had gathered into Edinburgh, to
have seized the Convention Again, (p. 96) That the Western Rabble which came to
Edinburgh in the time of the Convention were in Arms against Law, (says he) is
false, for they were called by the Authority of the Estates as their Guard,
when their Enemies had gathered a formidable party into Edinburgh. And though
they were together before the Earl of Levin got the command, yet not before
they were called together by the Estates. (ibid.) And (p. 110) He (Dundee) had
gathered a formidable party to destroy the Convention of Estates, and they
gathered a force for their own security. Now,

One who is a mere stranger to Scottish affairs, finding this Plot of Dundee's,
so confidently asserted, so frequently insisted on, made use of to serve so
many turns, would seem to have Reason to believe that there was really such a
Plot, and that all this was uncontrovertible Matter of Fact. For how is it to
be imagined that one who undertook to be the Vindicator of the Kingdom of
Scotland, should talk so boldly of such a Recent Matter of Fact, if there was
no such thing really? And yet,

The whole Nation knows, this whole Matter is as Notorious Figment, as Arrant
Poesy, as is in all Homer or Ovid's Metamorphosis: For my part, I never so
much as once heard of it, (and I was at Edinburgh for the most part, the whole
year 1689) till I found it asserted by G.R. in his Second Vindication, i. e.
toward the end of the year 1691. And let the world judge of its Credibility.

Poets themselves should be careful to feign things Plausibly: But it seems our
Author has never Read so much as the first ten lines of Horace, De Art Poetica.

That Convocation of the Rabble from the West, which was at Edinburgh when the
Convention of Estates met, would not have amounted to above 6 or 700 men. I saw
them actually drawn up between the Tolbooth and the Weigh-house of Edinburgh,
upon the 18 th day of March 1689. I am confident they were not 800, yet, though
they were but a Rabble, raw and untrain'd men, they chased Dundee out of
Edinburgh, though he had 2000 Trained and Disciplined men under his command; and
yet the same Dundee with scrace 2000 Vntrain^d, Vndisciplin'd Highlanders
routed near to 4000 Trained and Disciplined men at Gillichranky: But this is
not all.

You may observe, he says, it was not to Defend the Ministers of Edinburgh,
that the College of Justice Armed, but in pursuance of that same Design with
Dundee, viz. the surprising and seizing of the Convention. Now, be it know to
all men, that the Convocation of the Rabble which occasioned the Arming of the
College of Justice was quite different from that Convocation which was made
when the Estates met. The Western Rabble met first at Edinburgh, with a Design
to have insulted the Ministers of that City, about the 24 th of January, and
their numbers were daily increasing. The College of Justice Armed and kept
Guard about the 25 or 26 th of that month. About the middle of February, there
was a Proclamation over the Cross of Edinburgh, Commanding all in Arms except
the Garrisons, etc. to Disband. Upon this, the College of Justice Disarmed
immediately. All this while, Dundee was so far from having got together 2000 to
surprise the Convention, that neither was the Convention so much as indicted
(for the Letters by which it was indicted bear date no sooner than Feb. 5. at
St. James's, and some six or eight or ten days, I think, were gone, before they
were delivered to all persons concerned in Scotland.) Nor was Dundee as yet
come from England to Scotland. Well^

Was not the Western Rabble, which was in Edinburgh in the time of the
Convention, called by the Meeting of Estates for Counterplotting Dundee's Plot?
Pure Poesy still! For did not our Author himself say (p. 11) That Dundee's
having got together 2000 men, etc. occasioned those in the West to gather as
many into Edinburgh to oppose him? Now if they were only occasionally Gathered
by those in the West, how could they be called by the Authority of the Estates?
Were those in the West, who Gathered them, the Estates? Besides, I would only
ask G. R. if he can as readily produce the Order of the Estates for leavying
these men for Defending the Convention against Dundee, as I can produce their
Act for returning thanks to them? Let him search all the Records and try if he
can find such ane Order. In short,

Who knows not that that Rabble was in Edinburgh as early as the Estates
themselves? The Estates (as all Britain knows) met on the 14 th day of March:
The Rabble threatened Dundee on the 15 th or 16 th: He represented it to the
Estates on Moonday's morning, being the 18 th: He could find no security for
his person: He departed therefore from Edinburgh with some 28 or 30 persons in
his retinue, that same day, and never saw it again. All this was done before
Levin got his Commission from the Estates to Command the Rabble, or form them
into Regular Troops. Besides,

Let the world consider if it required not even Poetic Expedition, to have got
that Rabble leavied by Order of the Meeting of Estates. There could not be ane
Order of the Estates for leavying them, before the Estates met, as I take it:
The Estates met on Thursday 14 th afternoon: on Moonday the 18 th, These men
were in Rank and File, on the street of Edinburgh: And many, most of them lived
at 50, 60, 70, miles distance from the City. This, one would think, was no
ordinary Expedition. And now let any man judge if G. R. was not inspired with a
goodly dose of Poetic ( Fire shall I call it? Or) Fury, when he laid this
foundation of Dundee's Plot, and raised so many pretty structures upon it. And
so much, of his modesty in narrating Matter of mere Fact. But is he as modest
at mixed Matters where both Right and Fact are concerned? Consider him but in
one instance, for brevity.

The Author of the Second Letter had given ane Account of Doctor Strachan's
Defense, when he appeared before the Committee of Estates, and was Challenged
for not praying for W. and M. as K. and Q. of Scotland, etc. This, for
substance: That the Estates had found in their Claim of Right, that none could
be K. and Q. of Scotland till they had sworn the Coronation Oath: For this
Reason, they had Declared that James by Assuming the Regal Power, and Acting as
King, without having taken the Oath required by Law -- had forfeited the Right
to the Crown: That all the Estates had yet done, was only the Nomination of W.
and M. as the Persons to whom the Crown should be offered; But they had not yet
actually made the offer: Far less had W. and M. accepted of it: It was possible
they might refuse it: But though they should not, yet, they could not be K. and
Q. of Scotland till they had solemnly sworn the Oath. This was not yet done:
And therefore he could not see how he could Pray for them as K. and Q. of
Scotland, nor how the Estates, in Reason, or in Consequence to their own
principles could require it of him. One would think there was some force in
this Defense. Yet,

Our Author had such a Force of Impudence as prompted him to offer at confuting
it. But how? It is known (says he) that the Exercise of the Government had
been, long before, tendered to the Prince, and that his Highness had Accepted
and Exercised it. True; It was tendered to him on the tenth of January 1688,
and he accepted of it upon the 14 th. But what was this to M.? Was the Exercise
of the Government Tendered to Her also? Or did this Tender made to W. and his
Accepting of it make him King? Was he King ever after the 14 th of January?

Observe here, by the way, when our Author had the Rabble to Defend, and the
Estates to justify for not restoring the Rabbled Ministers (and the Nation
knows, hundreds were Rabbled after that 14 th of January) He could tell it
twenty times over that that was ane Interregnum, a State of Anarchy, etc. So
that, if I mistake not, it may try his Reconciling Skill to make what he says
here, and what he said on these occasions, piece well together. Proceed we now
to what he has said more about Strachan's Defense.

The Nations Representative (says he) had then owned him (W.) as their King;
and therefore it was a contempt of the Authority of the Nation for any man to
refuse to own him, when called to do so. Now, what could move our Author to
such a stretch of his main Talent, as thus to say that the Representative of
the Nation had owned him as their King? I confess I am not able to fathom. For,
how could they own him as King so long as he had not taken the Oath, nor Agreed
to the Claim of Right? If they owned him as King before that, was he not King
before that? But if he was King before that, where is the use of the Oath, or
the Claim of Right?

The Estates, indeed, upon the 11 th of April Declared W. and M. to be the
Persons to whom they had resolved to Offer the Crown, upon such and such
Conditions, as is evident from that day's Proclamation: But the ^etter of the
Estates by which they actually made the Offer of the Crown, on these
Conditions, was not written till April 24. and the return, bearing that They
had Accepted of the Crown, on these Conditions, is dated May 17. And was not
Doctor Strachan Deprived, even before the Letter of the Estates was sent to
London? Were not more than 24 Ministers Deprived before their Majesty's return
came to Edinburgh? Besides,

G. R.'s Impudence, as sturdy as it is, did not serve him, it seems, to give a
faithful Account of D. Strachan's Defense, and grapple with all the force of
it: For the Doctor (if the Author of the Second Letter was right) made the
supposition, that W. and M. might refuse to take the Crown with such
Conditions: This was so far from being ane Impossible, that it was truly a very
Reasonable, a very Equitable, a very Dutiful supposition: Now, suppose they had
done so, would they have been K. and Q. for all that, by virtue of the
Declaration of the Estates of the 11 th of April? If so, I ask again, what the
Coronation Oath, or the Claim of Right signified? Or were the Estates to make
them K. and Q. whither they would or not? If, upon that supposition, they had
not been K. and Q. (as, undoubtedly, they had not been) then, what can be more
evident than that the Proclamation of the 11 th of April, did no more than
Nominate them to be K. and Q. upon their Agreeing to such Conditions? So that
G. R. was even himself, when he said that the Nations Representative had owned
them as K. and Q. before the 13 th of April. I add further,

What though they had owned them as K. and Q. by their Proclamation of the 11 th
of April? Did not the whole Drift, the whole Design, the whole Train, the whole
Tendency, the whole Aspect, and the whole Circumstances of the Deliberations,
Resolutions and Conclusions of the Estates evidently propose it to the dullest
apprehension, that the Crown was not to be granted to them, but on such and
such Conditions? This Question I propose, for vindicating D. Strachan from the
guilt of Contempt of the Authority of the Estates, with which G. R. charges
him: For if the affirmative in the Question be true, (and, I think, G. R.
himself dares not to say, it is false) then, I ask how it could be called a
Contempt of the Authority of the Nation to have refused, then, to own W. and M.
as K. and Q.? How can he be said to Contemn the Authority of the Nation, who
Reasons upon the Nations Authority? Who Reasons upon the Force of all the
Deliberations, Resolutions and Conclusions of the Representative Body of the
Nation? If doing so, he does yet Contemn the Authority of the Nation, I am apt
to think, it cannot be his Fault: He does but what a man must needs do, when
the Nation makes Repugnant and Contradictory Determinations. But after all
this, is it not pleasant that G. R. forsooth, should so zealously exaggerate
the Crime of Contemning the Authority of the Nation? Good Man! He paid it a
wonderful Dutifulness all his life: Far was it still from him to treat it with
such Contempt as Dr. Strachan's amounted to. But he has not yet done.

He Answers further, that it is a Material mistake of the words of the Claim of
Right: (that was alleged in Strachan's Defense) which does not say, none can
be King or Queen, but that none can exercise the Regal Power till they have
taken the Coronation Oath: It is certain that on the death of a King, his
Rightful Successor is King; and may be prayed for as such; and such praying may
be injoined even before taking of the Oath: The same may be said of one Chosen,
and Proclaimed by the Supreme Authority of the Nation, which is the Case now in
hand.

Here is a piece of as odd stuff as one would wish to see: For, if it was a
Material mistake to say, none can be King or Queen, when it should have been
said, none can exercise the Regal Power, it seems to me to have been a mistake
made of very Mathematical Matter, not of the solid sensible Matter, which can
be felt and handled: For my part I cannot forbear thinking it must be
compounded of Negative Quantities, till I shall learn how one can be a King,
(i. e. a Person who has Right to Rule and Act as King) who has, yet, no Right
to exercise the Regal Power, or Act as King. I know, one may be Physically
incapable of exercising the Regal Power, and Acting as King, by himself, in
several Cases, such as that of Infancy, etc. yet even then, he has Right which
is not a Physical but a Moral Quality. Now, I say, I would fain understand how
one can be a King, without this Moral Quality; or how he can have this Moral
Quality, called Right, and yet be Morally incapable of exercising it. I shall
own G. R. is good at Metaphysics, if he can give ane Intelligible Account of
these things. Well!

But it is certain, that on the death of a King, his Rightful Successor is
King, and may be Prayed for, as such, and such Praying may be enjoined even
before taking of the Oath: All this is true; But then I affirm it is as true
that that Rightful Successor who is King, may and can exercise the Regal Power
and Act as King, before he takes the Oath. So, I am sure, our Scottish Monarchs
have done: So the Law allows them to do, so, of necessity they must do. For
instance, they are not bound, by Law to take the Oath but at their Coronation:
And (not to speak of other things) I think it is truly ane exercising of their
Regal Power, and Acting as Kings to appoint the preparations for, the day, the
place, the solemnities, etc. of their own Coronations: For, I think, none other
can do it but the King, and, if so, he must do it as King, otherwise, another
might do it. But then,

Though I have granted our Author this much, that the Rightful Successor is King
before he takes the Oath, I think no Reason can oblige me to grant what
follows, viz. That the same may be said of ONE CHOSEN, and Proclaimed by the
Supreme Authority of the Nation, which is the CASE NOW IN HAND. For, (not to
insist on the Liberty our Author has taken here, to call their Majesty's
Elective Sovereigns, in opposition to such as are Hereditary, though, I think, it
was pretty bold in him to talk so) I think this is one of the most notable
differences, between ane Hereditary and ane Elective Monarchy, that in the
Hereditary, the King never dies, i. e. In that same instant that the Regnant
Kings breath goes out, the Rightful Successor is King: Whereas in the Elective
Monarchy the King dies with the Man, and there is no King till there is a New
Creation. This, I think, makes the Cases pretty wide: And, I think, they are
wider, yet when he that is to be the Elected King, is not to be King at all,
till he Agrees to such and such Conditions: Who sees not a vast difference
between the Hereditary and the Elective King in this Case? But not to press our
Author farther, and once for all to end this Controversy about Strachan's
Defense, take what follows for undoubted Truth.

Upon that same very eleventh of April 1689, on which the Estates gave out
their Proclamation, importing that they had Resolved that W. and M. should be
K. and Q. of Scotland, they enacted their Declaration containing the Claim of
Right, and their Resolution to Offer the Crown only on the Terms of that Claim;
and not only so, but they made this following Act, word for word.

Forasmuch as the Estates of this Kingdom, by their former Acts Declared that
they would continue undissolved until the Government, Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom should be settled and secured; and they having now proceeded to Resolve
that W. and M. K. and Q. of England, be, and be Declared K. and Q. of Scotland:
And considering that the Nation cannot be without Government until the said K.
and Q. of England accept the Offer of the Crown, according to the Instrument of
Government, and take the Oath required before they enter to the Exercise of the
Regal Power; Therefore the said Estates do hereby Declare and Enact, that they
will continue in the Government, as formerly; until their Majesty's acceptance
of the Crown, and their taking of the said Oath be made known to them.

If this Act does not make it evident that there was no Material Mistake of the
words of the Claim of Right, in Dr. Strachan's Defense; But that the Doctor
pleaded and Reasoned upon the Manifest Principles of the Meeting of Estates: If
it does not Demonstrate that the Doctors Plea was Solid and Irrefragable; and
if it follows not by necessary consequence, that it was ane unaccoutable
proceeding of the Committee of Estates to deprive the Doctor, and near to
thirty more, for not praying for W. and M. as K. and Q. of Scotland, before
they were, or could be K and Q. of Scotland, let the intelligent Reader judge.
But if these inferences are notoriously just, then let him judge again, if G.
R. by offering to invalidate the Dr. 's Defense, was not guilty of a palpable
indiscretion, in refreshing the memory of such an unaccountable proceeding of
the Meeting of the Committee of Estates, which had been far better buried in
perpetual oblivion, and lastly let him judge, if it argued not more than ane
ordinary Impudence in G. R. to have attempted the Defense of that Procedure;
And if such ane attempt was not, with a Fetch of his Talent, peculiar to
himself, to offer violence to Reason and Law, to Justice and Equity, to the
Light of Nature, and the Common sense of Mankind.

One would think, 'twas Impudence enough in all Conscience, to have made so
bold with common Humanity, and particularly, with the Universal Convictions of
ones Native Country, as to a plain Matter of Fact: But such is our Authors
share of that Daring Talent, that assisted by it, he could even flee in the
face of his Dearer Relations, and leave them in the Lurch, rather than appear
to have been worsted in his Argument: Thus, e. g.

8. When he was put to it, and could not, otherwise, make his escape, he never
made scruple to flee in the face of the present Civil Government.

He tells you, indeed, in his Preface to 2 Vind.. 6. That one of his Designs in
writing his Book was to Vindicate and Justify the Actings of the Civil
Government. Believe him, on many occasions, and he is a most dutiful Subject;
there cannot be a greater Reverencer of Authority; He tells you, It Is a saucy
boldness for private persons to meddle with the Designs of Legislators. (2
Vind. p. 112) And God knows how frequently he exposes his Adversaries to the
Resentments of the Civil Government: How zealous is he for stretching necks,
etc.? And yet, for all this, as much as he is obliged to it, as great a
veneration as he pretends for it, it must not only shift for it self, but he
must run through its sides, if he has not another hole to escape by. I shall
only take notice of two instances of his behavior this way.

The first is in his 2 Vind. (p. 22) His Adversary had laughed at the
Presbyterian Address, and their protestation of Loyalty to K J. But I would
fain know (says G. R.) by what Topic either of these can be Condemned. I
think, I have hinted, at least, at Topic enough about that: Go we on, now,
with our Author: They gave thanks for restoring them to their just Right:
Neither is this the Matter: They Professed and practiced Loyalty toward their
LAWFUL Sovereign, though of a different Religion from them. Here it is. For don't
you hear him plainly affirming, that K. I. was a LAWFUL SOVEREIGN? Now what was
this less than striking at the very root of the present Establishment? Is it
not a direct Contradicting of the Claim of Right, which Declares that K. J. had
forfeited the Right to the Crown by assuming the Regal Power, and Acting as
King, without ever taking the Oath required by Law? i. e. Manifestly, for not
being a LAWFUL SOVEREIGN. If thus to Contradict its very foundation, strikes
not at the root of the present Constitution, let the world judge. But so it
was, that our Author could not otherwise justify the Presbyterian Address, etc.
Again,

One of his Adversaries had Argued, that Episcopacy was abolished by the
Parliament as being contrary to the Inclinations of the People, and therefore,
if the People should alter their Inclinations, it might be restored by another
Parliament.

One would think there was Reason here; and it seems G. R. was sensible of it:
And therefore finding no other way to avoid its Dint, he straight impugns the
Power of King and Parliament. Take his own words (2 Vind p. 90) But he should
have considered (says he) that whatever Motive the Estates went upon, it is
Declared against in the Claim of Right as a Grievance, and therefore, cannot be
restored without overturning the Foundation of our present Civil settlement. He
is at this, again, in other places, upon the like occasions, particularly p.
152. Now,

Not to insist on the Irreligion and Godlessness of that wild fetch, viz. That
whatsoever the Motives were which induced men to Establish any thing, yet being
once Established it cannot be altered;

Not to insist on the notorious unreasonableness of separating the Conclusion
of the Estates from their Premises, and saying the Conclusion must stand though
the Premises be rejected, though they Established the Conclusion on the strength
they apprehended was in the Premises.

Not to insist on the the Ridiculousness of saying, that Episcopacy cannot be
restored without overturning the Foundation of the present civil Settlement:
Tho nothing can be more Ridiculous than to say that the foundations of the
present civil Settlement are Subverted, if all Ecclesiastical Grievances are
not Redressed.

Not to insist that our Author spoke very much at Random when he called the
Abolition of Episcopacy, one of the Fundamentals of the present Civil
Settlement, considering that the present Civil Settlement was not only Founded,
but Finished, a good time before the Abolition of Episcopacy: Not to insist on
these things, I say, However Momentous.

Consider, only, how directly and plainly he Impugns the power of King and
Parliament, by saying, They cannot Restore Episcopacy without Subverting the
Foundations of the present civil Settlement. What is this less than that, if
King and Parliament should Restore Episcopacy, they should break their Original
contracts? Than that both should forfeit their Titles? Than that the King
should be no more King, and the Parliament should be no more Parliament?

Is it not clear that, with our Author, the Articles of our present Claim of
Right are unalterable? Unchangeable Rules both to King and Parliament? Now if
this is not to impugn their power, I know not what can be. In effect it is to
Evacuate the usefulness of all Sovereign power: For where lies its usefulness,
if it is not able to rectify what is amiss, even in the Constitution? But how
can it rectify what is amiss, in the Constitution, if the Constitution, Right
or Wrong, is unalterable.

For my part, I cannot see but there is still that Supreme power in the Nation,
which was, when the present civil Settlement was made: And as it might, while
it was a making Settlements, have made either another, or the same, with twenty
little varieties, so, it may still alter that which is made. I cannot think
that it either Disabled or Exhausted it self, so, as to be no more capable of
providing farther, or otherwise, for the Good of the Nation, when it shall find
it necessary.

In short, Is not that same power still in the Nation which established the
Claim of Right? if it is not, what is become of it? How can the Nation subsist
without a Supra-Legal, Supra-Original-Contract, Supra-claim of Right Power? It
had it once, otherwise how could it ever have had Laws, or Claims of Right, or
Original Contracts? And must it not have it still? Has it lost it? Or thrown it
away? Or has any body taken it from it? But if it is still to the fore; If the
Nation is still possessed of it; where is it ^odged, if it is not Lodged in
King and Parliament?

Was there more power in the meeting of Estates than there is, now, in King and
Parliament? How came the meeting of Estates by it, then? Or whether is it
vanished now? What is become of it? Especially,

I think, 'Twas pretty bold to say that the same power is not in the present
King and the present Parliament; Considering that the present Parliament is
that same very individual thing with the meeting of Estates by which the claim
of Right was Created. Cannot the same, the very same Creators pretend to a
power of Altering their own ill-made Creature, and make it Better? Had they
more power under One name than under Another? Or have they weakened or lost
their power by communicating it to their King, so that there is not so much
power, Now, in him, and them both together, as there was once in them Singly?

And now let the Reader Judge if G. R. for avoiding a difficulty, has not
impudently run himself into the Guilt of the most Atrocious, the most Criminal,
the most Treasonable Treason; The Treason of impugning the power of King and
Parliament. This was odd enough, for one in his circumstances: But yet the next
step seems to me a little more Surprising: For.

9 On several occasions, he has not stood on disgracing his own dear party, the
Presbyterians themselves, and most undutifully, as well as impudently,
discovering their Nakedness. I shall not insist on all instances that might be
adduced to this purpose, particularly his Loading the Cameronians with so much
Guilt and so many hard Names, upon every turn: The Cameronians, I say, these
Men of plain principles, these a vowed Covenanters, these most Orthodox and
Honest Presbyterians in the Nation; even them tho they are the true Champions
of the Cause, and were the principal promoters of the Presbyterian interest in
the beginning of the late Revolution, he has Lasht to purpose, when his
Argument required it; as may be seen in every page almost of his Second
vindication. But this I shall not insist on, I say, leaving him and them to
reckon for it, if they shall think it fit.

I shall take notice only of one very tender Secret of his own Anomalous
Species of pretended Presbyterians which he has even needlessly, and by
consequence, very foolishly and undutifully exposed. He has, in his Books, made
many more inexcusable off^cious Lies, than if he had made One for covering such
a Mighty Shame of theirs: But it is hard for one of his prudence to avoid such
escapes, when pressed with a pungent Argument. The matter is this.

The Author of the Case of the afflicted Clergy had said, that the Presbyterian
Ministers, never preached against the disorders of the Rabble: Now hear G. R.
(2 vind. p. 97.) This is False, tho we thought not sit to make that our
constant Theme. Now, that Rabbling work was such a Barbarous and Unchristian
work, that one would think, it had not misbecome the Presbyterian Ministers
themselves to have made it, at least, very much their Theme on that occasion.
But the Secret is not here.

He adds, And if but few did it; It was because they, who were the Actors in
that Scene, little Regarded the preaching of the Sober Presbyterians: A great
many things may be observed here: For besides that he owns they were but few
who prea^hed against the Rabbling, It might be of use to enquire at our Author,
what kind of Scene he took it to be? Whither was it Tragical or Comical? or
Both? Tragical to the Prelatists, and Comical to the Presbyterians? It were
worth enquiring likewise, whom he meant, by Sober Presbyterian Preachers? If
there are any such in the Nation? How many? Where do they preach, etc. But I
insist not on these things, because the Secret is not amongst them. Yet

The next thing he produces is worth the Noticing. And they (The Sober
Presbyterian Preachers, if they had preached against Rabbling the Clergy)
Should have lost their SWEET WORDS. Now, here is subject afforded for several
weighty Controversies: For it may be made a Question, Whither it be the duty of
Sober Presbyterian Preachers to preach Righteousness to a Rebellious people,
whither they will Hear, or whither they will Forbear? It may be made another,
Whither our Author, here, gave up all the Rabblers to a reprobate Sense? It Is
possible he meant so. For the Sweetest words, the Soberest Presbyterians can
utter in their preachings are not too precious to be spent on such as are in a
state of Reclaimableness. But that which I take to be the most proper Question,
the Question that arises most naturally from the Text, is, Whither
Presbyterian Words are not Sweeteer than that they should be Spent on such
needless purposes, as the Recommendation and Assertion of Righteousness, and
the Condemnation of Iniquity? Whither it had not been ane unaccountable
prodigality in them to have lost their Sweet words, about such Trif^ing
concerns as these? But neither is the Secret here: But it follows now.

These practices of the Rabble were publicly spoken against by Ministers, both
before they were Acted, for preventing them, and after, for Reproving them, and
preventing the like. Here it is, I say: Has he not, here, discovered ane
important Secret of his party? Has he not discovered that the Rabbling of the
Clergy was not the product of Chance or Accident, but a Deliberated, a
Consulted, ane Advised politic? Has he not discovered that even the sober
Presbyterian Ministers were privy to the plot of it? Has he not told, that they
spoke against it, before it was Acted, for preventing it? And does it not
follow clearly that they knew of it before it was Acted: for if they had known
nothing of it, how could they have spoken against it for preventing it?

But tho they knew of it, that it was to be done, yet, it seems, They Consented
not that it should be Done; For they spoke against it for preventing of it. But
I am afraid our Author, here, turned weary of his Sincerity: For who spoke
publicly against these practices of the Rabble? Or where, or when were they
spoken against, before they were acted? I dare challenge him to name one of his
most sober Presbyterian Ministers who preached publicly against them for
preventing of them. When I am put to it I can name more than One or Two, who
pretend to be of the First Rank of the Sober Presbyterian Ministers, who knew
of them indeed, and Consulted privately about them; and said, It was the surest
way, to have the Curates once dispossessed: Because, Once dispossessed, they
might find difficulties in being Repossessed: But I never heard of so much as
One who preached against them before they were Done. I am very confident G. R.
cannot name One. Indeed,

Seeing, as our Author Grants, they knew of the Rabbling before it was Acted;
If they had been so serious against it, as they should have been, and as our
Author would have us believe they were; how natural and easy, as well as
Christian and Dutiful had it been, to have given Advertisements to the poor men
who were to suffer it, about it? Was ever any such thing done? But it seems
Presbyterian words were Sweeter to Presbyterian palates than Common humanity or
Christian Charity: They were too Sweet to be Lost in such Advertisements. By
this time, the Reader, I think, has got a proof of G. R.'s tenderness, even, to
his own Herd, when the Argument of ane Adversary pinched him. But this is not
the Highest stepped. For

10. If ane Argument straitens him, He never stands to baffle, and expose, and
contradict and make a Lier of his own Learned, Sensible, Civil Modest Self.
And, here, again, One might write a large volume, but I shall confine my self
to a Competent number of instances.

First, then, you never saw a Prelatist and a Presbyterian Contradicting one
Another, in more plain, opposite and peremptory Terms, than he has done himself
on several occasions. Take this Taste

In his Answer to D. Stillingfleet's Irenicum (p. 64) He is at great pains to
prove that where Episcopacy is, Presbyters have no power: Particularly, he has
these two profound Arguments for it. 1. If Bishops be set over Presbyter, they
must either be only Praesides, which is not contrary to Parity; or they must
have Authority above, and over their Brethren: And if so, They may rule without
their Brethren; Seeing they may command them, etc. 2. If Presbyters under a
Bishop have ruling power, either they may Determine without, or against his
consent, or not: if so, The Bishop is but a President: If not, The Presbyters
are but Ciphers. Now who would think that one of G. R.'s Courage would ever
have parted with such ane important proposition, especially, having such
impregnable Arguments for it? Yet.

Consider if he has not done it, most notoriously in his Answer to the Doctors
Unreasonableness of the separation, etc. page 182. where he has these express
words. He (The Doctor) Undertakes to prove that the English Episcopacy does
not take away the whole power of Presbyters -- we do not allege that it takes
away the whole power of Presbyters, for that were to reduce them into the same
order with the rest of the people; but we say it usurpeth ane undue power over
them, etc. Again,

In his First Vind. of his Church of Scotland, His cause led him, in Answ. to
Quest. 10. to say That K. Is. Tolleration was against Law: He was pressed with
this Argument about the Inclinations of the people, That not fifty Gentlemen,
in all Scotland (out of the West did, upon the Indulgence, forsake the Churches
to frequent Meeting houses: And his Answer was. They clave to the former way
(i. e. Continued in the Episcopal Communion) Because the Law stood for it. Is
it not plain, here, that the Meeting houses were contrary to Law? Hear him,
now, in his 2 vind. (p. 43, 44. passim) when he was pressed with the Scandal of
his party's Complying with the dispensing power, and erecting Meeting houses
contrary to Law. He affirmed boldly, that the Dispensing power was according to
Law, And K. I. was enabled by Law, to Grant his Toleration. Again,

In his 2. vind. in Answ. to Letter 1. 9. p. 12. when he had the Meeting of
Estates to Apologize for, for suffering and allowing persons to sit as Members,
who were not Qualified according to Law. He Granted some such Members sat
there, but they had been most unjustly Forfeited in the Late Reign. Even
Parliamentary Forfeitures, you see were most Unjust Forfeitures, and there was
no Reason that they should exclude these Gentlemen from their Just and Ancient
Rights and Privileges. But when he was pressed by the Author of the Case of
the Afflicted Clergy, etc. with this That many Ministers Benefices were
unjustly and illegally kept from them; he got his Cloak on the other Shoulder,
as we say, if the Authority of the Nation in the convention or Parliament have
Determined otherwise, I know not where their Legal Right can be founded. (p.
96. 6.) It was not so much as Knowable, to our Author, in that Case, that there
might be most Unjust Parliamentary Determinations.

It were ane endless work to adduce all such little Squabbles as these, between
himself and himself: I shall Insist, therefore, only on two more, which are a
little more Considerable. And

First, Our Author was not at more pains about any one thing in his Answ. to D.
Still.'s Irenicum, than the Inseparableness that is between the Teaching and
Ruling power of Presbyters: He spent no less than 8 or 9 pages about it,
Stretching his Invention to find Arguments for it: Whosoever pleases to turn to
page 79 may see the whole Deduction

He is as earnest about it in his True Representation, etc. These are his words
( prop. 13) There being no Disparity of power amongst Ministers by Christ's
Grant of power to them; No man can make this Disparity by setting one over the
rest: Neither can they Devolve their power on one of themselves: For Christ
has given no such warrant to men to dispose of his Ordinances, as they see
fit: And power being Delegated to them by him, They cannot so commit it to
Another to Exercise it for them, as to deprive themselves of it. Also, it being
not a License only, But a Trust, of which they must give ane account, They must
perform the work by themselves as they will be Answerable. Now, it is not
possible for one to contradict himself more than he has done both Indirectly
and Directly in this matter.

He has Contradicted himself Indirectly, and by unavoidable Consequence, in so
far as he has owned, or owns himself a Presbyterian, and for the Lawfulness
(not to say the Necessity) of Scottish Presbyterian General Assemblies of the
present Constitution. For, are all the Ruling Officers of Christ's appointment,
Both Preaching and Governing Elders allowed to be Members of General
Assemblies? Do they all discharge their Trust, and perform their work by
themselves, there, as they will be Answerable to him, from whom they got their
Trust? Does not every Presbytery (consisting of 12, 16, or 20 preaching, and as
many Ruling Elders) Send only some Three or Four Preaching Elders, and only One
Ruling Elder to the General Assembly? Do they not Delegate these, and Devolve
their power upon them, and Constitute them their Representatives for the
Assembly? Let their Commissions be Inspected, and let it be Tried, if it is not
so: Now, How is such a Delegation Consistent with our Authors position about
the Indevolvibility or Indelegability of such a power? It were easy to pursue
this farther in its Consequents. Now what an ill thing is it, for a man, thus,
to sap and subvert all his own Foundations? To Contradict the fundamental
Maxims of his own Scheme by such unadvised propositions? But this is not the
worst of it.

He has contradicted himself most directly in that same Individual True
Representation, etc. in Answ. to the 10th Objection; and in his 2 Vind. p. 154,
155. For in both places he endeavors to justify the Taking of all Ruling power
out of the hands of the Episcopal Ministers, and the putting it, only, in the
hands of the Known sound Presbyterians; Reserving to the Episcopal Ministers,
their Teaching power, only. It Is true, It Is evident that he found himself sadly
puzzled in the Matter, and was forced to bring in his Good Friend Necessity, and
the Old Covenant-Distinction of Status Ecclesiae turbatus and paratus, to Lend
him a Lift. I have considered his Friend Necessity, sufficiently in my Book,
and thither I refer the Reader for satisfaction about it. But what to do with
his Praesens Ecclesiae Status, I do not so well know: Only this I dare say,
granting it to be so nimble as to break Scot-free through Divine Institutions,
Yet it can, neither by itself, nor with Necessity to help it, reconcile
notorious Contradictions.

The other Instance I shall adduce is in a very important matter; no less than
the Presbyterian Separation from the Episcopal Church of Scotland. He was put
to it, to defend it in both his Vindications of his Church of Scotland. First
Vind. in Answ. to Quest. 4. 2 Vind. in Answer to Letter 2. 3. All the Reasons
he has for that Separation may be reduced to these Three, 1. Episcopacy. 2. The
Episcopal Ministers were Usurpers or Intruders: For 3. They had not the Call of
the People; and so the People were not bound to own them as their Ministers.
These are his Grounds, I say, on which he justifies their Separation from us.
Now, hear him in his Rational Defense, etc. published, as I have told, since
the beginning of the Late Revolution, by Consequence, after the Scottish Schism
was in its full Maturity: Hear him there, I say, and you never heard Man reject
any thing, more fairly, more fully, or more directly, than he has done these
his own Grounds. Let us try them one by one.

1. For Episcopacy, turn first to page 95. And you shall find these very words,
Whatever fault we find with the Ministers of the Church and the Hierarchy, we
do not separate because of these; we would join with you (the English Church)
for all these Grievances, if you would but suffer us to do it, without sinning
against God in that which is our personal Action.

Turn next to page 150. There he offers at enumerating the Causes that cannot
justify a Separation, and he talks particularly about Episcopacy, thus; We are
grieved with Prelatical Government, and taking away that Parity of Power that
Christ has given to the Ordinary Ministers of his Church. This we cannot
approve, and therefore Ministers ought rather to suffer Deprivation of the
public Exercise of their Ministry than own it. And People also ought not to
own that, their Lordly Authority that they Exercise; Yet, because this is not
Required to be acknowledged as a Lawful Power in the Church, by the People, I
see not that we should withdraw from the Public Assemblies, merely because
there are Diocesan Bishops set over the Church; Except our owning them by
submitting to their Jurisdiction is Required as one of the Terms of Communion
with the Church. Who so pleases may find more to the same purpose, page 157,
275, etc. Nay,

So condescending is he in that Book ( p. 159.) that he can allow Bishops their
Temporal Honors and Dignities. We meddle not with their Titles and Revenues
(says he) These are the Magistrates Gifts, and do not cross Christ's
institution, whatever inconvenience may be in them.

2. As to the Plea of the Usurpation or Intrusion of the Prelatists, D. Still.
had alleged that the Dissenters pleaded, That most of the present Ministers of
the Church of England were Usurpers, and that from such the People might
lawfully separate. We deny both parts of the Assertion, (says G. R. p. 115,
116.) Whatever Usurpation some of them may be guilty of, we know most of them
have the (Tacit, at least) consent of the People, a post facto; and therefore
however they may be guilty of Intrusion in their Entry, in their continuing in
their places they are no Usurpers: Neither do we own it to be lawful to
separate from Every Minister that is ane Usurper, Merely on the Account of his
Usurpation. And he discourses the point copiously; as the curious Reader may
find, ibid. Neither is he less positive about the

3. Thing, which, in his Scottish Management of the Plea, he insists on as the
Great Reason of the former, viz. The Popular Call. For D Still. had adduced D.
Owen as asserting, that the depriving of the People of the Right to choose
their own Pastors was a just Ground of Separation. And G. R. answers, If Doctor
Owen has done so, Let it pass for a part of the Independent Judgment which was
a mistake of that Eminent Servant of God; Others are not of that Mind. And a
little after: The People by the Laws of the Gospel have the Right of Election
of their own Pastors; But it does not follow that they ought not to bear with
being hindered the Exercise of this Right for the sake of Peace and Unity. And
p. 151. Depriving the People of their Right of choosing their own Church
Officers, is also Matter of Complaint, but we must bear it rather than separate
for that, from a Church. And page 197. when he came to assert that Right of the
People, He told he did Not make the Depriving of the People of that Power, a
Cause of Separation. Nay,

Not once, but very frequently, he lays the whole stress of the English
Separation, Upon the sinful terms of Communion (as he calls them) imposed by
the Church of England. Let the Church purge her Offices of humane Inventions,
Let her lay aside the the Liturgy, the Cross in Baptism, Kneeling at the
Receiving of the Eucharist, and Holy Days, etc. and he, and all his Party shall
join with her cheerfully, Vide p. 24, 81, 106, 107, 109, 120, 133, 144, 151,
etc. Now

Let any Man, even of his own Sect, reconcile these things: Let him show why
Episcopacy, Usurpation, and Depriving the People of their Right to choose their
own Pastors, should be so every way sufficient Grounds for Separating from the
Church of Scotland, and so no ways sufficient grounds for separating from the
Church of England. What could move the Man to venture upon such lumpish,
bulkish Contradictions? For my part, I cannot guess at another Motive than that
which I have frequently mentioned, viz. The present Argument.

In England he had some other things to bear the Burden, but no other thing in
Scotland; and it was necessary for his Vindicatorship to justify the
Separation: And therefore what could not do it in England, behoved to do it in
Scotland.

But perhaps he may endeavor to extricate himself by running for shelter to
the Old Scottish Plea of the Covenant. For, Is not Prelacy abjured in Scotland?
Is not the Oath of God upon Presbyterians, nay on all the Nation, not to own
Prelacy? Are not all the Prelatists perjured, etc.? And now may not the
Presbyterians separate lawfully?

He seems indeed to betake himself to this Plea, in his Answer to the
Historical Relation of the General Assembly, 20. p. 189. The setting up of
Episcopacy (says he) was more sinful in this Nation (Scotland) than it could be
elsewhere, because of the Oath of God that the Nation is under, against it; Not
in latter times only, but in the times of King James the Sixth, who caused the
whole Nation swear the Shorter Confession of Faith, called the National
Covenant, where it is abjured. Now

Not to insist on showing that, upon the supposition, all this were true, it
militates only against Episcopacy; It could conclude it only, but neither the
Usurpation, nor the Depriving the People of their Right, etc. to be a
sufficient Ground for the Separation. Nor yet to insist on the notorious
falsehood of the supposition, viz. That Episcopacy was abjured in King James the
Sixths time. Not to insist on these things, I say,

If he himself is strong enough for himself* himself will not suffer himself to
make the Abjuration of Episcopacy in Scotland, a sufficient Ground for
separating from the Episcopal Church of Scotland. For in the 40th page of his
Rational Defense, etc. Attempting to show a Difference between complying with
the Church of England at the Reformation, and complying with her Now, he opens
thus: I might here allege the Obligation of the National Covenant that we are
under, as they were not to whom the Doctor would make our Case parallel (i. e.
those who lived at the Reformation) Tho I never thought that that Bond made any
Sins or Duties that were not such Antecedently. Now

(Not to insist on the Pleasantness of pretending that he might insist on a
Topic, in which he instantly acknowledges there is no Force;) If Oaths and
Covenants make no Duties nor Sins, which were not such Antecedently, I would
fain understand, how the National Covenant, or whatever Covenant has been in
Scotland, could make Episcopacy a sufficient Ground for Separating from the
Church of Scotland; if it was not a sufficient Ground for such Separation
Antecedently to these Covenants? Thus he himself has cut off himself from all
hopes of escaping by the Covenant. Indeed there is no possibility of Escape
left him: It is not in the power of Nature to rescue one who is so plunged over
Head and Ears in such a Sink of Contradictions.

What has been said might be sufficient, in all Conscience, for representing
his own Unnatural Unmercifulness toward himself: For what can be more
Unmercifully done to one, than to demonstrate him to all the world to be a
Manifest Lier? And who can be a more manifest Lier than he, who, upon every
turn, vomits Contradictions? Yet this is not all, perhaps it is not the worst.

There is such an Intimate Relation between himself and his Books written by
himself, That, I think, it is reasonable to say, that whosoever treats his Books
with any Degrees of Impudence, is every whit as Impudent toward himself. Now,
it is not possible that Ranker, more Mercyless, or more Impudent injury can be
done to any thing, than himself has done to his Second Vindication of his
Church of Scotland. At least, to near three parts of four of it: To it, so far
as it Answers The Four Letters, The Case of the Afflicted Clergy, and the Late
Letter. For he has engraven on it such indelible Characters of Disingenuity,
Partiality, Injustice, Unfair Dealing, Effrontery, Ridiculousness, etc. as
perhaps never Book was injured or bespattered with, since writing of Books was
in fashion. The Reader may think this is a very strange Charge: But I can make
it good, to a Demonstration, by a very plain and obvious Deduction. Thus,

Some of the Episcopal Clergy, thought themselves obliged for their own
Vindication, to give some short Representations of their Circumstances, and the
Unkindly Treatment they had met with from the Presbyterian Party, An. 1688,
1689, etc. The whole Nation knows, they were so far from feigning instances, or
aggravating the circumstances of their Sufferings, that they told not the
twentieth part of what they suffered; nor represented what they told in all its
proper Blacknesses: However, so much was told, as was enough to represent the
Presbyterian Temper in no very Lovely Colors. The Party were sensible of this;
And therefore, it was necessary to try if there was a possibiltty of Collecting
and Connecting some Rags to cover their Shame and Nakedness. The Expedient they
agreed to was, that the Accounts given by the Episcopal Clergy should be
Answered and Refuted: But then the Difficulty was to find ane Author, who had
Talents proper for such a Task.

It was committed, first to Mr. Alexander Pitcairn: But after he had thought
some time about it, it seems, It stood with his Stomach: He had not so far
abandoned all Principles of Truth, and Honesty, and Ingenuity, as was necessary
for such ane Undertaking; he resigned the employment, therefore into the hands
of another General Meeting of the Party, and told them, He would have nothing
to do with it.

This, no doubt, was a Discouragement to all others of any Wit or Probity, to
undertake it: For if it was to be done, to any good purpose at all, Pitcairn
was as fit for doing of it as any of the Sect: And if he gave it over, after so
much Deliberation about it, it was to be presumed, there was Frost in it; it
was not safe to meddle with it. Thus it fell to the share of G. R. as he tells
himself both in his Preface, and in the Beginning of his Book.

Such ane Odd Undertaking did, indeed, require a suitable Undertaker; and now
it had one as oddly qualified for it as the world has heard of. For if we may
believe himself in his Preface to his Anim. on D. Stillingfleet's Irenicum (for
who but himself would have been at pains to write Prefaces to his Books?) He
died a worthy and much lamented Author, Anno 1662. And, so far as I can learn,
he continued thus in the state of the dead, till toward the end of the year
1688. i. e. about 26 years. Then, indeed he returned to Life. Now, it is not to
be imagined, his Soul, all this while, was either in the Regions of Eternal
Rewards, or Eternal Punishments; for, then, how should it have returned?
Doubtless, therefore, it was in some Purgatory: But what Purgatory, is not easy
to determine. I am confident, it was not the Ordinary Purgatory, in which
People are purged from the Dregs of Corruption they carry out of this world
with them; for he came alive again more corrupted and vicious than ever.
Possibly, he has been in some New Purgatory, which the Pope built lately for
keeping a Seminary of such as he lets out upon Occasion, for Plagues to the
Protestant Churches. Whatever Purgatory it was, Our Author came out of it,
purged pretty clean of all principles of Sense, or Shame, or Honesty. And now,
who fitter than he to be the Vindicator of the Kirk of Scotland? Before his
Death he wrote only such Books as were little in their own Eyes (Pref. to Anim.
on Irenicum) but he ventured on writing such Books as his Second Vindication,
after his Resurrection.

I have given this Account of our Author, and the Occasion of his writing the
Book, for fixing the Readers attention, that he may consider it with the
greater Application.

Now, in this Book, (His Second Vindication, I mean) he rejected, by the Bulk,
all the Matters of Fact, which were contained in the Four Letters, because they
were not Attested; as if, forsooth, the Writers of the Letters had had
opportunity to have had all the particular Cases, Tried in formal Courts,
before Indifferent Judges, and with all the Usual Solemnities of Process: As if
it had been their Intention, by their Letters, to have made formal Pursuits for
the Injuries had been done the Clergy. As if the World could not have easily
Discerned, That all their purpose in writing these Letters, was not to sue
Legally for Redress, but to represent to their Friends, Matter of Fact, in the
common way of History. Well!

To mend this, however, The Case of the afflicted Clergy gave him Attestations,
enough, in all Conscience: But did that satisfy him? No more than if he had got
none at all, for they were not worth a Button, they were not probative, they
were but partial; he had reason to reject every one of them. Thus,

When the Author of the Case, etc. cited D. Burnet, G. R. replied in these
words; He farther proves our Persecution by citing some passages out of Doctor
Burnet, whom, being a party, we are not to admit as a Witness against us. (85)
What? No not D. Burnet? No not the Son of such a Mother? No not the Nephew of
such ane Uncle? No not the Brother of such a Brother? No not the Cousin German
of such a Cousin German? No not the Man who has all along advised the
Scottish Prelatists (particularly Mr. Malcome, one of the Ministers of
Edinburgh) to return to their Native Country, and submit to the Ecclesiastical
Government Now Established; Do you reject even him as a party? But to proceed.

If the person who was barbarously used by the Rabble, gave an Account of his
own Usage, (and who could do it better?) and subscribed his name to it; This
was such ane Attestation, as G. R. thought fit to reject with a Fie upon it. It
was Test Meipso, (p. 88.) and so, not worth ane halfpenny: As if it had been
possible for a Minister, when the Rabble surprised him, and came upon him
unawares, still to have had witnesses at hand for Attesting all their
Rudenesses; as if it had not been enough for all the design of such Accounts,
that a Man of known Probity and Reputation, subscribed his own Narration of a
Matter of Fact which so nearly concerned himself, and thereby declared his
Readiness to make the Matter appear, as far as he was capable.

If the Rabbled Minister adduced Witnesses (as was done in the Case, etc. in
several Instances) And they subscribed the Account, was he then satisfied?
Never ane Ace more than before. All of his Witnesses are the sworn Enemies of
Presbyterians, and in a Combination to defame them, (p. 88.) And again (p.
100.) His first Collection is of Accounts that he has had from his Accomplices,
a company of Men avowed and malicious Enemies of all Presbyterians -- and all
this attested by themselves. Nay,

Tho they were not Episcopal Ministers, but Laics who attested, if it was done
in favor of Episcopal Ministers, that was enough to prove them Friends to
Episcopacy, and so they were no more Boni and Legales Homines, as he calls his
Vnexceptionable Witnesses, (p. 111.) Thus,

The Account which was sent to London immediately after the Second Tumult at
Glasgow, which happened on the 17th of Feb. Anno 1688/^ was subscribed by James
Gibson, then One of the Magistrates of the City; John Gillhagie, who had been a
Magistrate the year before; and Patrick Bell, Son to Sir John Bell, a discreet
young Gentleman, and Merchant in the City.

These three subscribed it, that it might make Faith; it was directed to Doctor
Fall, Principal of the College of Glasgow, that he might show it to the then
P. of O. and crave, that now, that he had taken upon him the Government of the
Kingdom of Scotland, he would interpose his Authority for discharging such
Tumults for the future, etc. Doctor Fall actually addressed to his Highness,
and showed the Account. All this was done before the Scottish Estates met in
March. Now consider G. R.'s Discussion of this Account. (p. 94.)

John (he should have called him James) Gibson was a Party, and made a Bailie
by the Archbishop, and all know the Prelates Inclinations toward the present
Civil Government. Have ye not here a goodly Specimen of both our Authors Law
and his Logic.

John Gillhagie is looked on by all as a Foolish and Rash Man, who little
considers what he does. Now what was his Testimony worth after our Author had
given him such a Character?

Patrick Bell and his Brother were soon after seized for Treasonable Practices,
were long in Prison, and are now under Bail. And is not G. R. now a potent
Author? How easily and readily he can reject Testimonies! And these three once
thus rejected, There was never such a thing as that Presbyterian Tumult at
Glasgow: No not tho there are Hundreds in Glasgow who can attest, that every
syllable of the Account was true. Again,

Page 109. in Mr. Gellies Case, How easily could he reject all the Testimonies
that were adduced? Why? They that testify for him are of his own party: And
then let them testify that they saw a Nose on G. R.'s own Face, and for any
thing I know, he should cut off his own Nose to have them Liers. And now,

Let the World judge of this way of disproving Historical Relations and
Attestations of Matters of Fact: Is it not plain that according to this
Standard, it is impossible to Attest any thing? For as I take it, the whole
Nation is so divided between Prelalatists and Presbyterians, or those who
favor One of the sides, that you shall not find many Neutrals. Now, who is
obliged to take the Testimonies of Presbyterians, in Matters of Fact, more than
the Testimonies of Prelatists? Have they any Divine, Natural or Municipal Law
for the Validity of their Testimonies beyond other Men? If they have not, as I
shall still be apt to believe till G R. produces the Law, then I would fain
know how G. R. by his own Standard can allow, That Presbyterian Witnesses
should appear before any Court Ecclesiastical or Civil against Episcopal
Ministers. Nay, may not the Presbyterians themselves reject even G. R.s
Testimony? Nay I say they ought to do it: Why? He stands nearly related to
Episcopacy. How? Let it be enquired into and I Will hold him two to one, if he
was Baptized at all, he was Baptized either by a Bishop, or by a Presbyter that
submitted to Bishops. But if so, then good morrow to his Testimony: For thus
the Argument runs, G. R. was Baptized by a Prelate or a Prelatist, and all know
the Prelates inclinations, etc.

Why this Reasoning should not hold in G. R.'s Case, as well as in James
Gibson's Case, I desire to learn of G. R. when he is at Leisure. But this is
not all.

As he rejected all the Attestations in that Book, without any show of Reason,
so he did some in Despite of the Common Sense of Mankind. For setting this in
its due Light, it is to be Remembered, that, in that Book, there are Accounts of
the Insolences committed by the Rabble upon such and such Ministers in the
Presbyteries of Glasgow, Hamilton, Irwing, Air, Paisley, Dumbarton, etc. Now
these Accounts were occasioned thus,

When the Rabble was in its fury, and making Havoc of all the Clergy in the
Western Diocese of Glasgow, some of them met at Glasgow upon the 22 of January,
1688/9. to consider what might be proper for them to do for their own
Preservation, and Protection against the Rage of their Persecutors: And the
best Expedient they could then fall upon, was to send Doctor Scot Dean of
Glasgow to London, to represent their Condition to his Highness the P. of O.
who had then assumed the Government of the Nation; and crave protection
according to Law. And that the Doctor might be the better instructed, it was
resolved, that particular Accounts of the Violences had been done to the Clergy
within the abovenamed Presbyteries should be digested by such Ministers as
lived within these Presbyteries, respectively: This was done. The Account of
the Violences done to those who lived within the Presbytery of Air, was
digested and signed by Mr. Alexander Gregory, Mr. William Irwine, and Mr.
Francis Fordyce; that for Paisley, by Mr. Fullerton, and Mr. Taylour, Ministers
at Paisley; that for Glasgow, by Mr. George, and Mr. Sage, etc. And that the
Truth of these Accounts might be the more unquest^onable, the Subscribers (in
some of them, at least) undertook to make all the particulars appear to be
true, upon the greatest peril, if they should get a fair Hearing. What greater
Evidence of Truth and Ingenuity could have been expected or required of People
in such Circumstances? Yet,

Even these accounts G. R. rejected, as readily and con^idently as he did any
other; he rejected them I say, indiscriminately, and without taking notice of
any difference between them, and such as were not written upon any such
Occasion, such as were only vouched Test Meipso. Was this like either the
Sense or the Discretion that were proper for the Vindicator of a Church? I do
not incline, so much as in the least, to insinuate, that any of the Accounts
contained in The Case of the afflicted Clergy, were false; I am satisfied they
were all very true: All I intend, is to represent G. R.'s impudent Rashness in
rejecting all Accounts with the same facility: And certainly, whosoever
considers this seriously, cannot but reckon of his Book as written with as
little Wit or Discretion, as Truth or Ingenuity. And all this will appear more
evident still, if it be considered, that,

All this did not content him; but he was such a Fool, as to stumble upon the
same Methods, himself condemned most, in his Adversaries, when he had any
Matter of Fact to Attest.

He was very careful, as he tells frequently, to have his particular
informations from all Corners, concerning all the Instances of Rabbling which
were represented in the Prelatick Pamphlets? But from whom had he these
Informations, mostly? From the very Rabblers themselves. It were both tedious
and unprofitable to trace him through all instances: One may be sufficient for
ane example. And I shall choose the very first that is to be found in his Book,
viz. That of Master Gabriel Russel Minister at Govean.

The Author of the Second Letter had given a brief and a just Account of the
Treatment, that poor Gentleman had met with. And G. R. convels it thus, To
this, I oppose, says he, The Truth of the Story, as it is attested by the
Subscriptions of Nine Persons who were present, i. e. Nine of the Rabblers; for
so Mr. Russel himself assured me, repeating over these very names which G. R.
has in his Book. And is not this a pleasant Attestation? Is it not pleasant, I
say, to rely upon the Testimony of such barbarous Villains, and take their own
word for their own Vindication? Yet there is one thing, a great deal more
pleasant yet, in the Story.

The Author of the Second Letter had affirmed, that Mr. Russel was beaten by
the Rabble; But they (the nine whom he adduces) utterly deny, That any of them
did beat him. And it is true indeed, none of these nine did beat him; but it is
as true that he was beaten: And one James Col^uhoun was the person who did it;
and therefore his Name was concealed, and not set down with the other nine. And
now I refer it to the Reader, if it is not probable, that he has got a parcel
of sweet History from G. R. in his Second Vindication. But I go on.

As he thus adduced the Rabble witnessing for themselves; so when he was put to
it, he never stood on adducing the Testimonies of single Presbyterian
Ministers, witnessing for the Honesty and Integrity of the Rabblers, or in
opposition to the Prelatical Relations. Thus,

In White's Case ( p. 32.) he adduces five Men, testifying that the Accounts of
White's Sufferings were false, etc. And for the Honesty of these five he tells
us, They have all their Testimony from their Minister that they are credible
and famous Witnesses. And

P. 105. He rejects Bullo's account, who was Episcopal Minister at Stobo, in
one word, thus, In this Narrative are many Lies, which is attested by Mr.
William Russel (Presbyterian) Minister at Stobo. But the best is,

After he had run down all the Prelatical Accounts by this Upright Dealing of
his, and concluded them all most horrid Liers and Calumniators, and all their
Relations most horrid Lies and Calumnies: He tells you gravely in his Preface,
6. That the Truth of Matters of Fact, asserted in his Book is not to be taken
from him, but from his Informers. That he pretends to personal Knowledge of few
of them: That therefore, not his Veracity, but theirs, is pledged for the Truth
of the Accounts he has published; That if they have deceived him, or been
deceived themselves, he is not to Answer for it.

Let the World judge if this was not a sure foot for supporting such
Superstructures as he raised upon it; and if his Second Vindication is not a
pleasant Book. Was it possible for him to have Farced it with more barefaced
Iniquities? What picqu'd the Man, so, at his own Book, as to publish it with so
many fair Evidences of Disingenuity, Partiality, Effrontery, and Downright
Ridiculousness, about it? What could move him to treat his own Brat with so
little compassion? Was not this, even in a Literal sense Male Natum exponere
foetum? Or rather what meant he by treating himself so unmercifully? For who
sees not that all the Infamy terminates on the Author, in the Rebound?

But, perchance, now that he is a profound Philosophic Head of a College, he
may fall on a way to distinguish between his own and his Books Credit:
Perchance he may think his own Credit secure enough, whatever hazard his Books
may run. Well! He may try it if he will; but I would advise him not to be rash
in falling out so with the Book; For, as sorry a Book as it is, yet, I
perceive, that with the assistance of a Neighbor Book, it can serve him a
Trick, that may be sufficient to put even his impudent self a little out of
Countenance. I Will be so kind to him as to let him see where the Danger lies.

He may remember, That the Author of the Second Letter (which, by the most
probable Calculation I can make, was written in December 1689, or January
1690.) endeavored to make it appear as probable, That the Leading Men in
Government were, then, very much inclined to Justify the Expulsion of the
Clergy by the Rabble, and sustain their Churches vacuated by that Expulsion;
and thereby cut off these poor Men from all hopes of being restored to their
Churches or Livings, tho they had neither been Convicted of any Crime, nor
Deprived by any Sentence. Now

There Is another Book, called Ane Account of the Late Establishment of
Presbyterian Government by the Parliament, Anno 1690. which gives a full and
fair Account, how the thing was actually Done, how the Expulsion of the Clergy
by the Rabble was actually Justified by that same Act of Parliament which
established Presbyterian Government.

If G. R. has not seen that Book, or is resolved to reject its Testimony
because probably written by a Party: I can refer him to the Universal
Conviction of the whole Nation, that such a thing was Done, by that Act of
Parliament: Nay I can refer him to the Act of Parliament it self.

That Book tells also a shrewd story concerning a Presbyterian Minister, called
Mr. Gilbert Rule, who preached a Sermon before the Parliament on the 25 of May,
being the Sunday before the Act was Voted in the House; And, before he
published it, wrote a Preface to it, after the Act was Voted, in which he
thanked the House very heartily for Voting such ane Act: And if G. R. distrusts
that Book, I refer him to Mr. Rule*s printed Preface to his Sermon, where I am
confident he may find satisfaction. Nay, I dare appeal to G. R. himself, if he
knew not all these things to be true, before he wrote one Syllable of his
Second Vindication: For these things were transacted, every one of them, before
the middle of June 1690, and his Second Vindication came not abroad till more
than a year after. Well!

But what of all this? how can this assist G. R.'s Book against himself, if it
should be irritated to serve him a Trick? Why? turn over to p. 43, 44 etc. and
consider how it discovers in him such a Brawny Impudence, as never Ghost
appearing in humane shape was guilty of, before him. For

Tho the Letter-man was fully justified by the Event; tho what he said seemed
to be intended by the Government, appeared undeniably to have been intended by
them in the Execution; tho they Justified the Expulsion of the Clergy by* the
Rabble* as plainly and positively as ane Act of Parliament could do it; So
plainly and positively, that the whole Nation was sensible of it, and cried
shame upon it; That some Members, in the very time, resented it highly, calling
it ane indelible Reproach upon the Justice of the Nation; That many Members to
this very minute will frankly acknowledge, there was never greater or more
notorious iniquity established by a Law. Tho G. R. knew it so well, and was so
much pleased with it, that he thanked the Parliament with all his Soul for it,
telling them, He and his Party were filled with Joy, while they beheld the
Religious Regard which the High and Honorable Court of Parliament had showed
to the Mountain of the Lords House, above other Mountains; in the Great Step
toward the Establishing thereof that they had made by their Vote. (Whereof
that Justification of the Rabble was a great part) Tho he prayed, That the Lord
would reward them for their good Deeds (whereof this was one) toward his
House. Tho all these things were, and are, clear as the Light, and
uncontrollable as Matter of Fact can be; yet

G. R. lasht the Letter-man till he had almost flayed him; made him a Railer,
one who Understood no Logic, a Strainer at Silly Quibbles, one who had ane
Extraordinary Dose of Brow, and whose Wit was a Wool* gathering, etc. And all
this for telling this plain Truth, That the Government had a design to Justify
the Expulsion of the Clergy by the Rabble.

Thus I think, I have made it appear how little tender G. R. was, even of his
own beloved self, when he was straightened in his Argument: I might have easily
adduced more Instances; but the Truth is, I am now very weary of him; and he
himself has done himself the Justice, to represent himself to any Man's
Satisfaction, who shall not be satisfied with the Representation I have given
of him: For he has fairly owned, that he sets himself in opposition to those
whom he acknowledges to be the Soberest and Wisest of his party. I don't love
to be unjust to him; I Will give it you in his own words, as I find them, 1 Vind.
Ans. to Quest. 5. 6.

He was complaining of the Persecutions his Party had met with for keeping
Conventicles, etc. And amongst other things, he discourses thus, There might
have been some shadow for such severity against Meeting (at Field-Conventicles)
with Arms, tho even that was in some Cases necessary; but that was always
disallowed by the Soberest and Wisest Presbyterians Now it is plain, there are
here these two Affirmatives. 1. That Meeting with Arms at Field Conventicles
was in some Cases necessary: This is our Authors sentiment. 2. That Meeting
with Arms at Field Conventicles, was always disallowed by the Soberest and
Wisest Presbyterians: This, I say, he plainly affirms to have been always the
sentiment of the Soberest and Wisest. By Consequence; are not both these
Affirmatives joined together E^^^pollent to this Complexe Proposition, Tho the
Soberest and Wisest Presbyterians did always disallow of Meeting with Arms,
etc. Yet, in my Judgment, it was sometimes necessary? And now have you not,
from his own Friendly self, a Fair Demonstration of his own Folly and Futility?
For who but a Futile Fool would have said, that he differed in his Sentiments
from the Soberest and Wisest? And now, to bring all home to my Original purpose.

By this time, I think, I have given Reason enough for my refusing to accept of
him for ane Answerer of my Book. No Man on Earth, I think, would willingly
enter the Lists with one who is so singular for four such Cardinal Talents. Tho
Incureable Ignorance and Incorrigible Nonsense, may be something pitiable, as
being the Vices of Nature rather than Choice; yet, it is no small Persecution
for one to be obliged to grapple with them. What must it be then to be
committed with the other two? Rank Ill Nature, I mean, and the most stubborn
Impudence?

Some Ill Natures may be cured: Men may be either cajoled or cudgel'd out of
them. Agelastus himself laughed once; so did Duke D Alva: But what hopes can
there be of one whose Common Sense is so intrinsecally vitiated, that he can
avouch the coursest, and most Scurrilous Scolding to be Excessive Civility? But
this is not the worst of it:

If there had been any thing Venust or Lepid, any shadow of Concinnity or
Festivity, of Iollity or Good Humor, any thing like Art, or Life, or Wit, or
Salt, in any One of Fifty of his Excessive Civilities; if they had had the
least Tincture of the Satyr, nay, if their Mein had resembled so much as the
Murgeons of ane Ape, I could have pardon^d him, and let his Talent pass for
Tolerable. There is something delightful in Marvelism, in well humor'd
wantonness, in lively and judicious Drollery: There may be some Enormous
Strokes of Beauty in a surprising Banter; some irregular Sweetness in a well
cook't Bitterness: But who can think on drinking nothing but Corrupted Vinegar?
What humane patience can be hardy enough for entering the Lists with pure
Barking and Whining? with Original ^ullness? who can think on Arming himself
against the Horns of a Snai^? or setting a Match for Mewing with a Melancholy
Cat? But

What can be said of his Impudence? his Master-Talent? Why? to tell Truth of
it, I am not able to define it, and so I must let it alone; I know nothing in
Nature like it: It Is too hard for all the Idea's or words I am Master of. Were
I to talk any more of it I should design it his Vndefineable Attribute. And now

I think our Author may be sensible, that it is not a good thing to cast a bad
Copy to the world, lest some, for Curiosity, try if they can imitate it. For my
part I do acknowledge, that I have crossed my temper to make an Experiment, if
it was possible to be Even with him: To let him see, that others, as well as
he, if they set themselves for it, may aim, at least, at Arguing the Case
Cuttingly, as he phrases it (Pref. to 2 Vind. 6.)

One thing I am sure of, I have been faithful in my Citations from his Books:
And I am not conscious that I have, so much as once forced ane Unnatural sense
on his words: For this, I am satisfied, that what I have said, be tried with
the greatest and most impartial Accuracy. But, if he is such ane Author as I
have truly represented him to be I hope the world will allow that I had, and
still have Reason to refuse to have any Dealing with him. Nay farther,

I think it is nothing for the Honor or Reputation of his Party, that he was
ever employed to be the Vindicator of their Kirk. If they can employ any civil,
discreet, ingenuous person to write for them, I shall be heartily satisfied;
and for his Encouragement, I do promise, if he falls to my share, I shall treat
him suitably. Nay

After all, if even G. R. himself will lay aside such Qualities, as I have
demonstrated adhere to him; if he will undertake to write, with that Gravity
and Civility, that Charity and Modesty, that Honesty and Ingenuity, which may
be thought to become One of his Age and Character; I can as yet admit of him
for my Adversary, (for I think the Party cannot assign me a weaker one) And I
do hereby promise him ane Equitable Meeting.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Book was designed for the Press December 1693.

The Article. That Prelacy and the Superiority of any Office in the Church
above Presbyters, is, and has been, a great and insupportable Grievance and
Trouble to this Nation* and contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of
the people, ever since the Reformation; (they having Reformed from Popery by
Presbyters) And therefore ought to be Abolished.
THis Article was Established in our Claim of Right, April 11, 1689. By virtue
of this Article Prelacy was actually Abolished by Act of Parliament, July 22.
1689. Upon the foot of this Article Presbyterian Government was Established,
June 7. Anno 1690. This Act Establishing Presbyterian Government was Ratified
in the whole Heads, Articles and Clauses thereof, June 12. 1693. It is
indisputable then, That This Article is the Great Foundation of that Great
Alteration which has been made in the Government of the Church of Scotland,
since the Beginning of the Late Revolution. Whether, therefore, This is a Solid
or a Sandy Foundation? cannot but be deemed a Material Question: And, I think,
I shall bid fair for the Determination of this Question, if I can give clear
and distinct Satisfaction to these following Enquiries.

I. Whether the Church of Scotland was Reformed solely, by persons clothed
with the Character of Presbyters?

II. Whether our Scottish Reformers, whatever their Characters were, were of
the present Presbyterian Principles? Whether they were for the Divine
institution of Parity, and the unlawfulness of Prelacy, amongst the Pastors of
the Church?

III. Whether Prelacy and the superiority of any Office in the Church, above
Presbyters, was a great and insupportable Grievance and trouble to this Nation,
and contrary to the inclinations of the generality of the people, ever since
the Reformation?

IV. Whether it was Such when this Article was Established in the Claim of
Right?

V. Whether, supposing the premises in the Article were True, They would be of
sufficient Force to infer the Conclusion, viz. That Prelacy, and the
Superiority of any Office in the Church, ought to be abolished?

The Determination of the main Question, I say, may competently result from a
perspicuous discussion of these five Enquiries: And therefore I shall attempt
it as fairly as I can, leaving to the world to judge, equitably, of my
performance: And without further prefacing, I come to

The First Enquiry.
Whether the Church of Scotland was Reformed, solely, by persons clothed with
the Character of Presbyters?

IF the Framers of the Article meant that it was in these words, They having
Reformed from Popery by Presbyters, I think, I am pretty sure they meant amiss:
For there is nothing more obvious to one who reads and compares our Histories,
than That persons standing in other stations, and clothed with other
Characters, had a very great hand, and were very considerable Instruments in
carrying on our Reformation. Particularly,

1. There were Prelates who concurred in that work as well as Presbyters. Knox
says there were present in the Parliament holden in August, 1560. (which
Parliament gave the first National Establishment to our Reformation) The Bishop
of Galloway, the Abbots of Lundoris, Culross, St. Colmes-inih, Coldingham,
Saint Mary-isle, and the Subprior of St. Andrews, with diverse others: And of
all these, he says, That they had Renounced Papistrie, and openly professed
Jesus Christ. Kn. 260.
Spotswood reckons up no fewer than Eight of the Spiritual Estate, all
Protestants, chosen, at that time, to be Lords of the Articles: Namely, Spot.
149.
the Bishops of Galloway and Argyle, the Prior of St. Andrews, the Abbots of
Aberbrothoik, Kilwinning, Lundors, Newbottle and Culross. Lay these two
Accounts together, and you shall have, at least a Round Dozen of Reforming
Prelates. It Is True Spotswood says, The Popish Prelates stormed mightily at
such a Nomination for the Articles, alleging that some of them were mere
Laics. But what if it was so? I am apt to think, our Presbyterian Brethren
will not be fond to make much advantage of this: I am apt to think they will
not say, That all those whom they allow to have been Reforming Presbyters, were
Duly and Canonically Ordained: That they were solemnly separated for the
Ministry, by such as had Commission and Power to Separate them, and in such
Manner as had Universally obtained, from the Apostles times, in the Separation
of Presbyters for their holy Function. The plain truth is,

2. Our Reformation was principally carried on by such as neither Did, nor
Could pretend to be Canonically promoted to Holy Orders. Knox himself Kn. 127.
tells us, that when the Reformation began to make its more public Advances,
which was in the Year 1558. there was a great Scarcety of Preachers: At that
time (says he) we had no public Ministers of the word; Only did certain
Zealous Men ( among whom were the Lord of Dun, David Forress, Mr. Robert
Lockhart, Mr. Robert Hamilton, William Harlaw, and others) Exhort their
Brethren, according to the Gifts and Graces granted to them: But shortly after
did God stir up his Servant Paul Methven, etc. Here, we have but a very
Diminutive account of them, as to Number: And such an Account, as, in its very
Air and Countenance, seems to own they were generally but Lay-Brethren: They
were but Zealous Men, not Canonically ordained Presbyters: And if we may
believe Lesly, Paul Methven was, by Occupation, a Baker, and William Harlaw a
Tailor. Lesl* 496.
The Lord of Dun, that same very year, was Provost of Montrose, and, as such,
sent to France, as one representing, not the First or the Spiritual, but the
Third Estate of Parliament, the Burrows; to attend at the Celebration of the
Queens Marriage, with the Dauphine of France: Lesl. 494. Spot. 95.
He was indeed a Gentleman of good Esteem and Quality, and he was afterward as
Superintendent, but it no where appears that he was ever Received into Holy
Orders. Nay,

3. After the pacification at Leith, which was concluded in July 1560, when the
Ministers were distributed amongst the several Towns, we find but a very small
Number of them. John Knox was appointed for Edinburgh, Christopher Goodman for
St. Andrews, Adam Herriot for Aberdeen, John Row for Perth, William Chrystison
for Dundee, David Ferguson for Dunfermline, Paul Methven for Iedburgh, and Mr.
David Lindesay for Leith. Beside these, Five were nominated to be
Superintendents; Spotswood for Lothian and Mers, Winram for Fife, the Lord of
Dun for Angus and Merns, Willock for Glasgow, and Carsewell for Argyle and the
Isles. These are all who are reckoned up by Knox and Spotswood: Kn. 259. Spot.
149.
And Spotswood adds, With this small Number was the Plantation of the Church,
at first, undertaken. And can we think, tho all these had been Presbyters duly
ordained, That they were the only men who carried on the Scottish Reformation?
Farther yet,

4. Petrie Pet. 222.
tells us, that the First General Assembly, which was holden in Dec. 1560,
consisted of 44 persons; and I find exactly 44 Names Recorded in my Mss.
Extract of the Acts of the General Assembly's, as the Names of the Members of
that Assembly: But of all these 44, there were not above Nine, at most, who
were called Ministers; so that, at least, more than Thirty, were but
Lay-Brethren according to the then way of Reckoning: probably, they were
generally such, if you speak in the Dialect, and reckon by the Measures of the
Catholic Church in all Ages. In short,

5. There is nothing more evident to any who considers the Histories of these
times, than, that they were generally Laymen, who promoted our Violent and
Disordered Reformation, as Spotswood justly calls it. Spot. 60.
And it is Reasonable to think, the Sense of this was One Argument, which
prevailed with our Reformers to Declare against the Ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolic Ceremony of Imposition of Hands in Ordinations; as is to be seen in
the 4 th Head of the First Book of Discipline, Spot. 154.
and as is generally acknowledged.

Thus I think I have sufficiently deduced Matters, as to my First Enquiry: It
had been easy to have insisted longer on it; but I had no inclination for it,
considering that there is a kind of Piety in Dispatch, when, the longer one
insists on a subject of this Nature, he must still the more Expose the Failures
of our Reformation, and the Weaknesses of our Reformers. Proceed we now to

The Second Enquiry.
Whether our Scottish Reformers, whatever their Characters were, were of the
present Presbyterian principles? Whether they were for the Divine Institution
of Parity, and the Unlawfulness of Prelacy amongst the Pastors of the Church.

THis Enquiry, if I mistake not, is pretty far, in the interests of the main
Question: For, the Article, as I am apt to take it, aims at this, That our
Reformation was carried on, with such a Dislike to Prelacy, or the Superiority
of any Office in the Church, above Presbyters, as made Prelacy, or such a
Superiority, ever since, a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble to
this Nation, etc. But if this is the Sense of the Article, what else is it,
Than that our Reformers were Presbyterian? But whether or not, This was truly
intended, (as it is truly very hard to know what was intended) in the Article,
This is Certain, this Enquiry is material and pertinent; And if it faces not
the Article Directly, Undoub^edly, i^ does it, by fair Consequence. It Is as
certain, our Presbyterian Brethren use, with confidence enough, to assert that
our Reformers were of their Principles. This is One of the Main Arguments by
which they endeavor, on all occasions, to influence the Populace, and Gain
Proselytes to their Party: And therefore I shall endeavor to go as near to the
bottom of this Matter as I can, and set it in its due Light; And I hope, It
shall appear to be competently Done, to all who shall, attentively and
impartially, weigh the following Deduction. And

I. Let it be considered, That while our Reformation was on the Wheel, and for
some years after its public Establishment, there was no such Controversy
agitated, in Europe, as this, concerning The Divine Institution of Parity or
Imparity amongst the Pastors of the Church.

The Popes pretended universal Headship was Called in Question, indeed; And,
Called in Question, it was run down with all imaginable Reason, some years,
before the Settlement of our Reformation. That Controversy was One of the
First, which were accurately ventilated by the Patrons of Reformation. And it
was very natural that it should have been so, considering what stress was laid
upon it by the Pontificians.

It Is likewise true, That the Corruptions of the Ecclesiastical Estate, were
Enquired into, in most Provinces, every where, where the Truth began to Dawn,
and the Reformation was Encouraged: And it was not to be imagined, but in such
Scrutinies, Bishops would be taken notice of, for their general Defection from
the Ancient Rules and Measures of the Episcopal Office, and the vast
Dissimilitude between them, and those of the same Order in the primitive times,
both as to the Discharge of their Trust, and their Way of Living: And who
doubts, but in these things the Popish Bishops were too generally culpable?

It Is farther true, That some Countries, when they reformed Religion, and
separated from the Church of Rome, did set up New Models of Government in the
Churches they erected, as they thought their civil Constitutions could best
bear them: And having once set them up, what wonder if they did what they could
to justify them, and maintain their Lawfulness? Thus, for instance, Mr. Calvin
erected a Model of the Democratical Size at Geneva, because that State had then
cast it self into a Democracy. And the Protestants in France, partly for
Convenience, partly in imitation of Calvin's Platform, fell upon a method of
governing their Churches without Bishops; And so it fared with some other
Churches, as in Switzerland, etc. while in the mean time other Churches thought
it enough for them to Reform the Doctrine and Worship, without altering the
Ancient form of Government. But then

It Is as evident as any thing in History, that all this while, from the first
Dawnings of the Reformation, I mean, till some years after the public
Establishment of our Reformation, That there was no such Controversy insisted
on, by Protestants, either in their Debates with the Papists, or with one
another, as that, about the Divine and Unalterable Institution of parity or
imparity, amongst the Pastors of the Church. And I dare confidently challenge
my Presbyterian Brethren to produce any One Protestant Confession of Faith for
their side of the Question: Nay more, I dare challenge them to instance in any
One Protestant Divine, of Note, who, in these times, maintained their side of
the Controversy; who maintained the Unlawfulness of Imparity amongst Christian
Pastors, before Theodore Beza did it, if he did it. Sure I am They cannot,
without the greatest impudence, pretend that Mr. Calvin (the only Transmarine
Divine, I can find, consulted by our Reformers about matters relating to our
Reformation) was of their Principles, For whosoever shall be pleased to consu^t his
Commentaries on the New Testament, particularly on 1 Cor. 11.2.; Or some
Chapters in the beginning of his 4 th Book of Institutions; Or his Book about
the Necessity of Reforming the Church; Or his Epistles, particularly his
Epistle directed to the Protector of England, dated October. 22. 1548. Or to
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury; Calv. Epist. Col. 134, 135.
To the Bishop of London; Col. 316.
To Ithavius Bishop of Vladislavia, dated December. 1. An. 1558; Col.
Or his Resolution of that Case, if a Bishop or Curate join himself to the
Church, etc. Col, 466.
Or lastly, his Epistle to the King of Poland Col. 190.
, wherein he tells him, That It was Nothing but pride and ambition that
introduced the Popes Supremacy; That the Ancient Church, had, indeed her
Patriarchs and Primates, for the Expedition of Discipline, and the Preservation
of Unity: As if, in the Kingdom of Poland one Archbishop should have the
precedence of the rest of the Bishops, not that he might Tyrannize over them,
but for Orders sake, and for Cherishing Unity amongst his Colleagues and
Brethren; And next to him there should be Provincial, or City Bishops for
keeping all things orderly in the Church. Nature teaching (says he) that from
every College, Sleut hoc Natura dictat, unum ex singulis Collegiis deligendum,
cui praeeipua Cura incumbat.
One should be chosen who should have the chief Management of affairs. But,
It Is another thing for one Man, as the Pope does, to arrogate that to himself
which exceeds all humane abilities; namely, The Power of governing the whole
Universe. Whosoever shall perpend these writings of Mr. Calvin's, I say, shall find
that he was very far from maintaining the Unlawfulness of Prelacy. Nay, farther
yet, I challenge my Presbyterian Brethren, upon their ingenuity to tell me,
weither it was not a good many years after 1560. that Beza himself (the true
founder of their Sect) condemned Prelacy, if he did condemn it.

I say, if he did maintain the Necessity of Parity, and condemned Prelacy; For
however he may seem, upon several occasions, not only to give the preference to
Presbyterian Government, and represent it as the most eligible, But to
endeavor to found it on Scripture; And represent Episcopacy as an humane
invention, yet I have not observed that, any where, (...) calls it absolutely
or simply Unlawful. On the contrary, he says in express terms, Humanus
Episcopatus tolerabilis quidem esset, Modo veteres puri Canones, Impediendae
Oligarchiae constituti, in usum revocarentur. Beza in Resp. ad 1 Quaest. a Dom.
Glam. propositam.
That it is Tolerable when it is duly Bounded; when the pure Canons of the
Ancient Church are kept in vigor to keep it within its proper Limits.

Sure I am, he was not for separating from a Church (as our modern
Presbyterians are) upon the account of its Governments being Episcopal, as
might be made appear fully from his Letters; so that whatever greater Degrees
of Dislike to Episcopacy he may have discovered, beyond his Predecessor Mr.
Calvin, yet it is not unreasonable to think, that his great aim was no more,
than to justify the Constitution of the Church, he lived in; and recommend it
as a pattern to other Churches.

The Scope of this whole Consideration is this, That if what I have asserted is
true; if there was no such Controversy agitated, all the time our Church was a
Reforming, nor for a good many years after; Then we have one fair Presumption,
that our Reformers were not Presbyterians: It is not likely that they were for
the Indispensibility of Parity, that being the side of a Question, which, in
these times, was not begun to be tossed. And this Presumption will appear, yet,
more ponderous, if

II. It be considered, that we have no reason to believe, that our Reformers
had any peculiar Motives, or Occasions, for adverting to the pretended Evils of
Prelacy; or any peculiar interests to determine them for Parity, beyond other
Churches; or that they were more sharp-sighted to espy faults in Prelacy, or
had opportunities or inclinations to search more diligently, or enquire more
narrowly, into these matters than other Reformers. The truth is

The Controversies about Doctrine and Worship, were the great ones which took
up the thoughts of our Reformers, and employed their most serious Applications.
This is obvious to any who considers the accounts we have of them; so very
obvious, that G. R. himself fairly confesses it in his First Vind. ad Quest. 1.
where he tells us, That the Errors and Idolatry of that way (meaning Popery)
were so gross, and of such immediate hazard to the Souls of People, That it is
no wonder that our Reformers minded these First and Mainly, and thought it a
great step to get these Removed; so that they took some more time to consult
about the Reforming of the Government of the Church. From which, it is plain, he
confesses, the Reformation of the Churches Government was not the subject of
their Main Thinking; which indeed is very true* and cannot but appear to be so,
to any who considers what a Lame Scheme was then dressed up by them. But however
this was, it is enough to my present purpose, That our Reformers were more
employed in reforming the Doctrine and Worship, than in thinking about Church
Governments. From which, together with the former presumption, which was, that
our present Controversies were not begun to be agitated in these times, one of
two things must follow unavoidably, viz. either 1. That if they were for the
Divine and indispensible Right of Parity, it is no great matter; their Authority
is not much to be valued in a Question about which they had thought so Little;
Or 2. That it is to be presumed, they were not for the Divine Right of Parity,
That being the side of a Question, which was not then agitated in any
Protestant Church, and as Little in Scotland, as any. To be ingenuous, I think
both inferences good, tho it is only the Last I am concerned for at present. But
this is not all, For

III. So far as my opportunities would allow me, I have had a special eye on
all our Reformers, as I found them in our Histories. I have noticed their
sentiments about Church Government as carefully as I could; And I have not
found so much as one amongst them, who has either directly or indirectly,
asserted the Divine and Unalterable Right of Parity.

By our Reformers, here, I mean such as were either 1. Martyrs, or 2.
Confessors for the Reformed Religion, before it had the countenance of Civil
Authority, or 3. Such as lived when it was publicly established, and had a
hand in bringing it to that perfection. Such, I think, and such only, deserved
the Name of our Reformers: And, here, again I dare be bold to challenge my
Presbyterian Brethren, to adduce clear and plain proof that so much as any one
man of the whole Number of our Reformers, was of the present principles of the
party.

Some of them, indeed, seem to have laid no great stress on Holy Orders, and to
have been of opinion, That personal Gifts and Graces were a sufficient Call to
any man to preach the Gospel; and undertake the pastoral Office. Thus that
excellent person Mr. George Wishart, who, in most things, seems to have juster
notions of the Gospel Spirit, than most of our other Reformers, when, at his
Trial, he was charged with this Article, That every man was a Priest, and that
the Pope had no more power than another man, answered to this purpose, That St.
John says of all Christians, He has made us Kings and Priests. And St. Peter,
He has made us a Kingly Priesthood. That, therefore, any man skilled in the
Word of God, and true Faith of Christ, had power given him of God; But he that
was unlearned, and not exercised in the word of God, nor constant in the Faith,
whatever his state or order was, had no power to bind, or to loose, seeing he
wanted the word of God, which is the Instrument of binding and loosing. Kn. 64.
And

It Is probable, This was a prevailing opinion in those times, from the too
common practice of it. But has this any relation to the Divine Right of
Parity? Does it not strick equally against both Orders, that of Presbyters, as
well as that of Bishops? Is it not plainly to set up the Ius Laicorum
Sacerdotale in opposition to both? And who can say but this Opinion might have
been in a Breast, which entertained no scruples about the Lawfulness of
Episcopacy? No doubt it might; and no doubt it was, actually, so with this same
holy Martyr: For, he was not only willing that the then Bishops, tho Popish,
should be his Judges; He not only gave them still their Titles, and paid them
all the Respect that was Due to their Order and Character (homages infinitely
scandalous with our modern Presbyterians) as is to be observed through all the
steps of his Trial: But in his last Exhortation to the People, at the very
Stake, he bespake them thus; Kn. 70.
I beseech you Brethren and Sisters, to exhort your Prelates to the Learning of
the Word of God; that they may be ashamed to do evil, and learn to do good; and
if they will not convert themselves from their wicked Errors, there shall
hastily come upon them, the wrath of God which they shall not eschew.

Here you see the Dying Martyr was earnest, that the Popish Prelates might quit
their Errors, not their Prelations. What is there here that looks like a
Divine-Right-of-Parity-man? Indeed he was none of that Principle: He had had
his Principles from England, as we shall find hereafter. Only one thing more
about him, here; He was not for Club law Reformations: He was neither for
violent Possessions of Churches, not for propagating the Cause by Rabbles, if
we may belie^^ Knox's accounts of him.

Others, again, of our Reformers, Declaimed loudly against the Bishops of these
times, and condemned them severely, and perhaps too deservedly: But what is
this to the Order? Does every man condemn the Office, who condemns this or that
Officer? If so, then, sure, the Order of Presbyters was as bad as the Order of
Bishops, in the judgment of our Reformers; For instance, hear Walter Milne in
his Exhortation to the People, at his Martyrdom: Therefore as ye would Spot.
escape Eternal Death, be no more seduced with the Lies of (whom? of Bishops
only? No, but of the whole collection of) the Priests, Abbots, Monks, Friars,
Priors, Bishops, and the rest of the Sect of Antichrist. But it is needless to
adduce the Testimonies of private persons: we have the public Deeds of the
Protestants of these times, very clear to this purpose. Thus,

They directed a Declaration of their minds to the Popish Clergy, under this
Title, To the Generation of Antichrist, the pestilent Prelates and their
Shavelings within Scotland, etc. Kn. 146.
And were not Presbyters of the number of these Shavelings? And what can be
more part to this purpose than the Supplication which was presented by our
Reformers to the Parliament, Anno 1560? There they tell the Estates, That they
cannot cease to crave of their Honors, the Redress of such Enormities, as
manifestly are, and of a long time have been committed by the Place-holders of
the Ministry, and others of the Clergy -- They offer evidently to prove, that,
in all the Rabble of the Clergy, there is not one Lawful Minister -- And
therefore they crave, that they may be decerned unworthy of Honor, Authority,
Charge, or Care, in the Church of God, etc. Kn. 260.
Whosoever pleases may see more of their public Representations, to this effect,
in Knox's History. p. 135* and 143.
Now, what can be more clear than that all this work was against Presbyters, as
much as against Bishops? and by consequence, against Both Offices, or against
neither? as, indeed, it was against neither, as I shall afterward demonstrate
from this same Petition. In short, nothing can be more evident to ane attentive
Reader, than that in all these Efforts of the Zeal of our Reformers, against
the Popish Bishops, it was only the Popery, and, not at all, the Prelacy, that
was aimed at. They never condemned Bishops as Bishops, but only as Popish
Bishops.

I have insisted the more largely on these things, because, I know, People are
apt to mistake in this matter, who do not sufficiently attend to the Dialect of
these times; Especially when they read the History which is commonly called
John Knox's. I return now to my purpose, and repeat my assertion, viz. That our
Presbyterian Brethren cannot adduce so much as one of our Martyrs, our
Confessors, or those who had any remarkable hand in the Establishment of our
Reformation, in the year 1560, who was of the Modern Presbyterian Principles.

Three Authors have indeed attempted it; The Author of the Pamphlet entitled,
The Course of Conformity; Mr. Calderwood, and Mr. Petrie.

The Author of the Course of Conformity in his 4 th Chap. reckons up a full
Dozen of such as (he says) gave Evident and full Testimony against Bishoprie,
as he calls it. But he has not recorded the Testimony of any One, except Knox.

All the rest he proves to have been enemies to Prelacy, by this one Argument:
They preached zealously against Popery, And Bishoprie is one of the greatest
Errors and Corruptions of that. He neither offers at proving his Subsumption,
nor at adducing any other Topic: And has he not proven the point
demonstratively? Besides, some of his Dozen were not heard of till several
years after the Reformation, and so, cannot be brought in Bar against my
Challenge.

Further, He has had the ill Luck to name such for the half of his Dozen, as
would have laughed heartily to have heard themselves cited as Patrons of the
Divine Right of Parity: Particularly, Mr. Willock, who lived and died
Superintendent of Glasgow; Mr. Pont, who died Bishop of Cathnes; Mr. Row, who
was one of the Three, who stood for the Lawfulness of Episcopacy, when it was
first called in question, at the Assembly in August 1575; Spot. 275. Called. 69.
Mr. Craig, whom Calderwood himself censures severely for his forwardness to
have the Brethren subscrive, That they should give obedience to their
Ordinary's; and charges with making bitter invectives against the sincerer
sort, as he calls the Non-Subscribers. Called. 167. and 187.
I may add Mr. Knox, as shall be made appear, by and by. But I have taken but
too much notice of The Course of Conformity, which is, truly, one of the
weakest Pamphlets was ever seen in print: And if that part of it which is
against Episcopacy was written by Mr. James Melvil, as Calderwood affirms,
Called. 536.
It is a Demonstration, That whatever his Zeal was against Prelacy, it was not
according to much Knowledge.

Mr. Petrie mentions only two of our Reformers, as Divine Right-of Parity Men:
The Earl of Murray, who was Regent, and Mr. Knox: Calderwood insists on Knox,
but does not mention Murray.

Petries Evidence about Murray, Pet. 366.
is, That he has read of him, that by his Letter, he did inform Queen
Elizabeth of the Honor and Happiness that would attend her Crown and State,
upon the Establishment of Christ's Government; And of the profitable Uses
whereunto the Rich Benefices of Bishops might be applied. But I. He tells not
in what Author he read this; And none who knows Mr. Petries Bias, will think
it unreasonable to require some other thing to rely on, than his own Bare
Authority. 2. If we should rest on his Authority, and allow that Murray wrote
so, because Mr. Petrie said it, yet how will it follow, that his Lordship was
for the Divine Right of Parity? Might not he have been against the Temporal
Dignities, and the rich Benefices of the English Bishops, without being against
Prelacy? How many have been so? Indeed 3. There is all the Reason in the world
to believe, That if Murray did write so to the English Queen, this was all he
aimed at: For, had he been for the Divine Right of Parity, would he ever have
so much countenanced Imparity in the Church of Scotland? Was not he one of the
Subscribers of the First Book of Discipline? Kn. 283. Spot. 175.
wherein Imparity was so formally established? Was not he Regent in December
1567? And did not he, then, give the Royal Assent to some Acts of Parliament,
made clearly in favor of Imparity? Or did he extend the Royal Assent to these
Acts in Despite of his Conscience?

It Is true, indeed, Time has been, when some Men have had such Ductile
Consciences, that picq't, the one year, for not having so much favor at Court,
as they thought they deserved, they could boldly stand up in Parliaments
against iniquous Laws, and tell their fellow Members, That such Laws reflected
on the Justice of the Nation, and what not? And yet, the next year, when the
Court smiled on them, and gave them Preferments and Pensions to satisfy their
Ambition, or their Avarice, they could retract all their former Niceness, so
much, that if they had got the management of the Royal Assent, they would have
made no scruple to have Applied it for the Ratification, Approbation, and
perpetual Confirmation of the same Laws, in their whole Heads, Articles and
Clauses, which seemed, to themselves, so scandalous and wicked: But the Earl of
Murray, while Regent, had no such temptations: I believe he had no such
yielding Conscience; if he had, I don't think his Authority was much to be
valued. Once more, I think it is very strange that he should have been for the
Divine Right of Parity, and yet should never have spoken so much out,
considering his occasions, except in his private Letters to Queen Eliz.

The only person now to be considered is John Knox. He was certainly a prime
instrument in the Advancement of our Reformation: His Authority was great, and
his Sentiments were very influential; And it is not to be denied, but it is of
some weight in the present question, to know what was his judgment. I shall
therefore endeavor to account for his principles a little more fully; and ^
shall do it by these steps. 1. I shall show the insufficiency of the arguments
that are adduced, by our Brethren, to prove him Presbyterian. 2. I shall adduce
the Arguments which incline me to think he was not.

The great Argument insisted on by the Author of the Course of Conformity, and
Mr. Petrie, Course of Conform. p. 32. Pet. 375.
is taken from a Letter of Knox's, directed to the General Assembly, holden at
Stirling, in August 1571. The words are these. Unfaithful and Traitors to the
Flocks shall ye be, before the Lord Jesus, if that, with your consent, directly
or indirectly, ye suffer unworthy men to be thrust in within the Ministry of
the Kirk, under what pretense that ever it be: Remember the Judge before whom
ye must make an Account, and resist that TYRANNY as ye would avoid Hell fire:
So the Author of the Course of Conformity, without the least attempt to let the
world see where the Argument lay. Mr. Petrie is indeed a little more discreet.
He tells us where it lies: John Knox in his Letter to the Assembly, by the word
Tyranny means Episcopacy: So he, but without any fuller deduction. And is not
this a Demonstration, that Knox was Presbyterian? And yet, after all this, it
is not possible to make more of the Letter, when it is narrowly considered
than, That Knox deemed it a pernicious and Tyrannical thing, for any person or
persons whatsoever to thrust unworthy men into the Ministry of the Church; and
Ministers who would make Conscience of their Calling and Trust, must resist
such encroachments with all possible concern and courage. No man, I say, can
make more of the Letter: And who doubts but Mr. Knox was so far in the right?
But then, let any man who looks not through Mr. Petries Spectacles, tell me
what this has to do with Parity or Imparity?

The next argument is insisted on both by Petrie and Calderwood: Pet. 55. Called.
374.
It is, that Knox was at St. Andrews, in Feb. 1571/2, when Douglas was advanced
to that See; That he refused to inaugurate him; Nay that in the Audience of
many then present, he denounced Anathema to the Giver, and Anathema to the
Receiver; And if you ask Calderwoods Evidence for this, he tells you, He found
it in a certain Manuscript, than which what can be more Apodectick? To be
short, tho we had reason to give credit to Calderwood, and his uncertain
Certain Manuscript, and to believe that the Matter of Fact is true, and that
Knox said and did so; yet, by what consequences will it follow, that he was for
the Divine Right of Parity? To deal frankly, it is like enough that Knox said
so, and it is very probable he had reason to say so, in that instance: For at
that time dreadful Invasions were made upon the Patrimony of the Church; None
more deep in that Iniquity than the Earl of Morton, then Chancellor; by whose
influence Douglas was preferred to that Archbishopric: And so it is like enough
that Knox, who, all his life was singularly Zealous for the Rights of the
Church, upon suspicion, if not certain knowledge, of some dirty Bargain between
Morton and Douglas, expressed suitable Resentments. But that it was not from
any persuasion he had of the Unlawfulness of Prelacy is clear, even from what
Calderwood and Petrie themselves have recorded, within a page or two Called. 57.
Pet. 875.
For both tell us, that when the next Assembly continued Douglas in the
Rectorate of the University of St. Andrews, a Station he had been in before he
was raised to the Archbishopric; John Knox Regrated that so many Offices were
laid on one Old Man, which scarcely 20 of the best gifts were able to bear. For
(as Petrie adds) He was now Archbishop, Rector of the University, and Provost
of the New College of St. Andrews. From this, I say, it is plain, That Knox did
not resent Douglas his advancement, from any opinion of the Unlawfulness of
Episcopacy, for no such word, so much as once muttered by him; but from a
persuasion he had, that no one man was fit for such a Multitude of Offices. And
I shall readily grant, that Knox was not for Largo Diocesses (such as St.
Andrews was then), as we shall learn by and by, tho I am afraid, little to the
comfort of my Presbyterian Brethren. But I have not yet dispatched the whole
Argument; It Is said, He refused to inaugurate the Bishop: Be it so, but may not
the grounds I have laid down already, make it reasonable for him to have done
so, tho he had no quarrel with imparity? What ane Argument is this, John Knox,
a Presbyter, refused to consecrate a Bishop, Ergo he was a Presbyterian? This
is upon the supposition, that Calderwood and Mr. Petrie have told us true
Matter of Fact: And yet I must confess, I see not the probability of its being
true, That Knox was desired to inaugurate him: For how is it imaginable, that
he would be desired to perform that Office, when there was a Bishop and a
Superintendent at hand to do it, and who actually did it, as both Authors
acknowledge* But that is not all.

There is another Argument insisted on by both Authors, Called. 56. Pet. 375.
viz. That Mr. John Ruther-foord, Provost of the Old College alleged, that Mr.
Knox 's repining proceeded from Male-Contentment, And Knox purged himself, next
Sunday, saying I have refused a greater Bishopric, than ever it was, which I
might have had with the favor of greater men than he has his; I did and do
Repine for Discharge of my Conscience. Now, what more is there in all this
than, That Knox his Conscience would not have allowed him to take a Bishopric,
with so much prejudice to the Rights of the Church, for any man's feud or
favor, as he suspected Douglas had done in compliance with the Earl of Morton?
Can the world see any thing here that looked like the Divine Right of Parity? But

Calderwood has yet a more wonderful Argument Called. 57.
to prove Mr. Knox one of his party: Mr. Beza, forsooth, being informed by Mr.
Knox, as appears, of the Intention of the Court to introduce Bishops, wrote a
Letter to him, wherein he told him, That as Bishops brought in the Papacy, so
false Bishops, the Relics of Popery, would bring in Epicurism to the world,
and therefore prayed him, that Episcopacy might never be readmitted into
Scotland, etc. Petrie indeed mentions the same Letter, but he had not the
courage, it seems, to say, that it appeared to have been occasioned by a Letter
of Knox's to Beza, concerning the intentions of the Court to introduce
Episcopacy. Indeed no such thing appears from any sentence, phrase, or
syllable, in all Mr. Beza's Letter: How it came to appear to Mr. Calderwood,
whether by some certain or uncertain Manuscript I know not; but however it was,
make the supposition, That Knox did write so to Beza, where is the consequence
of the Argument? And if he wrote not (and it is impossible to make it appear
from Mr. Beza's Letter that he did) Why was Calderwood at such pains to give
the world a citation out of Beza's Letter against Episcopacy? was that a good
proof that Knox was Presbyterian, that Beza sent him such a Letter? The truth
is, if any thing can be collected from that Letter, concerning Knox's
sentiments, it seems rather, that he was for Prelacy. For Beza seems clearly to
import, that Knox needed to be cautioned against it: Sed and istud, M. Knox, te
caeterosque fratres velim meminisse, quod jam oculis pene ipsis obversatur,
sicut Episcopi papatum pepererunt, etc. Beza Epist. 79. page 315.
For thus he writes; One thing I would have you, my dear Knox, and your
Brethren to advert to, as being very obvious, it is, That as Bishops brought
forth the Papacy, etc. But if Knox needed this Commonitory, I think it is no
great Argument that he was Presbyterian, so much, at least, as Beza would have
had him. But to do Mr. Calderwood justice, he seems to have laid no great
stress on this Argument, and so I leave it. So much for the Arguments insisted
on to prove, that Mr. Knox was for Parity. I come now to the Arguments which
incline me to think he was not.

When we are enquiring after ones sentiments about a point in controversy, It
is not reasonable to build much on far fetched consequences; or refine upon
incidental sayings, which may be, very frequently, the Results of Negligence or
Inadvertency: It is not proper to fasten on indirect propositions, or snatch at
this or that indeliberated phrase or expression, which might have dropped
unwarily from his tongue or pen. Following such measures, we may easily strain
men's words, beyond their meaning; and make them speak Nonsense, or innumerable
Contradictions when we have a mind for it. The solid measure is to weigh a man's
deliberate and serious thoughts, if, any where, he has expressed them; To
consider his Reasonings, when he treated directly on the controverted Subjects,
or any thing that stands so nearly related to it, that one cannot readily
discourse the one, without reflecting on the other; To trace him through his
life, if the controverted point is Relative to Practice, and try what was his
Behavior, when he had occasion to declare his mind concerning the matter in
question. This, as I take it, is the true Rule. Now allowing this Rule to take
place, I am very much mistaken if Knox shall be found to have been for the
Divine Institution of Parity, and the Unlawfulness of Prelacy.

Had he been so persuaded, how seasonable had it been for him to have spoken
out so much, when he was brought before King Edwards Council? Life of Knox.
Called. p. 3.
The question was then put to him, Whether he thought that no Christian might
serve in the Ecclesiastical Ministration, according to the Rites and Laws of
the Realm of England? Here was a proper opportunity for him to have declared
himself against Prelacy, if he had been really against it. How natural had it
been for a sincere Parity man, on that occasion, to have told that Council,
That no Christian could, the^ serve with a safe Conscience, as a Pastor of the
Church of England, because according to the Laws of that Realm, he behoved to
serve as a Member of ane Unlawful Hierarchy? yet he answered nothing, but that
No Minister in England had Authority to separate the Lepers from the whole,
which was a Chief Part of his Office: Plainly founding all the Unlawfulness of
being a Pastor of the Church of England, not on the Unlawfulness of the
Hierarchy, which he spoke nor one word about, but on the Kings. Retaining, in
his own hands, the Chief Power of Ecclesiastical Discipline, as, it is known,
he did.

When was it more opportune for him to have expressed these sentiments, if he
had had them, than when he was at Frankfort? Yet not one word of the Divine
Right of Parity, or the Unlawfulness of Prelacy in all these controversies
Knox* Life. Kn. Hist. 102. Heyl. Hist: Ref. Burn. hist. Ref. Called. 3. Calv. Ep.
Still. Unreasonableness of Separation. part 1. Sect. 3.
He was warm enough then, and eager enough, to have found faults in the English
Constitution; yet he never charged her with the horrid guilt of Prelacy: Not so
much as one word of that in any Account I have seen of these Troubles.

How suitable had it been for him to have declared himself in this matter, in
his Appelation from the cruel, and most unjust sentence, pronounced against
him, by the false Bishops and Clergy of Scotland; as he calls them, published
by himself Anno 1558? yet, in all that Appellation, not one syllable to this
purpose: On the contrary, he plainly supposes the Lawfulness of the Episcopal
Office; all along, throughout it: He appeals to a Lawful General Council;
page 2^
Such a Council, as the most Ancient Laws and Canons do approve: And who knows
not that the most Ancient Laws and Canons made Bishops the Chief, if not the
only Members of such Councils? He says page 32.
if the Popish Clergy, his Adversaries, are for it. He is content that Matters
in Controversy between him and them, be determined by the Testimonies and
Authorities of Doctors and Councils. Three things being granted him, whereof
these are two, 1. That the most Ancient Councils, nearest to the Primitive
Church, in which the Learned and Godly Fathers examined all matters by Gods
word, may be holden of most Authority. 2. That no Determinations of Councils,
nor Men, be admitted against the plain verity of Gods word, nor against the
Determinations of the four chief Councils. Would he, if he had been
Presbyterian, have agreed so frankly to have stood by the Determination of
these 4 Chief Councils? Could he have expected, they would have favored the
Divine Right of Presbyterian Parity? Will any Scottish Presbyterian, now adays,
stand to the Decision of these 4 Councils? Farther, In that same Appelation, p.
40.
he requires of the Nobility, that the Bishops be compelled to make answer for
the neglecting their Office; which plainly supposes the Lawfulness of the
Office, and charges Guilt only on the Officers.

When had it been more seasonable, than in his Admonition to the Commonalty of
Scotland, published also Anno 1558? His great design, in it, was to excite them
to a Reformation, by loading the Papistical Clergy with every thing that was
abominable: Yet not a Syllable of it here, neither; nothing but a farther and a
clearer Supposition of the Lawfulness of Prelacy. You may (says he p. 40.
in a peaceable manner, without Sedition, withhold the fruits and profits,
which your false Bishops and Clergy, most unjustly receive of you, until such
time, as they shall faithfully do their Charge and Duties, which is, To preach
unto you Christ Jesus truly; Rightly to minister the Sacraments, according to
his Institution; And so to watch for your Souls as is commanded by Christ, etc.
If this supposes not the Innocence of the Episcopal Office in it self, I know
not what can.

Had he been for the Divine Right of Parity, how unfaithful had he been in his
Faithful Admonition to the true Professors of the Gospel of Christ within the
Kingdom of England, written Anno 1554? His great work there, was to ennumerate
the Causes, which, in Gods righteous judgment, brought Queen Mary's Persecution
on them. But he quite forgot to name the Sin of Prelacy, as one. Assuredly he
had not done so, had he been of the same sentiments with our Famous General
Assembly 1690. See Act for a National Fast.
How unfaithfully was it done of him, I say, thus to conceal one of the most
Crimson Guilts of the Nation? But this is not the worst of it: In that same
Admonition he has a most scandalous Expression; sure he was not then
sufficiently purged of Popish Corruption. God gave (says he) such strength to
that REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, Thomas Cranmer, to cut the Knots of Devilish
Sophistry, etc. p. 51.
To call an Archbishop a Reverend Father in God, what was it else, but the
plain Language of the Beast? How Rankly did it smell of the Whore?

How seasonable had it been, in his Letter to the Queen Regent of Scotland,
written, Anno 1556, and published by himself, with additions, Anno 1558? He
talked very freely about the Popish Bishops in it; but never a Tittle of the
Unlawfulness of the Office. It is plain from that Letter he never dreamed of
the Doughty Argument, so much insisted on, since, against Prelacy, viz. That it
is a Branch of Popery, and Bishops are Limbs of Antichrist. For having stated
it as one of the Popish Arguments, p. 90.
That their Religion was ancient, and it was not possible, that that Religion
could be false, which, so long time, so many Councils, and so great a Multitude
of Men had authorized and confirmed; He gives his answer thus: If Antiquity of
time shall be considered in such Cases, Then shall not only the Idolatry of the
Gentiles, but also the False Religion of Mahomet be preferred to the Papistry;
For both the one, and the other, is more ancient than is the Papistical
Religion; Yea Mahomet had Established his Alcoran before any Pope of Rome was
crowned with a Triple Crown, etc. Can any man think, John Knox was so very
unlearned as to imagine, that Episcopacy was not much older than Mahomet? or
knowing it to be older, that yet he could have been so Ridiculous, as to have
thought it a Relict of Popery, which he himself affirmed to be younger than
Mahometism? whosoever pleases may see more of his sentiment about the Novelty of
Popery in his conference with Queen Mary, recorded in his History Kn. 318.
. One other Testimony to this purpose I cannot forbear to transcribe; All that
know any thing of the History of our Reformation, must be presumed to know,
That Superintendency was Erected by Mr. Knox's his special advice and counsel.
That it was in its very height, Anno 1566, is as indubitable: Now, we are told
that Knox wrote the 4 th Book of his History, that year. Hear him, therefore,
in his Introduction to it. Kn. 308. Called. 401
We can speak the Truth, whomsoever we offend; There is no Realm that has the
Sacraments in like Purity: For all others, how sincere that ever the Doctrine
be, that by some is taught, Retain in their Churches, and in the Ministers
thereof, some Footsteps of Antichrist and Dregs of Popery. But we (all Praise
to God alone) have Nothing within our Churches that ever flowed from that Man
of Sin. Let any man judge, now if Mr. Knox looked upon imparity as a Dreg of
Popery.

Thus we have found Knox, when he had the fairest occasions, the strongest
temptations, the most awakening calls, when it was most seasonable for him, to
have declared for the Divine Right of Parity, and the Unlawfulness of Prelacy,
still silent in the matter; or rather, on all occasions, proceeding on
suppositions, and reasoning from principles fairly allowing the Lawfulness of
Prelacy. But is there no more to be said? Yes. More with a witness.

In his Exhortation to England for the speedy Embracing of Christ's Gospel,
dated from Geneva, January 12, Ann. 1559. Amongst many other Reformations, He
is for Reforming their Bishoprics indeed: But how? By abolishing them? Nothing
like it: How then? Take it in his own words, p 110.
Let no man be charged in preaching of Christ Jesus above that a man may do: I
mean, That your Bishoprics be so Divided, that of every one (as they are n^w
for the most part) may be made ten: And so in every City and Great Town there
may be placed, a Godly Learned Man, with so many joined with him, for preaching
and instruction, as shall be thought sufficient for the Bounds committed to
their Charge. So he: And let our Parity-men, if they can, give this Testimony a
Gloss favorable to their side of the Question, without destroying the text:
The Truth is, this Testimony is so very nicking, that I am apt to apprehend, it
might have been for its sake, That this whole Tractate was left out of the
Folio-Edition of Knox's Works, printed at London, Anno 1641. However, the
Inquisition, it seems, has not been so strict at Edinburgh; for, there it
escaped the Index Expurgatorius. And yet tho it had not, the Good Cause had not
been one whit the Securer. For Knox's practice would have sufficiently
determined the matter: For,

Did not he compile the First Book of Discipline? Spot. 1^4.
And is not Imparity fairly Established there? Did not he write and bear the
Letter sent by the Superintendents, Ministers and Commissioners of the Church
within the Realm of Scotland, Spot. 198. Per. 348. Called. 41. Kn. 445.
to their Brethren, the Bishops and Pastors in England, Anno 1566? Did not he,
in that same Title of that same Letter acknowledge, that these Brethren,
Bishops and Pastors of England had renounced the Roman Antichrist, and
professed the Lord Jesus in sincerity? And does not the Letter all along
allow of the Episcopal Power and Authority of these English Bishops? Did not he
publicly and solemnly admit Mr. John Spotswood to the Superintendency of
Lothian, Anno 1561? K^ 289. Old Liturgy.
Did not he Concur, at the Coronation of King James the Sixth, with a Bishop
and two Superintendents, Anno 1567? Spot. 211.
Was not he, some time, a Commissioner for Visitation, as they were then
called, i. e. a Temporary Bishop? And did not he, then, Act in a Degree of
Superiority above the Rest of his Brethren, within the bounds of his
Commission? Did not he sit, and vote, and concur in many General Assemblies,
where Acts were made for performing Canonical Obedience to Superintendents? In
fine, does not Spotswood tell us Spot. 266.
That he was far from the Dotages, wherein some, that would have been thought
his followers, did afterward fall? That never man was more obedient to Church
Authority than be? That he was always urging the Obedience of Ministers to
their Superintendents; for which he caused diverse Acts to be made in the
Assemblies of the Church? And, That he showed himself severe to the
Transgressors?

I have insisted the longer on this instance of Knox, because he made a
Singular Figure amongst our Reformers. Besides, having so fully evinced that he
(whom our Brethren value so much) was no Divine-Right-of-Parity-Man; I think it
may readily pass for credible, that neither were any of the rest of our
Reformers of that opinion. And now, to bring home all this to my main purpose,
if not so much as one of our Reformers, no not Knox himself, was for the Divine
Right of Parity, I think it may amount to an undeniable evidence, at least, to
a strong Presumption, That they were not of the present Presbyterian
Principles, and all this will appear still farther unquestionable, when it is
considered in the

IV. place, How much reason there is to believe, That our Reformers proceeded
generally on the same principles with the Reformers of England; where the
Government of the Church, by imparity, was continued, without the least
opposition.

This is a Consideration, which, I am afraid, may not relish well with the
Inclinations of my Presbyterian Brethren; yet, withal, may be of considerable
weight with unprejudiced people; and bring light to several things about our
Reformation, which, even those who have read our Histories and Monuments, may
have passed over, inadvertently; And therefore I shall take leave to insist
upon it somewhat fully: And I shall proceed by these steps.

1. I shall endeavor to represent how, our Reformation, under God, was
principally Cherished and Encouraged by English influences. 2. I shall
endeavor to represent how, in Correspondence to these Influences, our
Reformers were generally of the same mind, with the Church of England, in
several momentous instances relating to Constitution and Communion, the
Government and Polity of the Church, wherein our present Presbyterian
Principles stand in direct opposition and contradiction to her. If I can make
these two things appear, I think, I shall make a Considerable Advance toward
the Determination of the Second Enquiry.
1. I say, our Reformation, under God, was Cherished and Encouraged,
principally, by English influences. That Scotland, barring foreign influences,
is Naturally disposed for receiving English impressions, cannot but be obvious
to common sense. We not only live in the same Island, separated from all other
Neighborhood; we not only breath the same air, and speak the same language,
and observe the same customs, and have all the opportunities of Reciprocating
all the Offices, which can result from daily Commerces, and familiar
acquaintances, and easy Correspondences, and Matrimonial Conjunctions, and
innumerable other such Endearing Relations, and Allectives to Mutual Kindness;
but also, Scotland is the lesser, England the larger; Scotland the more barren,
England the more fertile; Scotland the poorer, England the richer; Scotland the
more penurious of people, England the more populous; Scotland every way the
weaker, England every way the stronger Kingdom; and, by consequence, Scotland
every way the more apt to receive, and England every way the more apt to give
impressions. And Nature, in this, is fully justified by Experience: For what
Scottish man knows not, that, when the late Revolution was a carrying on, as
England cast the Copy to Scotland, so it was used and pressed, as one of the most
popular and influential Topics to persuade the Scots to follow the Copy, That
England had done it; and why should Scotland follow a separate Course? Was not
England a powerful and a wise Nation? what Defense could Scotland make for it
self, if England should invade it? And how was it to be imagined, that England
would not invade Scotland, if Scotland did not follow England's Measures? So
that, to stand by K. I. when England had rejected him, what was it else, than
to expose the Nation to unavoidable Ruin? Who knows not, I say, that this was
one of the most pressed, because one of the most plausible Arguments, in the
beginning of the late Revolution? And who sees not that the Force of the
Argument lay in Scotland's obnoxiousness to England's impressions? Let no true
hearted Scottish man imagine, It Is in my thought, to dishonor my Native
Country: I have said no more than all the world knows to be true, and what
cannot be denied. If we could contend with them for Virtue, and Integrity; for
Honor and Gallantry; for Civility and Loyalty; for Glories that are truly
manly; 'Twere for the Credit of our Nation; And it were our own fault if we
were inferior to them, in such Competitions: But it is Arrant Vanity to contend
with them for Wealth, or Strength, or Multitude. Now, to bring this home to my
purpose.

God had so ordered, in his wife Providence, that, for many Ages before,
Scotland had not been so free of foreign influence, as a little before, and all
the time, our Church was a reforming: The French were the only foreign
Influences which were wont to find Entertainment in Scotland: And, in those
times, the French had treated us very basely and dishonourably. I shall deduce
the matter with all convenient brevity.

King Henry the Eighth of England had resolved upon a War with France, Anno
1512. The French King perceiving this, applied to James the Fourth of Scotland,
his old Confederate, to engage him in ane Alliance against Henry. His
Application was successful: a private League was made betwixt them in November
that year. Lesl. 343. Herb. 27.
Two of the Articles were, That if England should invade Scotland, France
should wage War with all its might, against England; Scotland should do the
like, if England invaded France. And neither of the two should take Truce with
England, without the other gave his Consent, and were comprehended therein, if
he pleased.

In pursuance of this League, James raised a potent Army, invaded England,
incurred the Popes Displeasure, to the very Sentence of Excommunication, Herb.
29.
fought the fatal Battle of Flowdon, Sept. 9. 1513, Lesl. 349. Herb. 44.
Lost his Life, and the Flower of all the Scottish Nobility and Gentry, and
left behind him, James the Fifth, ane Infant, exposed, with his whole State, to
the not very tender Mercies of King Henry. Here was serving the French
interests with a witness. Well!

How did Lewis requite this? The next year, he patcht up a Peace with Henry,
Pax pacta est, quae res non tantam tranquillitatem Regno Galliae peperit,
quantam Regi Notam Inussit, quod, in illa percutienda, Scotorum, qui illlus
Causa, Anglis, Bellum intulerunt, nulla omnino facta fuerit mentio. Lesl. 355.
without comprehending Scotland, without Respect to his Faith and Promise,
without Pity to those who were reduced to such Extremities on his account: If
this was not, what can be called, Disobliging? But this was not all.

The Scots, reduced to these difficulties, and sensible, that it was not
possible for the Nation to subsist, under ane infant King, without a Regent,
became humble Suppliants to the French King, that he would send them John Duke
of Albany, then in the French Service; a Man of great Abilities, and next by
Blood to the Scottish Crown, that he might be their Governor, during their
Kings Minority; But Henry's Threats, for a long time, prevailed more with the
French King Herb. 50.
than Scotlands Necessities, or his Obligations to it; For Albany came not to
Scotland, till May 1515. Buch. 488.
so that, for near two years, through the French Coldness and Indifferency toward
Scottish affairs, the Kingdom had no settled Government.

The War brake out again betwixt France and England, Anno..... and a new Peace
was concluded Anno 1518. And Albany our Scottish Regent was present, in person,
when it was concluded; but the English Obstinacy, not to comprehend Scotland,
was more effectual with Francis the First (who had then got upon the Throne)
than all the Intercessions of Albany, or the Merits of our Nation. Lesl. 372.
Nay, if we may believe Herbert, It was one of the main Articles of that
Treaty, that Albany should not return to Scotland; Herb. 122.
Nor did he return, till October. 1521. Buch. 496.
And returning then, Henry reckoned it a Main Breach of Treaty, nay and plain
Perjury in Francis, that he gave way to it. Herb. ibid.
Thus were we treated, then, by France.

Let us now consider, if Henry was at any pains, all this while, to make ane
Interest in Scotland. And if we may believe the unanimous voice of our own
Historians, or my Lord Herbert in the History of his Life, Herb. 49, 59, 60,
65, 99. passim.
never was man more earnest for any thing, than he, in that pursuit, and he had
brave occasions for it: For not only were the Scots highly (and justly)
irritated by the degenerous and undervaluing slights France had put upon them,
(as I have just now made appear) But Henry had surprised them with ane
Unexpected and Unaccustomed Generosity, after the Battle of Flowdon. He had not
pursued his Victory, but had listened gently to their Addresses for Peace; and
told them that tho he might, yet he would not, take advantage of their
circumstances: Henricus, animo magno and vere Regio, respondit, sibi cum Scotis
pacatis, pacem, cum bellantibus, bellum fore. Buch. 485.
He would treat them frankly; if they were for Peace, so was he, if for War,
they should have it. A Response so full of true Honor and Gallantry, as could
not but work on their affections. Besides,

His Sister Margaret, the Queen of Scots, a Lady of rare Endowments, was all
along working to his hand, and making a Party for him. James the 4 th by his
Testament, before he went to Flowdon, had nominated her, Governess of the
Realm, during her Widowhood. This gave her once the principal hand in affairs.
It Is true, she was young and lively, and married within a year after the King's
Death, and so lost her Title to the Regency. But then she married the Earl of
Angus, the choice of all the Scottish Nobility, and one who was in great Repute
with all Ranks of People, Buch. 484, 489.
so that, however her Marriage annulled her Title, it did not so much weaken
her Interest, but that she had still a great Party in the Nation; So great,
That tho Albany was advanced to the Regency, she was for the most part able to
overbalance him in point of power and following. In short

Such was Henry's and his Sisters influence, That all the time Albany was
Regent, the Nation was divided into two Factions; The one French, headed by
Albany; the other English headed by the Queen Dowager; and hers was generally
the more prevalent; so much, that tho Albany was perhaps one of the bravest
Gentlemen that ever was honored with the Scottish Regency, he was never able
to prosecute, to purpose, any project, he undertook, for the French Service.
Thus,

Anno 1522. He raised ane Army to invade England; But with what success? Why?
The Scottish Nobility waited upon him to the Border indeed, but they would go
no further. They told him plainly, they would hazard lives and fortunes in
defense of their Country; but it was another thing to invade England. Buch.
487. Lesl. 386.
And Lesly plainly attributes all this Refractoriness in these Nobles to the
Queens influence. Regina etsi absens, hujus tamen consilli Nobilibus auctor
fuit. Lesl. 386. Albanius cum intellexerat Scotos Nobiles a bello gerendo
abhorrere, quod non Relp. suae utilitate sed Regis Franci voluntate, tanquam
susceptum illud putaverint, in Franciam ^ransmittit, etc. Lesl* 387.
Nay, it is evident from the same Lesly, that the Baseness and Ingratitude of
the French in the forementioned Treaties, was one of the principal Arguments
that moved them to such Backwardness: And Albany was sensible of it, and
therefore went to France, and told the French King so much, and asked a
swinging Army of Frenchmen, five thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot: with
such a force, he promised to Act something against England; but from the Scots,
by themselves, nothing was to be expected.

And this his absence was a new opportunity to Henry to play his Game in
Scotland. Indeed he neglected it not; he used all arts imaginable, further, to
advance his own, and weaken the French interest; he harassed the Borders,
without intermission, that, in the Miseries and Desolations of War, the Scots
might see the Beauties and Felicities of Peace, on the one hand; Hostis autem
Consilium eo spectabat ut feroces Scotorum animos, malis fractos ad paciscendum
secum cogeret. Buch. 499.
resolving, as it were, to Cudgel them into ane Accord, if no other thing could
do it: And on the other hand, he had his Emissaries and Instruments busy at
work, in the Heart of the Kingdom, and about the Helm of Affairs, Nec Segnius
etiam Scoti, factionis Gallis adversae laborabant ut perpetuum cum Anglo foedus
iniretur, Regina Principe. Buch. ibid.
employing all their Skill and Interest, all their Wit and Rhetoric, all their
Eloquence and Diligence, to persuade the Nation to a perpetual Amity with
England, the Queen being the Chief Actrix. Neither did this seem sufficient; He
sent Ambassadors, and wrote Letters, and represented things in their fairest
Colors, and made most charming Overtures, Si Scoti in animum Inducerent,
Soluto cum Gallis foedere, etc. Buch: ^b.
etc. If they would break the League with France, and enter into one with
England, the world should see, and they should find by Experience, that it was
not Humor, or Ambition, or Love of Greatness, that had moved him to treat them
so, but Love of Concord, and Concern for the Prosperity and Happiness of the
Nation; That he had but one only Child, a Daughter, Mary; Her he would give to
James in Marriage; hereby the English would become subject to the Scottish, not
the Scottish to the English Government; and a great deal more to this purpose.
Whosoever pleases may see this whole matter transcribed by Herbert Herb. 148, 149.
from Buchanan. I go on.

The French King was not at leisure, it seems, to afford Albany such
assistances as he required; so he was obliged to return without them. And
returning, found the French interest still weaker and weaker, and the English
stronger and stronger, as appears from his Success. For,

Having returned to Scotland in September 1523, Buch: 499.
He instantly gave out his Orders, That the whole force of the Kingdom should
meet in Douglas-dale, against the middle of October. He found Obedience so far,
indeed, that they met; but when he had marched them to Tweed, and they found,
he designed to invade England, they would not move one foot further, but
sounded, aloud, their old Carol. They knew by experience what was to be gained
by invading England: It was enough for for them that they were willing to
defend their own Country, etc. Buch. 501.


Here they stood, I mean, as to their Resolutions, not, their Ground; for they
left that, and instantly returned within their own Borders; so hastily, and
with such strong inclinations, it seems, to be at home, That, with great
difficulty, he got them kept together, some days, till he should fall on some
pretext, which might give a fair color to his Retreat, and cover it from
appearing, downright, dishonorable. It Is true his luck was so good that he
found it: But how? By the Art and Interest of the English Faction. Lesl. 390,
391. fuse.
Thus,

Queen Margaret, to wait her opportunities, had come to the Border, and lodged
not far from the Scottish Camp. The Earl of Surry commanded the English Army,
with whom she kept secret Correspondence; and it was concerted betwixt them, it
seems, that the English should by all means avoid Fighting, and she should be
employed as a Mediatress to bring matters to some honest accommodation. The
Plot succeeded; a Truce was readily patcht up, to the satisfaction, no doubt,
of both Parties. Albany had reason to be glad of it, for, he could make no
better of the Bargain; and 'twas with much difficulty he brought his Expedition
to so honorable ane issue. And it is plain, the English Faction had reason to
be as glad, for they had gained two points: They had got Albany to understand
the temper of the Nation, and the weakness of the French interest: And they had
treated the Scots, who were so averse from Fighting, so discreetly, by shunning
all occasions of Engaging, and thereby showing that they were no Enemies to the
Scots, unless it was on the French account, that they could not have fallen on
a more successful politic for Gaining King Henry's great purpose, which was,
To disengage the Scots of the French, as much as he could: And the Success was
agreeable. For,

After that, Albany's Authority, and the French interests, decayed so sensibly,
and the English Faction managed their designs, so successfully, that, within a
few months, Albany was turned out of his Regency; and the young King (then but
twelve years of age) was persuaded to take in his own hands, the Government. It
was the English Faction, I say, that wrought this Revolution, as is evident
from the whole thread of the History: And Lesly Lesl. 393. Hinc intellexit
Gubernator se apud quosdam Nob^les non esse gratiosum, qui Regis pueri
imperitiam, suo excusso imperio, volebant subire, atque nullum bellum (quod,
Franci causa, acriter urgebar Albanius) cum Anglis justum esse putabant. Lesl.
393:
tells us plainly, that Albany was sensible of it, and was persuaded, it was in
vain to endeavor any more, to gain them to the French side, and therefore he
took his leave and departed the Country. This was in the year 1524.

The King, so young, all know, was not able to manage the Government by
himself; but stood in need of Counselors; They were English who had got him
thus Early to assume the Government in his own person: It Is obvious to collect,
therefore, they were English enough, who were his Counselors. And such they
were indeed, For, as Lesly has it, a Parliament was indicted to meet in
February thereafter, Ita tamen ne qu^d horum Consilio omnino flatueret vel
antiquaret Rex, quod Regina tanquam. Regni Princeps, antea, sua authoritate non
fixer^^ aut resixerit. Lesl. 397.
wherein, a Council was nominated for assisting the King in the Administration
of the Government, but so as that the Queen was to have the Sovereignty, so far
as nothing was to be done without her special approbation and allowance.

Albany, the great Opposer of his interests in Scotland, thus dispatched, King
Henry's whole Soul was divided betwixt Gladness and Kindness: He was Glad,
almost to excess, that he had got rid of such ane eyesore. Inc^edibili quadam
laetitia elatus. Lesl. 394.
He was kind to the highest degree, to his Sister, and Nephew, and the Scottish
Nobility: He dispatched two Ambassadors, with all Expedition, for Scotland, by
whom he offered to establish a Lasting Peace; and in the interim, agreed to a
Truce for a year, till a fond for a solid settlement might be maturely
considered. Lesl* ibid.
On the other hand

Our Queen (without doubt, with her Brothers fore-knowledg and allowance)
having now the Reins in her hands, sends three Ambassadors to England; The Earl
of Cassils, the Bishop of Dunkeld, and the Abbot of Cambuskeneth, to propose to
Henry, in the name of the Scottish Nation, that there might be a firm and
perpetual Amity established betwixt the two Crowns; and, to this great End, that
a Match might be agreed to, betwixt James and Mary. Henry entertained the
proposition with all imaginable shows of Satisfaction, but demanded two things,
That the Scots might break the League with France, and make one of that same
Nature with England; And, That James might be educated in England, till ripe
for Marriage. But the Scottish Ambassadors were not Plenipotentiaries enough
for adjusting these Matters: Cassils therefore comes home; a New Meeting of the
States is called; and Cassils is returned to England, with Commission to tell
Henry, That the Scottish Lords are content to Relinquish the French, on
Condition the Match with the Princess Mary were secured. See for all this Lesl.
394, 395. Herb. 163.
It Is true, nothing followed upon this Treaty but a Truce for three years; for
what reason I know not. But from the Deduction I have briefly made, it may
sufficiently appear how weak the French, and how strong the English interest
was then in Scotland; so very strong, as, clearly, to overcome, and, almost,
quite extirpate the other.

Well! did Francis nothing to recover the Scottish amity? Alas! at that time,
he had greater matters to employ his thoughts. He lost his Liberty at the
Battle of Pavia, Anno 1525, and became the King of Spain's Prisoner; and was
not Restored to his Freedom, till Henry interposed with a powerful Mediation:
For which, He entered into another League with Henry 1527, without minding the
Scots, Gillus studio, maxim and diligentia Angli, in libertatem, ex Hispanorum
manibus restitutus, foedus adeo amplum cum iis fecir ut multum Scotico foederi
derogaretur. Buch. 519.
or being concerned for their security. This was a third slight put upon the
Scots by the French, in their Treaties with England. It Is true indeed, Francis
did not enter into this League with Henry, overawed by his Threats, but
constrained by his Kindness and Good Offices, in his Liberation from his
Spanish Captivity: But it was all one to the Se^ts, for what reason it was, if
they were Deserted. It Is true indeed,

When James came to full age, he had strong inclinations for renewing the Old
Amity with France; and no wonder, considering how much he was managed by the
Clergy, who abhorred Henry, for shaking off the Popes Authority; and thought
themselves concerned, with all their Might, to guard against Henry's contagious
influences, as they deemed them. But however the King and Clergy were inclined,
it is evident, the Body of the Nation continued constant in their so frequently
provoked Coldness to the French interests; and in their good Affection toward
England, so much, that they would never thereafter, (at least all the time our
Reformation was a carrying on) follow either King or Regent to invade England.
Thus,

When James the Fifth, Anno 1542. was very earnest for it, the Nobility
generally declined it; and he was forced to dismiss them: And when, shortly
after that, Rex mirum in mod^m cupiebat praelio decernere, adversa Nobilitate;
a quibus id impetrare non poterat. Buch. 52o. L^sl. 435.
his Earnestness that way, it seems, increasing, he ordered ane Army to meet at
Carlaverock, intending therewith to enter England; so soon as Oliver Sinclare
was declared Chief Commander, and the Kings intentions were made known, all
threw away their Arms, and suffered themselves to be taken prisoners. Lesl.
437. Buch. 529.
And

When the Earl of Arran Regent, Anno..... went with a goodly Army to besiege
the Church of Coldingham, which the English, for the time had fortified, he was
forced to run for it, abruptly; fearing (as Buchanan says Buch. 544.
his friends pretended) lest his Army should betray him into the hands of the
English. And

Anno 1557, when the Queen Regent ( Mary of Lorrain) was most earnest to have
had England invaded, thereby to have made a Diversion, and eased France of the
English Force, which was assisting Philip the Second of Spain against Henry the
Second of France, the Nobility could by no means be gained to do it, as all our
Historians tell us. I could have insisted on this Deduction far more largely,
but I think, what I have said, may be sufficient for my purpose, which was to
show how much Scotland was disengaged of Foreign Influences, and by
consequence, how much it was disposed to receive English impressions from the
very Dawning of our Reformation, till its Legal Establishment 1560.

Let us next try, if according to these Dispositions, the English influences
were Communicated; and made suitable impressions. And, I think, in the

1st place, No man can reasonably doubt but that it is fairly credible, they
did: For no man can deny that the Reformation made a considerable figure in
England, more early, than it did in Scotland: When Light was thus arising in
the Isle, it was natural for it to overspread both Nations: And it was as
Natural, that the more and sooner Enlightened Nation should be the fountain of
Communication; that is, in plain terms, that Scotland should derive it, under
God, from England; Especially considering, how, at that time, they were
mutually disposed toward one another. Indeed

2. It Is certain, Books deserve to be reckoned amongst the prime Vehicles of
such Light as we are now considering; and it is as certain, That the first Books
which enlightened Scotland were brought from England. Tindal translated the New
Testament into English, Anno 1531. And Copies of it were dispersed here in
considerable plenty; and other useful Books were then written also in the
Vulgar Language, which was common to both Nations; which coming from England,
had great success in Scotland, as is evident even from Knox's History: Kn. 38.
But this is not all. The truth of all this will appear more fully, if,

3. We consider, That King Henry had no sooner begun his Reformation (such as
it was) in England, than, he Endeavored to transmit it into Scotland. He shook
off the Popes Supremacy, Anno 1534. And he sent the Bishop of St. David's to his
Nephew James of Scotland, Anno 1535. Buch 520. Spot. 70.
with Books written in English, containing the substance of Christian Religion;
Earnestly desiring him to read them, and join with him in carrying on the
Reformation. And Herbert says, Herb. 396.
Henry was vastly sollicitous, To draw James on his side, as knowing of what
Consequence it was to keep his Kingdom safe on that part; And therefore
Labored still to induce him to abrogate the Papal Jurisdiction in his
Dominions: And tho this Embassy of St. David's had not success, yet Henry gave
not over; but continued to write Letters to James, insisting still upon the
same Requests. Petrie has transcribed one from Fox Pet. 176.
wherein Henry Premonishes, requires, and most heartily prays, James to
consider the Supremacy granted by the Holy Scriptures, to Princes, in Church
matters: To weigh what Gods word calls a Church: To consider what
Superstitions, Idolatries, and blind abuses, have crept into all Realms, to the
high Displeasure of God; and what is to be understood by the Censures of the
Church, and Excommunication, (for the Pope had then Excommunicated Henry) and
how no such Censure can be in the power of the Bishop of Rome, or of any other
man, against him, or any other Prince, having so just ground to avoid from the
Root, and to abolish, such ane execrable Authority, as the Bishop of Rome has
usurped, and usurps upon all Princes, to their Great Damage: Requesting him for
these Reasons, to ponder, of what hazard it might be, to James himself, if he
agreed to such Censures, and, by such example, gave upper-hand, over himself,
and other Princes, to that Usurper of Rome, to scourge all who will not Kiss
and Adore the foot of that Corrupt Holiness, which desires nothing but Pride,
and the universal Thrall of Christendom, etc.

Here was Earnestness, for Reformation in Scotland, with a witness. And can it
be imagined that Henry, who was so serious with the King of Scots, was at no
pains at all with his Subjects? with the Nobility and Gentry, with such as
might had influence, either at the Court, or in the Country? No, certainly, as
may be evident, if we consider

4. That, when, in the year 1540 or 1541, Henry was earnest for a Congress with
James, to try, no doubt, if meeting face to face, and personal and familiar
Converse and Conference might prevail with him; All our Scottish Protestants
were mighty zealous that the Interview might take effect, and both time and
place (which was York) might be punctually observed. Factio Sacerdotlbus
iniquior toto Conatu, atque animi viribus, co incubuerunt, ut Rex tempus
locumque colloquli petitum obiret, Buch. 525.
Is not this a Demonstration, that they understood Henry's project, and
approved his designs? and that they were in the same Bottom with him, in
pursuance of a Reformation? It Is true James followed other Counsels, and
disappointed the Interview; and therefore Henry turned angry, and raised War
against him: But then, it is as true, that James found his Subjects so backward
(as I showed) and was so unsuccessful in the management of that War, that he
contracted Melancholy, and soon after died. Add to this

5. That after James's Death, Henry persisted, in his Concern to advance the
Reformation in Scotland, as well as in England. To this end, He was careful,
that those of the Scottish Nobility and Gentry who were taken Prisoners at
Solway-moss, might be lodged with such persons as could instruct them in the
Reforming Principles. And so soon as he heard that James was dead, and had left
a Daughter, some few days old, yet Heiress of the Crown, He dispatched them for
Scotland, to promote his interests, in the Matter of the Match, he was zealous
to have made, betwixt his Son Prince Edward, and our Infant Sovereign. Indeed
they were as diligent as he could have desired: They got it carried in
Parliament; and that they did it from a prospect of carrying on the Reformation
of Religion, by that conjunction, cannot be doubted, if we may believe Dr.
Burnet, in his Abridgment of the History of the Reformation of the Church of
England: For there Burn. 279, 280.
he not only tells, That Cassils had got these seeds of Knowledge at Lambeth,
under Cranmer' s influences, which produced afterward a Great Harvest in
Scotland. But also, That the other Prisoners were instructed to such a degree,
that they came to have very different thoughts of the Changes that had been
made in England, from what the Scottish Clergy had possessed them with; who had
encouraged their King to engage in the War, by the assurance of Victory, since
he fought against ane Heretical Prince, etc. And a little after, They were sent
home, and went away much pleased both with the Splendour of the Kings Court, and
with the way of Religion which they had seen in England. And that we have
reason to believe this Author in this matter, is evident, because he is
justified, herein, by all our Historians, especially Buchanan, as my appear by
the sequel. Here was Success of the English influences: Seven of the Supreme
Order, i. e. Noblemen, and 24 of inferior Quality, considerable Gentlemen, all
enlightened in England, for so Buchanan numbers them. Buch. 532.
And here, by the way, it will not be amiss to consider the strength of the
Protestant Party in Scotland, when in this Parliament, wherein the Match, by
the influence of the English Converts, was agreed to,

They were so strong, that they carried the Regency for the Earl of Arran,
prompted thereto, chiefly by the persuasion they had of his affection to the
Reformation, as is evident from the consentient Accounts of Buchanan, Knox, and
Spotswood. Buch: 531. Kn. 36. Spot. 71.
They carried it for the Match with England in opposition to all the Popish
Party, as I have just now represented. Nay, which is more, because more
immediately concerning the Reformation of Religion, they procured ane Act to be
made, That it should be Lawful to every Man, to take the Benefit of the
Translation, which they then had of the Bible, and other Treatises containing
wholesome Doctrine, etc. Kn. 38. Spot. 72.


Indeed, at that time, the Reformation was so far advanced, That the Regent
kept his two Protestant Chaplains, Guillam and Rough, both Church of England
men, as we shall hear, who preached publicly to the Court Les^. 443. Kn. 36.
Spot. 72.
and declaimed boldly against the Roman Corruptions. So far advanced, that it
stood fair, within a short space, to have got the public establishment, if
Arran, the Regent, to keep the Popes Cover on his Title to the Succession,
wherein, without it, there were a Couple of sad Chasms, and for other worldly
ends, had not played the Jade, by renouncing his Profession, and returning to
the Popes Obedience.

Observe further, by the way, That this first Parliament of Queen Mary's, was
holden, in her name, and by her Authority, upon the 13th of March 1542/3, as is
clear, not only from our Historians, but, the printed Acts of Parliament; and
she was not crowned till the 20th of August thereafter, if we may believe both
Lesly and Buchanan* Lesl. 444, 445. Buch. 537.
And yet there was not so much as the least objection made, then, against the
Legality of the Parliament; no such thing was thought on: So that it is no new,
nor illegal thing, for Scottish Monarchs to hold Parliaments before their
Coronations. But this, as I said, by the way.

Such was the strength of the Reforming Party, then, and this strength, under
God, advanced so far, principally, by English influences. And all this will
appear more convincing still, when it is considered in the 6th place, That all
along the Popish Clergy were very sensible of it, and very much offended with
it, and were at all imaginable pains to disappoint it, and oppose it. Thus,

When Henry sent the Bishop of St. David's (as we have heard) Anno 1535. to
treat with James about Reforming, the Clergy were in a dreadful pother, how to
keep off the Interview; and used all imaginable Arguments with the King, to
dissuade him from listening to it; Sacerdotes qui pro aris and focis sibi
certandum videbant fremere; Religionem hoc congressu prodi. Buch. 521.
Telling him, it would ruin Religion, and that would ruin his Soul, his
State, his Kingdom, etc. Nay

The Pope himself was extremely solicitous, how to prevent so great a mischief,
as he deemed it; For, as Lesly tells us Lesl: 415.
His Holiness finding that Henry had cast off his Yoke, and fearing lest James
should transcribe his Uncles Copy, sent his Legates to Scotland to confirm him
in the Faith, and fortify him against Henry's impressions. And Buchanan Buch.
517.
says, He allowed him the Tenths of all the Benefices within the Kingdom, for
three years time, to keep him right. Again,

When Henry, Anno 1540. insisted the second time for ane Interview, the Clergy
were in a whole Sea of troubles; They used all arts, Id cum Sacerdotes
rescissent, actum de Ordine suo Rati, nisi Congressum Regum impedirent, etc.
Buch. 525. vid. Lesl. 431, 432.
and tried all Methods to impede it. At last they sell upon the true Knack,
(and a true Demonstration of their Concern, seeing, it was a Knack that looked
so unkindly on their Pockets) which was, to promise him Money, largely, no less
than 30000 Crowns yearly, says Buchanan; Knox calls them 50000, out of their
Benefices, besides a vast sum which might arise out of the confiscated Estates
of Heretics. 50000 Crowns was a good round sum in those days in Scotland.
Further,

How were they alarmed? what fears were they under? what shapes did they turn
themselves in? what tricks did they play, when the Match betwixt Edward and
Mary (spoken of before) was in Agitation? Occasio item supremae potestatis
Invadendae, and celeritatis egere visa est, ut Captivorum and Exulum, ex
Anglia, Red^tum, praeveniret, ne quid in approbatione sui honoris, eis,
integrum Relinqueret, quorum and potentiam and Gratiam formidabat, and mentem a
se alienam, ob diversum pietatis cultum non dubitabat. Buch. 531. vide Kn. 35.
Spot. 71.
The Cardinal forged a Will in the Kings Name, nominating himself, the
principal, of four Conjunct Regents, for managing the Government during the
Queen's Minority: intending, thereby, to secure the Popish interests, and
prevent the coming of the Nobility from England, who, he knew, would lay out
themselves with all their Might to oppose him, being his Enemies upon the
account of Religion, and advance the Designs of England. This not succeeding,
(for the forgery was manifest) His next Care was, that all the Popish Party
should tumultuate, bawl and clamor, confound and disturb, the Parliament, all
they could; which, indeed, was done so successfully, that nothing could be done
to purpose, till he was committed to Custody: Buch. 533.
Neither did this put an end to these practices of the Party, but so soon as
the Parliament (having concluded the Match) was over, and he set at Liberty,
with the Queen Dowagers advice (who was all over French and Papist) He convenes
the Clergy, represents to them the impossibility of their standing, the certain
Ruin of the Catholic Religion, every thing that could be frightful to them,
unless that Confederacy with England were broken; obliges them therefore to tax
themselves, and raise great Sums of Money, for Bribing some of the Nobility,
that were not proof against its Charms and Beauties; And to use all their
Rhetoric with others, to the same purpose: And lastly, it was concluded in
that Religious Meeting, That the Match and Alliance should be preached against
from the Pulpits; and that all possible pains should be taken to excite the
Populace to Tumults and Rabbles, and treat the English Ambassador, with all
affronting Tricks and Rudenesses. Vide Buch. 533, 534. Spot. 73.
In short, the Faction never gave over till they had cajoled the weak Regent
into ane Abjuration of Protestancy (as was told before) and reconciled him to
the French, which, then, in Scotland, was all one with the Popish Interest. Nay

His Holiness himself again interrested himself in this juncture, as Lesly
tells us; Lesl. 445, 449.
sending Petrus Franciscus Contarenus, Patriarch of Venice, his Legate, into
Scotland, to treat with the Regent and the Nobility, in the Popes Name, and
promise them large assistances against the English* if they would break the
Contract of Marriage betwixt Edward and Mary; Studebat enim avertere illorum
animos a Nuptl^s cum Anglo contrahendis, quod suspicaretur, per illam
Conjunctionem, aliquam fieri potuisse, in Scotia, Religionis eversionem, etc.
Lesl. 449.
which had so fatal ane aspect toward the Catholic Religion. By this Taste,
it is easy to discern how much the Popish Party were persuaded, of the great
influence, England had on Scotland in order to a Reformation of Religion: And
laying all together that has been said, it is as easy to perceive, they wanted
not reason for such a persuasion. Having thus given a brief Deduction of the
State of our Reformation in King Henry's time, and made it apparent, that it
was much encouraged and quickened by English Influences, then, I think, I need
not insist much on the succeeding Reigns. Briefly then

7. As Edward the Sixth had the same reasons for interesting himself in our
Scottish affairs, which his Father Henry had before him, so we find his
Counsels were suited accordingly. No sooner was Henry dead, and Somerset warmed
in his Protectoral Chair, than the Demands about the Match were renewed. And
being rejected by the Popish Party, here, who had our weak Regent at their
Beck, and were then the governing Party, the Matter ended in a Bloody War.
Somerset raised a great Army, and entered Scotland: But before it came to
fighting, he sent a Letter to the Scots Buch 561. Spot: 88. Knox. 87.
written in such ane obliging style, and containing so kind, and so fair, so
equitable propositions, That the Regent, advised by some Papists about him,
thought fit not to publish it to his Army, but to give out, that it tended to
quite contrary purposes than it really contained, That it contained Threats
that the English were come to carry off the Queen by force, and Ruin and
Enslave the Nation, etc. Dreading, no doubt, that if he had dealt heartily, and
showed the Letter to such men of interest in the Nation, as were there, it
would have taken so with them, that they would have laid aside thoughts of
Fighting. Indeed! this was no groundless jealousy, the matter was above-board:
For, as Buchanan tells us, In the next Convention of Estates which was holden
shortly after that fatal Battle of Pinkie, Erant qu^ ob Religionis Consensum
Anglorum oblatam amicitiam censerent amplectendam -- Galliae factioni favebant
omnes Papani. Buch. 566. Spot* 89.
those who were for the Reformation, being of the same Religion with England,
were zealous for the English Alliance, and against sending the Queen into
France; and that they were the Papists only who were for sending her thither.

8. When Edward died, and his Sister Mary ascended the Throne, a heavy Cloud
indeed did hang over both Nations, and threatened a dreadful storm to the
Reformation of Religion. Mary, according to her surly humor, fell to downright
Persecution in England: And our Q. Dowager having shouldered out Arran, and
possessed herself of the Scottish Regency, in her subtle way, was as zealous to
maintain the Superstitions of Popery, using less Cruelty, indeed, than Mary,
but more policy, and to the same purposes. And now the purgation of
Christianity, seemed to be brought to a lamentable stand, in both Kingdoms, and
the hopes of those to be quite dashed, who were breathing for the profession of
that Holy Religion in its purity. Yet God, in his kind providence, did
otherwise dispose of things, and made that a means to advance Religion amongst
us, which, men thought, should have utterly extinguished it: For some of those
who fled from Mary's persecution in England, taking their Refuge into this
Kingdom, did not only help to keep the light which had begun to shine, but made
the Sun to break up more clear than before, as Spotswood has it from Knox.
Spot. 92. Kn. 99.
For then came into Scotland, William Harlaw, John Willock, John Knox, etc. of
whom more hereafter. Thus we were still deriving more light and heat from
England.

9. Mary died, and Elizabeth succeeded, in November 1588. our Queen was then in
France: It was morally impossible to recover her thence: The English
influences, which in Henry and Edwards time, had cherished our Reformation,
(except so far as God sent us Harlaw, Willock and Knox, by his special
providence, as I told just now) were quite cut off all the time of Mary's
Government. Our Reformers, therefore, to make the best of a bad hand, were
earnest to be amongst the foremost Courtiers with the Queen Regent: They were
ready to serve her design with all possible frankness: particularly, they were
amongst the most forward for carrying on the Match with the Dauphine of France,
and voted cheerfully that he should have the Matrimonial Crown conferred upon
him, after the solemnization of the Marriage. In consequence of this their
frankness, the Earl of Argyle and the Prior of St. Andrews, two first-rate
Protestants, were the persons nominated to pass into France, to honor the
Dauphine with that complement: And they undertook it cordially.

But, in the very instant, almost, they were informed that Mary of England was
dead, and Elizabeth on the Throne, and withal professing Protestancy. This
altered their whole Scheme: They presently considered, The English Influences,
so long stopped in their Courses, might now begin to Drop again: And there were
hopes of Assistance from that Female Sovereign: So, these two Lords (no doubt,
with the advice of the rest of the fraternity) gave over thoughts of their
French Voyage: The Dauphine might purchase a Crown for himself, or wait till
his Father dyed, if he could not do better: They resolved to carry him no
Matrimonial Crowns from Scotland. Indeed their hopes of Assistance from England
to carry on the Reformation of Religion, were better grounded then than ever.
For,

Upon the Death of Queen Mary of England, by French advice, our Queen, as Next
Heir to that Crown, had assumed the English Titles. It Is not to be thought
Elizabeth liked this well; and resolving to continue Queen of England, she had
no reason: For who knows not that her Title was Questionable? But our Queens
Descent was Vncontroverted. What wonder then if Elizabeth thought herself
concerned to secure herself as well as she could? And what more feasible and
proper way for her security, than to have the Affections, and by consequence
the Power of Scotland on her side? And what measure so natural for obtaining
that, as to cherish the Reformation of Religion in Scotland, and weaken the
Popish, and by consequence, the French interests there, and get the Rule of
that Kingdom put in the hands of Protestants? The politic was obviously solid;
all the work was to set it a going: But that difficulty was soon over; for no
sooner did she employ some private instruments, to try the Scottish pulses,
than they smelt the matter, and relisht it immediately. The least intimation
that she was so inclined, was to them as a spark of fire amongst Gunpowder, it
kindled them in a thought: They addressed her, quickly begged her protection, and
plighted their Faith that they would depend upon her, and stand by her, and to
the outmost of their power, secure her interests; if she would grant them
suitable assistances. Thus the bargain was readily agreed to on both sides; and
both performed their parts successfully. For who knows not that our Reformation
was carried on by Elizabeth's Auspices? by English Arms* and Counsels, and Money
in the year 1560? And who knows not, that by the Treaty at Leith in July, that
same year, after the French were expelled Scotland, when our Reformers, by her
help, had got the upper hand, her Crown was secured, as far as the Scottish
Protestants could secure it? Who knows not, I say, that it was one of the
Articles of that Treaty, That the Queen of Scotland and King of France, should
not, thereafter, usurp the Titles of England and Ireland, and should delete the
Arms of England and Ireland out of their Scutchions? and whole Housholdstuff?
Spot. 149.
By this time, I think, it may competently appear, how much our Scottish
Reformation, under God, depended on English influences. But I have two things
more to add

10. Then, It is considerable that some of our Chief Luminaries, of those, who
had a principal hand in preaching and planting the Gospel in Purity among us,
had drunk in these principles in England, and brought them, thence, to Scotland
with them. Thus the excellent Martyr Mr. George Wishart, (of whom in part
before) as Spotswood tells us, Spot. 76.
had spent his time in Cambridge, and returned to his own Country to promote
the Truth in it, Anno 1544. And Mr. John Spotswood, that worthy man who was so
long Superintendent of Lothian after our Reformation, was one of Cranmers
Disciples, as you may see in the beginning of the Life of Archbishop Spotswood
his Son, and also in his History. Spot. 344.
And John Willock and William Harlaw had both lived in England, before they
preached in Scotland, as I have already accounted; and perhaps a strict Enquiry
might discover some others.

11. and lastly, On the other hand, (except so far as John Knox was Calvinist,
and a Lover of the Forms of Geneva, for which, perhaps, I shall account
hereafter) none of our Historians give so much as one particular instance, of a
Scottish Reformer who had his Education in any other foreign Church, except Mr.
Patrick Hamilton, who, I think, cannot be proven to have been a Presbyterian;
and tho it could be done, it could amount to no more than the Authority of a
very young man, considering he was but 23 years of age when he died. Neither do
they mention any Foreigner, who came here to Scotland, to assist us in our
Reformation: Lesly, Lesl. 492.
indeed, says, that the Scottish Protestants sent Letters and Messengers to
Germany, to call thence Sacramentarian Ministers, as being very dexterous at
fostering Sedition, and subverting Religion; but no other Historian says so;
and he himself says not that ever any such came to Scotland. Thus, I think, I
have accounted competently for the first thing proposed, viz. That our
Reformation, under God, was principally Cherished and Encouraged by English
Influences, I proceed to the

2. Which was, That, in Correspondence to these Influences, our Reformers were
generally of the same Mind with the Church of England, in several momentous
instances relating to the Constitution and Communion, the Government and Polity
of the Church, wherein, our present Presbyterian principles stand in direct
opposition and contradiction to her.

That our Reformers agreed with those of the Church of England, in the Common
Articles of the Christian Faith, in their Creed, was never called in Question.
But it is not my present purpose to consider the sentiments of our Reformers in
relation to the Church as it is a Sect, but as it is a Society, neither shall I
be curious to amuse many particulars; I shall content my self with two or three
of considerable weight and importance. And*

1. Our Reformers, generally, or rather, unanimously, looked on the Church of
England, as a Church so well constituted, that her Communion was a Lawful
Communion. For this we have two as good Evidences as the nature of the thing is
capable of, viz. The constant and uniform practice of our Reformers joining in
the Communion of the Church of England, when they had occasion, as those of the
Church of England did, with the Church of Scotland; and their open profession
in their public deeds that they thought it Lawful.

1. I say it was the constant practice of our Reformers to join in the
Communion of the Church of England, when they had occasion, as those of the
Church of England, did, with the Church of Scotland. Thus, we find all such of
our Reformers, as, in times of Persecution, fled into England, still joining
with the Church of England* e. g. Friar Alexander Seaton, Spot. 65.
when he was forced to flee, in King James the 5th's time, went to England, and
became the Duke of Suffolk's Chaplain, and died in that service. Alexander
Aless was in great favor with King Henry, and called the King's Scholar.
Spot. 66.
He was a Member of the English Convocation, and disputed against Stokesly
Bishop of London, and maintained there were but two Sacraments, Baptism and the
Eucharist, Anno 1536, or 37: Burnet ad An.
And he it was that first turned the English Liturgy into Latin, for Bucer's
use, Anno 1549, as both Heylin and Burnet, in their Histories of the English
Reformation, tell us. Burn. ad Ann. Heylin. p. ^9.
John Fife, and one M' Dowdal stayed as long in England as Aless did. Spot. 66.
And it is not to be doubted that they were of the same principles. John M' Be
during his abode in England, was liberally entertained by Nicol. Saxton Bishop
of Salisbury, who made much account of him, Ibid.
which is no argument, I think, that he was a Presbyterian. Sir John Borthwick
was charged with Heresy, Anno 1640, for maintaining, That the Heresies,
commonly called the Heresies of England, and their New Liturgy, was
Commendable, and to be embraced of all Christians: And, That the Church of
Scotland ought to be governed, after the manner of the Church of England, Spot.
70. Pet. 180.
i. e. under the King, and not the Pope, as Supreme Governor. Friar Thomas
Guillam, the first public Preacher of the Reformed Religion, in Scotland, He,
by whose Sermons John Knox got* the first lively impressions of the Truth Life
of Knox.
, This Guillam, I say, after Arran, the Regent, Apostatized, withdrew, and went
into England, Spot. 73.
and we hear no more of him; From which it is reasonable to conclude, That he
kept the Common Course with the other Reformers, there.

John Rough was the Regents other Chaplain, while he was Protestant; He
likewise fled to England, tho sometime after Guillam: He preached some years in
the Towns of Carlisle, Berwick and Newcastle; and was afterward provided to a
Benefice by the Archbishop of York, where he lived till the Death of King
Edward. When Mary's Persecution turned warm, he fled, and lived some time in
Freesland. He came to London, about some business, Anno 1557. was apprehended,
and brought before Bonner; Questioned if he had preached any, since he came to
England? Answered he had preached none: But in some places where godly people
were Assembled, He had read the Prayers of the Communion Book set forth in the
Reign of King Ed. VI. Questioned again, what his Judgment was of that Book?
Answered, He approved it, as agreeing in all points with the word of God; And
so suffered Martyrdom. I think this man was neither for Parity, nor against
Liturgies. But to proceed.

The excellent Mr. Wishart, as he had spent some time in England (as was told
before) so, it seems, he returned to Scotland, of English (I am confident, not
of Presbyterian) Principles: For, he was not only for the Lawfulness of Private
Communion, as appeared by his practice; but Knox Kn: Hist. 69.
gives us fair intimations, that he ministered it by a Set-form. I know King
Edward's Liturgy was not then composed: But it is not to be imagined, That the
Reformers in England, in Wishart's time administered the Sacrament without a
Set-form. The Extemporary Spirit was not, then, in vogue: And why, else, could
Sir John Borthwick have been charged with the Great Heresy of Commending the
English Liturgy? However, I shall not be peremptory, because I have not the
opportunity of enquiring, at present, what Forms the English Reformers had,
then. All I shall say, is, if they had a Liturgy, it is very probable, Wishart
used it; For, as Knox tells us, when he celebrated the Eucharist, before his
Execution, After he had blessed the Bread and Wine, he took the Bread and Brake
it, and gave to every one of it, bidding each of them, Remember that Christ had
died for them, and feed on it spiritually; so taking the Cup, he bade them
Remember that Christ's Blood was shed for them, etc. So Knox, word for word,
which account, I think, seems fairly to intimate, that Wishart used a Form, but
if he did, what other could it be than such as he had learned in England?

I have accounted already how John Willock and William Harlaw had served in the
English Church, before they came to Scotland, Spot. 93.
I might perhaps make a fuller Collection: But what needs more?

Even Knox himself lived in Communion with the Church of England, all the time
he was in that Kingdom: He went not there to keep Conventicles, to erect Altar
against Altar, to gather Churches out of the Church of England, to set up
separate and schismatical Churches, as some of our present Parity-men have
sometimes done: No, he preached in the public Churches, and, in subordination
to the Bishops; and he preached before King Edward himself, as he himself tell
us, in his Admonition to the Professors of the Truth in England; p. 52.
which, it is very improbable, he would have been allowed to have done, if he
had Condemned the Communion of the Church of England, as it was then
established: For who knows not, that, in King Edwards time, all Schism and
Nonconformity were sufficiently discouraged? And, through that whole
Admonition, he, still, speaks of himself as One of the Ministers of the Church
of England. Nay

If it be Reasonable to Collect men's Sentiments from their Reasonings, I am
sure, in that same Admonition I have enough for my purpose: For, he reasons
upon suppositions, and from Principles, which, clearly, condemned Separation
from the Church of England, as then established. For, when he gives his
thoughts of that fatal Discord which happened between the two great men (
Somerset, and the Admiral, as I take it) He discourses thus; God compelled my
tongue (says he) openly to declare, That the Devil and his Ministers (the
Papists) Intended only the Subversion of Gods true Religion, by that Mortal
Hatred amongst those who ought to have been, most assuredly, Knit together by
Christian Charity -- And especially that the wicked and envious Papists (by
that ungodly Breach of Charity) diligently minded the overthrow of him
(Somerset) that, to his own Destruction, procured the Death of his innocent
friend (and Brother) -- All this trouble was devised, by the Devil and his
instruments, to stop and let Christ's Disciples and their poor Boat ( i. e.
the Church.) What can be more plain (I say) than, that Knox, here, proceeds on
suppositions, and reasons from Principles, which condemned Separation from the
Church of England, as then established? Does he not suppose, that the Church of
England, as then established, was Christ's Boat, his Church? And that the Sons
of the Church of England were Christ's Disciples? Does he not suppose, that
these two Brothers, as Sons of the Church of England, ought to have been
assuredly knit together, by Christian Charity? That the Breach between them was
ane ungodly Breach of that Charity, by which, Members of that same Church ought
to have been assuredly knit together? And that it was a contrivance of the
wicked and envious Papists, thereby, to Ruin the Church of England? Does he
not suppose all these as unundoubted Truths, I say. Or rather, does he not
positively or expressly assert them? And now, if Separation from the Church of
England, and condemning her Communion as ane Unlawful Communion can consist
with these principles and suppositions; or, if he who reasons on these
suppositions, and from these principles, can be deemed, at the same time, to
have been for the Unlawfulness of the Communion of the Church of England, I
must confess I know not what it is to collect men's sentiments from their
Principles and Reasonings.

Whosoever pleases may find more of Knox's sentiments to this purpose, in his
Exhortation to England for the speedy receiving of Christ's Gospel; Dated from
Geneva, January 12. 1559. For, there, he calls England happy, In that, God by
the power of his verity, of late years ( i. e. in King Edward's time) had
broken and destroyed the intolerable yoke of her spiritual Captivity, and
brought her forth, as it had been, from the bottom of Hell, and from the
Thraldom of Satan (in which she had been holden blinded by Idolatry and
Superstition) to the fellowship of his Angels, and the possession of that rich
Inheritance, prepared to his Dearest Children with Christ Jesus his Son. And a
little after, he says of the Church of England, that in that same King Edward's
days, she was a Delectable Garden planted by the Lords own hand. p. 102.
And in his Letter to Secretary Cecil, from Diep, April 10, 1559. he tells him,
He expects that same favor from him, which, it becomes one Member of Christ's
Body to have for another. Kn. Hist. 224.
And in his Letter to Q. Elizabeth from Edinburgh, 28 July 1559. He renders
thanks unfeignedly to God, That it has pleased him of his eternal Goodness, to
exalt her Head to the Manifestation of his Glory, and the Extirpation of
Idolatry. ib. 231.
Is this like the Clamor which has been ordinary with our Presbyterians, about
the Idolatry of the Church of England? And in the conclusion of that Letter, he
prays, that the Spirit of the Lord Jesus may so rule her, in all her Actions,
and Enterprises, that, in her, God may be Glorified, his Kirk Edified, and she,
as a lively Member of the same, may be ane Example of Virtue and Godliness of
Life, to all others. Are these like the sayings of one, who, in the mean time,
judged the Communion of the Church of England, ane Unlawful Communion.

It Is true, indeed, John Knox was displeased with some things in the English
Liturgy: He thought she had some Modes and Ceremonies there, which were
scandalous, as symbolizing too much with the Papists; and it cannot be denied,
that he disturbed the peace of the English Church at Francfort: But, if I
mistake not, he did so, not that he thought the terms of her Communion truly
sinful; but, that he judged his own, (or rather the Genevian) Model, purer;
For, it is reasonable to think, he proceeded on the same principles, and was of
the same sentiments with his Master, Calvin: And nothing can be clearer, than,
that Calvin did not condemn the things scrupled at, as impious or unlawful, but
as not agreeable to his Standard of Purity, as appears from the Citation on the
Margin, In Anglicana Ecclesia, qualem describitis, multa^ video ^uisse
tolerablles inept^as. His duobus verbis ex primo, non fuisse eam puritatem,
quae optanda fuerat: Quae tamen, primo statim die, corrigi non poterant vitia,
cum NULLA SUBESSET MANIFESTA IMPIETAS, ferenda ad tempus fuisse. Calv. Angl.
Francoford. inter Epist. Col. 213.
and might easily be made appear more fully, if one were put to it; but it is
needless, now, considering that all, I aim at, is, that it cannot be inferred
from what Knox did at Francfort, That he judged the Communion of the Church of
England, ane Unlawful Communion, tho, I must confess in making these stirs, he
proceeded, not according to the true Catholic Principles of Christian
Communion. But enough of him at present. To proceed,

As our Reformers thus generally look upon the Church of England, as a true
Church, and her Communion, as a Lawful Communion, so, after our Reformation was
established, those of the Church of England, had the same sentiments of the
Church of Scotland: The Ambassadors, who, at any time, for many years, came
from England to the Scottish Court, made no scruple to live in the Communion of
the Church of Scotland, and join in her public Worship. Thus the Earl of
Bedford Kn. Hist. 440.
who came to assist at the Solemnization of the Princes (afterward K. James
the Sixth's) Baptism, Anno 1566. went daily to Sermon, i. e. (by a Synecdoche
very familiar in Scotland) to the public Worship. Neither did I ever observe
the least intimation, in any monument of these times, I have seen, of these two
Churches having opposite Communions, till many years after the Reformation. But
I have insisted long enough on this Consideration. The sum whereof is, briefly,
this: Our Reformers so far as can appear from their private sentiments and
practices, looked upon the Church of England as a true Christian Church: They
lived in her Communion when they had occasion to be within her Bounds; not one
of them condemned her Communion as ane Unlawful Communion; not one of them set
up Conventicles in England, when they were there, nor erected separate
Churches, etc. From all which, it seems to follow, at least, very probably,
That they reformed, generally, upon the same Principles; entirely, upon the
same, as to Church Communion. The reason why I have insisted so long on this
argument, is, that it smooths the way for the next, which is

2. That our Reformers, in their public deeds, openly and solemnly professed
that they were of one Religion, one Communion, with the Church of England.
This, as I take it, is a point of considerable importance, and therefore I
shall endeavor to set it, at least, in a competent Light.

1. Then, Unity of Religion (and by good Consequence, I think, Oneness of
Communion) between the Scottish and the English Protestants, was the great
Argument insisted on by the Scots, in their Addresses to England for Assistance
to turn out the French, and establish the Reformation in Scotland, Anno 1559:
And it was one of the main Grounds, on which all that great Revolution was
transacted, that year, and the next, viz. 1560. Take the account, as I have it
from that which is commonly called Knox his History.

When the Lords of the Congregation, found it would be necessary for them to
implore foreign Assistance for driving out the French, then, the great
Obstacles to the Reformation; They resolved, in the first place, to apply to
England, and the Reason, given for this Resolution was, That ENGLAND WAS OF THE
SAME RELIGION. Or, if ye please take it in the Authors own words Kn. 170.
We thought good to seek aid, and support, of all Christian Princes, against
her (the Queen Regents) Tyranny, in case we should be more sharply persued, AND
BECAUSE THAT ENGLAND WAS OF THE SAME RELIGION, and lay next unto us, it was
thought expedient first to prove them, etc.

It was rational enough to try, there, first, indeed, considering what I have
already observed concerning Queen Elizabeth; And, Tried it was, and found
successful; For Secretary Cecil, no sooner heard of their intention, than he
sent them word, That their Enterprise misliked not the English Council Kn. 228.
. Upon the sight of this great Ministers Letter, which brought them so
comfortable news, they instantly returned ane Answer: Knox has it word for
word; Kn. ib.
I shall only take ane Abstract of what is proper for my present purpose. In
short then;

They perceive their Messenger, Master Kircaldie of Grange, has found Cecil
ane unfeigned favourer of Christ's true Religion: -- As touching the Assurance
of a perpetual Amity to stand betwixt the two Realms, as no earthly thing is
more desired by them, so, they crave of God to be made the Instruments, by
which, the Unnatural Debate which has so long continued between the Nations
may be composed, To the Praise of Gods Name, and, the Comfort of the Faithful
in both Realms: If the English Wisdom can foresee and devise how the same may
be brought to pass, they may persuade themselves not only of the Scottish
Consent and Assistance, but of their Constancy, as Men can promise, to their
lives end; And of Charge and Commandment to be left by them to their posterity,
that the Amity between the Nations (IN GOD) contracted and begun, may be, by
them, kept inviolate for Ever: Their Confederacy, Amity and League shall not be
like the pactions made by worldly men, for worldly profit, but, as they Require
it, FOR GODS CAUSE, so, they will call upon his Name for the Observation of it:
As this their Confederacy requires Secresy, so, they doubt not, the English
Wisdom will communicate it only to such as they know to be favorers of such A
GODLY CONJUNCTION; And, in their opinion, it would much help, if the Preachers
both in persuasion, and in public prayers (as theirs in Scotland do) would
commend the same unto the people. And thus, after their most humble
Commendation to the Queen's Majesty, (whose Reign they wish may be prosperous
and long, to the Glory of God and Comfort of his Church) they heartily commit
him to the Protection of the Omnipotent. Given at Edinburgh, July 17. Anno
1559.

Before I proceed further, I must tell my Reader, that all our Historians are
extremely defective as to this great Transaction between Scotland and England,
I am now accounting for. None of them (neither Buchanan, nor Lesly, nor
Spotswood) has this Letter except Knox, and he calls it, the first Letter to
Sir William Cecil from the Lords of the Congregation, which imports there were
more, as no doubt there were many, and yet he has not so much as a second.
Besides, I find by Knox, Buchanan and Spotswood Kn. 218. Spot. 140. Buch. 604.
that, in November 1559, Secretary Maitland was sent by the Lords of the
Congregation, to treat with the Queen of England. I find likewise that he
managed the matter so, and brought it to such maturity, that, immediately upon
his return, the League between the Queen of England, and the Scottish Lords was
transacted and finished; and yet I can, no where, find, what Commission he had,
nor what Instructions; how he managed his business, nor upon what terms the
Queen of England and He came to an Agreement; and several other such lamentable
defects I find, so that it is not possible for me to give so exact a Deduction
of such ane important Matter as were to be wished. Tho, I doubt not, if it had
been clearly and fully deduced, it might have brought great Light to many
things about our Reformation, which, now, so far as I know, are buried in
Obscurity. Any man may readily imagine how sensible one, that would perform my
present task, must needs be, of so great a disadvantage: However, when we
cannot have what we would, we must satisfy our selves the best way we can. And
so I return to my purpose, which, tho I cannot dispatch so punctually as might
be desired, yet I hope to do it sufficiently, and to the satisfaction of all
sober, tho not, nicely critical Enquirers. To go on then.

By the aforementioned Letter, you see, The Lords of the Congregation, referred
it to the Wisdom of the English Council, to foresee and devise the Means and
Assurances) they are the very words of the Letter) how ane effectual
Confederacy might be made, between them, for Gods Cause. Now let us reason a
little upon the common principles of prudence, where Matter of Fact is so
defective.

What was more natural for the English Council to Require, than, that (now that
the English Reformation was perfected and legally established, and the Scottish
was only in forming) the Scots should engage to transcribe the English Copy,
and establish their Reformation upon that same foot, i. e. receive the
Doctrine, Worship, Rites and Government of the Church of England, so that there
might be no difference between the two Churches, but both might be of the same
Constitution, so far as the necessary distinction of the two States would
allow? The point in Agitation was a Confederacy in opposition to Popery, and
for the security of the Reformed Religion in both Kingdoms. It was obvious,
therefore, to foresee, that it would be the stronger, and, every way, the
better suited to that great End, if both Churches stood on one bottom: For who
sees not that Different Constitutions are apt to be attended with Different
Customs, which in process of time may introduce Different Sentiments and
Inclinations? Who sees not that the smallest Differences are apt to create
jealousies, divisions, cross-interests? And that there is nothing more necessary
than Uniformity for preserving Unity? Besides,

Queen Elizabeth was, peculiarly, concerned to crave this. There Is nothing more
necessary to support a State, especially a Monarchy, than Unity of Religion. It
was for the Support of her State, the Security of her Monarchy, that she was to
enter into this Confederacy. She was afraid of the Queen of Scotland's
pretensions to the Crown of England; For this cause she was confederating with
the Queen of Scotland's Subjects, that she might have them of her side. It was
her concern, therefore, to have them as much secured to her interests as
possibly she could: they were, then, at a great Bay without her succor; and
had referred it to her and her Council, to foresee and devise the terms on
which she would grant it. And now laying all these things together, what was
more natural. I say than that she should demand, that they should be of the
same Religion, and their Church of the same Constitution, with the Church of
England.

This politic was so very obvious, that it is not to be imagined, she and her
wise Council could overlook it; And tho it had been no where upon Record, that
she craved it, yet the common sense of mankind would stand for its Credibility;
what shall we say then, if we find it recorded by ane Historian, whose Honesty
is not to be questioned in this matter? And such ane one we have, even Buchanan
himself, tho he misplaces it, and narrates it, a long time after it was done,
and as it were only by the by.

The occasion on which he records this, is, when in the year 1569. (the tenth
year after this Confederacy between the Scots and the English was concerted, as
I take it) the Earl of Murray, then Regent, had gone to the Northern parts of
the Kingdom to settle matters there, Accounts were brought to him of the Duke
of Norfolk's Conspiracy, which was so well compacted, and so deep laid, that it
was judged morally impossible to disappoint it; and Murray's friends were
earnest with him to retreat in time, and disengage himself of the opposite
party, with whom he had hitherto sided; and so when Buchanan comes to give the
History of this juncture, he, to find a just rise for his Narration, returns no
less than ten years backward, discoursing thus, The State of English affairs
oblige me to look back a little; because, in these times, the interests of both
Kingdoms were so twisted, that the concerns of the one cannot be represented
without the other: The Scots, some years before, being delivered from the
Gallican Slavery by the English assistance, had subscribed to the Religious
Worship and Rites of the Church of England; Status Rerum Anglicarum, hic, nos
paulum divertere cogit, quod, eo tempore adeo utriusque Regni prospera and
adversa, conjuncta erant, ut, altera sine alteris explicari nequirent: Scoti,
ante aliquot Annos, Anglorum auxiliis, e Servitute Gallica, Liberati,
RELIGIONIS CULTUI ET RITBUS CUM ANGLIS COMMUNIBUS SUBSCRIPSERUNT: Ea subita
rerum mutatio spondere videbatur Brittaniam universam ad omni Domestico tumultu
conquleturam. E continenti vero, etc. Buch. 714.
and that surprising change, in Affairs, seemed to promise, to Britain,
quietness, and rest from all intestine Commotions, and Factions, etc.

Here, you see, the thing is plainly and undeniably asserted: Yet, so careless,
(to say no worse) have all our Historians been, that not one of them mentions
it, but he, and he does no more than mention it; and, to this minute, we are,
generally, in the dark, when, how, by whom, and with what Solemnities it was
done. Buchanan's words would seem to import that it was done after, that our
Deliverance (as he calls it) was accomplished. But not one word of it in the
Treaty concluded at Leith, and proclaimed July 8th, 1560. which succeeded
immediately upon the back of that Deliverance; not one word of it (I say) in
that Treaty, as it is either in Buchanan, Knox or Spotswood, or any other
Historian, I have had occasion to see; neither have we any other public
Transaction or Deed that mentions it.

I find it told by several Historians Buch. 614. Kn. 284. Sp^t. 1^1.
that the Earls of Morton and Glencarne were sent to England, after that our
Deliverance, to return thanks to Queen Elizabeth for her assistance: It Is
possible it might have been done then; for, as Spotswood has it, After the
Professors heard of the cold Entertainment that Sir James Sandilands, who went
to France to give ane account of the Treaty, had got at that Court, their minds
were greatly troubled; for, they were seasible of their own weakness, and
doubtful of Support from England, if France should again invade, because of the
Loss the English had received in the late Expedition; Neither, (says he) had
the Earls of Morton and Glencarne, who upon breaking up of the Parliament, were
sent into England, to render thanks to the Queen, and to entreat the
Continuance of her Favor, given any advertisement of their acceptance. If,
upon this occasion, Commission was sent to these two Earls, to subscribe, in
name of the rest of the Protestants, to such ane Union in Religion, it exactly
answers Buchanan's Account; but no such thing is so much as insinuated to have
been done on that occasion. For my part, I humbly offer it to be considered,
whither it is not possible, that Buchanan intended not to lay any such stress
upon the word [LIBERATI] as thereby to import, that it was after the
Accomplishment of our Deliverance, that the Scots subscribed: But, bringing in
the whole matter, occasionally, where he mentions it, and intending to dispatch
it in as few words as he could; he did not stand nicely upon the wording of it.
And if it is holds, the most Rational and Natural Account will be, that Secretary
Maitland, and Sir Robert Melvil, who were sent by the Scottish Lords, in the
beginning of November 1559. to implore the Queen of England's Assistance, were
empowered to agree, in name of the whole body, to this Union of Religion, if it
should be demanded. That the Secretary had power to treat, and agree to, and
sign Articles, is certain; for, amongst the Instructions given to the
Commissioners for concluding the Treaty at Berwick, dated at Glasgow, Feb. 10.
1559/66. I find this as one, Kn. 236.


Item, If it shall be desired of you to confirm, for us, and in our Name, the
things past and granted, by our former Commissioner, the young Lord of
Lethington, ye shall, in all points, for us, and in our Name, confirm the same,
so far as it shall make either for the WELL and CONJUNCTION of the two Realms,
or this PRESENT CAUSE, or yet, for the security of our part for fulfilling of
the same Kn. 244.
.

This, I say, is one of the Articles of these instructions; from which it is
evident, that Lethington, had signed Articles in England; tho we are no where
told what they were. And may it not pass for a probable conjecture, that that
concerning Unity in Religious Worship and Ceremonies was one of them? But
whenever, or by whomsoever it was done, is not the Critical Hinge of the
Controversy. We have Buchanan's word for it, that it was done; and I hope, my
Presbyterian Brethren will not hastily reject his Authority; especially
considering, that his Veracity, in this matter is so much assisted and made
credible by the strain of the Letter directed to Secretary Cecil, on which we
have already insisted. Neither is this all, For

2. The public Thanksgiving, and Prayers made with great Solemnity, in St.
Giles's Church in Edinburgh, Kn. 259, etc. in the Scot. Liturgy.
after the Pacification at Leith, in July 1560, amount to no less than a fair
Demonstration of ane entire Union between the two Nations as to Church Matters,
and Religion; for on that occasion it was thus addressed to Almighty God, with
the common Consent, and as a public Deed of our Scottish Reformers.

-- Seeing that nothing is more odious in thy presence (O Lord) than is
Ingratitude and Violation of ane Oath and Covenant made in thy Name; and seeing
thou have made our Confederates in England, the Instruments by whom we are now
set at this Liberty, and, to whom in thy Name, we have promised mutual Faith
again; Let us never fall to that Unkindness (O Lord) that either we declare our
selves unthankful unto them, or Prophaners of thy holy Name. Confound thou the
Counsel of those that go about to break THAT MOST GOGLY LEAGUE CONTRACTED IN
THY NAME; And retain thou us so firmly together, by the power of thy holy
Spirit, That Satan have never power to set us again at Variance nor Discord.
Give us thy Grace to live in that Christian Charity, which, thy Son our Lord
Jesus Christ has so earnestly commanded to all the Members of his Body; that
other Nations provoked by our Example, may set aside all Ungodly War,
Contention and Strife, and study to live in Tranquillity and Peace, as it
becomes the Sheep of thy pasture, and the People that daily look for our final
Deliverance by the coming again of our Lord Jesus, etc. Thus it was prayed, I
say, in great Solemnity, at that time; and every Petition, is a Confirmation of
Buchanan's Fidelity and my Assertion. Further yet,

3. In the Old Scottish Liturgy compiled in these times, and afterward used
publicly in all the Churches, There is a Thanksgiving unto God, after our
Deliverance from the Tyranny of the Frenchmen, with Prayers made for the
Continuance of the Peace betwixt the Realms of Scotland and England, wherein we
have these Petitions offered.

Grant unto us, O Lord, that with such Reverence we may remember thy Benefits
received, that, after this, in our Default, we never enter into Hostility
against the Realm and Nation of England. Suffer us never, O Lord, to fall to
that Ingratitude and detestable Unthankfulness, that we should seek the
Destruction and Death of those whom thou have made instruments to Deliver us
from the Tyranny of Merciless Strangers: Dissipate thou the Counsels of such as
Deceitfully travel to stir the hearts of the inhabitants of either Realm
against the other: Let their malicious practices be their own confusion; and
grant thou of thy Mercy, that Love, Concord and Tranquillity may continue and
increase amongst the Inhabitants of this Isle, even to the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whose glorious Gospel, thou, of thy Mercy do CALL US BOTH TO
UNITY, PEACE AND CHRISTIAN CONCORD, the full PERFECTION whereof we shall
possess in the fullness of thy Kingdom, etc.

Here is a set of Demonstrations to the same purpose also: And now, let any man
lay all these things together; The Letter to Cecil; The Confederacy betwixt
Scotland and England; Buchanan's Testimony; and these Thanksgivings and
Prayers, and then let him judge impartially whither or not, there is reason to
believe, that, in those days, there was a good Agreement between the Scottish
and English Protestants, as to Religion and Church Matters.

Thus, I think, I have sufficiently cleared that our Reformers, Generally, if
not Unanimously, looked upon the Church of England, as so well constituted, that
they acknowledged her Communion to be a Lawful Communion. But before I proceed
to other things I must try, if I can make any more advantage of what has been
said: And I reason thus,

Was there not here truly and really, a Confederacy, ane Oath, A Solemn League
and Covenant, betwixt the Scottish and the English Protestants? Were not these
English Protestants, then, united in that Society, which, at that time, was,
and, ever since, has been called The Church of England? And was not the Church
of England of that same very constitution, then, that it was of in King Charles
the First his time, for example, Anno 1642? But if so, then, I ask again, was
not this Solemn League and Covenant, made, thus, by our Reformers with their
Brethren in England, as much designed for the Security, the Defense, the
Maintenance, of the Church of England, as then by Law established, as for the
Establishment of our Reformation? Did not our Reformers promise Mutual Faith to
the English, as well as the English promised to them? Would it have been
consistent with the mutual bonds and obligations of this Confederacy, this
Solemn League and Covenant, for the Scottish Reformers, to have raised ane
Army, at that time, against Queen Elizabeth to invade her Dominions, in order
to ruin the Church of England? I cannot imagine, any sober person can grudge
to grant me this much also. But if this be granted, then I ask in the third
place, Did not that Solemn League and Covenant, made by our Reformers, with
those of the Church of England, run in a direct opposition to the Solemn League
and Covenant, made by our Scottish Presbyterians with a Factious Party in
England, for destroying the Church of England, in King Charles the First's
time? Nay did not our Scottish Presbyterians in that King's time, by entering
into that Solemn League and Covenant, directly, and effrontedly, break through
the Charge and Commandment, which our Reformers left to their Posterity, That
the Amity betwixt the Nations, in God contracted and begun, might by them, be
kept inviolate for ever? Nay, further yet, did not our Reformers solemnly pray
against those who made the Solemn League and Covenant in the days of King
Charles the First? Did they not address to God, that he would dissipate their
Counsels, and let their Malicious Practices be their own Confusion? And now,
let the world judge what rational pretenses these Presbyterians, in that Holy
Martyrs time, and, by consequence, our present Presbyterians, can make for
their being the only true and genuine Successors of our First Reformers?
Expecting solid and serious Answers to these Questions,

I shall now advance in the prosecution of my main undertaking on this Head,
which was to show, how our Reformers agreed with the Church of England in
several momentous matters Relative to the Constitution and Communion, the
Government and Polity of the Church, etc. But because I have insisted so long
on this general one, which I have just now taken leave of, I shall only
instance in two or three more, and dispatch them as speedily as I can.

2. Then, it is evident, and undeniable, that our Scottish Protestants, for
some years, used the Liturgy of the Church of England in their public
Devotions. Indeed,

The very first public step, toward our Reformation, made by the Lords of the
Congregation, was to appoint this Liturgy to be used: It was ordered upon the
third day of December, 1557. as both Knox and Calderwood have it. Kn. 112.
Called. 5.
Take the Ordinance in Knox his words: The Lords and Barons professing Christ
Jesus conveened frequently in Council, in the which, these Heads were
concluded. First, It is thought expedient, advised and ordained, That in all
Parishes of this Realm, the Common Prayer be read, weekly, on Sunday, and other
Festival days, publicly, in the Parish Churches, with the Lessons of the Old
and New Testament, conformable to the Book of Common Prayers: And if the
Curates of the Parishes be qualified, that they read the same; And if they be
not, or if they refuse, that the most qualified in the Parish use and read the
same, etc. Kn. Ib. Spot. 117. Pet. 192.
Spotswood and Petrie give the same account. But such is the Genius of Mr.
Calderwood, that you are to expect few things, which may make against the
Presbyterian Interest, heartily and sincerely represented by him. For instance,
in his overly account of this matter, he quite omits the mention of other Holy
days, besides Sundays.

These consistent Testimonies of all those four Historians, are so full and
plain a Demonstration of the Matter of Fact, that I cannot foresee so much as
one Objection that can be made, or one Evasion that can be thought on, unless
it be, That it is not said by any of them, that it was the Book of the Common
Prayers of the Church of England. But this difficulty is soon removed. For

1. It was either the Book of the Common Prayers of the Church of England, or
the Genevian Liturgy: For we no where read of a Third, ever pretended to have
been used, in those times, in Scotland: Now that it was not the Liturgy of
Geneva, is plain; for besides that it is utterly incredible, that there could
have been so many Copies, of the Genevian Form in the vulgar Language, then, in
Scotland, as might serve so many Parish Churches; Nay, that it is highly
probable, there was not so much as one. Besides this, I say, in the Genevian
Form, which was afterward used in Scotland, there is no Order for, no footstep
of, the observation of other Holy Days, besides Sunday: Neither is there any
Order in it for Reading of Lessons of the Old and New Testament, except in the
Treatise of Fasting, which was not compiled till the year 1565. There, indeed,
Lessons are appointed, such and such Psalms, and such and such Histories, in
the Old, but not so much as one Tittle of the New Testament: In all the rest of
the Book a deep Silence about Lessons; than which there cannot be a clearer
Demonstration* that the Book appointed to be used in December 1557, was not
that of Geneva. Indeed

2. None of our Presbyterian Historians, neither Petrie, nor Calderwood, have
the confidence to pretend, nay to insinuate the possibility of its being the
Common Order of Geneva; which, it is very probable, they would have done, if
they had had the smallest hopes of making it feasible. On the contrary,
Calderwood seems fairly to acknowledge, that it was the English Liturgy; but
then this acknowledgement lies at such a distance from the year 1557. that, no
doubt, he thought himself pretty secure, that few Readers would reflect upon it
as ane acknowledgment; he does not make it till he comes to the year 1623, when
he had occasion to tell how the use of the English Liturgy was brought into the
New College of St. Andrews. Take it in his own words Called. 800.
Upon the 15 th of January, Master Robert Howie, Principal of the New College
of St. Andrews, Doctor Wedderburn, and Doctor Melvin, were directed by a Letter
from Doctor Young, in the Kings Name, to use the English Liturgy, Morning and
Evening, in the New College, where all the Students were present at Morning and
Evening Prayers: Which was presently put in execution; notwithstanding they
wanted the warrant of any General Assembly, or of any CONTINVED PRACTICE OF THE
FORM in time, bypast, since the Reformation. Where, you see, he lays the stress
of his Argument against it, on its nor having had a continued Practice, since
the Reformation, which is a clear concession that at the Reformation, it was in
practice, tho that practice was not continued. But whither he acknowledged this
or not, is no great matter; we have sufficient Evidence for the point in hand,
without it: For

3. Buchanan's Testimony, which was adduced before about the Scots subscriving
to the Worship and Rites of the Church of England, is unexceptionable: And yet
it is not all. For

4. The Order, as you see it appointed by the Lords of the Congregation, December.
3d, 1557. is, That the Book, there authorized, be used in all Churches from
that very date: but we find by the First Book of Discipline, Spot. 153.
That the Order of Geneva was only coming in to be used, then, in some of the
Churches, i. e. 1560. And it had nothing like a public Establishment, till the
General Assembly holden at Edinburgh, Dec. 25, 1652. For then, and not till
then, It was concluded, that ane Uniform Order should be kept in the
Ministration of the Sacraments, Solemnization of Marriages, and Burial of the
Dead, according to the Kirk of Geneva. So it is in the Mss. and so Petrie has
it; Pet. 233.
But Nature works again with Calderwood; For he has no more but this, It was
ordained that ane Uniform Order be kept in the Ministration of the Sacraments,
according to the Book of Geneva: Called. 32.
Omitting Marriage, and the Burial of the Dead; Marriage, I believe, to bear
the other Company; for the Burial of the Dead, was the Dead Flee: Why? The Book
of Geneva allowed of Funeral Sermons, as he himself acknowledges: Ib. 24.
A mighty Superstition! in the opinion of Prerbyterians; so that it would have
been offensive to the sincerer sort, as he commonly calls those of his own
Gang, and inconsistent with the Exigences of the Good Cause to have let the
world know, that A General Assembly had ratified the Order of that Book about
Burials, and thereby had justified the Superstition of Funeral Sermons. Nay

5. It seems this Act of the General Assembly, December. 1562. has not been strong
enough for turning out the English Liturgy, and introducing the form of Geneva:
For if we may believe Calderwood himself, Ib. 39.
The General Assembly holden at Edinburgh, December. 25. 1564. found themselves
concerned to make another Act, ordaining Every Minister, Exhorter, and Reader
to have one of the Psalm books, lately printed at Edinburgh, and use the Order
contained therein, in Prayers, Marriage, and Administration of the Sacraments.
Where observe further, that Prayers, not mentioned in the Act, 1562. are now
put in; from which it may be probably conjectured, that, as much as Knox was
against the English Liturgy, he found many difficulties to get it laid aside;
so many that, it has not only been used by some (few or many, I cannot tell) in
the Ministration of the Sacraments, etc. after the Act 1562. But the Clergy
have not found themselves obliged to forbear the use of it, in the public
prayers; so that it was needful, in this Assembly 1564, to make a New Act,
restricting them both as to Prayers and other Ministrations, to the Order of
Geneva. And if this holds, we have the English Liturgy, at least, seven Years
in continued practice in Scotland. But it is enough for my main purpose, that
it was once universally in use, which I think cannot be denied by any who
impartially considers what has been said: And now

6. May not I adduce one Testimony more? It Is true it is of a latter date: But
it is very plain and positive, and what I have adduced already is security
enough for its Credibility: It is the Testimony of the Compilers of our
Scottish Liturgy, which made the great Stir in the year 1637. And was made one
of the main pretenses for the first Eruptions of that execrable Rebellion which
ensued; The Compilers of that Liturgy, I say, in their Preface to it, tell us,
That it was then, known, that diverse years after the Reformation we had no
other Order for Common Prayer, but the English Liturgy. A

Third Principle wherein our Reformers agreed with the Church of England, and
which stands in direct contradiction to the Principles of our Presbyterians,
is, that they owned, the Church had a great Dependence on the State; That it
belonged to the Civil Magistrate to reform the Church; That People might appeal
from the Church, to the Civil Magistrate, etc.

I am not now to enter into the Controversy concerning the Dependence or
Independence of the Church upon the State, that falls not within the compass of
my present Undertaking: Neither will I say that our Presbyterians are in the
wrong, as to the true substantial Matter agitated in that Controversy. All I
am concerned for at present, is that, in these times, those of the Church of
England owned a great Dependence of the Church upon the State, and that our
Reformers agreed with them in that Principle; and I think I may make short work
of it: For

That that was the Principle of the Church of England in these times, I think
no man can readily deny, who knows any thing about her, at, and a good many
years after, her Reformation. All my business is to show, that our Reformers
were of that same Principle. And I think that shall be easily made to appear:
For

As to the Civil Magistrates power to reform the Church what can be more clear,
than the Petition presented to the Queen Regent, in November 1558? There our
Reformers tell her Majesty, Kn. 130. Spot. 118.
that Knowing no Order placed in this Realm, but her Majesty and her grave
Council, set, to amend, as well, the Disorder Ecclesiastical, as the Defaults
in the Temporal Regiment, they do most humbly prostrate themselves, before her
Feet, asking Justice, and her Gracious Help against such as falsely traduced
and accused them as Heretics and Schismatics, etc. In which Address, we have
these two things very clear and evident, 1. That they owned, that the Civil
Magistrate, had power to amend Ecclesiastical Disorders, as well as Temporal.
2. That, in consequence of this, they applied to the Civil Magistrate for
protection against the pursuits of the Church. And in their Protestation given
in to the Parliament about that same time, They most humbly beseech the sacred
Authority to think of them as faithful and obedient Subjects, and take them
into its Protection, keeping that Indifferency, which becomes Gods Lieutenants
to use, toward those, who, in his Name, do call for Defense against Cruel
Oppressors, etc. Meaning the then Churchmen. Knox: 136. Spot. 120.
Indeed,

None clearer for this than Knox himself, as is to be seen fully in his
Appellation from the cruel and most unjust Sentence, pronounced against him by
the False Bishops and Clergy of Scotland, (as he himself names it) For there
Kn. Ap. 4.
He lays down and endeavors to prove this Assertion, That it is lawful to Gods
prophets, and to Preachers of Christ Jesus to appeal from the Sentence and
Judgment of the visible Church, to the Knowledge of the temporal Magistrate,
who, by Gods Law, is bound to hear their Causes and to defend them from
Tyranny. And in that same Appellation, p. 13, 14, 15, 16, etc.
he largerly asserts and maintains the Dependence of the Church upon the State:
The Ordering and Reformation of Religion, with the instruction of Subjects (he
says) does appertain especially to the Civil Magistrate. For why? Moses had
great power in the Matters of Religion: God revealed nothing particularly to
Aaron (the Churchman) but commanded him to depend from the Mouth of Moses (the
Civil Magistrate): Moses was empowered to separate Aaron and his Sons for the
Priesthood: Aaron and his Sons were subject to Moses. Moses was so far
preferred to Aaron, that the one commanded, the other obeyed. The Kings of
Israel were commanded to read the Book of the Law all the days of their Lives,
not only for their own private Edification, but for the public preservation of
Religion; so David, Solomon, Asa, Iehosophat, Hezekiah, Josiah understood it,
and interested themselves in the Matters of the Church, accordingly. From which
it is evident, (says he) That the Reformation of Religion, in all points,
together with the Punishment of false Teachers, does appertain to the power of
the Civil Magistrate: For what God required of them, his justice must require
of others, having the like Charge and Authority; what he did approve in them,
he cannot but approve in all others, who with like Zeal and Sincerity do
enterprise to purge the Lords Temple and Sanctuary. Thus Knox (I say) in that
Appellation. I do not concern my self with the truth or falsehood of his
positions; neither am I to justify or condemn his Arguments; All I am to make
of it is, to ask my Presbyterian Brethren, whither these Principles of Knox's
suit well with declining the Civil Magistrate as ane incompetent Judge in
Ecclesiastical matters? with refusing to appear before him prima instantia for
the trial of Doctrines preached in the Pulpit? with the famous distinction of
the Kings having power about Church matters Cumulative but not Privative? etc.
I am afraid it shall be hard enough to reconcile them.

I shall only instance in one principle more, which seems to have been common
to our, and the English Reformers, but it is one of very weighty consequence
and importance to my main design: It is

Fourthly, That Excellent Rule of Reformation, viz. That it be done according
to the word of God, interpreted by the Monuments and Writings of the Primitive
Church. That ancient, solid, approven Rule: That Rule so much commended by that
excellent Writer Vincentius Lirinensis: Al^ter namque illam ( scrip^uram)
Novatianus aliter Sabellius, aliter Donatus, etc. exponit: Atqui idcirco multum
necesse est, propter tantos tam varij erroris anfractus, ut Propheticae and
Apostolicae interpretationis linea, secundum Ecclesiastici and Catholici sensus
Normam dirigatur. Vin. Lin. Commonit. cap. 2.
That Rule which the common sense of mankind cannot but justify, when it is
considered soberly and seriously, without partiality or prejudice. A Rule,
indeed, which, had the Reformers of the several Churches, followed unitedly and
conscientiously, in those times, when the Churches in the Western parts of
Europe were a Reforming; we had not had so many different Faiths, so many
different Modes of Worship; so many different Governments, and Disciplines, as,
Alas! this day, divide the Protestant Churches, and by consequence, weaken the
Protestant Interest: A Rule, which had the pretenders to Reformed Religion, in
Scotland, still stood by, we had not, possibly, had so many horrid Rebellions,
so many unchristian Divisions, so many unaccountable Revolutions, both in
Church and State, as, to our sad Experience, have, in the Result, so unhinged
all the Principles of natural justice and honesty, and disabled, nay, eaten out
the principles of Christianity amongst us, that now we are not disposed so much
for any thing as downright Atheism. But were our Reformers, indeed, for this
Rule? That shall be demonstrated by and by, when we shall have occasion to
bring it in again as naturally, to which opportunity I now refer it: in the
mean time, let us briefly sum up all that has been hitherto said, and try to
what it amounts.

I have, I think, made it appear, that, while our Reformation was a carrying
on, and when it was established Anno 156^, there was no such Controversy
agitated, in the Churches, as that concerning the indispensible necessity of
Presbytery, and the Unlawfulness of Prelacy, concerning the Divine Right of
Parity, or the Vnallowableness of imparity amongst the Governors of the Church.
I have said enough to make it credible, that our Scottish Reformers had no
peculiar occasions, opportunities, provocations, abilities, for falling on that
Controversy, or determining of it, more than the Reformers of other Churches:
In consequence of this, I have further showed, that, from all the monuments of
these times, I have seen, not so much as One of our Reformers can be adduced,
as asserting the Presbyterian side of this Controversy. Lastly, I have, I
think, made it evident, that our Reformers went very much upon the same
Principles, on which the English Reformers went, who still continued
Episcopacy; unquestionably, on many Principles of great weight and importance,
as to the Constitution and Communion, the Government and Polity of the Church,
which staid in direct opposition and contradiction to the Principles of our
present Presbyterians. And now, let any judicious and impartial person lay
these things together, and then let him ingenuously determine, whether it be
not highly incredible, that our Reformers were for the divine institution and
indispensible Right of Parity, and the Unlawfulness of Prelacy, which is the
Principle, at least, the Profession of our present Presbyterians. Yet after all
this,

I must tell my Reader, that I have insisted on these things, so much as I have
done, principally for smoothing the way for the Evidences I am yet to produce
for the certainty of my side of the Second Enquiry. And I am content, that
these things I have already discoursed, should pass for no more than Rational
Presumptions, till I have tried if more strength can be added to them, and they
can be rendered more cogent and concluding by a succession of plain, positive,
direct, and formal proofs of my Assertion: And, to engage my Readers attention,
I dare adventure to promise him that, to as high a degree as the nature of the
thing is capable of, at least, can reasonably bear. And so, without further
address, I thus proceed.

Before our Reformation was established by Law, our Reformers addressed to the
Government by several Petitions, that Religion and the Church might be
reformed. I shall take notice of Three, all pertinent to my purpose. One of
them is no where (that I have seen) set down at length; the other two are in
Knox his History.

That which is no where set down at length, is to be seen abridged in Buchd^a^,
Lesly, and Spotswood, Buch. 586. Lesl. 504. Spot. 119.
but with some little variation; For Buchanan has given that Article, which I
am at present concerned about^ according to his way, in general terms; Thus, Vt
Ministrorum Electio, juxta antiquam Ecclesiae consuetudinem, penes populum
esset, Spotswood has translated Buchanan's words faithfully enough, in this
matter, as he does in many other things; but Lesly gives it a little more
distinctly thus Vt EPISCOPI deinceps, and PASTORES, illi, Dominorum ac Nobilium
cujuscunque DIOICESIS, hi, PAROCHORVM assensione ac voluntate, ad BENEFICIA
cooptentur. That this Petition thus abridged by these three Historians was a
Petition different from that which we have published at length in Knox, seems
unquestionable; for that which is in Knox, has not one syllable about the
Election of Ministers; and beside, Buchanan fairly insinuates, that there was
another, distinct from that which he had abridged, tho not much different: For
thus he discourses Buch. 587.
Papani, Edinburgi, ad eadem FERE postulata quaeper Nobilitatem ad eam (Reginam
proregem) sunt delata, PENE paribus usi sunt Responsis. Now if it had been the
same Petition, why would he have said, ad eadem FERE postulata, and PENE
paribus Responsis?

This I take notice of, that my Presbyterian Brethren may not have occasion to
^avil, at the Article as it is in Lesly, as if it were not genuine, because it
is not in the Petition recorded by Knox, and, from him (most imperfectly)
abridged by Calderwood, their two great and authentic Historians. For, as for
Mr. Petrie, he was so wise, as not to trouble himself with either of these
Petitions; perceiving, belike, that neither of them was favorable to his
beloved Parity. To proceed, now, with the Article as it is in Lesly.

If he has set it down faithfully, I think we have a fair account of the
sentiments of our Reformers, concerning Mother Parity; K. Jam. Bas Dor. 160.
calls Parity the Mother of Con^usion, etc.
so very fair, that he who runs may read it. The Question then is, whither
Lesly has faithfully transmitted this Article to us? And for the affirmative, I
offer these Reasons.

1. There Is no reason to doubt of his integrity in this matter; he was a
zealous Papist, and a Bishop to boot: And it is evident, as he was either of
these, it was not his interest to make our Reformers such friends to
Episcopacy, if they were not such, really: For if they had not made that
Distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, if they had professed the Divine
Right of Parity, he had had good ground for accusing them of receding from the
undoubted principles, and universal practice of the Catholic Church, in all
times, and in all places, in a point of so great weight and consequence in the
Government of the Church: Ane occasion which one of his Zeal for his party
would not probably have neglected to take hold of; far less would he have lied
so palpably to save the Reputation of his Adversaries.

2. As he had no temptation to falsify in this matter, so, he had all other
Qualifications of a credible Witness. He lived in these times; he himself was a
Clergy man, then; probably, he was a Member of that same Convocation to which
the Petition was offered; and I think no man will doubt of his Abilities to
comprehend such a matter. Indeed

3. If he forged this Article, he was ridiculously impudent at Forging; for as
he did it without any imaginable necessity, without any shadow of a degree of
subserviency to his Cause, so he put himself upon a necessity of forging more,
even, a good long Answer, De Episcopis quoque ac Pastoribus el^gendis, aequum
imprimis esse, ut, quae jure canonico caventur, ea Sarta tecta maneant, neque
novi quid, abrogatis veteribus, ullo modo surrogetur, id quoque prudentur
adjecerunt, cum praelatorum Electio, in Regia potestate, suffragante summo
pontifice, esser, de ea, in tenella Reginae aetate, contra, quisquam staturi,
sine aperta temeritatis no^a, ae Regiae potestatis imminutione, nullo modo
posse, Lesl. 504.
which, he says, was returned to that Article by the Convocation, viz. That it
was not reasonable, they should alter the Method of Electing Bishops and
Presbyters, prescribed by the Canon Law, especially in the time of the Queens
Nonage: Her Prerogative was interested in the matter: She with the Popes
Consent had power to nominate the Prelates; and to take that Power out of her
hands without her Consent, or before she came to perfect Age, was notoriously,
as well as undutifully to invade her Royalty. Ane Answer, indeed, exactly
fitted for the Article, as he has transmitted it. But the truth is,

4. That he neither forged the Article, nor the Convocations Answer to it, we
have further undoubted Evidence; for I have seen ane Old Manuscript Scottish
History (which I can produce if I am put to it) which exactly agrees with
Lesly, as to the Article; for thus it has it, The Election of the Bishops and
Kirkmen, to pass* by the Temporal Lords, and People, of their Diocesses and
Parishes. And, Buchanan, upon the matter, gives that same account of the
Convocations Answer, Hoc etiam amplius, ad eam partem, quae erat de Ministrorum
Electione; in hoc genere Quaestionum, aut juris Canonici, aut Concilii
Tridentini Decretis standum, Buch. 587.
affirming, that, As to the Election of Ministers they answered, That such
Matters were to be regulated by the Canon Law, or the Decrees of the Council of
Trent.

5. Neither will it be found of any force, to say, that Buchanan has not the
Article; nor Spotswood, whose interest it was to have had it, if such a thing
had been, considering his Principles, and what was one of his principal designs
in writing his History. This is of no force, I say, for 1st as for Buchanan, it
is evident from the whole tract of his History, That he aimed, principally, at
Matters of State, bringing in Church Matters only by the by, as we say, so that
it is no wonder, if he did not record them accurately, and with all the
preciseness of Nicety: And yet, even as he sums up the Petition, he has
something in it which plainly imports, the Petitioners had no thought to
interrupt the Continuation of Imparity; for thus he puts the last Article, If,
by the Negligence of former times, Si per superiorum temporum Negl^gentiam,
indocti flagitiosive ad honores obrepsissent, ut iis a Ministeriis Ecclesiae
remotis, alii sufficerentur. Buch. 586.
ignorant or wicked men had been advanced to Ecclesiastical Dignities, they
might be removed, and others substituted in their Offices. In which words, it is
plain, that as there had been HONORES, Ecclesiastical Dignities, and
MINISTERIA, different Offices amongst the Clergy before, so now, there was
nothing like petitioning, for abrogating any of them. But that these Dignities
might be better bestowed, and these Offices better provided: The Dignities and
Offices were to continue, no Change to be made but of the Dignitaries and
Officers. 2. As for Spotswood, as, I grant, it had been very proper for his
purpose to have taken notice of the Article as it is in Lesly; so, that he took
no notice of it, is no argument that Lesly was in the wrong; for, besides that
there is no color of reason for discrediting one Historians accounts, because
another is silent about them; the truth is, whosoever reads Spotswoods History,
and compares it with the rest of our Histories, will find a very great many
such Defects: And we shall have a very clear, as well as a very considerable
instance by and by, when we come to the next Petition. In the mean time, let me
add another irrefragable Evidence (so I think) of Leslies integrity, as to this
Article. It is

6. That when our Reformers had carried the day, and so came to establish the
Government of the Church; they exactly reduced to practice, that which they had
petitioned for in the Article, in the Election of Superintendents; as is clear
both from the First Book of Discipline, and the Form of Electing
Superintendents, as it is to be seen both in the Old Scottish Liturgy, and in
Knox his History.

In the Fifth Head of the First Book of Discipline, it was appointed Spot. 159.
That the Council should nominate the Superintendents, or give Commission to
men of best Knowledge, and who had the fear of God, to do it; the Gentlemen and
Burgesses of Towns, within the Diocesses, being always made privy to the
Election. And

In the Order for Electing Superintendents, as it is both in the Old Liturgy,
and Knox's History Kn. 289.
we are told, that the Council having given charge and power to the Churches of
Lothian, to choose Master John Spotswood, Superintendent, sufficient warning
was made, by public Edict, to the Churches of Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Sterling,
Trenent, Hadingtown and Dumbar; as also to Earls, Lords, Barons, Gentlemen, or
others that had, or might claim to have, Voice in Election, to be present, etc.
This was done in the beginning of the year 1561. Now

Lay these two things together, and what is the Result? what else, than giving
power to the Nobility and Gentry of the Diocese to elect their Bishop,
according to the Article, as Lesly has it in his Breviate of the Petition?
Thus we have found Lesly honest, and his account just and genuine; and thereby
(as I take it) this proposition fairly demonstrated, that our Reformers were so
far from being Presbyterian, so far from being for the divine institution, and
indispensable right of Parity, that, on the contrary, they were clear for
Imparity, for Episcopacy. But this is not all.

The Second Petition which I mentioned, and which is set down in full form in
Knox's History, tho it does not name Bishops, is every whit as plain and
decretory, that the sentiments of our Reformers were no ways inimicous to
Prelacy (if I may make use of a word made fashionable, by a Nobleman of the
fashion.) But, on the contrary, that they were plainly for it. This I take to
be so fully and fairly expressed in the fifth and last Article of that Petition,
that I will here transcribe it word for word. Ib. 131.


Lastly, we require most humbly, that the wicked, slanderous and detestable
Life of Prelates, and of the State Ecclesiastical, may be reformed, that the
people, by them, have not occasion (as of many days they have had) to contemn
their Ministry, and the preaching whereof they should be Messengers. And if
th^^ suspect, that we rather envy their Honors, or covet their Riches and
Possessions, than zealously desire their Amendment and Salvation, we are
content, that not only the Rules and Precepts of the New Testament, but also
THE WRITINGS of the ANCIENT FATHERS, and the GODLY and APPROVED LAWS of
JUSTINIAN the EMPEROR, decide the Controversy betwixt us and them: And if it
shall be found that, either malevolently, or ignorantly, we ask more; than
these forenamed have required and continually do require, of able and true
Ministers, in Christ's Church, we refuse not Correction as your Majesty, with
right Judgment, shall think meet: But if all the forenamed shall condemn, THAT
which we condemn; and approved THAT which we require; then we most earnestly
beseech your Majesty, that, notwithstanding the long Custom which they have had
to live at their lust, they be compelled either to desist from Ecclesiastical
Administration, or to discharge their Duties, as becomes True Ministers. So
that, the GRAVE and GODLY FACE of the PRIMITIVE CHVRCH being REDVCED, Ignorance
may be expelled, true Doctrine and good Manners, may once again appear in the
Church of this Realm.

Here our Reformers lay down a complexe Rule, according to which they crave the
Church, and the Ecclesiastical State may be Reformed: This complexe Rule, is
made up of the Rules and Precepts of the New Testament, the Writings of the
Ancient Fathers, and the Godly and Approved Laws of the Emperor JUSTINIAN. This
is that solid, orthodox, proper, and adequate Rule of Reformation, which I
mentioned before; as Vincentius Lirinensis his Rule, and the Rule wherein our
Reformers agreed with the English Reformers: By this Rule, our Reformers are
content, that all the Controversies betwixt them and the Papists, be de^ided;
they refuse not Correction, if they ask more than this Rule requires; they
condemn no more than this Rule condemns: This Rule approves all they are
asking. In short, they require no more than that according to this Rule, the
grave and godly Face of the Primitive Church may be restored, as it was in
JUSTINIAN's time; Let the Ecclesiastical State be reduced to that Frame and
Constitution, and the Clergy live, and rule, and discharge their Trusts and
Offices, as the Clergy did then, and they are satisfied: And now, if these
Reformers who thus petitioned, and, in their Petition, thus reasoned and agreed
to such a Rule of Reformation, were for the divine institution of Parity, and
the sacred Rights of Presbytery; nay if* they were not, not only for the
Lawfulness, but the Continuance of Prelacy; I must confess my ignorance to be
very gross, and so I refuse not Correction.

For this Evidence, as I said we are beholden to Knox, and to Knox only: It Is
true indeed, Calderwood Call. 5
gives us the Abstract of this Petition, but he conceals and suppresses the
whole pith and marrow of this Article, summing it up in these few
ill-complexion'd words, That the slanderous and detestable life of the
Prelates, and the State Ecclesiastical may be reformed; which, at first view,
one would imagine, looked kindly toward Presbytery; but I am not surprised to
find him thus at his Tricks; it is but according to his Custom: To have set down
the full Article, or to have abridged it so as that its force and purpose might
have been seen, had been to disserve his Cause, and do ane ill Office to his
Idol, Parity. And Petrie (as I have said) was so wise, as not to touch it at
all, lest it had burnt his Fingers: but that Archbishop Spotswood should have
overlookt it both in his History, and in his Refutatio Libelli, etc. seems very
strange. For my part I should rather think we have not his History entire, and
as he designed it for the Press (for which, I have heard other very pregnant
presumptions) than that so great a man was guilty of so great ane Oscitancy.
But whatever be of this, Knox has it, and that is enough; and Calderwood has
abridged it, and that is more than enough for my Presbyterian Brethren.

The Third Petition which I promised to adduce, is that which was presented to
the Parliament which established the Reformation Anno 1560. for which we are
obliged to Knox alone also; at least, so far as the present Argument is
concerned. Kn. 261.
For tho both Spotswood and Petrie Spot. 150. Pet. 219.
make mention of the Petition or Supplication, yet neither of them has recorded
that which I take notice of; and Calderwood is so accurate ane Historian, as to
take no notice of the Petition. That which I take notice of in it, as it is in
Knox, is, That when our Reformers came to crave the Reformation of the
Ecclesiastical State, they bespoke the Parliament thus. And lest that your
Honors should doubt in any of the premises (they had affirmed before, That
the Doctrine of the Roman Church contained many pestiferous errors; that the
Sacraments of Jesus Christ were most shamefully abused and profaned by the
Roman Harlot; that the true Discipline of the ancient Church, amongst that
Sect, was utterly extinguished; and that the Clergy, of all men within the
Realm, were most corrupt in life and manners, etc.) we offer our selves
evidently to prove, that in all the Rabble of the Clergy, there is not one
Lawful Minister, IF GODS WORD, THE PRACTICES OF THE APOSTLES, THE SINCERITY OF
THE PRIMITIVE CHVRCH, AND THEIR OWN ANCIENT LAWS SHALL IVDGE OF THE ELECTION.
Here, I say, our Reformers insist on that same very Rule, for finding if there
be Corruptions in, and by consequence for reforming of, the Church, on which
they insisted, in the aforementioned Petition; from which, it is evident, they
persisted of the same sentiments, and it is easy to draw the same inferences.

Such were the sentiments of our Scottish Reformers, before the Reformed
Religion had the countenance of the Civil Government, and Acts of Parliament on
its side, and was made the National Religion. Let us try next what kind of
Government they did establish, when they had got Law for them? Whither they
established a Government that was to be managed by Ministers acting in Parity,
or in Imparity? And, here, I think, the Controversy might very soon be brought
to a very fair issue. The First Book of Discipline, the Acts of many General
Assemblies, the Acts of many Parliaments, Both, without interruption; the
unanimous Consent of Historians, and the uncontroverted Practice of the Church
for many years; all concurring to this Assertion. That the first Establishment
was of a Government, which was to be managed by Superintendents, and Parochial
Ministers, Elders and Deacons, acting in Subordination, not in a State of
Parity with, but in a State of inferiority in Power and Jurisdiction to these
Superintendents. This Establishment, I say, is so clear and undoubted from all
these fountains, That no more needed be said upon the whole Argument. But
because our Presbyterian Historians and Antiquaries,, tho they cannot deny the
thing, do yet endeavor with all their Might and Cunning to intricate it, and
obscure it; I shall, further, undertake two things.

I. I shall give the world a fair prospect of the power of Superintendents, as
they were, then, established, and of the Disparities betwixt them and Parish
Ministers. II. I shall endeavor to dissipate these Mists, whereby our
Presbyterian Brethren are so very earnest to involve and darken this Matter. As
for the
I. The world may competently see, that Superintendents as established in
Scotland, at the Reformation, had a considerable stock of Prerogatives, or
Preheminencies (call them as ye will) which raised them far above other
Churchmen, far above the allowances of that Parity, our Presbyterian Brethren
contend for so eagerly, from the following Enumeration.

1. They had Districts or Diocesses of far larger extent than other Churchmen:
Private Ministers had only their private Parishes, and might have been as many
as there were Churches in the Kingdom: But according to the Scheme laid down by
our Reformers in the First Book of Discipline, Head 5. Spot. 158.
only ten or twelve Superintendents were designed to have the Chief Care (as it
is worded in the Prayer at the Admission of a Superintendent) of all the
Churches within the Kingdom: Indeed ten are only, there, designed, but it was
because of the scarcity of qualified men, as we shall learn hereafter.

2. As they had larger Districts than Parish Ministers, so, there were
correspondent Specialities in their Election. Parish Ministers were to enter to
such Churches as had Benefices, by presentation from the Patron, and Collation
from the Superintendent, as is evident from Act 7. Parl. 1. Iam. 6. and many
Acts of Assemblies, as shall be fully proven afterward. If they were to serve
where the Benefice was actually possessed by a Papist, they were to be chosen
by the People of the Congregation, by the appointment of the First Book of
Discipline, Head 4. Ib. 154.
But the Election of Superintendents was quite different; they were to be
nominated by the Council, and elected by the Nobility and Gentry, etc. within
their Dioceses, as has been already considered.

3. There was as great a difference in the matter of Deposition, if they
deserved it. Parish Ministers by the First Book of Discipline, Head 8. Ib. 168.
were deposable by the Superintendent of the Diocese, and the Elders of the
Parishes, where they were Ministers; but of this more hereafter. Ib. 160.
But by that same First Book of Discipline, the Superintendent was to be judged
by the Ministers and Elders of his whole Province, over which he was appointed;
and if the Ministers and Elders of the Province were negligent in correcting
him, one or two other Superintendents, with their Ministers and Elders were to
conveen him, providing it were within his own Province, or Chief Town, and
inflict the Censure which his Offense deserved. Of the Reasonableness of this
afterward.

4. There was as remarkable a difference in point of Ordination, which in the
then, Scottish style was called Admission. Private Ministers were to be
admitted by their Superintendents, as we shall find afterward.

But by the First Book of Discipline, Head 5. Ib. 159.
Superintendents were to be admitted by the Superintendents next adjacent, with
the Ministers of the Province.

5. In the case of Translation, the General Assembly holden at Edinburgh,
December. 25. 1562. Gives power to every Superintendent, within his own bounds, in
his Synodal Assembly, with consent of the most part of the Elders and Ministers
of Kirks, to translate Ministers from one Kirk to another, as they shall
consider the Necessity; Charging the Minister so translated to obey the Voice
and Commandment of the Superintendent, Mss. Pet. 233.
But according to the First Book of Discipline, Head 5. Spot. 160.
No Superintendent might be translated at the pleasure or request of any one
Province, without the Council of the whole Church, and that for grave Causes
and Considerations.

6. A special care was to be taken of his Qualifications and Abilities for such
ane important office, for thus it is appointed by the First Book of Discipline,
Head 5. Ibid:
That after the Church shall be established, and three years are past, no man
shall be called to the Office of a Superintendent, who has not, two years, at
least, given a proof of his faithful Labors in the Ministry. A Caution simply
unapplyable to Parish Ministers.

7. He had a living provided for him by the First Book of Discipline, Head 5.
Ib. 157.
about five times as much, yearly, as was allotted for any private Minister. And
it is to be observed, that this was in a time when the Popish Bishops still
brooked their Benefices. But when the Resolution was, Anno 1567, to deprive all
the Popish Clergy; it was agreed to, in the General Assembly, by the Churchmen
on the one hand, and the Lords and Barons on the other, That Superintendents
should succeed in their places, as both the Mss. and Spotswood have it
expressly. Ib. 210. Art. 11.


8. Superintendents, by virtue of their Office, were constant Members of the
General Assemblies: Therefore the General Assembly holden at Perth, June 25.
1563. statuted, That every Superintendent be present the first day of the
Assembly under the pain of, 40 sh. to be given to the poor without Remission.
So it is in the Mss. but Petrie has it barely, That they shall conveen on the
first day of every Assembly. Pet. 237.
And it seems, because that punishment had not sufficient influence on them, it
was, again ordained by the G. Ass. at Edinburgh, March 6. 1573. That they shall
be present in the Assembly, the first day, before noon, under the pain of
losing one half of their stipend for a year, etc. So both the Mss. and Petrie.
Ib. 379.
But as we shall find afterward, such presence of Parish Ministers was not
allowed, far less necessary.

9. It belonged to them to try those who stood Candidates for the Ministry,
thus, 1. B. of Disc. Head 4. Spot. 157.
Such as take upon them the Office of Preachers, who shall not be found
qualified therefore, by the Superintendent, are by him to be plac^d Readers.
And again, Head 5. Ib. 158.
No Child, nor person within the age of 21 years, may be admitted to the Office
of a Reader; but such must be chosen and admitted by the Superintendent, as for
their Gravity and Discretion may grace the Function that they are called unto.
And the Ass. at Edinburgh, Dec. 15. 1562. Ordains, That Inhibition be made
against all such Ministers as have not been presented by the people, or a part
thereof, to the Superintendent, and he, after Examination and Trial, has not
appointed them to their Charges. So the Mss. and so Petrie; Pet. 233.
and Spotswood cites another Act of the General Assembly at Edinburgh 1564. to
the same purpose. Spot. 190.


10. As appears by that Act of the Assembly, December. 25. 1562. just now cited,
and the 7 Act Parl. 1 Iac. 6. cited before; also Superintendents had the power
of granting Collations upon presentations. And the Assembly at Perth, holden in
June 1563. appoints, That when any Benefice chances to vaik, or is now vacant,
that a qualified person be presented to the Superintendent of that Province
where the Benefice lies, and that he being found sufficient be admitted, etc.
So I find it cited by the Author of Episcopacy not abjured in Scotland.

11. A Superintendent had power to plant Ministers in Churches, where the
people were negligent to present timeously; and indeed that power devolved much
sooner into his hands by the First Book of Discipline, Head 4. Ib. 154.
than it did afterward into the hands of either Bishop or Presbytery; for
there it is ordered, That if the people be found negligent in electing a
Minister, the space of forty days, the Superintendent with his Counsel may
present unto them a man whom they judge apt to feed the flock, etc. And as he
had thus the power of trying and collating Ministers, and planting Churches in
the case of a Ius Devolutum. So

12. He had the power of Ordination, which, as I said, was then called
Admission, as is evident from the First Book of Discipline, (cap. 5.) and
several Acts of Assemblies already cited.

13. All Presbyters or Parish Ministers, once admitted to Churches, were bound
to pay Canonical Obedience to their Superintendents. Thus in the Assembly at
Edinburgh, June 30. 1562. It was concluded by the whole Ministers assembled,
that all Ministers should be subject to the Superintendents in all lawful
admonitions, as is prescribed, as well in the Book of Discipline, as in the
Election of Superintendents. So the Mss. And by that aforecited Act of the
Assembly at Edinburgh, December. 25. 1562. Ministers translated from one Church to
another, are commanded to obey the Voice and Commandment of the Superintendent.
Indeed, it was part of ane Article presented by the Church to the Council, May
27. 1561. That ane Act should be made appointing a (civil) Punishment for such
as disobeyed or contemned the Superintendents in their Function. Kn. 297. Pet.
223.


14. He had power to visit all the Churches within his Diocese, and in that
Visitation (they are the words of the First Book of Discipline, Head 5. Spot.
159.
To try the Life, Diligence and Behavior of the Ministers, the Order of their
Churches, the Manners of their People, how the Poor are provided, and how the
Youth are instructed, etc. And further,

In these Visitations he had power, particularly, to take account of what Books
every Minister had, and how he profited from time to time by them. By Act of
Assem. at Edinburgh, June 29. 1562. So it is in the Mss.

15. He had power to depose Ministers that deserved it; as appears from the
First Book of Discipline, Head 8. already cited. And by the Assem. at
Edinburgh, March 6. 1573. It is statuted that, if any Minister reside not at
the Church where his Charge is, he shall be summoned before his Superintendent,
or Commissioner of the Province, to whom the Assembly gives power to depose
him, etc. So the Mss. and Potrie. Pet. 378.


16. He had power to translate Ministers from one Church to another, as appears
from the Act already cited, Number. 4. and by ane Act of the Assembly at
Edinburgh, June 25. 1564. It is concluded, that a Minister, being once placed,
may not leave that Congregation without the Knowledge of the Flock, and Consent
of the Superintendent, or whole Church: ( i. e. a General Assembly) So the Mss.
had so Pet. Ib. 340.
These are all powers, methinks, scarcely reconcilable with ane opinion of the
Divine Right of Parity; but there are more, and perhaps, more considerable, as
yet to follow. For

17. He had power to nominate Ministers to be Members of the General Assembly.
This is clearly asserted by the Acts of two General Assemblies: The first at
Edinburgh, in June 1562. where it was ordained, That no Minister leave his
Flock for coming to the Assembly, except he have complaints to make, or be
complained of, or at least be warned thereto by the Superintendent. So it is in
the Mss. and Spotswood cites it in his Refutatio Libelli, etc. The other Act
was made by the Assembly holden at Edinburgh, July 1. 1563. which I find thus
worded in the Mss. fairly agreeing with Spotswood. Spot. 219.
Anent the Order hereafter to be used in General Assemblies -- They all voted
and concluded as follows, viz. That if the Order already received, pleases
not, by reason of the Plurality of Voices, it be reformed in this manner.

First, That none have place to vote, except Superintendents, Commissioners
appointed for visiting the Kirks, and Ministers brought with them, presented as
persons able to reason, and having knowledge to judge; with the aforenamed
shall be joined Commissioners of Burghs and Shires, together with Commissioners
of Universities. Secondly, Ministers and Commissioners shall be chosen at the
Synodal Convention of the Diocese, by Consent of the rest of the Ministers and
Gentlemen, that shall conveen at the said Synodal Convention, etc. From which
it is plain, that the Superintendent or Commissioner (who was a temporary
Superintendent) nominated the Ministers they brought with them to the Assembly;
and that the rest of the Ministers, etc. had only a power of consenting; and so
it was, thereafter, Post Reformatam Religionem Consuetudine recep^um est, ut
Episcopi, and ex Ministris Pastoribus ac Senioribus, tot quot iidem Episcopi
jusserint, unum in locum conveniant, cum praecipuis Baronibus ac Nobilibus,
Religionem veram profitentibus, and de doctrina and de moribus inquisituri.
practiced unquestionably. And if there were need of more Light, it might be
copiously received from the Lord Glamis his Letter to Mr. Beza, Anno 1576.
wherein he tells him, that it had been the Custom, ever since the Reformation,
that the Superintendents, or Bishops, still nominated the Ministers, who met in
the General Assemblies, than which, nothing can be more distinct and plain. And
this Testimony is the more considerable, that it was not Glamis his own private
deed, but that which was the Result of a considerable Consult; as we shall
learn hereafter.

This was such a Branch of Episcopal power as mightily offended our
Presbyterian Historians, it seems, for they have endeavored to obscure it as
much as they could: Neither Calderwood nor Petrie mentions the first of these
two Acts; they mention the second, indeed, but how? Calderwood Called* 45.
huddles it up thus, It was thought meet, for eschewing of Confusion, that this
Order be followed -- That none have place, nor power to vote, except
Superintendents, Commissioners appointed for visiting of Kirks, Ministers,
Commissioners of Burghs and Shires, together with the Commissioners of
Universities. Ministers and Commissioners of Shires shall be chosen at the
Synodal Convention of the Diocesses, with consent of the rest of the Ministers
and Gentlemen, etc. Leaving out entirely these words [ brought with them ( i.
e. with the Superintendents and Commissioners of Kirks) presented as persons
able to reason, and having knowledge to judge] whereby the power of the
Superintendents and Commissioners for visiting of Kirks, is quite stifled, and
the whole sense of the Act perverted; for what sense is it, I pray, to say that
the Ministers were to be chosen by consent of the rest of the Ministers, when
you tell not who was to choose, or who they were, to whose Choice or Nomination
the rest of the Ministers were to give that consent? But it is no strange thing
with this Author to let sense shift for it self, if the good Cause cannot be
otherwise served. Neither is Petrie less unfaithful, for, he not only draws the
Curtain over the whole power of the Superintendent, etc. so that you cannot
have the least Glimpse of it from his account; But he intermixes lies to boot;
only he stumbles not on Nonsense. He accounts thus, Pet. 359.


Because heretofore all Ministers, that would come, were admitted to vote; (not
one word of this, in the Narrative of the Act, as it is in the Mss. or any
other Historian; and it is directly contrary to the Act 1562. already
mentioned; so that it is plain it is a figment of his own) And now the Number is
increased, and Commissioners of Shires were chosen in the Sheriff Court (no
other Historian, or Record I have seen, has one syllable of this either, tho
it is probable enough it was so) This Assembly makes ane Act of three parts,
concerning the Admission of Members: 1. That none shall have place to vote, but
Superintendents, Commissioners for visiting Churches, Ministers and
Commissioners of Shires and Burghs, chosen as follows, together with
Commissioners of Universities. 2. Ministers and Commissioners of Shires shall
be chosen at the Synod of the Bounds, by the Ministers and Gentlemen conveening
there, etc. Not, with the consent of the rest of the Ministers, etc. you see,
as Calderwood ridiculously had it, but, chosen by the Ministers, etc. without
the least syllable that might import the Superintendents having any (and far
less the principal) power in that Election. This is clean work of it. Thus, I
say, these two Historians of the Party treat this notable branch of the power
which our Reformers thought reasonable to confer on Superintendents; but we
shall not want occasions enough, for admiring their ingenuity. Return we now to
our task.

18. They had power to hold Diocesan Synods: Ordains further (they are the
words of ane Act of the Ass. holden in December. 1562. as it is both in the Mss.
and Pet. Ib. 233.
) That the Superintendents appoint Synodal Conventions twice in the year, viz.
in the months of April and October, on such days of the said months as the
Superintendents shall think good. Whereby two things appear, 1. That he had the
sole appointment of the day of meeting. 2. That he alone was Praeses of the
meeting; indeed they are frequently, or rather constantly, called his Synods.

19. Superintendents had power, within their own bounds, to appoint Diocesan
Fasts, granted to them, by ane Act of the Assembly holden at Edinburgh, March
5. 1570. For there it is enacted, That all Superintendents and Commissioners to
plant Kirks, in their first Synodal Conventions, hereafter following, with the
advice of their Ministers, shall reason and appoint public Fasting, if it
shall be thought necessary. So the Mss. and Petrie. Ib. 369.


20. Another considerable instance of the power of Superintendents, was that of
modifying or assigning to Parish Ministers, their Stipends or Livings. This is
clear from ane Act of the General Assembly, holden at Edinburgh on the seventh
of July 1569. as it is both in the Mss. and Petrie Ib. 365.
wherein, The Kirk presently conveened found it most needful and expedient that
all Superintendents, Ministers, Exhorters and Readers, should have their own
particular Assignations (out of the Thirds of Benefices, as shall be more fully
discoursed hereafter) appointed them, to be received from the hands of the
Laborers respective, or others addebted in payment of the Thirds. And
therefore the Kirk in one voice by this their Act, gave their full power and
commission to every Superintendent and Commissioner, within their own bounds,
with Advice and Consent of their Synodal Conventions, to give to every
Minister, Exhorter and Reader, particular assignations ad vitam, as they should
find the same expedient, under the Superintendents Subscription, and Ministers
aforesaid, with all Clauses needful and expedient thereto; which shall be as
sufficient, as if the same were sped by the General Assembly of the Kirk; and
as concerning the Superintendents and Commissioners of Kirks, their Provision
and Assignation to be made by the General Assembly.

21. Appeals were to be made to them from inferior Iudicatories. Thus, by the
Assembly at Perth in June 1563. Mss. Pet. 237. Called. 33.
Concerning the Order of Appellation, it is statuted and ordained, that, if any
person find himself hurt, by any Sentence, given by any Minister, Elders or
Deacons (i. e. by any Kirk Session, as we call them) It shall be lawful for the
person so hurt, to appeal to the Superintendent of the Diocese, and his Synodal
Convention, within ten days, next after; and the said Superintendent shall take
Cognition, whether it was well appealed or not, and give his sentence
thereupon. It Is true indeed, (and it was reasonable) by the same Act, the
person, if he thought himself injured, by the Superintendents sentence, might
appeal to the General Assembly. Nay,

22. If the Superintendent found it Male Appellatum he had power of Fining;
thus it is ordered by the same Assembly. If the Appellant justifies not his
Appellation, before the Superintendent and his Convention aforesaid; then the
Superintendent shall impute a pain upon the said Appellant, as ^e shall think
good, beside the expense of the party. That he had this power is all I am
concerned for; let others judge whether it was purely Ecclesiastical. And as
the Superintendent had this power of receiving Appeals made from inferior
Courts, so agreeably

23. He had the power, with the advice of his Synod, or such of the Ministers
of his Diocese as he should choose for that purpose, to determine intricate
Cases of Conscience or Government. Thus, by the Assembly at Edinburgh, December.
25. 1564. Mss. Pet. 341.
It is ordained, that no Questions be proponed by any Brother till the affairs
of the Kirk, and the Order thereof be first treated and ended; and thereafter,
if any Brother have a Question, worthy to be proponed, that the same be
presented in writ; and if the same requires hasty Resolution, it shall be
decided in the present Assembly before the end thereof; otherwise, the Decision
of the same shall be referred to every one of the Superintendents, within whose
bounds the Question is proponed; and they, and every one of them, with a
certain number of Ministers, as they shall think meet to appoint, for
assisting, shall hear the Reasonings of the aforesaid Questions, and thereafter
present the Reasons in writ affirmative, or negative, which every one of them
shall report to the next Assembly. Again, by the Assembly holden at Eden. in
July 1568. Mss. Pet. 360. Spot. 219.
It is statuted and ordained, that Ministers, Exhorters, Readers, or other
persons, hereafter, trouble not, nor molest, the General Assembly, with such
things as Superintendents may, and ought to decide in their Synodal
Conventions; and if any chance to do hereafter, in the contrary, their Letters
shall be rejected. Which Act, as is obvious, extends both to Cases of Right and
of Fact; and extending to Cases of Fact, it clears a little further, the former
Head of Appeals, intimating fairly, that they were not to be made per saltum,
neither yet Delations; but does in their proper Gradation, were to be brought,
first, before the Superintendent, and by him, only, if he thought it needful,
to be advanced, before the General Assembly: But most home to the present
point, is the Act of the Assembly March 5. 1571. Mss. Pet. 369.
by which it is statuted, That all Questions be first proponed to
Superintendents, or Commissioners, in their Synodal Conventions, and, there,
receive Solution; and if they think them too hard, that they bring them to the
General Assembly; but that no private Ministers bring Questions to the Assembly
prima instantia.

24. It belonged to the Superintendents, particularly, to judge of Divorces; a
point of great intricacy, as well as importance: Thus, I find, the Assembly at
Edinburgh, December. 25. 1562. (as it is in the Mss.) ordains, That no Ministers,
nor others bearing Office in the Kirk, take in hand to cognosce or decide in
the Actions of Divorcement, except the Superintendents, and they, to whom they
shall give special Commission.

25. It was a branch of their power also to enjoin P^nnance to greater
Criminals: So the General Assembly holden at Edinburgh, June 25. 1564. (as it
is in the Mss.) where it is thus, Touching such as relapse the third time in
any kind of crime, such as Fornication or Drunkenness, it is statuted and
ordained, that no particular Minister admit such persons to Repentance, but
that they send them to the Superin^endent of the Diocese, where the crimes are
committed, with information; who shall give them such injunctions, as they
think may make the offense to be holden in horror; but chiefly that they compel
the Offender to satisfy where the Offenses were made, more days than one, as
the Superintendent shall think good. And by the Genesis Ass. at Eden. March 5.
1571. Mss. Pet. 369.
It is ordained that Adulterers, and other such scandalous persons, shall
hereafter be called by the Superintendent or Commissioner of the Province, to
compear before their Synodal Convention, and there receive their injunctions.
And accordingly we find the Custom of the Church in those times, particularly,
in the Case of the Countess of Argyle, Anno 1567. She had been guilty of a
mighty scandal in being present at the Christening of the Prince, (afterward,
James the Sixth) which was performed after the Popish manner; she behoved
therefore to give satisfaction to the Church: And was ordered to do it, by the
General Assembly, in such manner, and at such time, as the Superintendent of
Lothian, (within whose bounds the Scandal was committed) should appoint. So
both Spot. and Pet. Spot. 214. Pet. 359.


26. Another branch, was, to restore Criminals to the Exercises of their
Offices, if they had any dependence on the Church, after they had performed
their Penance, and received Absolution. Thus Thomas Duncanson, Reader at
Sterling, had fallen in the Sin of Fornication; for this he was silenced: He
had performed his Penance, and was absolved. Then the Question was put to the
General Ass. met at Eden. December. 25. 1563. Whither having made public
Repentance, he might be restored to his Office? And the Assembly determined, He
might not, till the Church of Stirling should make Request to the
Superintendent for him. Mss. Pet. 242.


27. To the Superintendents was reserved the power of Excommunication, in Cases
of Contumacy, etc. Thus it is statuted by the Genesis Ass. at Eden. July 1. 1562.
That in Cases of Contumacy the Minister give notice to the Superintendent, with
whose advice Excommunication is to be pronounced. So the Mss. and both the Mss.
and Petrie have another long Act of the Assembly holden at Eden. Sept. 25.
1565. to the same purpose. Pet. 346.


28. It belonged also to them to delate Atrocious Criminals to the Civil
Magistrate, that condign corporal punishments might be inflicted on them. To
this purpose, I find it enacted by a Convention of the Kirk (as it is called in
the Mss.) met at Eden. December. 15. 1567. to wait on the motions of the
Parliament, That Ministers, Elders and Deacons make search within their bounds,
if the crimes of Incest or Adultery were committed, and to signify the same to
the Superintendent, that he may notifye it to the Civil Magistrate. Such was
the power of Superintendents in the Government of the Church, and her
Discipline. But because, several things may have relation to the Church, tho
not formally and directly, yet reductively, and by way of Analogical
Subordination, their power extended even to these things also, I shall only
instance in two.

29. Then, because Universities, Colleges and Schools, are the Seminaries of
Learning, and by consequence Nurseries for the Ministry; the power of
Superintendents over them, was very considerable. Thus by the First Book of
Discipline, Head 5. Spot. 162.
if, e. g. The Principal, or Head of any College within the University of St.
Andrews died, the Members of the College, being sworn to follow their
Consciences, were to nominate three of the most sufficient men within the
University: This done, the Superintendent of Pife, by himself, or his special
Procurators, with the Rector and the rest of the Principals, were to choose one
of these three, and constitute him Principal. And when the Rector was chosen,
he was to be confirmed by the Superintendent, Ib. 163.
by that same Book: And again, by that same Book Ibid.
The Money collected in every College for upholding the Fabric, was to be
counted and employed at the sight of the Superintendent. Further, the Genesis Ass.
conveened at Eden. Ian. 25. 1565. presented this Article in a Petition to the
Queen, That none might be permitted to have charge of Schools, Colleges, or
Universities, etc. but such as should be tried by the Superintendents. So it is
in the Mss. It Is true it was not granted at that time; but it shows the
inclinations of our Reformers, as much as if it had been granted. And because
it was not granted then, it was proposed again in the Ass. in July 1567. and
consented to by the Nobility and Gentry, and ratified by the Eleventh Act of
the First Parliament of King James the Sixth, in December, that same year. And
accordingly we find the Lord of Dun. Superintendent of Angus and Mearns, in
July 1568. holding at Visitation of the University of Aberdeen, and by formal
sentence turning out all the Popish Members. The very air and style of the
Sentence, as Petrie has it Pet. 362.
is a notable Evidence of the paramount power of Superintendents; for thus it
runs, I, John Areskin, Superintendent of Angus and Mearns, having Commission of
the Church to visit the Sheriffdoms of Aberdeen and Bamf, by the Advice,
Counsel, and Consent of the Ministers, Elders and Commissioners of the Church,
present, decern, conclude, and for final Sentence pronounce, That Master
Alexander Anderson, etc.

30. Because bad Principles may be disseminated by bad Books, and thereby both
the Purity and Peace of the Church may be endangered; the Revising and
Licensing of Books was committed to the Care of the Superintendents, by the
General Ass. holden in June 1563. whereby it is ordained, That No work be set
forth in Print, neither yet published in Writ, touching Religion or Doctrine,
until such time as it shall be presented to the Superintendent of the Diocese,
and advised and approven by him, or by such as he shall call, of the most
learned within his bounds, etc. Mss. Pet. 237.


Thus I have collected no fewer than Thirty Disparities betwixt
Superintendents, as they were established in Scotland, by our Reformers, and
private Parish Ministers; each of them a Demonstration of inequality either of
power or figure; perchance a more nice and accurate Enquirer may find out more:
But methinks these may be sufficient for my purpose, which was to give the
world a fair prospect of the Pre-eminence of Superintendents, and of the
Differences betwixt them and other Churchmen. And having thus performed the
first part of my Undertaking, it is obvious to all who can pretend to be of the
thinking part of mankind, that the second part is needless. For if these 30
Disparities amount not to ane invincible proof, that our Church, at the
Reformation, was not governed by Ministers acting in parity, I may justly
despair of ever proving any thing. Yet because I know many simple and less
thinking people, are imposed on by the Noise and Dust our Presbyterian Brethren
have raised about this matter; I shall proceed to the next thing I undertook,
which was

II. To dissipate these Mists, wherewith our Parity-men are so very earnest to
involve and darken this Prelatical power of Superintendents. They may be
reduced to these Three.

1. The Establishments of Superintendents was only temporary, and for the then
Necessities of the Church; Superintendency was not intended to be a perpetual
standing Office. 2. It was not the same with Episcopacy. 3. It was never
established by Act of Parliament.
1. It Is pleaded that Superintendency was only designed to be a temporary, not
a perpetual standing Office in the Church. Thus Calderwood Call. 25.
speaking of the First Book of Discipline, we may safely say (says he) the
whole was recommended to be perpetually observed, except some few things, as
the Office of Superintendents -- whereunto they were forced, as they thought,
by necessity, etc. And in his Breviate of the first book of Discipline Ib. 26.
he offers at a Reason why it was so. They make a Difference, at this time
among Ministers, some to be Superintendents, some to be ordinary Ministers; not
because Superintendents were of divine institution, as ane Order to be observed
perpetually in the Kirk, but because they were forced only, AT THIS TIME, to
make the Difference, lest, if all Ministers should be appointed to make
continual Residence in several places, when there was so great Rarity of
Preachers, the greatest part of the Realm should be destitute of the preaching
of the word: And G. R. in his first Vindication of the Church of Scotland,
printed at Edinburgh 1691. in answer to the first of the ten Questions,
following Calderwood exactly, (as, indeed, he does all along; and it seems he
has never read another of our Historians, so that he had some reason to call
him, THE HISTORIAN, ibid.) delivers it thus: It Is true the Protestant Church of
Scotland did set up Superintendents, but this was truly, (and declared so to
be) from the Force of Necessity, and designed only for that present Exigency of
the Church, etc. And more pointedly in his true Representation of Presbyterian
Government, printed at Edinburgh 1690. prop. 18. where he lays it down as ane
undoubted truth, That Superintendency was only established throught necessity,
when a qualified Minister could scarcely be had in a Province, etc. And Petrie
seems to aim at the same way of Reasoning. Now Pet. 218.


1. Supposing all this true, what ground have they gained by it? Do they not
fairly acknowledge, that the Prelacy of Superintendents was established at the
Reformation? And is not that all I am concerned for? For the Question is not
whither Superintendency was designed to be perpetual or temporary? but whither
it was a Prelacy? And if it was a Prelacy, the Church of Scotland was not,
then, governed by Ministers acting in parity. The Perpetuity, or Temporariness
of it does not affect its nature: If it was a Prelacy at all, it was as really
a Prelacy, tho it had lasted but for a Day, as it had been, tho it had lasted
till the Day of Judgment. Just as our Presbyterian Brethren were as really
Addressers to K. I. by addressing once, as they should have been, tho they had
continued addressing to him till this very minute. This alone, in all
conscience, might be enough for discussing this Plea. Yet, that I may not
offend the Party, by seeming to think so meanly of this mighty argument; I
shall insist a little longer, and consider

2. If they have any sufficient Fund, in the Records of these times, for this
pretense? And

3. What Force or Solidity is in the reason insisted on to make this pretense
seem plausible? As to the first, viz. Whither there is any sufficient Fund in
the Records of these times for this pretense? All I have observed insisted on
for this, is only one phrase in the fifth Head of the First Book of Discipline,
AT THIS TIME. Take the whole period as it is in Petrie; for he censures
Spotswood for curtailing it. As Petrie has it, it runs thus. If the Ministers
whom God has endued with his singular Graces, among us, should be appointed to
several places, there to make their continual Residence, the greatest part of
the Realm should be destitute of all Doctrine; which should not only be the
occasion of great Murmur, but also dangerous to the Salvation of many; and
therefore we have thought it a thing expedient AT THIS TIME, That from the
whole number of Godly and Learned Men, now, presently, in this Realm, be
selected Ten or Twelve ( for in so many Provinces we have divided the whole) to
whom Charge and Commandment should be given to plant and erect Kirks, to set,
order, and appoint Ministers to the Countries, that shall be appointed to their
care, where none are now. Ibid*
This is the whole foundation of the Plea, for the Temporariness of
Superintendency; but, if I mistake not, the true Gloss of this period, will
amount to no more than this, That because there were, then, so few men
qualified for the Office of Superintendency, tho Ten or Twelve were, by far,
too small a number for the whole Kingdom, yet, at that time, they thought it
expedient to establish no more: And tho, when the Church should be sufficiently
provided with Ministers, it would be highly reasonable, that the
Superintendents should have places appointed them, for their continual
Residence; yet, in that juncture, it was necessary that they should be
constantly traveling through their Districts, to preach and plant Churches, etc.
That the period will bear this Gloss is obvious to any who considers it
impartially. And that this, and not the Presbyterian, is the true Gloss, I
hope, may competently appear, if these things be considered,

1. It is notorious, that the Compilers of that First Book of Discipline, were
generally, to their dying day, of Prelatical Principles. They were six, as Knox
tells us: Kn. 283.
Mr. John Winrame, who died Superintendent of Strathern; John Spotswood, who
was many years a Superintendent, and a constant Enemy to parity, as appears
from his Sons account of him. Spot. 344.
John Willock, who died Superintendent of the West. John Douglas, who died
Archbishop of St. Andrews. John Row, who was one of the three that defended the
Lawfulness of Episcopacy, at the Conference appointed by the General Assembly
1575; and John Knox, of whom we have said enough already. Now, I ask, is it
credible, that these men, all, so much for Prelacy, all their Lives, without
any constraint on them (As it is certain, there was none) should, while
digesting a Model of Policy, have been only for a Prelacy that was to be laid
aside, within, God knows, how short a time; so soon as the Parish Churches
could be planted with Ministers? I know nothing can be said here, unless it be,
that Knox was not so prelatical as the rest, and he would have it so, and the
rest have yielded: But there is no ground for this. For

2. Even Knox himself, if he was the Author of the History which bears his
Name, amongst our Presbyterian Brethren, assigns a quite other reason than the
then Necessities of the Church, for the Establishment of Superintendency:
Superintendents and Overseers were nominated (says he) Kn. 260.
that all things in the Church, might be carried with order, and well. A
Reason, which, as it held since the Apostles times, will continue to hold so
long as the Church continues. And is it not told again in that same History,
Ib. 289.
That, at the Admission of Spotswood to the Superintendency of Lothian, John
Knox in his Sermon asserted, the Necessity of Superintendents or Overseers, as
well as Ministers? The Necessity, I say, and not the bare Expediency, in that
juncture. Further, now that I have Knox on the Stage, I shall repeat over
again, a Testimony of his, which I have once transcribed already from his
Exhortation to England for the speedy embracing of Christ's Gospel. Let no man
be charged in preaching of Christ Jesus (says he p. 110.
above that which a man may do: I mean, that your Bishoprics be so divided,
that of every one, (as they are now for the most part) may be made ten; and so
in every City, and great Town, there may be placed a godly learned Man, with so
many joined with him, for preaching and instruction, as shall be thought
sufficient for the bounds committed to their Charge. Than which testimony, it is
not possible to find a better Comment upon that period of the First Book of
Discipline, (penned also by Knox himself) which is the subject of our present
Controversy; and it agrees exactly with my Gloss: For, from this Testimony it
is clear, that he was for a great number of Bishops, and little Diocesses; and
that in a Church sufficiently provided with Ministers, the Bishop should not be
obliged to travel from place to place, for preaching; but might stay at the
Chief City or Town of his Diocese. What I have said, might be sufficient for
preferring Mine, to the Presbyterian Gloss: But I have more to say. For

3. This sense of the period accords exactly with the whole tenor of the First
Book of Discipline; in which, there is not another syllable, the most partial
Reader can say, favors the mistaken Conceit about the Temporariness of
Superintendency, but much to the contrary. Thus

In the Head of the Election of Superintendents Spot. 1^9.
the very first words are, Such is the present Necessity, that the Examination
and Admission of Superintendents cannot be so strict as afterward it must.
Clearly importing, that, as Necessity forced them to establish a small number
at first, so also, to take them as they could have them; but that a stricter
accuracy in their trial would be needful, when the number of qualified men
should increase, which runs quite counter to the whole design of the
Presbyterian Gloss.

Again, Ibid.
If so many able men cannot be found at present, as Necessity requires, it is
better that these Provinces wait till God provide, than that men unable to
edify and govern the Church be suddenly placed in the Charge, etc. Another
Demonstration, why, at that time, they established so few Superintendents.

Again, Ibid.
If any Superintendent shall depart this life, or happen to be deposed, Rules
are laid down for supplying the Vacancy. But to what purpose, if
Superintendency was to be of so short continuance?

Farther yet, Ib. 160.
After the Church shall be established, and three years are past, no man shall
be called to the Office of a Superintendent, who has not, two years, at least,
given a proof of his faithful Labors in the Ministry of some Church. What
could more plainly import, that the Office was to be durable?

Once more, Ib. 162, 163.
When this Book of Discipline comes to the business of the Universities, it
supposes that Superintendents and Colleges were to be of equal continuance; for
the Superintendent was still to be at the choosing and installment of
Principals and Rectors: and the Moneys collected for upholding the Fabric,
were to be counted yearly upon the 15th day of November, in the presence of the
Superintendent of the bounds, and employed with his advice, etc. Neither is
this all yet; For

4. The Form and Order of the Election of the Superintendent, to be found both
in Knox's History, Kn. 289, etc.
and the Old Scottish Liturgy, is every way as patt for the continuance of the
Office, as the First Book of Discipline. For the first thing we meet with
there, (as I have already observed) is, The Necssity of Ministers, and
Superintendents o^ Oversecrs without any Exception or Speciality about the one
more than the other. And as our Reformers had petitioned the Government for the
Establishment of a Method, to be observed in the Election of Bishops and
Presbyters, without any intimations of the Temporariness of either Office; as
we have showed before; so, here we find it put in practice (as has likewise,
before, been observed) without so much as one syllable, favoring the
Presbyterian side of the present Controversy; but on the contrary, all along
for mine. Thus,

The People are asked, If they will obey and honor him as Christ's Minister,
and comfort and assist him in every thing pertaining to his Charge? And their
Answer is, They will, and they promise him such Obedience, as becomes Sheep to
give unto their Pastor, (not so long as the present Necessity forces, or, the
present Exigence requires, but) so long as he remains faithful in his
Charge. In short, the Order or Form for admitting a Superintendent, and a
Parish Minister, was all one; and there was nothing in it importing the one
Office to be temporary, more than the other. And, however Calderwood thought
fit to affirm, That Superintendents were not, then, established as of Divine
Institution; yet, in all this Form the divine Institution of their Office, is
as much to be found as the divine Institution of Ordinary Ministers. The
People, as we had it just now, were asked, if they would obey him as Christ's
Minister? And he himself was asked, If he knew that the Excellency of this
Office, to the which GOD CALLED HIM did require that his Conversation should be
irreprehensible? And again it was asked the People, Will ye not acknowledge
this your Brother for the Minister of Christ Jesus? Your Overseer and Pastor?
Will ye not maintain and comfort him in his Ministry and Watching over you,
against all such as wickedly would rebel against God, and HIS HOLY ORDINANCE?
And in the Prayer after his Instalment, we have this petition, Send unto this
our Brother, whom, IN THY NAME, we have charged with THE CHIEF CARE of thy
Church within the bounds of Lothian, etc. Thus our Reformers thought of
Superintendency when they composed this Form. Now, if they looked upon it as
Gods Ordinance, etc. with what reason can it be said, they designed it merely
to be temporary, and for the, then, Necessities of the Church. I think it will
be hard to prove, that it was the Divinity of these times, that men might
dispense with divine Institutions; but of this more afterward. In the mean
time, proceed we to a further, and indeed, ane irrefragable Topic for
confirming my side of the present Controversy; and that is

5. That, as the First Book of Discipline, and the Form of admitting
Superintendents, do both fairly import, that our Reformers intended nothing
less than the Temporariness of Superintendents, so it is as clear from a vast
number of Acts of General Assemblies.

Most of these Acts I have already adduced for showing the Disparities between
Superintendents and Ordinary Ministers, when they are seriously considered,
will be found uncontrovertibly to this purpose: But there are many more; for
example consider these following.

The Assembly May 27, 1561. Kn. 297. Pet. 223. Mss.
addressed to the Council, That special and certain provision might be made for
the Maintenance of the Superintendents, Ministers, Exhorters and Readers; and
that Superintendents and Ministers might be planted where none were.

The Assembly at Eden. December. 25. 1562. (as the Mss. has it) enacted, That,
notwithstanding the proponing and nominating of the Superintendents for
Aberdeen, Bamf, Jedburgh, and Dumfries, appointed before in the Third Session:
and the days appointed for the Election of the same; the further Advisement and
Nomination of the persons should be remitted to the Lords of the secret
Council; providing, always, that the days appointed for their Election be not
prolonged. Observe here that Aberdeen and Bamf were now designed, each to have
their Superintendent, whereas both were to be under one by the first
Nomination, in the Book of Discipline*

One of the Articles ordered by the Assembly at Eden. December. 25. 1564. to be
presented to the Queen, was, To require that Superintendents might be placed in
the Realm, where none were, viz. in the Mers, Teviotdale, Forest Twedale, and
the rest of the Dales, in the South, not provided; with Aberdeen, and the other
parts of the North, likewise destitute: So it is in the Mss. Petrie Pet. 341.
has it only in short, That Superintendents be placed where none are. But as it
is in the Mss. it shows plainly that, now that the Church was of four years
standing, and the number of qualified men was increasing, the Assembly were for
increasing, proportionably, the number of Superintendents: As is demonstrated
thus; by the Establishment in the First Book of Discipline, the Superintendent
of Lothians Diocese comprehended the Sheriffdoms of Lothian, Stirling, Mers,
Lauderdale, and Twedale. Spot. 158.
Spotswood was set over this Diocese in March 1560/1. He was still alive, and
in the Exercise of his Office; and yet here, now, the Assembly craves that
Superintendents may be placed in the Mers and Twedale, and the rest of the
Dales. From which it follows, that that which was but one Diocese, Anno 1560.
when qualified men were few, was designed by the Assembly, Anno 1564. when the
number of qualified men was somewhat increased, to be divided, at least, into
three or four. Exactly agreeable to what I have all along asserted.

In the Assembly at Eden. July 20. Anno 1567. That famous Assembly, whereof
Buchanan was Moderator, and which tumbled Queen Mary from her Throne, it was
agreed, by the Nobility and Barons on the one hand, and the Church on the
other, That all the Popish Clergy should be dispossessed, and that
Superintendents, Ministers and other NEEDFUL MEMBERS of the Kirk, should be
planted in their places. So it is in the Mss. and so Spotswood has it: Ib. 210.
But both Calderwood and Petrie, tho they mention the thing, yet, labor to
obscure it; for they do not so much as name Superintendents, far less, take
notice that, they are reckoned amongst the Necessary Members, or were to
succeed the Popish Bishops. Pet. 356. Called. 42.


Farther, by the Ass. at Eden. July 1. 1568. it is resolved, To advise with my
Lord Regent his Grace and Council, that in the Rowms and Countries where no
Superintendents are, they may be placed. So the Mss. and Pet. Pet. 360.
Nay

Does not Calderwood himself tell us, that, the Ass. holden at Eden. March 1.
1570. when it appointed the Order to be observed thereafter, in handling
affairs brought before General Assemblies, ordained, in the sixth place, That
the Complaints of Countries for want of Superintendents should be heard and
provided for, etc. Call. 46.
Further, does not the same Calderwood record, that, when in the year 1574. the
Superintendents of Angus, Lothian, and Strathern, would have dimitted their
Office, the Assembly would not admit of their Dimission, but ordered them to
continue in their Function? Ib. 65.
For what reason they offered to demit, perhaps, we shall learn hereafter. All
I am concerned for at present is, that the Assembly would needs continue them
in their Office now, fourteen years after the first legal Establishment of the
Reformation. The truth is, this Assembly was holden in March, and Master Andrew
Melvil, the Protoplast Presbyterian in Scotland, came not to the Kingdom, till
July thereafter.

By this time, I think, I have made it appear, that our Reformers intended
nothing less than to make Superintendency only temporary, and subservient to
the then pretended Necessities of the Church. And likewise I have sufficiently
made it appear, that it was merely for scarcity of qualified men, that so few
Superintendents were at first designed, by the First Book of Discipline; which
was the one half of my Gloss upon the controverted period in that Book.

The other half, which was, that when once the Church was competently provided
with Parish Ministers, the Superintendents were no longer obliged to their
Evangelistical way of traveling constantly through their Diocesses, to preach,
etc. is plain from what both Petrie and Spotswood agree in, as contained in the
Book, viz. That they were to follow that method no longer than their Kirks were
provided of Ministers, or, at least, of Readers. Pet. 219. Spot. 1^9.
Thus I have dispatched the first thing which was proposed to be enquired into,
viz. Whither there was any sufficient fund in the Records of these times, for
believing that our Reformers intended, that Superintendency should only be
temporary. It remains now that we should consider the

2. viz. What Force or Solidity is in the reason insisted on by our
Presbyterian Brethren, to make this pretense seem plausible?

The reason insisted on, by them, is, The Force of Necessity, there being so
few men, then, qualified for the Ministry; scarcely one in a Province, etc.
Now who sees not that this so often repeated reason is entirely naught and
inconsequential? For, what tho, in these times, there were few qualified men
for the Ministry? How follows it, that therefore it was necessary to raise up
Superintendents, and set them above their Brethren? If the principles of parity
had, then, been the modish principles, could not these few, who were qualified,
have governed the Church, suitably to these principles? Suppose we Twenty,
Thirty, Forty men, in the Kingdom, qualified for the Office of the Ministry;
could not these 20, or 30, or 40, have divided the Kingdom into a
proportionable number of large Parishes? And, still, as more men turned
qualified, could they not have lessened these greater Parishes, till they had
multiplied them to as great a number as they pleased, or was convenient? It was
easy to have done so: so very obvious, as well as easy, that, it is not to be
doubted, they would have done so, if they had been of these principles. Why
might not they have done so, as well as our Presbyterian Brethren, now adays,
unite Presbyteries where they have a scarcity of Ministers of their Persuasion?
Where lies the impossibility of Uniting Parishes, more than uniting
Presbyteries? Indeed

This way of reasoning is more dangerous than it seems our Presbyterian
Brethren are aware of, for it quite cuts the sinews of Parity, and demonstrates
irrefragably, that it cannot be the Model, our blessed Lord instituted for the
Government of his Church. For who can believe he would institute a Model of
Government for his Church, which could not answer the ends of its institution?
And is it not plain, that Parity cannot answer the ends for which Church
Government was instituted, if the Church can be reduced to that State, that the
Governors thereof, forced by Necessity, must lay it aside, and, for a time,
establish a Prelacy? Besides,

What strange Divinity is it to maintain, that Parity is of divine Institution,
and yet, may be laid aside in Cases of Necessity? It Is true G. R. in his True
Representation of Presbyterian Government, cited before, is bold to publish to
the world, such Divinity: But let him talk what he will of the Case of
Necessity, the Force of Necessity, the Law of Necessity, let him put it in as
many Languages as he pleases, as well as he has done in Latin, telling, that
Necessitas quicquid coegit, defendit: (tho, I must confess, I have seen few
Authors more unhappy at Latin;) And all that shall never persuade me, ought
never persuade any Christian, that any Necessity can oblige Christians to
forsake, far less, to cross Christ's institutions; for if it can oblige to do so
in one Case, why not in all Cases? Indeed to talk of crossing Christ's
institutions, when forced to it by the Laws of Necessity, what is it else, than
to open a Door to Gnosticism, to Infidelity, to Apostasy, to all imaginable
kinds of Antichristian Perfidy and Villainy? But enough of this at present.

That which I am concerned for, is only this, that, being it was so very
obvious and easy for our Reformers to have cast the very first Scheme of the
Government of the Church, according to the Rules and Exigencies of Parity, if
they had believed the divine and indispensable institution of it; and being
that they did it not, we have all the reason in the world to believe, that they
believed no such principle. For my part, I am so far from thinking it
reasonable, that Prelacy should be only needful, where there is a scarcity of
men qualified to be Ministers; that on the contrary I do profess, I am of
opinion, that Prelacy seems to be every whit as needful and expedient, if not
more, (supposing we had it in our power to cut and carve (as we say) on Christ's
institutions) where there are many, as where there are few Ministers. Sure I
am, Experience has taught so, and teaches so daily: and as sure I am, it can,
with great reason, be accounted for, why it should be so; but if it is so, I
think, it is only help at a dead Lift (as we say) to say, that Superintendency
was established at our Reformation, only, because of the Scarcity of men
qualified to be Ministers. And so I proceed to our Brethrens next Plea, which
is,

SECONDLY, That Superintendency was not the same with Episcopacy. Calderwood
assigns seven or eight differences between Superintendents and Bishops; Called.
26, 27.
and his faithful Disciple G. R. in his First Vindication, in answer to the
first Question, resumes the same Plea, and insists mostly on the same
Differences. Calderwood reckons thus, 1. In the Election, Examination and
Admission of Ministers, the Superintendents were bound to the Order prescribed
in the 4 th Head of the First Book of Discipline; which is far different from
the Order observed by Prelates. 2. Superintendents kept not the bounds, nor the
limits of the old Diocesses. 3. Superintendents might not remain above twenty
days in any place, till they had passed through the whole bounds; must preach,
at least, thrice in the week; must stay no longer in the Chief Town of their
Charge, than three or four Months at most, but must re-enter in Visitation of
the rest of the Kirks in their bounds. Bishops think preaching the least of
their Charge. 4. The Election, Examination, and Admission of the
Superintendent, is set down far different from the Election, Examination and
Admission of Bishops now adays, etc. 5. Superintendents were admitted without
other Ceremonies than sharp Examination, etc. To the Inauguration of a Bishop
is required the Metropolitans Consecrations. 6. There were no degrees of
superior and inferior, provincial and general Superintendents: It is otherwise
in the Hierarchy of the Prelates, etc.


I have set down these six huge Differences, without ever offering to consider
them particularly; are they not huge Differences? Behold them, examine them
carefully; is not each of them as essential and specific as another?

Think not, courteous Reader, it was Malice or Ill Will to Episcopacy, made our
Author muster up these Differences: These make but a small number; if he had
been acted by passion or vicious Bias, if his Malice had been vigorous and
earnest to discharge it self that way; he could have easily reckoned six
hundred, every whit as considerable Differences: He might have told them, that
Bishops wore Black Hats, and Superintendents Blue Bonnets; that Bishops wore
Silks, and Superintendents Tartan; that Bishops wore Gowns and Cassocks, and
Superintendents Trews and slasht Doublets; and God knows, how many such
differences he might have readily collected. And if he had adduced such notable
differences as these, he had done every way as Philosophically, and as like a
good Difference-maker. But in the mean time what is all this to Parity or
Imparity amongst the Governors of the Church? Do these differences, he has
adduced, distinguish between Bishops and Superintendents as to pre-eminence of
power, and the essentials of Prelacy? Do they prove that Superintendents had no
Prerogative, no Authority, no Jurisdiction, over Parish Ministers? I have
treated him thus coursly, because I know no other way of treatment Authors
deserve, who will needs speak Nonsense rather than speak nothing. It Is true
indeed:

One difference he has mentioned, which seems something material, and therefore
I shall endeavor to account for it with some more seriousness. It is that by
the Constitution, as we have it, both in the First Book of Discipline, and the
Form and Order of electing Superintendents, Superintendents were made obnoxious
to the Trial and Censures of the Ministers within their own Diocesses. This I
acknowledge to be true; and I acknowledge further, that, herein, there was a
considerable difference between them and Bishops; as Bishops stood eminenced
above Presbyters in the primitive times, and as they ought to stand eminenced
above them in all well constituted Churches. But then I have these things to
say,

1. I shall not scruple to acknowledge that, herein, our Reformers were in the
wrong; and that this was a great Error in the Constitution. I do avowedly
profess, I don't think my self bound to justify every thing that was done by
our Reformers: If that falls to any man's share, if falls to theirs who
established this Article in the Claim of Right, which gave occasion to this
whole Enquiry. That our Reformers, herein, were in the wrong, I say, I make no
scruple to acknowledge; and I think it cannot but be obvious to all, who have
spent but a few thoughts about matters of Policy and Government. Indeed, to
make Governors subject to the Censures and Sentences of their Subjects, what
is it else than to subvert Government, to confound Relations, to sap the
Foundations of all Order and politic Establishment? It is (as King James the
sixth has it in his Discourse about the true Law of Free Monarchies, K.J. his
Works, p. 202.
and I cannot give it better) to invert the Order of all Law and Reason; to
make the commanded, command the Commander; the judged, judge their Judge; and
them who are governed to govern, their time about, their Lord and Governor. In
short, to give a just account of such a Constitution, it is very near of Kin,
to that bantering Question I have sometimes heard proposed to Children or
Idiots, If you were above me, and I, above you, which of us should, be
uppermost? I add further

2. That, as I take it, our Reformers put this in the Constitution, that they
might appear consequential to a principle, then espoused and put in practice by
them, about Civil Government; which was, that the King was superior to his
Subjects in their distributive, but inferior to them in their collective
Capacity. Major singulis, minor universis.
This principle, I say, in those days was in great Credit: Knox had learned it
from the Democratians at Geneva; his Authority was great, and he was very fond
of this principle, and disseminated it with a singular zeal and confidence.
Besides, our Reformers were, then, obnoxious to the civil Government; the
standing Laws were against them, and the Sovereigns persuasion, in matters of
Religion, jumpt with the Laws. This Principle, therefore, (had it been a good
one) came to them most seasonably; and coming to them in such a nick, and
withal, meeting, in them, with Scotch Metal, Praefervidum Scotorum ingenium.
they put it in practice; and being put in practice, God suffered it to be
successful; and the success was a new Endearment, and so it came to be a
Principle of Credit and Reputation. Indeed, they had been very unthankful to
it, and inconsequential to boot, if they had not adopted it into their
Ecclesiastical, as well as their Civil Systeme; and the Superintendents, having
had a main hand in reducing it to practice against the Prince, could not take
it ill if it was made a Law to themselves; it was but their own measure. This,
I say, I take to be the natural History of this part of the Constitution. Nay,

3. So fond, it seems, they were of this principle, that they extended it
further, so far, as even to make Ministers accountable to their own Elderships.
So it is expressly established by the First Book of Discipline, Head 8. Spot. 167.
The Elders ought also to take heed to the Life, Manners, Diligence and Study
of their Minister: And if he be worthy of Admonition, they must admonish him;
if of Correction, they must correct him; and if he be worthy of Deposition,
they, with the Consent of the Church and Superintendent, may depose him. Here
was a pitch of Democracy which, I think, our Presbyterian Brethren themselves,
as self denied as they are, would not take with, so very kindly. And yet I am
apt to believe, the Compilers of the Book, never thought on putting these
Elders in a state of parity with their Ministers; tho this is a Demonstration,
that they have not been the greatest Masters at Drawing Schemes of Policy. But
to let this pass.

4. Tho this unpolitical stroke (to call it no worse) was made part of the
Constitution by that Book, as I have granted; yet I have no where found, that
ever it was put in practice. I have no where found, that De Facto a
Superintendent, was judged by his own Synod; whether it was, that they behaved
so exactly, as that they were never censureable, or that their Synods had not
the insolence to reduce a Constitution so very absurd, and unreasonable, to
practice, I shall not be anxious to determine. But it seems probable it has
been as much, if not more, upon the latter account than the former; for I find
Superintendents frequently tried, and sometimes censured by General Assemblies;
and there was reason for it, supposing that General Assemblies, as then
constituted, were fit to be the supreme Judicatories of the National Church:
For there was no reason that Superintendents should have been Popes, i. e.
absolute and unaccountable; so that, if I am not mistaken, our Brethren raise
Dust, to little purpose, when they make so much noise about the Accountableness
of Superintendents to General Assemblies, as if that made a difference between
them and Bishops: For I know no man that makes Bishops unaccountable,
especially when they are confederated in a National Church. But this by the
way: That which I take notice of is, That seeing we find they were so
frequently tried by General Assemblies, without the least intimation of their
being, at any time, tried by their own Synods, it seems reasonable to conclude,
that it has been thought fit to let that unreasonable Stretch in the first
Constitution fall into Dissuetude: But however this was, I have all safe
enough. For

5. Such a Constitution infers no such thing as parity amongst the Officers of
the Church. Those who maintain, that the King is inferior to his Subjects, in
their Collection, are not yet so extravagant as to say, he is not superior to
every one of them in their Distribution: They acknowledge he is Major Singulis;
and there is not a person in the Kingdom, who will be so unmannerly as to say,
that he stands upon the same Level with his Sovereign. But what needs more?
These same very Presbyterian Authors, who use this Argument, even while they
use it, confess, That Superintendents, and ordinary Parish Ministers, did not
act in parity; and because they cannot deny it, but must confess it, whether
they will or not, they cannot forbear raising all the Dust they can about it,
that unthinking People may not see clearly that they do confess it. And had it
not been for this reason, I am apt to think, the world had never been plagued
with such pitiful jangle, as such Arguments amount to. Neither is the next any
better, which is,

3. That Superintendency was never established by Act of Parliament. This is G.
R.'s Argument in his learned Answer to the first of the ten Questions; for
there he tells us, That Superintendency was neither brought in, nor cast out,
by Act of Parliament. And what then? Does he love it the worse that it was
established, purely, by Ecclesiastical Authority? How long since he turned ^ond
of Parliamentary Establishments? I wonder he was not afraid of the Scandal of
Erastianism. But to the point: It Is true indeed, it was not brought in by Act
of Parliament; but then, I think, he himself cannot deny, that it was
countenanced, allowed and approven, by more than half a Dozen of Acts of
Parliaments; which, if our Author understands any thing either of Law or
Logic, he must allow to be, at least, equivalent to a Parliamentary
In-bringing. I have these Acts in readiness to produce, when I shall be put to
it: But I think his own Act which he cited (tho most ridiculously, as shall be
made appear afterward) in the immediately preceding paragraph, may be good
enough for him. For, He concludes it as evident, that Episcopal Jurisdiction
over the Protestants, was condemned by Law in the Parliament 1567. because it
is, there, statute and ordained, that no other Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical be
acknowledged within this Realm, than that which is, and shall be, within this
same Kirk, established presently, or which sloweth therefrom, concerning
preaching the Word, correcting of Manners, administration of Sacraments; and
Prelatical Jurisdiction was not then in Scotland. So he reasons. Now I dare
adventure to refer it to his own judgment, whither it will not, by the same way
of reasoning, follow, and be as evident, that the Jurisdiction of
Superintendents was allowed of, by this same Act, seeing he himself cannot have
the Brow to deny, that it was, then, in its vigor, and daily exercised? I think
this is Argument good enough, ad hominem; But, as I said, we shall have more of
this Act of Parliament hereafter.

Thus I have dispelled some of these clouds our Presbyterian Brethren use to
raise about the Prelacy of Superintendents; perhaps there may be more of them,
but, considering the weakness of these, which, certainly, are the strongest, it
is easy to conjecture what the rest may be, if there are any more of them. And
thus, I think, I have fairly accounted for the Sentiments of our Reformers, in
relation to Parity or Imparity amongst the Governors of the Church, during the
First Scheme into which they cast the Government of the Church.

BEFORE I proceed to the next, I must go back a little, and give a brief
Deduction of some things which may afford considerable Light, both to what I am
now to insist on, and what I have insisted on already.

Tho I am most unwilling to rake into the Mistakes or Weaknesses of our
Reformers, yet I cannot but say, that our Reformation was carried on, and, at
first established upon some principles, very disadvantageous to the Church,
both as to her Polity and Patrimony. There were Mistakes in the Ministers on
the one hand, and sinister and worldly designs amongst the Laity, on the other:
and both concurred unhappily, to produce Great Evils in the Result.

There was a principle had, then, got too much sooting amongst some Protestant
Divines, viz. That the best way to reform a Church, was to recede as far from
the Papists as they could; to have nothing in common with them, but the
Essentials; the necessary and indispensable Articles and Parts of Christian
Religion; whatever was, in its nature indifferent, and not positively and
expressly commanded in the Scriptures, if it was in fashion in the Popish
Churches, was therefore to be laid aside, and avoided as a Corruption; as
having been abused, and made subservient to Superstition and Idolatry.

This principle John Knox was fond of, and maintained zealously; and the rest
of our reforming Preachers were much acted by his Influences. In pursuance of
this principle, therefore, when they compiled the First Book of Discipline,
they would not reform the Old Polity, and purge it of such Corruptions as had
crept into it, keeping still by the main Draughts and Lineaments of it; which
undoubtedly had been the wiser, the safer, and every way the better course, as
they were then admonisht, even by some of the Popish Clergy: Spot. 174.
But they laid it quite aside, and instead thereof hammered out a New Scheme,
keeping at as great a distance from the Old one, as they could, and as the
Essentials of Polity would allow them; establishing no such thing, however, as
Parity, as I have fully proven. And no wonder; for as Imparity has, obviously,
more of Order, Beauty and Usefulness in i^^ Aspect, so it had never, so much as
by Dreaming, entered their Thoughts, that it was a Limb of Antichrist; or a
Relic of Popery.

That our Reformers had the aforesaid principle in their view, all along,
while they digested the First Book of Discipline, is plain to every one that
reads it. Thus,

In the First Head, they condemn Binding Men and Women to a several and
disguised Apparel; to the superstitious observing of Fasting Days -- Keeping of
holy days of certain Saints, commanded by Man, such as be all these THE PAPISTS
HAVE INVENTED, as the Feasts of the Apostles, Martyrs, Christmas, etc. Ib. 153.
In the Second Head, The Cross in Baptism and Kneeling at the Reception of the
Symbols, in the Eucharist. In the Third Head, they require not only Idolatry,
but all its Monuments and Places to be suppressed; and amongst the rest,
Chapels, Cathedral Churches, and Colleges, i. e. as I take it, Collegiate
Churches. And many other such instances might be adduced; particularly, as to
our present purpose: They would not call those, whom they truly and really,
stated in a Prelacy above their Brethren, Prelates or Bishops, but
Superintendents: They would not allow of Imposition of hands in Ordinations:
They made Superintendents subject to the Censures of their own Synods; they
changed the bounds of the Diocesses; they would not allow the Superintendents
the same Revenues which Prelates had had before: They would not suffer
Ecclesiastical Benefices to stand distinguished as they had been formerly; but
they were for casting them all, for once, into one heap, and making a new
Division of the Churches Patrimony, and parcelling it out in Competencies, as
they thought it most expedient. In short,

A notable instance of the prevalency of this principle we have, even in the
year 1572. after the Restoration of the Old Polity was agreed to. For, then,
by many in the General Assembly, Exceptions were taken at the Titles of
Archbishop, Dean, Archdeacon, Chancellor, Chapter, etc. as being Popish
Titles, and offensive to the Ears of good Christians; Spot. 260. Pet. 376.
Called. 58.
As all Historians agree. Bu^ then,

As they were for these and the like alterations, in pursuance of this
principle; so they were zealous for, and had no mind to part with, the
Patrimony of the Church. Whatever had been dedicated to Religious Uses;
whatever, under the notion of either Spirituality or Temporality, had belonged
to either Seculars or Regulars, before, they were positive, should still
continue in the Churches hands, and be applied to her Maintenance and
Advantages; condemning all Dilapidations, Alienations, Impropriations, and
Laick Usurpations, and Possessions of Church Revenues, etc. as is to be seen
fully in the Sixth Head of the Book. Spot. 164.
Thus, I say, our Reformers had digested a New Scheme of Polity, in the First
Book of Discipline, laying aside the Old one, because they thought it too much
Popish. And now that we have this Book under consideration, it will not be
unuseful (nay it will be needful for a full understanding of what follows) to
fix the time when it was written.

Knox (and Calderwood follows him) says, Kn. 283. Called. 24.
it was written after the Dissolution of the Parliament, which sat in August
1560. and gave the legal Establishment to the Reformation. But Petrie Pet. 218.
says, it is expressly affirmed in the beginning of the Book it self that the
Commission was granted for compiling it on the 29th of April, 1560. and that
they brought it to a Conclusion, as they could for the time, before the 20th of
May (a short enough time, I think, for a work of such importance.) So Petrie
affirms, I say, and it is apparent he is in the right; for, his account agrees
exactly with the First Nomination of Superintendents, which both Knox and
Spotswood affirm to have been made in July, that year. Kn. 259, 260. Spot. 149.
And, besides, it falls in naturally with the Series of the History; for the
Nobility and Gentry's having seen the Book, and considered it before the
Parliament sat, according to this account, makes it fairly intelligible, how
it was entirely neglected, or rather rejected, not only, so far, as that it was
never allowed of nor approven by them, as we shall learn by and by; but, so
far, that, in that Parliament no provision, at all, was made for the
Maintenance and Subsistence of the Reformed Ministers. For understanding this
more fully, yet,

It is to be considered, that there had been Disceptations and Controversies
the year before, viz. 1559. about the Disposal of the Patrimony of the Church.
This I learn from a Letter of Knox's to Calvin, (dated August 28. 1559. to be
seen amongst Calvin's Epistles, Col. 441.) wherein he asks his sentiments about
this question, Whither the yearly Revenues might be paid to such as had been
Monks and Popish Priests, even tho they should confess their former errors,
considering that they neither served the Church, nor were capable to do it? And
tells him frankly, Haec, quia nego, plus aequo severus judicor, non a solis
Papisticls, verum etiam ab ijs qui sibi voritatis patroni videntur.
that he had maintained the negative, for which he was called too severe, not
only by the Papists, but even by many Protestants. From which it is plain, not
only that there were, then, Controversies about the Disposal of the Patrimony
of the Church, as I have said, but also, that Knox (and by very probable
consequence, the Protestant Preachers, generally) was clear, that the
Ecclesiastical Revenues had been primarily destinated to the Church for the
ends of Religion; and therefore whatever person could not serve these ends,
could have no just Title to these Revenues: By which way of reasoning, not only
ignorant Priests and Monks, but all Lay men whatsoever, were excluded from
having any Title to the Patrimony of the Church. Now,

While this Controversy was in agitation, as to point of Right, the Guise was
going against Knox's side of it, as to matter of Fact. For, in the mean time,
many Abbeys and Monasteries were thrown down, and the Nobility and Gentry were
daily possessing themselves of the Estates that had belonged to them; and so
before the First Book of Discipline, (which was Knox's performance, and so, no
doubt, contained his principle) was compiled, they were finding that there was
something sweet in sacrilege, and were by no means willing to part with what
they had got, so fortunately, as they thought, in their Fingers. Besides, They
foresaw, if Knox's project took place, several other, which they judged
considerable, inconvenients would follow: If the Monks and Priests, etc. who
acknowledged their former errors, should be so treated, what might they expect,
who persisted in their adherence to the Romish Faith and Interests? Tho they
were blinded with Superstition and Error, yet they were Men, they were Scottish
men; nay they were generally of their own Blood, and their very near Kinsmen:
And would it not be very hard to deprive them entirely of their Livings, and
reduce them, who had their Estates settled upon them by Law, and had lived so
plentifully and so hospitably, to such ane Hopeless State of Misery and Arrant
Beggary? Further, by this Scheme, as they behoved to part with what they had
already griped, so their Hopes of ever having opportunity to profit themselves
of the Revenues of the Church, thereafter, were more effectually discouraged,
than they had been even in the times of Popery: The Popish Clergy, by their
Rules, were bound to live single, they could not marry, nor, by consequence,
have lawful Children to provide for. The reformed, as the law of God allowed
them, and their Inclinations prompted them, indulged themselves the Solaces of
Wedlock, and begot Children, and had Families to maintain and provide for;
there were no such Expectations, therefore, of easy Leases, and rich Gifts, and
hidden Legacies, etc. from them, as from the Popish Clergy. Add to this, the
Popish Clergy foresaw the Ruin of the Romish Interests; they saw no likelihood
of Successors, of their own Stamp and Principles. They had a mighty spite at
the Reformation. It was not likely, therefore, that they would be anxious what
became of the Patrimony of the Church, after they were gone. It was to be hoped
they might squander it away, dilapidate, alienate, etc. without difficulty; (as
indeed they did) And who but themselves (the Laity) should have all this gain?

Upon these and the like Considerations, I say, the Nobility and Gentry had no
liking to the First Book of Discipline; And being once out of Love with it, it
was easy to get Arguments enough against it: The Novelties, and the numerous
needless Recessions from the Old Polity, which were in it, furnished these both
obviously and abundantly. So it was not only not established, but, it seems,
the Nobility and Gentry, who have ever the principal sway in Scottish
Parliaments, to let the Ministers find how much they had displeased them, by
such a Draught, resolved to serve them a Trick. Indeed they served them a
monstrous one; for tho in the Parliament, 1560. they established the
Reformation, as to Doctrine and Worship, etc. and by a Legal Definition, made
the Protestant the National Church, yet they settled not so much as a Groat of
the Churches Revenues upon its Ministers, but continued the Popish Clergy,
during their Lives, in their possessions.

It Is true, indeed, through the importunity of I. Knox, and some others of the
Preachers, some Noblemen and Gentlemen subscribed the Book in January 1560/1.
Kn. 282, 283. Spot. 175.
But as they were not serious, as Knox intimates, so, they did it with this
express provision (apparently levelled against one of the main designs of the
Book) That the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Prelates, and Beneficed Men,
who had already joined themselves to the Religion, should enjoy the Rents of
their Benefices, during their Lives, they sustaining the Ministers for their
parts, etc. But it was never generally received; on the contrary it was treated
in Ridicule, and called a DEVOVT IMAGINATION, which offended Knox exceedingly.
Kn. lb. Spot. 174.
Nay, it seems, the Ministers themselves were not generally pleased with it,
after second thoughts, or, The Laity have been more numerous in the General
Assembly holden in December 1561. For (as Knox himself tells us Kn. 323.
) when it was moved, there, that the Book should be offered to the Queen, and
her Majesty should be supplicated to ratify it, the Motion was rejected.

The Reformation thus established, and through the Badness, or, at least, the
Disagreeableness of the Scheme laid down in the Book on the one hand, and the
Selfish and Sacrilegious Ends of the Laity on the other, no provision made for
the Ministers; it was unavoidable that they should be pincht. And pincht they
were, indeed, to purpose; For, for full Eighteen or Nineteen Months, after the
Reformation was established by Law, they had nothing to live by, but Shift or
Charity; and, which heightened the Misery, all this time of Want, they had
little or no prospect of the end of it: For when a Parliament, so much
Protestant, as in the Queens absence, to establish the Purity of Doctrine, etc.
had treated them so unkindly, what was to be expected, now that she was at
home, every inch Popish, and zealously such? Tho a Parliament should now
incline to pity them, yet how could it meet? Or what could it do without the
Sovereigns Allowance? And what ground had they to hope that she would be friend
them? Indeed, nothing was to be attempted that way; it was not to be expected
that the Popish Clergy should be dispossessed of the Revenues of the Church,
and the Reformed entitled to them, by Act of Parliament. Another project was
to be fallen upon.

The Project fallen upon was, That the Council, then, entirely Protestant,
should deal with the Queen to oblige the Popish Clergy, Possessors of the
Benefices, to resign the Thirds of them, into her Majesty's hands, that they
might be a fond for the Maintenance of the Protestant Ministers, The Nation
was, then, generally Protestant, and that Interest was too strong for the
Queen, so that they were not to be too much provokt: Besides, one Argument was
used which prevailed much with her Majesty. The Revenues of the Queen were,
then, very low, and she loved to spend; and pains were taken to persuade her
that, beside what would be subsistence enough for the Ministers, she would be
sure to have what might considerably relieve her own Necessities. This was a
taking proposition, so, the project succeeded. The Popish Clergy were put to
it, and resigned the Thirds. Kn. 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, etc. fuse.
Collectors were appointed to bring them in to the Exchequer: The Ministers,
were, thence, to receive their Allowances. Well!

Were they well enough provided now? Alas! Poor Men! It was but little that was
pretended to be provided for them; the Thirds of these Benefices which the
Laity had not already swallowed: And yet far less was their real portion. They
found by sad experience that it was not for nothing, that the Thirds were
ordered to be brought into the Queens Treasury. For when they came to be
divided, how mean were their Allotments? Ane hundred Merks Scottish, i. e.
about 5 l. 11 sh. English, to ane ordinary Minister in the Country. Three
hundred (says Knox p. 329.
) was the highest that was appointed to any, except the Superintendents, and a
few others.

All this, the Ministers, indeed, resented highly. John Knox Ib.
said publicly in his Sermon, If that Order for maintaining the Ministers
ended well, his judgment failed him -- for he saw two parts freely given to the
Devil, (the Popish Clergy) and the third must be divided betwixt God and the
Devil, i. e. betwixt the Protestant Ministers, and the Popish Queen. And, no
doubt, her Share was truly considerable. But neither did the Misery end here:
As poor as these small Pittances were, they could not have them either
seasonably, or fully paid. The Thirds came in but slowly, and the Queens
Necessities behoved to be first served; by which means, the Ministers were
forced to wait, many times, very long, for their Money: And, sometimes, to take
little, rather than want all: In short, their sense of the treatment they met
with was so lively, that this turned to a Proverb, amongst them: The Good Lord
of Pittaro was ane Earnest Professor of Christ; but the Great Devil receive the
Controller. Ibid.
Thus, poor Men! they were hardly treated: they had great Charges, and a
weighty Task; and they were ill provided, and worse paid.

This bred them much work in their Genesis Assemblies: For, scarcely did they ever
meet, but a great part of their time was spent in forming Petitions, and
importuning the Government for Relief of their Necessities; but all in vain,
they were never the better, no not so much as heard, almost, till July 1567.
Then, the Nobility and Gentry, resolved to lay aside the Queen from the
Government, and finding it necessary to have the Ministers of their side, began
to bespeak them a little more kindly. Then, indeed, it was made the Second
Article of that League, into which they entered, That the Act already made (by
the Queen and Council) concerning the Thirds of the Benefices within this
Realm, principally, for sustaining the Ministers, should be duly put in
Execution, according to the Order of the Book of the Appointment of Ministers
Stipends, as well of them that are to be appointed, as of them who are already
placed, and that the Ministers should be first duly answered, and sufficiently
sustained, of the same, to the Relief of their present Necessity, ay and while
a perfect Order might be taken, and established, toward the full Distribution
of the Patrimony of the Kirk, according to Gods word, etc.

So I read in the Mss. and Spotswood Spot. 209.
has the same upon the matter. But this was not all, Burnt Bairns Fire dread.
The Ministers sensible, it seems, of the mean and uncertain way of Living, they
had had before, resolved now to make the best advantage they could of that
opportunity; and so they obtained this likewise for another Article of that
Confederacy, and the Nobility promised, That how soon a lawful Parliament might
be had, or that the Occasion might otherwise justly serve, they should labor
at their uttermost, that the Faithful Kirk of Jesus Christ, professed within
this Realm, might be put in full Liberty ( i. e. possession) of the Patrimony
of the Kirk, according to the Book of God, and the Order and Practice of the
Primitive Kirk, and that nothing should pass in Parliament, till the Affairs of
the Kirk were first considered, approved and established; and also, that they
should reform themselves, in the Matters of the Church, for their own parts;
Ordaining the Contraveeners and Refusers of the same to be secluded from the
Bosom of the Kirk, etc. So the Mss. and Spotswood also. Ibid.


Here were fair promises indeed! Were not the Ministers well enough secured
now? Was not the Patrimony of the Church, now, to run in its Right Channel?
Alas! All promises are not performed. No sooner had these Nobles and Barons
carried their main point, which was the dethroning of the Queen, (to which also
the Ministers were forward enough) than they quite forgot their promises. For,
tho the Parliament met in December, thereafter, and tho the Restitution of the
Patrimony of the Church was promised to be the first thing that should be done
in Parliament, yet nothing like performance! Nay, tho ane Act was made for
putting the Articles about the Thirds in Execution; yet, the Ministers were
forced to wait long enough, before they found the effects of it. In short, they
continued in the same straits they had been in before, for full two years
thereafter, that is, till July 1569. at which time, I find by the Mss. and Mr.
Petrie Pet. 363.
the Church was put in possession of the Thirds; for which their Necessities
made them very thankful, as appears from the Narrative of ane Act of their
Assembly at that time, which runs thus, as I find it in the Mss. For as much as
this long time by gone, the Ministers have been universally defrauded and
postponed of their Stipends, and, now, at last, it has pleased God to move the
hearts of the superior power, and the Estates of this Realm, etc. A Narrative,
which, it is probable, they would not have used when the Thirds were, at first,
projected for their Maintenance: Sure, I am, of a quite different strain from
Knox's Resentment, which I mentioned before. But by this time, Experience had
taught them to thank God for little; and that it was even Good to be getting
something. However,

All this while they continued still to have the same sentiments concerning the
Patrimony of the Church; that, unless God by immediate Revolution, should
dispense with her Right, it belonged to her unalienably; that it was abominable
Sacrilege to defraud her of it; and that neither Church nor State could be
happy so long as it was so much in the hands of Laics. And as they had still
these sentiments, (and no wonder, so long as they had any sense of Religion)
so, they were still using their best endeavors, trying all experiments, and
watching all opportunities to bring the Nobility and Gentry to a reasonable
Temper; and to put the Church in possession of her undoubted Revenues; but all
in vain. On the contrary, these Leeches having once tasted of her Blood, were
thirsting still for more, and daily making farther Encroachments. For

A Parliament met in August 1571, and made ane Act, obliging all the Subjects,
who in former times, had held their Land and Possessions of Priors, Prioresses,
Convents of Friars and Nuns, etc. thereafter to hold them of the Crown. This
was ane awakening, ane allaruming Act. These who, heretofore, had possessed
themselves of the Churches Patrimony, had done it by force, or by connivance;
without Law, and without Title; so there were still hopes of recovering what
was possessed so illegally. But this was to give them Law on their side; As
things stood then, it would be easy to obtain Gifts, now, that the King was
made immediate Superior; and then, there was no recovering of what was thus
colourably possessed. So, I say it was ane awakening Act of Parliament; and
indeed it rouzed the Spirits of the Clergy, and put them in a quicker motion.
Now they began to see the Error of Drawing the New Scheme of Polity in the
First Book of Discipline, and receding from the Old one: Now they perceived
sensibly that, that making of a New one, had unhinged all the Churches
Interests, and exposed her Patrimony, and made it a Prey to the Ravenous Laity;
and that it was therefore, time, high time, for them to bethink themselves, and
try their strength and skill, if possibly a stop could be put to such notorious
Robbery. Vide Spot. 258.
And so I am fairly introduced to

THE SECOND MODEL into which the Government of the Church was cast, after the
public Establishment of the Reformation. For

The General Assembly of the Church, meeting at Stirling, in that same month of
August 1571. Gave Commission to certain Brethren, to go to the Lord Regent his
Grace, and to the Parliament, humbly to request and desire, in Name of the
Kirk, the granting of such Heads and Articles, and redress of such Complaints,
as should be given to them by the Kirk, etc. So it is in the Mss. and so
Spotswood and Petrie have it. Spot. 258. Pet. 371.
Before I proceed, there is one seeming difficulty which must be removed; it
is, that this General Assembly met before the Parliament. How then could it be
that Act of Parliament which so awakened them? But the Solution is easy. In
those times, Parliaments did not sit so long as they are in use to do now; but
all things were prepared, and in readiness, before the Parliament met.
Proclamation was made a month, or so, before the Parliament was to meet,
requiring all Bills to be given in to the Register, which were to be presented
in the succeeding Session of Parliament, that they might be brought to the
King, or Regent, to be perused and considered by them, and only such as they
allowed were to be put into the Chancellors hands to be proponed to the
Parliament, and none other, etc. Whosoever pleases may see this account given by
King James the Sixth of Scotland, and First of England, to his English
Parliament, in his Speech dated 1607. Indeed the thing is notorious, and
Calderwood himself gives a remarkable instance of this method, Called. 759.
for he tells how, in the end of April, or beginning of May 1621. A Charge was
published by Proclamation, commanding all that had Suits, Articles, or
Petitions to propone to the Parliament, to give them into the Clerk of the
Register before the twentieth day of May, that by him they might be presented
to so many of the Council, who were appointed by his Majesty to meet, some days
before the Parliament, and to consider the said Bills, Petitions and Articles
with Certification, that the same should not be received, read, nor voted in
Parliament, except they were passed under his Highness hand. And yet the same
Calderwood tells us, Ib. 764.
That the Parliament was not appointed to meet till the Twentieth and Third of
July; so that here were two full months between the giving in of the Bills,
etc. and the Meeting of the Parliament. This being the Custom in those times,
it is easy to consider how the General Assembly, tho it met some days before
the Parliament, might know very well what was to be done in Parliament; for if
this Bill was allowed by the then Regent to be presented, there was no doubt of
its passing. And that it was very well known what the Parliament was to do in
that matter, may be further evident from John Knox's Letter directed, at that
time, to the General Assembly, wherein he is earnest with them, that with all
Vprightness and Strength in God, they against and the mercyless Devourers of the
Patrimony of the Church, telling them, that if Men will spoil, let them do it
to their own Peril and Damnation; but it was their Duty to beware of
communicating with their sins, but by public protestation to make it known to
the world, That they were innocent of Robbery, which would, e're long, provoke
Gods Vengeance upon the Committers, etc. From which nothing can be clearer,
than that he had a special eye to that which was then in agitation, and to be
done by the Parliament. For this Letter see Spot. 258. and Pet. 370.
Having thus removed this seeming difficulty, I return to my purpose.

The Earl of Lennox was, then, Regent: He was murdered in the time of the
Parliament: So, at that time, things were in confusion, and these Commissioners
from the General Assembly could do nothing in their business. The Earl of Mar
succeeded in the Regency; Application was made to him. It was agreed to between
his Grace, and the Clergy who applied to him, that a Meeting should be kept
between so many for the Church, and so many for the State, for adjusting
matters. For this end, ane Assembly was kept at Leith, on the 12 of January
1571/2. By this Assembly, Six were delegated to meet, with as many to be
nominated by the Council to treat, reason and conclude, concerning the
Settlement of the Polity of the Church. After diverse Meetings, and long
Deliberation, (as Spotswood has it, Spot. 260.
) they came to an Agreement, which was, in effect, That the Old Polity should
revive, and take place; only with some little alterations, which seemed
necessary from the Change that had been made in Religion. Whosoever pleases may see
it more largely in Calderwood, Called. 50, etc.
(who tells us, that the whole Scheme is Registered in the Books of Council)
more briefly, in Spotswood and Petrie Spot. 260. Pet. 273.
In short,

It was a Constitution, much the same with that, which we have, ever since,
had, in the times of Episcopacy. For by this Agreement, those who were to have
the Old Prelatical power, were also to have the Old Prelatical Names and
Titles, of Archbishops and Bishops; the Old Division of the Diocesses was to
take place; the Patrimony of the Church was to run, much, in the Old Channel;
particularly, express provision was made concerning Chapters, Abbots, Priors,
etc. That they should be continued, and enjoy their Old Rights and Privileges,
as Churchmen; and, generally, things were put in a regular Course.

This was the Second Model (not a new one) of Polity, established, in the
Church of Scotland, after the Reformation; at a pretty good distance, I think,
from the Rules and Exigencies of Parity. The truth is, both Calderwood and
Petrie acknowledge, it was Imparity, with a witness. The thing was so manifest,
they had not the brow to deny it; all their Endeavors are only to impugn the
Authority of this Constitution, or raise Clouds about it, or find Weaknesses in
it. So far as I can collect, no man ever affirmed, that, at this time, the
Government of the Church of Scotland was Presbyterian, except G. R. who is
truly singular for his skill in these matters: But we shall have, some time or
other, occasion to consider him. In the mean time let us consider Calderwood's
and Petrie's Pleas against this Establishment. They may be reduced to these
four.

1. The Incompetency of the Authority of the Meeting at Leith, in January
1571/2. 2. The Force which was, at that time, put upon the Ministers by the
Court, which would needs have that Establishment take place. 3. The Limitedness
of the power, then, granted to Bishops. 4. The Reluctancies which the
subsequent Assemblies discovered against that Establishment.
These are the most material Pleas, they insist on, and I shall consider, how
far they may hold. The

1. Plea is, the Incompetency of the Authority of the Meeting at Leith, Ian.
12. 1571/2. which gave Commission to the Six for agreeing with the State to
such ane Establishment. It is not called ane Assembly, but a Convention, in the
Register. The ordinary Assembly was not appointed to be holden till the 6th of
March thereafter. Call. 49. Pet. 372.
As it was only a Convention, so it was in very great haste, it seems, and took
not time to consider things of such importance, so deliberately, as they ought
to have been considered. Call. 50. Pet. 373, 374.
It was a corrupt Convention, for it allowed Master Robert Pont, a Minister, to
be a Lord of the Session. Call. 50. Pet. 375.
These are the Reasons they insist on to prove the Authority of that Meeting
incompetent. And now to examine them briefly.

When I consider these Arguments, and for what end they are adduced, I must
declare, I cannot but admire the Force of prejudice and partiality, how much
they blind men's Eyes, and distort their Reasons, and bias them to the most
ridiculous Undertakings. For,

What tho the next ordinary Assembly was not appointed to meet till March
thereafter? Do not even the Presbyterians themselves maintain the Lawfulness,
yea, the Necessity of calling General Assemblies extraordinarily, upon
extraordinary occasions? pro re nata (as they call it)? How many, such, have
been called since the Reformation? How much did they insist on this pretense
Anno 1638? And,

What tho the Register calls this Meeting a Convention? was it therefore no
Assembly? Is there such an opposition between the words, Convention and
Assembly, that both cannot possibly signify the same thing? Does not Calderwood
acknowledge, that they voted themselves ane Assembly, in their second Session?
Does he not acknowledge, that all the ordinary Members were there, which used
to constitute Assemblies? But what if it can be found that ane undoubted,
uncontroverted Assembly, owned it as ane Assembly; and its Authority, as the
Authority of ane Assembly? What is become of this fine Argument then? But can
this be done indeed? Yes, it can; and these same very Authors have given it in
these same very Histories Call. 57. Pet. 376.
, in which they use this as ane Argument, and not very far from the same very
pages. Both of them (I say) tell, that the General Assembly holden at Perth, in
August immediately thereafter, made ane Act which began thus, Forasmuch as the
Assembly holden in Leith, in January last, etc.

But if it was ane Assembly, yet, it was in too great haste, it did not things
deliberately. Why so? No Reason is adduced, no Reason can be adduced, for
saying so. The Subject they were to treat of was no new one; it was a Subject
that had employed all their Heads for several months before: Their great
business, at that time, was to give a Commission to some Members to meet with
the Delegates of the State, to adjust matters about the Polity and Patrimony of
the Church. This Commission was not given till the Third Session, as Calderwood
himself acknowledges. Call. 49.
Where then, was the great haste? Lay it in doing a thing in their Third
Session, which might have been done in the First?

But were not these Commissioners in too great haste to come to ane Agreement
when they met with the Delegates of the State? Yes, if we may believe Petrie,
for he says, Pet. 353.
That the same day (viz. January 16.) the Commissioners conveened and conclued,
etc. But he may say, with that same integrity, whatever he pleases. For, not to
insist on Spotswood's account, Spot. 260.
who says, it was after diverse Meetings and long Deliberation, that they came
to their Conclusion; not to insist on his authority, I say, because he may be
suspected as partial; does not Calderwood Call. 50.
expressly acknowledge, that they began their Conference upon the Sixteenth of
January, and Ib. 55.
that matters were not finally concluded and ended till the First of February?

But was it not a corrupt Convention? Did it not allow Pont, a Minister, to be
a Lord of the Session? A mighty Demonstration, sure, of its Corruption! Well!
Suppose it was a Corruption, was it such a plag^y one as infected all the other
Acts of that Convention? Is one corrupt Act of ane Assembly enough to reprobate
all the rest of its Acts? If so, I think, it will fare ill with a good many
Assemblies. Whither was it a Corruption in ane Assembly to oblige men to do
penance for doing their Duty? to declare against the Kings Negative Voice in
Parliament, and so to Unking him, etc.? But to go on, why should this Assembly
bear the whole Blame of this Corruption, if it was one? was it not ratified by
a subsequent Assembly? And should not it bear its share? Both Authors knew this
very well, for both of them record it: Call. 62. Pet. 379.
It was the Assembly holden at Eden. March 6. 1573. The Regent craved some
learned Men of the Ministry (they are Calderwood's own words) to be placed
Senators of the College of Justice. The Assembly, after reasoning, at length,
voted, that none was able to bear the said two Charges, and therefore inhibited
any Minister to take upon him to be a Senator of the College of Justice, Master
Robert Pont only excepced, who was already placed with advice and consent of
the Kirk. Petrie gives the same account, only he ends it thus, By Advice, etc.
He thought it expedient, it seems, to conceal the mention made of the Kirk. And
no doubt he did wisely, i. e. suitably to his purpose; for Calderwood added it
but foolishly, considering that there could not be a clearer Acknowledgement of
the Authority of the Convention at Leith, than giving it thus the name of The
Kirk; but what needs more? If this was a Corruption, it was one, even in the
times of Presbytery, after the year 1580. For did not Pont, even then continue
to be a Lord of the Session? Or will our Brethren say, that it is a fault to
introduce a Corruption, but it is none to continue it when it is introduced?
All this is said upon the supposition that it was a Corruption; tho I am not
yet convinced that it was one, at least so great a one as might have given
ground for all this stir about it. I doubt, if the Members of this Assembly at
Leith, had been through paced Paritymen, vigorous for the Good Cause, it
should, no more have been a Corruption in them to have allowed Pont to sit as a
Lord of Session, than it was in the Kirk, once upon a day, to allow Mr.
Alexander Henderson to sit as a Member of a Committee, you know for what. And
so much for the first Plea, proceed we to the

2. The Force, the Court, at that time, put upon the Clergy, to accept of that
Establishment. Calderwood is mighty on this Plea. The Superintendent of Angus
(who had a principal hand in the Agreement at Leith) a man too tractable, might
easily be induced, by his Chief, the Earl of Mar, Regent, for the time, to
condescend to the Heads and Articles of this Book. Call. 55.
And, It was easy to the Court to obtain the Consent of many Ministers to this
sort of Episcopacy -- Some being poor, some being covetous and ambitious, some
not taking up the gross Corruption of the Office, some having a Carnal Respect
to some Noblemen their Friends. Ib. 56.
And how often does he impute it all to the Earl of Morton? And Calderwood's
faithful Follower G. R. in his First Vindication, etc. tells us that the
Convention of Churchmen met at Leith was too much influenced by the Court. p. 7.
Now for answer to all this, in the first place, what if one should allow all
that is alleged? will it follow from that allowance that Prelacy was not,
then, agreed to? The Question is not how it was done? but if it was done? For
if it was done it is ane argument that the Clergy, then, thought little on the
indispensibility of Parity; or that they were very bad men, who, tho they
believed that indispensibility, did yet agree to Prelacy. It Is true, indeed,
Calderwood makes them, here, every whit as bad as that could amount to:

He makes them a pack of poor, covetous, ambitious, ignorant, Carnal Rogues,
who were thus Court-ridden. But behold the Difference between Market days, as
we say; the same Author, when he comes, afterward, to tell who were appointed
to compile the Second Book of Discipline, (a task agreeable to his temper)
gives the same Men, who were Commissioners, at the Agreement at Leith, (for
they were generally nominated for that work) a far different Character: Our
Kirk has not had worthier men, since, nor of better Gifts. Call. 73*
This might be enough; yet I will proceed further, because what I have to say
may be useful for coming by a just sense of the state of affairs in these
times. I say therefore,

That all this Plea is mere groundless Noise and Fiction. The Court had no
imaginable reason for pressing this Establishment, which was not as proper for
the Clergy to have insisted on; and the Clergy had one Reason more than the
Court could pretend to.

The great Reasons the Court could, then, insist on, what else could they be,
than that Episcopacy stood still established by Law? That according to the
fundamental Constitution, which had obtained time out of mind, the
Ecclesiastics had made one of the Three Estates of Parliament? That such ane
Essential Alteration, in the civil Constitution, as behoved necessarily to
result from the want of that Estate, being the First of the Three, was
infinitely dangerous at any time, as tending to turn the whole Constitution
loose, and shake the very Foundations of the Government? That it tended to the
Subversion of the High Court of Parliament, and naturally, and necessarily,
inferred Essential Nullities in all the Meetings, the other two Estates could
have, and all the Acts they could make? That it was more dangerous, at that
time, during the Kings Minority, to have the Constitution so disjoynted, than
on other occasions? That whosoever was Regent, or whosoever were his
Counselors, might be called to ane account for it, when the King came to
perfect Age? And it was obvious that it might easily be found High Treason in
them, that they had suffered such Alterations? That the best way to preserve
the Rights of the Church, and put her, and keep her in her Possession of her
Patrimony, was to preserve that Estate? That the best way to preserve that
Estate, was to continue it in the old, tried, wisely digested, and long
approven Constitution of it? What other arguments, I say, than these, or such
as were like them, can we conceive, the Court could then make use to persuade
the Clergy to agree to the Old Polity? Is it to be imagined they turned
Theologues, and endeavored to indoctrinate the Clergy, and convince them from
Scripture, and Antiquity, and Ecclesiastical History, etc. that Episcopacy was
of divine Institution, or the best, or a lawful Government of the Church? If I
mistake not, such Topics, in these times were not much thought on, by our
Statesmen. But if they were such Arguments as I have given a Specimen of, which
they insisted on, as no doubt they were, if they insisted on any, then I would
fain know, which of them it was that might not have been as readily insisted on
by the Clergy, as by the Statesmen? Nay, considering that there were no
Scruples of Conscience then, concerning the Lawfulness of such a Constitution;
how reasonable is it to think, that the Clergy might be as forward as the
Statesmen could be, to insist on these Arguments* Especially if it be further
considered, that,

Besides these and the like Arguments, the Clergy had one very considerable
Argument to move them for the Re-establishment of the Old Constitution, which
was, that they had found by Experience, that the New Scheme fallen upon in the
First Book of Discipline had done much hurt to the Church, as I have already
observed; that by forsaking the Old Constitution, the Church had suffered too
much already; and that it was high time, for them, now, to return to their Old
Fond; considering at what losses they had been since they had deserted it. And
all this will appear more reasonable and credible still, if two things more be
duly considered. The

First is, That the Six Clergymen who were commissioned by the Assembly, on
this occasion, to treat with the State, were all sensible men; men who
understood the Constitution both of Church and State, had Heads to comprehend
the consequences of things, and were very far from being Paritymen. The

Second is, The Oddness, (to call it no worse) of the Reason, which our Authors
feign to have been the Motive which made the Court, at that time, so earnest
for such ane Establishment; namely, that thereby, They might gripe at the
Commodity. (as Calderwood Call. 55.
words it) That is, possess themselves of the Churches Patrimony. What? Had the
Clergy so suddenly fallen from their daily, their constant, their continual
Claim to the Revenues of the Church? Had they in ane instant, altered their
sentiments about Sacrilege, and things consecrated to Holy uses? Were they now
willing to part with the Churches Patrimony? Did that which moved them to be so
earnest for this Meeting with the State, miraculously flip out of their Minds,
so that they inconcernedly quate their pretensions, and betrayed their own
interests? Were they all fast asleep when they were at the Conference? So much
asleep, or senseless, that they could not perceive the Court intended them such
a Trick? On the other hand,

If the Court had such a design as is pretended, I must confess, I do not see
how it was useful for them to fall on such a wild project for accomplishing
their purposes. Why be at all this pains to re-establish the Old Polity, if the
only purpose was to rob the Church of her Patrimony? Might not that have been
done without, as well as, with it? Could they have wished the Church in weaker
circumstances for asserting her own Rights than she was in, before this
Agreement? Was it not as easy to have possessed themselves of a Bishopric, ane
Abbacy, a Priory, etc. when there were no Bishops, nor Abbots, nor Priors, as
when there were? What a pitiful politic, or rather what ane insolent
wickedness was it, as it were, to take a Coat which was no man's, and put on
one, and possess him of it, and call it his Coat, that they might rob him of
it? Or, making the uncharitable supposition, that they could have ventured on
such a needless, such a mad fetch of iniquity, were all the Clergy so
short-sighted, that they could not penetrate into such a palpable, such a gross
piece of Cheatry? But what needs more?

It Is certain that by that Agreement, the Churches Patrimony was fairly secured
to her, and she was put in far better condition than she was ever in before,
since the Reformation. Let any man read over Calderwoods account of the
Agreement, and he must confess it: And yet perhaps the account may be more full
and clear, in the Books of Council, if they be extant.

It Is true, indeed, the Courtiers, afterward, played their Tricks, and robbed
the Church; and it cannot be denied, that they got some bad Clergymen, who were
sub^ervient to their purposes: But this was so (...) from being pretended to be
aimed at, by (...) Courtiers, while the Agreement was a m^k^ng; It was so far
from these Clergymens minds, who adjusted matters at that time with the Laity,
(these Courtiers) to give them the smallest advantages that way, to allow them
the least Scope for such Encroachments; That, on the contrary, when,
afterward, they found the Nobility were taking such Methods, and plundering
the Church; they complained mightily of it, as a manifest breach of the
Agreement, and ane horrid iniquity.

But whatever Truth is in all this Reasoning, I have spent on this point, is
not much material to my main purpose: For, whither, at that time, Episcopacy
was imposed upon the Church or not; or, if imposed, whither it was out of a bad
design or not; affects not, in the least, the principal Controversy. For
however it was, it is certain the Church accepted of it, at that time, which we
are bound, in Charity, to think, a sufficient Argument that she was not then of
Antiprelatical principles; She had no such Article in her Creed, as the Divine
Right of Parity; which is the great point I am concerned for in all this
tedious Controversy.

3. The Third Plea, is, The Limitedness of the Power which was, then, granted
to Bishops. They had no more Power granted them by this Establishment, than
Superintendents had enjoyed before. This all my Authors insist upon with great
Earnestness. Call. 51, 55, 56, 66. Pet. 374, 383. G. R. 1 Vind. p. 8.
And I confess it is very true: This was provided for both by the Agreement at
Leith, and by ane Act of the Assembly holden at Eden. March 6. 1574. But then
1. If they had the same power which Superintendents had before, I think they
had truly Prelatic Power; they did not act in Parity with other Ministers. 2.
Tho they had no more power, yet it is certain they had more Privilege: They
were not answerable to their own Synods, but only to General Assemblies, as is
clear, even from Calderwoods own account of the agreement at Leith. Call. 51.
In that point, the absurd Constitution in the First Book of Discipline was
altered. 3. One thing more I cannot but observe, here, concerning Mr.
Carlderwood. This judicious Historian, when he was concerned to raise Dust
about the Prelacy of Superintendents, found easily 7 or 8 huge Differences
between Superintendents and Bishops. And now, that he is concerned to raise
Dust about the Prelacy of Bishops, he thinks he has gained a great point if he
makes it the same with the Prelacy of Superintendents. What a mercy was it that
ever poor Prelacy outlived the Dint of such doughty Onsets? But it seems it
must be a tough-lived thing, and cannot be easily chased out of its Nature.

There is another considerable Thrust made at it by Calderwood, and his
Disciple G. R. Ca^. 61. G. R. 1 Vind. 7.
which may come in as a Succedaneum to the former Argument: What is it? (...)
is even, that in the Genesis Assembly at (...). March 6. 1573. David Ferguson was
chosen M^^^rator, who was neither Bishop nor Superi^ten^ent. And so down falls
Prelacy! But so was (...) George Buchanan in the Assembly holden in July 1507.
who was neither Superintendent, Bishop, nor Presbyter, and so Down falls
Presbytery! Nay Down falls the whole Ministry! Is not this a hard Lock,
Prelacy is brought to, that it shall not be it self, so long as one wrong step
can be found to have been made by a Scotch General Assembly?

I have adduced and discussed all these Plea's, not that I thought my Cause in
any hazard by them; but to let the World see, what a party one has to deal with
in his Controversy: Whatever it be, Sense or Nonsense, if their Cause requires
it; they must not want an Argument. But to go on. But

4. The Fourth, and greatest Plea, is, That this Episcopacy was never owned by
the Church: It was never allowed by the General Assembly. Call. 56. Pet. 389. G.
R. 1 Vind. 7.
It was only tolerated for three or four years. Call. 56.
It was protested against as a Corruption. Call. 58, G. R. 7.
As these Articles were concluded without the Knowledge of the Assembly, so the
whole Assembly opposed them earnestly. Pet. 376.
They were obtruded upon the Church, against her Will. p. 383.
The Church from the beginning of the Reformation opposed that kind of Bishops.
p. 387.
The Church did only, for a time, yield to Civil Authority, yet so that she
would endeavor to be free of these Articles. p. 376.


These and many more such things are boldly and confidently asserted by
Calderwood, Petrie, and the strenuous Vindicator of the Church of Scotland, who
seldom misses of saying what Calderwood had said before him; and I shall grant
they are all said to purpose, if they are true: But how far they are from being
that may sufficiently appear, I hope, if I can make these things evident.

1. That the Agreement at Leith was fairly and frequently allowed, approven,
and insisted on, by many subsequent Assemblies.

2. That after Episcopacy was questioned, and a Party appeared against it, it
cost them much struggling, and much time, before they could get it abolished.

1. I say, The Agreement at Leith was fairly and frequently allowed, approven,
and insisted on, by many subsequent Assemblies. This Assertion cannot but
appear true to any unbyassed Judgment, that shall consider but these two things.

1. That, in Every Assembly, for several years, after that Establishment, or
Agreement, or Settlement at Leith, Bishops were present, and sat, and voted as
such; and, as such, were obliged to be present, and sit, and vote, etc. As both
Calderwood and Petrie acknowledge, and shall be made appear by and by.

2. That these two Authors have been at special pains, to let the world know,
how punctually they were tried, and sometimes rebuked and censured for not
discharging their Offices, as they ought to have done. Both Authors, I say,
have been very intent and careful to represent this in their accounts of the
subsequent Assemblies. I know their purpose, herein, was to expose the Bishops,
and cast all the Dirt, they could, upon Episcopacy. But then, as I take it,
their pains, that way, have luckily furnished me with a plain Demonstration of
the falsehood of all they have said, in this Plea, I am now considering: For

Would these Assemblies have suffered them to be present, and sit, and vote as
Bishops? Would they have tried and censured them as Bishops? Would they have
put them to their Duty as Bishops, if they had not owned them for Bishops? And
was there any other Fond for owning them for Bishops, at that time, except the
Agreement at Leith? This alone might be sufficient, I say, for dispatching this
whole Plea. Yet

3. To put this matter beyond all possibility of ever being, with the least
color of probability, controverted hereafter; I recommend to the Readers
consideration, the following Series of Acts made by subsequent Assemblies.

The Agreement at Leith as was observed before, was conclud^d (...) the First
day of February, Anno 1571/2. (...) Ordinary Assembly met at Saint Andrews, on
the Sixth of March thereafter: The Archbishop of St. Andrews (newly advanced to
that See, by the Leith Agreement) was present, and the first person named (as
Calderwood himself has it, Call. 56.
to be of the Committee that was appointed for Revising the Articles agreed
upon at Leith: And ane Act was made in that Assembly, (as it is both in the
Mss. and Petrie Pet. 375.
) Ordaining the Superintendent of Fife to use his own Jurisdiction, as before,
in the Provinces not subject to the Archbishop of St. Andrews; and requesting
him to concur with the said Archbishop, in his Visitations, or otherwise, when
he required him, until the next Assembly -- And in like manner, the
Superintendents of Angus and Lothian, without prejudice of the said Archbishop,
except by Virtue of his Commission.

By the Assembly holden at Perth, August 6. 1572. this Act was made: Forasmuch
as in the ASSEMBLY (not the Convention) of the Church holden at Leith, in
January last, Certain Commissioners were appointed to deal with the Nobility,
and their Commissioners, to reason and conclude upon diverse Articles and
Heads, thought good, then, to be conferred upon; according to which Commission,
they have proceeded in sundry Conventions, (is this consistent with Petrie's
assertion, that, the same day, they met and concluded?) and have concluded for
that time, upon the Heads and Articles as the same produced, in this Assembly,
proport: In which, being considered, are found certain Names, as Archbishop,
Dean, Archdeacon, Chancellor, Chapter, which Names are thought slanderous and
offensive in the Ears of many of the Brethren, appearing to found toward
Papistry; Therefore, the whole Assembly in one voice, as well they who were in
Commission at Leith, as others, solemnly protest, that they mean not, by using
such Names, to ratify, consent, or agree to any kind of Papistrie or
Superstition; wishing rather the said Names to be changed into other Names,
that are not scandalous and offensive; and, in like manner, they protest, That
the said Heads and Articles agreed upon, be only received as ane Interim, until
farther, and more perfect Order be obtained, at the hands of the Kings
Majesty's Regent and Nobility: For the which, they will press, as occasion
shall serve. Unto the which Protestation the whole Assembly, in one voice,
adhere. So the Mss. Spot. Called. Pet. Spot. 260. Called. 57. Pet. 376.


This is the Act, on which, Calderwood, Petrie, and G. R. found their
assertion, That Episcopacy, as agreed to at Leith was protested against, and
earnestly opposed, by a General Assembly; but with what Shadow of Reason, let
any Man consider: For, what can be more plain, than, that they receive the
substance of the Articles, and only protest against the Scandalousness of the
Names used in them? What reason they had for that, besides the over-zealous
Principle I mentioned before, let the curious enquire: That Is none of my
present business.

But, They protest that they receive these Articles only for ane Interim: True;
But how does it appear that they received them only for ane Interim, out of a
Dislike to Episcopacy? Had they believed the Divine Right of Parity, how could
they have received them so much as, for ane Interim? How could they have
received them at all? The Truth is, there were many things in the Articles
which required amendment, even tho the Genesis Ass. had believed the Divine Right
of Episcopacy. And that they did not receive them, for ane Interim, upon the
account of any Dislike they had to Episcopacy, shall be made evident, by and
by. In the mean time, we have gained one point, even, That they were received
by this Assembly; unless receiving for an Interim be not receiving: But if they
were received, I hope it is not true, that they were never allowed by a General
Assembly. And if Episcopacy was not protested against at all, and if there was
no such word or phrase in the Act, as had the least Tendency to import that
they judged it a Corruption, I hope, it may consist well enough with the Laws
of Civility, to say that G. R. was talking without Book, when he said, It was
protested against as a Corruption, by this General Assembly. I doubt, if he had
found any of the Prelatists talking with so much Confidence, where they had so
little ground, he would have been at his beloved Lies and Calumnies. But enough
of this, proceed we in our Series.

By the Universal Order (so it is worded in the Mss.) of the General Ass.
holden at Eden. March 6. 157^/3. It was Statuted and Ordained, that all
Bishops, Superintendents, etc. present themselves in every Genesis Ass. that
hereafter shall be holden, the first day of the Assembly before Noon, etc. Mss.
Pet. 379.
Again, It is thought most reasonable and expedient, That Bishops, etc.
purchase General Letters, without any delay, commanding all Men to frequent
Preaching and Prayers according to the Order received in the Congregations,
etc. Mss. Pet. ibid.


In the Ass. holden at Eden. Aug. 6. 1573. The Visitation Books of Bishops,
etc. were produced, and certain Ministers appointed to examine their Diligence
in Visitation. Mss. Pet. ibid.
In that same Assembly, Patoun, Bishop of Dunkeld, was accused that he had
accepted the Name, but had not exercised the Office of a Bishop, not having
proceeded against Papists, within his bounds. He was also suspected of Simony
and Perjury, in that, contrary to his Oath, at the receiving of the Bishopric,
he gave Acquittances, and the Earl of Argyle received the Profits. Pet. ib.
If these things were true, he was a foolish, as well as a bad Bishop. But then
it was evident, that this Assembly fairly owned Episcopacy. Further, that by
the Agreement at Leith, express provisions were made against Simony and
Dilapidation of Benefices; and that Bishops should swear to that purpose, etc.
which, I think, is not well consistent with the Plea insisted on, before, viz.
That the Agreement at Leith was forced on the Clergy, by the Court, out of a
design, it had, upon the Revenues of the Church.

I find these further Acts made by this Assembly, in the Mss.

Touching them that receive Excommunicates, the whole Kirk, presently
assembled, ordains all Bishops, etc. to proceed to Excommunication against all
Receivers of Excommunicate persons, if after due Admonition the Receivers rebel
and be disobedient.

The Kirk ordains all Bishops, etc. in their Synodal Conventions, to take a
List of the Names of the Excommunicates, within their Jurisdictions; and bring
them to the General Assemblies, to be published, to other Bishops and
Superintendents, etc. That they, by their Ministers, in their Provinces, may
divulgate the same, in the whole Countries, where Excommunicates haunt.

The Kirk presently assembled, ordains all Bishops and Superintendents, etc. to
conveen before them, all such persons as shall be found suspected of consulting
with Witches; and finding them guilty, to cause them make public Repentance,
etc.

That Uniformity may be observed in processes of Excommunication, It is
ordained that Bishops, and Superintendents, etc. shall direct their Letters to
Ministers, where the persons that are to be Excommunicated dwell; commanding
the said Ministers to admonish accordingly, and in Case of Disobedience, to
proceed to Excommunication, and pronounce the Sentence thereof, upon a Sunday,
in time of Preaching; and, thereafter, the Ministers to indorse the said
Letters, making mention of the days of their Admonitions, and Excommunication,
for Disobedience aforesaid, and to report to the said Bishops, etc. according
to the Direction contained in the said Letters.

Ib. 380.
Petrie has the substance of most of these Acts, but has been at pains to
obscure them. And no wonder; for here are so many Branches of true Episcopal
power, established in the persons of these Bishops, that it could not but have
appeared very strange, that a General Assembly should have conferred them on
them, if there was such ane aversion then, to the Order, as he and his Fellows
are willing to have the world believe, there was. But

Honest Calderwood was wiser, for he has not so much as ane intimation of any
one of them. And Calderwood having thus concealed them, nay, generally, all
along, whatever might make against his Cause, as much as he could; what
wonder if G. R. who knows nothing in the matter, but what Calderwood told him,
stumbled upon such a notable piece of Ignorance, in his first Vindication, as
to tell the world, That Nothing was restored at Leith but the Image of Prelacy?
That these Tulchan Bishops had only the Name of Bishops, while Noblemen and
others had the Revenue, and the Church all the power? Nay, That,
notwithstanding of all, was done at Leith, The real Exercise of Presbytery, in
all its Meetings lesser and greater, continued and was allowed? But of this
more hereafter.

The Assembly, holden at Eden. March 6. 1574. Concluded concerning the
Jurisdiction of Bishops, in their Ecclesiastical Function, that it should not
exceed the Jurisdiction of Superintendents, which, heretofore, they have had,
and presently have: And that they should be subject to the Discipline of the
General Ass. as Members thereof, as Superintendents had been heretofore, in all
sorts. And again, This Assembly Ordains, That no Bishop give Collation of any
Benefice within the bounds of Superintendents within his Diocese, without their
Consent and Testimonials, subscribed with their hands: And that Bishops, within
their Diocesses visit by themselves, where no Superintendent is; and give no
Collation of Benefices without the Consent of three well qualified Ministers.

Here indeed both Calderwood and Petrie Called. 66. Pet. 383.
appear briskly, and transcribe the Mss. word for word: Here was something like
limiting the power of the Bishops; and that was ane opportunity not to be
omitted. But, as I take it, there was no very great reason for this Triumph, if
the true reason of these Acts be considered, as it may be collected from
Spotswood and Petrie Spot. 272. Pet. 383.
which was this,

The Earl of Mor^on, then Regent, and sordidly covetous, had flattered the
Church out of their Possession of the Thirds of the Benefices; the only sure
Stock, they could as yet claim, by any Law, made since the Reformation of
Religion; promising, instead thereof, to settle local'd Stipends upon the
Ministers; but having once obtained his end, which was to have the Thirds at
his Disposal, he forgot his promise; and the Ministers found themselves
miserably trickt. Three or four Churches were cast together, and committed to
the Care of one Minister; and a Farthing, to live by, could not be got, without
vast attendance, trouble and importunity. Besides, the Superintendents, who had
had a principal hand in the Reformation, and were Men of great Repute, and had
spent liberally of their own Estates in the Service of the Church, were as ill
treated as any body: For when they sought their wonted allowances, they were
told, there was no more use for them; Bishops were now restored; it was their
Province to govern the Church: Superintendents were now superfluous and
unnecessary. The Superintendents thus Mal treated, what wonder was it if they
had their own Resentments of it? So, when, the General Assembly met, Areskin,
Spotswood and Winram, three of them (and, by that time, it is probable, there
were no more of them alive) came to the Assembly, offered to dimit their
Offices, and were earnest that the Kirk would accept of their Dimission: They
were now turned useless Members of the Ecclesiastical body; their Office was
evacuated; they could serve no longer. The whole Assembly could not but know
the matter; and as they knew for what reasons these ancient and venerable
persons were so much irritated, so their own concern, in the same common
interest, could not but prompt them to a fellow-feeling; they knew not how soon
the next Mortonian Experiment might be tried upon themselves; they, therefore,
unanimously, refuse to accept of the Dimission, and whither the Superintendents
will or not, they continue them in their Offices; and not only so, but they
thought it expedient to renew that Article of the Agreement at Leith, viz. That
Bishops and Superintendents stood on the same Level, had the same Power, the
same Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and were to be regulated by the same Canons:
Importing thereby, that both were useful in the Church at such a juncture; and
that the Church had not received Bishops to the Exauctoration of the few
surviving Superintendents; and now, in their old age, rendering them
contemptible. And who could condemn the Assembly for taking a course that was
both so natural and so obvious? Nay, it was even the Bishops interest, as much
as any other Assembly-mens to agree to this conclusion; For the great business
in hand, was not about Extent of Power, or Point of Dignity; had no Incentive
to Jealousy or Emulation in it; but it was about the Revenues of the Church:
To secure these against the insatiable Avarice of a Griping Lord Regent. A
point the Bishops were as nearly concerned in as any Men: For if these three
Superintendents, who had so long born the heat of the day, and done such
eminent and extraordinary services to the Church, should be once sacrificed to
Mortons Covetousness, how easy might it be for him to make what farther
Encroachments he pleased? How easy, to carry on his project against other men,
who perhaps, had no such Merit, no such Repute, no such Interest in the
Affections of the People? This, I say, was the Reason for which these two Acts
were made in this Assembly; and not that the Assembly were turning weary of
Bishops, or were become, any way, disaffected to them. So that Calderwood and
Petrie had but little reason to be so boastful for these two Acts.

That it was not out of any Dislike to Episcopacy, that these two Acts were
made, is clear, as Light, from the next Assembly, which met in August 1574. For
therein the Clergy manifestly continuing of the same Principles, and proceeding
on the same Reasons, order a Petition consisting of Nine Articles, to be drawn,
and presented to the Regent. Calderwood, indeed, does not mention this
Petition. But it is in the Mss. and Petrie Pet. 384.
talks of it, but disingenuously; for he mentions it only Overly, telling, That
some Articles were sent unto the Lord Regent; and he sets down but two,
whereas, as I said, there are Nine in the Mss. and most of them looking the
Regents Sacrilegious inclinations even Staringly in the Face. I shall only
Transcribe such of them as cannot, when perpended, but be acknowledged to have
tended that way. They are these:

1. That Stipends be granted to Superintendents, in all time coming, in all
Countries destitute thereof; whither it be where there is no Bishop, or where
there are Bishops, who cannot discharge their Office, as the Bishops of St.
Andrews and Glasgow; who had too large Diocesses. This Article Petrie has but
Minced: Indeed it is a very considerable one; For here you see, 1. That, in
contradiction to the Regents purposes, the Assembly owns and stands by the
Superintendents: They are so far from being satisfied to part with the Three,
they had; that, on the contrary, they crave to have more, and to have
provisions for them; and that, in all Countries, where Bishops either are not;
or are, but have too large Diocesses. 2. They crave these things For all times
coming; a Clause of such importance to the main Question, that Petrie has,
unfaithfully, left it out: And truly, I must confess, if it were lawful for Men
to be Unfaithful, when it might serve that which they conceived to be a Good
End, he had great Reason, to try it, in this instance: For this Clause, when
(not concealed, but) brought above board, gives a fatal Overthrow, to all these
popular Plea's of Episcopacy's being then obtruded on the Church; forced upon
her against her Will; tolerated only for a time, etc. For, from this Clause, it
is as clear, as a Clause can make it, that this Assembly entertained no such
imaginations. They supposed Episcopacy was to continue for all time coming,
For, for all time Coming, they petition that provision may be made for
Superintendents, where no Bishops are, or where their Diocesses are too large
for them.

2. The Second Article is, That in all Burghs, where the Ministers are
displaced, and serve at other Kirks, these Ministers be restored to wait on
their Cures, and be not obliged to serve at other Churches, etc. Directly
striking against the Regents politic of Uniting three or four Churches under
the Care of one Minister. The

4. (Which Petrie also has) is, That in all Churches destitute of Ministers,
such persons may be planted as the Bishops, Superintendents and Commissioners
shall name; and that Stipends be assigned to them. Ane Article, visibly,
levelled as the former.

5. That Doctors may be placed in Universities; and Stipends granted them;
whereby, not only they who are presently placed may have occasion to be
diligent in their Cure; but other learned Men may have Occasion to seek places
in Colleges. Still to the same purposes, viz. the finding reasonable Uses for
the Patrimony of the Church.

6. That his Grace would take a General Order with the poor, especially in the
Abbeys, such as are Aberbrothoick, etc. Conform to the Agreement at Leith.
Here, not only the Leith-Agreement insisted on; but farther pious Use for the
Churches Patrimony.

9. That his Grace would cause the Books of the Assignation of the Kirk, be
delivered to the Clerk of the General Assembly. These Books of Assignation, as
they call them, were the Books, wherein the Names of the Ministers, and their
several proportions of the Thirds were Recorded: It seems they were earnest to
be repossessed of their Thirds, seeing the Regent had not kept promise to them.
But

The Eighth Article, which, (by a pardonable inversion, I hope) I have reserved
to the last place, is, of all, the most considerable. It is, That his Grace
would provide Qualified persons for Vacant Bishoprics. Let the candid Reader
judge, now, if Episcopacy, by the Leith-Articles was forced upon the Church
against her Inclinations? If it was never approven (when Bishops were thus
petitioned for) by a General Assembly? If it be likely that the Assembly in
August 1572. protested against it as a Corruption? If the Acts of the last
Assembly, declaring Bishops to have no more power than Superintendents had, and
making them accountable to the General Assembly, proceeded from any Dislike of
Episcopacy? If this Assembly, petitioning thus for Bishops, believed the divine
and indispensible institution of Parity? If both Calderwood and Petrie acted
not as became Cautious Pretbyterian Historians; the One, by giving us None, the
other, by giving us only a Minced account of this Petition? Well!

By this time, I think, I have not entirely disappointed my Reader: I think, I
have made it competently appear, That the Agreement at Leith was fairly and
frequently allowed, approven, and insisted on, by not a ^ew subsequent General
Assemblies. I could adduce some Acts more of the next Ass* which met at Eden.
March 7. 1575. But, I think, I have already made good my Undertaking, and
therefore I shall insist no further on this point: Only One thing I must add
further; It is this.

After the most impartial, narrow, and attentive Search, I could make, I have
not found, all this while, viz. from the first public Establishment of the
Reformed Religion in Scotland, Anno 1560. so much as One Indication of either
public or private Dislike to Prelacy; But that it, constantly, and
uninterruptedly, prevailed, and all persons, cheerfully as well as quietly
submitted to it, till the year 1575. when it was first called in Question. And
here I might fairly shut up this long, and perhaps nauseous Discourse, upon the
Second Enquiry which I proposed: For, whatever Men our Reformers were, whatever
their other principles might be; I think I have made it plain, that they were
not for the Divine Right of Parity, or the Unlawfulness of the Superiority of
any Office in the Church, above Presbyters: No such principle was prosessed, or
insisted on, or offered to be reduced to practice, by them, Before, At, or full
fifteen years After the public Establishment of the Reformation: And if this
may not pass for sufficient proof of the truth of my Resolution of the Enquiry,
I know not what may. However, because

THE SECOND thing I promised to show, tho not precisely necessary to my main
design, may yet be so far useful, as to bring considerably more of Light to it;
and withal, give the world a prospect of the Rise and Progress of Presbytery in
Scotland, I shall endeavor to make good my Undertaking; which was, that, after
Episcopacy was questioned, it was not easily overturned; Its Adversaries met
with much Resistance, and Opposition, in their Endeavors to subvert it. I shall
study brevity as much as the weight of the matter will allow me. In short then;
take it thus.

Master Andrew Melvil, after some years spent at Geneva, returned to Scotland
in July 1574. He had lived* in that City, under the influences of Theodore
Beza, the true parent of Presbytery. He was a Man, by Nature, fierce and fiery,
confident and peremptory, peevish and ungovernable: Education, in him, had not
sweetened Nature, but Nature had sowred Education; and both conspiring together,
had trickt him up into a true Original; a piece compounded of pride and
petulance, of jeer and jangle, of Satyr and Sarcasm; of venom and vehemence:
He hated the Crown as much as the Mitre, the Scepter as much as the Crosier,
and could have made as bold with the Purple Called. 329.
as with the Rochet: Ib. 548.
His prime Talent was Lampooning and writing Anti-tami-Cami-Categorias's. In a
word, He was the very Archetypal Bitter Beard of the Party.

This Man thus accoutred, was scarcely warm at home, when he began to
disseminate his sentiments, insinuate them into others, and make a party
against Prelacy, and for the Genevian Model. For this I need not depend on
Spotswoods Authority, tho he asserts it plainly: Spot. 275.
I have a more Authentic Author for it, if more Authentic can be: I have
Melvil himself for it, in a Letter to Beza dated Novem. 13. 1579. (to be found
both in Petrie Pet. 401.
and in the Pamphlet called Vindiciae Philadelphi, from which Petrie had it) of
which Letter, the very first words are, we have not ceased these five years to
fight against Pseudepiscopacy, etc. Now reckon five years backward, from Novem.
1579. and you stand at November 1574. whereby we find that within three or four
Months, after his arrival, the Plot was begun, though it was near to a year
thereafter, before it came above-board.

Having thus projected his work, and formed his party, the next care was to get
one to Table it fairly: He himself was but lately come home; he was much a
Stranger in the Country, having been ten years abroad: He had been but at very
few General Assemblies, if at any; his influence was but green and budding; his
Authority but young and tender: It was not fit for him, amongst his First
Appearances, to propose so great ane Innovation. And, it seems, the Thinking
Men of his Party, however resolutely they might promise to back the Motion,
when, once, fairly Tabled, were yet a little shy to be the first Proposers: So,
it fell to the share of one, who, at that time, was none of the greatest
Statesmen.

John Durie, one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, was the person; as Spotswood
describes him, Spot. 457.
A sound hearted Man, far from all Dissimulation, open, professing what he
thought, earnest and zealous in his Cause, whatever it was; but too too
credulous, and easily to be imposed on. However, (that I may do him as much
justice, as Spotswood has done him before me.) A Man he was, who thought no
Shame to acknowledge his Error, when he was convinced of it. For so it was,
that, when, after many years Experience, he had satisfied himself, that Parity
had truly proved the Parent of Confusion, and disappointed all his
Expectations; and when, through Age and Sickness, he was not able, in person,
to attend the General Assembly, Anno 1600. he gave Commission to some Brethren
to tell them, as from him, That there was a Necessity of restoring the Ancient
Government of the Church, etc. Such was the Man, I say, to whose share it fell
to be the first, who, publicly, questioned the Lawfulness of Prelacy in
Scotland; which was not done till the Sixth day of August 1575. as I said
before, no less than full fifteen years after the first legal Establishment of
our Scottish Reformation. And so I come to my purpose.

On this Sixth of August 1575. the Genesis Ass. met at Edinburgh, according to the
Order, then, observed in General Assemblies; the First thing done, after the
Assembly was constituted, was, the Trial of the Doctrine, Diligence, Lives,
etc. of the Bishops and other constant Members: So, while this was a doing,
John Durie stood up and protested, That the Trial of the Bishops might not
prejudge the Opinions and Reasons, which he and other Brethren of his Mind,
had, to propose against the Office and Name of a Bishop. Mss. Pet. 385. Spot.
275. Called. 68.
Thus was the fatal Controversy set on foot, which, since, has brought such
Miseries and Calamities on the Church and Kingdom of Scotland.

The Hare thus started, Melvil, the Original Huntsman, strait pursued her: He
presently began a long, and, no doubt, premeditated Harangue; commended Durie's
Zeal, enlarged upon the flourishing State of the Church of Geneva, insisted on
the Sentiments of Calvin and Beza concerning Church Government; and, at last
affirmed, That none ought to be Office-bearers in the Church, whose Titles were
not found in the Book of God: That the the Title of Bishops was found in
Scripture, yet, it was not to be understood in the Sense, then, current: That
Jesus Christ, the only Lord of his Church, allowed no Superiority amongst the
Ministers, but had instituted them all, in the same Degree, and had endued them
with equal power: Concluding, That the Corruptions, which had crept into the
Estate of Bishops were so great, as, unless the same were removed, it could not
go well with the Church, nor could Religion be long preserved in Purity. Spot.
275. Pet. 387.


The Controversy thus plainly stated, Mr. David Lindesay, Master George Hay,
and Master John Row, three Episcopalians, were appointed to confer and reason
upon the Question proponed with Mr. Andrew Melvil, Mr. James Lawson, and Mr.
John Craig; two Presbyterians, and one, much indifferent for both sides. After
diverse Meetings, and long Disceptation says Spotswood, Spot. 275.
after two days, says Petrie, Pet. 386.
they presented these Conclusions to the Assembly, which, at that time, they
had agreed upon.

1. They think it not expedient, presently, to answer, directly, to the First
Question. But if any Bishop shall be chosen, who has not such Qualities as the
word of God requires, let him be tried by the General Assembly De Novo, and so
deposed.

2. The Name Bishop is common to all them who have particular Flocks, over
which they have particular Charges, to preach the Word, administer the
Sacraments, etc.

3. Out of this Number may be chosen some to have power to Oversee and Visit
such reasonable Bounds, beside his own Flock, as the General Kirk shall
appoint; and, in these bounds, to appoint Ministers, with Consent of the
Ministers of that Province, and of the Flock to whom they shall be appointed.
Also, to appoint Elders and Deacons in every principal Congregation, where
there are none, with Consent of the People thereof; and to suspend Ministers,
for reasonable Causes, with Consent of the Ministers aforesaid. So the Mss.
Spot. Pet. Called. Spot. 275. Pet. 386. Called. 69.


It Is true, here are some things, which, perhaps, when thoroughly examined,
will not be found so exactly agreeable to the Sentiments and Practice of the
Primitive Church. However, it is evident, for this Bout, the Imparity-men
carried the day; and it seems the Parity-men have not yet been so well fixed
for the Divine and indispensible Right of it, as our Modern Parity-men would
think needful; otherwise, how came they to consent to such Conclusions? How
came they to yield that it was not expedient, at that time, to answer directly
to the first Question, which was concerning the Lawfulness of Episcopacy? Were
they of the Modern Principles, G. R's Principles? Did they think that Divine
institutions might be dispensed with, crossed, according to the Exigencies of
Expediency or Inexpediency? What ane Honor is it to the Party if their first
Hero's were such Casuists? Besides, is not the Lawfulness of imparity clearly
imported in the Third Conclusion? Indeed both Calderwood and Petrie acknowledge
so much.

Calderwood Call. 69.
says, It seems that by Reason of the Regents Authority, who was bent upon
the Course ( i. e. Episcopacy) whereof he was the chief Instrument, that they
answered not directly, at this time, to the Question. Here, you see, he owns
that nothing, at this time was concluded against the Course, as he calls it;
whither he had reason, to say, It seemed to be upon such ane account, shall be
considered afterward.

Petrie Pet. 387.
acknowledges it too; but in such a passion, it seems, as quite mastered his
Prudence, when he did it; for these are his words. Howbeit in these Conclusions
they express not the Negative, because they would not plainly oppose the
particular interest of the Council, seeking security of the Possessions, by the
Title of Bishops; yet these Affirmatives take away the pretended Office. Now
let the world consider the Wisdom of this Author in advancing this fine period.
They did not express the Negative, (they did not condemn Episcopacy) because
they would not plainly oppose the particular interest of the Council, seeking
Security of the Possessions, etc. Now let us enquire who were these, They, who
would not, for this reason condemn Episcopacy, at that time? It must either
belong to the Six Collocutors who drew the Concusions, or to the whole
Assembly: If to the Collocutors, it is plain, Three of them, viz. Row, Hay, and
Lindesay were innocent; they were persuaded in their Minds of the Expediency
(to say no further) as well as the Lawfulness of Episcopacy, and I think that
was reason enough for them not to condemn it. The Presbyterian Brethren, then,
if any, were the persons who were moved not to condemn it, because they would
not plainly oppose the particular interest of the Council, etc. But if so, has
not Master Petrie made them very brave fellows? Has he not fairly made them
such friends to Sacrilege, that they would rather baulk a divine Institution,
than interrupt its Course, and offend its Votaries? If by the word, They, he
meant the General Assembly; if the whole Assembly were they, who would not
express the Negative, because they would not oppose, etc. I think, Mr. Petrie,
were he alive, would have enough to do, to prove that that was the Reason they
were determined by. What? Had the whole Church quate all their pretensions,
they insisted on so much, on every Occasion? Had they now given over their
Claim to the Revenues of the Church? Shall I declare my poor opinion in this
matter? I am apt to believe that it was one of the great Arguments insisted on
by the Three Episcopalian Collocutors, at that time, That if Episcopacy should
be concluded unlawful, and, by consequence, overturned, the Patrimony of the
Church would undoubtedly go to wreck; The hungry Courtiers would presently
possess themselves of the Revenues belonging to the Bishops:

Sure I am, as things then stood, there was all the Reason in the world for
insisting on this Argument: But to pass this. Petrie it seems was not content
with giving the quite contrary of that, which in all probability, was the true
Reason, at least one of the true Reasons, for not overturning Episcopary at
that time; But he behoved to add something more Extravagant: He behoved to add
That the Affirmatives in the aforesaid conclusions took away the pretended
Office of Episcopacy. What might he not have said, after this? It seems, that
in this Authors opinion, all is one thing, to assert the Lawfulness of ane
Office, and thereupon to continue it, and to take it away. But perhaps I may be
blamed for taking so much notice of ane angry man's Excesses, For no doubt it
was anger that such conclusions should have been made, that hurtied him upon
such Extravagances; and therefore I shall leave him, and return to my thread.

By what I have told, it may be easy to judge, how cold the first Entertainment
was, which Parity got when it was proposed to the General Assembly: and so much
the more, if it be further considered that, by this same Assembly, some 8 or 9
Articles were ordered to be presented to My Lord Regents Grace, whereof the
First (as I find it in the MS. and in Petrie himself Pet. 385.
though neither so fully nor so fairly) was this.

Imprimis, for planting and preaching the word, through the whole Realm, It is
Desired, that so many Ministers as may be had, who are yet unplaced, may be
received, as well in the Country, to relieve the charge of them who have many
Kirks, as otherwise, throughout the whole Realm, with Superintendents or
Commissioners within these Bonnds where Bishops are not, and to help such
Bishops as have too great Charges: And that Livings be appointed to the
aforesaid Persons: and also payment to them who have traveled before, as
Commissioners, in the years of God 1573. and 1574. and so forth, in time
coming, without which, the travels of such Men will cease.

This I say is the First of many Articles ordered by this Assembly for the
Regent; From which it is Evident, not only, that Mr. Melvils Project made
little, or no progress, at this time, but also that the Assembly continued firm
and steadfast in the same very intentions, and of the same very Principles,
which had prevailed in former Assemblies, viz. to stop the uniting of Churches;
to multiply the number of persons clothed with Prelatick power; To continue
that power in the Church; and by all means to secure her Patrimony and guard
against, and Exclude all alienations of it.

Melvil and his Partisans, thus successless in their first attempt, but withal,
once engaged and resolved not to give over, began, it seems, against the next
Assembly to reflect on what they had done, and perceive that they had mistaken
their measures: And indeed it was a little precipitantly done, at the very
first, to state the Question simply and absolutely upon the Lawfulness or
Unlawfulness of Episcopacy, in the General, as they had stated it. It was a new
Question which had never been stated in the Church of Scotland before: And it
could not but be surprising to the greatest part of the Assembly. Thus to call
in Question the Lawfulness of ane Office which had been so early, so
universally, so usefully, so incontestedly, received by the Catholic Church.
This was a point of great importance: For, to Declare that Office Unlawful,
what was it else than to condemn all these Churches, in the primitive times,
which had owned it and flourish't under it? What else than to condemn the
Scottish Reformation and Reformers, who had never Questioned it, but, on the
contrary, had proceeded all, along, on principles which, clearly supposed its
Lawfulness, if not its Necessity? Nay, was it not to condemn, particularly, all
these General Assemblies which, immediately before, had so much Authorized and
confirmed it? Besides, as has been already observed, to Declare Episcopacy
Unlawful was, unavoidably, to stifle all these projects, they had been so
industriously forming for recovering the Churches Patrimony: And not only so,
but to expose it more and more to be devoured by the voracious Laity. It was
Plain, it could no sooner be declared Unlawful, than it behoved to be parted
with; and turn out the Bishops, once, and what would become of the Bishoprics?
Nay, to turn them out, what was it else, than, to undo the whole Agreement at
Leith, which was the greatest security, the Church, then, had for her
Patrimony? For these and the like reasons, I say, laying aside the impiety, and
insisting only on the imprudence of the Melvilian Project, it was, no doubt,
precipitantly done, at the very first, to make that the State of the Question:
And it was no wonder if the Assembly was unanimous in agreeing to the
conclusions which had been laid before them by the six Collocutors: Nay, it was
no wonder if Melvil and his Party, sensible of their error, and willing to
cover it, the best way they could, yielded, for that time, to the other Three,
who had, so visibly, the advantage of them, at least, in the point of the
Churches interest: And therefore,

At the next Assembly, which was holden at Edinburgh, April 24. 1576. they
altered the State of the Question, as Spotswood observes, Spot. 276.
and made it this, Whether Bishops, as they were then in Scotland, had their
Function warranted by the word of God? But even thus stated, at that time, it
availed them nothing: For, (as it is in the MS.) The whole Assembly, for the
most part, after Reasoning and long Disputation upon every Article of the
Brethrens (viz. the six Collocutors) opinion and advice, resolutely approved
and affirmed the same, and every Article thereof, as the same was given in by
them. And then the Articles are Repeated.

Calderwood and Petrie do both shuffle over the state of the Question, Called.
72. Pet. 387.
but, upon the matter, they give the same account of the Assembly's Resolution:
However, I thought fit to take it in the words of the MS. the very style
importing that they are the most Authentic. And in this Resolution we may
observe these three things.

1. That whatever the Melvilian Party might then be, They were but the smaller
Party: The whole Assembly for the most part, that is, as I take it, the far
greater part of the Assembly was against them. 2. That the whole Assembly for
the most part seem to have been seriously persuaded they were in the right, and
did not approve and affirm these Articles either indeliberately or faintly; For
it was after Reasoning and long Disputation, that they approved and affirmed
them, and they were sufficiently Keen in the matter, for they did it
Resolutely. 3. The Melvilian Party were over-voted, even as the Question was,
then, Stated: The whole Assembly for the most part, stood for Episcopacy as it
was then established in Scotland, and would not declare it Unlawful. From all
which, I leave to the world to judge, if Presbyterian parity did not meet with
opposition, with very great opposition, at its first appearances in Scotland:
Neither was this all.
As this General Assembly did thus stand its ground, and appeared for Imparity,
so it continued of the same sentiments and Resolutions with former Assemblies,
in the Matter of the Churches Patrimony; For, By it, it was resolved also, That
they might proceed against unjust possessors of the Patrimony of the Church, in
respect of the Notorious Scandal, not only by Doctrine and Admonition, but with
the Censures of the Church, and that the Patrimony of the Church, whereupon the
Church, the Poor and the Schools should be maintained, was ex jure divino. So
it is in the MS. and so Petrie has it: Pet. 387.
Well! Did the Paritymen gain no ground in this Assembly? Yes, they did: Two
things they obtained, which were very useful for them afterward. They obtained
1. And Act to be made That the Bishops should be obliged to take the charge of
particular Congregations. It Is true, the Assembly could not get this refused
after they had approved and affirmed the abovementioned Articles. For, it was
fairly deduceable both from the second and third: But then, it is plain, this
Act did militate nothing against the Essentials of Episcopacy: It was highly
consistent with Imparity amongst the Governors of the Church: and the Articles
evidently import as much: However, as I said, this proved very serviceable to
the Melvilian Party, afterward, as we shall hear. But this was not the worst
of it: For 2. The Earl of Morton, then, Regent (whatever the Presbyterian
Historians talk of his being so much for Episcopacy) made a very ill-favored,
as well as a very fatal step in the time of this Assembly: Take it in
Spotswoods words, Spot. 276.
The Regent hearing how the Church had proceeded, and taking ill the Deposition
of Master James Patton Bishop of Dunkeld, who was, in the former Assembly,
deprived for Dilapidation of his benifice, sent to require of them (this
Assembly met in April 1576) whether they would stand to the Policy agreed unto
at Leith? And if not, to desire them to settle upon some form of Government at
which they would abide.


The Champions for Parity had fairly met with a second repulse from this
Assembly, as I have discoursed, and if all concerned had acted their parts, as
they might and ought to have done, and as the cause required, it is highly
credible, that Mother of confusion might have been quit crush't and stifled for
ever: But that was not done; The Prelates themselves were negligent and
unactive, as Spotswood intimates, Spot. 276.
and here, the Regent made this proposition. A proposition, than which, none
could be made more surprizingly obliging and acceptable to the Presbyterian
Party. All things considered, it was the very thing, the common principles of
conduct might have taught them to have asked, next, if they had had things for
the asking; For what can fall out more luckily for those who have a mind to
innovate, than to have the old foundations shaken, and leave allowed to erect
new Models? So ill-favored (I say) was this step, which, at this time, was
made by Morton, who, by the exigencies of his station, was bound to have
guarded against all innovations, especially such as had so natural a tendency
to disturb the public peace; and therefore I must ask my Readers allowance to
make a little digression, if it may be called a digression, and discourse this
Question,

Whether it may not be thought probable that Morton made this proposition
Deliberately, and from ane Intention to Cherish the Presbyterian Party, and
encourage their humor for innovating, and confounding the Peace of the Church?

This, perhaps, at first sight, may seem a bold Question, as not only being
New, but apparently Crossing the received accounts of our Presbyterian
Historians; But if I can make the affirmative very probable (if not evident) I
am apt to think, it may bring no small accessions of light to the present
subject I am insisting on, viz. how Presbyterianism was first introduced into
Scotland? I will therefore lay down my Reasons for it, that the world may judge
of them; and

1. That which I have already descoursed, seems to be a very fair Argument that
Morton made this proposition, intentionally, to give scope and slackened Reins
to the Presbyterian Party; For if he had not made it; if he had resolved to
stand by the Agreement at Leith; if he had been serious for the Established
Government and Peace of the Church; It had been easy for him to have suppressed
all Melvil's Projects for innovation. He had visibly, the major part of this
Assembly, of his side, if that had been his Aim; No appearance that the Body of
the People was then infected with the principles of Parity. The Nobility were
generally for the old constitution, as is evident from no less Authority than
Melvil's own, in his Letter to Beza cited before, in which he tells him, He and
his Party had many of the Peers against them; Pet. 401.
where, then, was there the least difficulty of Crushing the Coccatrice in the
Egg, if he had had a mind for it? Besides, how inconsistent was the making of
this proposition with the Integrity and Honesty of a Regent? The King was,
then, a Minor; The Nation had but just, then, emerged out of a vast Ocean of
civil broyls and troubles, which had long harassed it, and kept it in
confusion; nothing more improper for it than to be involved again, instantly,
in jarrs and discords; So that if he had no such Plot, as I am endeavoring to
make probable he had, he was, certainly, very unfortunate in granting such a
Liberty; For, considering all things, it looks so very like a Plot, that it
cannot but be very hard to persuade a thinking man that there was none.
Especially if it be considered

2. That he was a Man, who had latitude enough, to do ill things, if he thought
them subservient to his interest. He was wretchedly Covetous, as all Historians
agree: And that vice alone disposes a Man for the worst things. He has
observed little of the affairs of the world, and the extravagances of Mankind,
who has not observed Avarice and a sordid temper to have put Men on the most
abominable courses: who has not observed, who has not seen, that Men have
sold Religion, Honor, Conscience, Loyalty, Faith, Friendship, every thing
that is sacred, for Money? Now by making this proposition, He projected a very
fair opportunity for gratifying this his predomining appetite. He had so
anxiously coveted the Emoluments of the Archbishopric of St. Andrews in the
year 1571 (as Sir James Melvil tells us in his Memoirs Mel. Mem. 110.
that meeting with a repulse, he forsook the Court, and was so much
discontented, that he would not return to it, till Randolf the English
Ambassador persuaded Lennox, then Regent, to give it to him; Promising that
the Queen of England should recompense it to him with greater advantage. How
much of that Bishopric he had continued still to possess, after the Agreement
at Leith, and Douglass's advancement to that Archbishopric, I cannot tell;
But it is not to be doubted, whatever it was, it sharpened his stomach for more
of the Churches Revenues; and now, the juncture made wonderfully for him; For,
as he had found by experience, and many Acts of Assemblies, etc. That the
Church, careful of her interests, and watchful over her Patrimony, was no ways
inclined to sit still and suffer her self to be cheated, and plundered,
according to his hungry inclinations; but was making, and like to continue to
make vigorous opposition to all such sacrilegious purposes, so long as she
continued united, and settled on the foot on which she then stood; So he found,
that, now, Contention was arising within her own Bowels, and a Party was
appearing zealous for innovations, and her peace and unanimity were like to be
broken and divided; and what more proper for him, in these circumstances, than
to lay the reins on their necks, and cast a further bone of Contention amongst
them? He knew full well what it was to fish in troubled waters, as Sir James
Melvil observes of him, Mel. Mem. Ibid.
and so it is more than probable he would not neglect such ane opportunity,
still so much the more, if it be considered,

3. That whatever professions he might have made, in former times, of good
affection to Episcopal Government, yet there is little reason to think that his
Conscience was interested in the matter; For besides that covetous, selfish,
subtle men, such as he was, use not to allow themselves to stand too precisely
upon all the Dictates of a Nice and tender Conscience; The Divine Right of
Episcopacy, (the true fund for making it matter of Conscience) in these times
was not much asserted or thought on: That was not, till several years
afterward, when the Controversies about the Government of the Church came to
be sifted more narrowly: It is commonly acknowledged that the main Argument
which prevailed with him to appear for Episcopacy, was its aptitude for being
part of a fund for a good Correspondence with England. Spotswood tells us,
Spot. 276.
that one of the Injunctions which he got when he was made Regent, was, That he
should be careful to entertain the Amity contracted with the Queen of England.
And Calderwood says thus expressly of him, Called. 66.
His great intention was to bring in conformity with England, in the Church
Government, without which, he thought, he could not Govern the Country to his
Fantasy, or, that, Agreement could stand long between the two Countries. And
again, Called. 80.
He pressed his own injunctions and Conformity with England. Now this being the
great motive that made him so much inclined, at any time, for Episcopal
Government; It is to be considered,

4. That, however prevalent this might be with him, when, first, he was
advanced to the Regency, civil Dissentions raging then, and the Party, of which
he was the Head, being unable to subsist, unless supported by England; Yet now,
that all these Dissentions were ended, and the Country quieted, and things
brought to some appearance of a durable settlement; His Dependence on England
might prompt him to alter his scheme, and incline him to give scope to the
Presbyterian wildfire in Scotland. To set this presumption in its due light,
Two things are to be a little further enquired into*

1. If it is probable that Queen Elizabeth was willing that the Presbyterian
humor should be Encouraged in Scotland? 2. If Morton depended so much on her,
as to make it feasible that he might be subservient to her Designs, in this
Politic? As for the
First, this is certain, it was still one of Queen Elizabeth's great cares to
Encourage confusions in Scotland. She knew her own Title was Questionable, as I
have observed before; and though that had not been, yet, without Question the
Scottish blood had the next best Title to the English Crown: and as it is
Natural to most People to worship the rising Sun, especially when he looks
Bright and Glorious; when he has no Clouds about him; I mean, the Apparent Heir
of a Throne, when he is in a prosperous and flourishing condition; So, it is as
Natural for the Regnant Prince to be jealous of him. Therefore, I say Queen
Elizabeth, for her own security, did still what she could to Kindle wildfire in
Scotland, and keep it burning, when it was Kindled. Thus, in the year 1560. She
assisted the Scottish subjects against their Native Sovereign (her jealoused
Competitrix) both with Men and Money, as I have told before: And Anno 1565. She
countenanced the Scottish Lords who began to raise tumults about the Scottish
Queens Marriage with the Lord Darnley; She furnished them with money, and
harbored them when they were forced to flee for it. And how long did She
foment our Civil wars after they brake out Anno 1567? What dubious Responses
did She give, all the time She Vmpir'd it, between the Queen of Scotland and
those who appeared for her Son? And is it not very well known that She had ane
hand in the Road of Ruthven 1582, and in all our Scottish seditions, Generally?
Sir James Melvil in his Memoirs gives us enough of her Practices that way: He
lived in these times, and was acquainted with intrigues; and he tells us, Mel.
Mem. 135.
That Randolf came with Lennox (when he came to Scotland, to be Regent, after
Murray's death) to stay here as English Resident: That this Randolf's great
employment was to foster discords, and increase Divisions among the Scots,
particularly, That he used Craft with the Ministers, Ibid. 109.
offering Gold to such of them as he thought could be prevailed with to accept
his offer: It Is true he adds, But such as were honest refused his gifts: But
this says not that none took them; and who knows but the most Fiery might have
been foremost at receiving? It has been so, since; Even when it was the Price
of the best blood in Britain. But to go on; Sir James tells further Ibid. 113.
that Morton and Randolf contrived the Plot of keeping the Parliament at
Stirling 1571. to forefault all the Queens Lords, thereby to Crush all hopes of
Agreement: That he was so much hated in Scotland for being such ane Incendiary,
that he was forced to return to England; Mr. Henry Kellegrew succeeding in his
stead, in Scotland; Ibid. 115.
that this Killegrew, at a private meeting told himself plainly, Ibid. 116.
that he was come to Scotland with a Commission, contrary to his inclinations,
which was to encourage Faction, etc. Thus practiced Queen Elizabeth, and such
were her Arts and influences in Scotland, before she had the opportunity of
improving the Presbyterian humor to her purposes: And can it be imagined she
would not encourage it when once it got sooting? Certainly she understood it,
better than so: The Sect had set up a Presbytery at Wandsworth in Surrey in the
year 1572, four years before Morton made this Proposition, seven years before a
Presbytery was so much as heard of in Scotland; No doubt she knew the Spirit
well enough, and how apt and well suited, it was for keeping a State in
disorder and trouble. Nay, I have heard from knowing Persons, that, to this
very day, the Treasury Books of England (if I remember right, sure I am, some
English record or other) bear the Names of such Scottish Noblemen and
Ministers, as were that Queens Pensioners; and what allowances they got for
their Services, in fostering and cherishing seditions and confusions in their
Native Country; From this sample, I think, it is easy to collect at least,
that it is highly probable that Queen Elizabeth was very willing that the
Presbyterian humor should be encouraged in Scotland. Let us try

2. If Morton depended so much on her, as may make it credible that he was
subservient to her Designs in this Politic? And here the work is easy; For he
was her very Creature: he stood by her, and he stood for her. Randolf and he
were still in one bottom, Ibid. 110.
The whole Country was abused by Randolf and Morton. Morton and Randolf
contrived the Parliament 1571. Mentioned before. When Lennox the Regent was
killed; Randolf was earnest to have Morton succeed him, Ibid. 115.
Randolf had no Credit but with Morton, Ibid.
Killegrew told Sir James Melvil at the Private Meeting, mentioned before, p.
116.
That the Queen of England and her Council built their course, neither on the
late Regent Lennox, nor the present Mar, but entirely on the Earl of Morton, as
only true to their interests. Morton after Mar's death was made Regent, England
helping it with all their Might. Ibid. 118.
And again in that same page, Sir James tells that those who were in the Castle
of Edinburgh, and stood for Queen Mary's Title, were so sensible of all this,
that when Morton sent the same Sir James to propose ane accommodation to them,
He found it very hard to bring on ane Agreement between them and Morton, for
the evil opinion that was then conceived of him, and the hurtful marks they
supposed by proofs and appearances, that he would shoot at, being by Nature
Covetous, and too great with England. And to make all this plainer, yet, Sir
James tells us that Morton entertaind a Secret Grudge against his Pupil, the
Young King. He was ever jealous that the King would be his Ruin. M. Mem. 118.
And England gave greater Assistances to Morton, than to any former Regents,
for they believed he aimed at the same mark, with themselves, viz. to intricate
the Kings affairs, out of old jealousies between the Stuarts and the Douglases.
Ibid. 123.
Now,

Let all these things be laid together, and then let the judicious consider if
it is not more than probable, That as England had a main hand in the
advancement of our Reformation, so it was not wanting to contribute for the
encouragement of Presbytery also; and that Morton playing England's game, which
was so much interw^^e^ with his own, made this ill favored Proposition to this
Genesis Ass. But however this was, ^l^^her he had such a Plot or not; It is clea^
that his making this proposition, had all the effects he could have projected
by being on such a Plot. For

No sooner had he made this Proposition than it was greedily entertained; It
Answered the Melvilian wishes; and it was easy for them to find colorable
Topics for obtaining the consent of the rest of the Assembly; For most part of
them were ready to acknowledge that there were Defects, and things to be mended
in the Agreement at Leith: And it had been received by the General Assembly in
August 1572. for ane Interim only: The revising of that Agreement, might end
some Controversies; and the Regent having made this Proposition, it was not to
be doubted, but he would Ratify what they should Unanimously agree to, etc.
These and the like Arguments I say, might, ('it is clear, some Arguments did)
prevail with the Assembly to entertain the Proposition: For

A commission was forthwith drawn to nineteen or twenty Persons, to Compose a
Second Book of Discipline; MS. Called. 73. Pet. 387.
a step by which at that time the Presbyterian got a wonderful advantage over
the other Party; For not only were Melvil and Lawson the two first Rate
Presbyterians nominated amongst these Commissioners; But they had their
business much pr^meditated; They had spent much thinking about it; and it is
not to be doubted, they had Mr. Beza bespoken to provide them with all the
Assistance, he and his Colleagues, at Geneva, could afford them: Whereas the
rest were Generally very ignorant in Controversies of that Nature: They had all
along, before that, employed themselves mainly in the Popish Controversies;
and had not troubled their heads much about the Niceties of Government; They
had taken the Ancient Government, so far, at least, as it subsisted by
imparity, upon trust, as they found, it had been Practiced in all ages of the
Church; perceiving a great deal of Order and Beauty in it; and nothing that
naturally tended to have a bad influence, on either the principles or the life
of serious Christianity: And with that they were satisfied: Indeed even the
best of them seem to have had very little skill in the true fountains whence
the solid subsistence of the Episcopal Order was to be derived; The Scriptures
I mean, not as Glossed by the Private Spirit of every Modern Novelist, but as
interpreted and understood by the First ages; as sensed by the constant and
universal practice, of Genuine, Primitive and Catholic Antiquity.

This charge of Ignorance, in the Controversies about the Government of the
Church, which I have brought against the Scottish Clergy, in these times, will
certainly leave a blot upon my self, if I cannot prove it: But if I can prove
it, it is clear, it is of considerable importance in the present disquisition,
and helps much for coming, by a just comprehension, to understand how
Presbytery was introduced into Scotland. And therefore I must again beg my
Readers patience, till I adduce some evidences for it. And

First, The truth of this charge may be obviously collected from the whole
train of their proceedings, and management, about the Government of the Church,
from the very first Establishment of the Reformation: For however they
Established a Government which clearly subsisted by imparity, as I have fully
proven, and which was all I still aimed at, yet, it is easy to Discover they
were very far from keeping Closely by the Principles and Measures of the
primitive constitution of Church Government. This is so very apparent to any
who Reads the Histories of these times, and is so visible in the Deduction I
have made, that I shall insist no longer on it.

Secondly, The truth of my charge may further appear, from the Instance of
Adamson, advanced, this year 1576, to the Archbishopric of St. Andrews. That
Nature had furnished him with a good stock, and he was a smart Man, and
cultivated beyond the ordinary Size, by many parts of good Literature, is not
denied by the Presbyterian Historians themselves; They never attempt to
represent him as a Fool or a Dunce, though they are very eager to have him a Man
of Tricks and Latitude. Now this Prelates ignorance in true Antiquity is
Remarkably visible in his subscribing to these Propositions (Anno 1580, if we
may believe Calderwood, Called. 93.94.
The Power and Authority of all Pastors is equal, and alike great, amongst
themselves. The Name, Bishop, is Relative to the Flock, and not to the
Eldership; For he is Bishop of his Flock, and not of other Pastors, or fellow
Elders; As for the Pre-eminence that one bears over the rest, it is the
Invention of Man, and not the Institution of Holy Writ. That the ordaining and
appointing of Pastors which is also called the laying on of hands, appertains
not to one Bishop only, so being, Lawful Election pass before; but to those of
the same Province or Presbytery, and with the like Jurisdiction and Authority,
Minister at their Kirks. That in the Council of Nice for eschewing of private
ordaining of Ministers, it was statuted, that no Pastor should be appointed
without the consent of him, who dwelt or remained in the Chief and Principal
City of the Province, which they called the Metropolitan City. That after, in
the latter Councils, it was statuted, (that things might proceed more solemnly
and with greater Authority) that the laying on of hands upon Pastors, after
Lawful Election, should be by the Metropolitan, or Bishop of the Chief and
principal Town, the rest of the Bishops of the Province voting thereto; In
which thing, there was no other Prerogative, but only that of the Town, which,
for that cause, was thought most meet both for the conveening of the Council,
and Ordaining of Pastors with common Consent and Authority. That the Estate of
the Church was corrupt, when the name, Bishop, which before, was common to the
rest of the Pastors of the Province, began, without the Authority of Gods Word
and ancient Custom of the Kirk to be attributed to one. That the power of
appointing and ordaining Ministers, and Ruling of Kirks with the whole
procuration of Ecclesiastical Discipline, was, now, only, devolved to one
Metropolitan; The other Pastors no ways challenging their Right and Privilege
therein, of very slothfulness, on the one part; And the Devil, on the other,
going about, craftily, to lay the ground of the Papistical Supremacy.

From these and such other Propositions, signed by him, at that time, it may be
judged, I say, if this Prelate did not bewray a very profound ignorance in true
Ecclesiastical Antiquity? Ane Arrant Presbyterian could not have said, could
not have wished more Indeed, it is more than probable (as perchance may appear
by and by) that these Propositions were taken out, (either formally, or by
collection) of Mr. Beza's Book De Triplici Episcopatu. Now if Adamson was so
little seen in such matters, what may we judge of the rest? But this is not
all, For

Thirdly, There cannot be a greater Evidence of the deplorable unskilfulness of
the Clergy, in these times, in the ancient records of the Church, than their
suffering Melvil and his Party to obtrude upon them, The Second Book of
Discipline; A split new Democratical Systeme; a very Farce of Novelties never
heard of before in the Christian Church. For instance; What else is the
confounding of the Offices of Bishops and Presbyters? Cap. ^.. 9.
The making Doctors or Professors of Divinity in Colleges and Universities a
distinct Office, and, of Divine Institution? Ibid. and Cap. 5. per. tot.
The setting up of Lay Elders, as Governors of the Church, Jure Divino? Making
them Judges of men's Qualifications to be admitted to the Sacrament? Visiters of
the Sick, etc. Cap. 8* per tot.
Making the Colleges of Presbyters, in Cities, in the primitive times, Lay
Eldership? Cap. 7.. 16.
Prohibiting Appeals from Scottish General Assemblies to any Judge Civil or
Ecclesiastic? Cap. ^2.. 8.
and by consequence to Oecumenick Councils. Are not these Ancient and Catholic
Assertions? What footsteps of these things in true Antiquity? How easy had it
been for men skilled in the Constitution, Government and Discipline of the
Primitive Church to have laid open, to the Conviction of all sober Men, the
novelty, the vanity, the inexpediency, the impoliticalness, the
uncatholicalness of most, if not all, of these Propositions? If any further
doubt could remain concerning the little skill, the Clergy of Scotland, in
these times, had, in these matters, it might be further Demonstated.

Fourthly, from this plain matter of Fact, viz. that that Second Book of
Discipline, in many points, is taken word for word from Mr. Beza's Answers to
the Questions proposed to him, by The Lord Glamis, then Chancellor of Scotland.
A fair Evidence that our Clergy, at that time, have not been very well seen in
Ecclesiastical Politics; Otherwise, it is not to be thought they would have
been so imposed on, by a single stranger Divine, who visibly aimed at the
propagation of the Scheme, which by chance, had got footing in the Church where
he lived. His Tractate De Triplici Episcopatu, written of purpose for the
advancement of Presbyterianism in Scotland, carries visibly in its whole train,
that its design was to draw our Clergy from off the Ancient Polity of the
Church; and his Answers to the Six Questions proposed to him, (as I said) by
Glanus, contained the New Scheme, he advised them to. Now, let us taste a
little of his skill in the Constitution and Government of the Ancient Church,
or, if you please, of his accounts of her Policy. I take his Book as I find it
amongst Saravia's works.

He is Positive for the Divine Right of Ruling Elders. p. 8.
He affirms that Bishops arrogated to themselves, the power of Ordination,
without Gods allowance. p. 29.
That the Chief foundation of all Ecclesiastical Functions, is, Popular
Election; That this Election, and not, Ordination, or Imposition of hands makes
Pastors or Bishops: That Imposition of hands does no more, than put them in
possession of their Ministry, (in the exercise of it, as I take it) the power
whereof they have from that Election; That, by consequence, it is more proper to
say that the Fathers of the Church are Created by the Holy Ghost, and the
suffrages of their Children, than by the Bishops. p. 30.
That Saint Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, in which he expressly
writes against, and condemns the Schism which then prevailed there, as
foreseeing that Episcopacy might readily be deemed a remedy against so great
ane evil, joined So^thenes with himself in the Inscription of the Epistle, that
by his own example he might teach how much that Princeliness was to be avoided
in Ecclesiastical Conventions, seeing the Apostles themselves, who are owned to
have been, next to Christ, first, in order, and supreme, in degree, did yet
Exercise their power by the Rules of Parity. p. 41.
Who will not, at first sight, think this a pretty odd fetch? But to go on, he
further affirms, p. 43.
That Episcopacy is so far from being a proper remedy against Schism, that it
has produced many Grievous Schisms, which had never been, but for that Humane
Invention. That the Papacy was the fruit of Episcopacy. p. 46.
That the Council of Nice by making that Canon about the (...), that the
Ancient customs should continue, etc cleared the way for the Roman Papacy*
which was then advancing apace; And founded a Throne for that Whore that sits
upon the seven Mountains. p. 58.
That the Primitive Churches were in a flourishing condition so long as their
Governors continued to Act in Parity; And had not yielded to Prelacy. p. 71.
And yet he had granted before, p. 45.
That humane Episcopacy, as he calls it, was in vogue, in Ignatius his time
etc. So that I think they could not flourish much, having so short a time to
flourish in.

These few^ of many such learned Propositions, I have collected out of that
Book, which was so successful, at that time, in furthering and advancing the
Presbyterian Principles, in Scotland; And could they be a learned Clergy? Could
they be great Masters at Antiquity and Ecclesiastical History, who swallowed
down these Propositions, or were imposed on, by the Book that contained them?
It Is true this Book came not to Scotland till the end of the year 1577, or the
beginning of 1578. But I thought it pardonable to anticipate so far, as, now,
to give this account of it, considering how proper it was for my present
purpose. We shall have occasion to take further notice of it afterward.

Thus, I think, I have made it appear how advantageous Morton's Proposition was
to the Presbyterian party: They had occasion, by it, to fall upon forming a New
Scheme of Church Governmet and Polity; They were as well prepared, as they
could be for such a nick; and they had a set of people to deal with, who might
easily be worsted in these Controversies. However it seems, the common
principles of Politics, which God and Nature have made, if not inseparable
parts, at least, ordinary concomitants of sound and solid reason, did sometimes
make their appearances amongst them; For, that there have been Disputations and
Contests, and that some, at least, of the many propositions, contained in the
Second Book of Discipline, have been debated and tossed, is evident from the
many Conferences, were about it, and the long time was spent before it was
perfected and got its finishing stroke from a General Assembly, as we shall
find, in our progress. Proceed we now in our deduction.

Though the Presbyterian Faction had gained this advantage in the Assembly 1576,
that they had allowance to draw a new Scheme of Polity, to which they could not
but apply themselves very cheerfully; yet, it seems, they were so much humbled
by the Repulses they had got, as to the main Question, viz. the Lawfulness of
Episcopacy, that they thought it not expedient to try the next Assembly with
it, directly, as they had done, unsuccessfully, twice before; But to wait a
little, till their party should be stronger; and, in the mean time to content
themselves with such indirect blows as they could conveniently give it; such, I
say, their deliberations seem to have been, at the next Assembly which was
holden at Edinburgh, October 24. 1576. For not so much as one word, in that
Assembly concerning the Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness of Prelacy, either, Simply,
and in it self; Or, Complexely, as, then, in use in Scotland. It Is true,

Certain ^re^hren, says the MS. some Brethren, says Calderwood; some, says
Petrie* Called. 74. Pet. 38^.
(without Question, the Melvilians) proposed that, now, that Mr. Patrick
Adamson was nominated for the Archbishopric of St. Andrews, He might be tried
as to his sufficiency for such a station, according to ane Act, made in March
1575. But it seems the major part of the Assembly have not been for it, for it
was not done, as we shall find afterward. Nay, another Act was fairly dispensed
with by this Assembly, in favor of Boyd, Archbishop of Glasgow: For, being
required to give his answer, if he would take the Charge of a particular Flock,
according to the Act made in April before? He Answered, That he had entered to
his Bishopric according to the Agreement at Leith, which was to stand in
force, during the Kings Minority, or till a Parliament should determine
otherwise: That he had given his Oath to the Kings Majesty in things
appertaining to his Highness: That he was afraid he might incur the Guilt of
Perjury, and be called in question, by the King, for changing a member of
state, if he should change any thing belonging to the Order, Manner,
Privileges, or Power of his Bishopric: That therefore he could not bind
himself to a particular Flock, nor prejudge the power of Jurisdiction, which he
had received with his Bishopric, etc. Thus he answered, I say, and the
Assembly, at that time, satisfied themselves, so far, with this answer, that
they pressed him no further, but referred the matter to the next Assembly, as
even both Calderwood and Petrie acknowledge. Called. 74. Pet. 389.
A fair evidence, that in this Assembly, the Presbyterian party was the weaker.
However,

One indirect step they gained in this Assembly also. By the First Book of
Discipline, Hedd 9. Spot. 170.
It was appointed that the Country Ministers and Readers should meet, upon a
certain day of the week in such Towns, within six miles distance, as had
Schools, and to which there was repair of Learned men, to exercise themselves
in the Interpretation of Scripture, in imitation of the practice in use among
the Corinthians, mentioned 1 Cor. 14.29. These Meetings, it seems, had been
much neglected and disfrequented in most places. It was therefore enacted by
this Assembly, That all Ministers within eight miles, etc. should resort to the
place of exercise, each day of exercise, etc. This, MS. Called. 76. Pet. 388.
I say, was useful for the Presbyterian designs; For these Meetings were
afterward turned into Presbyteries, as we shall find when we come to the year
1579. And so it is very like, the motion, for reviving them, was made by those
of the Faction; For no man can deny that they have still had enough of Draught
in their Politics.

The next Assembly was holden April 1. Anno 1577. No direct progress made, now,
neither, as to the main Question: And only these indirect ones: 1. The
Archbishop of Glasgow was obliged to take the charge of a particular Flock; if
we may believe Calderwood, Called. 76.
but neither the MS. nor Petrie has it. 2. The Archbishop of St. Andrews being
absent; full power was given to M. Robert Pont, M. James Lawson, David
Ferguson, and the Superintendent of Lothian, conjunctly; To cite him before
them, against such day or days as they should think good; to try and examine
his entry and proceeding, etc. with power also to summon the Chapter of St.
Andrews, or so many of that Chapter as they should judge expedient, and the
Ordainers or Inaugurers of the said Archbishop (observe here, the Bishops, in
these times were Ordained or Inaugurated) as they should find good, for the
better trial of the premises: And in the mean time, to discharge him of
further visitation, till he should be admitted by the Church. MS. Called. 76.
Pet. 390.


Here, indeed, the Melvilians obtained in both Instances, that which was
refused them by the last Assembly: However, nothing done Directly (as I said)
against the Episcopal Office: On the contrary, Adamson* it seems, might exerce
it, when admitted by the Assembly.

May I not reckon the Fast appointed by this Assembly, as a third step gained
by our Parity-men? A successful Establishment of perfect Order and Polity in
the Kirk, was one of the reasons for it. MS. Called. 79. Pet. 391.
And ever since it has been one of the Politics of the Sect to be Mighty for
Fasts, when they had extraordinary projects in their heads; and then, if these
Projects (however wicked, nay though the very wickedness which the Scripture
makes as bad as witchcraft) succeeded; To entitle them to Gods Grace* and make
the success, the Comfortable Return of their pious Humiliations, and sincere
Devotions.

I find also that Commissioners were sent by this Assembly to the Earl of
Morton to acquaint him that they were busy about the matter and argument of the
Polity; and that his Grace should receive Advertisement of their further
proceedings; and that these Co^^issioners, having returned from him, to the
Assembly, reported, That His Grace liked well of their travels and labors, in
that matter; and required expedition and haste; Promising, that when the
particulars should be given in to him, they should receive a good Answer. Called.
77.
So Calderwood and the MS. From which, two things may be observed: the First,
is, a further Confirmation of the suspicion I insisted on before, viz. That
Morton was truly a Friend to the Innovators. The second, that the Second Book
of Discipline had hitherto gone on but very slowly: Why else would his Grace
have so earnestly required Expedition and hasty Outred (as the MS. words it, i.
e. Dispatch) and promised them a good answer when the particulars should be
given in to him? The truth is, there was one good reason for their proceeding
so leisurely in the matter of the Book: Beza's Answer to Glamis his Letter was
not yet returned.

Thus two General Assemblies passed, without so much as offering at a plain, a
direct Trust against Imparity: Nay, it seems matters were not come to a
sufficient Maturity for that, even against the next Assembly.

It was holden at Edinburgh, October. 25. 1577. And not so much as one word in
the MS. Calderwood or Petrie, relating either directly or indirectly to the
main Question. But two things happened a little after this Assembly, which
animated Melvil and his Party to purpose.

One was, Morton's quitting the Regency: For, whatever services he had done
them, he was so obscure and Fetching in his measures, and so little to be
trusted, that they could not rely much upon him: And now that he had demitted,
they had a fair prospect of playing their game to better purpose than ever:
They were in possessions of the Allowance he had granted them to draw a New
Scheme of Policy; They had a Young King who had not yet arrived at the twelfth
year of his Age, to deal with; By consequence they were like to have a divided
Court and a Factious Nobility; and they needed not doubt, if there were two
Factions in the Kingdom, that one of them would be sure to Court them, and
undertake to promote their Interests.

The other encouragement, which did them every whit as good service, was Beza's
Book, De Triplici Episcopatu, Divino, Humano, and Satanico, with his Answers to
the Lord Glamis his Questions, which about this time was brought to Scotland:
as is clear from Calderwood. Called: 79.
Beza, it seems, put to it, to Defend the Constitution of the Church of Geneva
had employed his wit and parts (which certainly were not contemptible) in
patching together such a Scheme of principles, as, he thought, might be
defended: That Is a method most men take too frequently, First, to resolve upon
a Conclusion, and then, to stretch their inventions and spend their pains for
finding Colors and plausibilities to set it off with. Beza, therefore, I say,
having been thus at pains to digest his thoughts the best way he could on this
subject; and withal being possibly, not a little elevated, That the Lord High
Chancellor of a Foreign Kingdom, should Consult him, and ask his Advice
concerning a point of so great importance as the constitution of the Government
of a National Church; Thought it not enough, it seems, to return an Answer to
his Lordships Questions, and therein give him a Scheme; which was very easy for
him to do, considering, he needed be at little more pains, than to transcribe
the Genevian Establishment; But he applied himself to the main Controversy
which had been started by his Disciple, Melvil, in Scotland, (and it is scarcely
to be doubted that it was done at his instignation) and wrote this his Book,
wherein, though he asserted not the absolute Unlawfulness of that which he called
Humane Episcopacy (he had not brow enough for that, as we have seen already),
In the page of these papers.
yet he made it wonderously dangerous, as being so naturally apt to Degenerate
into the Devilish, the Satanical Episcopacy. This Book, I say, came to
Scotland, about this time, viz. either in the end of 1577. or the beginning of
1578. and (though I have already given a Specimen of it) who now could hold up
his head to plead for Prelacy? Here was a Book written by the Famous Mr. Beza,
the Successor of the great Mr. Calvin; the present great Luminary of the Church
of Geneva; our Elder Sister Church; the Best Reformed Church in Christendom;
Who would not be convinced now that Parity ought to be Established and Popish
Prelacy abolished? And* indeed, it seems, this Book came, seasonably, to help
the good new cause (for it behoved to take some time before it could merit the
name of the good old one) for, we have already seen how slowly and weakly it
advanced before the Book came: But now we shall find it gathering strength
apace, and advancing with a witness. Nay, at the very next Assembly it was in a
pretty flourishing condition.

This next Ass. met, Apr. 24. Anno 1578. And Mr. Andrew Melvil was chosen
Moderator; the Prince of the Sect had the happiness to be the Praeses of the
Assembly, and presently the work was set a going. Amongst the first things
done, in this Ass*, it was enacted, That Bishops and all others bearing
Ecclesiastical Function, should be called by their own names, or Brethren, in
all time coming. MS. Called. 81. Pet. 394*
No more Lord Bishops! and it was but consequential to the great Argument,
which was, then, and, ever since, has been in the mouths of all the party, The
Lords of the Gentiles, etc. Matt. 20.25. Luke 22.25. This was a step worthy of
Mr. Andrew's Humility, which was not like other men's Humility's, consisting in
Humbling themselves, but of a new species of its own, consisting in Humbling of
his Superiors. Indeed, after this, he still treated his own Ordinary the
Archbishop of Glasgow, in public, according to this Canon; Though when he was at
his Graces table, where he got better entertainment than his own Commons (for
he was, then, in the College of Glasgow) he could give him all his Titles of
Dignity and Honor. Spot. 303.
But,

Another more important Act was made, by this Assembly; Take it, word for word
from Calderwood who agrees exactly with both the MS. and Pet. Called. 81. Pet.
394.
Forasmuch as there is great corruption in the State of Bishops, as they are
presently set up, in this Realm, whereunto the Assembly would provide some
stay, in time coming, so far as they may, to the effect that farther corruption
may be bridled; The Assembly has concluded, that no Bishop shall be Elected or
Admitted before the next General Assembly; Discharging all Ministers and
Chapters to proceed, any ways, to the Election of the said Bishops, in the mean
time, under the pain of perpetual Deprivation; And that this matter, be
proponed first in the next Assembly, to be consulted what farther Order shall
be taken therein.

Here was ground gained indeed; However, this was but preparatory still;
Nothing, yet, concluded concerning the Unlawfulness of the Office; It was
consistent with this Act that Episcopacy should have continued, its corruptions
being removed. Neither are we, as yet, told what these corruptions were; It
seems, even the Presbyterians themselves, though in a fair condition, now, to be
the prevailing party, had not yet agreed about them. Indeed. another Assembly
must be over, before we can come by them. Leaving them, therefore till we come
at them; proceed we with this present Assembly.

Another Fast was appointed by it; The Nation, it seems, was not yet
sufficiently diposed for Presbytery: Rubs and difficulties were still cast in
the way; and the good cause was deplorably retarded. So it is fairly imported in
the Act for this Fast: The corruption of all Estates: Coldness in a great part
of the Professors: That God would put it in the Kings heart and the hearts of
the Estates of Parliament, to Establish such a Policy and Discipline in the
Kirk, as is craved in the word of God, etc. These are amongst the prime Reasons
in the narrative of this Act for Fasting. MS. Pet. 394. Called. 81.
Indeed, all this time the Book of Discipline was only in forming; It had not
yet got the Assemblies Approbation.

The next General Assembly met at Stirling, June 11. this same year, about six
weeks or so, after the Dissolution of the former: But the Parliament was to
sit; and it was needful the Assembly should sit, before, to order Ecclesiastic
business for it. And, now, it seems there was little struggling; For the
Assembly, all in one* voice (as it is in MS. Calderwood and Petrie, MS. Called.
82. Pet. 395.
concluded, That the Act of the last Assembly, discharging the Election of
Bishops, etc. should be extended to all time coming: And here Petrie stops; But
the MS. and Calderwood add, ay and while, the corruptions of the Estate of
Bishops, be, all utterly, taken away. And they ordained, That all Bishops
already Elected should submit themselves to the Genesis Ass. Concerning the
Reformation of the Corruptions of that Estate of Bishops, in their Persons;
Which, if they refused to do, after Admonition, that they should be proceeded
against to Excommunication. This Ass. met, as I said on the 11 th of June, and
indeed it seems the weather has been warm enough: Yet neither, now, did they
adventure again upon the Main Question, nor ennumerate the Corruptions of the
Estate of Bishops.

By this Assembly, a Commission was also granted to certain Persons to attend
the Parliament, and Petition that the Book of Discipline might be Ratified;
Though all the Articles were not, as yet, agreed to. A pretty Odd overture, to
desire the Parliament to Ratify what they themselves had not perfectly
Concerted.

The next Assembly met at Edinburgh, October. 24. of that same year 1578. And it
was but reasonable to have three Assemblies in six Months, when the Church was
so big with Presbytery. And, now, the Corruptions, so frequently talked of
before, were ennumerated; and the Bishops were required to Reform them in their
Persons. They were required, 1. To be Ministers or Pastors of one Flock. 2. To
usurp no Criminal Jurisdiction. 3. Not to vote in Parliament in Name of the
Kirk, without Commission from the General Assembly. 4. Not to take up, for
maintaining their Ambition and Riotousness, the Emoluments of the Kirk, which
ought to sustain many Pastors, the Schools, and the Poor; But to be content
with reasonable livings, according to their Office. 5. Not to claim the Titles
of Temporal Lords, nor usurp Civil Jurisdiction, whereby, they might be
Abstracted from their Office. 6. Not to Empire it over particular Elderships,
but be subject to the same: So the MS. Calderwood and Petrie have it, though
Spotswood has the word, Presbyteries; MS. Called. 85. Pet. 397. Spot. 303.
Which I take notice of, because the unwary Reader, when he reads,
Presbyteries, in Spotswood, may take them for these Ecclesiastical Judicatories
which now are so denominated, whereas there were none such as yet in the
Nation. 7. Not to usurp the Power of the Pastors (says the MS.) nor take upon
them to visit any Bounds not committed to them by the Church. 8. And lastly, If
any more Corruptions should, afterward, be found in the Estate of Bishops, to
consent to have them Reformed. These were the Corruptions: and particularly at
that same very time, the two Archbishops were required to Reform them in their
Persons.

What Adamson, Archbishop of St. Andrews did, or said, on this occasion, I know
not; But, it seems he submitted not: For I find him, again, required to do it
by the next Assembly. And that it was particularly laid to his charge that he
had opposed the Ratification of the Book in Parliament. But,

Boyd Archbishop of Glasgow did certainly behave at this Assembly like a Person
of great worth and a Man of Courage, suitable to his Character, giving a brave
and resolute Answer: You may see it in Spot. Called. and Pet. Spot. 303. Called.
84. Pet. 396.
I have not leisure to transcribe it: But it pleased not the, now, too much
Presbyterian Assembly; and no wonder, for he spoke truly like a Bishop.

The next Assembly was holden at Edinburgh, in July, Anno 1579. The King sent a
Letter to them, whereby he signified his dislike of their former proceedings,
and fairly advised them to show more temper, and proceed more deliberately.
Calderwood calls it ane Harsh Letter: It is to be seen, word for word, both in
him and Petrie. Called. 86. Pet. 398.
But what had they to do with the Kings of this World, especially such Babie
Kings as King James was, then; they, I say, who had now the Government of
Christ's Kingdom to settle? However, no more was done against Prelacy, at this
time, than had been ordered formerly. Indeed there was little more to be done,
but to declare the Office abolished; But that, it seems they were not yet Ripe
for; Perchance the Corruptions mentioned before had proved a little Choking,
and peoples stomachs could not be, so soon, disposed, for another dish of such
strong meat in ane instant; so, that was reserved till the next Assembly.
Nevertheless,

In the mean time take we Notice of one thing which we never heard of before;
which started up in this Assembly; and which must not be forgotten. It was
proposed by the Synod of Lothian (says Calderwood, Called. 88.
That a General Order might be taken for Erecting of Presbyteries in places
where public exercise was used, until the Polity of the Church might be
Established by Law. And it was Answered by the Assembly, That the exercise was
a Presbytery, MS. Called. 88. Pet. 400.


A Presbytery turned afterward, and, now, is, one of the most specific,
essential and indispensible parts of the Presbyterian constitution. Provincial
Synods can sit only twice in the year, General Assemblies, only once, according
to the Constitution. It Is true, it is allowed to the King to Convocate one
extraordinarily, and pro re nata as they call it: And the Kirk claims to have
such a power too, as she sees occasion. But then it is as true, that Kings have
been so disgusted at such meetings that they have hindered General Assemblies to
meet for many years: So that their meetings are uncertain; and in innumerable
cases, there should be too long a Surcease of Ecclesiastical Justice, if Causes
should wait, either on them, or Provincial Synods. The Commission of the
General Assembly, as they call it, is but ane accidental thing: The sudden
dissolution of a General Assembly can disappoint its very being; as just now
there is none, nor has been, since the last Assembly, which was so surprizingly
dissolved in February 1692. When there is such a Court, it commonly sits but
once in three Months; and it meddles not with every matter; Besides, many of
themselves do not love it; and look upon it as ane error in the Custom of the
Kirk, for it was never made part of the Constitution by any Canon of the Kirk
nor Act of Parliament. But

A Presbytery is a Constant Current Court; They may meet when they will; Sit
while they will; adjourn whither, when, how long, how short time soever, they
will. They have all the substantial Power of Government and Discipline; They
have really a Legislative Power; They can make Acts to bind themselves and all
those, who live within their Jurisdiction; and they have a very large Dose of
Executive power; They can Examine, Ordain, Admit, Suspend, Depose, Ministers;
They can Cite, Judge, Absolve, Condemn, Excommunicate whatsoever Criminals. The
Supreme power of the Church, under Christ is Radically and Originally in them;
It is in General Assemblies, themselves, Derivatively, only, and as they
Represent all the Presbyteries in the Nation; and, if I mistake not, if a
General Assembly should Enact any thing, and the greater part of the
Presbyteries of the Nation, should Reprobate it, it would not be binding; and
yet how necessary, how useful, how powerful so ever, these Courts are, though
they are essential parts of the constitution; though they may be really said to
be that which Specifies Presbyterian Government; This Time, this seventh or
eighth or tenth of July, Anno 1579, was the first time they were heard of, in
Scotland.

That which was called the Exercise before, was nothing like a Court; had no
imaginable Jurisdiction; Could neither Enjoin Penance to the smallest
Offender, nor Absolve him from it; It could exert no Acts of Authority: It had
not so much Power as the meanest Kirk-session: It was nothing like a
Presbytery: and, however it was said, in this Assembly, That the Exercise was a
Presbytery, yet, that saying (as omnipotent as a Presbyterian Assembly is) did
not make it one. That was not a Factive proposition. There were no Presbyteries
erected at this time: The First that was erected, was the Presbytery of
Edenburg: And if we may believe Calderwood himself, Called. 116.
That Presbytery was not erected till the thirtieth day of May 1581. more time
was run before the rest were erected: They were not agreed to by the King till
the year 1586. They were not Ratified by Parliament till the year 1592. And now
let the Impartial Reader judge if it is probable that our Reformers, who never
thought on Presbyteries, were of the present Presbyterian principles? Were they
Presbyterians who never understood, never thought of, never dreamed of that,
which is so Essential to the constitution of a Church, by Divine Institution,
according to the present Presbyterian principles?

But does not G. R. in his First Vindication of the Church of Scotland, in
Answer to the First Question,. 8. tell us that the Real Exercise of Presbytery
in all its meetings, lesser and greater, continued and was allowed in the year
1572, etc. True, he says so: But no Man but himself ever said so: But I know
the Natural History of this Ignorant blunder; His Historian Calderwood had said
that the Kirk of Scotland ever since the beginning, had four sorts of
Assemblies, Called. 29.
and this was enough for G. R. For what other could these four sorts of
Assemblies be, than Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General
Assemblies? But if he had, with the least degree of any thing like attention
read four or five lines further, he might have seen that Calderwood himself was
far from having the brow to assert that Presbyteries were, then, in being: For
having said there were four sorts of Assemblies from the beginning, he goes on
to particularize them, thus, National, which were commonly called General
Assemblies; Provincial, which were commonly called by the General Name of
Synods; Weekly Meetings of Ministers and Readers for interpretation of the
Scripture, whereunto succeeded Presbyteries, that is, Meetings of many
Ministers and Elders for the Exercise of Discipline; and the Eldership of every
Parish, which others call a Presbytery. In which account, it is evident, that
he does not call these weekly Meetings for interpretation of the Scriptures,
Presbyteries; But says, that Presbyteries succeeded to these weekly Meetings;
and he gives quite different Descriptions of these weekly Meetings and
Presbyteries; making the weekly Meetings to have been of Ministers and Elders
for the interpretation of Scripture; and Presbyteries to have been (as they
still are) Meetings of many Ministers and Elders, for the Exercise of
Discipline. It Is true, he might have, as well, said, that Presbyteries
succeeded to the Meeting of the Four Kings against the Five, or of the Five
against the Four, mentioned in the 14 th Chapter of the Book of Genesis; For
the Meetings of these Kings were before our Presbyteries, I think, in order of
time: And these Meetings of these Kings were as much like our present
Presbyteries, as those Meetings were, which were appointed at the Reformation
for the inte^pretation of Scripture; So that even Calderwood himself was but
tri^ling when he said so: But tri^ling is one thing, and impudent founding of
false History upon another Man's trifling, is another. But enough of this Author
at present; we shall have further occasions of meeting with him.

This Assembly was also earnest with the King that the Book of Policy might be
farther considered; and that farther Conference might be had about it; That the
Heads, not agreed about, might be compromised, some way or other. MS. Pet. 399.
Called. 87, 88.
But the King, it seems, listened not; For they were at it again, in their next
Assembly. And now that I have so frequently mentioned this Second Book of
Discipline, and shall not have occasion to proceed much further in this
wearisome Deduction; Before I leave it, I shall only say this much more about
it.

As much stress as the Presbyterian party laid on it, afterward, and continue,
still, to lay on it; as if it were so very exact a Systeme of Ecclesiastical
Polity; yet, at the beginning, the Compilers of it, had no such Confident
sentiments about it; For, if we may believe Spotswood, Spot. 277.
(and herein he is not contradicted by any Presbyterian Historian) when Master
David Lindesay, Mr. James Lawson and Mr. Robert Pont, were sent by the Assembly
to present it to the Regent, Morton, in the end of the year 1577, They
entreated his Grace to receive the Articles presented to him, and if any of
them did seem not agreeable to reason, to vouchsafe Audience to the Brethren,
whom the Assembly had named to attend. Not, that they thought it a work
complete, to which nothing might be added, or from which nothing might be
diminished; for, as God should reveal further unto them, they should be willing
to help and renew the same. Now, upon this Testimony, I found this Question*
Whither the Compilers of the Second Book of Discipline, could* in reason, have
been earnest that this Book, which they acknowledged not to be a work so
complete, as that nothing could be added to it or taken from it, should have
been confirmed by ane Oath, and sworn to, as ane Unalterable Rule of Policy?
Are they not injurious to them who make them capable of such a bare faced
absurdity? Indeed whatever our present Presbyterians say, and with how great
assurance soever, they talk to this purpose, this is a Demonstration, that the
compilers of it, never intended, nay could not intend, that it should be sworn
to in the Negative Confession. That it was not sworn to in that Confession, I
think, I could prove with as much evidence as the nature of the thing is
capable of, if it were needful to my present purpose: But not being that, I
shall only give this further Demonstration, which comes in here naturally
enough, now, that we have mentioned this Book so often. The Negative Confession
was sworn to and subscribed by the King and his Council upon the 28. of January
1580/1. Called. 96.
Upon the second of March thereafter the King gave out a Proclamation, ordering
all the subjects to subscribe it. Called. 97.
But the King had never approven, never owned, but on the contrary, had
constantly rejected the Second Book of Discipline; Nay it was not Rati^ied, got
not its finishing stroke from the General Assembly it self, till toward the
end of April in that year 1581. By necessary consequence, I think, it was not
sworn to in the Negative Confession. And thus I leave it. Proceed we now to the
next Assembly.

It met at Dundee upon the twelfth of July 1580. full twenty years after the
Reformation; For the Parliament which Established the Reformation, (as the
Presbyterian Historians are earnest to have it) had its first Meeting on the
tenth of July 1560. This, this was the Assembly, which, after so many fencings
and strugglings, gave the deadly Thrust to Episcopacy. I shall transcribe its
Act word for word from Calderwood, who has exactly enough taken it from the MS.
and both Spotswood and Petrie agree, Called. 90. Spot. 311. Pet. 402.
It is this,

Forasmuch as the Office of a Bishop, as it is now used and commonly taken
within this Realm, has no sure Warrant, Authority nor good Ground out of the
Book and Scriptures of God, but is brought in by the Folly and Corruptions of
men's invention, to the great overthrow of the true Kirk of God, The whole
Assembly, in one voice, after Liberty given to all men to Reason in the matter,
none oppening themselves in defense of the said pretended Office; Finds and
Declares the same pretended Office, Used and Termed as is abovesaid, Unlawful
in the self, as having neither Fundament, Ground nor Warrant in the word of
God; And Ordains, that all such Persons as brook, or hereafter shall brook
the said Office, be charged simpliciter to dimit, quite, and leave off, the
Samine; as ane Office whereunto they are not called by God; and sicklike to
desist and cease from preaching, Ministration of the Sacraments, or using, any
way, the Office of Pastors, while they receive, de novo, Admission from the
General Assembly, under the pain of Excommunication to be used against them;
Wherein, if they be found Disobedient, or Contraveen this Act in any point, The
sentence of Excommunication, after due admonition, to be execute against them.
This is the Act.

Perhaps it were no very great difficulty to impugn the Infallibility of this
true blue Assembly, and to expose the boldness, the folly, the iniquity, the
preposterous zeal, which are conspicious in this Act; Nay, yet, after all this,
to show, that the Zealots for Parity had not arrived at that height of
Effrontery, as to Condemn Prelacy, as simply and in it self Unlawful: But, by
this time, I think, I have performed my promise, and made it appear that it was
no easy task to Abolish Episcopacy and Introduce Presbytery; to turn down
Prelacy, and set up Parity in the Government of the Church, when it was first
attempted, in Scotland: And therefore I shall stop here, and bring this long
Disquisition upon the Second Enquiry to a Conclusion; after I have
Recapitulated and represented in one entire view, what I have at so great
length deduced.

I have made it appear, I think, That no such Article was believed, professed
or maintained by the body of any Reformed or Reforming Church, or by any
Eminent and Famous Divine in any Reformed or Reforming Church, while our Church
was a Reforming; No such Article, I say, as that, of the Divine and
indispensible Institution of Parity, and the Unlawfulness of Prelacy or
Imparity amongst the Governors of the Church: I have made it appear that there
is no reason to believe that our Reformers were more prying in such matters
than the Reformers of other Churches: I have made it appear that there is not
so much as a syllable, a show, a shadow of ane Indication, That any of those
who Merited the Name of our Reformers, entertained any such Principle, or
maintained any such Article: I have made it appear that our Reformation was
carried on, much, very much, by the Influences, and upon the principles of the
English Reformers, amongst whom that principle of parity had no imaginable
footing: These are, at least, great presumptions of the Credibility of this,
That our Reformers maintained no such principle.

Agreeably to these presumptions, I have made it appear that our Reformers
proceeded de Facto upon the principles of Imparity: They formed their petitions
for the Reformation of our Church, according to these principles: The first
Scheme of Church Government, they erected, was Established upon these
principles: Our Superintendents, were notoriously and undeniably Prelates: The
next Establishment, in which the Prelates resumed the old Names and Titles of
Archbishops and Bishops, was the same for substance, with the first: At least,
they did not differ as to the point of Imparity: I have made it appear that
this second Establishment was agreed to, by the Church, unanimously, and
submitted to calmly and peaceably; and that it was received as ane
Establishment which was intended to continue in the Church: At least, no
Objections made against it, no appearances, in opposition to it, no indications
of its being accepted, only for ane Interim upon the account of Imparity's
being in its constitution: I have made it appear that Imparity was received,
practiced, owned and submitted to, and that Prelates were suitably honored and
dutifully obeyed, without reluctance, and without interruption, for full
fifteen years after the Reformation; and I have made it appear, that, after it
was called in Question, its Adversaries found many Repulses, and mighty
difficulties, and spent much travel, and much time, no less than full five
years, before they could get it Abolished; and if the Deduction I have made
puts not this beyond all doubt, it may be further confirmed by the Testimonies
of two very intelligent Authors; The first is that ingenious and judicious
Author who wrote the accurate piece, called Episcopacy not Abjured in Scotland,
published Anno 1640. Who affirms positively, p. 97.
That it was by Reason of opposition made to the Presbyterians, by many wise,
learned and Godly Brethren, who stood, firmly for the Ancient Discipline of the
Church, that Episcopacy was so long a condemning. It appears from his Elaborate
work that he was ane ingenuous as well as ane Ingenious Person, and living
then, and having been at so much pains to inform himself concerning not only
the Transactions, but the Intrigues of former times, it is to be presumed, he
did not affirm such a proposition without sufficient ground: But whatever dust
may be raised about his Credit and Authority; Sure I am, my other witness is
unexceptionable. He is King James the Sixth of Scotland, and the First of
England; This Great and Wise Prince lived in these times in which Presbytery
was first introduced; and I think it is scarcely to be Questioned, That he
understood, and could give a just account of, what passed, then, as well as any
man, then, living; and he in his Basilion Doron, p. 160* of his Works printed
at London 1616.
affirms plainly, That the Learned, Grave and Honest Men of the Ministry, were
ever ashamed of, and offended with, the Temerity and Presumption of the
Democratical and Presbyterian party. All these things, I say, I think, I have
made appear sufficiently; and so I am not afraid to leave it to the world to
judge, Whither our Reformers were of the present Presbyterian principles?

Only one thing more, before I proceed to the next Enquiry. Our Presbyterian
Brethren, Calderwood, Petrie and G. R. (as I have already observed) are very
earnest and careful to have their Readers advert, that when Episcopacy was
Established by the Agreement at Leith, Anno 1572. the Bishops were to have no
more Power, than the Superintendents had before; and, indeed it is true, they
had no more, as I have already acknowledged; But I would advise our Brethren to
be more Cautious in insisting on such a dangerous point, or Glorying in such a
Discovery, hereafter; For thus I Argue.

The Episcopacy Agreed to at Leith, Anno 1572, as to its Essentials, its Power
and Authority, was the same with the Superintendency Established at the
Reformation, Anno 1560. But the General Assembly holden at Dundee, Anno 1580.
Condemned the Power and Authority of the Episcopacy, Agreed to at Leith, Anno
1572. Ergo they condemnd the Power and Authority of the Superintendency
Established by our Reformers, Anno 1560. Ergo, the Assembly 1580. not only
forsook, but Condemned the principles of our Reformers: But if this Reasoning
holds; I think our present Presbyterian Brethren have no Reason to Claim the
Title of Successors to our Reformers: They must not ascend so high as the year
1560, They must stand at the year 1580; For, if I mistake not, the Laws of
Heraldry will not allow them to call themselves the True Posterity of those
whom they Condemn, and whose principles they Declare Erroneous. In such Moral
Cognations, I take Oneness of principle to be the foundation of the Relation,
as Oneness of Blood, is in Physical Cognations. Let them not, therefore, go
farther up than the year 1580. Let them date the Reformation from this Assembly
at Dundee, and Own Master Andrew Melvil and John Durie, etc. for their First
Parents. When they have fixed there, I shall, perchance, allow them to affirm
that the Church of Scotland was Reformed (in their sense of Reformation) by
Presbyters, that is Presbyterians. Proceed we now to

The Third Enquiry.
Whether Prelacy, and the Superiority of any Office, in the Church, above
Presbyters, was a great and insupportable Grievance, and trouble to this
Nation, and contrary to the inclinations of the Generality of the People, EVER
since the Reformation?

Considering what has been Discoursed, so fully on the former Enquiry, this
may be very soon dispatched: For, If Prelacy, and the Superiority of other
Officers in the Church, above Presbyters, was so unanimously consented to, and
Established at the Reformation; If it continued to be Owned, Revered, and
Submitted to, by Pastors and People, without interruption, without being ever
called in Question for full fifteen years after the Reformation; If, after it
was called in Question, its Adversaries found it so hard a task to subvert it,
that they spent five years more, before they could get it subverted and
declared Unlawful, even, as it was, then, in Scotland; If these things are
true, (I say) I think it is not very Credible, that it was a great and
insupportable Grievance and trouble to this Nation, and contrary to the
Inclinations of the Generality of the People EVER since the Reformation. This
Collection I take to be as clear a Demonstration as the subject is capable of.
But beside this, we have the clear and consentient Testimonies of Historians to
this purpose.

Petrie Pet. ad An. 1576. p. 352.
delivers it thus, Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and Peace, had never, since
Christ's coming in the Flesh, a more Glorious Meeting and Amiable Embracing, on
Earth; Even so, that the Church of Scotland justly obtained a Name amongst the
Chief Churches and Kingdoms of the world -- The hottest Persecutions had not
greater Purity; The most Halcyon times had not more Prosperity and Peace; The
best Reformed Churches, in other places, scarcely Paralleled their Liberty and
Unity.

Spotswood, Spot. ad Anno 1571* page 258.
thus, The Superintendents were in such Respect with all Men, as,
notwithstanding the Dissensions that were in the Country, no Exception was
taken at their proceedings, by any of the parties; But all concurred in the
Maintenance of Religion* And in the Treaties of Peace made, That was ever one
of the Articles: such a Reverence was, in those times, carried to the Church;
The very form of Government purchasing them Respect.

I might also cite Beza himself to this purpose, in his Letter to John Knox,
dated, Geneva, April 12. 1572: wherein he Congratulates heartily the happy and
United state of the Church of Scotland. Perhaps it might be no difficult task
to adduce more Testimonies: But the truth is, no man can Read the Histories and
Monuments of these times without being convinced that this is true; and that
there cannot be a falser proposition, than, That Prelacy was such a Grievance,
then, or, so contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People.

Further, even in succeeding times, even after it was Condemnd by that Assembly
1580, it cannot be proven that it was such a Grievance to the Nation. It Is true
indeed, some Hotheaded Presbyterian Preachers endeavored, all they could, to
possess the People with ane opinion of its Antichristianism, forsooth, and that
it was a Brat of the Whore, a Limb of Popery, and what not? But all this time,
no account of the Inclinations of the Generality of the People against it. On
the contrary, nothing more evident, in History, even Calderwoods History, than
that there was no such thing. Is it not obviously observable, even in that
History, that after the Civil Government took some 12 or 14 of the most forward
of these Brethren, who kept the pretended Assembly, at Aberdeen, Anno 1605 a
little Roundly to Task, and some 6 or 8 more were called by the King, to attend
his will, at London, all things went very peaceably in Scotland? Was not
Episcopacy restored by the General Assembly at Glasgow, Anno 1610, with very
great Unanimity? Of more than ane hundred and seventy voices, there were only
five Negative and seven, Non liquet. Nay Calderwood himself has recorded that
even these Ministers, who went to London, after their return, submitted
peaceably to the, then, Established Prelacy. And there are few things more
observable in his Book, than his Grudge, that there should have been such a
General Defection from the good Cause. Indeed I have not observed, no not in
his History, that there were six in all the Kingdom, who, from the
Establishment of Episcopacy, Anno 1610. did not attend, at Synods, and submit
to their Ordinaries; I do not remember any except two, Calderwood himself, and
one Iohnston at Ancrum; and even these two pretended other Reasons than Scruple
of Conscience for their withdrawing.

It is further observable that the Stirs which were made, after the Assembly,
at Perth, Anno 1618. were not pretended to be upon the account of Episcopacy;
Those of the Gang, could not prevail, it seems, with the Generality of the
People to tumultuate on that account. All that was pretended were the Perth
Articles: Neither did the Humor against these Articles prevail much, or far,
all the time King James lived, nor for the first twelve years of King Charles,
his Son and Successor; It fell asleep, as it were, till the Clamours against
the Liturgy and Book of Canons, awakened it Anno 1637: And all that time, I
mean, from the year 1610, that Episcopacy was restored, till the year 1637,
that the Covenanting work was set on foot, Prelacy was so far from being a
great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble to this Nation, and contrary to
the Inclinations of the Generality of the People; that, on the contrary, it was
not only Generally submitted to, but, in very good esteem. Indeed, it is
certain, the Nation had never more Peace, more concord, more plenty, more
profound quiet and prosperity, than in that Interval. Let no man reckon of
these things as naked Assertions: I can prove them; And hereby I undertake
(with Gods allowance and assistance) to prove all I have said, and more, if I
shall be put to it. But I think my cause requires not that it should be done at
present. Nay further yet,

I don't think it were ane insuperable task, if I should undertake to maintain,
that, when the Covenanting Politic was set on foot, Anno 1637. Prelacy was no
such Grievance to the Nation. This I am sure of, it was not the Contrariety of
the Generality of the Peoples Inclinations to Prelacy that first gave life and
motion to that Monstrous Confederation. Sure I am, it was pretty far advanced,
before the Leading Confederates offered to fix on Prelacy, as one of their
Reasons for it: So very sure, that it is easy to make it appear, that they were
afraid of nothing more, than that the Generality of the People should smell it
out, that they had designs to overturn Episcopacy. How often did they Protest
to the Marquis of Hamilton, then, the Kings Commissioner, that their meaning
was not to Abolish Episcopal Government? See large Declar. 114, 115.
How frank were they to tell those, whom they were earnest to Cajole into their
Covenant, that they might very well swear it, without prujudice to Episcopacy?
Ibid. 69. and 173.
Nay how forward were the Presbyterian Ministers themselves to propagate this
pretense? When the Doctors of Aberdeen told the Three, who were sent to that
City to procure subscriptions, that they could not swear the Covenant because
Episcopacy was abjured in it. Are not these Hendersons and Dicksons very words,
in their Answer to the fourth Reply, You will have all the Covenanters, against
their intention, and whither they will or not, to disallow and condemn the
Articles of Perth, and Episcopal Government; -- But it is known, to many
hundreds, that the words were purposely conceived, for satisfaction of such as
were of your Iugment, that we might all join in one Heart and Covenant? Many
more things might be readily adduced to prove this more fully: But it is
needless, for what can be more fairly colligible from any thing, than it is
from this Specimen, that it was their fear, that they might miss of their mark,
and not get the people to join with them, in their Covenant, if it should be so
soon discovered, that they aimed at the overthrow of Episcopacy.

It Is true indeed, after they had, by such disingenuous and Iesuitish Fetches,
gained numbers to their party, and got many well-meaning Ministers and People
engaged in their Rebellious and Schismatical Confederacy, they took off the
Mask; and condemned Episcopacy in their pack't Assembly, Anno 1638; Declaring
with more than Iesuitish impudence, that, (notwithstanding of their
protestations so frequently and publicly made to the contrary) it was abjured
in their Covenant. And yet I dare advance this Paradox, that, even then, it was
not ane Insupportable Grievance to the Presbyterians themselves, far less to
the whole Nation. I own this to be a Paradox, and therefore I must ask my
Readers allowance to give my Reason for which I have dared to advance it. It is
this.

Considering how much Prelacy affects the Church as a Society; Of how great
consequence it is in the Concerns of the Church; whatever it is in itself, it
cannot, in Reason, be called ane Insupportable Grievance to such as are
satisfied, they can live safely and without sin, in the Communion of that
Church, where it prevails. If such can call it a Grievance at all, I think they
cannot justly call it more than a Supportable Grievance: I think it cannot be
justly called ane Insupportable Grievance, till it can Justify, and, by
consequence, Necessitate a Separation from that Church which has it in its
Constitution. How can that be called ane Insupportable Grievance, especially in
Church matters, where Grievance and Corruption, (if I take them right, must be
terms very much equivalent) to those who can safely support it? i. e. Live
under it without sin, and with a safe Conscience, continue in the Churches
Communion while it is in the Churches Government? How can that be called
insupportable, which is not of such Malignity in a Church as to make her
Communion sinful? How can that be called insupportable in Ecclesiastical
concerns or Religious matters, to those who are persuaded they may bear it, or
with it, without disturbing their inward Peace, or endangering their Eternal
Interests? Now, such, in these times, were all the Presbyterians, at least,
Generally, in the Nation; They did not think upon Breaking the Communion of the
Church; upon separating from the solemn Assemblies under Prelacy, and setting
up Presbyterian Altars in opposition to the Episcopal Altars: They still kept
up one Communion in the Nation: They did not refuse to join in the Public
Ordinances, the Solemn worship of God and the Sacraments, with their Prelatick
Brethren: all this is so well known, that none, I think, will call it in
Question. Indeed that Height of Antipathy to Prelacy had not prevailed amongst
the party, no not when Episcopacy had its fetters struck off, Anno 1662. for
then, and for some years after, the Presbyterians generally, both Pastors and
People kept the Unity of the Church, and joined with the Conformists in the
public Ordinances: And I believe there are hundreds of thousands in Scotland
who remember very well how short a time it is since they betook themselves to
Conventicles, and turned avowed Schismatics.

I Confess the reasoning I have just now insisted on cannot militate so patly
against such: For if they had reason to separate, they had the same Reason to
call Prelacy ane insupportable Grievance; No more and no other: But I cannot
see how the Force of it can be well avoided by them, in respect of their
Predecessors, who had not the Boldness to separate upon the account of Prelacy.

But it may be said that those Presbyterians who lived Anno 1637. and downward,
Shook off Prelacy, and would bear it no longer; and was it not, then, ane
insupportable Grievance to them? True, indeed, for removing the pretended
Corruptions of Prelacy, they, then, ventured upon the; really, horrid sin of
Rebellion against their Prince; they embroyled three Famous and flourishing
Kingdoms; They brake down the Beautiful and Ancient Structures of Government
both in Church and State; They shed Oceans of Christian blood, and made the
Nations welter in gore; They gave up themselves to all the wildnesses of rage
and fury; They gloried in Treason and Treachery, in Oppression and Murder, in
Fierceness and Unbridled Tyranny; they drench't innumerable miss-led souls, in
the Crimson guilt, of Schism and Sedition, of Rebellion and Faction, of Perfidy
and Perjury: In short, they opened the way to such ane Inundation of
Hypocrisy, and Irreligion, of Confusions, and Calamities, as cannot easily be
Paralleled, in History; And for all these things they pretended their
Antipathies to Prelacy; and yet, after all this, I am where I was; Considering
their aforesaid principles and practices as to the Unity of the Church, they
could not call it ane Insupportable Grievance; They did not truly find it such;
Had they really and sincerely, in true Christian simplicity and sobriety, found
or felt it such, they would, no doubt, have looked on it, as a forcible ground,
for separating from the Communion, in which it prevailed; as the Protestants,
in Germany, found their Centum Gravamina, for separating from the Church of
Rome. To have made it that, indeed, and, then, to have suffered patiently, if
they had been persecuted for it, without turning to the Antichristian course of
Armed Resistance, had had some color of ane Argument that they deemed it ane
insupportable Grievance; But the Fiercest fighting against it, so long as they
could allow themselves to live in the Communion which owned it, can never infer
that it was, to them, ane insupportable Grievance; at most, if it was, it was,
to wanton humor and wildfire, only, and not to Conscience, and real Christian
Conviction. And so I leave this Argument.

I could easily insist more largely on this Enquiry, but* to avoid tediousness,
I shall advance only one thing more; It is a Challenge to my Presbyterian
Brethren, to produce but one public deed, one solemn or considerable
Appearance of the Nation, taken either Collectively or Representatively, which
by any tolerable construction or interpretation, can import that Prelacy or the
superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbyters, was a great and
insupportable Grievance and trouble to this Nation, and contrary to the
Inclinations of the Generality of the People, for full thirty years after the
Reformation.

The Learned G. R. thought he had found one, indeed, it seems, for he
introduced it very briskly, in his first Vindication of the Church of Scotland,
in Answer to the first Question,. 9. hear him. It is Evident (says he) that
Episcopal Jurisdiction over the Protestants was condemned by Law, in that same
Parliament, 1567, wherein the Protestant Religion was Established. What? No
less than Evident! Let us try this Parliamentary condemnation. It is there
Statute and Ordained, That no other Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical be acknowledged
within this Realm, than that which is, and shall be, within this same Kirk,
Established presently, or which flows therefrom, concerning Preaching the
word, Correcting of manners, administration of Sacraments. So he: No Man who
knows this Author and his way of writing will readily think it was ill manners
to examine whither he cited right; I turned over, therefore, all the Acts of
that Parliament which are in Print (and I think his citation shall scarcely be
found amongst the unprinted ones) but could not find this citation of our
Author's. What was next to be done? I knew that full well; I turned to the 43.
page of his Historian, Calderwood, and there I found it word for word. Well!
But is there no such Period to be found in the Acts of that Parliament? Not
one, indeed.

It Is true, there is ane Act, the sixth in number; Entitled, Anent the true
and Holy Kirk, and of them that are declared to be of the same; which Act I
find insisted on by the Covenanters, Anno 1638. in their Answer to the Marquis
of Hamiltons Declaration, at Edinburgh, in December, that year, (as is to be
seen in the large Declaration,) p. 352.
as condemning Episcopacy. It Is very probable this might be the Act Calderwood
thought he abridged in these words, borrowed from him by G. R. I shall set it
down, word for word, that the world may judge if Episcopacy is Condemned by it.

Forasmuch as the Ministers of the blessed Evangel of Jesus Christ, whom God of
his mercy has now raised up amongst us, or hereafter shall raise, Agreeing
with them who now live, in Doctrine, and Administration of the Sacraments, (as,
in the Reformed Kirks of this Realm, they are publicly Administrate) according
to the Confession of Faith; Our Sovereign Lord, with advice of My Lord Regent,
and three Estates of this present Parliament, has declared, and declares, the
aforesaid Persons, to be the only true, and Holy Kirk, of Jesus Christ, within
this Realm; And Decerns and Declares, that all and sundry, who, either,
gainsay the word of the Evangel, received and approved, as the Heads of the
Confession of Faith Professed in Parliament, before, in the year of God 1560.
years; As also specified in the Acts of this Parliament, more particularly does
express, and now Ratified and approved in this present Parliament; Or that
refuses the Participation of the Holy Sacraments, as they are now Ministrate,
to be no Members of the said Kirk within this Realm, presently Professed, so
long as they keep themselves, so divided, from the Society of Christ's Body.

This is the Act: Now, here, not one word of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
either Foreign or Domestic; Not one word of any Jurisdiction within this
Realm, or in the Kirk within this Realm, or that should ever flow from the said
Kirk; Not one word of Correcting of Manners: From which it is evident that, if
this was the Act, Calderwood aimed at, he gave the world a very odd abridgement
of it: And G. R. should consider things, a little better, and not take them
upon trust, to found Arguments on them so Ridiculously.

But does not this Act condemn Episcopacy? Let the world judge if it does; what
can be more plain, than that all this Act aims at is only to Define that
Church, which, then, was to have the legal Establshment, and the countenance of
the Civil Authority? This Church, it Defines to be, that Society of Pastors and
People which professed the Doctrine of the Evangel, etc. according to the
Confession of Faith then Established: It Is plain, I say, this is all, that Act
aims at: Not one word of Jurisdiction or Discipline, of Government or Polity,
of Episcopacy or Presbytery, of Prelacy or Parity, of Equality or Inequality
amongst the Governors of the Church: Whatever the Form of Government was,
then, in the Church, or whatever it might be, afterward, was all one to this
Act, so long as Pastors (whither Acting in Parity or Imparity) and People, kept
by the same Rule of Faith, and the same manner of administting the Sacraments.
What is there here like a Condemnation of Episcopal Jurisdiction? Is this the
way of Parliamentary Condemnations, to Condemn ane Office, or ane Order, or a
Jurisdiction, (call it as you will) without either naming it, or describing it,
in terms so circumstantiated as the world might understand, by them, that it
was meant? To Condemn a thing, especially a thing of so great importance,
without so much as repealing any one, of many Acts which Established or
Ratifyed it, before? Surely, if this Act Condemned Episcopacy, this Parliament
happened upon a New Style, a Singular Style, a Style never used before, never
used since. Besides,

If this was the Act G. R. intended, I would earnestly desire him to name but
any one Man, who lived in these times, and understood Episcopacy to have been
Condemned by this Act. How blind was Master Andrew Melvil? How blind was all
the Presbyterian Fraternity, that, all the five years, they were fighting
against Prelacy, could never hit on this Act, and prove that it ought to be no
longer tolerated, seeing it was against ane Act of Parliament? Were they so
little careful of Acts of Parliamant, that they would not have been at pains to
cite them for their purpose? Mr. Andrew Melvil in his so often mentioned Letter
to Beza, dated November. 13. 1579. writes thus: We have not ceased, these five
years, to fight against Pseudepiscopacy (many of the Nobility resisting us) and
to press the severity of Discipline -- We have many of the Peers against us:
For they allege if Pseudepiscopacy be taken away, one of the Estates is pulled
down, etc. Now, how easy had it been for him to have stopped the mouths of these
Peers, by telling them that it was taken away already by this Act of
Parliament? What a dunce was the L. Glamis Chancellor of Scotland, (by
consequence, one, obliged by his station, to understand something, I think, of
the Laws of the Nation) and all those whom he consulted about the Letter he
wrote to the same Beza, that neither he, nor they knew any thing of this Act of
Parliament, but told the Gentleman bluntly, that Episcopacy subsisted by Law;
Leges Regni longo usu and inveterata consuetudine Receptae, ut quotles de rebus
ad Reipublicae salutem pertinentibus in publicis Regni Comitiis agitur, nihil
sine Episcopis constitui potest, quum ipsi tertium Ordinem and Regni Statum
efficiant quem aut mutare, aut prorsus tollere, Reipublicae admodum esset
periculosum.
That the Prelates made one of the three Estates; that nothing could be done,
in Parliament without them; and that the Legal Establishment of the Order, and
its lying so very near the foundation of the Civil Constitution, made it
extremely dangerous to alter it, far more to abolish it? But what needs more?
Let the Reader cast back his eyes on the Articles agreed on betwixt the Church
and the Nobility and Barons in July 1567, that same year, by which it was
provided that all the Popish Bishops should be deprived, and that
Superintendents should succeed in their places. And then let him consider if it
be probable that Episcopacy was Condemned by this Act of Parliament.

But G. R. continues: I hope (says he) none will affirm that Prelatical
Jurisdiction then, was, or was soon after, Established in the Protestant Church
of Scotland: Was not our Author pretty forward at hoping? Will none affirm it?
I do affirm it: and I do affirm that if our Author had but looked to the very
next Act of that Parliament, the seventh in number, nay if he had but cast his
eye some ten lines upward in that same 43. page of Calderwoods History, he
would have seen the Prelacy of Superintendents, expressly owned, and supposed
in being by ane Act of that same Parliament, in the matter of granting
Collations upon Presentations: And now I leave it to the world to judge, if G.
R. has not been very happy at citing Acts of Parliaments against Prelacy. But,

Being thus engaged with him about Acts of Parliament, I hope it will be a
pardonable digression, though I give the world another instance of his skill and
confidence that way.

The Author of the ten Questions had said (in his Discussion of the first
Question) That the Popish Bishops sat, in the Parliament which settled the
Reformation: A matter of Fact so distinctly delivered by Knox, Spotswood and
Petrie, (but passed over by Calderwood) that nothing could be more
unquestionable: Nay even Leslie himself has it, for he tells us that the three
Estates Conveened; Ineunte Augusto, Edinburgum convocati sunt tres Regni
Ordines. Les^. 529.
and I think, in those days the Ecclesiastical Estate was one, the first, of
thee three: I think also, That Estate was Generally Popish, Yet, however plain
and indisputable this matter of Fact was, our learned Author could contradict
it: Take his Answer in his own words; To what he says of the Popish Bishops
sitting in a Reforming Parliament, I oppose what Leslie Bishop of Rosse a
Papist has, de Gest. Scotorum lib. 10. page 536. that Concilium a Sectae
Nobilibus cum Regina habitum nullo Ecclesiastico admisso, ubi Sancitum, ne quis
quod ad Religionem attinet, quicquam novi Moliretur; Ex hac lege (inquit) omne
sive Haereseos, sive inimicitiarum, sive seditionis malum, tanquam ex font
fluxit. Now, in the first place, I think it might be made a Question, for what
Reason our Author changed Leslies words? Might he not have given us the
Citation just as it was? Leslie has it thus, Convenientibus interim undique
Sectae Nobilibus, Concilium, nullo Ecclesiastico viro admisso, Edinburgi,
initur. In eo Concilio in primis Sancitum est, ne quis, quod ad Religionem
attineret, quicquam novi moliretur: Sed res in eo duntaxat Statu quo erant, cum
Regina ipsa in Scotiam primum appulisset, integrae manerent. Ex hac Lege,
tanquam font, omne sive haereseos, sive inimicitiarum, sive Seditionis malum
in Scotia nostra fluxit. Because Leslie was a Papist, must his very Latin be
Reformed? If this was it, if, I mistake not, a further Reformation may be
needful; for if Leslie was wrong in saying, in eo Concilio, I think our Author
has mended it but sorrily, by putting, ubi, in its stead; i. e. by making ane
Adverb of place the Relative to Concilium; And let the Critics judge whither
G. R's. attinet or Leslies, attineret, was most proper: But perhaps the true
Reason was, that there was something dark in these words, Sed Res in eo
duntaxat Statu quo erant, cum Regina ipsa in Scotiam primum appulisset,
integrae manerent. It Is true, indeed this Sentence quite subverts our Authors
purpose; for it imports that there had been some certain sort of Establishment
of Religion before the Queen came to Scotland, which was not judged fit then to
be altered. Now that this Learned man may be no more puzzled with such ane
obscure piece of History, I will endeavor to help him with a Clue. Be it known
to all men therefore, and particularly to G. R. the Learned and renowned
Vindicator of the Church of Scotland, That the Parliament which Established the
Reformation, and in which the Popish Bishops sat, was holden in August 1560;
That Queen Mary returned not to Scotland till August 1561. That this Council,
which Leslie speaks of, met after the Queens return, as is evident from Leslies
words; and that it was, at most, but a Privy Council; and nothing like a
Parliament. Have we not G. R. now, a very accurate Historian? And so I leave
him for a little, and proceed to the

Fourth Enquiry.
Whither Prelacy, and the Superiority of any Office, in the Church, above
Presbyters, was a great and insupportable Grievance, and Trouble to this
Nation, and contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People, when
this Article was Established in the Claim of Right?

THis Enquiry is about a very recent matter of Fact; the subject will not allow
of Metaphysical Arguments; It is not old enough to be determined by the
Testimonies of Historians; It cannot be decided by the public records or Deeds
of the Nation; For, if I mistake not, there was never public deed, before,
founded, mainly, and in express terms, upon the Inclinations of the Generality
of the People; and I do not think it necessary, by the Laws of Disputation,
that I should be bound by the Authority of a public deed, which I make the
main thing in Question. The Method, therefore, which I shall take for
discussing this Enquiry, shall be to give a plain Historical narration of the
Rise and Progress of this Controversy, and consider the Arguments made use of,
on both sides, leaving it to the Reader to judge whither side can pretend to
the greater probability. The Controversy as I take it had its Rise, thus;

The Scottish Presbyterians, seasonably forewarned of the, then, P. of O.'s
designs to possess himself of the Crowns of Great Britain and Ireland, against
his coming, had adjusted their Methods for advancing their interests, in such a
juncture; and getting their beloved Parity Established in the Church; They were
no sooner assured that he was in successful circumstances, than they resolved
on putting their projects in execution: The first step was, in ane hurry to
raise the Rabble, in the Western Counties, against the Episcopal Clergy,
thereby, to Confound, and put, all things, in Disorder: The next, it seems,
amidst such confusion, to endeavor, by all means, to have themselves elected
members for the Meeting of Estates, which was to be at Edinburgh, upon the 14
th of March 168^. In both steps the success answered their wishes; and it
happened that they got, indeed, the prevailing sway in the Meeting: and in
gratitude to the Rabble which had done them so surprising service, they
resolved not only to set up Presbytery, but to set it up on this foot, That
Prelacy was a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble to the Nation, and
contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People.

If this was not, it, that determined them to set up their Government on this
foot; I protest I cannot conjecture what it might be, that did it. Sure I am,
there was no other thing done, then, that, with the least show of probability
could be called ane Indication of the Inclinations of the People. They could
not collect it from any clamours made, at that time, against Prelacy, by the
Generality of the People; There were no such clamours in the mouths of the
twentieth part of the People. They could not collect it from the Peoples
separation from the Episcopal Clergy, during the time of K. I.'s toleration;
The tenth part of the Nation had not separated. They could not collect it, from
any Covetous disposition, they could reasonably imagine, was, in the Generality
of the People, to make themselves Rich by possessing themselves of the Revenues
of Bishoprics; They could not but know that 6 or 7000 l. ster. was a sorry
morsel for so many appetites; and they could not but know, that when Prelacy
should be abolished, few, and but a very few, could find advantage that way.
They could not collect it from any suspicions, the People could possibly
entertain that the Bishops or the Episcopal Clergy were inclining to turn
Papists; They could not but know that such had very far outdone the
Presbyterian Preachers in their appearances against Popery. The Members of that
Meeting of Estates had received no instructions from their Respective Electors,
either in Counties or Burghs to turn down Prelacy and set up Presbytery; I
could name more than one or two, who, if they did not break their trust, did,
at least, very much disappoint their Electors, by doing so. There were no
Petitions, no Addresses presented to the Meeting, by the People, craving the
Eversion of Prelacy, or the Erection of Presbytery. They never so much as once
offered at Polling the People about it. Shall I add further? After it was done,
they never received thanks from the Generality of the People, for doing it.
There was never yet any thing like ane Universal Rejoicing amongst the People,
that it was done. They durst never yet adventure to require from the Generality
of the People, their Approbation of it. And now,

If the Article was thus Established, at first, entirely upon the foot of
Rabbling the Episcopal Clergy in the West, I think I might reasonably superceed
all further labor about this Controversy; For, not to mention that they were
but the Rascally scum of these Counties, where the Rabbling was, who performed
it; and that even in these Counties there are great numbers of People, who
never reckoned Prelacy a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble; but
lived, and could have, still, lived, peaceably, and contentedly under it,
particularly the most part of the Gentry. Not to insist on these things, I say,
but granting that all the People in these Counties had been inclined, as is
affirmed in the Article; yet, what were they to the whole Nation? Is it
reasonable to judge of a whole Kingdom by a corner of it? To call these the
sentiments of all the Kingdom, which were only the sentiments of four or five
Counties? But lest I have mistaken, in fixing on the Performances of the
Western Rabble, as the true foot of this part of the Article; I shall proceed
further, as I promised.

The Article (however founded) thus framed and published, surprised the
Generality of the People; It was thought very odd, not only that Prelacy should
have been Abolished upon such weak Reasons; But that the Inclinations of the
Generality of the People should have been pretended, at all, against it;
Considering how sensible, all People were, that they had never been, so much as
once, asked how they stood inclined in the matter. It came, therefore, to be
very much the subject of common discourse, if it really was so? And many, who
pretended to know the Nation, pretty well, were very confident, it was not so:
And began to admire the wisdom of the Meeting of Estates, that they should have
asserted a proposition, so very Positively, which was so very Questionable. In
short, the noise turned so great about it, that it could not be confined within
the Kingdom, but it passed the Borders, and spread it self in England,
particularly at London. This being perceived, one of the Presbyterian Agents,
there, (I know not who he was) fell presently on writing a Book, which he
Entitled Plain Dealing, or, A Moderate General Review of the Scottish
Prelatical Clergy's, Proceedings in the Latter Reigns. Which was published in
August, I think, or September 1689; wherein, having said what he pleased, sense
or nonsense, truth or falsehood, as he found it most expedient, for coming at
his Conclusion, toward the end he gave his Arguments for his side of our
present Controversy. They were these two: Take them in his own words.

1. There being 32 Shires or Counties, and two Stewartries (comprehending the
whole body of the Nation) that send their Commissioners or Representatives to
Parliaments, and all General Meetings of the Estates or Conventions: Of these
34 Districts or Divisions of the Kingdom, there are 17 entirely Presbyterians;
So that where you will find one, there, Episcopally inclined, you will find 150
Presbyterians: And the other 17 Divisions, where there is one Episcopally
inclined, there are two Presbyterians.

2. Make but a calculation of the valued Rent of Scotland, computing it to be
less or more, or computed, argumentandi gratia to be three Millions, and you
will find the Presbyterian Heritors, whither of the Nobility or Gentry, to be
proprietors and possessors of two Millions and more, so that those that are
Episcopally inclined cannot have a third of that Kingdom: And as for the
Citizens or Burgesses and Commonalty of Scotland, they are all Generally
inclined to the Presbyterian Government, except Papists and some Remote wild
and Barbarous Highlanders, etc. And all this (he says) is so true that it can
be made appear to a Demonstration.

I am not at leisure to take so much impudent trash to task: Only, he himself,
if he knew any thing of Scotland, could not but know that, with the same
Moderation, he might have asserted that all Scottish Men were Monsters, and all
Scottish Women, at every Birth produced Soutrikins: And indeed, as he had the
hap to stumble on two such Demonstrations, so I believe, to this minute, he may
have the happiness to claim them as his property; For I have never heard that
any other of his Party (no not G. R. himself) had the hardiness to use them
after him. However, so far as I have learned, He was the first Author, who
published any thing about this Controversy.

The Presbyterian party having this adventured to Exercise the Press with it,
one who intended to undeceive the world concerning some Controversies between
the Episcopalians and the Presbyterians in Scotland, digested his Book into ten
Questions, and made the tenth concerning our present subject: viz. Whither
Scottish Presbytery was agreeable to the General Inclinations of the People?
Arguing to this purpose, for the Negative: That the Nobility of the Kingdom (a
very few, not above a dozen excepted) had all sworn the Oath commonly called
the Test, wherein all Fanatical principles, and Covenant Obligations, were
renounced and abjured; That not one of 40 of the Gentry but had sworn it also;
And not 50 in all Scotland (out of the West) did, upon the Indulgence (granted
by King James, Anno 1687.) forsake their Parish Churches to frequent
Meeting Houses; That the Generality of the Commons live in Cities and Marcat
Towns; That all who could be of the Common Council in such Corporations, or
were able to follow any ingenious trade, were obliged to take the Test (and had
generally done it) That the Clergy stood all for Episcopacy; There being of
about a thousand, scarcely twenty Trimmers betwixt the Bishop and the
Presbyterian Moderator; which twenty together, with all the Presbyterian
Preachers, could not make up the fifth part of such a number as the other side
amounted to: That in all the Universities, there were not four Masters, Heads
or Fellows, inclined to Presbytery: That the Colleges of Justice and Physic,
at Edinburgh were so averse from it, that the Generality of them were ready,
last Summer ( viz. 1689) to take Arms in defense of their Episcopal Ministers,
etc. This Book was published, I think, in the beginning of the year 1690.

What greater Demonstration could any Man desire of the truth of the Negative,
if all here alleged was true? And what greater Argument, of the truth of every
one, of the Allegations, than the Confession of a right uncourteous Adversary?
G. R. I mean, who in Answer to this Book wrote his first Vindication of the
Church of Scotland, as it is now by Law Established, as he calls it; Published
at London, about the end of the year 1690, and Reprinted at Edinburgh in the
beginning of 1691. But did he indeed acknowledge the truth of all the
Allegations? Yes, he did it Notoriously.

He yielded to his Adversary all the gang if the Clergy except a few; The
Universities, and the College of Justice, at least, as lately stated: He was
not so frank to part with the Physicians, indeed, because, if we may take his
word for it, There are not a few worthy Men of that Faculty who are far from
Inclinations toward Prelacy: But he durst not say, it seems, that either the
major part or any thing near the half was for him. He also yielded the
Generlity of the Burgesses.

All the dust, he raised, was about the Nobility and Gentry: But what nasty
dust it was, let any sensible man consider: As for the Nobility, he granted
there were only, a few who took not the Test: But then, he had three things to
say, for them who took it. 1. They who took the Oaths, did not, by that, show
their inclination so much, as what they thought fit to comply with rather than
suffer: But what were they to suffer if they took not the Oaths? The loss of
their vote in Parliament, and a small fine, which was seldom, if at any time,
exacted: But if they were to suffer no more, could their Fears of such
sufferings, force them to take Oaths so contrary to their inclinations?
Abstracting from the impiety of mocking God, and the wretchedness of crossing
ones light, which are conspicuous, in swearing against men's persuasions, could
such sufferings as these incline any man to swear to support ane interest which
he looked on as so great and insupportable a Grievance and Trouble to the
Nation? But this is not all, for he added: 2. How many of these, now, when
there is no force on them, show, that it was not choice but necessity that led
them that way? I know he meant, that many of these Nobles have now broken
through these Oaths: Let them Answer for that: But what had he to do, in this
case, with his old friend Necessity? What Necessity can force a man to do ane
ill thing? Besides, can he prove that it was Choice, and not that same kind of
Necessity, that led them in the way they have lately followed? That men can be
for this thing to day, and the contrary to morrow, is a great presumption that
they do not much regard either; But I think it will be a little hard to draw
from it, that they look upon the one as a great and insupportable Grievance
more than the other. But the best follows; 3. Many who seem to make Conscience
of these Bonds, yet show no inclination to the thing they are bound to, except
by the constraint that they brought themselves under. After this, what may not
our Author make ane Argument, that Prelacy is such ane ill-lik't thing, as he
would have it? Seeing he has got even them to hate it, who are Conscientiously
for it?

Neither is he less pleasant about the Gentry; He acknowledges, they, as
generally, took the Test; which was enough for his Adversary, as has appeared.
But how treats he the other Topic, about their not going to the Presbyterian
Meetings, when they had King James his Toleration for it? Why? A silly
Argument! Why so? Many did go; But did his Adversary lie grossly or
calumniate, when he said, that not 50 Gentlemen in all the Kingdom (out of the
West) forsook their Parish Churches and went to Conventicles? Our Vindicator
durst not say he did; And has he not made it evident that it was a silly
Argument? But, Most other clave to the former way (he means the Episcopal
Communion,) Because the Law stood for it, and the Meeting Houses seemed to be
of uncertain continuance. But would they have cleaved to the former way if they
had thought it a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble? Would they have
so crossed their Inclinations, as to have Adhered to the Communion of the
Episcopal Church, when it was evident the sting was taken out of the Law, and
it was not to be put in Execution? Were they so fond or so afraid of a
lifeless Law (if I may so call it) that they would needs conform to it, though
they had no inclination for such conformity? Though what they conformed with, in
obedience to that Law, was a great and insupportable Grievance to them? Did our
Author and his Party reckon upon these Gentlemen, then, as Presbyterians? And
what though the Meetings seemed to be of uncertain continuance? How many of the
Presbyterian Party said, in those days, that they thought themselves bound to
take the Benefit of the Toleration, though it should be but of short continuance?
And that they could return to the Church, when it should be retracted? Might
not all men have said and done so, if they had been as much Presbyterians? It Is
true our Author has some other things on this subject in that first
Vindication: But I shall consider them afterward. This was G. R.'s first Essay
on this Controversy.

Another Parity man finding, belike, that neither the Plain Dealer nor the
Vindicator had gained much credit by their performances, thought it not
inconvenient for the service of his Sect to publish a Book, Entitled, A
further Vindication of the present Government of the Church of Scotland; And
therein to produce his Arguments for Determining this Controversy: It was
Printed in September, I think, in the year 1691. It Is true he wrote something
like a Gentleman, and spoke discreetly of the Episcopal Clergy; He had no
scolding in his Book, and was infinitely far from G. R.'s flat Railwifery: And
I think my self obliged to thank him for his civility. But after all this, when
he came to his Arguments for proving the point about the Inclinations of the
People, I did not think that he much helped the matter. They were these two, p.
32.
1. Though the Bishops were introduced in the year 1662 and did continue till the
year 1689. During which time, the far greatest part of all the Ministry in
Scotland was brought in, by themselves, and though they had obtained a National
Synod formed for their own interest, yet they durst never adventure to call it
together, so diffident were they even of these Ministers. And can there be a
greater Demonstration (says he) of the General inclination of this Nation
against Prelacy? But who sees not how many things are wanting, here, to make a
probable Argument, much more, a Demonstration? For who knows not that it was
not in the Power of the Bishops, but of the King, to Convocate a National
Synod? And who knows not, that Presbyterian National Synods, had committed such
extravagances, as might have tempted any King, almost, to have little kindness
for National Synods? Again, supposing the Bishops might have obtained one, if
they had been for it, but would not ask it, was there no other imaginable
Reason for their forbearing to ask one, but their Diffidence of the Ministers?
One living 24 or 28 years agone might possibly have slipped into such a mistake;
But for one who wrote only in the year 1691, after it was visible, nay signally
remarkable, that of near to a thousand Presbyters, not above twenty had fallen
from the Episcopal principles; But all had so generally continued to Profess
them, and not only so, but to Profess them amidst so many discouragements, to
Profess them and suffer for them; After this. I say, for any man to found a
Demonstration for proving that Prelacy is contrary to the inclinations of the
People, on the Bishops averseness to a National Synod; and to found that
averseness, on the diffidence they had of the Presbyters, as if they had
dreaded, or had ground to dread that the Presbyters would have subverted their
order if they had got a National Synod, seems to me a very singular
undertaking. Sure I am, if there is any Demonstration here at all, it is that
there was no great store of Demonstrations to be had for our Authors main
Conclusion. Neither was his other Argument any stronger, which is this; 2. This
National aversion is yet further Demonstrated from this, that albeit Prelacy
had all the Statutes that the Bishops could desire on their behalf, and had
them put in Execution with the outmost severity, yet there was ever found a
necessity to keep up a standing Army to uphold them, and to suppress the
Aversion of the People; And notwithstanding thereof there were frequent
Insurrections and Rebellions. Now who sees not the weakness of this
Demonstration? For who knows not that a small part of a Nation by their
notorious Vngovernableness, and their habitual Propensities to Rebel, may
oblige the Government to keep up a little standing Army, such as ours in
Scotland was, for suppressing them, if, at any time, they should break out into
a Rebellion? The party, I think, can have but little credit from such
Demonstrations: For this Demonstration must either suppose that none in the
Nation are apt to Rebel, except Presbyterians, and they, too, only upon the
head of Church Government; Or it can conclude nothing: For if Presbyterians can
Rebel upon other Reasons, though they make this the main, the specious, the
clamourous Pretext, as, I doubt not, their Democratical principles may incline
them to do, upon occasion; Or, if others than sincere Presbyterians can venture
on the horrid sin of Rebellion, there is still Reason for the standing Army.
Besides, what gained they by these their frequent Insurrections and Rebellions?
Were they not easily and readily crush't by the rest of the Nation? But if so,
I think, if there is any Argument here at all, it concludes another way than
our Author designed it. But it is not worth the while to insist longer on this
Argument. Only,


If it is a good one, the Bishops and their Adherents have Reason to thank our
Author for showing them the way, how they may have their Government restored;
For by this way of reasoning they have no more to do but fall upon the Knack of
raising frequent Insurrections and Rebellions, against the present Government;
And then their work is done: For thus a Demonstration shall befriend them;
this, when there is a necessity of keeping up a standing Army to support
Presbytery, because of frequent Insurrections and Rebellions, raised on its
account; It is a Demonstration that it is a great and insupportable Grievance
and Trouble to the Nation, and contrary to the inclinations of the Generality
of the People, and therefore it ought to be Abolished. The truth is, such
reasonings are not only Sophistical, but dangerous; They are founded upon the
principles of Rebellion; and they tend directly and naturally toward
Rebellion; And they ought to be noticed by every wise Government: And so I
leave this Author.

The next Paper-combat I shall take notice of, was between the Author of the
third Letter in the Pamphlet, called ane Account of the present Persecution of
the Church in Scotland, etc. published Anno 1690. And G. R. in his Second
Vindication published toward the end of the year 1691.

The Epistler, as G. R. is sometimes pleased to call him, had craved a Poll,
deeming it, it seems, the only proper method for coming at a sure account of
the inclinations of the generality of the People; and I think he had Reason:
For if matters must go by the inclinations of the People, it is just to ask the
People about their inclinations. But would G. R. allow him this Demand, which
had so much of plain equity in it? No, His talk (says he) of putting the Matter
to the poll I neglect as ane impracticable fancy. 2 d. Vind. ad Let. 3.. 5.
But who sees not that this was plain Fear to put it upon such ane Issue; What
imaginable impossibility, or absurdity, or difficulty, or inconveniency could
make polling, upon this account, Impracticable? Was it not found practicable
enough, in the days of the Covenant, when the veriest child, if he could write
his own Name, was put to it to subscribe it? What should make it more
impracticable to poll the Kingdom, for finding the Peoples inclinations, about
Episcopacy and Presbytery, than it was to levy Hearth-money from the whole
Kingdom? Is it not as practicable to poll the Kingdom about Church Government,
as to poll it, for raising the present subsidy, which is imposed by poll? I am
apt to believe, the inclinations of the Generality of the People would have
been as much satisfied, if polling had been reduced to practice on the one
account, as the other.

That same Epistler, in that same Epistle, adduced another Argument which was
to this purpose: That in the years 1687 and 1688, when the Schism was in its
Elevation, there were but some three or four Presbyterian Meeting Houses
erected on the North side of the Tay, i. e. in the greater half of the Kingdom;
And these too, very little frequented or encouraged; and that on the South side
of that River (except in the five Associated Shires in the West) the third man
was never engaged in the Schism. This was Matter of Fact: And if true, a solid
Demonstration that Prelacy and the Superiority of any Office in the Church,
above Presbyters was not, then, a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble
to the Nation, and contrary to the inclinations of the generality of the
People: For had it been such, how is it imaginable when there was such ane
Ample Toleration, such ane Absolute and Vnperplex't Liberty, nay so much
notorius encouragement given by the, then, Government to separate from the
Episcopal Communion, that so few should have done it? Whosoever pleased might,
then, have, safely, and without the least prospect of worldly hazard, joined
the Presbyterians: yet scarcely a fifth or a sixth part of the Nation did it. I
am not sure that the nature of the thing was capable of a clearer evidence,
unless it had been put to the impracticable Fancy. Let us next consider G. R.'s
Answers, and judge, by them, if the Epistler was wrong as to the matter of
Fact. He has some two or three: we shall try them severally.

The First, to the purpose, is, If there be many in the Northern parts, who are
not for Presbytery, there are as few for the present settlement of the State.
To what purpose is the present settlement of the State forced in here? Was the
Controversy between him and his Adversary concerned in it, in the least? What
impertinent Answering is this? Is there so much as one syllable here that
Contradicts the Epistlers position? But

2. We affirm (says G. R.) and can make it appear not only that there are many
in the North, who appeared zealously for Presbytery, as was evident by the
Members of Parliament, who came from these parts: Very few of them were
otherwise inclined, and they made a great figure in the Parliament for settling
both the State and the Church. If one were put to it to examine this Answer
particularly and minutely, I think he might easily make even G. R. himself wish
that he had never meddled with it: It were no hard task to give a just account
how it only happened that there was so much as one Northern member (who was not
such by birth) of the Presbyterian persuasion, in the Meeting of Estates: It
were as easy to represent what Figures some of them made, or can readily make,
Uncouth Figures, truly: All this were very easy, I say, if one were put to it:
But as it is not seasonable, so it is not needful: For it is plain, nothing,
here, contradicts the Epistlers position: Though the Northern members, of the
Presbyterian persuasion, had been twice as many as they were, and though they had
made greater figures than can be pretended; yet, it may be very true that there
were so few, separatists in the Northern Counties, as the Epistler affirmed
there were. And for the respect G. R. owes to his Northern Friends and
Figure-makers, I would advise him never again to insist on such a tender point;
And so I leave it, and proceed to what follows.

3. There are very many Ministers in the North (and People that own them) who,
though they served under Episcopacy, are willing to join with the Presbyterians,
and whom the Presbyterians are ready to receive when occasion shall be given,
and those of the best Qualified among them. How such Ministers as have joined,
or are ready to join with the Presbyterians, can be called the best Qualified
amongst the Episcopal Clergy, so long as integrity of life, constancy in
adhering to true Catholic Principles, ane hearty abhorrence of Schism,
Conscience of the Religion of Oaths, Self-denial, taking up the Cross patiently
and cheerfully, and preferring Christian Honor and innocence to worldly
conveniences, can be said to be amongst the best Qualifications of a Christian
Minister, I cannot understand. I understand as little what ground our Author
had, for talking so confidently about these Northern Ministers: Sure I am, he
had no sure ground to say so; And I think the transactions of the last General
Assembly, and the unsuccessfulness of Mr. Meldrum's Expedition to the North,
this Summer, are Demonstrations that he had no ground at all to say so; But
whatever be of these things, I desire the Reader to consider, impartially,
whither (supposing all were uncontroverted truth, our Author asserts so
confidently, here,) this Answer convells the Matter of Fact asserted by the
Author of the Letter? What is there here that looks like proving that the
Schism was greater in the North, than was asserted by the Epistler? Or what is
there here that can by any color of consequence infer that Prelacy in these
Northern parts was a great and insupportable Trouble and Grievance, and
contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People? Does not our
Author acknowledge that these Ministers served under Episcopacy, and that their
People owned them, without any Reluctancies of Conscience?

But the Epistler had said there were not above 3 or 4 Presbyterian
Meeting Houses on the North side of the Tay, and the Vindicator says they far
exceeded that number. How easy had it been for the Vindicator to have given us
the Definite number of Presbyterian Meeting Houses, in these parts, during the
time of the abovementioned Toleration? He who was so very exact to have his
informations from all corners, might, one would think, have readily satisfied
himself in this instance, and fairly fixed one lie on the Epistler: And is it
not a great presumption that the Epistler was in the Right, and that the
Vindicator, who was so anxious to have all his Adversaries Liers, was hardly
put to it in this Matter? When he could do no more than oppose ane Indefinite
number to the Epistlers Definite one? For my part I think it not worth the
while to be positive about the precise number; But I can say this without
Hesitation, that all who separated from their Parish Churches, on that side the
River, would not have filled four ordinary Meeting Houses.

From what has been said, I think it is clear, the Epistler was honest enough
in his reckoning for the North side of the Tay. Can all be made as safe on the
South side? The Epistler had said, that (except in the West) the third Man was
never engaged in the Schism: G. R. Answers, We know no Schism but what was made
by his party: But that the plurality did not suffer under the horrid
persecution raised by the Bishops, Does not prove that they were not inclined
to Presbytery; But either that many Presbyterians had freedom to hear Episcopal
Ministers, or that all were not resolute enough to suffer for their principle;
So that this is no Rational way of judging of the Peoples inclinations. I will
neither engage, at present, with him, in the Question, who is the Scottish
Schismatic? Nor digress to the point of the horrid Persecution raised by the
Bishops: Another occasion may be as proper for them: But I desire the Reader
again, to consider this Answer, and judge, if it keeps not a pretty good
distance from the Epistlers position? Is any thing said, here, that
contradicts, that looks like contradicting the Matter of Fact? What new fashion
of Answering, is this, to talk whatever comes in ones head, without ever
offering to attack the strength of the reasoning he undertakes to discuss?

By this Taste the judicious Reader may competently judge which is the right
side of the present Controversy; and withal, if I mistake not, he may guess if
the Presbyterian Kirk in Scotland was not well provided when it got G. R. for
its Vindicator. Shall he furnish thee, O patient Reader, with any more
divertisement; If thou can promise for thy patience I can promise for G. R.

This Learned Gentleman found himself to puzzled, it seems, about this part of
the Article, that he was forced to put on the Fools-cap, and turn Ridiculous to
mankind: However, it was even better to be that than to yield in so weighty a
Controversy; than to part with the Inclinations of the People, that Articulus
Stantis and Cadentis Ecclesiae: But is there a Play to succeed worthy of all
this Prologue? Consider and judge.

He has so limited and restricted the Generality of the People, to make his
cause some way defensible, that, for any thing I know, he has confined them all
within his own doublet: At least, he may do it, before he shall need to yield
any more, in his Argument: He is at this trade of limiting in both his
Vindications. 1. Vind. ad Quest. 10.2. Vind. Answer to Letter 3.. 4.
I shall cast them together, that the world may consider the Product.

1. There are many ten thousands who are inconcerned about Religion, both in
the greater and the lesser truths of it; And it is most irrational to consider
them in this Question. 2. There are not a few who are of opinion, that
Church Government, as to the species of it, is indifferent: These ought not to
be brought into the reckoning. 3. There are not a few, whose light and
conscience do not incline them to Episcopacy, who are yet zealous for it, and
against Presbytery; Because, under the one, they are not censured, for their
immoralities, as under the other; These ought to be excluded also. So ought all
4. Who had a Dependence on the Court; And 5. All who had a Dependence on the
Prelates. 6. All Popishly Affected, and who are but Protestants in Masquerade.
7. All Enemies to K. W. and the present Government.
I am just to him; all these Exclusions out of the reckoning he has, if he has
not more; And give him these, and he dares affirm, That they who are
Conscientiously for Prelacy, are so few in Scotland, that not one of many
hundreds or Thousands is to be found; 1 Vind. They who are for Episcopacy are
not one of a Thousand in Scotland; 2 Vind. Now, not to fall on examining his
Limitations singly, because that were to be sick of his own disease.

In the first place, one would think, if he had been allowed his Limitations,
he might, in all Conscience, have satisfied himself without begging the
Question to boot; Yet, even that he has most covetously done; For, I think the
Question was not, who were Conscientiously for Prelacy or inclined for
Episcopacy? But, whither Prelacy and the Superiority of any Office in the
Church above Presbyters was a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble to
the Nation, and contrary to the inclinations of the Generality of the People?
And there is some difference, as I take it, between these Questions. But let
him take the State of the Question; if he must needs have it, I can spare it to
him: Nay, if it can do him service, I can grant him yet more: When the Matter
comes to be tried by this his Standard, I shall be satisfied that it fall to
his share to be judge; He should understand his own Rule best; and so may be
fittest for such Nice Decisions, as a point so tender must needs require; Though,
I think, He may take the short cut, as we say, and give his own judgment
without more ado; For thither it must recur at last; Only I cannot guess why he
excluded all Popishly affected, etc. Was it to let a friend go with a fee? I
think he might have learned from History, if not, from Experience, that Papists
have been amongst the best friends to his Interest; and very ready to do his
party service upon occasion, which, it is not to be thought they would have
done for nothing. But however this is,

Having granted him so much, I think, he is bound to grant me one little thing;
I ask it of him only for peace; I can force it from him, if I please: It is,
that all his Limitations, Restrictions, Exclusions, Castings-out,
Settings-aside, or what ever he pleases to call them, were adduced by him for
setting the Article in its Native and proper light, and as it ought to be
understood; But, if so, I cannot think he himself can repute it unfair dealing,
to give the world a fair view of the Article as thus explained and enlightened:
And so digested, it must run to this purpose, as I take it.

That Prelacy and the Superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbyters,
is, and has been, a great and insupportable Grievance, and Trouble to this
Nation, and contrary to the inclinations of the Generality of the People;
Excluding from this Generality of the People, 1. All these many ten thousands
of the People, who are unconcerned about Religion both in the greater and
lesser truths of it. 2. All these many of the People who are of opinion that
Church Government, as to the species of it, is indifferent. 3. All these other
many of the People, whose Light and Conscience do not incline them to
Episcopacy, who are yet zealous for it, and against Presbytery, because, under
the one, they are not censured for their immoralities, as under the other. 4.
All such of the People as had any dependence on the Court. 5. Or on the
Prelates. 6. Or are Popishly affected, and Protestants only in Masquerade. And
7. All such as are Enemies to K. W. and the present Civil Government; Ever
since the Reformation: ( They, i. e. such of the People, as are not excluded,
from the Generality of the People, by any of the aforesaid Exceptions, having
Reformed from Popery by Presbyters) and therefore it ought to be Abolished.

So the Article must run, I say, when duly Englightned by our Authors Glosses;
and when a New Meeting of Estates shall settle another New Government, and put
such ane Article in another New Claim of Right, I do hereby give my word, I
shall not be the first that shall move Controversies about it: But till that is
done, G. R. must allow me the use of a certain sort of Liberty I have, of
Thinking, at least, that his wits were a wool-gathering (to use him as mannerly
as can be done by one of his own Complements) when he spent so many of his
sweet words (another of his Phrases) so very pleasantly.

Thus did G. R. defend this part of the Article against the Arguments of his
Adversaries: But did he produce none, for his own side of the Controversy?
Yes, one, and only one, so far as I can remember. It is in his Answer to the
first of the four Letters,. 7. The Letter written by the Military Chaplain, as
he was pleased to call him.

This Military Chaplain had said, That the Church Party was Predominant in this
Nation both for Number and Quality. That it is not so (says G. R.) is evident
from the Constitution of our Parliament: This is the Argument. Now, not to
enter upon dangerous or undutiful Questions about Parliaments; I shall say no
more at present but this; When G. R. shall make it appear that all the Acts and
Deeds of the present Parliament have been, all along, agreeable to the
Inclinations of the Generality of the People; or when he shall secure the other
part of the Article against the Dint of this his own good Argument; I mean,
when he shall make it appear that such reasoning is firm and solid, in the
present case, and withal, shall make it appear, that the Deeds and Acts of
twenty seven Parliaments (he knows well enough who numbered them to him)
Ratifying and consuming Episcopacy, cannot, or ought not to amount to as good
ane Argument for the Inclinations of the Generality of the People in former
times: When he shall make these things appear, I say, I shall, then, think a
little more about his Argument. This I think is enough for him. At present I
shall consider it no more; Only, now that he has brought the present
Parliament upon the stage, I will take occasion to propose some few Questions,
which the minding of it suggests to me: and I seriously desire (not G. R. but)
some truly sensible, ingenious, and sober person of the Presbyterian
persuasion; Some person who had opportunity to know how matters went, and a
head to comprehend them, and who has Candor and Conscience to relate things as
they truly were, or are; To give plain, frank, direct and pertinent answers to
them, speaking the sense of his heart, openly, and distinctly, without mincing,
and without ^ergiversation. My Questions shall not, in the least touch the
Dignity or Authority of the Parliament: All I design them for, is to bring
Light to the present Controversy. And I ask,

1. Whither the Presbyterian party did not exert and concenter, all their Wit
and Force, all their Counsel and Cunning, all their Art and Application, all
their Skill and Conduct in Politics, both before and in the beginning of the
late Revolution, for getting a Meeting of Estates formed for their purposes?

2. Whither the Universal Vnhinging of all things, then, and the general
Surprise, Confusion and Irresolution of the rest of the Nation, occasioned
thereby, did not contribute extraordinarily for furthering the Presbyterian
Designs and Projects?

3. Whither, notwithstanding all this, when the Estates first met, they had not
both great, and well-grounded fears that their Projects might miscarry, and
they might be outvoted in the Meeting?

4. Whither very many, very considerable Members had not deserted the House
before it was thought seasonable to offer at putting the Article about
Church Government in the Claim of Right?

5. Whither, though they got this Article thrust into the Claim of Right, and
made part of the Original Contract between King and People, in the Month of
April 1689. They were not, to their great grief, disappointed of the
Establishment of their Form of Church Government in the first Session of
Parliament holden in June, etc. that same year.

6. Whither in the beginning of the next Session (which was in April 1690.)
they were not under very dreadful apprehensions of another disappointment? And
whither they would not have been very near to, if not in, a state of Despair,
if all the Anti-Presbyterian Members had unanimously conveen'd* and sat in
Parliament?

7. After they had recovered from these fears, and when they had the courage to
propose the Establishment of their Government, and it came to be voted in the
House, I ask, if it was any thing like a full House? Plainly, if a third part
of those who might have s^te as Members, were present?

8. Whither all those Members who voted for it at that time, can be said to
have done it from a Principle of Conscience, or a firm persuasion, they had,
that Prelacy was a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble to the Nation,
and contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People? Or whither it
may be said without Breach of Charity, that not a few (of the few) voted so
mainly from other principles, such as Compliance with some Leading Statesmen?
etc.

9. Whither those of the Presbyterian persuasion, after they found that they
had prevailed in the Parliament, did not proceed to make the Act, obliging all
Persons in public Stations to sign the Declaration called the Assurance, as
much, if not more, for securing the Government in their own hands, and keeping
out Anti Presbyterians, than for strengthening K. W.'s interests?

10. Whither they had not in their prospect, the great difficulty of getting
Presbyterian Ministers planted in Churches, if Patronages should continue, when
they made the Act depriving Patrons of these their Rights? And whither they had
not in their prospect the as great difficulties of getting such Ministers
planted, if (according to the true Presbyterian principles, at least
pretensions) the calling of a Minister, should have depended upon the plurality
of voices in the Parish, when they consented to such a Model for calling of
Ministers as was Established in that same Session of Parliament?

11. Notwithstanding that Act of Parliament which Abolished Patronages did
notoriously encroach upon the Peoples power, Legated to them by Christ, in his
Testament, according to the Genuine Presbyterian principles, by putting the
Real power of calling Ministers in the hands of the Presbytery, for the greater
Expedition and security of getting Presbyterian Ministers planted in Churches;
notwithstanding all this, I say, I ask, whither they did not meet with many
difficulties, and much impediment and opposition in the plantation of such
Ministers in very many Parishes? In consequence of this, I ask,

12. Whither it was not the sense of these difficulties and oppositions which
so frequently encumbred them, that made the Presbyterian Ministers, so
notoriously, betray their trust which they pretend to have, as Conservators of
the Liberties and Privileges of Christ's Kingdom and People, when they
consented, that, in the last Session of Parliament, Christ's Legacy should be so
clogged and limited, as that none shall have Power of giving voice in the
calling of Ministers, till they shall first swear the Oath of Allegiance and
sign the Assurance.

13. And lastly, I ask, whither our Presbyterian Brethren would be content that
all that has been done in reference to Church Matters, since the beginning of
the late Revolution, should be looked upon as undone; and that the settlement of
the Church should, again, depend upon a new, free, unclogg'd, unprelimited,
unover awed Meeting of Estates?

I am very much persuaded, that a plain, candid, impartial, and ingenuous
Resolution, of these few Questions, might go, very far, in the Decision of this
present Controversy: And yet after all this labor spent about it, I must
confess, I do not reckon, it was, in true value, worth threeteen sentences: As
perchance may appear, in part, within a little. And so I proceed to

The Fifth Enquiry.
Whither, supposing the Affirmatives in the proceeding Enquiries had been true,
they would have been of sufficient force, to infer the Conclusion advanced in
the Articles, viz. that Prelacy, etc. ought to be Abolished?

THe Affirmatives are these two; 1. That Prelacy was a great and Insupportable
Grievance, etc. 2. That this Church was Reformed by Presbyters: The purpose of
this Enquiry is to try if these were good Reasons for the Abolition of Prelacy;
without further Address, I think they were not; Not the

First, viz. Prelacy's being a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble to
this Nation, and contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People.
Sure I am,

1. Our Presbyterian Brethren had not this way of Reasoning from our Reformers;
For, I remember John Knox, in his Letter to the Queen Regent of Scotland, Kn.
Ap. 90.
rejected it with sufficient appearances of Keenness and Contempt; He called it
a Fetch of the Devils, to blind Peoples eyes, with such a Sophism; To make them
look on that Religion as most perfect, which the Multitude, by wrong custom,
have embraced, or to insinuate, that it is impossible that that Religion should
be false, which so long time, so many Councils, and so great a Multitude of men
have Authorized and confirmed, etc. For (says he) if the opinion of the
Multitude ought always to be preferred, then did God injury to the Original
world; For they were all of one mind, to wit, conjured against God, except Noah
and his family. And I have showed already that the Body of our Reformers, in
all their Petitions for Reformation, made the word of God, the Practices of the
Apostles, the Catholic Sentiments and Principles of the Primitive Church, etc.
and not the inclinations of the People, the Rule of Reformation. Nay,

2. G. R. himself is not pleased with this Standard; He not only tells the
world, That Presbyterians wished and endeavored that that Phrase might not
have been used as it was; 2. Vind. in Answ. to Let. 3.. 3.
But he ridicules it in his first Vindication, in Answer to the tenth Question,
tho^ he made himself ridiculous by doing it, as he did it. The Matter is this:
The Author of the ten Questions finding that this Topic of the inclinations of
the People, was insisted on in the Article as ane Argument for Abolishing
Prelacy, undertook to Demonstrate that, though it were a good Argument, it would
not be found to conclude as the Formers of the Article intended; Aiming,
unquestionably, at no more, than that it was not true, that Prelacy was such a
great and insupportable Grievance, etc. and to make good his undertaking; He
formed his Demonstration, as I have already accounted. Now hear G. R. It is a
new Topic (says he) not often used before, that such a way of Religion is
best, because, etc. This his Discourse will equally prove that Popery is
preferable to Protestantism; For in France, Italy, Spain, etc. not the
Multitude only, but all the Churchmen, etc. are of that way. Thus, I say, G. R.
ridiculed the Argument, though he most ridiculously fancied, he was ridiculing
his Adversary, who never dreamed that it was a good Argument; But could have
been as ready to ridicule it, as another: However, I must confess G. R. did
indeed treat the Argument justly; For

3. Supposing the Argument good, I cannot see how any Church could ever have
Reformed from Popery: For I think, when Luther began in Germany, or Mr. Patrick
Hamilton in Scotland, or Zuinglius or Oecolompadius or Calvin, etc. in their
respective Countries and Churches, they had the inclinations of the People
generally against them: Nay, if I mistake not, our Savior and his Apostles
found it so too, when they at first undertook to propagate our Holy Religion;
and perchance, though the Christian Religion is now Generally Professed in most
Nations in Europe, some of them, might be soon Rid of it, if this Standard were
allowed to take place.

I have heard of some who have not been well pleased with Saint Paul for having
the word, Bishop, so frequently in his Language; and I remember to have been
told that one, (not ane Vnlearn'd one) in a Conference, being pressed with a
Testimony of Irenaeus's (in his 3 Cap. 3 Lib. Adversus Her.) for ane
uninterrupted Succession of Bishops in the Church of Rome, from the Apostles
times at first, denied confidently that any such thing was to be found in
Irenaeus; and when the Book was produced, and he was convinced by ane ocular
Demonstration that Irenaeus had the Testimony which was alleged, he delivered
himself to this purpose, I see it is there, Brother, but would to God it had
not been there! Now, had these People, who were thus offended with St. Paul and
Irenaeus, been at the writing of their Books, is it probable, we should have
had them (with their Imprimatur) as we have them? Indeed, for my part I shall
never consent that the Bible, especially the New Testament, be Reformed
according to some Peoples inclinations: For if that should be allowed, I should
be very much afraid, there would be strange cutting and carving: I should be
very much afraid, that the Doctrine of self-preservation should justle out,
the Doctrine of the Cross; That Might should find more favor than Right, that
the Force and Power should possess themselves of the places, of the Faith and
Patience of the Saints, and that (beside many other places) we might soon see
our last, of (at least) the first seven verses of the 13 th Chapter to the
Romans.

I shall only add one thing more, which G. R.'s naming of France gave me
occasion to think on: It is that the French King and his Ministers, as much as
some People talk of their Abilities, must, for all that, be, but of the
ordinary Size of Mankind; For, if they had been as wise and thinking men, as
some of their Neighbors, they might have easily stopped all the mouths that were
opened against them some years ago, for their Persecuting the Protestants in
that Kingdom; For if they had but narrated in ane Edict, that the Religion of
the Hugonots, was, and had still been a great and insupportable Grievance and
Trouble to their Nation, and contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of
the People, ever since it was Professed amongst them, their work was done. I
believe G. R. himself would not have called the Truth of the Proposition in
Question.

How easy were it to dwell longer on this subject? But I am afraid, I have
noticed it too much already; To conclude then; What is this Standard, else,
than the Fundamental principle of Hobbism, that Holy Scheme for Brutalizing
Mankind, and making Religion, Reason, Revelation, every thing that aims at
making men Manly, to yield unto, at least, to depend on, the Frisks of Flesh
and Blood, or, which is all one, Arrant sense and ungovernable Passion? And so
I leave it. But is the Second Reason any better? If this Church had been
Reformed by Presbyters, would that have been a good Argument for Abolishing
Prelacy? Who sees not that it is much about the same Size with the former?
Indeed I am apt to think, had the several Churches in the world erected their
Governments, by this Rule, we should have had some pretty odd Constitutions;
Thus, the Church collected, of old, amongst the Indians, by Frumentius and
Aedesius, should have been Governed still by Laics; For Frumentius and
Aedesius were no more than Laics when they first converted them. Thus all
Xaverius's Converts and their Successors should have been always Governed by
Jesuits; For it is past Controversy Xaverius was a Jesuit. Thus the Churches of
Iberia and Moravia should have been Governed by Women; For if we may believe
Historians, the Gospel got first footing in these parts, by the Ministry of
Females. Indeed, if the Argument has any strength at all, it seems stronger for
these Constitutions, than for Presbytery, in Scotland, inasmuch as it is more
to Convert Infidels, than only to Reform a Church, which, though Corrupt, is
allowed to be Christian. Nay, which is more and worse, more contrary to the
Inclinations of Scotch Presbyterians, and worse for Scotch Presbytery.

By this way of Reasoning, Episcopacy ought still, hitherto, to have continued,
and hereafter, to continue the Government of the Church of England; Because,
that Church was Reformed, by her Bishops. But, if so, what can be said for the
Solemn League and Covenant? How shall we defend our Forty-three-men and all the
Covenanting work of Reformation, in that Glorious Period? And if it must
continue there, what constant Perils must our Kirk needs be in, especially so
long as both Kingdoms are under one Monarch?

What I have said, I think, might be enough, in all Conscience, for this Fifth
Enquiry; But because it is obvious to the most overly Observation, that the
Framers of the Article have not been so much concerned for the strength and
solidity of the Reasons, they choosed for supporting their Conclusion, as for
their Color and Aptitude to catch the vulgar, and influence the populace; and
because our Presbyterian Brethren have of a long time been, and still are, in
use, to make zealous Declamations and huge noises about Succession to our
Reformers; Because the clamor, on all occasions, that those who stand for
Episcopacy have so much forsaken the principles and maxims of the Reformation,
that they Pay our Reformers so little Respect and Deference; That they have
Secret Grudges, at the Reformation; That they would willingly return to Popery;
And what not? Whereas, they themselves have a Mighty Veneration for those who
Reformed the Church of Scotland; They are their, only, true, and Genuine
Successors; They are the only Men who stand on the foot of the Reformation, the
only sincere and heart-Protestants, the only Real Enemies to Antichrist, etc.
For these Reasons, I say, I shall beg the Readers patience till I have
discoursed this point a little farther. And to deal frankly and plainly,

In the first place, I own, those of the Episcopal persuasion in Scotland, do
not think themselves bound to maintain all the principles, or embrace all the
sentiments, or justify all the Practices of our Reformers. It Is true, I speak
only from my self; I have no Commission from other men to tell their
sentiments; Yet I think the Generality of my Fathers and Brethren will not be
offended, though I speak in the Plural number, and take them into the reckoning.
And therefore, I think, I may safely say,

Tho we think, our Reformers, considering their Education and all their
disadvantages, were very considerable men, and made very considerable progress
in Reforming the Church, yet we do not believe, they had ane immediate
allowance from Heaven for all they said, or did: We believe they were not
endued with the Gifts of infallibility, inerrability or impeccability: We
believe (and they believed so themselves) that they had no Commission, no
Authority, to Establish new Articles of Faith, or make new Conditions of
Salvation; We believe they had no Power, pretended to none, for receding from
the Original and immovable Standard of Christian Religion. In consequence of
this,

We believe and are confident, that where they missed (and being Fallible, it
was very possible for them to do it) of Conformity to that Standard, we are at
Liberty to think otherwise, than they thought; to Profess otherwise than they
professed; We are not bound to follow them. To instance in a few of many things.

We own we cannot allow of the principle of Popular Reformations, as it was
asserted and practiced by our Reformers. We own, indeed, it is not only Lawful,
but Necessary, for every Man to Reform himself both as to Principles and
Practice, when there is Corruption in either; And that, not only without, but
against public Authority, whither Civil or Ecclesiastical. Farther, we own,
it is not only Lawful, but plain and Indispensible Duty in the Governors of the
Church, to Reform her, Acting in their own Sphere, even against humane Laws, in
direct opposition to a thousand Acts of a thousand Parliaments; I say, Acting
and keeping within their own Sphere, i. e. so far as their Spiritual Power can
go, but no farther; Keeping within these their own bounds, they may and should
condemn Heresies, purge the public worship of Corruptions, continue a
Succession of Orthodox Pastors, etc. In a word, do every thing, which is
needful to be done, for putting and preserving the Church, committed to their
Care, in that State of Orthodoxy, Purity and Unity, which Jesus Christ, from
whom they have their Commission, and to whom, they must be Answerable, has
Required by his holy Institution. But we cannot allow them to move
Excentrically, to turn Exorbitant, to stir without their own Vortex. We cannot
allow them to use any other, than Spiritual means; or to make any other than
Spiritual Defenses: We think, they should still perform all dutiful submission
to the Civil Powers; Never Resist by Material Arms; never absolve subjects from
their Allegiance to their Civil Sovereign; Never Preach the Damnable Doctrine
of Deposing Kings for Heresy; never attempt to make those whom they should
make good Christians, bad Subjects: But to teach them the great and fundamental
Doctrine of the Cross, and Exemplify it to them, in their Practice when they
are Called to it. This we Profess: And we do not think it Popery. But our
Reformers taught a quite different Doctrine. Their Doctrine was that it
belonged to the Rabble to Reform Religion publicly, to Reform it by Force; To
Reform the State if it would not Reform the Church; To Extirpate all false
Religion by their Authority; To assume to themselves a Power, to overturn the
Powers that are Ordained of God; To depose them, and set up new Powers in their
stead, Powers that would Protect, that, which they judged to be the best
Religion: Whosoever pleases may see this Doctrine fully taught by Knox, in his
Appellation, p. 22, 23, 24, etc.
and he may see the same principle insisted on by Mr. Hendersone in his Debates
with K. C. I. And who knows not that our Reformation was but too much founded
on this Principle. Herein, I say, we own we have forsaken our Reformers: And
let our Presbyterian Brethren, if they can, Convict us, in this, of Heresy.

In short, our Reformers maintained that the Doctrine of Defensive Arms was
Necessary: That Passive Obedience or Non-resistance was sinful, when People had
means for Resistance. Kn. Hist. 389.396. App. 25.107. Passim.
That Daniel and his Fellows did not Resist, by the Sword, Because God had not
given them the Power and the means. Ibid. 317.
That the Primitive Christians assisted their Preachers, even against the
Rulers and Magistrates, and suppressed Idolatry, wheresoever God gave them
Force. Ibid. 393.
They maintained that the Judicial Laws of Moses (though not adopted into the
Christian Systeme) in many considerable instances, continued still obligatory;
Particularly that the Laws punishing Adultery, Murder, Idolatry with Death,
were binding; That in obedience to these Laws, that Sentence was to be executed
not only on Subjects, but on Sovereigns; Ibid. 391, 392, 393. Passim.
That whosoever executes Gods Law, on such Criminals, is not only innocent, but
in his Duty, though he have no Commission from Man for it. That Samuel's slaying
Agag the fat and delicate King of Amalek; And Elias's killing Baal's Priests;
and Iesabel's false Prophets; and Phineas's striking Zimri and Cosbi, in the
very Act of filthy fornication, were allowable Patterns for private men to
imitate. Ibid. 356, 357.


That all these and more such strange Doctrines were Common and Current amongst
them, I am able to prove at full length, if I shall be put to it. Besides, they
had many other Principles relating to other purposes, which I am persuaded,
were not founded on Scripture, had no Countenance from Catholic Antiquity,
were not aggreeable to sound and solid Reason, which we own, we are so far from
maintaining, that we think our selves bound, both to Profess and Practice the
contrary. And how easy were it to Confute as well as Represent some of Master
Knox's principles which perhaps were peculiar to him?

He fairly and plainly condemned St. Paul and St. James, the first Bishop of
Jerusalem, for their practice, Act. 21.18, 19, etc. Ibid. 100. Spot. 93.
He esteemed every thing that was done in Gods service, without the express
command of his word, vain Religion and Idolatry. App. 2.
He affirmed that all Papists were infidels, both in public and private; Kn.
Hist. 363.
I cannot think he was right in these things.

He had, sometimes, Prayers, which do not seem to me to Savor any thing of a
Christian Spirit: Thus in His Admonition to the Professors of the Truth in
England, after he had insisted on the Persecutions in Queen Mary's time, he had
this Prayer, Kn. App. 68.
God for his great Mercies sake stir up some Phineas, Elias or Jehu that the
blood of abominable Idolaters may Pacify Gods wrath, that it consume not the
whole Multitude, Amen. I must confess it was not without some horror that I
put his own Amen to such a petition. In that same Exhortation he prays, also,
thus, Repress the pride of these blood-thirsty Tyrants; Consume them in thine
anger, according to the Reproach which they have laid against thy Holy Name.
Pour forth thy vengeance upon them, and let our eyes behold the blood of the
Saints required of their hands: Delay not thy vengeance, O Lord, but let death
devour them in haste; Let the Earth swallow them up, and let them go down quick
to the hels; For there is no hope of their Amendment; The Fear and Reverence of
thy Holy Name is quite banished from their hearts; And therefore, yet, again, O
Lord, consume them; Consume them in thine Anger. App. 78.


Let the world judge if such Prayers Savor of a Gospel Spirit. Was this loving
our Enemies, or Blessing them that Curse us, or Praying for them who
despitefully use us, or Persecute us? Was this like forgiving others their
trespasses as we would wish our own trespasses to be forgiven? Was this like
Father forgive them for they know not what they do. Or Lord lay not this sin to
their charge? Did Master Knox consider or know what manner of spirit he was of,
when he offered up such petitions?

I shall only give one other Specimen of Master Knox's Divinity, and because
it is about a point which of late has been so much agitated, I shall not grudge
to give his sentiments somewhat fully: Because, perchance, he may come to have
some credit by it; He may chance to be honored as a Father by the
Providentialists. The Story is this.

He wrote a Book against the Regiment of Women, as he called it: His aim was
principally against Mary Queen of England: When Queen Elizabeth, was raised to
the Throne, some body having told her that he had written such a Book, she
resented it so, that she would not allow him to set his foot on English ground,
when he was returning from Geneva to Scotland, Anno 1559. This grated him not a
little: However, he could not endure to think upon retracting the Positions in
his Book; having once asserted them, he deemed it point of Honor, it seems to
adhere to them; for thus he told Secretary Cecil in a Letter from Diepe, April
10. 1559. Kn. Hist. 226.
He doubted no more of the Truth of his Proposition, than he did, that it was
the voice of God, which, first, did pronounce this Penalty against Women. In
dolor shall thou bear thy Children. And in a Conference with Mary Queen of
Scotland, Anno 1561. He told her, that, to that hour, he thought himself alone
more able to sustain the things affirmed in that Book, than any ten Men, in
Europe, could be, to confute them. Ibid. 315.
But for all this, Queen Elizabeth (as I said) was raised to the Throne of
England; and it was needful her Majesty should not continue to have quarrels
with him: Her Kindness and Countenance, at that time to him and his Projects,
were worth little less than a Deanery; Some Knack was, therefore, to be devised
for making a Reconcilement between his Book and her Regiment; Well! what was it
he fixed on? Why? The Providential Right served him to a Miracle: For thus he
wrote, in his aforementioned Letter to Cecil; If any Man think me either Enemy
to the Person, or yet to the Regiment of her, whom God has now promoted, they
are utterly deceived in me; For the MIRACULOUS work of God, comforting his
afflicted by ane infirm Vessel, I do acknowledge: And I will Obey the Power of
his most potent hand (Raising up whom best pleases his Majesty to suppress
such as fight against his Glory) Albeit that both NATURE and GODS MOST PERFECT
ORDINANCE REPUGNE to such Regiment. More plainly to speak: If Queen Elizabeth
shall Confess that the EXTRAORDINARY DISPENSATION of Gods great Mercy makes
that LAWFUL unto HER, which both NATURE and GODS LAW do DENY unto all Women,
Then shall none in England be more willing to maintain her Lawful Authority
than I shall be: But if (GODS WONDROUS WORK set aside) She ground (as God
forbid) the justness of her Title upon Consuetude, Laws and Ordinances of Men,
then I am assured, that, as such foolish presumption does highly offend Gods
Supreme Majesty, so, I greatly fear, that her Ingratitude shall not long lack
punishment. This was pretty fair, but it was not enough.

He thought it proper to write to that Queen her self, and give her a Dish of
that same Doctrine. His Letter is dated at Edenburg, July 29. 1559. Kn. Hist.
231, 232.
In which having told her, He never intended, by his Book to assert any thing
that might be prejudicial to her Just Regiment, providing she were no^ found
Unfaithful to God, he bespeaks her thus: Ingrate you will be found in the
presence of his Throne, if you transfer the Glory of that Honor in which you
now stand to any other thing than the DISPENSATION of his Mercy, which ONLY
makes that Lawful to your Majesty which NATURE and LAW denies to all Women,
to command and bear Rule over Men -- In Conscience I am compelled to say that
neither the consent of People, the Process of time, nor Multitude of Men can
Establish a Law which God shall approve, but whatsoever he approves, by his
Eternal word that shall be approved, and stay constantly firm: And whatsoever
he Condemns shall be Condemned, though all Men on Earth should travel for the
justification of the same: And therefore, Madam, The only way to retain and
keep the Benefits of God, abundantly of late days, poured upon you, and your
Realm, is, unfeignedly. to render unto God, to his Mercy and undeserved Grace,
the whole Glory of all this your Exaltation: Forget your BIRTH and all TITLE
which thereupon does hang -- It pertains to you to ground the JUSTICE of your
Authority, not on that LAW which from year to year does change, but upon the
ETERNAL PROVIDENCE of him, who CONTRARY to the ORDINARY course of NATURE, and
without your deserving, has exalted your Head. If thus in Gods presence, you
humble your self, I will, with Tongue and Pen, justify your Authority and
Regiment, as the Holy Ghost has justified the same in Deborah, that Blessed
Mother in Israel: But if you neglect (as God forbid) these things, and shall
begin to Brag of your Birth, and to Build your Authority and your Regiment upon
your own Law, flatter you who so lists, your Felicity shall be short, etc.
Let Contentious People put what Glosses they please on Bishop Overal's
Convocation Book, sure I am, here is the Providential Right so plainly taught
that no Glosses can obscure it. Here it is maintained, in plain terms, and
Resolutely, in opposition, to all the Laws, not only of Men, but of God and
Nature.

Thus I have given a taste of such principles as the Prelatists, in Scotland,
profess they disown, though maintained by our Reformers: It had been easy to have
instanced in many more; But these may be sufficient for my purpose, which was
not in the least, to throw dirt on our Reformers (to whom I am as willing as
any man to pay a due reverence) but to stop the mouth of impertinent clamor,
and (...) the world have occasion to consider if it is such a scandalous thing,
to think otherwise, than our Reformers thought, as our Brethren endeavor on
all occasions, to persuade the populace: For these principles of our Reformers
which I have mentioned in Relation to Civil Governments, are the principles in
which we have most forsaken them: And let the world judge, which set of
principles has most of Scandal in it: Let the world judge, I say, whither their
principles or ours participate most of the Faith, the Patience, the
Self-denial, etc. of Christians: Whither principles have least of the love of
the world, and most of the image of Christ in them: Whither principles have
greatest affinity with the principles and practices of the Apostles, and their
immediate successors, in the most afflicted, and, by consequence, the most
incorrupted times of Christianity: Whither principles have a more natural
tendency toward the security of Governments and the peace of Societies, and
seem most effectual for advancing the power of Godliness, and propagating the
Profession and the life of Christianity. I further, subjoyn these two things.

1. I challenge our Presbyterian Brethren to convict us of the Scandal of
receding from our Reformers in any one principle which they maintained, in
Common, with the Primitive Church; the Universal Church of Christ, before she
was tainted with the Corruptions of Popery: And if we have not done it, (as I
am Confident our Brethren shall never be able to prove, we have,) our receding
from our Reformers, as I take it, ought to be no prejudice against us. I think
the Authority of the Catholic Church, in the days of her indisputed Purity and
Orthodoxy, ought, in all Reason to be deemed preferable to the Authority of our
Reformers; especially considering that they themselves professed to own the
Sentiments of the Primitive Church, as a part, at least, of the Complexe Rule
of Reformation, as I have already proved.

2. I challenge our Presbyterian Brethren to instance in so much as one
principle, in which we have Deserted our Reformers, wherein, our Deserting them
can, by any Reasonable, by any Colorable construction, be interpreted ane
approach toward Popery. I think, no Man who understands any thing of the
Popish Controversies can readily allow himself the Impudence to say, that, to
dislike Tumultuary Reformations, and deposing Sovereign Princes, and subverting
Civil Governments, etc. upon the score of Religion, is, to be for Popery; Or
that the Doctrine of Submission to Civil Authority, the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience or Non-resistance, or (which I take to be much about one, in the
present case) the Doctrine of the Cross, are Popish Doctrines; Or that to
Condemn the Traitorous Distinction between the Person and the Authority of the
Civil Magistrate, as it is commonly made use of, by some People, and as it is
Condemned by the Laws of both Kingdoms, is, to turn either Papistical or
Iesuitical. Let our Brethren, if they can, Purge their own Doctrines, in these
matters, of all Consanguinity with Popery. And now, after all this,

3. I would desire my Readers to remember, that this Artifice of Prejudicating
against principles, because different from, or inconsistent with, the
principles of our Reformers, is none of our Contrivance; Our Presbyterian
Brethren, not we, were the First, who set on foot this Popular, though very
pitiful way of Arguing; By all the Analogies, then, of equitable and just
Reasoning, they ought to endure the Trial of their own Test. And this brings me
to Enquire whither they have stuck so precisely by the principles of our
Reformers, that they are in Bona Fide to insist on such a Topic? And I think
they will not be found to be so, if I can make it appear that they have
Notoriously deserted the principles of our Reformers.

I. In the Faith. II. In the Worship. III. In the Discipline. And IV. In the
Government of the Church.
I. I say they have forsaken our Reformers as to the Faith of the Church. Our
Reformers digested a Confession of Faith, Anno 1560. They got it Ratifyed in
Parliament that same year; It was again Ratifyed, Anno 1567. and in many
subsequent Parliaments. It continued still to be the public, Authorized
Standard of the Faith of this National Church, for more than eighty years. Our
Reformers designed it to be a perpetual and unalterable Standard of the Faith
of this National Church, for ever. When the Barons and Ministers gave in their
Petition, to the Parliament, for ane Establishment of the Reformation, Anno
1560. They were called upon and Commandment given unto them, to draw into plain
and several Heads, the sum of that Doctrine, which they would maintain, and
would desire the Parliament to Establish, as wholesome, true, and only
necessary to be believed, and to be received within the Realm: And, they
willingly accepted the Command, and, within four days, presented the
Confession, which was Ratified, Kn. 262. Pet. 220.
and that its Establishment might pass with the greater solemnity and formality
of Law, The Earl Marshal protested that it might never be altered. Kn. 279.
Yet, now,

Our Presbyterian Brethren have set up a quite different Standard of Faith,
namely, the Westminster Confession, and have got it, now, Ratifyed by this
current Parliament, Anno 1690. (it was never, before, Ratified by Act of
Parliament) I call it a quite different Standard of Faith: Indeed, whosoever
diligently compares both Confessions, shall readily find it such; He shall not
only find many things kept out of the Westminster Confession, which are in the
Confession of our Reformers; and many things put in the Westminster Confession,
which were not in the Confession of our Reformers; and many things, nicely,
minutely, precisely and peremptorily determined, and that in the most
Mysterious matters, in the Westminster Confession, which our Reformers thought
fit (as was indeed proper) to express in very General and Accommodable Terms:
But he shall meet with not a few plain, evident and irreconcilable
Contradictions: And now, by this present Parliament, in its Last Session,
particularly, upon the twelfth day of June, Anno 1693, it is statuted and
ordained, That no Person be admitted, or continued, for hereafter, to be a
Minister or Preacher, within this Church, unless he subscribe the Westminster
Confession, declaring it to be the Confession of his Faith; and that he owns
the Doctrine therein contained to be the true Doctrine, to which he will
constantly adhere. And by unavoidable consequence, he is bound to subscribe to,
and own, God knows how, many propositions, not only not required nor professed
by our Reformers; but directly contrary to their Faith and principles: And now,
let the world judge if our Presbyterian Brethren are the Successors of our
Reformers in point of Faith.

II. They have forsaken them, yet more, in the point of Worship: and here a
vast field opens; For to this head I reduce (artificially or inartificially, is
no great matter, if I adduce nothing but wherein our Brethren have deserted our
Reformers) the public Prayers, the public Praises, the public Preaching of
the word, the administration of the Sacraments, etc. with all their Ceremonies,
Solemnities and Circumstances, etc. Generally, whatever uses to be comprehended
in Liturgies.

1. In the General, our Reformers were far from Condemning Liturgies, or
Set-Forms in the public Offices of the Church. There Is nothing more plain,
than that they preferred public Composures to these that were private:
Composures digested by the public Spirit of the Church, to Composures digested
by the private Spirit of particular Ministers; and Premeditated and well
digested Composures, though performed by private persons, to the, too frequently,
Rash, indigested, incomposed performances of the Extemporary Gift. They
preferred Offices which were the productions of grave, sedate, well pondered
thoughts, to Offices which were mostly the productions of Animal Heat, and
warmth of Fancy.

John Knox himself (one who had as much Fire in his temper, and was as much
inclined to have given scope to the Extemporary Spirit, I am apt to think, as
any of our Reformers) had even a set form of Grace or Thanksgiving after meat,
Kn. 366.
he had a set-form of Prayer for the public, after Sermon, Kn. 384.
and he had set-forms of Prayers read, every day in his Family. Spot. 266.


In conformity to this principle, ou^ Reformers for seven years, together, used
the Liturgy of the Church of England, as I have fully proven.

When (by the importunity and persuasions of John Knox, principally, I am sure,
if not only) they resolved to part with the English Liturgy, they continued
still as far as ever from Condemning Liturgies. They did not lay it aside to
take up none; They choosed another to succeed it; they choosed that which went,
then generally, under the name of the Order of Geneva, or the Book of Common
Order; Since, under the name of Knox's Liturgy, or the Old Scottish Liturgy:
This Liturgy continued in use, not only, all the time, the Government of the
Church subsisted by Imparity, after the Reformation; But even, for many Decads
of years, after the Presbyterian Spirit and Party turned prevalent.

It was so universally received and used, and in so good esteem, that, when it
was moved by some in the Assembly holden at Burnt-Island, in March, Anno 1601.
That there were sundry Prayers in it, which were not convenient for these
times, and a change was desirable, the Assembly rejected the motion, and
Thought good, that the Prayers, already, contained in the Book, should neither
be altered nor deleted; But if any Brother would have any other Prayers, added,
as more proper for the times, they should first present them to be tried, and
allowed, by the General Assembly. MS. Called. 456. Pet. 558.
Here, indeed, was caution and concern about the public worship worthy of a
General Assembly. Nay,

The First-Rate Presbyterians themselves used the Book, as punctually, as any
other People. When Mr. Robert Bruce (of whose zeal for the good cause, no Man,
I think, can doubt) was relegated to Innerness, Anno 1605. He remained there
four years, Teaching every Sabbath, before noon, and every Wednesday; And
exercised at the Reading of the Prayers every other night. Called. 496.
And Master John Strimgeour (another prime Champion for the cause) when he
appeared before the High Commission, March 1. Anno 1620, and was challenged for
not putting in practice the five Articles of Perth; Particularly for not
Ministering the Eucharist to the People on their knees, answered, there is no
warrantable form directed or approven by the Kirk, besides that which is extant
in Print, before the Psalm Book, ( i. e. the old Liturgy) according to which,
as I have always done, so now, I Minister that Sacrament. Called. 748.
In short,

It continued to be in use even after the beginning of the Horrid Revolution,
in the days of King Charles the First, and many old People, yet alive, remember
well, to have seen it used indifferently, both by Presbyterians and Prelatists.
But it is not so now.

Our Modern Presbyterians do not only Condemn the Liturgy of the Church of
England (used as I say by our Reformers) calling it a Dry, lifeless service, a
spiritless, powerless service; ane unwarrantable service; ane ill-mumbled mass;
a farce of Popish Dregs and Relics; a Rag of Romish Superstition and
Idolatry; and God knows how many ill things: But they Generally Condemn all
Liturgies, all set-forms of public worship and devotion; They will admit of
none: All to them are alike odious and intolerable.

Herein, I think, there is a palpable Recession from the principles of our
Reformers, about the public and solemn worship of the Church; and that in a
most weighty and material instance: But this is not all; They have not only
deserted our Reformers, and Condemned them as to Forms; But they have made very
considerable and important Recessions from them, as to the matter, both in the
substance and circumstances of Liturgical Offices; and here I must descend to
particulars.

1. Then, our present Presbyterians observe no Forms in their public Prayers,
either before, or after Sermon; For the most part, they observe no Rules; They
Pray by no Standard; Nay they do not stick by their own Directory: All must be
Extemporary work; and the newer, the odder, the more surprising both as to
matter and manner, the better. If any Brother has not that fire in his temper,
that heat in his blood, that warmth in his Animal-spirits, that sprightlyness
and fervor in his fancy, or that readiness of elocution etc. If he wants any
one or two of these many Graces, which must concur for accomplishing one with
the ready Gift, and shall adventure to digest his thought, and provide himself
with a Premeditated Form of his own making; He shall be concerned likewise to
be so wise and wary, as to provide himself, either with a variety of such
Forms, or many disguises for his one form, or he shall run the hazard of the
success of his Ministry, and his Reputation to boot; He is a Gone-man if the
Zealots of the gang smell it out, that he prayed by Premiditation. Forethought
Prayers are little less Criminal, than forethought Felony: He wants the
spirit, and deserves to be ranked amongst the Antichristian Crew of
Formalists. Nay, so much are they against set-forms, that it is Popery, for any
thing I know, to say the Lords Prayer.

Our Reformers never met for public worship, but they used it once or oftener;
And they used it as in obedience to our Saviors Commandment. Take, for a
taste, these instances, which I have collected from the old Liturgy.

The Prayer for the whole Estate of Christ's Church, appointed to be said after
Sermon, is Concluded thus, In whose name we make our humble petitions unto
thee, even as he has taught us, saying, Our Father, etc. Scot. Liturgy page 27.


Another Prayer to be said after Sermon, has the Lords Prayer in the very bosom
of it. 39.


The Prayer to be used when God threatens his Judgments, concludes thus, --
Praying unto thee with all humility and submission of minds, as we are taught
and commanded to Pray, saying, Our Father. etc. p. 53.


The Prayer to be used in time of Affliction, thus, Our only Savior and
Mediator, in whose name we Pray unto thee as we are taught, saying, Our Father,
etc. p. 56.


The Prayer at the Admission of a Superintendent or a Minister, thus -- Of whom
the perpetual increase of thy Grace, we crave, as by thee our Lord, King, and
only Bishop, we are taught to Pray, Our Father, etc. p. 74.


The Prayer for the Obstinate (in the order for Excommunication) thus, -- These
thy Graces, O Heavenly Father, and farther, as thou know to be expedient for
us, and for thy Church Universal, we call for, unto thee, even as we are
taught, by our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, saying, Our Father, etc. p. 104.


The last Prayer before Excommunication, thus, -- This we ask of thee, O
Heavenly Father, in the boldness of our Head and Mediator Jesus Christ, praying
as he has taught us, Our Father, etc. p. 109.


The Confession of sins, etc. in time of public Easts, thus, -- We flee to the
obedience and perfect Justice of Jesus Christ our only Mediator -- Praying as
he has taught us, saying, Our Father, etc. 170.


The Prayer of Consecration in Baptism, thus, -- May be brought as a lively
Member of his Body, unto the full fruition of thy joys, in the Heavens, where
thy Son, our Savior Christ Reigns, world without end; In whose name, we
Pray, as he has taught us, saying, Our Father, etc. p. 189.


So many of the Prayers used by our Reformers, were concluded with the Lords
Prayer: And it is obvious to any body that sometimes 3 or 4 of them were to be
said at one Assembly: And still when the Lords Prayer is brought in, you see,
it is plainly in Obedience to our Saviors Command, from which, it is clear our
Reformers looked on the using it, as, not only Lawful, but, Necessary. Our
present Presbyterians will not only, not use it, but they Condemn and writ
against the using of it. Indeed,

They have not retained so much as one Form, except that of Blessed use by
Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 13.14. This indeed they commonly say (though I am not sure
they say it in the Form of a Blessing) before the Dissolution of the Assembly:
But why they have kept this and rejected all other Forms; or, how they can
reconcile the retaining of this, with the rejection of all other Forms, I
confess I am not able to tell: Let themselves answer for that, as well as for,
retaining set-forms of Praise while they Condemn set forms of Prayer.

2. Our Reformers, in their public Assemblies, never omitted to make a solemn
and public Confession of their Faith, by rehearsing that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed: It was said after the Prayer for the whole Estate of
Christ's Chruch, and it was introduced thus, Almighty and Everliving God,
vouchsafe we beseech thee, to grant us perfect continuance in thy lively Faith,
augmenting the same in us daily, till we grow to the full measure of our
perfection in Christ, whereof we make our Confession, saying, I believe in God
the Father, etc. Herein they are entirely deserted by our present Presbyterians
also.

3. The Preaching of the word may be performed two ways; By the public Reading
of the Scriptures; and by Sermons, etc. founded on the Scriptures: Our present
Presbyterians, in both these, have Receded from our Re^^^mers.

1. As for the Reading of the Scriptures, our Reformers delivered themselves
thus, in the First Book of Discipline, Head 9. Spot. 170.
We think necessary that every Church have a Bible in English, and that the
People conveen to hear the Scriptures Read and Interpreted; that by frequent
Reading and Hearing, the gross ignorance of the People may be removed; And we
judge it most expedient, that the Scriptures be read in order, that is, that
some one Book of the Old and New Testament be begun and followed forth to the
end. For a good many years after the Reformation there was ane order of men,
called Readers, who supplied the want of Ministers in many Parishes: Their
Office was to Read the Scriptures and the Common Prayers: The Scriptures
continued to be Read in Churches for more than eighty years, after the
Reformation: In many Parishes, the old Bibles are still extant, from which the
Scriptures were Read: Even the Directory it self, introduced, not before the
year 1645. appointed the Scriptures to be Read publicly in Churches, one
Chapter out of each Testament, at least, every Sunday before Sermon, as being
part of the public worship of God, and one mean^ Sanctified by him for the
Edifying of his People Yet, now, what a Scandal would it be to have the
Scriptures Read in the Presbyterian Churches? The last days Sermons, taken from
the mouth of the powerful Preacher, by the inspired singers of Godly George or
Gracious Barbara, in some Churches of no mean Note, have been Deemed more
Edifying than the Divine Oracles. The Scriptures must not be touched but by the
Man of God, who can interpret them; And he must Read no more than he is, just
then, to interpret: What shall I say? Let Protestant Divines Cant as they
please about the Perspicuity of the Scriptures, it is a dangerous thing to have
them Read publicly without Orthodox Glosses, to keep them close and true to
the principles of the Godly: And who knows but it might be expedient to wrap
them up again in the unknown tongue? But enough of this.

2. As for Sermons, etc. The First Book of Discipline gives us the sentiment of
our Reformers, thus, The Sunday, in all Towns, must precisely be observed;
before and after noon; before noon, the word must be Preached, Sacraments
Administered, etc. After noon, the Catechism must be taught, and the young
Children examined thereupon, in audience of all the People. Spot. 168.
This continued the manner of the Church of Scotland, for full twenty years,
after the Reformation: For I find no mention of afternoons Sermons, till the
year 1580, that it was enacted (by that same General Assembly which Condemned
Episcopacy,) That all Pastors or Ministers should Diligently travel with their
Flocks to conveen unto Sermon, after noon, on Sunday; Both they that are in
Landward, and in Burgh, as they will answer unto God. MS. Pet. 40^.
The whole Kingdom knows, Lectures before the forenoons Sermon, were not
introduced, till the days of the Covenant and Directory; Yet, now, a mighty
stress is laid upon them, and I my self have been told, that they were one good
Reason for forsaking the Episcopal Communion, where they were not used, and
going over to the Presbyterians, where they were to be had. I am not to condemn
a diligent instruction of the People: But to speak freely, I am very much
persuaded the Method of our Reformers, in having but one Sermon, and
Catechizing, after noon, was every way as effectual for Instructing the People
in the substantial knowledge of our Holy Religion, and pressing the practice of
it, as any method has been in use since; Much more might be said on this
subject; But from what I have said, it is plain there is a great Dissimilitude
between our Modern Presbyterian and our Reformers even in this point; and that
is enough for my purpose.

4. They have as little stuck by the Pattern of our Reformers in the Office of
Praise: Our Reformers, beside the Psalms of David had, and used, several other
Hymns in Meter: They had the Ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, the Creed,
Veni Creator, the humble suit of a sinner, the Lamentation of a sinner, the
Complaint of a sinner, the Magnificat, the Nunc Dimittis, etc. They never used
to conclude their Psalms without some Christian Doxology: The Gloria Patri was
most generally used: In the old Psalm Book, it is turned into all the different
kinds of Measures, into which the Psalms of David are put, that it might still
succeed, in the conclusion, without changing the Tune: It was so generally
used, that, (as Doctor Burnet in his Second Conference, Edit. Glasg. p. 182.
tells us) even a Presbyterian General took it in very ill part, when it begun
to be disused: Yet, now, nothing in use, with our present Presbyterians but the
Psalms of David; and these too, for the most part, without Discrimination. The
Gloria Patri, recovered from Desuetude, at the last Restitution of Episcopacy,
and generally used in the Episcopal Assemblies, these thirty years past, was a
Mighty Scandal to them; So great, that even such as came to Church, hanged
their Heads and sat silent, generally, when it came to that part of the Office.

Having mentioned Doctor Burnet's Conferences, I will transcribe his whole
Period, because some other things than the Gloria Patri are concerned in it.
When some Designers (says he) for popularity in the Western Parts of that Kirk
did begin to disuse the Lord Prayer in worship, and the singing the conclusion
or Doxologie after the Psalm, and the Ministers kneeling for Private Devotion,
when he entered the Pulpit, the General Assembly took this in very ill part;
And, in the Letter they wrote to the Presbyteries, complained sadly of a Spirit
of Innovation was beginning to get into the Kirk, and to throw these Laudible
practices out of it, mentioning the three I named which are commanded still to
be practiced, and such as refused Obedience, are appointed to be conferred
with, in order to the giving of them satisfaction; And if they continued
untractable, the Presbyteries were to proceed against them as they should be
answerable to the next General Assembly. Thus he; and this Letter, he said, he
could produce, Authentically Attested: I doubt not, he found it amongst his
Uncle Waristown's Papers, who was Scribe to the Rampant Assemblies from the
year 1638, and downward. I wish the Doctor had been at pains to have published
more of them; If he had employed himself that way, I am apt to think he had
done his Native Country better service, than he has done her Sister Kingdom by
publishing Pastoral Letters to be used, he knows how; But even from what he has
given us, We may see how much the disusing of the Lords Prayer, and the
Doxologie is a late Innovation, as well as a Recession from the Pattern of our
Reformers. And as for the decent and Laudable custom of kneeling for private
Devotion, used by the Minister when he entered the Pulpit; It may be reckoned

5. Another Presbyterian late Recession. It is certain it was used by our
Reformers; It is as certain, it continued in use, till after both Covenants
were sworn; The National I mean, and the Solemn League and Covenant; It was not
turned Authoritatively (I intend no more than the Equivocal Authority which
Schismatical Assemblies pretend to) into disuse till the General Assembly 1645.
Even, then, it was not Condemned as either superstitious or indecent; It was
laid aside, only, in compliance with the English Presbyterians. By that
Assembly, a Committee was appointed, to give their opinion, about keeping a
greater Uniformity in this Kirk, in the practice and observation of the
Directory, in some points of public worship: And the fourth Article to which
they Agreed, was this* word for word, It is also the Judgment of the Committee,
that the Ministers bowing in the Pulpit, though a Lawful Custom in this Kirk,
be, hereafter, laid aside, for satisfaction of the desires of the Reverend
Divines in the Synod of England, and Uniformity with that Kirk so much endeared
to us. And then follows the Assembly's approbation of all the Articles
digested by the Committee. Here, it is evident this Assembly owned it to be a
Lawful Custom: A former Assembly called it Laudible. And yet it is Scandalous
if not Superstitions to our present Presbyterians. Let me add as ane Appendage
to this,

6. Another (in my opinion) very decent, and commendable Custom, which
obtained in Scotland, generally, till the latter times of Presbytery. This,
when People entered the Church, they commonly uncovered their Heads, as
entering into the House of God; And generally they put up a short Prayer to God
(some kneeling, some standing, as their convenience allowed them) deeming it
very becoming to do so, when they came thus into the place of Gods special
presence and his public worship. This custom was so universal, that the
vestiges of it may be, even yet, observed amongst old People, educated before
the Donatism of the Covenant, who continue to retain it; Now adays, it is plain
Superstition to a Presbyterian, not to enter the Church, with his Head covered.
Mas John himself does it as mannerly as the coursest Cobbler in the Parish. In
he steps, uncovers not till in the Pulpit, claps straight on his Breech, and
within a little falls to work as the Spirit moves him. All the Congregation
must sit close in the time of Prayer; Clap on their Bonnets in the time of
Sermon, etc. This is the way; and it brings me in mind of ane observe, ane old
Gentleman has frequently repeated to me, which was, that he found it impossible
to perform Divine worship without Ceremonies; For (said he) the Presbyterians
themselves, who pretend to be against all Ceremonies, seem, even to
Superstition, precise, in observing the Ceremonies of the Breech, etc. But --

Thus I have represented, in some instances, how our Presbyterian Brethren have
deserted our Reformers in the ordinary stated parts of public worship. I
proceed now to the Sacraments.

7. Then, our Reformers had not only a set form for Administering the Sacrament
of Baptism; But, beside the Father of the Child, they allowed of Sureties or
Sponsors. This is plain from the conclusion of the discourse concerning the
nature and necessity of Baptism, in the Old Liturgy; For, the Minister, there,
addressed to the Father and the Sponsors, thus; Finally to the intent that we
may be assured that you the Father and the Sureties, consent to the performance
hereof (of the conditions mentioned before) Declare, here, before the Face of
this Congregation, the sum of the Faith wherein you believe, and will instruct
this Child. After this there is this Rubric; Then the Father, or, in his
absence, the Godfather, shall rehearse the Articles of his Faith, which done,
the Minister expounds the same as follows. That which follows is, a large
explanation of the Apostles Creed, etc. Thus it was appointed in the old
Liturgy; and thus it was practiced Universally for some scores of years.

But our Modern Presbyterians do not only abhor all Set-forms, as I have said,
but, to name Sponsors or Godfathers, to them is to incur the Scandal of Popery.
The Apostles Creed is no agreeable Standard of the Christian Faith, into which
one is initiated by Baptism. They cannot endure to hear of it, in this Office.
Whosoever presents a Child to them to be Baptized, must promise to bring up the
Child in the Faith, as it is contained in the Westminster Confession, and the
larger and shorter Catechisms. This they Require Generally: Not a few Require
that the Child be educated in the Faith of the Solemn League and Covenant.

7. About the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I find many considerable
alterations. Take these for a Taste.

1. It was Administered by our Reformers, by a set-form, contained in the Old
Liturgy: It continued to be so Administered for more than 60 years, by
Presbyterians themselves, as I have observed already in the instance of
Scrimgeour.

2. As for the frequency of this most Christian Office; The First Book of
Discipline, Head 9th, Spot. 169, 170.
Determined thus: Four times in the year, we think sufficient, for
Administration of the Lords Table -- Albeit we deny not, but every Church for
Reasonable causes, may change the time, and Minister the same, oftener. The
General Assembly holden at Edinburgh, December. 25. 1562, Ordained, the Communion
to be Ministered four times in the year in Burghs, and twice, in Landward, MS.
Pet. 233.
The First Rubric in the Office for the Lords Supper, in the Old Liturgy,
intimates it was oftener administered, for thus it runs; Upon the day that the
Lords Supper is Ministered, which commonly is used once a Month, or as often as
the Congregation shall think expedient, etc.

3. Our Reformers had no preparation Sermons on the Saturndays immediately
before the Adminstration of the Sacrament: No vestige of any such Sermons in
the Old Liturgy, nor in the Acts of the Old Assemblies, nor in any of our
Histories. It is plain, such Sermons were not required by the Authority of any
(even Presbyterian) Assembly till the year 1645. Then, indeed, amongst the
Articles prepared by the Committee, mentioned before, I find this the seventh
Branch of the Third Article, which was about the Lords Supper, That there be
one Sermon of Preparation, delivered in the ordinary place of public worship,
upon the day immediately preceding. And it is clear from the style of these
Articles that this was new; and had not been practiced, at least generally,
before.

4. Our Reformers thought as little on Thanksgiving Sermons on the immediately
succeeding Moondays. Indeed such were not required, no not by that Innovating
Assembly, 1645. All it has about Thanksgiving Sermons, is in the 8 th Branch of
the aforesaid Article, which is this, That before the serving of the Tables
there be only one Sermon delivered to those who are to Communicate, and, that,
in the Kirk, where the service is to be performed: And that, in the same Kirk,
there be one Sermon of Thanksgiving, after the Communion is ended.

5. No Vestige of Assistant Ministers at the Administration of this Sacrament,
in the practice of our Reformers; So far as I can learn, it was that same
Assembly 1645 which first allowed this, also, in the Sixth Branch of the
aforesaid Article, which is this; That when the Communion is to be Celebrated
in a Parish, one Minister may be employed for assisting the Minister of the
Parish, or at the most two. Indeed, as our Reformers digested the matter, there
was no use for any; The Minister of the Parish, was sufficient, alone, for all
the work; for they were careful that it might be no insupportable task; as,
sure, it ought not to be. They neither made it such as might exhaust a man's
Spirits, nor over-burden his Memory, etc. Particularly.

6. In the time of Celebration, they had no Exhortations at all, neither
Extemporary nor Premeditated; But the First Book of Discipline appointed thus,
During the Action we think it necessary that some comfortable places of
Scripture be Read, which may bring in mind, the Death of the Lord Jesus, and
the benefits of the same; For seeing, in that Action, we ought Chiefly to
Remember the Lords Death; We judge the Scriptures, making mention of the same,
most apt to stir up our dull minds, then, and at all times. The Ministers at
their disoretion may appoint the places to be Read as they think good. And in
the Old Liturgy, the Rubric appoints thus; During which time (the time the
Communicants are at the Table, and participating of the Elements) some place of
Scripture is Read, which does lively set forth the Death of Christ, etc. This
continued the custom of the whole Church for more than eighty years, after the
Reformation, without any attempts to Innovate, till the often mentioned
Assembly 1645. Then, and not till then, it was Enacted, That there should be no
Reading in the time of Communicating; But, that the Minister making a short
Exhortation at every Table, thereafter, there should be silence, during the
time of the Communicants Receiving, except only when the Minister should
express some few short sentences, suitable to the present condition of the
Communicants, in the Receiving, that they might be incited and quickened in
their Meditations, in the Action.

7. Our Reformers never so much as once dreamed of keeping Congregational
Fasts, some day of the week, before the Celebration of the Sacrament; Nor of
shutting the doors of all the neighboring Churches, that day, it was to be
Celebrated in any Parish Church; Nor of having so many Sermons in the
Churchyard where the Office was performed. Indeed, no such customs entered
the thoughts of the very Assembly 1645. At least, if they thought on them, it
was rather to Condemn, than Approve them. Nothing at all, indeed, about the
Preparatory Fast. But the other two are expressly discharged, or, at least,
guarded against: For the ninth Branch of the Committees Article is this, When
the Parishioners are so Numerous that their Parish Kirk cannot contain them, so
that there is a Necessity to keep out such of the Parish, as cannot
conveniently have place; In that case, the Brother, who assist the Minister of
the Parish, may be ready, if need be, to give a word of Exhortation, in some
convenient place appointed for that purpose, to those of that Parish, who, that
day, are not to Communicate, which must not be begun till the Sermon delivered
in the Kirk be concluded. And the eleventh this, That the Minister who comes
to assist have a special care to provide his own Parish, lest, otherwise, while
he is about to Minister comfort to others, his own Flock be left destitute of
Preaching.

Thus the Eucharist was Celebrated by our Reformers; and thus, it was Innovated
by the Presbyterian General Assembly, Anno 1645. Well! what is the Method of
our present Presbyterians? Whether do they keep by the Measures of our
Reformers, or their own Assembly 1645? Or have they receded from both? I shall
give ane account of their Method, as just and faithful as I can, and let the
world judge.

The Practice of our present Presbyterians is this. In many places,
particularly in the West, a Fast is kept on some day of the week, before the
Sacrament is Celebrated: The Congregation Meets: A Lecture, and two long
Sermons are Preached: Long enough, Good enough; But if they are not long, they
are good for nothing. In all Parishes, on Saturnday, afternoon, another long
Sermon in the Church, and, in most places, a long one too, in the Churchyard,
Preached by some Neighbour-Brother.

On Sunday (the day on which the Communion is given) six, seven, eight, ten or
twelve Ministers, leaving their own Churches empty, that day, and without
Divine Service, conveen at the Church where the Sacrament is to be Administered:
The People of their Parishes, deprived of the public worship, at home, resort
thither, frequently also. If the Minister who gives the Sacrament, is a
Gracious Man, a man of renowned zeal for the good Cause; most of the First-Rate
zealots, both Masculine and Feminine, especially, the Females of the first
Magnitude, the Ladies, who live within 6, 10, 16, 20, 30 miles distance, must
be there also.

In the morning, pretty early, some two or three hours sooner than ordinary,
they fall to work. The Minister of the Parish himself, commonly Preaches a long
long Sermon in the Church; After some two hours and ane half, sometimes three
full hours, spent in hard labor (too hard for sides that are not very
substantial) He descends from the Pulpit, to the Communion Table, there he has
another long Discourse, before he Consecrates the Elements; That done, he
Consecrates, not by a form, that were highly scandalous and unspiritual, but,
as the ready Gift serves him. After that, ane Exhortation, which wants nothing
but the Formality of having a Text Read, to make it a pretty long Sermon. Then
the Elements are distributed to those who are set about the Table; and that is
called, the First Table. These, having participated, arise and remove; Others
plant themselves about the Table: Sometimes the Parish-Minister serves this
Second Table also; But if he does not, a fresh Brother succeeds, with another
long Exhortation; and so onward, so long as there are People who have not sat
down, at every Table (and sometimes there may be 10, 12, 14 Tables, more or
fewer, as it happens) there is a new long Exhortation, before the Destribution
of the Elements; and shorter ones in the time the Communicants (who receive not
from the Minister, but from one another, sitting 50, 60, 70, 80, etc. about the
Table) are eating and drinking. After all the Tables are served the Minister of
the Parish ascends the Pulpit, again declaims another long Harangue, then
Prays, etc. and all this, without Papers, from the Magazine of his Memory,
unless it be sometimes supplied from the stores of the Extemporary Spirit. But
this is not all.

All this time, the Sermons are thundering in the Churchyard, sometimes by
pairs together, if the Confluence is great: Brother succeeds after Brother, and
there is Sermon upon Sermon, indeficient Sermoning, till the Congregation
within the Church is dissolved, which is not, for the most part, till much of
the day is spent, indeed cannot readily be, considering what work there is of
it.

The Congregation dissolved, there is a little breathing time; Then the Bell
rings again, and the work is renewed: Some other Brother than the Parish
Minister mounts the Pulpit in the Church, in the afternoon; and Preaches a
Thanksgiving Sermon, and the rest are as busy in the Church yard as ever: And
then on Moondays morning the Preaching work is fallen to a fresh and pursued
vigorously, one Preaching in the Church, another in the Church yard, as
formerly. I am sure I am just in all this Account; I could prove it by many
instances, if it were needful, but I shall only name two. Thus,

Last year when this Sacrament was Celebrated at St. Cuthberts, where the
renowned Mr. David Williamsone Exercises, on the three days, viz. Saturday,
Sunday and Moonday, in the Church and Churchyard, there were no fewer than 12
or 13 formal Sermons, besides all the Incidental Harrangues, and all the
Exhortations at the Tables, etc. And when the Sacrament was given in the New
Church in the Canon-gate in September, or the beginning of October 1692, there
was much about the same number. I my self overheard parts of some three or four
which were Preached in the Churchyard: And that which made me have the deeper
impressions of the unaccountableness of this their Method, was, that all who
were in the Churchyard, on Sunday, at least, and four times as many, might,
that day, have had room enough in the Churches of Edinburgh, which were at no
great distance: But, it seems, the solemnity of Churchyard Sermons, is now
become necessary on such occasions.

I have narrated nothing in this strange account (I say) but what is Notorious
Matter of Fact: All this Parade they have, ordinarily, even in the Country;
and though there are but some scores, or, at most, but some hundreds to
Communicate, yet the Communion is not Solemn enough, there is a Cloud upon the
Ministers reputation, something or other is wrong, if there are not some
thousands of Spectators.

I doubt not, when strangers Read this account, they will think it a very
surprising one: And no wonder, for, not to insist how much they have receded,
not only from the Rules and Practices of our Reformers, but even from the
Determinations of their own General Assembly 1645; not only receded from them,
but, almost, in every particular, run quite Counter to them: not to insist on
what occasions, may be given to much scandal, and many wickednesses, by such
indigested, disorderly, confused, and mixed Convocations: For who knows not that
hundreds, generally, strangers to one another, who have no sense of, no concern
for, no care about serious Religion, may meet, on such occasions, for Novelty,
for Curiosity, for Intrigues not to be named, for a thousand such sinister
ends? Not to insist on these things, I say, though they are of no small
consequence: What a vast difference is there between such Communions, and the
Orderly and Devout Communions of the Primitive Church? What would the Ancient
Lights and Guides of the Christian Church, who would suffer none to stay in the
Church but such as were to Participate, say, if they saw such promiscuous Routs
assembled, and mostly, for no other end, than making a Spectacle of such a
Venerable Mystery? Is not such unaccountable Parade much liker to the Popish
Processions, than the Devout Performances of the purer times of Genuine
Christianity? How impossible were it, at this rate, to Celebrate the Sacrament,
once a Month in every Parish Church? How much more impossible to restore it to
its due and proper frequency? How far is this from looking on this Holy
Sacrament, as ane ordinary, though a very signal part of Divine worship? Or
rather is it not to make a Prodigy of this Divine Mystery? Certainly, when
People observe how seldom, and withal, with what strange Pomp, with what,
ordinarily, impracticable solemnity such ane holy ordinance is gone about, it
cannot but work differently upon their different dispositions, It stands fair
to be a Scarecrow to the weak Christian; He dares not approach, where there is
so much frightening Address; It stands as fair for being a scandal to the
strong and understanding Christian, when he sees so much vain show, so much
needless ostentation, so much odd, external tricking* about it; And the
Hypocrite can hardly wish any thing more useful for him; For who should doubt
of his being a Saint, when he approaches, amidst so much solemnity? Besides,

Every body may easily see what is aimed at by all this; It is, as they think,
a proper Method for catching the Populace; It is to make them admire the
Devotion, the Religion, the Abilities of the Party. How Glorious and August are
their Communions! What singular preparations have they! How many Powerful
Prayers! How many Soul-searching Sermons! Who can compare with them for fervor
and zeal, for Graces and Gifts, for special marks of Gods peculiar favor and
assistance! Must not their way be Gods way! Must not those of their way be the
true, the only People of God! I ask God and my Presbyterian Brethren pardon, if
this is not at the bottom of the Matter; But if it is, I wish they would
consider from what principles it proceeds; How easy is it to discern in such
Arts and Methods, the clear Symptoms, the lively Signatures, of a Schismatical
temper? How easy to perceive the plain features of Faction, and the Lineaments
of a preposterous Fondness to have their way and party had in Admiration? How
easy were it, more fully to expose such dangerous and dreadful Methods? But I
am afraid I have digressed too much already. There is

8. Another very considerable instance of their Deserting the principles of our
Reformers in the Matter of this Sacrament; Such ane instance as may make
another strange Figure, when seriously considered.

Our Reformers, having once Established the Confession of Faith, as the
Standard for this National Church, required no more for qualifying private
Persons for the Sacrament of the Eucharist, than, that they could say the Lords
Prayer, the Articles of the Belief, and the sum of the Law, and understand the
use and Virtue of this Holy Sacrament; So it is expressly delivered in the
ninth Head of the First Book of Discipline. Spot. 170.
Supposing the Person free from scandal, this was certainly a Genuine Measure,
and agreeable to the Rules and Principles of Catholic Unity. For However
expedient it may be, upon some Emergent Occasions, or Necessities, to require
suitable Obligations of Office-bearers in the Church, yet, no man, I think, who
loves Christian Simplicity and Unity, but will acknowledge, it is proper and
prudent, to make the terms of Communion as Catholic and Comprehensive, as
Christ's institutions will allow them to be made. Now, not to insist on our
Brethrens separating, from the Communion of those, who keep by the terms of
Communion required by our Reformers, whereby they expressly Condemn the
Communion of our Reformers: not to insist on this, I say, though it might be more
than enough, to prove their Recession from the principles of our Reformers, in
this Matter:

Our Presbyterian Brethren are bound by ane Express Act of the General Assembly
1648, not to give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to any who do not, first,
swear the Solemn League and Covenant. The occasion was this.

In the beginning of that year 1648, most part of the Nobility and Gentry of
Scotland having come to a sense of the Miseries and Calamities, the Kingdoms
had been involved in, by the horrid Rebellion, which had, then, prevailed, too
long, and too successfully; and willing to acquit themselves, for once, as
dutiful subjects, for the relief of their suffering Sovereign, at that time,
most sadly oppressed, and kept in prison, by a prevailing party of his most
undutiful subjects, entered into a most Dutiful Confederacy, commonly called
Duke Hamiltons Engagement; by the Presbyterians, the Unlawful Engagement: And
in pursuance thereof, made suitable preparations, provided Arms, levied men,
etc. to form an Army. The Presbyterian Preachers were generally against it;
Preached and Prayed Damnation and Ruin to the undertakers, Condemned the
undertaking as Unlawful and Perjurious, as Traitorous to the Cause of God, and
a Breach of Solemn League and Covenant, and what not? Particularly,

The Presbytery of Edenburg, the leading Presbytery, the Presbytery which sat
upon the Watchtower, of the Nation, showed, I must say, Remarkable, though I
cannot say, Good Example to the Rest of the Presbyteries, in the Months of May
and June; They racked their inventions for falling on methods to crush and
disappoint the Designs of the Engagers. For instance, they set on foot this
Politic in the Respective Parishes, within their District, that the Ministers
and Kirk-Sessions should form supplications against the Engagement, and give
them in to the Presbytery, who were to give them in to the Committee of
Estates, and thereby, to represent to them how much their undertaking was
contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People. The Device took
effect in some Parishes: The Kirk-Sessions of Edinburgh, Holy-Rude-chouse,
Duddingstown, Liberton, Rutho, Curry, Cramond, gave in their supplications,
declaring that they could not be satisfied in their Consciences about the
Lawfulness of the Engagement. I have instanced in the forwardness of the
Presbytery of Edinburgh, to give my Reader a Taste of the humor of these
times; nor is it to be imagined that others were asleep, while they were so
diligent.

The General Assembly met on the twelfth of July, they justified the endeavors
and diligence used before, against the Engagement, with a witness: They
approved all the Declarations, Remonstrances, Representations, Petitions, etc.
against it, which had been made by the Commission of the Kirk: They Declared
there was no possibility of securing Religion, so long as this Unlawful
Engagement was carried on. They made Acts and Declarations against Acts of
Parliament; and Threatened all who should Obey them, with the wrath of God and
the Censures of the Kirk: They gave out their public warnings against it, and
wrote to their Covenanted Brethren in England, showing their utter abhorrence
of it: They made their Act Declaring silence about it, a Crime, and requiring
all Ministers to make the main current of their Applications in Sermons against
it, under the pain of being Censured by their Presbyteries. And to show their
sincerity and real zeal in all this, and for preventing all such ungodly
Engagements, for the time to come, etc. They made this Act, That hereafter all
Persons, whatsoever, should take the Covenant, at their first Receiving of the
Lords Supper, requiring Provincial Assembly's and Presbyteries to be careful,
that this Act should be observed, and account thereof taken, in the visitation
of particular Kirks, and the trial of Presbyteries. If this was not to
streighten Christian Communion, if this was not to impose strange terms, on all
who desired this Holy Sacrament, let the world judge: And it is very well known
that for some years thereafter this Act was observed. Perhaps it were no
difficult task to give ane account of many strange things which happened in
pursuance of this Act: But I shall content my self at present with one instance.

In pursuance of the Politic, of the Presbytery of Edenburg, mentioned before,
the Ministers of South Leith, proposed, to that Kirk-Session* the overture of
supplicating, against the Engagement. The Plurality of the Elders rejected it:
This was in May or June; The Engagement, as every body knows, was unsuccessful;
The Army was Routed at Preston, etc. and the Kirk had opportunity to be avenged
of Malignants. The Presbytery of Edinburgh, therefore, on the sixth of
December, that same year, kept a Visitation at the Church of South Leith; they
made diligent Enquiry, who of the Elders, refused to supplicate against the
Engagement; They Deposed them from their Office, and they ordered the Ministers
to go about ane Election of a New Session. But this was not all.

Upon the 8 th of December, they met again, to digest a Method for Renewing the
Covenant, in obedience to the Assemblies Act; and particularly, they Ordained
that such Seducers as dissuaded others from petitioning against the Engagement
should be debarred from the COVENANT. Nay upon the 24 th of January 1648/9 it
was ordered, particularly, That those in South Leith who had accession to the
Paper drawn in Captain Ramsey's house, (which Paper, so far as one can
Conjecture, from the Depositions of the Witnesses about it, was nothing but ane
Apologetick, for their not supplicating) as also those who were sent from the
Corporations (the Town, as I think, is divided into four Corporations) to the
Ministers and Session, to desire them to forbear supplicating, against the
Engagement, should make public acknowledgement of their Offense, before they
should have permission to take the Covenant: So that at last, as is obvious,
the matter resulted in this: The Elders of South Leith, and those who came from
the Corporations to the Session to Dissuade from supplicating, could not have
the Sacrament without first taking the Covenant; and they could not have the
Benefit of the Covenant (as it was then Deemed) till they should make public
acknowledgement of the Heinous Guilt of not supplicating, and, as Seducers,
Dissuading others from supplicating, against the Unlawful Engagement. For the
Truth of this I Appeal to the Faith of the public Register of that Presbytery.

I know, our Presbyterian Brethren will be ready to say, that this was only a
Deed of the particular Presbytery of Edinburgh, so that, if there was any thing
amiss in it, it ought not to be imputed to the whole party: If this be said, I
have these things to reply; 1. What did the Presbytery herein that was not in
pursuance of the public Spirit of the times, and the Acts of the General
Assembly? But then 2. as extravagant as the Presbytery of Edinburgh was in this
matter, They came not up, it seems, to the full Measures of Rigiditie, which
the Spirit of the Assembly, required: For whosoever pleases to turn over, in the
Register, to the 31 st of January 1648/9, shall find that the Commission of the
Kirk (the Authentic Vehicle of the public Spirit of the Kirk, during the
Interval between Assemblies) wrote a Letter to the Presbytery, Requiring,
greater accuracy in the Trial of Malignants, and admitting People to the
Renovation of the Covenant, prohibiting Kirk-Sessions to meddle in such
Matters, and Ordering all to be done by the Presbyteries themselves; Except
very difficult Cases, which were to be referred to the Commission of the Kirk.
And to secure this side also, let him turn over to the Acts of the General
Assembly, Anno 1649, and he shall find First Act Entitled, Approbation of the
proceedings of the Commissioners of the General Assembly; by which Act that
Assembly (Acted by that same Spirit, with the former) found that the
Commissioners appointed, Anno 1648. had been zealous, diligent and faithful in
the discharge of the trust committed to them, and therefore did unanimously
Approve and Ratify the whole Proceedings, Acts, and Conclusions of the said
Commission; Appointing Mr. John Bell, Moderator pro tempore, to return them
hearty thanks, in the name of the Assembly, for their great pains, travel, and
fidelity.

If it be said, farther, that our present Presbyterians require not, now, that
condition of taking the Covenant of those, they admit to the Sacrament: I
reply, 1. do not the Cameronians, who, in all true Logic, are to be reputed
the Truest Presbyterians observe it punctually?

2. How can our present Regnant Presbyterians justify their Omission of it? By
their own principles the Act binds them; for it stands as yet unrepealed by any
subsequent General Assembly: By the common principles of Reason they are bound,
either to obey that Act or Reprobate the Assembly which made it. This I am sure
of, they can neither plead the Dissuetude of that Act, nor any Peculiarity in
the Reason of it, for their neglecting it, more, than many other Acts which
they own still to be in vigor: But I am afraid my Reader has too much of this.

Thus I have showed, in part, how much our Presbyterian Brethren have Deserted
the Rules and Rites of our Reformers about the Sacraments, proceed we now to
other Liturgical Offices.

8. Then, our Reformers not only appointed a form for the Celebration of
Marriage, (to be seen in the Old Liturgy) but in that Form some things agree
word for word with the English Form; Particularly, the charge to the Persons to
be Married to Declare if they know any impediment, etc. A Solemn Blessing was
also appointed, to be pronounced on the Married Persons; and after that the 128
Psalm to be sung, etc. Besides it was expressly appointed, by the First Book of
Discipline, that Marriages should be only Solemnized on Sunday, in the
forenoon, after Sermon, Cap. 9. Spot. 169.
And this was so Universally observed, that the Introduction of Marrying, on
other days, is remarkable: For it was proposed to the General Assembly, holden
at Edenburg, July 7. Anno 1579, as a doubt, whither it was Lawful to Marry on
week days, a sufficient number being present, and joining Preaching thereunto?
and the General Assembly Resolved It was Lawful. MS. Pet. 400.
But

Our present Presbyterians, if I mistake not, make it rather a Doubt, whither
it be Lawful to Marry on Sunday: Sure I am, it is inconsistent with their
principles to do it by a Form: As sure I am, though they were for a Form they
could not well digest the Form of our Reformers; which smelled so rankly of the
English Corruptions: I know not if they use, solemnly, to Bless the Married
Pair: If they do it not, I know they have Deserted their own Second Book of
Discipline. I think they will not deny but the singing of the 128 Psalm in the
Church, immediately after the Persons are Married, is out of fashion, with them.

9. They have also forsaken our Reformers in the Burial of the Dead: It Is true,
indeed, the First Book of Discipline seems to be against Funeral Sermons,
neither does it frankly allow of Reading suitable portions of Scripture, and
singing Psalms at Burials; Yet it was far from Condemning these Offices: We are
not so precise in this (say the Compilers) but that we are content that
particular Churches, with Consent of the Minister, do that, which they shall
find most fitting, as they will Answer to God, and the Assembly of the
Universal Church, within this Realm. Spot. 173.
But the Old Liturgy, which was Authorized by two General Assemblies (which the
First Book of Discipline could never pretend to) has not only a Form for
visiting the Sick (not observed, I am sure, by our present Presbyterians) but
expressly allows of Funeral Sermons. These are its very words about Burial. The
Corpse shall be Reverently brought to the Grave, accompanied with the
Congregation, without any further Ceremonies; which being Buried, the Minister,
if he be present, and required, goes to the Church, if it be not too far off,
and makes some Comfortable Exhortation to the People, touching Death, and the
Resurrection; Then Blesses the People, and dismisseth them. To our present
Presbyterians, Funeral Sermons are as the worshipping of Relics; They are
every whit as ill as Praying for the Dead, and the Doctrine of Purgatory. One
thing more I shall take notice of in the Old Liturgy. It is

10. The Form and Order of the Election of the Superintendent, which may serve,
in Election of all other Ministers. I shall not repeat what I have already
observed as to this point, concerning our Presbyterians Condemning the Office
of Superintendents; and their forsaking our Reformers, as to the Ceremony of
imposition of hands, in Ordinations; a point wherein our Reformers, I confess,
were somewhat unaccountable. That which I take notice of now, is, that that
Form continued, at least, for sixty years, to be used in Ordinations:
Particularly it was in use, even with the Parity men, Anno 1618, as is evident
from Calderwood, Call: 712.
and it was insisted on by them, then, as a Form, which was to be reputed so
venerable, and of such weight, that any Recession from it, was ane intolerable
innovation: And yet I refer it to our present Presbyterians themselves, if they
can say that they have not entirely Deserted it. Because the Designation of the
Person to be Ordained is Prior in order of nature to his Ordination; I shall
add as ane Appendage to this Head, the Discrepance between our Reformers and
our present Presbyterians, about Patronages and Popular Elections: of Ministers.

Our present Presbyterians, every body knows, are zealous for the Divine Right
of Popular Elections: The Power of Choosing their own Ministers, The Persons
who are to have the charge of their Souls, is a Privilege which Christ, by his
Testament, has Bequeathed to his People: It is his Legacy to them; ane
unalienable part of their Spiritual Property; It cannot be taken from them
without a Direct crossing of Christ's institution, and the horrid sin of Robbing
his People of their indisputable Privilege. Patronages are ane Intolerable
Grievance, and Yoke of Bondage on the Church: They have been always the cause
of Pestering the Church with a bad Ministry; They came in amongst the latest
Antichristian Corruptions and Usurpations, etc. This is their Doctrine, though,
it is obious to all the world, they put strange Comments on it by their
Practice: Well! What were the sentiments of our Reformers in this Matter?

The First Book of Discipline, indeed, affirms ( Head 4.) That it appertains
to the People and to every several Congregation to Elect their own Minister:
But it has not so much as one syllable of the Divine institution of such a
Privilege: On the contrary, in that same very breath, it adds, and in case
they be found negligent therein, the space of 40 days, the Superintendent with
his Council may present a Man, etc. If this Man after trial is found qualified,
and the Church can justly reprehend nothing in his Life, Doctrine or Utterance,
then, We judge (say our Reformers) the Church, which, before, was destitute,
unreasonable, if they refuse him, whom the Church does offer; And that they
should be compelled, by the Censure of the Council, and Church, to receive the
Person appointed and approved by the Judgment of the Godly and Learned; unless
that the same Church has presented a Man better, or as well, Qualified, to
Examination, before that the aforesaid trial was taken of the Person, presented
by the Council of the whole Church. As for Example, the Council of the Church
presents a Man unto a Church to be their Minister, not knowing that they are
otherwise provided; In the mean time, the Church has another sufficient, in
their judgment, for that charge, whom they present to the Learned Ministers,
and next Reformed Church to be examined: In this case, the presentation of the
People to whom he should be appointed Pastor, must be preferred to the
presentation of the Council or greater Church, unless the Person presented by
the inferior Church be judged unable for the Regiment, by the Learned. For
this is always to be avoided, that no man be intruded or thrust in upon any
Congregation. But this Liberty, with all care, must be reserved for every
several Church, to have their voices and suffrages in Election of their
Ministers; Yet we do not call that violent intrusion, when the Council of the
Church, in the fear of God, regarding only the salvation of the People,
offers unto them, a man sufficient to instruct them, whom they shall not be
forced to admit before just Examination. So that Book. Add to this, this
consideration, That at that time the Popish Clergy were in possession of all
the Benefices; the Reformed Clergy had not, then, so much as the prospect of
the Thirds, which I have discoursed of, before: These things laid together,
it is obvious to perceive, 1. That it was only from Prudential Considerations,
our Reformers were inclined to give the People so much Power at that time; It
was much for the Convenience of the Ministers, who were to live by the
Benevolence of the Parish, etc. They did not grant them this Power, as of
Divine Right; No such thing so much as once insinuated, as I have said; 'Twas
plainly nothing but a Liberty. And no injury, no violence was done to a Parish,
even in these circumstances of the Church, when the Council of the Church gave
them a Minister without their own Election. It Is as plain, 2. that (so far as
can be collected from the whole Period above) our Reformers (the Compilers of
the Book I mean) abstracting from the, then, circumstances of the Church were
more inclined, that the Election of Ministers should be in the hands of the
Clergy, than of the People; Which I am much inclined to think was not only,
then, but a long time after, the prevailing sentiment; And all the world sees,
I am sure, it was a sentiment utterly inconsistent with the opinion of the
Divine Right of Popular Elections.

I have been at pains to set the First Book of Discipline, thus in its due
light, that our Brethren may not complain, it was neglected, not that my Cause
required it; For that Book was never Law, either Civil or Ecclesiastical, and
so I might fairly have omitted it. Let us try next what were truly the public
and Authoritative sentiments of our Reformers.

The first which I find of that nature, is the sentiment of the General
Assembly, holden in September 1565. The General Assembly holden in June
immediately before, had complained, that some vacant Benefices had been
bestowed by the Queen, on some Noblemen and Barons. MS. Pet. 342.
The Queen answered, She thought it not Reasonable to deprive her of the
Patronages belonging to her: And this General Assembly in September answer
thus: Our mind is not that her Majesty, or any other Person, should be
defrauded of their just Patronages, but we mean, whenever her Majesty, or any
other Patron, do present any Person, unto a Benefice, that the Person presented
should be tried and examined, by the judgment of Learned Men of the Church;
Such as are, for the present, the Superintendents: And as the presentation of
the Benefice belongs to the Patron, so the Collation, by Law and Reason,
belongs to the Church. MS. Pet. 344. Spot. 193.
Agreeably, we find, by the 7 Act 1 Parl. Iac. 6. Anno 1567. (The Parliament
holden by Murray Regent) It was enacted (in pursuance (no doubt) of the
Agreement between the Nobility and Barons, and the Clergy in the General
Assembly, holden in July that year) That the Patron should present a qualified
Person, within six Months, to the Superintendent of these parts, where the
Benefice lies, etc. And by the Agreement at Leith, Anno 1572, the Right of
Patronages was reserved to the Respective Patrons. Called. 52.
And by the General Assembly holden in March 1574, it was enacted that
collations upon presentations to Benefices should not be given without consent
of three qualified Ministers, etc. Called. 66.
The General Assembly in August that same year, supplicated the Regent that
Bishops might be presented to vacant Bishoprics, as I have observed before. By
the General Assembly holden in October 1578, It was enacted, that presentations
to benefices be directed to the Commissioners of the Countries where the
Benefice lies. MS. Pet. 396. Called. 84.


It Is true, indeed, the Second Book of Discipline, Cap. 12.. 10. Condemns
Patronages, as having no ground in the word of God; as contrary to the same;
and as contrary to the Liberty of Election of Pastors, and that which ought not
to have place in the Light of Reformation. MS. Spot. 301. Called. 114.
But then it is as true; 1. That that same General Assembly, holden in April
1581, which first Ratified this Second Book of Discipline, Statuted and
Ordained, That Laick Patronages should remain whole unjoynted, and undivided,
unless with consent of the Patron. MS. Pet. 410. Called. 99.
So that, let them, who can, reconcile the Acts of this Presbyterian Assembly.
For to my skill (which I confess is not very great) it seems, as we use to say,
to have both burnt and blown Patronages; blown them by this Act, and burnt them
by Ratifying the Book which Condemned them. But whatever is of this, that which
I observe 2. is far more considerable; For though the Book Condemned Patronages,
yet our Presbyterian Brethren, of the Modern Cut, have no great advantage by
it, for it had nothing less in its prospect, than to Condemn them, for making
way for Popular Elections. Indeed it gave no countenance to such Elections, far
less did it suppose or assert them to be of Divine Right. This is its
Determination in the 9 th of that 12. Cap. The Liberty of Electing Persons to
Ecclesiastical Functions, observed without interruptions, so long as the Church
was not corrupted by Antichrist, we desire to be restored and retained within
this Realm; So as none be intruded upon any Congregation, either by the Prince,
or any other inferior Person, WITHOUT LAWFUL ELECTION, and THE ASSENT OF THE
PEOPLE, over whom the Person is placed, according to the Practice of the
Apostolic and Primitive Church. Now, 1. considering that it was the common
talk, of the Presbyterians, of these times, that Antichristian Corruptions,
began to pester the Church, so soon as Episcopacy was introduced, It is clear,
that that which they call the Uninterrupted Practice of the Church, must have
descended, according to themselves but for a very few years: and I shall own my
self their humble servant, if our present Presbyterians shall prove that
Popular Elections were in Universal uninterrupted Practice, during that
interval, of their own making; the interval, I mean which they make between the
Apostles times, and the first Introduction of Episcopacy. Indeed, 2. the Book
plainly distinguishes between LAWFUL ELECTION, and THE ASSENT OF THE PEOPLE,
and all the world knows they are naturally distinguishable; and whosoever knows
any thing of the Monuments of these Primitive times, knows they were actually
distinguished; and that all the Peoples Privilege was to ASSENT, not, to
ELECT; They were not in use of Electing, if I mistake not, till toward the end
of the third Century: So that, if we can believe the Compilers of the Book; if
they were for restoring the Primitive Practice; it is easy to understand that
they meant no such thing as to restore Popular Elections. Especially, if 3. it
be considered that we have one very Authentic Explication of this 9 th Article
of the 12. Cap. of the Second Book of Discipline, handed down to us by
Calderwood himself. Called. 383.
The story is this.

King James the Sixth, continually vexed with the Turbulency of the Presbyterian
temper, caused publish 55 Questions, and proposed them to be sifted, thinking
that clear and distinct Resolutions of them, might contribute much for ending
many Controversies, agitated, in those times, between the Kirk and the Crown.
They were published in February, or January 159^. They are to be seen both in
Spotswoods Spot. 434. Called. 38^.
and Calderwoods Histories. I am only concerned, at present, for the third
Question, which was this, Is not the Consent of the most part of the Flock, and
also of the Patrons necessary in the Election of Pastors? Now, Calderwood says,
that there were Brethren delegated from every Presbytery of Fife, who met at
St. Andrews upon the 21. of February, and, having tossed the Kings Questions,
sundry days, gave Answers to every one of them, particularly, to the third,
this was their Answer, The Election of Pastors should be made by those, who are
Pastors, and Doctors Lawfully called, and who can try the Gifts, necessarily
belonging to Pastors, by the word of God: And to such as are so chosen, the
Flock and Patron should give their Consent and Protection. Called. 383.
Now this, I say, is a very Authentic Explication of the words of the Book,
for these Delegates Meeting at St. Andrews, it is not to be doubted, but Mr.
Andrew Melvil, at that time, principal of the New College, was with them,
probably they met, in that City, that he might be with them; for sure I am, it
was not otherwise the most convenient place of the County for their Meeting:
And having him with them, they had one, than whom, none on earth was capable of
giving a more Authentic Sense of the words of the Book.

It were very easy to adduce more Acts of General Assemblies to this purpose:
But I am afraid I have insisted too much on this subject already: In short
then, the Groundless Fancy of the Divine Right of Popular Elections, is more
properly ane Independent than a Presbyterian principle. The English
Presbyterians of the Provincial Assembly of London, wrote zealously against it,
in their Ius Divinum Ministerii Evangelici: It is truly inconsistent with the
Old Presbyterian Scheme; It obtained not generally amongst our Scottish
Presbyterians till some years after 1638. It was not adopted into their Scheme
till the General Assembly 1649. Patronages were never taken away by Act of
Parliament till of late, i. e in the year 1690. It Is true G. R. in his True
Rrepresentation of Presbyterian Government, p. 15.
says, they were taken away by Law, meaning, no doubt, by the Act of the
pretended Parliament, Anno 1649. But he had just as much Reason for calling
that Rout, a Parliament, or its Acts, Laws, as he had for making the
suppressing of Popular Elections of Ministers, a just Cause for separating from
the Communion of a Church. Thus I have insisted on the Recessions of our
present Presbyterian Brethren from the sentiments of our Reformers about the
public worship of the Church and some of its Appendages; Perchance I have done
it too tediously; if so, I shall endeavor to dispatch what remains, more
curtly.

III. They have also Deserted our Reformers in the Discipline of the Church;
The particulars are too numerous to be insisted on; Let any man compare the two
Books of Discipline; The First compiled by our Reformers, Anno 1560; The
Second, by the Presbyterians of the first Edition, and Ratified by Act of the
General Assembly, holden in April 1581, and he shall find no scarcity of
differences; He shall find Alterations, Innovations, Oppositions,
Contradictions, etc. Let him compare the Acts of Assemblies after the year
1580, with the Acts of Assemblies, before, and he shall find many more. Indeed,

Our present Presbyterians have made not a few notorious Recessions from the
Second, The Presbyterian Book of Discipline. To instance in a few.

The Third Chapter of the Second Book of Discipline is thus Entitled, How the
Persons that bear Ecclesiastical Function, are admitted to their Offices. This
Chap. treats of such Persons in the general; The particular Orders of Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, etc. are particularly treated of, in subsequent Chapter^. This
Third Chapter treating, thus, of Ecclesiastical Officers in the general, makes
two things necessary to the outward call, Election and Ordination, 6. It
defines ordination to be the separation and sanctifying of the Person appointed
by God, and his Church, after that he is well tried and found qualified. It
ennumerates Fasting, Prayer, and imposition of hands of the Eldership, as the
Ceremonies of Ordination, 11, 12. Now the whole Nation knows, no such thing as
either Trial, Fasting, or imposition of hands, are used by our present
Presbyterians in the Ordination of Ruling Elders.

The Sixth Chapter is particularly concerning Ruling Elders, as contra-distinct
from Pastors or Teaching Elders. And it determines thus, concerning them,. 3.
Elders once Lawfully called to the Office, and having Gifts of God fit to
exercise the same, may not leave it again: Yet nothing more ordinary with our
present Presbyterians, than laying aside Ruling Elders, and reducing them to a
state of Laics; So that, Sure I am, if ever they were Presbyters, they come
under Tertullians Censure (De Praescrip.) Hodie Presbyter, qui cras Laicus. A
Presbyter to day, and a Porter to morrow.

By the 9 th. of that same Chapter, It pertains to them (these Ruling Elders)
to assist the Pastor in examining those that come to the Lords Table, and in
visiting the Sick. This Canon is not much in use, I think, as to the last part
of it; as to the first, it is entirely indesuetude. Indeed some of them would
be wondrously qualified for such ane Office.

The Seventh Chapter is about Elderships and Assemblies. By 2. Assemblies are
of four sorts, viz. either of a particular Congregation, or of a Province, or a
whole Nation, or all Christian Nations. Now of all these indefinitely it is
affirmed,. 5. In all Assemblies a Moderator should be chosen by common consent
of the whole Brethren conveened; Yet no such thing observed in our
Kirk-Sessions, which are the Congregational Assemblies spoken of 2. But Man
John takes the Chair without Election; and would not be a little grated if the
best Lord in the Parish should be his Competitor. Crawford himself, the First
Earl of the Kingdom, had never the Honor to be Moderator in the Kirk Session
of Ceres.

The 14 th Canon, in the same 7 th Chapter is this, When we speak of Elders of
particular Congregations, we mean not that every particular Parish Church can,
or MAY have their particular Elderships, especially to Landward, but we think
three or four, more, or fewer particular Churches may have a common Eldership
to them all, to judge their Ecclesiastical Causes. And Chapter 12. Canon 5. As
to Elders, there would be in every Congregation, one, or more, appointed for
censuring of manners, but not ane Assembly of Elders, except in Towns and
Famous Places, where men of Judgment and Ability may be had: And these to have
a common Eldership placed amongst them, to treat of all things that concern the
Congregations of whom they have the Oversight. But as the world goes now, every
Parish, even in the Country, must have its own Eldership; and this Eldership
must consist of such a number of the Sincerer sort, as may be able to out-vote
all the Malignant Heritors, upon occasion; as when a Minister is to be chosen,
etc. So long as there is a precise Plough-man, or a well-affected Webster, or a
covenanted Cobbler, or so, to be found in the Parish, such a number must not be
wanting. The standing of the Sect is the Supreme Law: The good cause must not
suffer, though all the Canons of the Kirk should be put to shift for themselves.

IV. The last thing I named, as that, wherein our present Presbyterians have
forsaken the principles and sentiments of our Reformers, was the Government of
the Church: But I have treated so fully of this, already, that it is needless to
pursue it any farther. I shall only therefore, as ane Appendage to this,
represent one very considerable Right of the Church, adhered to by our
Reformers, but disclaimed by our present Presbyterians. It is, her being the
First of the three Estates of Parliament, and having vote in that great Council
of the Nation.

It is evident from the most Ancient Records, and all the Authentic Monuments
of the Nation, That the Church made still the First, of the Three Estates, in
Scottish Parliaments, since there were Parliaments in Scotland. This had
obtained, time out of mind, and was looked upon as Fundamental, in the
Constitution of Parliaments, in the days of the Reformation. Our Reformers
never so much as once dreamed, that this was a Popish Corruption: What
Sophistry can make it such? They dreamed as little of its being unseemly or
scandalous, or incongruous, or inconvenient, or whatever, now adays, men are
pleased to call it. On the contrary, they were clear for its continuance, as a
very important Right of the Church. The First Book if Discipline, Head 8 th,
allowed Clergymen to Assist the Parliament when the same is called. It Is true
Calderwood both Corrupts the Text, here, and gives it a false Gloss. Instead of
these words [ when the same is called,] he puts these [ if he be called,] Spot.
168. Called. 28.
and his Gloss is, Meaning with advice, (says he) not by voice, or sitting as a
Member of that Court. I say this is a false Gloss. Indeed, it runs quite
counter to all the principles and practices of these times: For not only did
the Ecclesiastical Estate sit, actually, in the Reforming Parliament, Anno
1560, and all Parliaments, thereafter, for very many years; But such stress, in
these times, was laid on this Estate, that it was generally thought, that
nothing of public concern could be Legally done without it: The Counsel of the
Ecclesiastic Peers was judged necessary in all matters of National Importance.
Thus

Anno 1567. when the Match was on foot, between the Queen and Bothwell, that it
might seem to be concluded with the greater Authority, pains were taken to get
the consent of the principal Nobility, by their susbcriptions. But this was not
all; that all might be made as sure as could be, Postridie, quod in Urbe fuit
Episcoporum Convocatur in Aulam, ut and ipsi, quidem, subscriberent. Buch. 667.
All the Bishops, who were in the City, were also Convocated, and their
subscriptions required, as Buchanan tells us. And

Anno 1568. when the Accusation was intented against the Queen of Scotland,
before the Queen of England's Arbitrators, that it might be done with the
greater appearance of the Consent of the Nation; That it might have the greater
semblance of a National Deed, as being a matter wherein all Estates were
concerned, the Bishop of Orkney, and the Abbot of Dunfermline were appointed to
represent the Spiritual Estate. Buch. 698. Spot 219.
Again,

Anno 1571. when the two Counter Parliaments were holden at Edenburg, those of
the Queens Faction, as few as they were, had the Votes of two Bishops in their
Session holden July 12, as is clear from Buchanan and Spotswood compared
together. Buch. 756. Spot. 254.


In their next Session, which was holden at Edenburg, August 22, that same
year, though they were, in all, but five Members, yet two of them were Bishops,
as Spotswood tells. Spot. 256.
But Buchanan's account is more considerable Buch. 760.
For he says, one of these two was there unwillingly, so that it seems he was
forced by the rest to be there, out of a sense they had of the Necessity of the
Ecclesiastical Estate. Now it is to be Remembered that those who appeared for the
Queen, were Protestants as well as these who were for her Son.

No Man, I think, will deny but the subsistence of the Ecclesiastical Estate,
and their Vote in Parliament was confirmed and continued by the Agreement of
Leith, Anno 1572. Indeed,

When the Project for Parity amongst the Officers of the Church was set on Foot
by Melvil, Anno 1575, and some of the Clergy were gained to his side, and they
were using their utmost endeavors to have Episcopacy overturned, it seems this
was a main difficulty to them, a difficulty which did very much entangle and
retard their purpose; This, I say, that the overturning Prelacy, was the
overturning one of the three Estates of Parliament. This is evident not only
from Boyd, Arch Bishop of Glasgow, his Discourse, to the General Assembly, Anno
1576. mentioned before, but also from the two Letters I have often named which
were written to Mr. Beza: the one by the Lord Glamis, Anno 1576, or 1577, the
other by Mr. Melvil, Anno 1579. Because they contribute so much light to the
matter in hand, I shall once more resume them. Glamis was then Chancellor of
Scotland; It is manifest he wrote not indeliberately, or without advice:
Undoubtedly he stated the Question, according to the sense, the Generality of
People had, then, of it; Now he states it thus. Seeing every Church has its
own Pastor, and the Power of Pastors in the Church of Christ seems to be equal;
The Question is whither the Office of Bishops be Necessary in the Church, for
convocating these Pastors, when there is need; for Ordaining Pastors, and for
Deposing them for just Causes? Or whither it be better, that the Pastors Acting
in Parity, and subject to no Superior Bishop, should choose Qualified Men, for
the Ministry, with consent of the Patron, and the People; and Censure, and
Depose, etc.? For Retaining Bishops we have these two Motives; One is, the
stubbornenss and ungovernableness of the People, which cannot possibly be kept
within Bounds Qui vix ac ne vix quidem in officlo contineri potest.
if they are not overawed by the Authority of these Bishops, in their
visitations. The other is, that such is the constitution of the Monarchy Leges
Regni longo usu and inveterata consuetudine Receptae.
which has obtained time out of mind, that as often as the Parliament meets,
for consulting about things pertaining to the safety of the Republic, nothing
can be determined without the Bishops, who make the Third Estate of the
Kingdom, which, to change or subvert, would be extremely perilous to the
Kingdom. So he, from which we may learn two things: The First is, a farther
confirmation of what I have before asserted to have been the sentiment of these
times concerning the Election of Pastors, namely that it was, that they should
be Elected by the Clergy, and that the People should have no other Power than
that of Consenting: The other is pat in Relation to our present business,
namely, that the Ecclesiastical Estate was judged Necessary, by the
constitution of the Monarchy; It could not be wanting in Parliaments: It was to
run the hazard of subverting the constitution, to think of altering it or
turning it out of doors. And

Melvil's Letter is clearly to the same purpose: We have not ceased these five
years to fight against Pseudepiscopacy (many of the Nobility resisting us) and
to press the severity of Discipline: We have presented unto his Royal Majesty,
and three Estates of the Realm, both before, and now, in this Parliament, the
form of Discipline, to be insert amongst the Acts, and to be confirmed by
public Authority: We have the Kings mind bended toward us, (too far said, I
am sure, if we may take that Kings own word for it) but many of the Peers
against us: For they allege, if Pseudepiscopacy be taken away, one of the
Estates is pulled down: If Presbyteries be erected, the Royal Majesty is
diminished, etc. It Is true, Melvil himself, here, shows no great kindness for
the third Estate: But that is no great matter; It was his humor to be singular;
All I am concerned for, is the public sentiment of the Nation; especially the
Nobility, which we have so plain, for the Necessity of the Ecclesiastical
Estate, that nothing can be plainer. Nay.

So indisputable was it, then, that this Ecclesiastical Estate was absolutely
necessary by the constitution, that the Presbyterians themselves never called
it in Question, never offered to advance such a Paradox as that, it might be
abolished: After they had abolished Episcopacy by their Assembly 1580, the King
sent several times to them, telling them, He could not want one of his three
Estates. How would they provide him with ane Ecclesiastical Estate, now that
they had abolished Bishops? Whosoever pleases to Read Calderwood himself shall find
this point frequently insisted on. What returns gave they? Did they ever in the
least offer to return that the having ane Ecclesiastical Estate in Parliament
was a Popish Corruption? That it was ane unwarrantable constitution? That it
was not Necessary? Or that the constitution might be i^^ire enough without it?
No such thing entered their thoughts; On the contrary, they were still clear
for maintaining it; They had no inclination to part with such a valuable Right
of the Church; Their Answer to the Kings Demands was still, one and the same;
They were not against Churchmens having vote in Parliament; But none ought to
vote in name of the Church without Commission from the Church. And this their
sentiment they put in the very Second Book of Discipline, for these are word
for word the seventeenth and eighteenth Articles of the eleventh Chapter.

17. We deny not in the mean time that Ministers MAY and SHOULD assist their
Princes when they are required, in all things agreeable to the word of God,
whither it be in Council or Parliament, or out of Council; Providing always
they neither neglect their own charges, nor, through slattery of Princes, hurt
the public Estate of the Kirk.

18. But generally we say, that no Pastor under whatso^ver Title of the Kirk,
and specially the abused Titles in Popery, of Prelates, Chapters and Convents,
ought to attempt any thing, in the Churches name, either in Parliament, or out
of Council, without the Commission, of the Reformed Kirk within this Realm.
Spot. 299. Called. 112.
And

It was concluded in the Assembly holden at Dundee, March 7. 1598. That it was
NECESSARY and EXPEDIENT for the well of the Kirk, that the Ministry as the
third Estate of this Realm, in name of the Church, have vote in Parliament. MS.
Pet. 545. Spot. 449. Called. 420.
So indubitable was it in these times, that the Ecclesiastical Estate was
necessary, and that it could not be wanting without the notorious subversion of
the constitution of Parliaments. Indeed, it was not only the sentiment of
General Assemblies, whatever side, whither the Prelatical or the Presbyterian
prevailed, but it was likewise the sentiment of all Parliaments: It were easy
to amass a great many Acts of a great many Parliaments to this purpose: I shall
only instance in a few. Thus

The eight Act Parl. 1. Iac. 6. holden in December. 1567, appoints the Coronation
Oath to be sworn by the King: And it is one of the Articles of that Oath, That
he shall Rule the People committed to his Charge -- according to the loveable
Laws and Constitutions received in this Realm, no wise repugnant to the word of
the Eternal God. Now, I think, this Parliament made no Question, but that the
Fundamental Law of the Constitution of Parliaments, was one of these Loveable
Laws and Constitutions, received in this Realm, no wise repugnant to the word
of the Eternal God. Indeed

The 24 th Act of that same Parliament is this, word for word; Our Sovereign
Lord, with advice and consent of his Regent, and the three Estates of
Parliament, has Ratified, and Ratifies, all Civil Privileges granted and given
by our Sovereign Lords Predecessors to the Spiritual Estate of this Realm in
all points, after the form and tenor thereof. Than which there cannot be a more
Authentic Commentary, for finding the true sense and meaning of the Coronation
Oath, in Relation to our present purpose: I shall only adduce two more, but
they are such two as are as good as two thousand.

The 130 th Act Parl. 8. Iac. 6. Anno 1584, is this word for word; The Kings
Majesty considering the Honor and the Authority of his Supreme Court of
Parliament, continued, past all memory of Man, unto these days, as constitute
upon the free votes of the three Estates of this Ancient Kingdom; By whom the
same, under God, has, ever, been upholden; Rebellious and Traitorous Subjects
punished; the good and faithful preserved, and maintained; and the Laws and
Acts of Parliament (by which all men are Governed) made and Established; and
finding the Power, Dignity, and Authority of the said Court of Parliament, of
late years, called in some doubt, at least, some (such as Mr. Andrew Melvil,
etc.) curiously traveling to have introduced some Innovations thereanent; His
Majesty's firm will and mind, always being, as it is yet; that the Honor,
Authority and Dignity of his said three Estates shall stand and continue in
their own integrity, according to the Ancient and Loveable custom bygone,
without any alteration or diminution: THEREFORE, it is Statuted and Ordained by
our Sovereign Lord, and his said three Estates, in this present Parliament,
that none of his Leiges and Subjects, presume or take upon hand to impugn the
Dignity, and the Authority of the said three Estates; or to seek or procure the
Innovation or Diminution, of the Power and Authority of the same three Estates,
or any of them, in time coming, under the pain of Treason. Here I think the
necessity of the three Estates, whereof, the Ecclesiastical was ever reckoned
the first, is asserted pretty fairly. Neither is this Act, so far as I know,
formally repealed by any subsequent Act: And whosoever knows any thing of the
History of these times, cannot but know that it was to crush the Designs set on
foot, then, by some, for innovating about the Spiritual Estate, that this Act
was formed.

The other which I promised, is, Act 2. Parl. 18. Iac. 6. holden Anno 1606.
Entitled Act anent the Restitution of the Estate of Bishops. In the Preamble
of which Act we are told, That of late, during his Majesty's young years, and
unsettled Estate, the Ancient and FUNDAMENTAL Policy, consisting in the
Maintenance of the THREE ESTATES of Parliament, has been greatly impaired, and
almost subverted; Specially by the Indirect Abolishing of the Estate of
Bishops, by the Act of Annexation of the Temporality of Benefices to the Crown
-- That the said Estate of Bishops is Necessary Estate of the Parliament, etc.

Such were the Sentiments of these times* So Essential was the Ecclesiastical
Estate deemed in the Constitution of Scottish Parliaments. And no wonder: For
no man can doubt, but it was as early, as positively, as incontestedly, as
fundamentally and unalterably in the constitution, as either the Estate of
Nobles, or the Estate of Burrows. There is no Question, I think, about the
Burrows: As for the Estate of Nobles, it is certain all Barons were still
reckoned of the Nobless: The lesser Barons in Ancient times, were still
reckoned a part of the Second, never a distinct Estate of Parliament; and they
must quit all pretensions to be of the Nobless, when they set up for a distinct
Estate: Setting up for such, they are no more of the Nobility, than the
Burrows. And then,

If two Estates can vote out one, and make a Parliament without it; If they can
split one into two, and so make up the three Estates: Why may not one split it
self as well into three? Why may not the two parts of the splitted Estate join
together and vote out the Estate of Burrows? Why may not the Nobility of the
First Magnitude join with the Burrows to vote out the smaller Barons? Why may
not the smaller Barons and the Burrows vote out the greater Nobility? After two
have voted out one, why may not one, the more numerous, vote out the other, the
less numerous? When the Parliament is reduced to one Estate why may not that
one divide and one half vote out the other? And then subdivide and vote out,
till the whole Parliament shall consist of the Commissioner for Rutherglen, or
the Lord of or the Earl of Crawford? Nay why may not that one vote cut himself
and leave the King without a Parliament? What a dangerous thing is it to shake
Foundations? How does it unhinge all things? How plainly does it pave the way
for that which our Brethren pretend to abhor so much, viz. a Despotick Power,
ane Absolute, and unlimited Monarchy? But enough of this.

To conclude this point; there is nothing more notorious than that the Spiritual
Estate was still judged Fundamental in the Constitution of Parliaments, was
still called to Parliaments, did still Sit, Deliberate, and Vote in Parliaments
till the year 1640, that it was turned out by the, then, Presbyterians: And our
present Presbyterians following their footsteps, have not only freely parted
with, but forwardly rejected, that Ancient and valuable Right of the Church:
Nay, they have not only rejected it, but they declaim constantly against it as
a Limb of Antichrist and what not? And have they not, herein, manifestly
Deserted the undoubted principles and sentiments of our Reformers?

It had been easy to have ennumerated a great many more of their notorious
Recessions from the principles of the Reformation: e. g. I might have insisted
on their Deserting the principles and practices of our Reformers about the
Constitution of General Assemblies; about Communion with the Church of England;
about the Civil Magistrates Power in Church Matters (justly or unjustly is not
the present Question) and many more things of considerable importance. Nay,
which at first sight may seem a little strange, as much as they may seem to
have swallowed down the principles of Rebellion and Armed Resistances against
Lawful Sovereign Princes, maintained by our Reformers, yet even herein, there
is difference; Considerable difference.

Our Reformers, as much as they were inclined to Rebel against Kings, did yet
maintain that they held their Crowns immediately of God. John Knox in his
Sermon preached on the 19 th of August 1565, and afterward published, has
this plain position, That it is neither birth, Influence of Stars, ELECTION OF
PEOPLE, Force of Arms, nor, finally, whatsoever can be comprehended under the
Power of nature, that makes the distinction between the Superior Power, and
the Inferior, or that does Establish the Royal Throne of Kings; But it is the
only and perfect Ordinance of God, who wills his Terror, Power and Majesty,
in a part, to shine in the Thrones of Kings and in the Faces of Judges, etc.
Neither was this only his private sentiment.

The 24 th Article of the Confession of Faith, compiled by our Reformers, and
Ratified by Act of Parliament, is every whit as plain and Decretory; For there,
They Profess to believe that Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions and Cities are
Distincted and Ordained by God: That the Powers and Authorities therein, are
Gods Holy Ordinance; That Persons placed in Authority are to be Loved,
Honored, Feared, and holden in most Reverend Estimation, because, they are
Gods Lieutenants, in whose Session God sits, as Judge; to whom, by God, is
given the Sword, etc. That therefore whosoever deny unto Kings, their Aid,
Counsel, or Comfort, while they vigilantly, travel in the executing of their
Office, they deny their help, support and Counsel to God, who, by the presence
of his Lieutenant, craveth it of them. So it was professed by our Reformers:
How this principle could consist with their practices, is none of my present
concerns. That is no more than to show how our Presbyterian Brethren have
deserted them in this matter: Now

Our Presbyterian Brethren make Kings, as such, not Gods, but the Peoples
creatures, by consequence, not Gods, but the Peoples Lieutenants; The People
sets them on their Thrones; They have their Power from the People; They are the
Peoples Trustees; They are accountable to the People; So that whosoever denis
his Aid, Counsel or Comfort to them, while they vigilantly travel in executing
their Office, in true Logic can be said to deny them only to the People. Even
here then there is this great difference, our Reformers maintained one good
principle in Relation to Sovereign Powers: Our present Presbyterians have even
rejected that one good principle. It Is true indeed, our Reformers seem to have
been inconsequential in substituting Rebellious practices in the retinue of ane
Orthodox principle; And our Presbyterian Brethren seem to be consequential in
having their principle and their practice of a piece; But does this mend the
matter? Nothing, as I take it; for all ends here, That our Reformers believed
Right, tho they practiced Wrong. But our Presbyterian Brethren are altogether
Wrong; They neither believe, nor practice Right.

Thus, I say, it had been no difficult task to have instanced in many more of
our Presbyterian Innovations; But the taste I have given, I think, is
sufficient for my purpose; For laying together so many undeniable Innovations,
so many palpable and notorious Recessions from the principles and practices of
our Reformers, as I have adduced; and these in so weighty and important
matters, as the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, Government, and Rights of the
Church, I may fairly leave it to the world, to judge, if our Brethren have just
reason to insist so much upon the principles of our Reformation, or to entitle
themselves (as, on all occasions they are so sollicitous and forward to do) the
only Real and Genuine Successors of our Reformers.

Neither is this all that may justly pinch them. They have not only Receded
from our Scottish Reformers, but from all other Reformed Churches. What
Reformed Church in Christendom maintains all the Articles of the Westminster
Confession? What Reformed Church requires the profession of so many Articles,
not mainly for Peace and Unity, but as a Test of Orthodoxy? What Reformed
Church, except our Kirk, maintains the Divine Institution of Parity among the
Pastors of the Church, so, as to make all kind of Prelacy simply unlawful? What
Reformed Church, except the Scottish, wants a Liturgy? What Party in Europe
that assumes the name of a National Church, Condemns Liturgies, set Forms of
Prayer, etc. as Unlawful, except Scottish Presbyterians? What Transmarine
Reformed Church, that is not Lutheran, Condemns the Communion of the Church of
England? What Reformed Church maintains the Divine institution and the
Indispensible Necessity of Ruling Elders in contradistinction to Pastors? What
Reformed Church maintains the Divine institution and the unalienable Right of
Popular Elections of Pastors? What Reformed Church ever offered to maintain
that the Government of the Church, by Bishops, or a public Liturgy, or want of
Ruling Elders, distinct from Pastors; or choosing Pastors, otherwise, than by
the voices of the People, or using some innocent and unforbidden Ceremonies, as
circumstances or Appendages of Divine worship, or observing some days besides
Sundays, were sufficient grounds for breaking the Peace of a Church, and
dividing her Unity, and setting up Altar against Altar? What Reformed Church
was ever Bound by her Rules and Canons to require of all such as she admitted
to the participation of the Lords Supper, the Subscription of such terms as are
contained in the Solemn League and Covenant? What Reformed Church does not
satisfy her self with the Profession of the Faith contained in the Apostles
Creed at Baptism? What Reformed Church requires the Profession of such a vast,
such a numberless number of Articles and Propositions as are contained in the
Westminster Confession, and the larger and shorter Catechisms, of all those,
whom they receive into the Catholic Church? What is this less, than to make
all these Propositions Necessary terms of their Communion? And how impossible
is it, at this Rate, ever to think of a Catholic Communion among Christians?
Is not this, needlessly, and, by consequence, very Criminally and
Unchristianly, to lay a Fund for unavoidable, unextinguishable and everlasting
Schisms? Neither yet is this all the Misery: For

Considering the Measures our Brethren steer by, there is little ground to hope
that they shall ever turn weary of Innovating. The first Brood of
Presbyterians, the old Melvilians, inverted (as I have told) almost the whole
Scheme of our Reformers: The next Birth, the thirty-eight-men, made innumerable
Recessions from their Progenitors, the Melvilians: The present Production have
forsaken most of the Measures of the thirty-eight-men: And what hopes of their
fixing? When shall it be proper for them to say, we have done innovating?
Hitherto we have innovated, but we will innovate no farther? How dreadful a
thing is it for men to give loose Reins to the Spirit of Innovation! But I
shall not pursue this farther: I know the temper of our Brethren; it is but too
too probable, they may impute it to Malice or Revenge, or ane imbittered
Spirit, to some ill thing or another, that I have pursued this matter so far;
But if they shall, I pray, God forgive them, for they are injurious to me. The
principle which prompted me to represent these things, was truly, that of
Fraternal Correption. My main Design was to soften, not irritate them; not to
exasperate them, but to bring them to a more Manageable and Considering temper.
For

I can, and do, sincerely, protest, that it is daily the earnest desire of my
Soul, that all men may be saved and come to the knowledge of the Truth. I wish
all Men Christians, and I wish all Christians, Christians Indeed; In a special
manner I wish our Presbyterian Brethren, and we, may, yet, be so much Honored
and blessed of God, that in the sincerity of Brotherly kindness, we may be all
United in one Holy Communion. I wish we may all earnestly contend, with all
Christian forbearance, fellow-feeling, and Charity, as becomes the members of
the one Church, whereof Christ Jesus is the Head, to have the poor, divided
desolated Church of Scotland restored to that Peace, Purity and Unity, That
Order, Government and Stability, which our Blessed Master has instituted and
commanded. May Almighty God inspire us all with the Spirit of his Son, that our
hearts being purified by ane Humble and a Lively Faith, the Faith that works
by Love, and our Lives Reformed according to the Laws and great purposes of our
Holy Religion, we may be all unanimously and dutifully disposed, for so Great,
so Glorious, so Desirable a Mercy. And with this I end this Fifth Enquiry. And
now,

I think, I have competently answered the ends of my undertaking, which was to
Examine this Article of our new Claim of Right, and try its firmness and
solidity. I think, I have comprised, in these five Enquiries, every thing that
is material in it, considered, either in it self, or as it supports the great
alterations have been, lately, made in the Church of Scotland. It might have
been more narrowly sifted; and sifted more narrowly it might have been found
liable to many more exceptions. For instance,

1. It may seem somewhat surprising that such ane Article should have been put
into a Scottish Claim of Right; That it should have been made so seemingly
Fundamental, at least, in the Constitution of the Scottish Monarchy, which is
so famous and has been so much renowned for its Antiquity. Was ever such ane
Article in a Scottish Claim of Right before? No Man, I think, will say it was
in the Original Contract made with Fergus the First (if any Original Contract
was made with him) for if he was, he was advanced to the Throne, 330 years
before our Saviors Birth, if we may believe our Historians: And, I think, it
was not ane Article in the Original Contract, then that the Christian Church
should be so or so Governed. Few men, I think, will say, it was part of the
Original Contract made with any Scottish King before the Reformation. No man
can produce any such Article in any Original Contract, made with King James the
Sixth, King Charles the First, or King Charles the Second, unless it was the
Solemn League and Covenant, or the Act of the West Kirk. It cannot be said that
it was in any Original Contract, made with King James the Seventh, for all the
Nation knows it was Declared by the Meeting of Estates, that he forfeited his
Right to the Crown for having made no Original Contracts. These are all the
real or pretended Kings we have had since the Reformation, till the late
Revolution. Is not this Article, therefore, a New Fundamental, added to the
Constitution of the Ancient Scottish Monarchy? This is all upon the supposition
that it is, truly, a part of our new Claim of Right. Though indeed,

2. It may be made a Question, whither it can be justly called a part of the
Claim of Right? It is very possible for one thing to be in another without
being part of that other. And one would think, this Article looked very unlike a
part of a Claim of Right: It seems not to run in the style that is proper for
Claims of Right: It Is certain, it runs not in the style of the rest of the
Articles. All the rest of the Articles tell us either what is contrary to Law,
or what are the undoubted Rights of the People: This Article imports nothing
like either the one or the other. It only Declares Prelacy to be a Grievance,
etc. This does not say that it was contrary to Law: For Laws themselves may be,
and actually were Declared to be Grievances by the Meeting of Estates, in
another paper; And the Articles Declaring that Prelacy ought to be Abolished,
is ane Argument that it subsisted by Law, and it was abolished as subsisting by
Law, for the Act which abolished it Repealed the Laws by which it subsisted.
Neither is Prelacy declared by the Article to be contrary to the Rights, but
only to the Inclinations of the People; and I think, it requires no Depth of
Metaphysical precision to distinguish between Rights and Inclinations. Indeed,
it seems obvious to any body that this Article had had its situation more
properly and naturally amongst the Grievances, which were digested in another
paper; and therefore, I say, being only praeternaturally, and by apparent
force, thrust into the Claim of Right, it may be made a Question, whither its
being, so, there, be enough to make it part of the Claim of Right? Or whither
its nature should not be regarded rather than its post. And, it should be
constructed to have no more weight than if it had been Regularly ranked in its
own Category? But such Questions are too hard for me, and more proper for
Lawyers to determine. Neither shall I meddle

3. With many other obvious difficulties which must necessarily result from
this Article, being made truly a part of the Original Contract, between King
and People; Such as its making the settlement of the Crown to depend, not on
Right of Inheritance, or Proximity of Blood, or any such Ancient, Legal, Solid,
Hereditary Title, but on the, every day, changeable Inclinations of the People,
for these are the main fund of the Article, and by the supposition, the Article
is intrinsecal and fundamental to the present settlement. This, I say, (and
many more such, which might be easily named) seems a very considerable
difficulty that might be urged on such a supposition: But I shall not insist on
them. Farther,

4. Besides all these Awkward exceptions, whither it is, or is not, a part of
the Claim of Right, the style of it might deserve to be considered:
Particularly, that Phrase, of Prelacy's being a great and insupportable
Grievance and Trouble to the Nation. It Is true I have in my Third Enquiry,
guessed at its meaning; But I do sincerely acknowledge it was but guessing; and
even yet, I can do no more but guess about it. Does it not, at first sight,
appear a little too big and swelling? Is it not hard to find, for it, a certain
and determined sound? To call a thing a great and insupportable Grievance and
Trouble, seems a little too flashy and fanciful. Is it not liker to the flights
of the Rhetoricians designed for popular amusement, than to the plain, solid
significant style which is proper for the Grand Council of a Nation? For
Original-Contract, and Claim-of Right-makers?

5. Seeing, it is plain, the Article was formed for the abolition of Prelacy,
and the Introduction of Presbytery, it seems a little strange, that such ane
important Revolution, in the Church, should have been founded on such
Vntheological Reasons. It seems to lie at the bottom of this Article, that the
Government of the Church is Ambulatory and Indifferent; That there is nothing
of Divine Institution about it; that the State may alter it when it pleases;
and, as it thinks expedient, set up, Alternatively, either Prelacy or Parity,
or neither, but plain Erastianism, if it has a mind for it. These are
suppositions, which, I think, ought not to be very relishing even to our
Presbyterian Brethren: Tho hitherto they only have got advantage by the
Article, yet it seems not honorable for their Government, to stand on such a
foot, nor can they be secure but that it may be very soon turned down again.
Though, in consequence of this,

6. By G. R's Measures, the Framers of the Article, were incapable of Voting
about the Establishment of any Form of Government in the Church: For they
proceeded in voting this Article, clearly upon the principles of Indifferency.
2 Vind. ad Let. 3.. 4.
But according to him as I have already observed, such, though they may be
persons both Religious and Learned, are not to be brought into the Reckoning,
with those who have Right to vote about Church Government. Indeed according to
his Scheme, the Nation, by this Article, is brought to a very lamentable state.
For thus ane Article is imposed on it, by such as had no Right, no Power to
impose it, because they have fairly declared themselves to be for the
indifferency of particular forms of Church Government. And yet by another
proposition, in his Scheme, this Article cannot be altered: For this is one of
his positions, that the Deed of a Meeting of Estates is to be interpreted the
Deed of the whole Nation: From which it follows by unavoidable consequence,
that the whole Nation, hereafter must be excluded from voting about the
Government of the Church: For the whole Nation (even Presbyterians themselves
not excepted) by Establishing this Article have declared themselves
indifferent, as to the Species of Church Government. Now as I said, is not this
a Lamentable state to which the Nation is reduced? It lies under the burden of
ane ill-contrived Article, imposed by such as were not Competent, had no Right,
to impose it; and yet it must lie, Remedilessly, under this burden, because
those who imposed it, by imposing it, while they were not Competent nor
Qualified for imposing it, have rendered the whole Nation incompetent, and
unqualified for altering it, or freeing it self of such a burden. Was ever
Nation so miserably intricated? But enough of G. R.

These, I say, and several other things, might have been farther considered and
insisted on: But having already answered the ends of my undertaking, I shall
proceed no farther: I conclude with this.

If these Papers shall have the Fortune to come to the hand of any Scottish
Noblemen or Gentlemen, and if they shall think it worth their while to peruse
them, I earnestly beg one piece of Justice from them: It is, that they would
not apprehend, I had the least intention or inclination to cast disgrace on
such of them as concurred either to the framing or the voting of this Article.
I love my native Country: I honor all Persons of true honor in it: I have no
where impugned the Authority of those who Established this Article; I had no
such purpose; My undertaking required no such performance; All I designed was
to do service to my Country, according to my poor abilities: I cannot think
any Ingenuous person, any person of true honor, can deny, that it is good
service done to mankind to tell them truth Civilly, and endeavor Dutifully to
recover them from mistakes, if they labor under any. We are all fallible, and
capable of taking things by the wrong handle; and a very mean Person may be
sometimes a seasonable Monitor. If I have said any thing false or amiss, I
crave all men pardon: But if I have advanced nothing but Truth, if I have done
nothing but Justice to this Article (and I protest seriously, I think, I have
done no more) I cannot think it will be Just or Generous, in any Man, to
harbor Picques against me, for doing what I have done; The Genuine use (I am
sure it is Genuine) I wish, my Contrymen, of whatever Station or Character,
may make of my Examination of this Article, is, to suffer themselves to be put
to thinking by it, and Enquiring whither there may not be some other Articles,
every whit, of as great importance to the Nation, in our new Claim of Right, as
ill-founded as this; And if any such are found, to contribute their joint
endeavors, as becomes true Scottishmen and good Christians to have all
Righted.

FINIS.

