A SPEECH Lately Made by a Noble PEER OF THE REALM.
My Lord,
IN this great Debate concerning the King's Speech, the sad State and Condition
we are in, and the Remedies thereof; I have Offered You my Opinion, and many
Lords have spoken admirable well to it, with great Freedom and Plainness, as
the Case requires.

Give me leave to offer you some few words, in answer to two or three of my
Lords of the Earls Bench, that have maintained the contrary Opinion.

My Lord, near me, has told your Lordships, that the President of Hen. the 4.
that I offered to you (who was a Wise and Magnanimous Prince; and yet upon the
Address of his Parliament, put away a great part of his Family, and Councils at
one time,) is no proper instance, because he was an Usurper, had an ill Title,
and was bound to please the People.

My Lords, I meddle not with his Title. I am sure our King has a very
undoubted one; But this My Lord must allow, that that wise Prince having need
of the People, knew no better way to please them, and to create a good
intelligence between them and him, than to put a way those from Court and
Council that were unacceptable to them.

If our King has the same Necessity to please the People, (though for other
Reasons than want of a Title;) Yet I am sure the President holds, that a Wise
Prince, when he has need of his People, will rather part with his Family and
Counselors, than displease them.

My Lords, This Noble Lord near me, has found fault with that President, that
he supposes I offered your Lordships concerning the Chergeable Ladies at Court;
But I remember no such thing, I said; but if I must speak of them, I shall say
as the Prophet did to King Saul, What means the bleating of this kind of
Cattle? And I hope the King will make me the same answer, that he reserves them
for Sacrifice, and means to deliver them up to please his People,

For there must be, ( in plain English) My Lords, a change; We must neither
have Popish Wife, nor Popish Favorite, nor Popish Mistress, nor Popish
Counselor at Court, or any new Convert. What I spoke was about another Lady
that belongs not to the Court, but like Simpronia in Catalines Conspiracy, does
more Mischief than Cethegus.

In this time of Distress, I could humbly advise our Prince would take the same
course that the Duke of Savoy did, to suffer neither Strangers nor Ambassadors
to stay above some few weeks in his Country; for all the Strangers and
Ambassadors here, have served the Plot, and Design against us; I am sure they
have no tie to be for us.

But my Lords, what I rose up to speak, was more especially to my Lord of the
Earls Bench, that spoke last, and sits behind me: Who, as he has the greatest
influence in our present Councils, so he has let fall to you the very Root of
the matter, and the hinges upon which all turns; He tells you that the House of
Commons have lately made offers to the King, and he wonders we do not expect
the Kings Answer to them, before we enter into so hot and high Debates.

He tells you, if the King be assured of Supplies we cannot doubt of his
Compliance in this and all we can ask; for otherwise the King should fall into
that that is the worst condition of a Prince, to have his People have no
confidence in him. My Lords, This is that I know they put the King upon, and
this is that we must be ruined by, if we may not with Freedom and Plainness
open our Case.

My Lords, It Is a very hard thing to say that we cannot trust the King; and
that we have already been deceived so often, that we see plainly the
apprehensions of Discontent in the People, is no Argument at Court. And though
our Prince be in himself an Excellent Person, that the People have the greatest
Inclinations imaginable to Love; yet we must say he is such an one, as no Story
affords us a parallel of: How plain and how many are the proofs of the Design
to murder him? How little is he apprehensive of it?

The Transactions between him and his Brother are Admirable, and
Incomprehensible; His Brother designs being early Known, to aim at the Crown,
before his Majesty's Restoration to this Kingdom.

This Match with a Portugal Lady, not like to have Children, Contrived by the
Dukes Father-in-Law; and no sooner effected but the Duke and his Party make
Proclamation to the World, that we are like to have no Children, that he must
be the certain Heir.

He takes his Seat in Parliament as Prince of Wales, His Guards about him; The
Princes Lodgings at Whitehall, his Guards upon the same Floor, without any
Interposition between him and the King; so that the King was in his Hands, and
in his Power every Night: All Offices and Preferments being bestowed by him,
Not a Bishop made without him.

This Prince changes his Religion to make himself a Party, and such a Party
that his Brother must be sure to dye and be made away, to make room for Him,
nothing could preserve him, but that which I hope he will never do, give
greater earnest to that wicked Party than his Brother could; and after all,
this Plot breaks out, plainly headed by the Duke, his interest and his Design.

How the King has behaved himself ever since the breaking ou^ of it, the World
knows; we have expected every hour that the Court should join with the Duke
against us: And it is evident more has been done to make the Plot a
Presbyterian Plot, than to discover it.

The Prorogations, the Dissolutions, the Cutting short of parliaments, not
suffering them to have time or opportunity to lo^k into any thing, has showed
what reason we have to have confidence in this Court. We are now come to a
Parliament again, by what Fate or what Council, for my part I cannot guess;
neither do I understand the R^ddle of it.

The Duke is quitted and sent away; the House of Commons have brought up a Bill
to disable him of the Crown; and I think they are so far extremely in the
right; but your Lordships are wiser than they, and have rejected it; yet you
have thought fit, and the King himself has made the Proposition, to make such
Expedients as shall render him but a Nominal Prince.

In the mean while where is this Duke, that the King and both Houses have
declared unanimously thus dangerous? Why he is in Scotland raising of Forces
upon the Terra firma, that can enter dry foot upon us, without hazard of Winds
or Seas, the very place he should be in to raise a party there, to be ready
when from hence he shall have notice: So that this being the case, where is the
trust? We all think the business is so ripe, that they have the Garrisons, the
Arms, the Ammunition, the Seas and Souliery all in their hands; they want but
one good Sum of Money to set up, and Crown the Work, and then they shall have
no more need of the People; and I believe whether they are pleased or no will
be no great trouble to them.

My Lords, I hear of a Bargain in the House of Commons, and an Address made to
the King but this I know, and must boldly say it and plainly, that the Nation
is Betrayed if upon any Terms we part with our Money till we are sure the King
is ours; have what Laws you will, and what Conditions you will, they will be of
no use but wast Paper before Easter, if the Court have Money to set up for
Popery and Arbitrary Designs in the mean while.

On the other hand give me leave to tell you my Lords, the King has no reason
to distrust his People; no man can go home and say, that if the King Comply
with his People they will do nothing for him, but ^are all up from him; we want
a Government and we want a Prince that we may trust, even with the spending of
half our Annual Revennues, for some time, for the Preservation of these Nations.

The growing Greatness of the French can not be stopped with a little Expense,
nor without a real and hearty Union of the King and his People. It was never
known in England that our Princes wanted Supplies either for their Foreign
designs, or for their Pleasures; nothing ever shut the English Purses but the
fears of having their Money used against them.

The hour that the King shall satisfy the People, that what we give is not to
make us Slaves and Papists, he may have what he will, and this your Lordships
know and all mankind that know us: Therefore let me plainly tell your
Lordships, the Arguments that the present Ministers use, is to Destroy the King
and not Preserve him: For if the King will first see what we will do for him,
it is impossible if we are in our Sen^es we should do any thing.

But if he will first show that he is entirely ours, that he Weds the Interest
and the Religion of the Nation, it is impossible he should want any thing that
we can give.

But I see how the Argument will be used: Sir, they will do nothing for you,
what should you do with these men? But on the other hand I am bold to say.

Sir, You may have any thing of this Parliament; put away these Men, change
your Principles, change your Court, and be your self; for the King himself may
have any thing of us.

My Lords, if I have been too plain, I beg your Pardon; I thought it was the
Duty of an English Nobleman at this time to speak plain or never.

I am sure I mean well: and if any man can answer or oppose Reason to what I
say, I beg they would do it; for I do not desire or propose any Question.

I Beg this Debate may last for some days, and that we may go to the bottom of
the matter, and see if these things are so or no, and what Cur^ there is of the
Evil we are in; and then the Result of your Debates may produce some proper
Question.

However, we know who hears, and I am glad of this, that your Lordships have
dealt s^ Honorably and so clearly in the Kings presenc^ and in the Kings
hearing, that he cannot say h^ wants a right State of thsngs; he has it before
him, and may take Council as he thinks fit.

London, Printed for F. S. at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhil, 168^


