Two Speeches.

I. The Earl of Shaftsbury's Speech in the House of Lords the 20th. of October,
1675.

II. The D. of Buckinghams Speech in the House of Lords the 16th. of November
1675.

Together with the Protestation, and Reasons of several Lords for the
Dissolution of this Parliament; Entered in the Lords Journal the day the
Parliament was Prorogued, Nov. 22d. 1675.

AMSTERDAM, Printed Anno Domini. 1675.

The Reader is desired, before he reads this Book, to correct these following
Errata's which have escaped the Press through have.
PAge 1. l. 17. for have r. hear, p. 2. l. 20. for persecuted r. prosecuted, p.
3. l. 12 r. of greatest dependence, l. 18. r. Lords may think, l. 26. for your
r. our, p. 4. l. 17. for quarrels r. Laws, and, p. 5. l. 9. for have they r.
they have, l. 17. r. your Judicature, l. 25. for tends r. leads, l. 35. for
raise r. pass, p. 6. l. 2. r. and when, l. 6. for out r. on, l. 11. for worst*
r. right, l. 30. r. declare, p. 7. l. 9. for and r: nor, l. 16. r. those in
Absolute Monarchies, l. 17. r. servile and low, l. 25. r. and the People, l:
37. for Common r. Commission, p. 8. l. 14. r. for all this, l. 15. cross out
Sir Ier. Whitchcot and the Booksellers, l. 17. for your r. our, l. 24. r. and
the disingagement, p. 9. l. 1. for your r. our, l. 17. r. by Situation, p. 13.
l 22. for Natino r. Notion, p. 16. l. 16. for Ld. Mahum. r. Ld. Mohun.

The Earl of Shaftsburys Speech in the House of Lords, upon the Debate of
appointing a day for the hearing Dr. Shirleys Cause, the 20th of October, 1675.
My Lords,
OUr All is at Stake, and therefore You must give me leave to speak freely
before We part with it. My Lord Bishop of Salisbury is of Opinion, that we
should rather appoint a day to consider what to do upon the Petition; then to
appoint a day of hearing: And my Lord Keeper, for I may name them at a
Committee of the whole House tell's Us in very Eloquent and Studied Language.
That he will Propose Us a way far less liable to Exception, and much less
Offensive and Injurious to our own Privileges, then that of appointing a day
of Heariug. And I beseech Your Lordships, did you not after all these fine
Words expect some Admirable Proposal! but it ended in this. That Your Lordships
should appoint a day, nay a very long day to Consider what You would do in it:
And my Lord has undertaken to convince you, that this is Your only Course by
several undeniable Reasons; the first of which is: That it is against your
Judicature to hear this Cause which is not proper before Us, nor ought to be
relieved by Us. To this my Lords give me leave to Answer, that I did not expect
from a man Professing the Law; that after an Answer by Orders of the Court was
put in, and a day had been appointed for Hearing, which by some Accident was
set aside, and the Plaintiff moving for a second day to be assigned that ever
without hearing Counsel on both sides; the Court did enter into the Merits of
the Cause. And if your Lordships should do it here in a Cause attended with the
Circumstances this is, it would not only be an apparent Injustice, but a plain
Subterfuge to avoid a Point you durst not maintain.

But my Lords second Reason speaks the Matter more clearly, for that is:
Because it is a doubtful case, whether the Commons have not Privilege, and
therefore my Lord would have You, To appoint a farther and a very long day to
consider of it, which in plain English is, that Your Lordships should confess
upon Your Books, that you conceive it on second Thoughts a doubtful Case, for
so Your Appointing a day to Consider will do, and that for no other Reason, but
because my Lord Keeper thinks it so, which I hope will not be a Reason to
prevail with Your Lordships; since we cannot yet by experience tell that his
Lordship is capable of thinking Your Lordships in the Right, in any Matter
against the Judgment of the House of Commons; it is so hard a thing even for
the ablest of men to change ill Habits.

But my Lords third Reason, is the most Admirable of all which he Styles
Unanswerable, viz. That Your Lordships are all convinced in Your Consciences
that this (if prosecuted) will cause a Breach. I beseech Your Lordships,
consider whether this Argument thus applied would not overthrow the Law of
Nature, and all the Laws of Right and Property in the World: For it is an
Argument, and a very good one, that You should not stand or insist on Claims,
where You have not a clear Right; or where the Question is not of Consequence
and of Moment, in a Matter that may produce a Dangerous Pernicious Breach
between Relations, Persons, Bodies politic joined in Interest, and High
Concerns together. So on the other hand, if the Obstinacy of the Party in the
wrong, shall be made an unanswerable Argument for the other Party to recede and
give up his just Rights. How long shall the People keep their Liberties, or the
Princes or Governors of the World their Prerogatives! How long shall the
Husband maintain his dominion, or any man his Property from his Friend, or his
Neighbors Obstinacy? But my Lords when I hear my Lord Keeper open so
Eloquently the Fatal Consequences of a Breach: I cannot forbear to fall into
some admiration how it comes to pass: That (if the Consequences be so fatal)
the Kings Ministers in the House of Commons, of which there are several that
are of the Cabinet, and have daily resort to His Majesty, and have the
Direction and Trust of his Affairs: I say that none of hese should press these
Consequences there, or give the least stop to the Carreer of that House in this
Business; but that all the Votes concerning this Affair, nay even that very
Vote, That no Appeal from any Court of Equity is cognisable by the House of
Lords, should pass nemine contradicente. And yet all the great Ministers with
us here, the Bishops and other Lords of dependence on the Court contend this
point, as if it were pro Aris and focis. I hear His Majesty in Scotland has
been pleased to declare against Appeals in Parliament, I cannot much blame the
Court if they think (the Lord Keeper, and the Judges being of the Kings Naming,
and in His Power to change) that the Justice of the Nation is safe enough, and
I my Lord think so too, during this Kings time, though I hear Scotland not
without reason complain already: Yet how future Princes may use this Power, and
how Judges may be made not men of Ability or Integrity, but men of Relation and
Dependence, and who will do what they are commanded; and all men's Causes come
to be Judged, and Estates disposed on as Great Men at Court please.

My Lords, the Constitution of your Government has provided better for Us, and
I can never believe so Wise a Body as the House of Commons, will prove that
Foolish woman, which plucks down her House with her hands.

My Lords, I must presume in the next place to say something to what was offered
by my Lord Bishop of Salsburye, a man of Great Learning and Abilities, and
always versed in a stronger and closer way of Reasoning, then the Business of
that Noble Lord I answered before did accustom him too, and that Reverend
Prelate has stated the Matter very sair upon two Heads.

The first, whether the hearing of Causes and Appeals, and especially in this
Point where the Members have privilege, be so Material to us, that it ought
not to give way to the Reason of State, of greater Affairs that pressed us at
the time.

The second was, If this Business be of that Moment, yet whether the appointing
a day to consider of this Petition; would prove of that consequence, and
prejudice to your Cause.

My Lords, to these give me leave in the first place to say, that this Matter
is no less then Your whole Judicature, and Your Judicature is the life and soul
of the Dignity of the Peerage of England, you will quickly grow burdensome, if
you grow useless, you have now the greatest and most useful end of Parliament
principally in you, which is not to make new Laws but to redress Grievances,
and to Maintain the Old Landmarks. The House of Commons Business is to
complain, Your Lordships to redress, not only the Complaints from them that are
the Eyes of the Nation, but all other particular persons that address to You. A
Land may Groan under a Multitude of Quarrels I believe Ours does, and when Laws
grow so multiplied, they prove oftener Snares, then Directions and Security to
the People. I look upon it as the ignorance and weakness of the latter Age, if
not worse, the effect of the Designs of ill men; that it is grown a general
opinion, that where there is not a particular direction in some Act of
Parliament the Law is defective, as if the Common Law had not provided much
better, Shorter, and Plainer for the Peace and Quiet of the Nation then
intricate, long, and perplexed Statutes do: which has made Work for the
Lawyers, given power to the Judges, lessened Your Lordships Power, and in a
good measure unhinged the security of the People.

My Lord Bishop tells You, That Your whole Judicature is not in question, but
only the privilege of the House of Commons, of their Members not appearing at
Your Bar: My Lords, were it not no more, yet that for Justice and the Peoples
sake You ought not to part with: How far a Privilege of a House of Commons,
their Servants, and those they own, does extend Westminster Hall, may with
Grief tell Your Lordships. And the same Privilege of their Members being not
sued, must be allowed by Your Lordships, as well, and what a failer of Justice
this would prove whilst they are Lords for life, and you for Inheritance, let
the World Judge; for my part I am willing to come to Conference when ever the
Dispute shall begin again, and dare undertake to your Lordships, that they have
neither President, Reason, nor any Justifiable pretense to show against us; and
therefore my Lords, if you part with this undoubted Right merely for the
asking, where will the asking stop! And my Lords, we are sure it does not stop
here, for have they already nemine Contradicente! Voted against Your Lordships
power of Appeals from any Court of Equity! so that you may plainly see where
this Caution and reason of State means to stop, not one jot short of laying
your whole Judicature aside, for the same reason of passing the Kings Money, of
not interrupting good Laws, or what ever else must of ncessity avoid all Breach
upon what score soever: And your Lordships plainly see the Breach will be as
well made upon Judicature in general as upon this, so that when your Lordships
have appointed a day; a very long day, or to consider whether Dr. Shirleys
Cause be not too hot to handle. And when you have done the same for Sir
Nicholas Stanton whose Petition I here is coming in, your Lordships must
proceed to a Vote to lay all private Business aside for six Weeks, for that
Phrase of private Business has obtained upon this last Age, upon that which is
your most public Duty and Business; namely the Administration of Justice. And
I can tell your Lordships, besides the reason that tends to it, that I have
some intelligence of the designing such a Vote: For on the second day of your
sitting, at the rising of the Lords House there came a Gentleman into the Lobby
belonging to a very great Person, and asked in great haste are the Lords up?
have they passed the Vote? and being ask't what Vote? He answered the Vote of
no Private Business for six Weeks.

My Lords, if this be your Business, see where you are, if ye are to Postpone
our Judicature for fear of offending the House of Commons for six Weeks; that
they in the interim may pass the Money, and other acceptable Bills that His
Majesty thinks of Importance; are so many wise men in the House of Commons to
be laid asleep, and to pass all these acceptable things, when they have done,
to let us to be let loose upon them.

Will they not remember this next time there is want of Money (...) may not
they rather be assured by those Ministers (...) are amongst them, and go on so
unanimously with (...) that the King is on their side in this Controversy,
(...) when the public Businesses are over, our time shall be to short to make
a Breach or vindicate our selves in the Matter. And then I beg your Lordships
where are you; after you have asserted but the last Session your worst of
Judicature, so highly even in this Point, and after the House of Commons had
gone so high against you on the other hand, as to post up their Declaration and
Remonstrances on Westminster Hall Doors, the very next Session after you
postpone the very same Causes, and not only those, but all Judicatures
whatever. I beseech your Lordships, will not this prove a fatal president and
confession against your selves? It Is a Maxim, and a rational one amongst
Lawyers, that one President where the Case has been Contested, is worth a 1000
where there has been no Contest: My Lords, in saying this I humbly suppose I
have given a sufficient answer to my Lord Bishops second Question; Whether the
appointing a day to consider what you will do with this Petition be of that
consequence to your right, for it is a plain confession, that it is a doubtful
Case, and that infinitely stronger then if it were a new thing to you never
heard of before; For it is the very same Case, and the very same thing desired
in that Case, that you formerly ordered and so strongly asserted; so that upon
time, and all the deliberation imaginable, you declared your selves to become
doubtful, and you put your selves out of your own hands, into that power that
you have no reason to believe on your side in this Question.

My Lords, I have all the duty imaginable to his Majesty, and should withal
submission give way to any thing that he should think of Importance to his
affairs: But in this Point it is to alter the constitution of the Government,
if you are ask't to lay this aside; And there is no reason of can be an
Argument to your Lordships to turn your selves out of that Interest you have in
the constitution of the Government, it is not only your concern that you
maintain your selves in it, but it is the concern of the Poorest man in England
that you keep your Station: It Is your Lordiships concern, and that so highly,
that I will be bold to say the King can give none of you a requital or
recompense for it, what are empty Titles? What is present Power, or Riches and
a great Estate, wherein I have no firm and fixed property? It Is the
constitution of the Government and Maintaining it that secures your Lordships
and every man else in what he has: The Poorest Lord, if the Birthright of the
Peerage be maintained, has a Fair Prospect before him for himself or his
Posterity: But the greatest Title with the greatest present Power and Riches,
is but a mean creature, and maintains those absolute Monarchies no otherwise
then by servile low flatteries and upon uncertain terms.

My Lords, It Is not only your Interest, but the Interest of the Nation that you
Maintain your Rights, for let the House of Commons and Gentry of England think
what they please, there is no Prince that ever governed without Nobility or an
Army: if you will not have one; you must have the other, or the Monarchy cannot
long support, or keep it self from tumbling into a Democratical Republique.
Your Lordships and people have the same cause, and the same Enemies. My Lords,
would you be in favor with the King? It Is a very ill way to it, to put your
selves out of a future capacity, to be considerable in his service: I do not
find in Story, or in Modern Experience, but that it is better, and a man is much
more regarded that is in a capacity and opportunity to serve, then he that has
wholly deprived himself of all for his Princes service: And I therefore declare
that I will serve my Prince as a Peer, but will not destroy the Peerage to
serve him.

My Lords, I have heard of 20. foolish Modells and Expedients to secure the
Justice of the Nation, and yet to take this Right from your Lordships as the
King by his Comm^^ appointing Commoners to hear Appeals; or that the twelve
Judges should be the persons, or that persons should be appointed by Act of
Parliament, which are all not only to take away your Lordships just Right, that
ought not to be altered any more then any other part of the Government, but are
in themselves when well weighed Ridiculous. I must deal freely with your
Lordships, these things could never have risen in men's minds, but that there
has been some kind of Provocation that has given the first rise of it: Pray my
Lords forgive me, if on this occasion I put you in mind of Committee Dinners,
and the Scandal of it, those Droves of Ladies that attended all Causes; 'twas
come to that pass, that men even Hired or Borrowed of their Friends handsome
Sisters or Daughters to deliver their Petitions: But yet for this I must say,
that your Judgments have been Sacred, unless in one or two Causes, Sir or,
Whitehootes, the Booksellers, and those we owe most to that Bench; from whence
we now apprehend most danger.

There is one thing I had almost forgot to speak to, Which is the Conjuncture
of time, the Hinge upon which your reason of State turns; and to that my Lords
give me leave to say, if this be not a time of Leisure for you to vindicate
your Privileges, you must never expect one: I could almost say that the
Harmony, good Agreement, and Concord that is to be prayed for at most other
times, may be fatal to us now, we owe the Peace of this last two years
disingagement from the French interest to the two Houses differing from the
Sense and Opinion of Whitehall, so at this time, the thing in the World this
Nation has most reason to apprehend, is a General Peace, which cannot now
happen without very advantageous Terms to the French, and Disadvantagious to
the House of Austria: We are the Kings great Counselors and if so, have Right
to differ, and give contrary Councels to these few are nearest about him, I
fear they would advance a General Peace, I Am sure I would advise against it,
and hinder it at this time by all the ways imaginable: I heartily wish nothing
from you may add weight and reputation to those Councels would assist the
French. No Money for Ships, nor Preparation you can make, nor Personal
assurances your Prince can have, can secure us from the French if they are at
leisure, he is grown the most Potent of us all at Sea: He has Built 24. Ships
this last year; and has 30. more in number then we besides the advantage that
our Ships are all out of Order, and his so exquisitely provided for, that every
Ship has his particular Storehouse. It Is incredible the Money he has, and is
bestowing in making Harbors, he makes nature it self give way to the vastness
of his Expense: And after all this shall a Prince so Wise, so intent upon his
affairs, be thought to make all these preparations to Sail over Land, and fall
on the back of Hungary, and Batter the Walls of Kaminit'z, or is it possible he
should oversee his Interest in seizing of Ireland, a thing so feasible to him,
if he be master of the Seas, as he certainly now is; and which when attained
gives him all the Southern, Mediteranian, East and West India Trade, and
renders him both Situation and excellent Harbors, perpetual Master of the Seas
without Dispute.

My Lords to, conclude this point, I fear the Court of England is greatly
mistaken in it, and I do not wish them the reputation of the concurrance of the
Kingdom: And this out of the most sincere Loyalty to his Majesty, and love to
my Nation.

My Lords, I have but one thing more to trouble you with, and that peradventure
is a consideration of the greatest weight and concern, both to your Lordships,
and the whole Nation. I have often seen in this House, that the Arguments, with
strongest reason, and most convincing to the Lay Lords in General, have not had
the same effect upon the Bishops Bench; but that they have unanimously gone
against us in matters, that many of us have thought Essential and undoubted
Rights; And I consider, that it is not possible, that Men of great Learning,
Piety, and Reason, as their Lordships are, should not have the same care of
doing right, and the same conviction, what is right upon clear reason offered,
that other your Lordships have. And therefore, my Lords, I must necessarily
think, we differ in principles; And then it is very easy to apprehend what is
the clearest sense to men of my principle, may not at all persuade or affect
the Conscience of the best man of a different one. I put your Lordships the
case plainly, as it is now before us. My principle is, That the King is King by
Law, and by the same Law that tbe poor Man enjoys his Cottage; and so it
becomes the concern of every man in England, that has but his liberty, to
maintain and defend, to his utmost, the King in all his Rights and
Prerogatives. My Principle is also, That the Lords House, and the Judicature
and Rights belonging to it, are an Essential part of the Government, and
Established by the same Law; The King governing and administering Justice by His
House of Lords, and advising with both His Houses of Parliament in all
important matters, is the Government I own, am born under, and am obliged to.
If ever there should happen in future ages (which God forbid) a King governing
by an Army, without his Parliament, it is a Government I own not, am not obliged
to, nor was born under. According to this Principle, every honest man that
holds it, must endeavor equally to preserve the frame of the Government, in
all the parts of it, and cannot satisfy his Conscience to give up the Lords
House for the Service of the Crown, or to take away the just rights and
privileges of the House of Commons to please the Lords. But there is another
Principle got into the World, my Lords, that has not been long there; for
Archbishop Land was the first Author that I remember of it: And I cannot find,
that the Jesuits, or indeed the Popish Clergy has ever owned it, but some of
the Episcopal Clergy of our British Isles; and it is withal, (as it is new*) so
the most dangerous destructive Doctrine to our Government and Law, that ever
was. It Is the first of the Cannons published by the Convocation, 1640. That
Monarchy is of Divine Right. This Doctrine was then preached up, and maintained
by Sibthorp, Manwaring, and others, and of later years, by a Book published by
Dr. Sanderson, Bishop of Lincoln, under the name of Archbishop Usher; and how
much it is spread amongst our Dignified Clergy, is very easily known. We all
agree, That the King and His Government, is to be obeyed for Conscience sake;
and that the Divine Precepts, require not only here, but in all parts of the
World, Obedience to Lawful Governors. But that this Family are our Kings, and
this particular frame of Government, is our lawful Constitution, and obliges
us, is owing only to the particular Laws of our Country. This Laudean Doctrine
was the root that produced the Bill of Test last Session, and some very
perplexed Oaths that are of the same nature with that, and yet imposed by
several Acts of this Parliament.

In a word, if this Doctrine be true, our Magna Charta is of no force, our Laws
are but Rules amongst our selves during the Kings pleasure. Monarchy, if of
Divine Right, cannot be bounded or limited by humane Laws, nay, what is more,
cannot bind it self; and All our Claims of right by the Law, or Constitution of
the Government, All the Jurisdiction and Privilege of this House, All the
Rights and Privileges of the House of Commons, All the Properties and
Liberties of the People, are to give way, not only to the interest, but the
will and pleasure of the Crown. And the best and worthyest of Men, holding this
principle, must Vote to deliver up all we have, not only when reason of State,
and the separate Interest of the Crown require it, but when the will and
pleasure of the King is known, would have it so. For that must be, to a man of
that principle. the only rule and measure of Right and Justice. Therefore, my
Lords, you see how necessary it is, that our Principles be known and how fatal
to us all it is, that this Principle should he suffered to spread any further.

My Lords, to conclude, your Lordships have seen of what consequence this
matter is to you, and that the appointing a day to consider, is no less then
declaring your selves doubtful, upon second and deliberate thoughts, that you
put your selves out of your own hands, into a more then a moral probability, of
haviug this Session made a president against you. You see your Duty to your
selves and the People; and that it is really not the interest of the House of
Commons, but may be the inclination of the Court, that you loose the Power of
Appeals; but I beg our House may not be Felo de se, but that your Lordships
would take in this affair, the only course to preserve your selves, and
appoint a day, this day 3 weeks, for the hearing Dr. Shirloys Cause, which is
my humble motion.

FINIS.
The Duke of Buckinghams Speech in the House of Lords, November 16. 1675.
My Lords,
THere is a thing called Property, (whatever some men may think) that the
People of England are fondest of. It is that they will never part with, and it
is that His Majesty in his Speech has promised to take particular care of.
This, my Lords, in my opinion, can never be done, without an Indulgence to all
Protestant dissenters.

It is certainly a very uneasy kind of life to any man, that has either
Christian Charity, Good Nature, or Humanity, to see his fellow Subjects daily
abused, divested of their Liberties and Birthrights, and miserably thrown out
of their Possessions and Free-holds, only because they cannot agree with others
in some Opinions and Niceties of Religion, which their Consciences will not
give them leave to consent to, and, which even by the consent of those who
would impose them, are no way necessary to Salvation.

But my Lords, besides this, and all that may be said upon it, in order to the
improvement of our Trade, and the increase of the Wealth, Strength, and
Greatness of this Nation (which with your leave I shall presume to discourse of
at some other time) there is methinks in this Nation of persecution, a very
gross mistake, both as to the point of Government and Religion.

There is so; as to the point of Government, because it makes every man's safety
depend upon the wrong place, not upon the Governors, or man's living well
toward the Civil Government, established by Law; but upon his being
transported with Zeal for every opinion that is held by those that have power in
the Church that is in fashion.

And I perceive it is a mistake in Religion, for that it is positively against
the express Doctrine and Example of Jesus Christ; Nay, my Lords, as to our
Protestant Religion, there is something yet worse; for we Protestants maintain,
that none of these Opinions which Christians here differ about, are Infallible;
and therefore in us it is somewhat an inexcusable conception, that men ought to
be deprived of their Inheritance, and all their certain conveniences and
advantages of Life, because they will not agree with us in our uncertain
Opinions of Religion.

My humble motion to your Lordships therefore is, That you will give me leave
to bring in A Bill of Indulgence to all dissenting Protestants. I know very
well, that every Peer of this Realm has a right to bring into Parliament any
Bill which he conceives to be useful to this Nation. But I thought it more
respectful to your Lordships to ask your leave for it before; and I cannot
think that doing of it, will be any prejudice to the Bill, because I am
confident, the Reason, the Prudence, and the charitableness of it, will be able
to justify it to this House, and the whole world.

Accordingly the House gave the Duke leave to bring in a Bill.

A List of the Lords who were present at the Vote for an Address to the King
for Dissolving the Parliament, November the 20th. 1675.
For the Address.
His Royal Highness D. of Buckingham M. Winchester E. Marshall, E. Norwich E.
Kent E. Dorsett E. Salisbury E. Bridgwater E. Westmerland E. Bullingbrooke E.
Chesterfield E. Stamford E. Peterborough E. Manchester E. Berkes E. Mulgrave E.
Scarsdale E. Sunderland E. Clarendon E. Essex E. Cardigan E. Shafresbury E.
Powys Vic. Fauconberg Vic. Hallifax Vic. Yarmouth Vic. Newport Ld. Sandys Ld.
Morley Ld. Sturton Ld. Wharton Ld, Peter Ld: Arundell of Wardet Ld. Lovelace
Ld. Tenham Ld. M^hum Ld. Bellasis Ld. Carington Ld. Delamere Ld. Townsend Ld.
Gray of Rolston These Lords present 41 gave gave 7 Proxies. 48
Lords absent and sick that gave proxies for this question.
E. Denbeigh Ld. Hollis
Other Lords absent that were for this Address.
E. Bedford E. Burlington Ld. Fitzwalter Ld. Ewer. And others.
Against the Address.
Ld. Keeper Ld. Treasurer Ld. Privy Seal Ld, Great Chamberlain E. Northampton
E. Bristoll E. Bath E. Craven E. Alisbury E. Gilford, D. Lauderdale Ld. Windsor
Ld. Pawlett Ld. Maynard Ld. Howard of E^stcreck Ld. Byron Ld. Lucas Ld.
Vaughan, E. Carbery Ld. Gerrard Ld. Frechvill. Ld. Butler, E. of Ossery Ld,
Arundell of Trerice 21 Lay Lords 13 Bishops, who were all that were in the
House. These 34 Lords gave 16 Proxies. 50.
The Protestation, with Reasons of several Lords for the Dissolution of this
Parliament, entered in the Lords Iournal, November 22. 1675. the day the
Parliament was Prorogued.
WE whose names are underwritten, Peers of this Realm, having proposed, That
an humble Address might be made to His Majesty from this House, that he would
be graciously pleased to Dissolve this Parliament: And the House having carried
it in the Negative, for the Justification of our Loyal Intentions toward His
Majesty's Service, and of our true respect and deference to this Honorable
House; and to show that we had no sinister or indirect Ends in this our humble
proposal, Do with all humility herein* set forth the grounds and reasons why we
were of opinion that the said humble Address should have been made.

1. We do humbly conceive, that it is according to the ancient Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, that there should be frequent and new Parliaments, and
that the practice of several years, has been accordingly.

2. It seems not reasonable; that any particular number of Men, should for many
years, ingross so great a trust of the People, as to be their Representatives
in the House of Commons: And all other the Gentry and the Members of
Corporations of the same degree and quality with them, should be so long
excluded. Neither, as we humbly conceive, is it advantageous to the Government;
that the Counties, Cities and Buroughs, should be confined for so long a time
to such Members as they have once chosen to serve for them. The mutual
correspondence and interests of those who choose and are chosen, admitting of
great variations in length of time.

3. The long continuance of any such as are entrusted for others, and who have
so great a power over the purse of the Nation, must in our humble opinion,
naturally endanger the producing of Factions and Parties, and the carrying on
of particular interests and designs, rather then the public Good.

And we are the more confirmed in our desires for the said humble Address, by
reason of this unhappy breach fallen out betwixt the two Houses of which the
House of Peers has not given the least occasion; they having done nothing but
what their Ancestors and Predecessors have in all times done; and what is
according to their duty, and for the Interest of the people that they should
do; which, notwithstanding the House of Commons have proceeded in such an
unpresidented and extraordinary way, that it is in our humble opinion, become
altogether unpracticable for the two Houses, as the Case stands, jointly to
pursue these great and good ends for which they were called.

For these reasons We do enter this our Protestation against, and dissent unto,
the said Vote.

Buckingham Winchester Salisbury Bridgwater Dorsett Westmerland Chesterfield
Stamford Berkes Clarendon Shaftesbury Fauconberg Hallifax Yarmouth Newport
Sandys Wharton Peter Mohun Delamere Townsend Gray of Rolston
These were all the Lords that were in the House early enough to sign the
Protestation before the Parliament was Prorogued.

FINIS.

