SOME OBSERVATIONS Concerning the REGULATING OF ELECTIONS FOR PARLIAMENT.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Concerning the REGULATING OF ELECTIONS FOR PARLIAMENT, FOUND
Among the EARL of Shaftsbury's Papers after his Death, and now recommended to
the Consideration of this Present Parliament.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall.
1689.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Concerning the REGULATING OF ELECTIONS FOR PARLIAMENT, etc.
THE Parliament of England is that Supreme and absolute Power, which gives Life
and Motion to the English Government. It directs and actuates all its various
procedures, as the Parent of our Peace, Defender of our Faith, and Foundation
of our Properties; and as the Constitution of this great Spring, and Primum
Mobile of Affairs, is in Strength and Beauty, so will also all Acts and
Performances which are derived from it, bear a suitable proportion and
similitude. For whether the Constituting Members of this Great Body be such, as
may give it the denomination of Sanctum, Indoctum or Insanum, (by which
Epithets some former Parliaments have been known and distinguished) such will
also be, all the Acts and Statutes which are made by them, each naturally
wearing the Character and Likeness of that, to which it owes its Being.

This Great Council bears a date, coaevous perhaps with the Originals of our
Government, and was Constituted with sufficient prudence and caution, with
relation to the Innocence and Ignorance of the Times and People then in being.
It was then, that a Deed of three Inches square, was sufficient to convey away
twenty good Manors and Lordships. But Subtilty and Cunning having now made
some bolder advances into the World, we are forced to alter our Measures, and
instead of Inches to take Else. It seems therefore necessary, as in things of
smaller concernment, so most especially in matters of so much greater moment,
(as is the settling and fortifying our Parliament,) so to erect its Bulwarks
and Rampires, that the most vigorous Attacks of Fraud and Corruption may make
no Breaches or Inrodes upon it. It is here, our care and diligence ought to be
applied with the greatest exactness; for as our Laws and Government are
Established, we can derive our Happiness or Misery from no other Source. It is
from the Fruit of this Great Council that we must expect our Nutriment, and
from its Branches our Protection; I hope therefore it may not seem over
Officious, if with the skilful Gardener, I do open and expose the Roots of this
great Tree of the Commonwealth, with an intent that every Branch and Fiber may
with the greater ease and convenience, be so trimmed and laid, that no Defects
or Redundancies may continue; But that every individual of this Great Body, may
happily conspire to produce that Peace and Tranquillity in the Nation, which
may be expected from their Counsels, and a well constituted Government.

It seems then reasonable to believe, That the Privilege of sending
Representatives to Parliament, (though grounded upon a Natural and Fundamental
Right in the People) was at first immediately derived from the King; for that,
where Histories and Records begin to transmit memorials to succeeding Ages, we
find him sending his Writs, directed to such Persons, Towns, or Vills, which he
thought most considerable within the Kingdom, by virtue of which Writs,
Elections were accordingly made, and Representatives returned to Parliament.
That the Kings Prerogative does still extend to grant this Franchise, to such
other Towns or Villages as he shall think fit, I cannot affirm, because some
Pryns Register of Parliament Writs, 1. Part, f. 238. b.
Learned in the Law assure us it cannot legally be done, but by Act of
Parliament. But others are again of a contrary opinion, as was adjudged in the
Case of Hob. Rep. f. 14.
Duncannon and Journal of the Commons House.
Newark. It is certain, that Parliamentary matters were never settled otherwise
than by Act of Parliament, as appears by several 5. R. 2. c. 4. 1. H. 5. c. 1.
23. H. 6. c. 15.
Statutes in such Cases made, and we also find the privilege of sending
Members to Parliament, given to several places by 27. H. 8. c. 26. 34. H. 8. c.
13. 35. H. 8. c. 11.
Act of Parliament, which had been unnecessary, could the King alone have
granted it by any other Method. It is moreover a thing of very dangerous
Consequence, to have such a Power lodged in the King alone; for then he might
thereby infranchise what number of Vills he pleases, and by the same power
place the Election of their Representatives in a select Number, such as he
should always have the power to direct and appoint; which would be in effect to
choose his own Parliament, and thereby to Make or Repeal what Laws he pleases.
Wherefore I conceive this Point ought now to be so settled, as for the future
to obviate all such inconveniences which might otherwise ensue.

Another thing, which also requires the care of this Great Council, is to limit
and restrain the exorbitancies of a Quo Warranto so, that the Electing
Buroughs may have their privileges and immunities secured, from the Judgment
of a Corrupt Judge, who derives his Being, and holds his Judicial Breath only
ad voluntatem Domini. If this Grievance be not obviated by some good Law, a
King may as well destroy all the old Buroughs, as erect new ones, to the
inevitable overthrow of our Laws and Government.

In the next place I conceive it may become the Prudence of this Parliament
(from which we may expect the Foundations of our Happiness will be so laid, as
to become impregnable against all the future Assaults of an invading Tyrranny)
to look into the Constitutions, and Customs of such Buroughs which have right
to Elect, and which in several particulars, seems to require a touch of the
Supreme Authority to set them Right. The first inconvenience they labor under,
is the variety of their respective Titles; some claiming to Elect by
Prescription, others by Grant; some again by a select Number, others by the
Populacy; some by the Magistrate and Burgesses, others by the Magistrate,
Burgesses and Freemen, others again by the Magistrate, Burgesses, Freemen, and
Commonalty, and some also in respect of their ancient Borough Houses only; the
rest of the Town, which is the much more considerable part, being excluded. The
Grievance which grows from this difference of Title in several Buroughs, is
often ambiguity and uncertainty of Title in the same Borough; for sometimes
the select Number contends with the Community, one Borough House with another,
etc. And from hence it is, that we have usually so many Petitioners in each
Parliament, the Magistrate not knowing which of right ought to be Returned. Nor
can a Committee of Elections ever settle their respective Titles, by a final
determinative Judgment; for we find it often giving an Opinion upon one and the
same Title, and in the same Borough, differently, as favor and power can make
the stronger interest. All this may be remedied by an Act, which should give
one and the same new Title to all the Electing Buroughs in England and Wales,
by which alone, they should all for the future, claim to send Members to
Parliament; thereby settling the Electing power in such persons, (whether they
be a select Number, or the whole Populace,) as in prudence should be thought
most convenient.

The design of choosing the Members of Parliament by the People, was, that no
Laws should be made, no Moneys raised, nor any Course pursued, by those who sit
at the Helm, but with the Steerage and Direction of the People, by their
Representatives. Now by all the Laws and Rules of Representation, no Town,
City, or Body of People, can be represented without a Vote in the Choice of
their Representative. That the Parliament as now Constituted, is no equal
Representative of the People, is notorious; in that several Buroughs, so
inconsiderable, that they contain not above three or four Houses, send each of
them two Representatives to Parliament, whilst others (which contain an hundred
times their Number of Houses, People, Trade and Wealth) have no Representative
at all in the management of Public Affairs. So also the County of Cornwall
sends no less than forty three Members to Parliament, whilst the City, and
whole County of Chester sends but four, and the twelve Counties of Wales but
twenty four amongst them all.

From this inequality of Representation it follows, that Acts are often made
which redound to the prejudice of the whole Body of the People, merely to
advance the Gain and Advantage of some particular places; as was that which
Prohibited the Importation of Irish Cattle, being carried principally by the
supernumerary Votes of some Counties, which have more Electing Buroughs, than
upon a just and equal Devidend, do fall to their share; and these being
generally of a dry and barren Soil are thereby chiefly adapted to the breeding
of Cattle; which benefit would have been diminished by an inlet of Beasts from
Ireland. This inconvenience may be easily removed by depriving Towns of less
note of this Franchise, and bestowing it upon others of greater Consideration
in the same, or in other Counties, which most want it, as do those of
Cambridge, Bedford, Hartford, Huntingdon, etc.

Where the Electing Right is committed to a select Number, I think it were
desirable, that the Electors should be chose annually, and not be Tenants for
Life in their Electorate; this would in a great degree prevent pre engagements,
and corruption, which often happens where a power by long continuance in one
person, is apt to stagnate and putrify.

The great number of Electors in Popular Buroughs, and in choosing Knights of
the Shire, requires to be regulated and limited, and the power of Election to
be fixed in the Optimacy only. My Reasons for this are, that amongst the
Electing Crowd, the Majority is generally of a mean and abject Fortune in the
World, and thereby subject not only to disorders and quarrels, but to be
misguided also by their ignorance, and total want of that discerning faculty,
which Electors in such weighty concerns ought to have: they are moreover under
the temptation of being Corrupted and Seduced by the inveiglements of a little
Money, or a Pot of Ale: whilst those whose Circumstances are more enlarged, have
their thoughts so likewise, being thereby raised beyond such low alurements,
and rendered more careful how, and into whose Hands they dispose of this great
Trust, the breach whereof might at once Rob and deprive them of that their
substance, which has been the acquisition perhaps of some Ages. It was for
these and several other Reasons mentioned in the Preamble, that by the Statute
of the 8. of H. 6. c. 7. it was enacted that no Knight of the Shire should be
chose by any, who had not a Freehold of the clear yearly value of 40 s. per
annum, which was then as much in value as 40 l. per annum is now, or has been,
since the finding out of the American Treasure, and the enlargement of our
Trade. And I think it but reasonable that as the value of Money falls, so the
Wealth of the Electors should rise, and that Electing Votes in the County
should again be limited to such only, who now have Lands and Tenements to that
value, which 40 s. per annum bore in those times when this Act was made. If
this particular were thus regulated, the numbers at the County Elections would
be reduced, probably to a fourth part of what they now are, and thereby the
unreasonable expense in entertaining so great a Crowd, and the great dangers
which may accrue from such an ungovernable Multitude, would be in a great
degree avoided and prevented.

As the Persons Electing ought to be Men of Substance, so in a proportioned
degree ought also the Members Elected. It is not safe to make over the Estates
of the People in Trust, to Men who have none of their own, left their Domestic
Indigencies, in Conjunction with a Foreign Temptation, should warp them to a
contrary Interest, which in former Parliaments we have sometimes felt to our
sorrow. Wealth and Substance will also give a Luster and Reputation to our
great Council, and a security to the People; for their Estates are then pawned,
as so many Pledges for their good behavior, becoming thereby equal sharers
themselves in the benefit or disadvantage which shall result from their own
Acts and Councils.

Thus a good Estate may be a good security to engage Faith and Honesty; but he
who sits at the Helm of Government, ought not only to be a Graduate in Fortune,
but in Prudence and Experience also. To me it seems extremely irregular, to see
the unfledged Youth make his first advances into the World, in the quality of a
Burgess for Parliament, chosen upon no other account but because it was his
Fortune, by his Fathers early death, to become the Landlord of a Neighboring
Borough, or is perhaps its best Customer, deriving from thence the necessaries
of a numerous Family. Forty years (whereof twenty five are generally spent in
Childhood and vanity) seem to be few enough to entitle any one to the Grandeur
and Gravity of an English Senator, and why so many, who seem by their greenness
to be as yet but a Novelty to the World, should be admitted a place in this
Great Council, whilst those of greater Age, Wisdom, and Experience must be
excluded, I do not understand.

By the 1. H. 5. chapter 1. It is Enacted that every Knight of the Shire should be
chosen out of such who are Resident in the County, and every Citizen and
Burgess, from amongst the Citizens and Burgesses of the Cities and Buroughs
Electing. How far this Act ought to be observed, will be worth consideration;
for a confinement in this Case, seems to be an abridgement of a free Choice,
and it often happens, that Men of the greatest Knowledge and Experience in the
Affairs of the Kingdom, have their Abode principally in the Metropolis,
especially such of the long Robe, who by their Profession are obliged to it.
But the Non observance of this Act on the other side, has been often the
occasion that Courtiers have bolted into Country Buroughs, and by the strength
of their Purse, and liberal Baits, have so seduced these poor Rural Animals, as
to obtain an Election from them, though to the ruin and overthrow of their own
Laws and Liberties. The choosing of such Men to serve in Parliament, might
probably be obviated, by an Act, Prohibiting the Expense of any Money by Treats
or otherwise, in order to be Elected, it being only to these indirect Methods,
that such persons usually owe their success.

But when all is done, it will be found difficult (though with the greatest
Art) to bring an old irregular Structure into a convenient Uniformity,
otherwise than by razing it to the Ground, and erecting a new Pile by some
better contrived design. For although all the defects and irregularities in the
Election of Members for Parliament beforementioned, should be removed and
altered, yet there still remains something in the very Constitution of this
part of our Government, which is not so agreeable to a curious thought. A True
and Perfect Model to build by, is what I dare not pretend to give, yet that
which follows may afford some hints and Assistance to a better Fancy and
Judgment.

In respect then, that every individual Person in the Nation, has a Natural
Right to Vote in this Great Council; but this being impracticable, they are
forced to do it by proxy (that is) by devolving this Right upon certain Common
Representatives indifferently chosen, for certain Select Numbers and
Communities of Men, in which the whole Body of the People is, or ought to be
comprehended; And whereas, every Pater-Familias, or Housekeeper, is a Natural
Prince, and is invested with an Absolute Power over his Family, and has by
necessary Consequence, the Votes of all his Family, Man, Woman, and Child
included in his; Let then the Sheriffs Precepts be directed to every Parish
within his County, which the next Sunday following the Receipt thereof, may be
publicly Read after the Forenoon Sermon in Church; Thereby giving notice to
all the House keepers in the Parish, to meet at a convenient place, and certain
hour the day following, in order to choose an Elector for the County. Let also
the Churchwardens of each Parish prepare a List of eight or ten of the most
eminent Persons for Wealth, Gravity, and Wisdom in their Parish; this List to
be brought the next day to the place of Election, to this purpose, that every
Housekeeper do, by a dot with a Pen, adjoined to the person's name whom he
enclines to Elect, declare his Choice; and that by the plurality of dots, the
Elector be returned by the Churchwardens to the Sheriff. This done in each
Parish, let the Sheriff prepare a List in the same manner, of the names of all
the Gentry in the County, who are each worth in Lands and movables at least
10000 l. all Debts paid, and not under forty years of Age; which being in
readiness, let all the Representatives of Parishes, chosen as aforesaid, repair
to the County Town the very next day after the Parish Election is over, and
there proceed to Elect out of the Sheriffs List, seven, nine, or eleven Members
to serve in Parliament, or so many as upon a just Dividend, shall be thought
expedient to complete the Number of Members, which are to Act in this great
Council.

Before the Electors proceed to choose for the County, it might probably be
convenient to Administer an Oath to this purpose, That their Vote is no way
pre-engaged, and that they will choose, without Favor or Affection, such
Members as in their Conscience they do believe most fit to serve in Parliament.
And that to the Members Elected, upon their admission to the House, this Oath,
together with the others in use, be Administered, viz. That they are worth 10000
l. all their Debts paid, and that directly, or indirectly they did not expend
any Money, or Gratuity whatsoever, in order to their Election, and that they
neither have, nor will receive any Gratuity whatsoever, upon the account of
their Vote in Parliament, but that they will in all Matters that shall come
before them, act uprightly according to their Conscience and Understanding,
without any private Design, Favor, or Affection to any.

That, to prevent the inconveniences of Fear and Favor in Electing, the Method
be such, that none may know on whom the Electors Votes were conferred; and it
may be thus performed. Suppose a Room with two opposite Doors, and a Table in
the middle, on which the List shall be spread. All the Electors being at one
Door, let them go in one by one, each Writing down his dots, and going out of
the Room at the other Door before another comes in; or if this may prove
tedious, it is only placing more Tables in the Room with every one a List on
it, and so many may then be admitted in at once, as there are Lists, which will
make greater dispatch, and yet no discovery, in that every List is upon a
separate Table. To prevent also all fraud and indirect practice, it will be
convenient that the Officers concerned in the Elections, both in Parishes, and
in the County, be upon their Oaths. It is also fit that a limited allowance be
made for the expense of the day, which is to be in Parishes, at the Parish
Charge, and in the County Town, at the Charge of the County.

If any Controversy arise about Elections, either in the Parishes or Counties,
(which in this Method can scarcely be supposed) it may be decided by the Votes
of the remaining Persons upon the List, who pretend to no Election. If several
Persons happen to have an equal number of Votes, it shall be determined by
Lot. If any Person from any part of England, shall send his Name to any
particular County, to be inserted in their List, as a Person qualified to serve
in Parliament; it may be done; but none to stand Candidate, in more than one
List at a time, lest he should be chosen in both Counties, and to occasion the
trouble of a new Election. That the same List of Candidates shall continue till
the dissolution of the Parliament, if it fits not above three Years; and upon
the intermedial death or removal of any of the Members for the County, then he
who had the next Majority of Votes upon the List, to succeed in his place,
without further trouble or charge of Election.

By this Method the Parliament will be a perfect Representative of the whole
Body of the People, and also of every numerical Person in the Kingdom. Here can
be no partial (and consequently prejudicial) Acts made by separate Interests
and Factions: None will sit in this Great Council but Men of Gravity, Wisdom,
Integrity and Substance; No pensionary Members; no unfair Elections; no foul
Returns; no Petitioners kept in Attendance till a Dissolution; no Quo Warrantos
to destroy the natural fundamental Rights of the People; no room for
Corruption, Bribery and Debauchery, either in the Electors or the Members
elected; no Patrimonies wasted in the Extravagancies of an Election; No
Bankrupts shrowding themselves under the shelter of a Parliamentary Privilege;
No unruly Rabbles, Tumults, Factions and Disorders in Election, amongst the
Commonalty; No Heats and Animosities amongst the Gentry, often caused by their
violent Competitions: But all will be managed with that evenness, Justice and
Temper, that nothing can more effectually conduce to the securing of our
Liberties and Properties, the Grandieur of our Government, and the Honor of our
Nation, than such an Establishment.

FINIS.
An Advertisement.
THere is lately Published by Randal Tailor the Proceedings of the present
Parliament, justified by the Opinion of the most Judicious and Learned Hugo
Grotious, with Considerations thereupon; Written for the satisfaction of some
of the Reverend Clergy, and others, who seem to labor under some Scruples
concerning the Original Right of Kings, their Abdication of Empire, and the
Peoples inseparable Right of Resistance, Deposing, and of Disposing, and
Settling of the Succession to the Crown.


