The CASE of INTEREST OR, USURY: As to the Common Practice, Stated and
Examined; In a Private Letter to a Person of Quality, who desired Satisfaction
in that Point.

By T. S.

Non sequeris Turbam ad faciendum malum: Thou shall not follow the Multitude to
do Evil,

Exodus 23.2. Vide Profectum! In Principo Legis a Fratribus tantum Faenus
tollitur; in Propheta, ab Omnibus Fanus removetur. Porro sub Evangelio Virtutis
Augmentum est.

S. Hieronymus in cap. 18. Ezechielis. Behold the Progress! In the Beginning of
the Law, Usury was only forbidden among Brethren. Under the Prophets, it was
prohibited among All. But in the times of the Gospel there is a greater
Perfection.

S. Jerome in his Comment. on the 18th. of Ezekiel. LONDON, Printed for Tho.
Guy, at the Corner Shop of Little Lumbard-Street and Corne-Hill, near
Wool-Church Market. 1673.

To the Fair Pattern of Piety, Virtue, and Nobleness, Mrs. A. M.
Madam,
What was lately composed at your Commands, is now in your name Exposed to the
World; with this considerable Advantage, that where my Reasons flagg, or are
deficient, the most attractive Motive of your Example will undoubtedly prevail.

For if Divine Plato dogmatiz'd right, Virtue in her self has such powerful
Charms, that should she but assume a visible shape, all would immediately
become her Inamourato's. And therefore I question not, but it will have great
Influence on the Reader, when he shall understand of a Young Lady, whose first
Demand at the Entrance on her Estate, was, how she might Regulate it according
to the severest Principles of Conscience.

The Pious Weeper of Israel in his Lamentations, chap. 3.27. acquaints us that
it is good for a Man to bear the Yoke from his Youth, Quia levavit se super se,
He has lifted himself above himself. Madam, by this Early and Heroic
Resolution, you have not only exceeded and anticipated the General Expectation
of those who knew you, but gained a most complete Victory over your self, which
in the Estimate of a Wise Man, is more than Alexander did in Conquering the
World. You have new taught Mankind that forgotten Lesson of King Solomon; To
honor God with our Substance, Prove. 3.9. and that our Real Interest, and
Lawful Usury, is, faenerari Domino, miserendo pauperis, By pitying the Poor,
to Lend to the Lord, chap. 19.17.

Qui dedit Velle, donet and Perficere. May indulgent Heaven, who has begun a
Good Work in your Soul, perfect it, and daily water that Blooming Goodness his
own Right Hand has planted; till laden with the fruit of Good Works, you wax
Ripe for Heaven, to be transplanted to the Paradise of God.

I shall close this Address by way, both of Encouragement, and Congratulation,
in the Words of King Laemuel's Mother's advice, Prove. 31.29.30. Multae Filiae,
etc. Many Daughters have gathered Riches together; but thou have surpassed them
all: Comeliness is Deceitful, and Beauty is Vain; the Woman that fears our
Lord, shall be praised, which is sufficient to wipe off the suspicion of
flattery in

Madam, Your true Honourer, and devoted Servant. T. S.
August the 3d. 1673.
The CASE of INTEREST OR USURY: As to the Common Practice, Stated and Examined
in a Private Letter.
Madam,
I Cannot but with Infinite satisfaction comply with your Virtuous desires
lately intimated to me by your Uncle; and likewise highly applaud your
Generous Resolutions, in not attempting any Method for the Increase of that
plentiful Estate, which Divine Goodness hath-caved out to you, as to the
Concerns of this; World, till you have a sufficient Warrant to Justify the
Way proposed.

For you must know, there is such a thing as God's Blessing, which is of maine
Importance, both for the Procuring, Preserving, and Improving in Estate.
Without this (which most assuredly is never entayled on Goods, either
Unlawfully Got or Managed) all Humane Providence, Industry and Policy are
altogether Insignificant; and instead of Raising we shall but Raze, and Destroy
both our Names and Family; and which, is far more Considerable, our own
precious Souls.

Solomon in his Proverbs, chap. 13.11. informs us that Wealth hastened (or as
the gloss expounds it, When we make speed to be Rich by any means whatever,
either Direct or Indirect) shall be diminished, which is no more than what his
Father David told us before, Psalm. 126.1, 2. Unless the Lord build the House,
they have labored in vain that build it. It is vain for you to rise before
Light, etc. Or, if for a final decision of this matter, you require a more
absolute Authority, behold a greater than either David or Solomon; God himself,
who thus by his Prophet Aggeus, c. 1.5, 6. makes a solemn Proclamation: Thus
says the Lord of Hoasts; Consider your ways; you have sown much, and have
brought in little: You have eaten, and have not been filled: You have covered
your selves, and have not been warmed; and he that gathered Wages, put them
into a broken bag. You have looked for more, and behold it became less; you
brought it into the House, and I puffed at it, etc.

From which, with a multitude of other Passages in Holy Writ, these two
remarkable Conclusions may undeniably be Collected. 1. That many taking a
preposterous way, and unlawful courses, to better that Condition Wise
Providence has cast them into, pull down a Curse upon the whole, instead of
increasing a part; and are so far from Thriving according to their expectation
and moral Probabilities, that by the just Judgment of God, some accident or
other has, like a secret Moth and Canker, eaten out what ever their care and
pains had hoarded together. Daily Experience testifying, that as the Debauched,
Intemperate Person, frequently transmits his bodily Diseases to his Children;
so the fraudulent oppressing devices of Unconsionable men, convey down an
invisible Plague on their Possessions; which, either by an insensible Infection
wastes and consumes them, or gnaws out the heart and comfort of them; which
Content and Comfort consists in that which our Religion teaches us, in
acquiescing with that moderate, competent fortune the All-Wise Goodness has
allotted to our share: So that the shortest way to be Rich, as one has well
observed, is not an over-eager enlargeing our Estates through the ordinary
slights and Leger-demains of Earthly-minded men; but by contracting our desires
to the disposal of Providence and our own proper Care and Industry, without
incroaching on the Labor, Sweat, and Hazard of our Neighbor, under pretense
of doing him a Courtesy in Lending, but in reallity Ruining both him and his
by a most Tyrannical Exaction of more than was delivered into his Hands.

The other Corollary we may deduce, is, that not only unjust shifts either in
obtaining at first, or afterward in bettering our External Affairs; but even
a neglect to make that good use of Temporal Blessings, which our Heavenly
Father intended when he bestowed them on us, (much more the abuse of them, to
the gratifying our sensual Pleasures, Lusts and Vanities) is both accountable
for, at that great and terrible last Assizes, when a strict Examen shall be
made of every Idle Word, (unless we think our Savior was in jest when he so
positively declared Math. 12.37. I say unto you, that every Idle Word that men
shall speak, they shall render an Account for it in the Day of Judgment. What
then shall we think of those prodigious expenses which Pride and Luxury have
squandered away?) and frequently, either sooner or later, even in this World
derives some signal Vengeance on the Offenders, either in their persons, or,
which is equivalent, their near Posterity; God himself having Avowed no less,
Exodus 20.5. I am the Lord thy God, Mighty, Jealous, Visiting the Iniquity of
the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them
that hate me, etc.

For, whatever we may conceit of our selves, we are not absolute Lords and
Masters of what we enjoy here, but only Stewards, entrusted with so many
Talents as the Supreme Wisdom judges requisite for our Capacity, (some in a
larger, some in a more slender measure;) and therefore we are obliged, both to
be contented with the Portion assigned us, and neither improve nor employ it
otherwise than the known Will of the Bestower will authorize us. Otherwise it
is to be feared, we shall too truly experience what S. Gregory the great has
forewarned us of; That the exact Reckoning which the Divine Tribunal will
infallibly one day make with us, increases and multiplies not only in
proportion to the good things we receive, but also to the tricks and shifts
used to advance them: Or what our Blessed Savior teaches in the Gospel, That
it is as usy for a Camel to pass through the eye of a Needle, as for a Rich man
to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Which is no such Paradox, considering what
the Apostle has observed, that The Love of Money is the Root of all Evil; and
the manisold temptations Wealth betrays a man to, both in Getting, Keeping,
Employing, and Leaving it, as would be obvious to instance in most of the
Villainies committed in all ages of the World, upon this very score.

But it is not my purpose, (neither I presume, your desire) to unrip all those
Intrigues and Mysteries of Iniquity wherewith the World abounds at this day, as
to the point of Thriving and Improvement. My design in this Preface was only to
let you see, that it is good Policy as well as Piety to avoid those Bypath,
and Stratagems wholly unwarrantable, which in the conclusion will be found to
be the fatal Destruction, rather than Augmentation of an Estate.

To omit therefore those more open crimes of Cheating, Oppression, Sacrilege,
or detaining from God what was once Consecrated to his Service, etc. I shall
only freely discover the Truth at present, concerning that Epidemical Raging
and Reigning Disease of Usury, yet so generally looked on as otherwise, that it
is become in a manner a Jack of all Trades, an Universal Profession; and though
the most sordid and mechanical in it self (ashamed even of its own name,
witness the dwindling of Use into Interest) yet practiced by the greatest
Pretenders to Gentility (however under-board as much as possible, out of sight
(a shrewd Argument, all is not justifiable.) And I shall not speak of it in
it is Latitude, or at large, but only as it is limited by the Laws of the Land.
For of it self, it is such a spreading Leprosy, that it was high time for the
civil Physician (I mean the Magistrate) to lend a helping hand, and hinder the
growth, where he could not wholly prevent the Infection, barely permitting what
he could not without a far greater Inconvenence prohibit.

The Question in debate (if there may any Question be made of a thing so
positively decided by all Reason and Authority, both Divine and Humane) may
without any farther Preamble, be thus fairly stated as to us here in England,

Whether Interest or Use, though permitted by the Laws of the Land, is
absolutely or in it self Lawful, as being Warrantable by the Law of God and
Principles of Right Reason?
NOw, Madam, though I intend chiefly your satisfaction in this Paper; and
consequently this Discourse is penned for your private perusal only; yet
because it may possibly contrary to my intention, happen into their hands who
will take the liberty to examine the grounds of this Assertion, I must crave
leave to proceed somewhat after the manner of the Schools: However I hope with
so much candor and perspicuity, as may no ways prejudice its main design;
which, as I premised, was solely the removal of your difficulties. And to
testify my own fidelity, and unbiassedness in the present Controversy, when
ever I have occasion to quote Authorities, either Sacred or Profane, I shall
readily put my self to the double pains, both of Transcribing, and Translating,
that so impartial Judges may be better censure.

To begin then with the Quid Nominis and Rei, or what it is we dispute against
Usury (in Latin Vsura, in Greek (...)) or as we now adays mince the matter,
Interest is, Quidcunque solutioni Rei Mutuatae accedit, ipsius Rei Vsus gratia,
pactione interposita, vel hac Intention habita, in contractu, vel exactione
habita post contractum, as the Summulists usually define it: That is to say,
what ever is more than the payment of the thing Lent, upon the account of the
Use of the thing, either by virtue of a Contract or Bargain interposed, or only
with this Intention in the Bargain (namely, of receiving More than was Lent) or
lastly by reason of some action occurring after the Bargain.

This Description is very exact, and includes all, or most of the kinds of
Usury. But being something obscure to those who are not versed in
Schoo-Learning, I shall rather give you this following Character of it out of
the Angelical Doctor of the Church S. Thomas Aquinas 2.2. q. 78. Vsura est
quicquid supra sortem accedit: What ever surmounts the Principal is Usury. Or,
Vsura est Pretium pecuniae mutuatae, vel cujuscunque Rei, cujus Vsus est
Consumptio vel Distractio ejus. Usury is Gain Received by lending of Money, or
any other thing, the Use whereof consists in its Consuming or Alienation.

Where by the way is to be Noted, that through the barrenness of our English
Language, we are forced to use the word (Lend) in the business of Usury, though
it be very improper: For Mutuum or Mutuatum in Latin, which we render by
Lending in English, is, facere de Meo Tuum, or a Contract, in which the
Dominion or Right to any thing consisting of Number, Weight, or Measure, is
translated from the Lender to the Borrower (a Mutuante in Mutuarium) with
Obligation to restore either the same, or the like in kind and goodness. And
this for the most part happens in things Consumptible by their very Use, as
Corn, Wine, Oil, etc. among which, Money may be reckoned; for though it be
not consumed, nor perish in it self, yet it passes away from him who trades
with it: Whereas in Lending, strictly speaking, we give away no Right nor
Dominion, but only the Use and Profit for a time. As for example, when I lend
my Horse for a Journey, or my Cloak upon any other occasion, I grant the Use,
but not the Thing. Whereas in Lending Money, the Borrower is absolute Master,
to dispose of it as he pleases, when he has it. The same may be said of
Pawning and Hiring proportionably, this I thought good to intimate, for the
better understanding of the subsequent Reasons in this discourse.

In brief then, Usury is Gain, or Profit bargained for, by reason of something
Lent; Or, Usury is what ever is Received besides the Principal. The Council of
Agatha defines it, Quando amplius requiritur quam datur; when more is demanded
than was Lent, chap. 3. St. Augustine upon the 36 Psalm is very clear, Si
faenerareris hominem, i. e. si mutuo dederis pecuniam tuam, a quo plus quam
dedisti expectes; non pecuniam solum, sed aliquid plus quam dedisti, sive illud
triticum sit, sive vinum, sive olcum, sive quod libet aliud, si plus quam
dedisti, expectes accipere, faeneratores, etc. If, says that most learned and
holy Father, thou lendest thy Money to any one, from whom thou expectest more
than thou did Lend; not only Money, but any thing more than thou lendest,
whether it be Corn, Wine, or Oil, or any thing else, if thou expectest more
than thou gave, thou art a Usurer, etc. Nor is St. Jerome less peremptory in
his Commentary on the Prophet Ezekiel; Putant quidam Vsuras tantum esse in
pecunia; quod praevidens sacra scriptura, omnis Rei aufert superabundantiam, ut
plus non recipias quam dedisti, etc; Some think that Usury consists only in
Money, which the Holy Scripture foreseeing, takes away the overplus of every
thing, forbidding to Receive more than we gave or lent. -- What the Holy
Scripture determines, we shall more fully discover by and by. -- But Divine St.
Ambrose in his first book concerning David, has so resolutely ended this
Question, that I know not what reply it can admit of; Item Esca Vsura est, and
vestis Vsura est, and Quodcunque accedit sorti, Vsura est; and, quod velis, ei,
nomen imponas, Vsura est; Usury, fayes he, may be committed in things eatable;
Usury may be in Garments, and whatsoever is over and above the Principal, is
Usury, and guild it over with what name you will, it is Usury. -- It is worth
our Observation (to name it only by the By) how shamefaced and modest the
Ancient Usurers were in comparison of our Modern Exactors; they only exacted
some gratuity (I speak of the honest sort) or Consideration for the Courtesy,
and that usually in another kind; a present of Corn, Oil, Wine, or Cloth,
or the like, (not 6.10. or 12. per cent) and yet how sharply they are taxed by
the Primitive Fathers, and brought within the circle of all those Curses
thundered out against the most Rigorous and Exacting Usury.

But if nothing but Gods own Voice will satisfy in this point, we have it as
express as is possible, Ezekiel, 18.8. where delineating forth a Righteous Man,
he describes him to be one, Qui ad Vsuram non Commodaverit, and Amplius non
acceperit; who has not Lent to Usury, and has not taken more, to wit, than
the main sum. So that receiving more, and Lending to Usury, in Gods account,
are the very self same thing. From the mouths of so many Witnesses it cannot
but be evident what Usury is. And indeed this is the Concepit which all men
frame Naturally of it.

The notion of the Thing, being thus established, that we might not Aerem
Verberare, as St. Paul phrases it, combat with the Wind, or argue against
what no man owns; it remains, that we deliver our sentiments as to the Problem
proposed, which must be in the Negative, namely, that

Use or Interest, though permitted (or rather limited) by the Laws of this
Kingdom and others, is yet absolutely unlawful, as being condemned by the Law
of God, and Principles of Right Reason.
AS to the Law of God, the case is so clear, that I scarce know any thing more
evidently or frequently, both forbid and threatened. And this Topic being of
weightiest moment with those, who set the fear of God before their eyes, and
have not their Consciences seared, as it were with a hot iron ( Authorized to
borrow the Apostles manner of expression) that is to say, altogether senseless,
hardened, stupid, and mortified, and the principles of Religion, Grace, and
Good Nature, desperately extinct through continual Custom, sensuality and
practice of sin; I shall be the more punctual in pressing those Considerations
that may be drawn from Divine Prohibition.

I begin with Exodus 22.25. Si pecuniam mutuam dederis populo meo pauperi, qui
habitat tecum, non urgebis eum quasi exactor, nec usuris opprimes. -- If thou
lend Money to my people, being Poor, who dwells with thee, thou shall not
urge them as an Exactor, nor oppress them with Usuries.

I am not ignorant, that Covetous Wits, and the professed Patrons of Usury,
have sound out a double reply to this place. 1. That all Usury is not here
condemned, but only Exaction, Excess, Tyrannical proceedings, and, in a word,
only that Usury which either ruins, or very much Oppresses the borrowing
party. This conceit is seconded by the signification of Neshec (the Hebrew
word for Usury) which comes from a Root importing to Pinch, Bite, Eat out, etc.
So that petty Interest and smaller Considerations fall not within the compass
of Non Vrgchis in the Text, Thou shall not Urge them. 2. Another Evasion is
discovered in those words, If thou lend Money to my People, being Poor. From
whence our Money-mongers argue, provided they trade only with Dives, those
Golden Lads, whose backs are able to bear it, and not with poor Lazarus, the
needy Handycraft-man, or Laboring, Peasant, Salva Res est, they are safe
enough and shot-proof against the Cannon-Law of Exodus 22. Their Banks may
fructify by an inundation from the Ocean, so they derive no advantage from the
shallower Brooks.

But this Varnish is soon washed off. For, 1. Besides the fallacy that is too
often couched in the Etimology, or Critical scanning of a word, the small force
it has in close Argumentation, and the great hazard of embroyling most of our
Fundamentals in a Logomachie or Contest about words, should these Reparties to
so manifest Prohibitions be admitted: It is replied that all Usury is Exactive,
Corroding and Oppressive, (though not equally, viz. 6. as much as 10. per
cent.) Yet more or less, it incroaches on my Neighbors Right, and secretly
gnaws the very bowels of his Estate. Not to mention its Repugnancy to
Evangelical Charity, which regards not so much whether it notably incommodates,
or disables, as whether it assists and advances the Good and Profit of others,
though our Enemies. As also that such an Interpretation thwarts the whole
current of Expositors. The Chaldee, derives it from a word signifying Increase,
not Exaction. The Arabic intimates whatever is above the Main or Principal.
The Septuagint, St. Basil, the two St. Gre-Cories, Nyssen and Nazianzen term it
(...), which Cardinal Balsamon, a Natural Grecian and Scholiast upon St.
Gregory Nyssen, renders, Cum dat quis quidpiam, ut plus quam, dederit accipiat:
When one lends something, that he may receive more, Tertullian in his fourth
book against Marcian, calls it Redundantiam Faenoris the Redundance or Overplus
of Usury. St. Jerome, Amplius or More, whom Vatablus follows. Pagninus and the
rest term it Incrementum, what ever Increases. And thus Three in the Hundred
being more than was lent, and eating into the Borrowers Concerns, falls under
the charge of Amplius, or Receiving more, and of Oppression, as well, though
not so much as Ten; the Theft of five shillings being as peremptorily Condemned
by, Thou shall not Steal, as of 500 pounds.

2. As to the business of the Poverty of the Borrower, this Circumstance no
ways Extuenates the malice of Usury. For the Poor are here specified, that a
more tender respect might be had to their Indigencies, as if the Text had run
thus, Thou shall not urge any of thy Neighbors, nor oppress them with Usury;
but more signally beware of Oppressing the Poor. The other is bad enough, but
this will prove a Crying Sin, and draw down a sudden Vengeance. And that here
is no force offered to the words, it is observable, that excepting this of
Exodus 22. and Levit. 25. in all other places of holy Scripture, there is not
the least notice taken of the Poor, but Usury it self, or taking of more, is
absolutely interdicted to be used to the one as well as the other. And as for
Levit. 25.35. I wish it were a little better minded. Si attenuatus fuerit
frater tuus, etc. If thy Brother be impoverished, and weak of hand, and thou
receive him as a Stranger, etc. take not Usury of him, nor more than thou
gave; fear thy God, etc. Thou shall not give him thy Money to Usury, and an
Overplus of the fruits thou shall not Exact of him. -- Where we have it most
evidently asserted, that to take Usury, is nothing else but to receive More
than we gave; and that both are as expressly forbidden, as the fear of God is
Commanded; and withal it is more than hinted to us, that where the true fear of
God is, those mischiefs will never be practiced.

In short, the Poor are here Nominated, because they are more frequently
compelled to Borrow, and consequently undergo the burden of Usury, than the
Rich. Though for my own part, I see not but that the Rich may be comprehended
in the number of the Poor. For when a man otherwise of a sufficient Fortune, is
reduced to terms of having recourse to his Neighbor, for that time he may
properly be called Poor, since he really wants, at least for a time, that which
he is forced to be beholding for to another; and according to the old saying,
He that goes a Borrowing, goes a Sorrowing. So that (with submission to better
judgments,) the meaning is this. -- If thy Brother be impoverished and weak of
hand, etc. that is, If any Neighbor, though perhaps at other times of a
considerable Competency, be so straightened, that he needs thy assistance,
either for saving or improving, by lawful means, what he already has; or is
Impoverished, to wit, in danger to be impoverished or undone, unless he have a
ready sum to lay down (which very substantial men have not always at hand, and
on that consideration may for the time be Poor.) Thou shall lend him, if thou
art able, or he give sufficient Surety for the Principal, or no notorious and
undoubted disadvantage arise to thy self thereby, without taking Use or More of
him.

That this is the Genuine sense of this place, appears from Deuteronomy. 15.7. Si Vnus
de fratribus tuis, etc. If one of thy Bre thren, etc. come to Poverty, thou
shall not harden thy heart, nor close thy hand, but shall open it to the poor
Man, and shall lend him that which thou perceivest he has need of; and v. 10.
Neither shall thou do any thing Craftily in relieving his Necessities, that our
Lord thy God may bless thee at all times.

From which places of Exodus 22. and Deuteronomy. 15. thus compared together, a very
Learned Doctor thus argues. Pray what strange Consequence is this, The Law
forbids to take Use from a poor Man; therefore it permits us to receive it from
the Rich? Let us examine a few Inferences of the like Nature, Exodus 22.22.
Viduae and Pupillo non Nocebitis, etc. A Widow and an Orphan you shall not
hurt; if you hurt them, they will cry to Me, and I will hear their cry, and my
Fury shall take Indignation, and I will strike you with the Sword, and your
Wives shall be Widows, and your Children Orphans. Let us see a parallel
Conclusion; we must not hurt the Widow nor Orphan, therefore we may deal as
rigorously as we please with those who have a Father or a Husband. Again Deuteronomy.
27.18. Maledictus qui errare facit caecum, etc. Cursed be he that makes the
Blind go amiss in his Journey. But there is no harm done, if we put one that
has the use of his eyes, out of his way wittingly. Once more, Deuteronomy. 24.14. Non
negabis mercedem indigentis, etc. Thou shall not deny the Hire of the Needy,
but the same day shall thou pay him the price of his Labor before the going
down of the Sun, because he is Poor, and therewithal sustaineth his life, lest
he cry against thee to our Lord, and it be imputed to thee for Sin. Now in this
Logic it will follow, that those who are not in want, or have something else
to live upon, may without any scruple be defrauded of their wages.

But the forecited place of Deuteronomy. 15.7. If one of thy Brethren come to Poverty,
thou shall not harden thy heart; thou shall lend him that, which thou
perceivest he has need of, etc. affords us an unanswereable solution to this
Objection. The Text commands us to Lend to the Poor; therefore we must Lend to
none but the Poor, (I hope they will acknowledge their own Conclusion.) The Law
forbids to take Interest of the Poor, therefore only with the Poor we may not
exercise Usury. Now if we must lend only to the Poor (as by their Argument we
must) and Usury exacted from the Poor, (even our Adversaries being Judges) is
unlawful, since we must lend only to the Poor; it inevitably follows that all
Usury is unlawful.

Calvin seems to plead thus in behalf of Usurers. The Rich have a greater
stock, and therefore may without damage spare so much as the Interest comes
to. His words are, Est ditior, and potest absque damno carere. But pray, says
the forementioned Learned Man, is not this to Patronize Rogues and Thieves?
Will not the same excuse serve the Robber as well as the Usurer? He is a Monied
or a Landed Man, and and can without much Inconvenience, part with so much as I
take. But let him be Poor or Rich, Theft is in its own Nature unlawful. No less
is Usury, which is a kind of Thievery. Yet is neither unjustifiable for the
quantity or sum, whether great or small; but by reason of those words of the
Law, as fatal to Usury as Robbery, Exodus 20.17. Neque omnia, quae illius sunt.
Thou shall not Covet thy Neighbors Wife, etc. nor any thing that is his. But
those things are his which are procured by his Industry and hazard, and we must
all eat the Labors of our ^wn hands.

Thus far he. And I have the rather in a manner transcribed so much, because
the Author (Bishop Andrews) is generally esteemed one of the most Learned
Prelates the Protestant Church of England ever enjoyed; and besides this, he
writes as it were by way of Apology in defense of his Church, which he
acknowledges was taxed (though unjustly as he conceives) by Catholics abroad,
for allowing, if not teaching this doctrine of the Lawfulness of Usury; so that
he seems to speak the mind of the whole Church of England. And I have insisted
the longer upon these two places, because they were subject to exceptions. But
amends shall be made in what follows; for they are so clear from any captious
Cavils, that to recount them will be sufficient both for Proof and Explaining.

The next Divine Authority is, from Deuteronomy. 23.19. Non faenerabis fratrituo ad
usuram, etc. Thou shall not lend to thy Brother, Money to Usury, nor Corn, nor
any other thing, etc. and to thy Brother thou shall lend that which he needs,
without Usury, that our Lord thy God may bless thee in all thy work, etc. Here
the Case is plain, for there is no mention either of Poor or of Tyrannical
Exaction; but the act it self absolutely and generally prohibited, both as to
persons and things, either in Quality, Money, Corn, or any thing else; or in
Quantity without Usury, that is, as I before demonstrated, without Receiving
More than was delivered. And it is worth our Notice that this book of
Deuteronomy being but an Exegetical or declaratory Repetition of the Law of
Exodus, as it were to prevent those shifts that might be made; wholly omits the
putting in of Poor, or Exacting too much; to teach us that the thing was
indifferently denied to all persons, Rich and Poor; and that in the least
quantity, six shillings as well as six pound for the hundred. For the Rule of
Lawyers, is, that therefore later Statutes are made, that they may explain the
former.

That great Patron and Restorer of the Jews, good Nehemias most sharply taxes
this vice, and spares not to reprove the Princes themselves, 2 Esdras 5.7. (or
according to the English account, Nehem. 5.7.) I was, says he, exceeding
Angry, and rebuked the Princes and Magistrates, and said to them, Do you every
one exact Usury of your Brethren? etc. The thing is not good which you do. Why
walk you not in the fear of our God, lest we be upbraided by all the Gentiles
our Enemies? Reddite eis hodie agros suos, quin and centesimam pecuniae,
Restore their Fields and Vinyards, yea the hundredth part also of Money, Corn,
Wine and Oil, which you were wont to exact of them. Where we see so petty a
matter as the hundredth part, not only condemned as contrary to the fear of God,
who had forbidden it; but even Restitution enjoined, as of goods unjustly
purchased, and the practice censured as scandalous to the very Heathen.

The Royal Prophet David in his 14th. Psalm, having proposed the Question to
God Almighty, about the Qualifications requisite for the attaining Eternal
Felicity; Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy
Holy Hill? God himself in the fifth verse returns an Answer, which may be
called the Usurers Doom. He that swears to his Neighbor and deceives not;
Qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad Vsuram, who has not given his Money to Usury.
Upon which words St. Ambrose thus argues. Si ergo qui non dedit, Benedictus;
sine dubio Maledictus qui ad Vsuram dedit: If he be blessed who has not put
out to Use, without doubt he is Cursed that drives that trade. If he who has
not done it, shall ascend to Gods Holy Hill of everlasting Happiness: He that
is guilty shall questionless be precipitated into the bottomless Gulf of
endless Miseries. I might here Cursorily take notice that some Critics have
observed, that not only the Usurers final Damnation is here asserted, but the
temporal Anathema, or Excommunication from the Church Militant is more than
glanced at; since he is neither permitted to dwell in Gods Tabernacle or
Catholic Church, nor to rest in his Holy Hill, or Mount Sion, in the Jerusalem
that is above. But of his Excommunication.

From the Father, who was a man after Gods own heart, let us pass to the Son,
who was the Wifest of Men; I mean from David to Solomon, and see what his
thoughts are in this business, and we shall find that the Usurers Condition is
as bad in this World, as it is threatened to be in the next, Prove. 28.8. Qui
coacervat Divitas Vsuris and faenore, etc. He that heapeth up Riches by Usury,
gathers them for him that is liberal to the Poor. A most remarkable Curse
upon the Usurer, that what he scrapes together shall never take root, or
continue in his Family, but be transplanted by way of Gratuity to the
Generation of the Merciful and Charitable.

As Usury is very pernicious to the Outward Estate thus managed, for it is no
less fatal to the Credit and Reputation of the Professors. These Publicans
contracting a general Odium and Malediction, which multiplies faster than their
bags, in so much that quite contrary to a right Patriot and Friend to
Mankind, the Usurer lives more by his Neighbors Tears than his own Sweat,
and dies with the Tryumphs of all that know him. A man would stand astonished
at that Complaint of the Prophet Jeremy, chapt. 15.10. Vaemihi, etc. Woe is me,
my Mother, why have thou borne me, a man of brawling, a man of discord in all
the Earth? I have not lent to Usury, etc. yet -- all Curse me. The good Prophet
is in amazement how his name came to be so blasted with popular Infection; and
cannot imagine that the Vilest Wretch should become so loath some and nauseous
to his Brethren, but by that detestable aspersion of Usury, on which an
Universal Curse seems to be entayled, which Vice he knew and proclaimed himself
wholly untainted withal.

But of all the heavy Judgments denounced in Gods Word by his own mouth,
seconded by a solemn Oath, and backed with a most vehement Repetition, that
seems to be levelled with most Terror at the Usurers head which we find Ezekiel.
18.7, 8, 9. etc. and indeed well-nigh through the whole Chapter; where first
for his greater glory he is ranked amongst those, who lift up their eyes to
Idols, Violate their Neighbors Wife, approach to a Menstruous Woman, make the
Poor and Needy sorrowful, (either by Uncharitableness or Oppression,) Violently
commit Robberies, (that is by sheding of blood as the Context seems to
insinuate,) restore not the Pledge, do Abomination. And then in the Rear of
this Black Regiment comes up, Ad Vsuram dantem and Amplius accipientem, who
gives to Usury, or takes More, as if this were the sum of all the rest. Then
this Indictment being thus found good and valid, the dismal sentence is at last
passed, v. 13. What, shall such an one live? He shall not live. Cum haec
detestanda fecerit, Morie Morietur, Whereas he has done these detestable
things, he shall dye the death, his blood shall be upon him. This, me thinks,
if duly pondered, should make the Usurers heart ache, his hair bristle, his
joints tremble, and himself become a horror to himself; or as the Prophet
speaks, a Terror round about him. For as sure as God speaks these things, so
sure is he to feel them (if he make not Restitution) with utmost Rigor and
Extremity.

God by the same Prophet, chap. 22. 12. speaks much to the same purpose. Munera
acceperunt upud te, etc They have taken gifts in thee to shed blood, thou have
taken Usury and Overplus, and thou have forgotten me, says our Lord God. As if
he had said, Thou have forgotten that I have so punctually and universally
forbid and threatened this Unconsionable practice. To which may be added, that
Usury is here compared with the forgetting of God, which in Scripture phrase is
the Imprimis, Item and total sum, the very source and original of Sin and
mischief.

Thus I have, as briefly as the matter would permit, from the Holy Writings of
the Old Testament, understood according to the judgment of the Holy Fathers,
most learned Expositors, and Sacred Councils, declared the sense of the Divine
Law in point of Usury. And I think you will confess them so diametrically
opposite, that it will be an equal task to reconcile Idolatry with the first
Commandment, and the Common Trade of Usury with the Righteous Law of God.

And lest we should flatter our selves, that Christian Liberty, Purchased by
Christ, and held forth in the Gospel, disingages us from all those Legal
Comminations and dispenses with the strictness of these prohibitions: We must
observe (and this without looking through the Spectacles of our proper temporal
Interest) that our Blessed Savior at the very entrance into his Preaching,
publicly protests that he came not to destroy or evacuate the Law, but to
complete and perfect it; as might be instanced in diverse particulars from St.
Math. 6.18.22. etc. You have heard, says he, it was said to them of Old, Thou
shall not Kill, but I say unto you, Whosoever shall be angry with his Brother,
shall be in danger of Judgment; And whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be in
danger of Hell Fire. You have heard it was said to them of old, Thou shall not
Commit Adultery: But I say to you, Whosoever shall look on a Woman to Lust
after her, has already committed Adultery with her in his heart: You have
heard it was said, Thou shall Love thy Neighbor and Hate thine Enemy: But I
say to you, Love your Enemies, do good to them that Hate you, Pray for them
that Abuse you, etc. And as to our particular Case, it is most evident he was
so far from abrogating the Laws then in force, that he rather inculcates,
ratifies and strongly confirms them both by his Doctrine and Practice.

By his Doctrine, thus St. Luke 6.32. If you love them that love you, what
thanks have you? for Sinners also love those who love them. And if you do good
to them who do good to you, what thanks have you? Sinners also do the same. And
if you lend to them of whom you hope to receive, what thanks is it to you? For
Sinners also lend to Sinners, for to receive as much. But love you your
Enemies; do good and lend, hoping for nothing thereby ((...), Mutuumdate, nihil
inde sperantes) and your Reward shall be great, and you. shall be Sons of the
Highest, because he is beneficial to the unkind and evil. Be ye therefore
Merciful, as your Father in Heaven is Merciful.

From which Heavenly discourse is fairly Inferred,

First, That the matter of Usury stands upon the same terms under Gospel
dispensation, as it did in the Mosaical. I say the same at least, as to the
business of cancelling, though perhaps otherwise more strictly interdicted than
before, upon manifold Considerations.

Secondly, That Lending is a work of Mercy, and therefore should be free (
Psalm. 36.26. Tota die miseretur and Commodat, and semen illius in benedictione
erit. All the day (that is upon all occasions) he is Merciful and Lends, and
his Seed shall be in Blessing, Psalm. 111.5. Acceptable is the Man that is
Merciful and Lends; Jucundus homo, as the Vulgar reads it.) For as Giving is
a relief of our Neighbors necessity for ever, so Lending is Relief for a time;
and this is the only Circumstance that distinguishes them. Nay in some sense,
Lending is a higher Act of Charity than Giving. For, in Lending I encourage the
Party to Labor and Industry, that he may be able to repay me the Stock or
Principal at the time assigned; whereas in Almes-giving, it is referred to the
pleasure of the Relieved, as to its disposal, who may possibly abuse it and
squander it idly away, knowing he is no further accountable. Whence I conclude,
that Lending in its Primary Notion and Institution, importing a singular Act of
Charity (as it is sensibly acknowledged by those, who being to set up for
themselves, enjoy the benefit of five or ten pounds, for so many years without
any Interest, only putting in sufficient Security for the Principal; and they
are worthily reckoned among choice Benefactors, who bequeath sums of Money to
such pious Employments;) and Charity if you will believe St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.
(...), seeks not her own; it necessarily follows, that by Lending to my own
Profit (for where is there one in ten thousand that either chiefly designs the
benefit of the Borrower, or so much as inquires whether he has made any?) I
commit both Sacrilege and Simony; by alienating what was designed by the Law
of God, Nature and Nations to the profit of my Brother, from him to my own
Coffers, and selling a pretended Courtesy to him (which is likewise full of
hazard) for a real and unquestionable (morally speaking) advantage to my self.

Thirdly, That the style of the New Law runs thus; We are in our Lending not so
much as to hope for any thing thereby; that is to say, any thing more than our
own, or what we Lent. For our Savior speaks not here of Giving, which is an
entire quitting of all Right and Dominion to the thing bestowed, and that for
ever; but of Lending, which necessarily involves both a Right of demanding, and
an Obligation of repaying what was disbursed. So that by Lending and hopeing
for nothing thereby, cannot be understood an Evangelical Counsel, or matter of
indifferency, as if we should Lend and expect nothing again, not so much as the
Principal, for this would not be Lending but pure Gift; but a Precept of
Charity to supply the wants of our Neighbor for a time (when we cannot
conveniently for good and all) if it may be done without eminent prejudice to
our selves (for all the Commands of assisting the Poor oblige no further) and
not so much as hope, have an eye or the least regard and respect to
self-Interest, which may accrue upon the score of Lending; which is properly to
hope for nothing thereby, namely by the act of Lending, but only the
satisfaction to have done our Neighbor a Courtesy, which I confess by the Law
of Gratitude he is bound to acknowledge, and (if his Improvements have been
notable) in some measure to repay; but by the Law of God I can neither bargain
for, nor exact upon the bare account of Lending.

To close this Argument; I think this Dilemma is unanswerable. Either our Lord
and Savior, when he bids us do good and Lend, hoping for nothing thereby,
imposes some duty upon us, or his words were to no purpose, and signify
nothing. To affirm the latter is little better than Blasphemy, since he himself
so solemnly proclaims that Heaven and Earth shall pass away but one Iota or
Tittle of his Words shall not pass. If he lays any Obligation upon us, then
either it is, that we should lend, and hope for nothing, not so much as the
Principal, and this is more than I urge, or the Defenders of Interest will
willingly hearken to; or else, we must lend and hope for nothing by way of
Augmentation or Overplus, over and above what was delivered. One of these
Interpretations must be fastened upon these words, or else (...) nothing will
be Terminus Impertinens as the School speaks, and stand for as much as the
Advice, just nothing at all. And now I leave the Usurer to his choice; let him
take which Exposition he pleases, one of them he cannot avoid.

This for the Doctrine of the Blessed Jesus, to which his practice was
conformable, though with some difference; that what he only dissuaded in words,
he severely punished in his actions, as may be Collected from the 2 of St.
John's Gospel, v. 14. where we read, that Jesus finding in the Temple them who
sold Oxen, Sheep, and Doves; and the Bankers ( Numularios, (...) is St.
Matthew's word) Those who sat with ready Money for such who would Borrow)
sitting, he made a whip of small Cords, and cast them all out of the Temple,
etc. and the Money of the Bankers he poured out, and the Tables he overthrew.
St. John indeed reports that he said only to the Sellers of Oxen, Sheep and
Doves, Take away these things from hence, and make not the House of my Father,
a House of Merchandise. But St. Matthew, chap. 21. 13. recounting the same
History, adds, that he threw them out of the Temple with this smart sarcasme,
My House shall be called the House of Prayer, but you have made it ((...)) a
Den of Thieves. Now those who bought and sold could not properly be styled
Thieves, since in it self, buying or selling is an honest Vocation; and
therefore it is more than probable that St. John only mentions what he said to
the Buyers and Sellers of Oxen, etc. but St. Matthew adjoyns what was
particularly addressed to the Bankers or Usurers; and shows that our Savior
made no distinction between their Profession and that of common Rogues. And yet
as we may discover from the Hebrew Antiquities, these Bankers only accepted of
some small present, as fruits or some such like Commodity, for the use of their
Money, far less considerable, and indeed nothing in respect of what is demanded
now adays.

It would not be besides the purpose to reflect here with many Holy Fathers and
great Doctors, how our Savior by driving Usurers out of the material Temple,
did leave a sufficient Authority for the succeeding Prelates of his Church, to
exclude them from the Communion of Saints by Excommunication, as is to this
day, and has for many hundred years been practiced in Catholic Countries by
Ecclesiastical Canons.

Let me deal ingeniously with you; either our Blessed Savior in these two
places so much insisted on, did absolutely forbid the practice of Usury; or we
must confess that at least in this point the Gospel falls short of the Law and
Charity (which yet breaths in every line of the Gospel) is more coldly pressed
in This than That, which in effect is to make Christians worse than Jews, and
affirm that Christians are allowed more unconscionable Exactions from one
another, than was ever permitted in the Mosaical Occonomie; which assertion,
how offensive it would prove to pious Ears, and discreditable to our Religion
both with Jews and Heathens, I leave it to your good judgment, Madam, to
conceive more amply than I can represent.

Before I dismiss this Motive of the Divine Prohibition, it will be worth the
while to prevent a double Objection; one is produced out of the Old Testament,
the other out of the New.

The former is from Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not lend thy Brother Money to
Usury, etc. sed Alieno, but to a stranger. So that it seems Usury is not
intrinsecally, or in its own Nature Evil, for then the exercise of it would
have been indifferently denied toward All, the Stranger as well as the Native
or Inhabitant. But to this the Answer is Obvious; for,

I. This favors not at all our Modern Money-Merchants, who take all fish that
comes to Net; not distinguishing between Strangers and their own Brethren.

2. Since the coming of the Messiah, or the Blessed Jesus, the Wall of
Partition between Jews and Gentiles, or Brethren and Strangers, is now pulled
down, and both are made one, ((...), as St. Paul speaks, Ephesians. 2.14. fecit
utraque unum, medium parietom maceriae solvens,) we are now all one Flock under
that great Shepherd of our Souls, and so all men are our Brethren, and the
Byword of Strangers is wholly Antiquated, and consequently Universally
Interdicted.

3. By this Argument, stretched to the utmost, we could only take Use of Jews,
Turks, and Insidels, which I presume our Bankers will not be content with,

4. I may speak in this matter as our Savior himself did in the point of
Divorce, Math. 19.6, 7. He had told the Pharisees, that Man and Wife were not
two, but one flesh; and therefore what God had joined together, no man could
separate. To this the Pharisees retort, Why then did Moses command to give a
Bill of Divorce and dismiss her? our Savior Answers, Because Moses for the
hardness of your hearts ((...)) permitted you to dismiss your Wives, but from
the Beginning it was not so. Thus because the Jews, as it is still observed,
were of a penurious, griping, exacting Nature; to prevent a greater mischief,
namely of Usury and Exaction, and consequently of Contention, Law-suites and
Ruining of Families among themselves; for the hardness of their hearts God
permitted them to take advantage of Strangers. Just as in hotter Climats, the
Stews and Public Brothels are tolerated, not as justifiable, but to divert the
grosser Crimes of Adultery, Sodomy and Bestiality. And humane affairs are many
times reduced to those Exigencies, that smaller offenses force the Magistrate
to connive at them on purpose to stave off more notable Enormities; of two
Evils the less being always to be chosen. Nor does this Doctrine infringe St.
Paul's Rule of not doing Evil, that Good may come of it: For behaving ones self
purely permissively, or Negatively, i. e. not actually concurring to sin, is
not positive committing it, as appears by the Toleration of all the
Extravagancies and Impieties acted upon the Worlds Theater, which yet might be
easily stopped, if the All-Wise Providence did not know how to extract greater
Good out of them; which Reason, as it sufficiently vindicates the Supreme
Purity, so may it justify Subordinate Authority, when necessitated upon the
Emergencies of Humane Frailty or Malice, to transcribe the Divine Original in
its proceedings, and especially when it has not only hopes, but assured
experience of produceing the same happy effects.

The Indulgence then, or permission of dealing after this fashion with
Strangers, was altogether Extraordinary, and much of the same Nature with that
grant God made them, Exodus 11.2. of Robbing and Spoiling the Egyptians, under
the pretense of Borrowing, which was a special act of Gods Perogative and
Supreme Dominion to transfer Right whither, and to whom he pleases, and so both
Impertinent to our purpose, and the like Consequences most pernicious to be
reduced to practice. Moreover you will perceive by the sequel of this Dispute,
that the Authorities and Reasons hereafter to be alleged (as the Texts of Holy
Scripture already produced have done) as forceably conclude against wronging a
Stranger as our Brother.

The other Pretext that Usury palliates her deformity withal, is extorted from
one of our Saviors Parables, St. Math. 25.14. etc. where he speaks of a man
that was going into a far Country, and delivered his Goods to his Servants,
that they might Traffic; to one he gives five Talents, to another two, and to
the third one: The first Traded, and made his five Talents ten; the other
likewise advanced his couple to four; but the last digging in the Earth, hid
his Masters Money: Now at the return of their Lord, the two former for their
diligence are dismissed with an Euge serve bone and fidelis, etc. Well done
Good and Faithful Servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord; whereas the third,
though he faithfully restored what he had received, and that entire, without
the least embezlement, yet for not employing his one Talent proportionably to
the others five and two, meets with this terrible Sentence, (...), etc. Serve
male and Piger, etc. Thou Wicked and Sloathful Servant, thou ought to have
committed my Money to the Bankers, that coming home, I might have received my
own with Usury. Cast ye out the Unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. -- Here our Money-mongers think their
profession not only tolerated, but highly applauded by Christ's own Approbation.

Truly at the first proposal of this place, I knew not well whether the
Objector were in earnest or jest; for the Consequences of it are so monstrously
absurd, that I could not conceive it possible for any serious man to put such
an Application or Construction upon it. Yet occasionally finding that Amesius
(otherwise no unlearned Clerk) makes use of this very Text to countenance what
I now plead against, I shall reply something to what else would probably have
produced nothing but my smile.

1. And to omit that known Maxim in Divinity, Parabola vel similitudo non est
Argumentativa. No solid conclusion can be drawn from Metaphorical or
Allegorical premises; if they be not elsewhere clearly (terminis
terminantibus) delivered. For why might I not as well justify a Servants
cheating his Master, from the Allusion to the unjust Steward in Luke 16.1.2.
etc. as Usury from this Reference to the Talents? I am sure the Circumstances
are parallel, and the Bayliffe is as highly commended for reckoning but
fourscore quarters of Wheat to his Master instead of an hundred, as here the
improvement of five Talents to ten, is v. 8. Et laudavit Dominus Villicum
Iniquitatis, etc. And the Lord praised the Bayliffe of Iniquity, because he had
done wisely. And then our B. Savior subjoynes, For the Children of this World
are Wiser in their Generation than the Children of Light. I commend these two
Parables to your serious perusal, and I am confident you will easily discover,
that if such kind of Argumentations be allowed, the sly, pilfering Steward or
Apprentice will find as fair a Cloak for his Knavery in the latter, as the
griping Miser can in the former for his greediness.

The sum of the business is this; neither the one nor the other, can any ways
pretend a Warrant for their proceedings from these two Scriptures; for simile
non est Idem: In every Similitude or Parable, one thing is expressed to the
Sense, and another suggested to the Understanding. And therefore we must
(unless we resolve to mistake in unridling such obscure speeches) attend
principally to the drift and scope of the propounder, which we shall find to be
quite different from what is pretended. For the design of the Blessed Jesus in
the first of these Resemblances, was only to inform us how dreadful a thing it
is not to employ the very least Talent, Gift or Grace of God to its proper
use, His Glory, the good of our Neighbor, and the advantage of our own soul.
So that it is Spiritual Usury that is here urged, and that by a consideration a
fortiori: If worldlings be so sollicitous in improving their temporal, fading
stock; and Carnal Masters are so rigorous in exacting an account of the profit
and in-come redounding from the same; it nearly behooves us, who have all, more
or less, received some Talent or other (as Learning, Strength, Beauty, Riches,
Time; but above all, the saving knowledge of God reconciled to us through the
blood of his Son,) from our Heavenly Father, not idly to lay it up in a Napkin,
(which in St. Paul's judgment is the Receiving the Grace of God in vain) or
Prodigally consume it on our Lusts and Vanities, but to use it faithfully to
the intents and purposes abovesaid, most certainly expecting to undergo a
severe Examine, both at the private Audit of our Death, and at the final Return
of our Great Master to the General Judgment; when, if our scores be not quitted
in this life, it is to be feared, (...), etc. Ne forte tradat te Adversarius,
etc. lest the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge to the
Officer, and thou be cast into Prison. Amen, I say to thee, thou shall not go
thence, till thou have paid (...), Vltimum Quadrantem, the uttermost farthing,
St. Math. 5.26.

The example of the Bayliffe of Iniquity, is near of kin to this, and both
together teach us this great Lesson: That if Bankers by Usury, and unjust
Stewards by Dishonesty, are so hotly set upon their outward affairs, though
with manifest hazard of their souls, it will be a burning shame for Professors
of Christianity, whose hopes are nobler, whose helps are ampler, and
Obligations stricter, to be outstript in the zeal and fervor of prosecuting
their designs, since the eagerness of the one, and the craft of the other in so
bad a cause, will rise up in Judgment against our Indifferency and Tepidity in
matters of grandest Importance.

In short, we have viewed our Saviors mind in clear words, and more clear
actions before, and therefore it is a very pitiful evasion to recurr to
Mysteries and Oracles, since it is a most undoubted truth, that what was so
solemnly condemned both by his preaching and practice, cannot possibly now be
authorized by a dark Parable. The litteral meaning whereof, I look upon as a
Sea-mark to be avoided, but the Moral as a Landmark to be followed in our
Journey to Heaven.

This might satisfy any Ingenious disinterested Spirit; but that I may for
ever stop the mouth of Avaricious Sophistry, I Answer:

Secondly: If any thing at all can be deduced from this Parable, it must needs
be these prodigious Paradoxes following, which I presume the boldest Usurer
will never have the Confidence to own.

1. That there is an Indispensable tie, and Obligation laid upon all without
exception, to turn Usurers (...), etc. Oportuit itaque, etc. Thou ought to
have committed my money to the Bankers. It is neither matter of permission
only, nor of mere indifferency.

2. That Usurers have, not only a Right to their Goods so purchased, (quite
contrary to what was evinced before out of the Old Testament, and the main
current of the Catholic Church) but likewise to the Goods of all others who
are not of their society and profession. (...) tollite itaque, etc. Take away
his Talent (to wit, who put it not out to the Bank) and give it to him that
has ten.

But 3dly. The most ridiculous and unheard of Inference is this, That none but
Usurers shall be saved. This naturally results from (...). Et Inutilem servum
ejicite in tenebras exteriores. Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: That is to say, in our
Adversaries sense; He who knows not the thriving knack, and so cannot, or has
a squamish Conscience, and will not thus increase and multiply five to ten, and
two to four, gain six or ten to the hundred, must even sing Fortune my Foe in
this World, and Lachrymae in the next, to the doleful tune of Gnashing of
Teeth. This is all that can with any show of probability be gathered hence, as
to our present purpose; so that certainly, if ever, here Litera Occidit, the
Letter kills; and something of a nobler nature must be inshrin'd within the
Curtains of this Oracle, which the Usurer is as unmindful to practice, as he is
averse to hear. What it is, was before hinted.

But these men being beaten from their Outworks, begin now to retire to their
Citadel. Since therefore they appeal to Reason, to Reason shall they go.

Though there remain little or nothing for humane Congruity to allege, when
the Divine Will (that supreme Reason and Rule of Equity) remains so positive
against what is here impugned. Stat pro Ratione; and it ill becomes Children of
Obedience to dispute the Why and Wherefore of Sovereign Injunctions. Nay, did
the Principles of Convenience as much protect, as they do in reallity oppose,
what some wish (for I can scarce persuade my self that they believe it) yet
there being many things, as St. Aug. has long since accurately observed, Ideo
Mala, quia Prohibita; non ideo Prohibita quia mala, Evil only upon the account
of being forbidden, not prohibited because Evil of themselves, (as appears by
various instances, wherein the liberty of the Patriarchs and Israelites was
abridged, purely to experiment the compliance and conformity of inferior
Inclinations to the dictates of their Creator) these notifications of the
Divine Pleasure, even in Adiaphoricals or Indifferent matters, ought as
promptly to be acquiesced in, as if they were (as in truth they are)
indissolubly twisted with our nearest concerns. Here at last blind Obedience
carries away the Palm from fruitless Inquisitiveness; I mean where the mind
of the Eternal Lawgiver is so express, as we have seen, though perhaps abused
Wit may pretend with some plausibility, that there is a little jangling with
the advantageous management of sublunary transactions.

We must not therefore attempt the reduceing of Divine Statutes to our shallow
understandings and private concerns, but rather believe them infinitely just
and reasonable. Whereof, he that fees not the Reason, would do well to
consider, there may be a Reason which he does not see, and that it is not only
possible, but usual for finite Intellects to mistake Lust or Interest, for the
Standard of Right and Equity; whereas for the supreme mind to deviate, or the
All powerful Will to be biassed, but by essential truth and goodness, is a
contradiction in terms; that being the inexhausted fountain of both, and by its
Emanations bestowing Reallity and Coherence as well as Existence on all
Creatures; so that a thing is therefore true and good, because comprehended by
this Immense and Un-obliquable Will. Whence it follows, that our only Lawful
Scrutiny in this matter, is that of St. Paul at his Conversion, Act. 9.6.
Domine, quid me vis facere? Lord what Will thou have me to do? The echo to the
Creators commands, must be no other than the Creatures obedience.

I argue after this manner; because, should I not be able to make out the
unlawfulness of what I here contend against, so Demonstratively as some may
expect, (which perhaps the matter it self will not bear;) yet the manifest
intimation of that Law, from whence there is no appeal, which I am confident I
have sufficiently evinced, will ex abundante, as we say, conclude the Thing
unreasonable, and the Practisers inexcusable. Indeed I scarce know any one
Divine Precept, which corrupt Nature may not nibble at, nay at some time or
other has not quarreled with. The most effectual course to silence the
debate, is, (...), Dixit Dominus, the Lord has said it; whom who can resist
and be guiltless? Now what He has said in the present business, has been over
and over cleared in the precedent Lines.

However, that I may disengage my promise, and leave no occasion of complaint
to the Antagonists, it will be very well worth your while, Madam, to view how
exactly Dissinterested Reason both corresponds with, and presses the Observance
of the forementioned Prohibition.

I can hardly conceive but that all Indifferent persons will easily discover
many Absurdities immediately consequent upon the Hypothesis of Usuries
Warrantableness; I shall consult your patience, and therefore rather name, than
prosecute some few which I find alleged by the most learned and sincere
Writers.

1. The Lender reaps very notable advantage by that which is no longer his own.
For I suppose, and it has been in part proved, that money, or any other thing
Lent (as Casulsts here use the word) is always made over, and is in the Right
Possession and Dominion of the Borrower for such a term of time. In which
respect only, it differs from Gift, which conveys the said Right and Dominion
away for ever. This is most apparent, because if the Money or Principale be
lost, it perishes to the Borrower, and not to the Lender, who makes that sure
against all contingencies by transferring his Right as to all Intents to the
said Borrower for the time agreed upon. Neither is he able to call it in, or
otherwise dispose of it, till that date is expired. All which, are most clear
evidences that by Receiving Interests he partakes the benefit of that which is
not his, and unconsionably requires to share in the prize, without ever
communicating in the hazard. Now how hard it is, and unreasonable for me to
make my markets of that which is strictly speaking another Commodity, is
obvious enough to any one who duly considers it. Hence arises a general Rule,
that every Condition or burden annexed to Lending, except such as is proper
and intrinsical to it, renders the contract Vsurary.

2. The end of Money is perfectly abused: For That, by virtue of its primary
Institution is the Universal Instrument of Commerce, and the common means of
exchanging other Wares. But the Usurer sells Money for Money, very
preposterously confounding the Merchandise and the price together.

3. The Usurer sells that which is his duty by a threefold Law of Nature,
Moses, and Grace. By the Law of Nature, the Rich are obliged to lend to the
Poor: (I understand, when they cannot conveniently give out right,) for that
teaches us to do to others, as we would be done to our selves. Now I refer it
to the Conscience of whom you please, whether they themselves had not much
rather borrow, when forced by necessity, without other Tie, but of Thanks and
the Principal, than even of 3 per cent. By Moses his Law, the Rich were
severely Commanded to assist the Poor by Lending Gratis. And what our Saviors
Judgment is, appears by what has been rehearsed before, but more fully from
St. Math. 5.42. Qui petit a te, da ei, etc. Give to him that asks of thee, and
turn not away from him that would borrow; and in all this, Nihil inde
sperantes; we must hope for nothing again. Surely the Poor are little beholding
to these Laws, if they meant only that there should indeed lie a strong
Engagement on the Rich to Relieve them, either by Giving or Lending; but
withal, they should pay dear for it, by returning a great deal more than ever
they received, to stuff up the Usurers Coffers.

4. The Usurer acts in complete Contradiction to Nature and Reason; and that
upon diverse accounts. For Accommodare est ad Commodum Proximi dare, and Dare
Mutuum, est Dare Meum ut sit Tuum, To Lend, is to profit my Neighbor, or do
him a Courtesy. But the Usurer pretending to do this, minds nothing less,
granting an uncertain (either for substance or quantity) and future profit to
the Borrower, but reserving a morally infallible and fixed Benefit to himself.
Again, Money is of a barren Nature, in token whereof, the metal is formed by
Nature in the most sterile, inhabitable places, -- (Itum est in Viscera Terrae
-- Effodiuntur Opes --) Now to bring forth the same species, is proper only to
things endued with life. Yet in spite of God and Nature, the Usurer will make
his Money fruitful, and that without Intermission, day and night, Winter and
Summer, and will have it work and improve, whilst he himself takes his ease and
rest. Besides all this, he most audaciously attempts upon that High Prerogative
of God, Creation, or producing Something out of Nothing; for 100 l. can be
worth but an 100 l. wherefore the 6. or more for Interest, must necessarily be
the product of Nothing. Or as the great Lawyer Baldas speaks, the Usurer
endeavors Impossibilities, that One should be more than One, a 100 l. should
be an 106 l. nay in time 200 l. He receives profit from that which is not, nor
perhaps will ever be, and therefore sells to the Borrower either Time or
Nothing, or the same thing twice, or the Borrowers proper Labor and Industry.
All which actions are most unjust and intolerable, as I might easily amplify
in every particular, but that I relinquish to your own pregnant Imagination,
abundantly able to supply what is here rudely shuffled together and slubberd
over. The utmost that can be said is, he does spem pretio vendere, sell the
hope of very uncertain gain, which is not yet, and God alone knows whether it
ever will be, for most assured profit; which by the Heathen themselves was
esteemed injurious in a high degree. For Aristotle himself by the Light of
Nature, 1 Politic. c. 7. could inform us, (...), etc. Usury says he, is Money
of Money, and therefore this sort of gain is directly against Nature. Hence
(...) pario, and Foenus a Foetu.

5. The Usurer violates Gods Law continually, without the least Cessation
either as to Time or Place; in which regard he may be styled an Everlasting
Offender. Nay he commits his Transgressions in an hundred several places
together sometimes, to wit, when his Money is breeding in so many distant
Banks. The Fornicator has his Quietus est at certain seasons, nor is he wholly
taken up in the Tents of Venus. The good Fellow has his lucid and serious
Intervals. Only the Usurer both sleeping and waking, night and day, in his
Chamber and a Church, Praying and Playing, is still trading, brooding, and
hatching more Money, without the least respite, and thus (...) (as St. Paul
threatens, Romans 2.5.) he Treasures up every moment to himself, Wrath against
the day of Wrath.

6. The Usurer has less Charity to his fellow Christian, than a Jew to his
Brother Jew; for a Jew durst not offer to take one penny Interest from one of
his own Religion. This may seem a weak Argument, but it is our Savior's own
motive in the forementioned sixth Chapter of St. Luke. If you lend to them of
whom you hope to receive, what thanks have ye? Nam and pecatores peccatoribus
senerantur, ut recipiant aequalia, For even Sinners lend to Sinners, that they
may receive equal. For shame, Christians, let not Publicans and Sinners, nay
Jews rise up in Judgment against us; for they lend, and only expect Aequalia
(...), an equal sum to what they lent, (if you will Credit Truth it self, who
avouches so) whereas Professors of, and Pretenders to the Doctrine of this
great Master, will not pleasure one another, without exacting their own and
much more into the bargain.

7. All the Usurers goods are Monstrous, Dentata, sull of Teeth, and Claws to
prey upon his Neighbor. His Corn, which was created by God to be the Food of
Man, in lieu thereof, eats up those who borrow and make use of it, and so of
the rest. This in effect is the sense of those frequent complaints we meet
with, I owe 50, 60, or 100 l. the very use whereof consumes and devours me! I
could of ten have refunded the main, but being rejected, because not attended
by the Accessory or Interest, that now has even surmounted the former? I
failed but one day, and was forced to renew my Lease, and submit my neck to the
yoke of another six months Exaction, though both Interest and Principal were
faithfully tendered! Oh the corroding, devouring expenses of Procuration,
Continuation, etc! under which I now groan! These, with the like grievous moans
and sighs of oppressed Families, make me ready to burst forth into his
Exclamation, Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut Nos non sumus Christiani! Either
the Texts before alleged, are not Scripture and Gospel, or we who practice the
contrary are hardly Christians! And whereas in the Primitive Age, the very
Badge and Characteristical note of our Religion, was Ecce, quomodo se invicem
diligunt Christiani! Behold, said the Infidels, how these Christians Love one
another! I fear it it would be now understood but Ironically, or rather altered
of necessity into its contrary, as matter of the World's astonishment; Behold
how these mock-Christians Trappan and swallow up one another! Nay, more like a
Canibal than civilized Creature, the Usurer eats up the very heart of the
Labors, drinks the tears and sweat of the poor with a great deal of gust,
content and jocundness.

8. Money, as I have observed elsewhere, is reducible to those things, the
Right or Dominion whereof is inseparable from the use. I can no more Use Money
without parting with it, than Victuals without eating them. Wherefore as he
would be deservedly esteemed a man of strange principles, who for a loaf of
bread should first ask me the true value for it, and after that was paid,
demand something considerable for my using or eating it; so it seems little
less Exaction to Lend money, and have the same again at such a time; and yet
not to be content with this, but over and above expect and extort something
extraordinary for the Use or spending of it. Thus in truth it is, for I
challenge any one Banker among ten thousand, who dares acknowledge that he
either bargains only for an equitable share in the Adventure or Purchase, or so
much as inquires whether a considerable Return was made or no; nay, whether the
Stock or Principal it self did not utterly miscarry, or at least fall short to
the expectation of the Employer, who is bound fast enough by Wax, Parchment and
Friends, both for the payment of that, and something else.

9. In all Contracts or Bargains, three Circumstances are very attentively to
be heeded, Labor, Charge, and Danger. But with which of these does the Usurer
so much as concern himself? All these Encumbrances lie on the back of the
Borrower. As for the Labor and Pains, let the Usurer stand, sit, sleep, laugh,
eat and drink,; whole weeks, months, and years run on, and the Use keeps even
pace with them. So that in flat defiance of In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane,
In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread, (which was the heavy
penalty laid on all the Children of Adam) he is resolved only to dip his in
that of his Neighbors. Then as to the charge and cost, that is altogether the
Borrowers, the Lender ventures not one penny. The danger likewise is only his;
for if the Stock fail, the Debtor is Responsible, whereas the Creditor is
secured all the ways that humane Wit, Policy, and Law can invent, to make him
safe, by Bonds, Witnesses, Sureties, and I know not what. Now what Lawful
profit is to be made, that is not conjoined with one or more of these three?
the Usurer medles with none of them.

I foresee what will be replied, and it is in every man's mouth, Damnum ex
Lucro Cessante, He suffers loss by reason of the Gain that cease by not
having the Money in his own hands. This is the Usurers threadbare plea. But,
pray what manner of loss is this that is alleged? The loss of a possible gain
is sufficiently recompensed by a possible loss that is avoided. This I am
confident of, that did any know how to make greater or equal advantage by
retayning their Money in their own possession, the Borrower should never have
the trouble of it. Here then lies the sweet of Usury; the Money, morally
speaking, is far safer in other men's hands than our own; for what Bonds or
Security have we from Thieves, Fire, and other Casualties of all sorts? all
which by this trick of Lending, are sufficiently warded off; besides a certain
delicious morsel which must accompany home the Principal to make it more
welcome.

By which way of proceeding, the Usurer falls very near within the Verge of
Atheism, totally as it were substracting himself from Providence; for what
need he depend upon the Influences of Heaven, pray for rain, fair weather, or
other blessings, since all is one to him? Let it shower or shine, he knows his
Debtor is acquainted with his day prefixed, which if he fail, the greatest
mercy to be looked for, is, either the Goal, Forfeiture of a Mortgage, or a
dismal Continuation of the former devouring Courtesy, from time to time, to
his final Ruin.

10. I might urge the very nature of Lending, which as has been declared in
its essential notion, speaks Gratuitousness, and is one of the works of
Corporal Mercy, chiefly respecting the Temporal good of another, providing only
for mine own Indemnity. Whereas in the Usurers practice, it is clean perverted
to the contrary, my own Convenience, and my Brothers Prejudice.

But for brevity sake, I shall pretermit that, with sundry other weighty
Reasons, and wind up all with this convincing one. It is a most solemn and
indispensable Statute, Levit. 19.36. Nolite facere iniquum aliquid in pondere,
in mensura. Statera justa and aequa sint pondera; Ego Dominus Deus vester: Do
nothing unjust in weight, or measure; let the balance be just, and the weights
equal; I am the lord your God, etc. I subsume, but Money now by general consent
is the Common Standard or measure of Exchange. How unjust then must the Usurer
be, who makes the measure it self, whence all Equality depends, Vn-even and
Vn-equal. An hundred pounds in the exchange of any Commodity, are precisely
worth but an hundred pounds. But to the Usurer, an hundred pounds are of the
value of an hundred and six, or more, according to his own pleasure (for his
Will must be the Standard of Worth, Price, and Value) and to the Debtor or
Borrower, they avayle but ninety four pounds or under. I would fain see the
Commutative Justice of this, which according to all, consists in an
Arithmetical exact proportion.

Here again they have recourse to their former refuge; The Usurer forsooth,
only recompenses the loss of a possible gain he might have purchased; and he
takes the Interest as a Reward of that possible profit the Borrower is presumed
to have made with his Money. But I answer for once and all.

1. That there is no sufficient Proportion between an Actual, Infallible gain,
and a mere possible one, attended by a multitude of Casualites; this is
apparent in other bargains. For example, why may not a Horse-courser sell a
Horse with a safe Conscience for five times as much as he knows him to be
worth, because there is a possibility of the Buyers being set upon by Robbers,
and for-ought he knows the Horse being very fleet, may save both his life and
200 pieces he has about him? The like may be instanced in an hundred other
occasions. So that it is not the uncertain hopes of a future Advantage, but the
present, real and intrinsecal value of the thing, that must sway in setting the
rate and price of it.

2. Whosoever will adjoyn such Cautions as these, in his Lending, namely, to
receive an equitable part (according to the Estimate of prudent, honest, and
indifferent Judges) of the In-comes from the Principal, when they are actually
in Being, and in the Borrowers hand; and withal, be willing to venture a
competent share of his own Principal, should it happen to miscarry; I have
nothing to argue against his contract, but conclude it warrantable. However, to
think that our Money-Merchants now adays act upon such ingenuous principles in
their dealings, -- Credat Indaus Apella, -- it is beyond my Faith, and I am
sure out of the common road both of their Law and practice.

That I have not been over rigid in censuring, I might easily evince from the
writings of Authors of the highest Rank and undoubted Authority, who
unanimously condemn far smaller matters than I have here impeached. I will but
give you a taste of some few. The The Learned Cardinal Tolet says, It is
Usury, though I have but an intention, without expressing it in the contract of
receiving more than I gave forth, as due upon the score of Lending. Cardinal
Lugo calls it Usury to Lend Money, that I may obtain some Office or Employment
under him to whom I Lend. To Lend old Corn, with obligation of repaying new, if
I foresee the new will be better and dearer, is Usury, as Sylvester and Navarre
teach. It is Usury to lend and lay a Juridical Obligation on the Borrower,
either to lend to thee again, or to buy in thy shop, or to serve under thee,
etc. as Lessius, Layman, and Bonacina affirm. It is Usury, as Salas very well
proves, to lend to the Prince or Commonwealth, that thou may be free from
Tribute and Taxes. It is Usury to oblige the Borrower to accept part of the
Money in thy Wares and Merchandice, in the judgment of that great Casuist
Diana. To lend Money on this Condition, that the Borrower at his great cost and
charges procure it from one of my Debtors, of whom I could not have got it
without much difficulty and trouble, is Usury, if we believe the judicious
Merchantius.

To go a little higher. In the Provincial Synods of Cambray, Anno 1586.
Mechline 1570. St. Omers, 1583. Ipres. 1577. In a special Edict set forth by
Philip the second, King of England and Spain, it was peremptorily decreed, that
No Tutor or Guardian of Orphans, under pretense of increasing their Patrimony,
should let out their Money from year to year for a certain gain above the
Capital, reserving a faculty or power of calling in the Principal or Capital
sum, either when the Pupils came to age, the day of Marriage, or otherwise at
their pleasure. The aforesaid Authority calls all such Contracts Usury, and
proceeds against such Lenders, as Usurers, and declares the Contract or
Obligation invalid or of no force.

From Provincial Synods, let us ascend to General Councils. The Council of
Agatha before cited, positively defines Usury to be the receiving of more than
was lent, chap. 3. The first Nicene Council declares it a mortal or heinous
sin, and punishes it in the Clergy with Degradation, Can. 17. The first Council
of Arles forbids Usurers the Participation of the Eucharist. The second
ratifies the Decree of the first, chap. 14. The first Council of Carthage uses
the Apostles word, and terms it Turpe Lucrum, filthy gain, cap. 13. The
Eliberitan Council formally degrades the Clergy, and Excommunicates the Laity
that are Guilty, cap. 20. and the Council of Toures severely prohibits it,
chap. 13. But the most terrible of all is the Lateran Council under Alexander
the III. chap. 25. It is too long to transcribe, but it confirms the censures
that went before, and super-adds others.

As to the matter of Law, I fear the Usurer will find but little favor.

1. The Canon Law both finds him guilty, and condemns him. The fifth book of
Decretals, the 47th. distinction in the Decrees, Cause. 14. Quest. 3. and 4.
wholly consound him. Two Decretal Epistles, one of Pope Gelasius, the other of
Pope Leo the first, thunder against him; by virtue of which, while he is well
in health, he must not receive the Eucharist in the Church, nor make any
Offering; when he is sick, he is not so much as to be visited, or permitted to
make his Will; nor when dead, is he admitted to Christian Burial. Nay, which I
wish would be laid well to heart, the Sollicitors who persuade, the Procurers,
the Public Notaries and Witnesses, who assist at, the Lawyers who defend, the
Judges and Magistrates who countenance such Contracts, the Confessors who
absolve him, are all involved in the same crime, and subjected to the same
Anathema. The Authentic Records of Primitive times assure us, that the person
who was but suspected of Usury, was neither vouchsafed the Kiss of Peace in the
Church, nor respected with common salutation in the streets; his house was
generally called the Seat of Satan, nor was it lawful for any Christian to
setch fire from thence.

Nor does the Civil Law handle him more civilly. Cato a Heathen in his Treatise
de Re Rustica, speaking of the Law of 12 Tables, says thus, Our Ancestor's
both thought so, and put it among their Laws, that a Thief should be condemned
in double, but an Usurer in fourfold Restitution. So much harsher an Opinion
had they of an Usurer than of a Thief.

It appears by the writings of St. Augustine, who flourished, Anno 420. that in
his time Usurers were Infamous by Law, and esteemed unworthy to be admitted to
any public Office in the Commonwealth.

As to the Principles of the Civil Law, they directly thwart the Usurers
practice, as will be manifest by a brief Recapitulation of some of them. I find
them reckoned up ready to my hand by Hottomanus, a Grave and Judicious
Conscientious Author, as he is cited by Bishop Andrews in his Theological
Determination of this point. They are these following.

1. It is of the very Essence and Nature of Lending, that it be free and
gratuitous. 2. We are not to receive most certain profit from very uncertain
Negotiation or Adventures. 3. Where Nothing is Exchanged, Nothing of Gain is to
be exacted. 4. Society cannot subsist without a Communication of Profits and
Damages, or Hazards. 5. Things that are consumed by or in their very Using,
neither in natural nor civil Reason are capable of Vsus fructus, which is the
Use or profit of what is another's, the propriety or substance of the thing
being still the Owners. 6. We are not to make advantage or profit of another
man's Goods, the Owner being unwilling, or not yiedling plenary assent: As here
the Borrower does not, but is forced to undergo such and such Conditions, or
go without the Money his affairs require. 7. The Law of an Inferior cannot
abrogate, or prejudice that of a Superior; and therefore Humane Laws
tolerating, or rather Regulating the excess of Usury, can no ways invalidate or
lessen the Authority Divine, absolutely forbidding it.
These are some few of those many civil Axioms, which utterly overthrow the
Usurers profession and pretensions.

Now for our own Native Municipal Laws, I refer the Curious to the
Statute-Books, with the other Elaborate Writings of the most Famous among those
of the Long Robe; particularly my Lord Coke, in his Reports; where I presume
little will be found to the Usurer's satisfaction. In short, because this is
out of my Sphere, as I find it set down by others.

1. Under the Britons, it was provided by an Ancient Statute, as we may see in
Gildas, that it should not be judged any Cheat to deceive an Usurer. 2. Under
the Saxons, by the 37th. Law of King Edward the Confessor, All Usury was
forfeited to the Crown. 3. Under the Normans in the Fourth of Edward the First,
there was an Act against the Jews upon this very score, and they were Banished
throughout the whole Kingdom: And from that time forward the Canon Law was in
full force till the Fifth year of Edward the Sixth; which, how it was affected
toward Usurers, may be more than guessed at, by what was said a little before.
I have little to say as to the political part, being so seldom conversant
either with discourses of that Nature, or persons of that Employment. However
let me give you, though not the words, yet the sense of one who was excellently
well versed in both; by which you will soon discern how incommodious, and well
nigh inconsistent Usury is with the Civil Government and Prosperity of a Nation.

To omit the frequent feuds, quarrels, and discords, says my Author, that
principally arise from this kind of Exaction, and those not always to be
decided by Gown-men, but sometimes having recourse to the Sword it self, as
appears by the Roman History, where it is observed, how that first Revolt of
the Plebeians or Commons, from the Senators or Gentlemen, sprung from the
Usurary proceedings of the latter with the former: To omit likewise those
continual murmurs, grudgings, repineings and Curses that accompany it, to the
perfect alienating of Subjects minds and Affections from one another, whence
most of the Revolutions of Kingdoms are derived; it being impossible, in our
Saviors reckoning, that a Community divided against it self, should be of long
continuance.

I may thus Reason;

Money put out to Use, is either placed with a Poor man, or a Rich. If with a
Rich man, usually he either turns Monopolist, and ingrosses a Commodity to
himself; or Protopolist, fore-stalling the Markets; and afterward by this
means he inhances the Rates of Merchandise at pleasure, converting that to the
private Pampering, and superfluous swelling of one particular Member, which
Reason designs for the common nourishment of the whole Body Politic. And
this, though it may be dissembled for a time, yet must necessarily breed bad
blood in the Republic.

If a person of a slender Fortune, light upon a good round sum by borrowing;
it often happens that at such an un-usual sight, he begins to foster
extravagant hopes, attempts too high matters, turns Prodigal, and then
Bankrupt; and after that, seeing his Fortune desperate, his inclinations swim
with it; let any Faction appear, let any Standard be Erected, whether of David
the Sovereign, or of Absolam the Rebel, it matters not, thither he Posts,
knowing it to be good Fishing in troubled Waters: Nor can hardly one among a
thousand Bankrupts be instanced in, who was not reduced to such exigencies
first by tampering with the Usurer.

The same Author leaves it to the consideration of Statesmen, whether it be for
the public good to permit any to serape together, and hoard up Wealth by such
idle, lazy means; since all Mechanical Arts, Adventuring in Merchandise,
Domestic Manufactures, both in Town and Country (which are the very sinews of
a Commonwealth) will quickly come to nothing. For who is so sottish as to run
hazards, toil night and day, compass Sea and Land for uncertain hopes, when he
may, lurking at home, without the sweat of his Brows, or the trouble of his
Brayns, at his leisure Increase and Multiply by that casie Trade of Lending?

There remains nothing now but to view the Judgment of Antiquity, the Primitive
and more purer Ages of Christianity, and that both in the Greek and Latin
Fathers; whereby we shall discover the mind of the Eastern and Western Church.

This has been done in, part, scatteringly here and there before, and
therefore it will be sufficient summarily to supply the test.

And, first occurrs that most ancient Writer Clemens Alexandrinus, lib.
Stromat. (...), etc.

It is not the part of a Righteous Man to put out his Money to Use; but with a
liberal hand and mind to contribute to the Necessitous.

St. Basil upon the 15th. Psalm (in his account the 14.) spends a whole Homily
in Inveighing against Usury.

St. Gregory Nyssen, in an Epistle to a certain Bishop, assures him that both
(...) and (...), etc. Usury and Increase are forbid in Holy Scripture, though
under the pretense of a Contract or Bargain. By those two words, he means Usury
and Overplus, or Accessorium sorti.

St Gregory Nazianzen, in his speech to the Silent Father, (...), etc. Usury
and Increase have corrupted the Earth, while it gathers where it never Sowed,
and Reaps, where it scattered not; nor does it Till and improve the ground, but
the wants of the Poor.

St. Chrysostom is a most Rigid Taxour of it. In the end of his Fifty-seaventh
Homily upon St. Matthew's Gospel, he spares not the Laws themselves that
connive at it. In his Forty-one Homily on Genesis, he discourses thus, From the
Beginning God forbad the Jews to take Use.

What excuse then can they have, who are more inhumane than the Jews? and after
the Law of Grace, and so great mercy live inferior to those, who were under
the Law of Moses?

The same Holy Father (or rather the Learned Author of the Imperfect Work upon
St. Matthew) in his Twelfth Homily speaks to this purpose.

Christ commands us to Lend our Money, yet not with Usury For he that puts his
Money out to Use, at first appearance indeed, he seems to give that which is
his own; whereas in truth he gives not what is his own, but takes away what is
another.

The Money of an Usurer is like the biteing of an Aspick (a certain venomous
Creature.)

He who is Stung by an Aspick, with great delight falls asleep, and in that
pleasant Dream, dies; because then the Poison secretly over-spreads all his
Members. So he that receives Money, and must pay the Use; for a while, he
fancies it a Courtesy; but at last the Use and Interest seizes on all his
Estate, and turns the whole into Debt. --

If we were but content with necessaries, that worst sort of men, Usurers had
never been heard of.

This for the Eastern Church, to which the Latin Fathers unanimously subscribe.

Tertullian. lib. 4. contra Marcion. Peruse the words of the Prophet Ezekiel,
concerning the just man.

He has not given his Money to Usury, nor will accept of Overplus, which is
Usury.

Therefore first the Prophet would root out the profit of Usury, that he might
the more easily accustom men patiently to loose even the Principal it self, if
need were, since by the Law they were commanded to loose the Interest.

Elegant Lanctantius, lib. 4. de Vero Cultu. c. 18. If he have Lent any Money,
he must not receive Use, that both the Courtesy may be complete, and he keep
his hands from other men's goods; For in such kinds of Civility, every man must
be contented with his own, nay, sometimes not spare his own, that he may do
good: But to receive more than he gave, is unjust; nor will a just man defile
himself with such Gain.

Saint Ambrose in his Fourteenth Chapter concerning Tobias; What ever is above
the Principal is Usury.

If it be lawful, why do you shun the Title? (as they do who call it Interest)
and draw a veil over it, making Interest the Plaster of Usury? If it be
unlawful, why do you seek for Increase?

What St. Jerome thinks of this business, you may see in the Title Page.

St. Augustine upon the Thirty-seaventh Psalm. Whatsoever it be, if thou expect
to Receive more than thou Gave, thou art an Usurer and to be Condemned, and
forbids us to give Alms of the Money purchased by Usury.

Leo the Great, in his Sixteenth Sermon concerning Fasting; Whatever effect
follows on Usury, it is a Sin: So that the Usurer must be either miserable, by
loosing what he gave; or more miserable by obtaining what he gave not.

Therefore the Iniquity of Usury is to be avoided, quia fenus pecuniae, funus
Animae, the Gain of the Money is the Loss of the Soul.

The Case of Orphans and other poor people is the greatest difficulty in this
matter. But we are in a point of Justice. In which Pauperis quoque non
misereberis in Judicio, Exodus 23.3. Even a poor Man is not to be countenanced.

He who made this Prohibition has no where exempted them: and therefore to his
Providence they must be referred, who has promised to have a special care over
them, and be a Father, the Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow.

In the interim, Merchants, and other pious disposed perso^^ may undertake the
management of their Stock, to their adva^tage, without entering into any such
formal Contract as we ha^^ here disputed against.

Thus having Gratified your Request in the Question proposed, I have no more to
do, but Subscribe ^^^self

Madam, Your most devoted Servant, T. S.

FINIS.

