Notes taken in Shorthand of a Speech in the House of Lords on the Debates of
appointing a day for Hearing Dr. Shirley's Cause, October. 20. 1675.
My Lords,
OUr All is at Stake, and therefore you must give me leave to speak freely
before we part with it: My Lord Bishop of Sarum is of Opinion that we should
rather appoint a day to consider what to do upon the Petition, then to appoint
a day of hearing: And my Lord Keeper (for I may name them) at a Committee of
the whole house, tells us in a very Eloquent and Studied Language: That he will
propose us a way far less liable to Exceptions, and much less offensive to our
Privileges than that of appointing a day of Hearing. And I beseech your
Lordships, did you not after all these fine words, expect some admirable
proposals, but it ended in this; that your Lordships should appoint a day, nay
a very long day, to consider what to do in it: And my Lord has undertaken to
convince you, that this is the only course by several undeniable reasons. The
first of which is, that it is against our Judicature to hear this cause which
is not proper for us, nor ought to be relieved by us. To this my Lords give me
leave to answer, that I did not expect from a man professing the Law; that
after an answer by order of the Court was put in, and a day had been appointed
for hearing, which by some accident was set aside, and the Plaintiff moving for
a second day to be assigned; that ever without hearing Council on both sides,
the Court did enter into the merits of the cause. And if your Lordships should
do it in a cause attended with the circumstances as this is, it would not only
be an apparent injustice, but a plain subterfuge to avoid a point you durst not
maintain.

But my Lords second reason speaks the matter more plainly, for it is because
it is a doubtful case whether the Commons have not privilege; therefore my
Lord would have you to appoint a further and very long day to consider of it,
which indeed in plain English is, that your Lordships would confess upon your
own Books that you conceive it on second thoughts a doubtful case, and that for
no other reason, but because my Lord Keeper thinks it so, which I hope will not
be a reason to prevail with your Lordships, since you cannot yet by experience
tell that his Lordship is capable of thinking your Lordships in the right in
any matter against the Judgment of the House of Commons; it is so hard a thing
even for the ablest man to change ill habits.

But now my Lords third reason is the most admirable of all, which he styles
unanswerable, ( viz.) That your Lordships are all convinced in your own
Conscience that this (if prosecuted) will cause a breach: I beseech your
Lordships to consider whether the Argument thus applied would not overthrow the
Law of Nature and all the Laws of right and property in the World; for it is an
Argument, and a very good one, that you should not stand or insist on claims
where you have not a clear right, or where the question is not of consequence
and moment, in a matter that may produce a dangerous and pernicious breach
between Relations, Persons or Bodies-politick joined in Interests and high
Concerns together: So on the other hand, if the obstinacy of the parties in the
wrong shall be made an unanswerable Argument for the other party to recede and
give up his just rights, how long shall the people keep their Liberties, or the
Princes and Governors of the World their Prerogatives? How long shall the
Husband maintain his Dominion, or any man his property from his Friends, or his
Neighbors Obstinacy?

But my Lords, when I hear my Lord Keeper open so Eloquently the fatal
consequence of a breach, I cannot forbear to fall into some admiration how it
comes to pass; that (if the consequences be so fatal) the Kings Ministers in
the House of Commons; (of which I am sure there are several that are of the
Cabinet, and have easy resort to his Majesty, and have the direction and trust
of his Affairs;) I say that none of these should press these consequences
there, or give the least stop in the career of that House in this business; but
that all the Votes concerning this affair, nay, even that very Vote that no
Appeal is cognoscible by the House of Lords, should pass nemine contradicente,
and yet all the great Ministers here, yea Bishops and other Lords of greatest
dependence on the Court contend this point, as if it were pro aris and foris: I
hear His Majesty in Scotland has been pleased to declare against Appeals in
Parliament. I cannot much blame the Court if they think (the Lord Keeper and
Judges being of the Kings naming, and in his power to change) that the justice
of the Nation is safe enough, and I my Lords may think so too during this Kings
Reign; though I hear Scotland (not without reason) complain already. Yet how
future Princes may use this power, and how Judges may be made, not men of
Ability or Integrity, men of Relation and dependence, who will do what they are
commanded, and all men's Causes come to be judged and Estates disposed of as
great men at Court please, is to be considered.

My Lords, the constitution of our Government has provided better for us, and
I can never believe so wise a Body as the House of Commons will prove that
foolish woman that plucked down her house with her hands.

My Lords, I must presume to say something, to wit, what was offered by my Lord
Bishop of Sarum, a man of great Learning and Ability, and always versed in a
stronger and closer way of reasoning then the business of the Noble Lord I
answered before did accustom him to; and that Reverend Prelate has stated the
matter very fairly upon two heads.

1. Whether the hearing of Causes and Appeals, and especially in this point
where the Members have privilege, be so material to us, that it ought not to
give way to the reason of State of greater Affairs that press us at this time.

2. If the business be of that moment, yet whether the appointing a day to
consider of the Petition would prove of that consequence and prejudice to our
cause.

My Lords, to these give me leave in the first place to say that this matter is
no less then your whole Judicature, and your Judicature is no less then the
Life and Soul of the Dignity of the Peerage of England; you will quickly grow
burthensom, if you grow useless, you have now the greatest and most useful end
of Parliament principally in you, which is not to make new Laws, but to redress
Grievances and to maintain the Old Landmarks. The House of Commons business is
to complain to your Lordships to redress not only the Complaints from them that
are the Eyes of the Nation, but also other particular persons that address to
you. A Land may groan under a multitude of Laws, and I believe ours does, and
when Laws grow so multiplied yearly, they oftener prove snares then the
directions and security of the people: I look upon it as the ignorance and
weakness of the latter Age, if not worse, the effect of the designs of ill men,
that it is grown a general Opinion, that when there is not a particular
direction in some Act of Parliament the Law i^ defective, as if the Common Law
had not provided much better, shorter and plainer for the peace and quiet of
the Nation, then intricate, long and perplexed Statutes do, which has made work
for the Lawyers, given power to the Judges, lessened your Lordships power, and
in a good measure unhinged the Security of the People.

My Lord Bishop tells you, your whole Judicature is not in question, but only
the Privilege of the House of Commons, of their Members not appearing at your
Bar. My Lords, were it no more, yet that for Justice and the peoples sake you
ought not to part with, how far a privilege of the House of Commons, their
Servants and those they own does extend, Westminster Hall may with grief tell
your Lordships, they have neither Presidents, nor Reason, nor any Justifiable
pretense to show against us; and therefore my Lords if you part with your
undoubted right merely for asking, where will their asking stop. And my Lords,
we are sure it does not stop here, for they have already nemine contradicente
Voted against your Lordships power of Appeal from any Court of Equity, so that
you may plainly see where the confusion and reason of State means to stop, not
one jot of laying your whole Judicature aside, for the reason of passing the
Kings Money if not interrupting good Laws, or whatever else, must of necessity
avoid all breach upon what score soever. And your Lordships plainly see the
breach will be as well made upon our Judicature in general, as upon this; so
that when your Lordships have appointed a day, a very long day to consider
whether Dr. Shirley's Cause be not too hot to handle; and when you have done
the same for Sir Nicholas Stoughton, whose Petition I hear is coming in, your
Lordships must proceed to a Vote to lay aside all private business for six
Weeks: For the phrase of private business had obtained this last Age upon that
which is your most public duty and business, namely the administration of
Justice. And I can tell your Lordships, besides the reason that leads to it,
that I have some intelligence of desiring such a Vote; for on the second day of
our sitting, at the rising of the Lords House there came a Gentleman into the
Lobby, belonging to a very great Person, and asked in great haste, are the
Lords risen, have they passed the Vote, and being asked what Vote, he answered,
the Vote of no private business for six Weeks. My Lords, if this be your
business, where are you; if we are to post-pone our Judicature for fear of
offending the House of Commons for six Weeks, that they may in the interim pass
the Money and other acceptable Bills that His Majesty thinks of importance. Are
so many wise men of the House of Commons so lulled to pass all these so
acceptable things, and when they have done to let us loose upon them, will they
not remember this next time there is want of Money, or may they not rather be
assured by those Ministers that are among them, and go on so unanimously with
them, that the King is on their side in this Controversy: And then I beg your
Lordships where are you, after you have but the last Sessions asserted your
rights of Judicature so highly even in this point; and after the House of Com:
had gone so high against you on the other hand, as to post their Declaration
and Remonstrance on Westminster. hall Doors: The very next Session after you postpone
the same Causes, and not only those, but all Judicatures whatever; I beseech
your Lordships, will not this prove a fatal President and Confession against
your selves: It Is a maxim, and a rational one amongst Lawyers, that one
President where the Case has been contested, is worth a 100. where there has
been no Contest. My Lords, in saying this I humbly suppose I have given
sufficient Answer to my Lord Bishops two Questions, for it is a plain
Confession that it is a thing never heard of before, for it is the very same
Case that you formerly Ordered, and so strongly asserted, so that upon time and
all the deliberation imaginable you declare yourselves doubtful, and you put
your selves out of your own hands that power you have no reason to believe on
your sides in this question.

My Lords, I have all the Duty imaginable to His Majesty, and should with all
submission give way to any thing that he should think of Importance to His
Affairs, but in this point it is to alter the Government.

If you are asked to lay this aside, yet there is no reason of State can be an
Argument to your Lordships to turn yourselves out of that Interest you have in
the Constitution of the Government: It is not only your concern, but it is the
concern of the poorest man in England, that you keep your Station. It is your
Lordships concern, and that so highly, that I will be bold to say the King can
give you no recompense for it. What are empty Titles? What is present Power, or
Riches, or great Estate, wherein I have no firm no fixed Property? It Is the
constitution of the Government, and maintaining it that secures your Lordships,
and every man else in what he has; the poorest Lord, if the Birthright of the
Peerage be maintained, has a fair prospect before him for himself and his
Posterity, but the greatest power with greatest Title and Riches, is but a mean
Creature, and maintains those Monarchies no otherwise then by servile and low
flatteries, and upon uncertain terms.

My Lords, It Is not your Interest, but the peoples that you maintain your
rights, for let the House of Commons and Gentry of England think what they
please, there is no Prince that ever governs without a Nobility or an Army; If
you will not have one, you must have the other, or else the Monarchy cannot
long support it self from tumbling down into a Democratical Republic. Your
Lordships and the people have the same Cause, and the same Enemies. My Lord,
would you be in favor with the King; it is a very ill way to it, to put your
selves out of a future capacity to be considerable in his service. I do not
find in Story or Modern Experience, but that it is better, and a man is much
more regarded that is still in a capacity and opportunity to serve, then he
that has wholly deprived himself of all for his Princes sake. And therefore I
declare I will serve my Prince as a Peer, but will not destroy the Peerage to
serve him.

My Lords, I have heard of twenty foolish Models and Expedients to secure the
Justice of the Nation, and yet to take this right from your Lordships: As the
King by his Commission to appoint Commissioners to hear Appeals, or that the
twelve Judges should be the persons, or that persons should be appointed by Act
of Parliament, which are all not only to take away your Lordships just right,
which ought not to be altered any more than any other part of the Government,
but are in themselves when well weighed, ridiculous: I must deal freely with
your Lordships, these things could never have risen in men's minds, but that
there has been some kind of provocation that has given the first rise of it. I
pray your Lordships forgive me if on this occasion I put you in mind of
Committe-Dinners, and the scandal of it, those droves that attend all Causes;
'twas come to that pass, that men even hired or borrowed of their Friends
handsome Sisters or Daughters to deliver their Petitions, but yet for all this I
must say that the Judgments have been impartial unless in one or two Causes,
and those we owe most to that Bench from whence now I apprehend most danger.

There is one thing I have almost forgot to speak to, which is the conjuncture
of time, the hinge on which our reason of State turns; and to that give me
leave to say, if this be not a time of leisure to vindicate your Privileges,
you must never expect one; I would almost say that the harmony, good agreement
and concord that is to be prayed for at other times may be fatal to us now: We
owe the Peace of this last two years and disengagement from the French
Interest, to the two Houses differing from the sense and Opinion of White Hall:
So as at this time the thing in the World this Nation has most reason to
apprehend is a general Peace, which cannot now happen without very advantageous
terms to the French, and disadvantageous to the house of Austria.

We are the Kings great Counselors, and if so, have right to differ, and give
contrary Counsels to those few that are nearest about him: I fear they would
advance a general Peace, I am sure I would advise against it, and hinder it at
this time by all the ways imaginable: I heartily wish nothing from you may add
weight and reputation to those Counselors who would assist the French: No
Money for Ships, nor preparations you can make, nor personal assurance our King
can have, can secure us from the French if they are at leisure; he is grown too
potent for us at Sea, he has built 24 Ships this last year, and has 30. more in
number then we; besides the advantage, that our Ships are all out of Order, and
his so exquisitely provided for, that every Ship has its particular
Storehouse, it is incredible the Money he has, and is bestowing in making
Harbors, he makes Nature it self give way to the vastness of his Expense: And
for all this shall a Prince so wise, so intent upon his Affairs, be thought to
make these preparations to sail over Land and fall on the back of Hungary, or
is it possible he should oversee his Interest in seizing of Ireland, a thing so
seazable to him if he be Master of the Seas, (as he certainly now is,) and
which when attained, gives him all the Southern and Mediteranean, East and
West India Trade, and renders him both by Situation and Excellent Harbors
Master of the Seas without dispute. My Lords, I conclude this point, I fear the
Court of England is greatly mistaken in it, and I do not wish them the
reputation of the concurrence of the Kingdom, and this out of the most sincere
Loyalty to His Majesty, and love to my Nation.

My Lords, I have but one thing more to trouble you with, and that peradventure
a consideration of the greatest weight and concern both to your Lordships and
the whole Nation: I have often seen in this house that the Arguments with the
strongest reason and most convincing to the Lay Lords in general, have not had
the same effect upon the Bishops Bench, but that they have unanimously gone
against us in matters that many of us have thought essential and undoubted
rights: And I consider that it is not possible that men of great Learning, Piety
and Reason, (as their Lordships are,) should not have the same care of doing
right, and the same conviction what is right upon clear reason that is offered,
which other your Lordships have. And therefore my Lords, I must necessarily
think we differ in Principles, and then it is very easy to apprehend that the
clearest sense to men of my Principles may not at all persuade or affect the
Conscience of the best man of a different one. My Principle is, that the King
is King by Law, and by the same Law that a poor man enjoys his Cottage, and
also it becomes the concerns of every man in England that has but his liberty,
to maintain and defend to his utmost the King in all his Rights and
Prerogatives. My Principle is also that the Lords House and the Judicature and
right belonging to it, are an Essential part of the Government and established
by the same Law, the King governing and administering Justice by his House of
Lords, and advising with both his Houses of Parliament in all important
matters, is the Government I own, am born under, and am obliged to. If ever
there should happen in future Ages (which God forbid) a King governing by an
Army without his Parliament, it is a Government I own not, was not born under,
nor am obliged to, and according to this principle, every honest man that holds
it must endeavor equally to preserve the Frame of the Government in all the
parts of it, and cannot satisfy his Conscience to give up the rights of the
Lords House for the service of the Crown, or to take away the just Rights and
Privileges of the Commons to please the Lords. But there is another Principle
got into the World my Lords, that has not been long there: For Archbishop Laud
was the first Author that I remember of it, and I cannot find that the Jesuits,
or indeed the Papist Clergy has ever owned it, but some of the Episcopal
Clergy of the British Isles; and as it is new, so it is withal the most
dangerous and destructive Doctrine to our Government and Law that ever was:
It Is the first of the Clamours published by the Convocation in the year 1640.
That Monarchy is of Divine Right. This Doctrine was then Preached up by
Sybthorpe and Manwaringe, and others of later years, by Books published by Dr:
Sanderson Bishop of Lincoln under the name of Archbishop Vslter, and how much
it is spread amongst our dignified Clergy is very easily known.

We all agree that the King and Government is to be obeyed for Conscience sake,
and that the Divine presence requires not only here, but in all parts of the
World obedience to lawful Governors. And that this Family are our Kings, and
his particular frame of Government is our lawful Constitution, but obliges us
in owning only the particular Laws of our Country.

This Laudean Doctrine was the root that produced the Bill of Test last
Session, and some very perplexed Oaths that are of the same nature with that
end, yet imposed by several Acts of Parliament.

In a word, if this Doctrine be true, our Magna Charta is of no force, our Laws
are but rules amongst our selves during the Kings pleasure; Monarchy if of
Divine right cannot be bounded or limited by humane Laws, nay what is more,
cannot bind it self, and all our claims of right by the Law, or the
Constitution of the Government, all the Jurisdiction and privilege of this
House, all the Rights and Liberties of the House of Commons, all the Properties
and Liberties of the people are to give way not only to the Interest, but the
Will and Pleasure of the Crown, and the best and worthiest of men holding this
Principle, must Vote to deliver up all we have, not only when reason of State,
but when the pleasure of the King will have it so.

Therefore my Lords you see how necessarily it is that our Principles be known,
and how fatal to us all it is that this principle should be suffered to spread
any further.

My Lords, To conclude, your Lordships have seen of what consequence this is to
you, that the appointing a day to consider is no less then declaring your
selves doubtful upon second and deliberate thoughts, that you put your selves
out of your own hands into a more then morally probability of having this
Session made a President against you, You see your duty to your selves and the
people, and that it is really not the Interest of the people, but may be the
inclination of the Court that you loose the power of Appeals: But I beg that
our House may not be Felo de se, but that your Lordships in this Affair will
take the only course to preserve your selves, and appoint a day this day three
weeks for the hearing of Dr. Shirley's Cause, is my humble Petition.



