AN INQUIRY Concerning VIRTUE, In Two Discourses; VIZ. I. Of VIRTUE, and the
belief of a DEITY. II. Of the Obligations to VIRTUE.

HONESTUM igitur id intelligimus, quod tale est, ut, detracta omni utilitate,
sine ullis praemiis fructibusve, per seipsum possit jure laudari. Quod quale
sit, non tam definitione, qua sum usus, intelligi potest (quamquam aliquantum
potest) quam communi omnium judicio, and optimi cujusque studiis, atque factis:
qui permulta ob eam unam causam faciunt, quia decet, quia rectum, quia honestum
est; etsi nullum consecuturum emolumentum vident. --

Cic. de Fin. B. and M. Lib. 2. LONDON, Printed for A. Bell in Cornhil, E.
Castle near Whitehal, and S. Buckley in Fleetstreet. M. DC. XC. IX.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 18. read, As when there are other Minds, besides one chief one;
but. lin. 21. r. As when there are, besides one chief good Principle, several
Principles. P. 22. l. 22. r. in himself. P. 35. l. 7. r. to their. P. 69. l.
11. r. are those. P. 79. l. 2. r. ill occurrence. P. 83. l. 2. r. IS, and. P.
104. l. 29. r. degrees. P. 105. l. 26. r. from hence. P. 146. l. 9. r. order,
set. P. 154. l. 29. r. content. P. 163. l. 17. r. perpetual Satiety. P. 182. l.
13. r. and are. P. 185. l. 5. r. losing. P. 187. l. 20. r. highly reigning. P.
197. l. 1. r. the natural.

BOOK the First. OF VIRTUE, AND THE Belief of a DEITY.
SECT. I.
RELIGION and VIRTUE, as they have near relation one to another, and are ever
presumed to reside together; so they are very rarely considered apart, or
distinguished from one another. However, since there have bin instances of
some, who having great Zeal in Religion, have yet wanted even the common
affections of Humanity, and have bin extremely vicious and corrupt; and since
others, even amongst those who have scarcely owned a Deity, have bin seen to
practice the rules of Morality, and have seemed to act with good meaning and
affection toward Mankind: it has given occasion to several to enquire HOW FAR
VIRTUE ALONE COULD GO; AND HOW FAR RELIGION WAS EITHER NECESSARY TO SUPPORT IT,
OR ABLE TO RAISE AND ADVANCE IT. And since by the example of others we have bin
engaged in an enquiry of this kind, and are now about to enter upon a Subject
where there is need of a very particular Explanation of things, and of a more
than ordinary clearness in terms; we may do well first of all to consider What
it is that we call ATHEISM, and what VIRTUE: and afterward we may examine the
consistency of these two together.

FIRST, then, AS TO ATHEISM. And here it cannot justly be wondered at, if the
method of explaining this appears unusual and strange, since the Subject it
self, and the Question here treated of, has, perhaps, so little entered into
consideration, and is a matter of so nice and dangerous speculation. But to
begin, therefore, according to the best of our Reason; the judgment of which is
submitted to others.

IN the Whole of things (or in the Universe) either every thing is according to
a good order, and the most agreeable to a general interest that is possible: or
every thing is not according to a good order; but there is that which might
possibly have bin better, more wisely contrived, and with more advantage to the
general interest of Beings, or of the Whole.

IF every thing that exists be according to a good order, and for the best, by
being in the wisest and justest manner; then is there of necessity no such
thing as REAL ILL in the Universe, nothing ILL with respect to the whole.

WHATSOEVER, then, has such an Existence or Being as that it could not have bin
better, or better ordered, is perfectly Good. Whatsoever in the order of the
world is called ILL, supposes a possibility in the nature of the thing to have
bin otherwise contrived or ordered by some wisdom or other: for if it could not
have bin better made, or any otherwise have bin better, by any supposed order
or regulation; it is perfect, and in no wise defective or ILL.

WHATSOEVER is ILL therefore, must be caused or produced, either by design
(that is to say, with Knowledge and Judgment) or through want of design, from
chance.

IF the order of all things be such, that nothing can be thought of, or
imagined, more wise, perfect and just; then it is impossible but that there
must be Wisdom, Understanding and Design in the whole; and that in the
perfectest, and highest manner and degree.

WHATSOEVER is from Design implies a Mind, Discernment, and Intelligence.

IF there be any thing ILL in the Universe from design (and it must be, if at
all, either from Design, or from Chance) then that which is the cause of, or
which disposes all things, is no one good designing Principle. For either there
is but one designing Principle or Mind, and that corrupt; or if there be one
that is good, there is another in being which operates contrarily, and is ILL.

IF there be any thing of ILL in the Universe from Chance, or which was not
designed, but accidental; then a designing Principle or Mind, whether good or
bad, cannot be the cause or guidance of all things. And if there be a designing
Principle which is the cause of good, and is good, but cannot prevent the ill
which happens from Chance, or from a contrary ill design; then is there no such
thing as a supreme good Design or Mind but what is impotent and defective: For
not to correct, or totally exclude that ill of Chance, or of a contrary ill
design, must proceed either from impotency, or ill will.

WHATSOEVER has intelligence, and is a Mind, having a superior power over us,
or having any eminent place, direction, or control in nature, is that we call
God, or Deity. For, tho a People believe and worship that which they think
neither perfectly good, nor perfectly powerful, nor yet eternal; it is a Deity
or God still, tho an imperfect one, which they worship: or whether they think
fit to worship or no, still they believe a God of some sort.

WHATSOEVER therefore is superior in any degree over the World, or that rules
in nature with discernment and a Mind, is that which we call GOD. If there are
several such superior Minds, they are so many Gods. But if that single
superior, or those several superiors are not in their nature necessarily good,
they rather take the name of DEMON. For remove all good from either of those
Beings, and we shall immediately pronounce it a Devil.

TO believe therefore that every thing is governed, ordered, or regulated
according to the best, by a designing Principle or Mind, such as is good and
eternal, is to be a perfect THEIST.

TO believe nothing of a designing Principle or Mind, nor any cause or measure
or rule of things, but Chance; so that in nature neither the interest of the
whole, nor of any particulars, can be said to be pursued, designed, or aimed
at; is to be a perfect ATHEIST.

TO believe no one supreme good designing Principle or Mind, but several, is to
be a POLYTHEIST.

TO believe this one single Mind, or these many Minds, are not absolutely and
necessarily good in their nature, but are vicious and unjust, is to be a
DAEMONIST. For, to believe any thing of Beings, or of a Being which dos
universally superintend, which governs all things by his Power and Will, but
not with that obligation and necessary confinement to good, and to what is
best, is to believe an infinite Devil, and not an infinite God.

TO believe this supreme Mind, or these supreme Minds good, and not the cause
of ILL (if real Ill be allowed) is to allow some other cause, which is either
Design or not Design. If it be Design, and of consequence a malicious and ill
Design (that is to say, if it proceed from the prevalency of an ill Mind or
Minds) then is this in reality being a Daemonist in some degree. If it be from
no design, but from chance; so that a Mind prevails but in some things, and
Chance in others; then is this to be an Atheist in some degree, or in as far as
Chance is thought prevalent and unsurmounted by the power and wisdom of any
supreme Mind or Minds.

THERE are few men who think always consistently, or according to one certain
Hypothesis upon any subject so abstruse and intricate, as this concerning the
Cause of all things, and the Economy or Government of the Universe. For it is
plain in the case of the most devout People, and by their own confession, that
they have times when their Faith only supports them, and that they are ready to
judge (that is to say, that their reason inclines them to judge) to the
disadvantage of a Providence and a just Rule.

THAT alone therefore is to be called a man's Opinion, which is of any other
the most habitual to him, and occurs upon the most occasions. So that it is
hard to pronounce of any one, that he is an Atheist; because, unless his whole
thoughts do at all times carry him against all design, or government of a Mind,
he is no perfect Atheist: for, to believe any thing of design, or government of
a Mind, tho limited, and not infinitely powerful, is to believe something of a
God. And that this is a proper way of speaking, and a necessary one, appears
from this; that otherwise if no one were to be styled a Theist in any degree,
who permitted any thing to Chance; then likewise would no one be to be styled a
Theist who permitted any thing to a contrary ill Principle, as those do, who
believe a Devil or Demon, opposite to God; or that there is any such thing in
the Universe, as real Ill, which is neither from chance nor from God. But if
any one believes more of Chance and Confusion than of Design; then is he more
an Atheist than a Theist, from that which most reigns with him, and has the
ascendent. As on the other side, if he believes more of the prevalency of an
ill designing Principle than of a good one, he is then more a Daemonist than he
is a Theist, and may be called a Daemonist from the side to which the balance
most inclines.

ALL these sorts both of Daemonism, Polytheism, Atheism, and Theism, may be
mixed: as thus.

1. THEISM with Daemonism: 2. Daemonism with Polytheism: 3. Theism with
Atheism; 4. and so Daemonism with Atheism; 5. and so Polytheism with Atheism.
6. Theism (as it stands in opposition to Daemonism, and denotes a goodness in
God) with Polytheism: 7. and that part of Theism and Daemonism, together with
Polytheism; 8. or with Polytheism and Atheism.

1. AS when the one chief Mind or sovereign Being is divided betwixt a good and
ill Nature, by being the cause of ill as well as good.

2. AS when there is not one, but several corrupt Minds that govern; which may
be called Polydaemonism.

3. AS when Chance is not excluded; but that God and Chance divide: for
instance, JUPITER governed both the Gods and Men, but could not prevent the ill
fate of his Son SARPEDON, nor the growth of the Titans, who sprung not from
him, but from Chance, and fought against him to gain the Sovereignty.

4. AS when an evil Demon and Chance divide.

5. AS when many Minds and Chance divide.

6. AS when there are more Minds than one, but agreeing in good, and with one
and the same will and reason.

7. AS when there is (...) good Principle, and an ill Principle; or several
such Principles or Minds, both good and bad.

8. AS when the last is together with Chance.

RELIGION excludes none of these except perfect Atheism. Undoubtedly perfect
Daemonists there are in Religion; because we know whole Nations that worship a
Devil or Fiend, to whom they sacrifice and pray, only to prevent the mischief
he would do them. And we know that there are those of some Religions, who give
no other Idea of their God, but of a Being arbitrary, violent, causing ill, and
ordaining to misery; which is a Devil in the place of God.

NOW as there are all these opinions concerning a God; and that there are some
who have no opinion at all, either through Skepticism, and a doubt which to
assent to, or by having never thought at all, so as to be influenced by any
belief in Religion, or any opinion in Philosophy as to this matter; the
consideration is, how any of these Opinions, or this of having no constant
Opinion, or no Opinion at all, dos consist, or is inconsistent with Virtue.

SECT. II.
BUT to examine now concerning VIRTUE. There is in every Creature a certain
Interest or Good, which is as an End in that Creature; and to which End if any
thing either of his Appetites, Passions or Affections be not conducing, but the
contrary, this is ill to him: and in this manner he is ill with respect to
himself; as he is said to be ill also with respect to others, when any such
Appetites or Passions make him injurious to them. And if, by the natural
constitution of any rational Creature, the same irregularities of Appetite
which make him to be ill toward others, make him to be ill also as to himself;
and that the same regularity of Affections which makes him to be good in one
sense, makes him to be good also in the other; then is that Goodness by which
he is thus useful to others (if this perhaps be what we call Virtue) a real
good to himself.

WHETHER this be so or not, is reserved to be considered afterward. Our
present design is, to examine separatly the good of Virtue to Society.

IF any one will maintain that a Creature well constituted as to himself, may
yet be contrariwise toward others; then, notwithstanding a Creature be thus
good for himself, this is not enough to make it be said of him that he is a
good Creature; unless he could be understood to be absolute and complete in
himself, and without any real relation to any thing in the Universe besides.
For if there be any where in nature a System of which this living Creature must
be considered as a part; then, if the Creature be to carry the name of good, he
must be such a part as makes to the good of that System or Whole. Now if there
be any thing in the structure of a particular Animal more than what has
relation to himself, or his own private System or Nature, and by which he has an
absolute relation to some other thing, or other System or Nature without him;
then is this Animal but a part of some other System: for instance, if an Animal
have the parts of a Male, it is with a relation to the Female; and the parts
both of the Male and Female have a relation to another thing besides the System
of themselves. So that they are parts of another System: which System is that
of a particular species of living Creatures that have some one common Nature,
or are provided for by some one order or constitution of things subsisting
together, and uniting to that end, of their support.

IN the same manner, if a whole species of Animals be such as contribute to
some other thing; and that their Existence has a necessary relation to
something else, or to the existence of some other species of Animals; then is
that whole species but a part of a System. For instance, to the existence of a
Spider, the existence of such Animals as Flies is made to be necessary: so that
the Fly has a relation to the Spider, as the Web of the Spider, and the Spider
it self have relation to such Animals as Flies. And thus, in the structure of
one of these Animals, there is absolutely as apparent and perfect a regard and
relation to the other, as in the system of our selves and in our own body there
is a relation of parts one to another; as of the stomach to the limbs: or, as
in the branches or leaves of a Tree, we see a relation to a root and trunk. In
the same manner are Flies necessary to the existence of other Creatures, both
Fowls and Fishes. And thus are other species or kinds subservient to one
another; which is being Parts of a certain system, according to which the
nature of Animals is disposed.

SO that there is a System therefore of all Animals together; an animal System,
and an animal Nature, or a Nature common to all Animals.

IN the same manner if the whole system of Animals, together with that of
Vegetables, and all other things in this world of ours; that is to say, if this
whole system of the Earth has a relation to, or a dependence on any thing else
whatsoever (as it has, for instance, with respect to the Sun, and Planets round
that Sun) then is the Earth but a PART of some other system. And since there
must be a SYSTEM OF ALL THINGS, a universal Nature, or Nature common to the
whole; there is no particular being or system which must not be either good or
ill in that general System of the Universe: For if it be insignificant and of
no use, it is a fault or imperfection, and consequently ill in the general
System. Therefore if any being be wholly and really ILL, it must be ill with
respect to the universal System; and then the System of the Universe is ill or
imperfect. But if the ill of one private System be the good of other Systems,
and be still the good of the general System (as when one Creature lives by the
destruction of another; one thing is generated from the corruption of another;
or one planetary System or Vortex may swallow up another) then is the ill of
that private System no ill in it sell; more than the pain of breeding teeth is
ill in a System or Body, where without that occasion of pain, the body would
suffer worse by being defective. So that we cannot say of any Being, that it is
wholly and absolutely ill, unless we can positively show and ascertain it, that
that which we call ILL is not GOOD in some other System, nor in THE WHOLE.

BUT if any entire species of Animals be destructive to all the other Species,
then is that to be called an ill Species, as being of ill in the animal Nature
or System. And if in any species of Animals (as in Men, for example) one man is
such as to be of a nature pernicious to the rest, then is he an ill Man.

BUT we do not say a man is an ill man, because he has the Plague-spots upon
him, or because he has convulsive fits which make him strike and wound those
that come near him. Nor do we say a man is a good man, when his hands are tied,
which hinders him from doing the harm that he has a mind to do, or (which is
near the same) when he abstains from executing his ill purpose, through a fear
of some impending punishment, or through an allurement of some private pleasure
or advantage, which draws him from his ill intention.

SO that in a sensible Creature, that which is not done through any affection
(and consequently with no knowledge, consciousness or perception at all) makes
neither good nor ill in the nature of that Creature, according to the sense we
speak in, when we say a Creature is a good or an ill Creature. And whatever is
done either of good or ill, otherwise than as through good or ill affections in
that Creature, it is in the nature of that Creature neither good nor ill,
according to the common understood sense of a good or ill Creature, a good or
ill Man.

A CREATURE in this sense is only good therefore when Good or Ill (that is to
say, a Good or an Ill to his System, or to that which he has a relation to) is
the immediate object of some Affection moving him: it being then only to be
truly said that he has good Affections, good Inclinations or Passions, a good
Nature, or a good Soul.

FOR if a Creature that is moved by a passion of Hatred to his own kind, be by
a violent fear of something hurtful to himself, moved so as to do that Good
which he is not inclined to, by any affection to the Good it self; it is not
good (that is to say, good as above) which is the object of the affection
moving him: for that which moves him is no affection relating to any good of
his Species, or of that which he is joined to, or is a part of: and therefore
there is no Goodness there; that is, there is nothing which takes from, or
abates any thing of the ill Nature or ill Disposition (which is the true
illness of the Creature) although the effects of that ill nature or ill
disposition be accidentally prevented, or that some Good come accidentally to
be wrought by that Creature, without good Nature, good Disposition, or good
Intention.

IF there be any affection toward private Good, which is for the good of the
Species in general that every individual should have, this cannot be other than
a good Affection; (...) it be not for such affection as this, that a Creature
is commonly called good.

IF there be any affection toward private Good which is not really consistent
with such private Good or Happiness; this, as being hurtful to the Creature, and
being superfluous, and such as must detract from, anticipate, or prevent the
other good affections, is vicious and ill.

IF there be any affection toward private or self-good which is consistent
altogether with real private Good or Happiness, but is inconsistent with that of
the other kind, the public Good or good of the Species (which whether a thing
possible to be supposed or no, will be afterward considered) this must be ill
and vicious in the common sense of Illness and Vice; for although profitable to
the particular Creature, it is injurious to the Society or Whole. If the
Affection, by being only in a moderate degree, be agreeable to the other
general Good; but by being immoderate, is the contrary; then is the immoderate
degree of this affection vicious, but not the moderate. And thus, if there be
any thing which is the occasion of a more than ordinary self-concernment or
regard to separat and private Good, or of an overgreat extension of the
appetite (...) attention of the Mind toward what is merely of self-good, or
reputed self-good; this, as being detracting from the affections toward other
Good, and inconsistent with just and equal concern for the Species, or toward
public Good, must necessarily be ill and vicious: and this is what is called
selfishness.

NOW, if there be any affection toward self-good, or toward pleasure, which
is in it self contributing to the other good, that of the Species or System;
then is that affection so far good, as that it is absolutely necessary in order
to constitute a Creature good.

FOR if the want of such an affection (as for instance, of that toward
Selfpreservation, or toward Generation) be of injury to the Species or System;
then is it vicious in some degree to want those affections, or to have such as
are contrary: as no body would doubt to pronounce, if they saw a man who minded
not any precipices that lay in his way, or who had a disposition that rendered
him averse to any commerce with Womankind, and of consequence unfitted him
through illness of Temper (and not merely through a defect of Constitution) for
the propagation of his Species or Kind.

SO that the affection to self-good or private good, may be a good affection or
an ill affection. For if the affection toward self-good be too strong (as for
instance, the love of Life, which by being overgreat, unfits a Creature for
any generous Act, and hinders him in the doing his PART) then is it vicious;
and if vicious, the Creature that is moved and acted by that, is vitiously
moved, and can never be otherwise than vicious in some degree, whilst moved by
that vicious affection. Therefore, if through such an overgreat love of Life
and Being, a Creature be accidentally induced or engaged to do a good thing, or
several good things (as he might be upon the same terms induced to do ill) he
is not any more a good or a virtuous Creature for this good he dos, than a man
is so much more a good man for pleading a just Cause which he is hired to, or
for fighting in a good Cause against a Tyrant whom he happens to have a private
quarrel with, and whom he fears or hates on that account only.

WHATSOEVER therefore is done that happens to be of good to the Species, or to
the System as above, through this affection toward self-good, or separat
private Good, dos not imply any more Goodness in the Creature than as the
affection is good. And if that affection in it self be not to be styled a good
or virtuous Affection; whatsoever happens through it, is not Goodness nor
Virtue, nor the Creature any more a virtuous or good Creature: but let him do
whatsoever Good, if it be only that vicious affection of exorbitant
selfishness, or an excessively extended Appetite toward Self-good, which moves
him; and that there be wanting therefore to move him any good affection, such
as ought of right to do it; the Creature is in it self still vicious, and will
always be so in some degree, whilst the passion toward Self-good, tho ever so
moderate and reasonable, is in any degree his motive in the doing that which a
natural affection to his kind should have moved him to; but, which natural
Affection is wanting in him, or so weakly implanted as to be insufficient to
move him without help from the other.

NOR indeed can there be any goodness till it comes to be a part of the natural
Temper of a Creature, such a one as is moved by affections, to be carried by
some immediate affection, directly and not consequentially or by accident, to
Good or against Ill: that is to say, till some Good or Ill (which is a Good or
an Ill as above) come to be the object of his affection, either as toward it,
or against it; and that such affection become part of his natural Temper: for
in the instance of Fear beforementioned, where through fear a Creature hating
his own Kind, is kept from hurting them, or is even induced to do them good; in
this case the fear of self-ill or private ill, or love of self-good or private
good, is part of the natural Temper: but the fear or abhorrence of other Ill,
or love of other Good (which is requisite in a good Creature) is no part of the
natural Temper, but far the contrary. So, let the Creature act how it will, or
whatever way it is casually moved by those affections which regard merely
private or separat Good or Ill; it will not have any thing more of true goodness
on that account, but will be still vicious and depraved, unless the natural
Temper come about, and the nature of its Affections change.

FOR instance, if a Creature naturally fierce and cruel, lose that fierceness,
and is made tame, gentle and treatable; then is his natural Temper changed.
Suppose now that the Creature has indeed a tame, gentle and mild Carriage, but
that it proceeds only from the fear of his Keeper; which if set aside, his
other Passion instantly breaks out; then is that mildness not his natural
Temper: but his natural Temper is what it was, and the Creature still as ill a
Creature in its own nature.

SUPPOSE on the other side, that a Creature be naturally inclined toward the
preservation of its young; but that the terror of the Hunters, or of an Enemy
in some extraordinary case, cause it to abandon them: in this case the Temper
of the Creature remains still what it was, and is not prejudiced or impaired,
tho hindered from operating by a strong Passion suspending it for the time. But
if by any operation of outward things, or by any thing from within, that
Passion or Affection toward the young comes to grow weaker, so that other
Passions may more easily prevail over it; then is the natural Temper changed in
some degree, and the Creature not so good a Creature.

NOTHING therefore being properly either goodness or illness in a Creature, but
what is from his natural Temper (or from those Passions or Affections which
constitute natural Temper) as it respects that Good or Ill of his Kind or
Species; a good Creature or a good Man in such a one as by his Affections or
natural Temper, is carried primarily and immediately, and not secondarily and
accidentally, to Good and against Ill; and an ill Man the contrary: who is
wanting in right Affections of force enough to carry him toward Good, and bear
him out against Ill, or who is carried by his natural Affections just
contrariwise; to Ill, and against Good.

IF the natural Temper be vicious, the man is vicious in the same degree: and
so if the natural Temper be good, he is in the same degree good.

IF a man be by his natural Temper just, equitable, kind; but that his natural
Temper toward Ambition fights against his other Temper, but not so as to
conquer it; in this case he is good still by natural Temper; the better natural
Temper being that which is prevalent in him, and has the mastery.

WHEN in the general, all the Affections or Passions are suited to the Good that
we have spoke of (the good of the System to which man relates) then is the
natural Temper, and consequently the man, chiefly good. If any such Passion or
Affection be wanting, or any Passion or Affection be redundant and over and
above, or too little and weak, or repugnant, or any way such as to be
unconsonant to that good, and disserviceable and contrary to that end; then is
it vicious.

I NEED not instance in Rage, Revengefulness, and other such (where it is so
obvious) to show how they are ill, and constitute an ill Creature: but even in
Kindness and Love, tho rightly placed, and toward a proper object (as when it
is that sort of love of a Creature to its young) if it be immoderate and beyond
a certain degree, it is vicious. On the other side, not to have it at all, or
not to have it to a certain degree, is a Vice in the Temper: and not to have it
at all toward this object, but to some other which is improper (as when a
fantastical Woman is fonder of a Toy, or of some tame Animal, than of her
Child) this is a double Vice. But where the good Passion is too intense and
eager, as where love to the young, or pity is in that degree; it is both
hurtful to the Creature, and disserviceable to that end it carries to: for so
over-fondness is destructive to the young, and excessive pity incapable of
giving succor. Thus the excess of motherly Love is a vicious fondness; over
great pity, effeminacy and weakness; over great concern for self-preservation,
meanness and cowardwise; too little, rashness; and none at all, or that which
is contrary ( viz. a Passion or Passions inclining to self-destruction) a very
great depravity.

IN a Creature capable of forming general Notions of things, not only the
sensible things that offer themselves to the sense, are the objects of the
Affection; but the very actions themselves, and the affections of Pity,
Charity, Kindness, Justice, and so their contraries, being brought into the
Mind by reflection, become Objects; as even that very thing it self of a good
and virtuous Life, or the PART of a good and virtuous Creature, having a through
good Affection, or entire good Affections: so that, by means of this reflected
sense, there arises another kind of Affection, which is toward the very
Affections themselves that were first felt, and are now the subject of a new
feeling, when either they cause a liking or aversion. And thus the several
Motions, Inclinations, Passions, Dispositions, and consequent Carriage and
Behavior of Creatures in the various parts of Life, being in several scenes
represented to the Mind, which readily discerns the good and the ill toward
the Species or Public; it proves afterward a new work for the Affection,
either virtuously and soundly to incline to, and affect what is just and right,
and disaffect what is contrary; or, vitiously and corruptly to affect what is
ill, and disregard or hate what is worthy and good.

AND in this case alone it is that we call any Creature virtuous, when it can
have a notion of Good, and can make Goodness and Illness an object, or have the
speculation or science of what is morally good and ill, of what is admirable or
blameable, right or wrong: for tho we may call a Horse a vicious Horse; and so
in the case of other Animals and things (as a vicious Medicin, a vicious
Stomach) yet we never say of a good Horse, or even of an Idiot or Changeling,
tho ever so well natured and good, that he is virtuous.

SO that if a Creature be generous, kind, constant, compassionate; yet if he
cannot reflect on what he dos, nor approve of what he dos or sees others do, by
observing what that thing is that is generous, just, or honest; and making that
idea or conception of Goodness, or a good Action done through good Affection,
to be an object of his Affection, he has not the name of being virtuous: for
thus, and no otherwise, he is capable of having a sense, in any kind, of what
is right or wrong; that is to say, of what is done through just, equal, and
good Affection, or what is not so.

IF any thing be done through an Affection which is not just, equal, and
universally conducing to the good of the Species or System to which man
belongs; this is certainly of the nature of wrong. If the Affection be equal,
sound, and good, and the subject of the Affection such as may with advantage to
Society be ever in the same manner prosecuted or affected; this cannot but be
right. For, Wrong is not barely such action as is the cause of harm (for thus a
Son striking to kill an enemy, but killing with that blow his Father, would do
wrong, which is not so) but that which is done through insufficient or unequal
Affection (as when a Son has no concern for the safety of a Father, or prefers
the safety of an indifferent person to the safety of his Father) this is of the
nature of Wrong.

BY unequal Affection is meant Affection unproportionably or unequally applied,
not toward the Object as it always actually exists or is (for then the running
to save a Father in distress, but taking a wrong man for him, would be unequal
Affection, and consequently wrong) but toward the Objects or Object, as it
appears to be, as it is the Object of the Mind, and as represented by the
Senses. For in this instance last mentioned, the Affection was, according to
this meaning, rightly applied to the Object; so that the Affection was not
unjust, but equal and right, tho the Sight perhaps were ill; and that it were a
purblind man who thus mistook a Stranger for his Father.

NEITHER can any weakness or imperfection of this sort create wrong, as
occasioning the unequal application, abuse or prostitution of the Affection, so
long as the Object, in the manner that it is taken or apprehended, is neither
absurd nor improper, but suitable to, and worthy of the Affection or degree of
Affection applied to it: for if it be possible to suppose a rational Creature
who has an entire and forcible Affection toward Right and Good, and who never
fails in a just and right degree of Affection toward every Object presenting
it self, but that his Memory or Parts fail him; and that the Objects are
through the Senses, as through ill Glasses, falsely conveyed and represented to
him, not as they are actually, but after a different manner; the person thus
failing, since his failure is not in the Affection, but elsewhere, is only
vicious where his defect is; that is to say, in his Senses (as in his Hearing,
Seeing, etc.) or in his Memory: but it being not for ill Memory, or ill Organs
of Sense that a man is called vicious, this is not Vitiousness or Wrongfulness
in one thus defective.

BUT as the extravagance of Opinion and Belief is such, that in some Countries
we have known that even Monkeys, Cats, Crocodiles, and such like Animals, have
bin held for Deities; should it appear to any one of the Religion and Faith of
that Country, that to save such a Creature as a Cat, before a Parent, was
Right; and that the Cat deserved the greater affection of the two; this would
be wrong, notwithstanding the appearance of the thing, or any appearance or
belief in the World.

SO that whatsoever is the cause of the misconception or misapprehension of the
worth or value of any Object, so as to raise an affection or degree of
affection toward it, such as ought not to be; this must be the occasion of
Wrong, as it is the occasion of an inequality or disproportion in the affection
toward the Object represented or appearing. For thus he who affects or loves a
man for the sake of something which is reputed honorable, but which is in
reality vicious, is himself vicious and ill: as when an ambitious Man, by the
fame of his high Attempts; a Robber or a Pyrat by his boasted Enterprises,
raises in any others an esteem and admiration of himself, and of that immoral
and inhuman Character which deserves abhorrence. But on the other side, he who
loves and esteems another, as believing him to have that Virtue which he has
not, but only counterfeits, is not on this account wrongful, vicious, or
corrupt.

SO that a mistake in fact (where there is due advertency) being no cause of,
nor any ways implying ill Affection, can be no cause of Wrong. But whatsoever
is a mistake of Right (that is to say, of the worth of the Object represented)
this being the cause of unequal or unproportioned Affection, is the cause of
Wrong.

BUT as there are many occasions where the matter of Right (that is to say, the
worth of the Object represented) may even to the most discerning part of
Mankind appear difficult and of doubtful decision (as when a man amongst
several Relations or Friends about to perish, doubts whom he shall first
succor) it is certain that the very least mistake in this way, the least wrong
preference, tho in a matter the most intricate, is in strictness of speaking an
Injustice or Wrong: yet however, as to that name or appellation of a worthy or
good Man, or Man of Integrity, it is not the very least error of this sort, or
the slightest inequality or disproportion of the Affection, through a mistake
of Judgment, which takes away that denomination, and makes a Man to be esteemed
a vicious or ill Man, whilst the Aim and Intention is still good, and the
Affection strong and of full force toward public Good, Justice and Equity. Tho
on the other side, where this good Aim is ever so much; and where the Affection
toward Right is ever so strong; yet if through Superstition or strange Custom
and Vogue, or through any wildness or extravagancy of Opinion, there come to be
very gross mistakes in the assignment or application of the Affection (as when
human Sacrifices or Bestiality are practiced as worthy and right) this cannot
but be wrong and vicious; and must denominate a man ill: and the same when the
Mistakes are less gross; but so complicated and frequent, that a Creature
cannot well live in a natural state; nor with due affections, so as to perform
his part even but tolerably well toward his Society or System.

AND thus we find how far Virtue (which is Goodness or Soundness of Affection
in a rational Creature) depends on a right knowledge of what is right and wrong,
and on such a right use of Reason as may give ground to a right application and
exercise of the Affections; that nothing horrid or unnatural, nothing
unexemplary, nothing contrary to, or destructive of that natural Affection by
which the Species or Society is upheld, may on any account or principle
whatsoever, through any notion of Honor, or on any pretense of good to Mankind,
or of obedience to supreme Powers, be at any time affected or prosecuted as a
good and proper Object of inclinable Affection, Love, and Esteem. For such an
Affection as this must be wholly vicious: and whatsoever is acted upon it, can
be no other than Vice and Immorality. And thus if there be any thing which
teaches men either Treachery, Ingratitude, or Cruelty, tho under the color and
pretense of Religion, or of any present or future good to Mankind or Society;
if there be any thing which teaches men (as amongst some Indians) that to
torment Captives of War in sport, and to eat their flesh, is a thing very
plausible; or that to eat the flesh of Enemies; or that to cut and slash
themselves in a religious Fury before their God; or to commit all sort of
Bestiality, is excellent or lovely in it self, or conducing to his particular
Nation or Society, or to Society in general, or to the Interest or Honor of the
Deities, and as such, praiseworthy and honorable; be it what it will that
teaches this; be it Custom that gives applause, or Religion that gives a
Sanction; this is not Virtue, nor ever will be of any kind, or in any sense;
but is still horrid Depravity in these men, notwithstanding any Custom or
Religion of their Country, which may be ill and vicious it self, but can never
alter the eternal measures and true nature of Virtue.

TO conclude therefore, upon this matter, from what has bin said before. As to
those Creatures who are only capable of being moved by sensible Objects; they
can only be either GOOD or Vicious (for we cannot say they are VIRTUOUS or
Vicious) as those sort of Affections stand. A Creature on the other hand,
capable of framing in his mind those other rational Objects of moral Good, of
Justice and Right, of what is generous, worthy, and becoming; although his other
Affections toward the sensible Objects may, any of them, remain ill; yet if
they do not prevail over him, because of his good Affections to the other sort
(that is to say, to Goodness and Virtue, as they are Objects of his Reason)
then is his natural Temper good in the main; and the Person esteem'd-virtuous
by all people, according to that natural Temper which is the Test still, and by
which every thing of Goodness or Virtue is measured.

NOW, if by natural Temper any one is passionate, angry, fearful, amorous, or
the like; but that he resists these Passions, and keeps to Virtue,
notwithstanding all their impression and force, we say commonly in this case,
that the Virtue is so much the greater: and we say well. Tho if that which
keeps the Person virtuous, in opposition to these Dispositions, be no good
Affection elsewhere in the Temper toward Goodness or Virtue; but that it be
only some Affection toward private good or selfgood (as hope of Reward, or
dread of Punishment) then is this not so much as any Virtue at all, as has bin
shown before. But this still is evident, that if an angry Temper bears, or an
amorous one refrains, so as that nothing of Severity, nor any Action immodest
or irregular can be drawn or forced from such a one, thus strongly tempted; we
applaud the Virtue of the Person, above what we should do, if he were free of
this Temptation and these Propensities: tho, at the same time, there is no body
will say that a propensity to Vice can be any way understood to be an addition
to Virtue, or helping to complete a virtuous Character. But thus it is. If
there be any part of the natural Temper in which ill Passions or Affections are
stirred, and which is consequently vicious; but that in another part of the
natural Temper the Affections are so vastly forcible toward Good; and that the
sentiments of Right and Wrong, of a virtuous Life, and of Integrity, are so
strongly fixed, as to master these other Attempts, of a contrary vicious
Temper; then is this the greatest proof imaginable, how strong the principle of
Virtue is in such a person, and how much a through good Affection toward Good
and Right (which is the true principle of Virtue) is strongly fixed in and
possessed of the natural Temper. Whereas if there be no such ill Passions
stirring in the natural Temper, a person may be much more cheaply virtuous; and
may live virtuously without* having so much of a virtuous principle as this
other. But if this other, who has the principle of Virtue so highly and so
strongly implanted, be without, or do lose these natural Impediments; he
certainly loses nothing in Virtue, or is wanting in any manner to Virtue; but
losing that other part which is vicious in his natural Temper, is more entire
to Virtue, and has it in a clearer and higher degree.

HOWEVER ill the natural Temper be with respect to the sensible Objects; as for
instance, however passionate, furious, lustful or cruel any Creature naturally
be; yet if there be any attractiveness or prevalency in those rational Objects
of Justice, Generosity, Gratitude, or any other Image or Representation of
Virtue, so as that it draws an Affection toward it; there is however some
Virtue here. And on the other side, however vicious the Mind be; or whatever
ill Rules or Principles it goes by; yet if there be any flexibleness in the
Temper toward the sensible Objects of moral Good or Ill (as when there is any
such thing as Mercy, Compassion, Bounty) still there is some good left in that
Creature; and he is not wholly unnatural and depraved.

THUS a Ruffian who refuses to discover his Associates out of a sense of
Fidelity and Honor of any kind whatever; and who rather than betray them is
contented to endure Torments in a Dungeon, and there expire, has something of
the principle of Virtue, and may be called virtuous in some degree: and so in
the same manner that Malefactor who rather than do the office of Executioner to
his Relations, chose to be executed with them.

IN short, therefore, it is hard to pronounce of any man, that he has no
Virtue, or that he is entirely vicious; there being few even of the horridest
Villains who have not something of Virtue, or some Goodness. Nothing being more
just than what is a known saying, THAT IT IS AS HARD TO FIND A MAN WHOLLY ILL,
AS WHOLLY GOOD: because wherever there is any good Affection left, there is
some Goodness or some Virtue still remaining.

AND, having considered thus as to Virtue, what it is, we may now consider how
it stands with respect to the Opinions concerning a Deity, as abovementioned.

SECT. III.
THE nature of Virtue consisting (as has bin explained) in just and equal
Affection, which we may hereafter call a due sense of Right and Wrong, as
comprehending in one the soundness both of Judgment and Affection; nothing can
in a Creature capable of such a sense, exclude a principle of Virtue, or can
obstruct or make it ineffectual, but what

1. EITHER wholly, or in some degree, excludes or takes away the sense of Right
and Wrong.

2. OR causes a wrong and disturbed sense of what is right and wrong.

3. OR, tho there be a sense of Right and Wrong, is the means however of
guiding the Affection to what is contrary. As when a man knowing any Action or.
Behavior to be morally ill and deformed, yet through some violent passion, as
of Lust or Anger, or through love of some imagined good, he notwithstanding
commits* the ill or unsociable Action.

AND so, on the other side, nothing can be assistant to, or promote Virtue, but
what either in some manner nourishes and supports that sense of Right and
Wrong, or preserves it from being false and imaginary, or causes it, when sound
and genuin, to be obeyed and submitted to, by subduing and subjecting the other
Affections to it.

UPON this account therefore, we are to consider, how it is that any of these
Opinions about the subject of a Deity do affect in these cases, or cause any of
these three things.

I. AS to the first case, THE TAKING AWAY THE NOTION OR SENSE OF RIGHT AND
WRONG. It will not be imagined, that by this is meant the taking away the
notion or sense of what is good or ill for the Species, or in Society, since
this is what no rational Creature can be unsensible of: but, it is then that we
say it of a Creature, that he has lost the sense of Right and Wrong, when being
able to discern the Good and Ill of his Species, he has at the same time no
concern for either, nor any sense of excellency or baseness in what relates to
one or the other. So that except merely with relation to private or separat
Good, there is nothing which gains any estimation or any good affection toward
it; nothing which is thought right, or worthy in it self of admiration, love or
good affection; nor any thing on the other side which is accordingly disliked
or hated, as morally ill, be it ever so horrid or deformed.

THERE is in effect no rational Creature whatsoever, but knows that when he
offends or dos harm to any one, he cannot fail to create an expectation or fear
of like ill, and consequently a resentment and animosity in any Creature
looking on; and therefore must be conscious to himself of being liable and
exposed in some manner to such a treatment from every one, as if he had in some
degree offended all.

THUS Offense and Injury is always known as punishable, and claiming punishment
from every one; and Equal Behavior, which is therefore called Merit, as
rewardable and well deserving from every one. This is no more than what the
wickedest creature imaginable has, and cannot but have a sense of. So that if
we have any farther meaning in this, of a sense of Right and Wrong; if there be
any sense of Right and Wrong which an absolute wicked creature has not, it can
be only the hatred and dislike of what is accounted morally ill; HATRED of
offense and injury, as such merely, and the love of, or approbation of what is
accounted morally good; LOVE of equal Behavior; equal and kind Affection as
such merely, and not because of consequent Punishment or Reward, which implies
only love of private Good, hatred of private Ill, and not of any thing farther,
as in it self amiable or detestable. So that Sense of Right and Wrong, as here
treated of, is nothing but the very Affection it self of kindness or dislike to
such objects of moral good or ill, as above explained.

IT is scarcely to be conceived, that any Creature should be at the very first
so ill, and of so cursed a nature, as that if it be merely a sensible, not a
rational Creature, it should as soon as it comes to be tried by objects, have
no one passion of Goodness toward its kind, no foundation in its Temper of
either pity, love, succorableness, or the like: or if the Creature be more than
sensible, and be a rational Creature, that it should as soon as it comes to be
tried by rational Objects, as of Justice, Generosity, and other Virtue, have no
inclining Affection, no kind of liking toward these, or dislike toward what
is on the contrary side cruel, horrid, base, villainous, or the like, but so as
to be of absolute indifference toward any thing of this kind; this is in a
manner impossible to suppose.

SENSE of Right and Wrong therefore being as natural to us as Natural Affection
it self, and being a first principle in our Constitution and Make; there is no
speculative Opinion, Persuasion, or Belief, which is capable immediately, and of
it self to exclude or destroy it: and it being it self an Affection of first
rise and production in the affectionate part, the Soul or Temper; nothing but
contrary Affection, by frequent check and control, can operate upon it so as
to make it cease to be; since that which is of original and pure nature,
nothing but contrary Habit or Custom (a second nature) is able to displace:
for, where the Mind is the most earnestly bent, merely against any bodily
gesture or mien, either natural or by Habit acquired, and would endeavor to
break it, so as to remove it wholly out of the carriage; it is not by such an
immediate and sudden disapprobation, or contrary bent of the Mind that this can
be removed; neither can that Affection in the Soul, of hatred to Inhumanity,
love of Mercy, or whatsoever else in a rational Creature implies a sense in
some degree of Right and Wrong, be instantly, nor yet without much force and
violence effaced or struck out of the natural Temper, even by the means of the
most pernicious Opinion and Belief in the world. But this mischief being not to
be effected directly through any Opinion, but in consequence and by effect of
untoward and opposite Affection (which may often be owing to, and occasioned by
Opinion) we may then speak of it more particularly when we speak of the ill
operation of other Affections, set in opposition to that of a sense of Right
and Wrong.

II. AS to the second case. If there be A SENSE OF RIGHT AND WRONG, BUT THAT IT
BE MORE OR LESS MISTAKEN AND CONFOUNDED, as in the case of those barbarous
Nations, as above; it often happens that it is no Opinion at all about the
subject of a Deity which influences in this place: for it is frequently nothing
else but the custom of some Countries, and the force of Education against
Nature, where such and such things are repeatedly viewed with Applause and
Honor accompanying them. So that it is possible that a man forcing himself, may
eat the flesh of his enemies, not only against his Stomach, but against his
Nature (if I may so speak) and yet think it very right and honorable, as being
of considerable service to his Community, and capable of advancing the name,
and spreading the terror of his Nation.

BUT to speak of the Opinions relating to a Deity, and what effect they have in
this place, which is our business.

AS to Atheism, it dos not seem that it can directly have any effect at all
here toward the setting up, or making of a false species or show of Right or
Wrong. For tho a man by ill practice, which may be occasioned by Atheism, may
come to lose, in a manner, all sense of Right and Wrong (that is to say, all
sense of good or ill, amiableness or deformity in any moral Action, as above)
tho Atheism, thus, may be the occasion of an almost through selfishness, as when
a creature has scarcely any thing that attracts him but what is of a selfish
kind, and what relates to a deliberat self-end, the satisfaction of some Lust,
or the security of the animal State; yet it dos not seem that Atheism should of
it self be the cause of any such estimation, or valuing of any thing as noble
of performance, generous, self-worthy and deserving, which was just the
contrary: so as that it should be thought that the being able to eat man's
Flesh, to commit Bestiality, or any such like Actions as have bin mentioned,
were after the same manner, good and excellent in themselves. But this is
certain, that by means of ill Religion, or Superstition, many things the most
horridly unnatural and inhuman, come to be received as most excellent, good and
laudable in themselves: For, where the commiting Bestiality is taught as a
religious Practice, there it is generally in high esteem, and thought to be in
it self a thing excellent: For if any thing that is abominable and horrid be
enjoined by Religion, as the supposed command of some Deity; if the thing be
not taken for good and excellent, but for horrid and abominable, then must the
Deity be taken for such, and be thought of as a Being odious and malignant;
which every Religion forbids to believe. Therefore whatever teaches the love
and admiration of a Deity, that has any character of Ill, teaches at the same
time a love and admiration of that Ill, and causes that to be taken for good
and amiable which is horrid and detestable.

SO that if the Praise and Love of a Deity be that which is proper to every
Religion, there is no Religion where God is not represented entirely good, and
free of malignity, injustice and cruelty, but what must make that sort
whatsoever it be, of malignity, injustice, or cruelty, to be applauded and
taken for Good and Right; and must be the cause therefore of men's acting
against natural Affection, and of their growing malignant, unjust, cruel, and
the like.

FOR instance; if JUPITER be he that is adored and reverenced; and that the
History of JUPITER makes him to be lustful, and to satiate his Lust in the most
loose and exorbitant manner; then is it impossible but his Worshipper believing
this History and Character, must be taught a greater love of lustful Actions.
If there be a Religion that teaches the adoration and love of a God, whose
Character it is to be full of jealousy, captious, and of high resentment,
subject to wrath and anger, furious, revengeful, and revenging injuries on
others than those who did injury; and if there be added in the Character of
this God, a fraudulent inclination, encouraging deceit and treachery, favorable
to a few, and that for slight causes or no cause, and cruel to the rest; it is
evident in the case of such a Religion as this, that it must of necessity raise
even an approbation and respect toward the vices and imperfections of this
kind, and breed accordingly that parallel disposition, that unsociable and
jealous temper, partiality, selfishness, moroseness, bitterness and
revengefulness, as well as treachery and inhumanity: for whatever is of this
nature must in many cases appear noble to him who views these things in that
Being to which he gives the highest Honor and Veneration.

BUT, if it be supposed, that in the worship of such a God, there is nothing
besides what proceeds merely from fear and aw, without the least esteem or love
toward him, as to one supposed amiable or excellent; then is not any one
indeed by this opinion, misled as to his notion of Right and Wrong, of what is
amiable or detestable in Actions. For if in following the precepts of his God,
or doing what is necessary toward the satisfying of such his Deity, he be
compelled only by fear, and act against his inclination the thing which he
dislikes as barbarous, unnatural, or any other way ill and odious; then has he
a sense of what is ill, and of what Right and Wrong is, and is sensible of ill
in the character of his God: however nice he be in pronouncing any thing
concerning it, or in not daring so much as to think formally about it out of a
superstitious fear or shyness. For whoever pretends to believe that there is a
God, and that God is just and good, must mean that there is such a thing as
Justice and Injustice, Right and Wrong, according to which he pronounces that
God is just: for if the Will of God, or Law of God alone, be said to be that
which makes Right and Wrong, then must this be a name only for what is or is
not his Will: for thus if by his will one Person were to be punished for
another fault, this would be Just and Right; and so the same, if arbitrarily
and without reason, some Beings were made to suffer nothing but Ill, and others
only to enjoy Good; which to say is just, is to say nothing, or to speak
without a meaning.

AND thus it ever is, and must be an ill consequence in false and ill Religion,
that where there is a real Reverence, Esteem and Worship of a supreme Being,
represented not as absolutely just and perfect, it must occasion the loss of
rectitude in the Creature so worshipping and adoring, and who is thus immorally
Religious.

TO this I need only add, that as the character of a vicious God (or rather
Demon or Idol of the Mind) dos injury to the affections of Men, disturbs and
impairs the sense of Right and Wrong; so on the other hand, it must highly
contribute to the fixing of right Apprehensions, and a sound sense of Right and
Wrong in men, to contemplate, respect, and adore a God who is ever, and on all
accounts represented to them so as to be actually a true model and example of
the most exact Justice, and highest Goodness and Worth; and who by a constant
good Affection expressed toward the Whole, must of necessity engage us to act
within our Compass, or in our Sphere or System, according to a like Principle
and Affection: and having once the good of the Species or Mankind in view, and
as our end or aim, it must be with difficulty that we can be misguided to a
wrong sense of what is Right or Wrong. Nor can any thing more prevail on men,
or more naturally form their Minds to a union with Virtue and Excellence, than
an established opinion, such as this, concerning a supreme Deity. But of this
afterward.

AS to this second case therefore; RELIGION (according to the kind it may be
of) is capable of doing great good or great harm, and ATHEISM not any positive
good or harm. For, however it may be indirectly an occasion of men's losing a
good and sufficient sense of Right and Wrong; yet it will not, as Atheism
merely, be the occasion of setting up false Right and Wrong, which only
fantastical reasoning, ill custom, or ill Religion can do.

III. AS to the last case, THE OPPOSITION OF OTHER AFFECTIONS TO THOSE VIRTUOUS
ONES, WHICH CREATE A REAL SENSE OF RIGHT AND WRONG; it is to be considered that
a Creature having this sort of sense or good Affection in any considerable
degree, must necessarily act according to it; if this Affection be not opposed
either by some interesting Affection toward a contrary imagined Self-good and
private Advantage, or by some strong and forcible passion, as of Lust or Anger,
which may not only overbear the sense of Right and Wrong, but even the sense of
private Advantage too, and overrule even the most settled opinion of what is
conducing to self-good.

NOTHING therefore can overcome or suppress this sense we speak of, or injure
the integrity of such a Creature, but what EITHER raises or affords growth to
those strong and obstinat Passions; OR otherwise causes an imagination of some
interest or self-advantage in opposition to this affection of Virtue; so as to
cause this good disposition to be resisted and gone against deliberatly, and in
cool judgment. Whatsoever is of this kind, besides that it turns a Creature
toward Vice in spite of this other good disposition^ it must in time also even
wear out that good disposition it self, and so leave the Creature in a manner
totally resigned to Vice.

NOW, in this former part of our Inquiry, our business is not to examine (as we
afterward shall) all the several ways by which this corruption is introduced
or increased: but we are to consider how the opinions concerning a Deity do
influence one way or another in this place, or cause this corruption whereby we
act in contradiction of good and right Affection, and which is followed by the
loss of that right Affection, or sense of Right and Wrong.

AND this being after this manner complicated, we shall treat it more openly
and at large.

THAT it is possible for a Creature capable of using reflection, to have a
liking or dislike of moral Actions, and consequently a sense of Right and
Wrong, before such time as he may have any notion or sense of GOD at all; this
is what will hardly be questioned: it being a thing not expected, or any way
possible, that a Creature such as Man, arising from his Childhood slowly and
gradually, to several degrees of Reason and Reflection, should at the very
first be taken up with those speculations or more refined sort of Reflections,
about the subject of God's Existence.

BUT to make this more plain; let us suppose a Creature wanting Reason, or
unable to reflect at all, who notwithstanding has many good Qualities and
Affections; as considering only that one of Pity or Compassionatness: it is
certain that if you give to this Creature a reflecting faculty, it will at the
same instant approve of Charity and Pity, be taken with any show or
representation of Pity, and think Pity amiable and good, and Cruelty the
contrary: and so the same in case of any other Passion or Affection. And this
is to be capable of Virtue, and to have a sense of Right and Wrong.

BEFORE therefore that a Creature may be supposed to have any Notion or Opinion
one way or other, concerning the subject of a God, he may be supposed to have a
sense of Right and Wrong, and to have Virtue and Vice in different degrees; as
we know by experience of those who have lived in such places, or in such a
manner as never to have entered into any thoughts or opinion at all in that
matter; who yet are very different amongst themselves, as to their Honesty,
Good nature and Virtue.

BUT whether we suppose in a Creature but the least part of this good
disposition or virtuous Principle; let us consider what it is (as to any of
these Opinions concerning a Deity) that can, or is likely to raise any
Affection in opposition; or on the other side, may be able to prevent and
hinder any such opposite Affection, subdue it, or make it less.

NOW, as to the belief of a Deity, and how men are influenced to yield
obedience, and act in conformity to such a supreme Being; it must be either in
the way of his POWER, as expecting advantage or harm from him, or in the way of
his EXCELLENCY and adorable Perfections, as thinking it the perfection of
Nature, and highest Glory and Honor to follow and imitate him, or to be
approved by him.

IF (as in the first case) there be a belief or conception of a Deity, who is
feared as one that will punish such or such a Behavior; and if upon this
account, through the fear of such a certain Punishment, the Creature be
restrained from doing that particular ill, which he is not otherwise in any
manner averse from; this is not, nor ever can be, as has bin proved, any Virtue
or Goodness, any more than as it may be said perhaps, that there is meekness
and gentleness in a Tiger chained up, or innocence and sobriety in a Monky
under the discipline of the Whip. For however orderly and well those Animals, or
Man himself upon like terms, may be brought to act, while the Mind or Reason is
not gained, nor the Inclinations carried that way; but that Aw alone is that
which prevails and forces obedience; the obedience is but servil, and all that
is done through it merely servil; and the greater degree of such a submission
or compliance is but the greater servility toward whatsoever subject it chance
to be. For, whether such a Creature have a good Master, or an ill one, he is
not less servil in his own nature: and tho the Master or Superior so feared be
ever so perfect, and of so excellent a Nature, yet the greater and more
prostitute submission that is caused in this case, and through this Principle
or Motive only, is but the lower and more abject servitude, and implies the
greater wretchedness and meanness in the Creature, as having those passions of
Self-love, or toward Self-good so much more strong and excessive, that is to
say, more faultily and vitiously; as has bin explained. So that this belief of
a God dispensing Rewards and Punishments according to such and such Actions, is
not of it self directly the cause of Virtue; tho it may be perhaps of a
virtuous-like Behavior. But if it be the character of a Religion, to injoin not
only the good Action, but the Affection, such as Charity and Love; and that in
reality it be the effect of such a Religion, to make men endeavor all they can
to create in themselves such free dispositions to Goodness: then is a Person by
this means made to have Virtue in any particular, when he begins to act through
such sincere and sound Affection. And thus the fear of Punishment and hope of
Reward may be understood to be the occasion of Virtue, when it gives rise to
another Principle than it self, and is at length the occasion of doing good out
of some other Affection than either that toward Reward, or that of
apprehension and dread of Punishment; there being no such thing possible as
either actual Love, Charity, or Goodness, till such time.

IF (as in the second case) there be a belief or conception of a Deity, who is
admired and adored, as being understood to have the most high and glorious
Qualities; such as of infinite Power and Wisdom, which make him conspicuous and
cause him of necessity to be reverenced and held in Veneration; and if in the
manner that this sovereign and mighty Being is apprehended, or as he is related
and described, there appear in him a high and eminent regard to what is good
and excellent, a concern for the good of all, or an affection of Kindness and
Love toward the Whole; such an example as this (of the good of which we have
already spoken) must certainly help to raise and increase the affection toward
Virtue, and help to submit and subdue all other Affections to that. And if
joined to this, there be an opinion or apprehension of the superintendency and
all-seeingness of such a supreme Being; as one who is a witness and spectator
of human Actions, and conscious of whatsoever is felt or acted in the Universe;
so that in the perfectest recess or deepest Solitude there is not wanting one
closely joined to us, whose Presence singly is of more moment than that of the
most August Assembly on Earth, or of all Mankind overlooking, before whom as
the shame of guilty Actions must be the greatest shame, so the Honor of
well-doing, even under the unjust censure of a whole World, must be the
greatest Honor and Applause; in this case, it is to the commonest view apparent
how far conducing a perfect Theism must be to Virtue, and how much want there
is in Atheism.

THEREFORE, if there be a Being conceived, all-intelligent, and all-seeing, of
infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness; the belief of such a Being (which is barely
the Theistical Belief and no more) must of necessity, thus, be highly effectual
to the creating or furthering of good Affections, and to the removing of
contrary ones; by rendering every thing that is of Virtue more lovely, splendid,
and attractive, and every thing that is of Vice more ignominious and deformed.

WHAT the fear of future Punishments, and hopes of certain future Rewards, may
farther do toward the promotion of Virtue; and of what Benefit this accession
of Belief may be to Virtue, we shall further consider as we proceed.

BUT this in the mean while is certain, that neither can this fear or hope be
of the kind of those Affections which we call good Affections, as being the
springs and sources of all Actions truly good. Nor yet can it, as has bin
proved, so much as admit of a through good Affection, where it stands as
essential to any moral performance, or where it has to do, as but in part a
motive to that which some other Affection ought alone to have bin a motive full
and sufficient: so that it is therefore not only not the Cause, but is
exclusive in some degree, of any virtuous Action, and must withal, as it
increases, strengthen the vicious Principle, that of excessive selfishness, or
habitual earnest attention of the Mind, and application of the Passions toward
self-good; which Principle as it is improved and made stronger every day, by
the strong exercise of the Passions in this Subject of more extended
Self-interest, must spread it self through the whole Life; and by causing a
greater attention to self-good in every thing else, must of necessity take off
from, and diminish the Affections toward other Good, that is to say, public
and extensive Good, or good of the System, as above; in short, must destroy
more and more true Generosity and Virtue, and introduce meanness and narrowness
of Soul.

THUS if true Piety be esteemed a Love of God for his own excellency, it will
follow, that as this solicitous regard to private Good expected from him, is
greater or lesser; so it will prove either more or less a diminution to the
Love of God for his own excellence, and consequently prove a diminution of
Piety: because whilst God is beloved only as the cause of private Good to any
one, he is beloved but as any other instrument or means of Pleasure by any
vicious Creature: and when there is more of this sort of Passion or Affection
toward private good, there is less room, as has bin shown, for the other
toward more general Good, or toward any deserving object worthy of Love and
Admiration for its own sake; such as is God.

IN the same manner, if the love and desire of Life, or prolongation of Being,
be remarkably strong in any Creature; the stronger it is, the less he is able
to have true submission or resignation to Providence, or the Rule and Order of
God, and consequently the less is his Piety. And if his Resignation depends
wholly on that expectation of infinite Reward, the meaning of his Resignation,
whatever the appearance be, is only this, That he resigns all other things upon
a condition of THAT which he himself confesses to be much beyond an Equivalent,
viz. eternal Living, and in a State of highest Pleasure and Enjoyment.

BUT, notwithstanding this, it is certain that although the Principle of Virtue
cannot in its own nature but suffer diminution by whatsoever is of that other
Kind; as by eagerness of Reward (which by it self, and in the room of better
Affection is mercenariness) and dread of Punishment (which is in the same sense
servility:) and although as any such ardent pursuit of Pleasure, or overgreat
attention of the Mind to self-concernment increases, the principle of
Generosity, Magnanimity and Virtue, must suffer and decrease; yet it is certain
that this Principle of fear of future Punishment and hope of future Reward may
indirectly, and in particular circumstances, be the occasion of great good and
advantage to Virtue; and what this may be, we shall to the full endeavor to
show.

IT has bin already considered how, that notwithstanding any implanted sense of
Right and Wrong, or any good affection toward Society, yet by violent Passion,
as by Rage or Lust, this other good Affection may be frequently controlled and
overcome. Where therefore there is nothing in the Mind capable to make such
Passions as these the objects of its aversion, and to cause them earnestly to
be opposed and struggled against; in this case, if there be any thing in
Religion which creates a belief that Passions of this kind as well as their
consequent Actions, are the object of a Deitys animadversion, it is certain
that such a Belief must be allowed beneficial to Virtue, as it will be allowed
to tend to the calming of the Mind, and to the disposing or fitting the Person
to a better recollection and observance of that other good and virtuous
Principle, which by being unobstructed must the more increase.

THIS also may be said as to the support which this Belief of a future Reward
and Punishment may prove to Virtue; that as it is capable of raising men to
Virtue who were at first in a manner strangers to it; so where men are already
in a virtuous Course, it may prove that which alone can save them from falling
off from the Virtue they possess, into a licentious and vicious practice.

TO prove how this may be, we may consider the thing thus. A Person who has
much of goodness and natural rectitude in his Temper, being sensible of
Poverty, Crosses and Adversity; and being perhaps of a Nature too sensible
toward some certain Pleasures, as of Fame or Reputation, Ease, Indolency or
Repose; it is certain that the meeting with any of these first, or the being
disappointed in any of these latter, must give a sourness and distaste to the
Temper, and make it averse to that which is the occasion of such ill. Now if
the Person be so affected as to think his Honesty or strict Integrity to be at
any time the occasion of this ill; it is likely he may be made dissatisfied
with his good Disposition and Principles. And if his own thoughts, or the
corrupt insinuations of other men still present this to his Mind, that his
Honesty is the occasion of this ill to him, and that if freed from this
restraint of Virtue and Honesty, he might be much happier; it is very obvious
that his love and relish toward Virtue and Honesty, must every day diminish,
as the Temper grows uneasy and quarrels with it. But if he opposes to this the
consideration, that Honesty carries with it, if not a present, at least a
future recompense, so as to make up that loss to private or selfgood which he
repines at; then may this injury to his good Temper and honest Principle be
prevented, and his Love or Affection toward Honesty and Virtue remain the same.

IN the same manner where there is not a love, but a sort of aversion toward
what is Good and Virtuous, as toward Lenity and Forgivingness, and that there
is a love of its contrary, Revenge; it is possible and very natural, that by
the consideration that Lenity is, by its rewards, made the cause of a greater
selfgood; that very Affection of Lenity and Mildness may be industriously
nourished, and the contrary depressed; so that the good Affection may come at
last to be seated in the Temper, and the good and proper Object to be beloved,
as by a Creature well affected, when no Punishment or reward is thought of.

THUS we see that in a State or Public, a virtuous and good Administration, and
an equal and just distribution of Rewards and Punishments is of service, not
only to restrain vicious men, and to make them act usefully to the public; but,
by making Virtue to be apparently the interest of every one, it removes all
prejudices against it, creates a fair reception for it, and leads men into that
path which afterward they cannot easily quit. For, thus a People made virtuous
by the long course of a wise and just Administration, when ever this happens to
be interrupted by some sudden Tyranny or Usurpation, they will on this account
rather be raised to exert a stronger Virtue. And even, where by long and
continued arts of a prevailing Tyranny, they are at last totally oppressed, the
seeds of that Virtue will still remain, and for some Ages afterward show
themselves not wholly extinct. But this withal we must here observe, that it is
Example which chiefly works these Effects; for a virtuous Administration is
seldom but accompanied with Virtue in the Magistrate. Nor is it so much the
reward it self, or the punishment which dos this, as the natural estimation of
Virtue, and shame of Villainy which is excited and moved by these expressions of
the hatred of Mankind toward injustice, and their approbation of Goodness and
Virtue. For even in the suffering of the greatest Villains themselves, we see
generally that the infamy of their Act, the odiousness of their Crime, and
their shame toward Mankind, contribute more to their misery than all besides;
and that it is not so much Death it self which creates their horror, as that
kind of Death they undergo.

IT is the same in private Families: and here tho the Slaves and mercenary
Servants, restrained and made orderly by punishment, and by the severity of
their Master, are not on that account made Good or Honest; yet the same master
of the Family using proper Rewards and Punishments toward his Children,
teaches them Goodness, and by this help instructs them in a Virtue which
afterward they practice upon other grounds, and without thoughts of reward.

IF by the thoughts of future Reward, or what regards another State, be
understood the love and desire of virtuous Enjoyment, or of the very practice
and exercise of Virtue in another Life; the expectation or hope of this, must
not only be a great encouragement to Virtue; but it appears plainly, that the
very following of Virtue in hope to obtain that supreme Happiness which
consists in the perfection of it, is of it self a degree of Virtue, a proof of
the sincere Love we have for it, as for its own sake; and cannot be called a
motive of self-interest or selfishness: for if the love of Virtue be any thing
distinct from that which we mean by common and narrow self-interest, then the
love and desire of Life (when loved and desired for the sake of Virtue alone)
must also be distinct. But if the desire of continued or prolonged Life, be
only through the violence of that aversion which is toward Death; if it be
through the love and desire of something else in Life, than virtuous Affection
and Practice, and through the unwillingness of parting with something else than
what is purely of this kind; then is this no longer any Virtue, or sign of
Virtue.

WHOEVER therefore (from what has bin said before) is after any manner, or in
any way at all persuaded or induced to think that Honesty and Virtue have their
Rewards; such a one is capable of being led to a Virtue which he already is not
arrived at; tho yet his doing any thing on the consideration or foresight
merely of such Reward separate from Virtue and of another nature, is no Virtue;
nor even that thing of setting about to make himself virtuous on that score,
can be any Virtue. For tho he may intend to be virtuous, he is not become so,
for having only intended, or for only intending to be so, because of the
rewards of Virtue: but as soon as he is come to have one single good Affection,
any Affection toward what is good and worthy, sociable, human, or any way
morally good, as liking and affecting this for its own sake, and as good and
amiable in it self; then is he in some degree Good and Virtuous, and not till
then.

UPON the whole therefore, one who has not any Reason or Belief to hinder him
from thinking that Virtue is the cause of Misery, and is of self-ill, such a
one must be subject to lose much of his Virtue and good Disposition. And one
who has a contrary Reason and Belief, which makes him think Virtue to be his
Good, or a cause of good to him, has an inducement to Virtue, and an assistance
in it which the other has not.

WHOEVER thinks always consistently, or according to one fixed or settled
Judgment, that Virtue causes Happiness, and Vice Misery; or whoever there is,
who, as they say commonly, feels by himself, that he can never be happy, if he
quits his Integrity and Innocence; either of these Persons carry with them that
requisite security, and that assistance to Virtue abovementioned. Or if there
are such who have not such thoughts, nor can believe that Virtue is their
interest in Life, except they are otherwise rewarded; yet if they believe a God
dispensing Rewards and Punishments in this present, or in a future State, to
Virtue and Vice, they carry also this security and assistance to Virtue along
with them; whilst their Belief continues thus, and is not in the least either
wavering or doubtful. For it must be observed here, that whenever the
dependence upon this is exceeding great, it very much takes off from any other
dependence or encouragement; for, where high Rewards are enforced, and the
imagination strongly turned toward them, the other natural Motives to Goodness
are apt to lose much of their force, whilst the Mind is thus transported and
taken up in the contemplation and pursuit of a highly elevated Self-interest,
and in a concernment of such infinite importance to our selves in particular,
that on this account, all other Affections toward Friends, Relations, or
Mankind (mere worldly objects) are slightly looked upon; the interest of our
Soul being so far superior. And we know this by experience, that the Persons
who are the most highly Devout, are, from the contemplation of the high
enjoyments of another State, accustomed to undervalue all other earthly
advantages of Goodness; and in the same religious Zeal are often carried to
decry all other natural benefits of Virtue: so as to declare, that except only
for the sake of that supreme Reward, they would divest themselves of all
Goodness at once, and should think it their greatest advantage to be vicious.
So that there may be nothing more fatal to Virtue, than the weak and uncertain
belief of a future Reward and Punishment; for, having laid the stress wholly
here, if this come to fail, or loosly to waver, it must prove a betraying of
Virtue, and must prove, if not the ruin, at least of mighty prejudice to men's
Morals.

BUT to return to our Argument; the belief of a God therefore may supply that
defect in the Thought or Opinion concerning the want of Happiness in Virtue,
which Atheism has no remedy for. Although it be not otherwise implied, but that
without an absolute and clear assent to that Hypothesis of full and complete
Theism; the other Opinion, or the other Thoughts as to the Happiness of a man
with good Affections, and the Misery of a man with contrary ones, may possibly
be established in the Mind; and so Virtue be esteemed good, or the means of
Good; and Vice always the contrary. Tho yet the natural tendency of Atheism be
very different; since besides the unaptness and disproportion of such a belief
as that of Atheism, to the apprehension or imagination of any thing in such
just order, and according to so admirable a disposition as that would be, were
Virtue always the Good, and Vice the Ill of every Creature: it must be besides
confessed too, that there is a great deal wanting in this Belief toward the
promotion of that particular good Affection of love to Virtue; which Love
however when at its height, and when forcibly felt, is the chiefest thing that
can make the happiness of Virtue to be well credited: for it is almost
impossible constantly and firmly to retain this opinion of the great Happiness
arising from Virtue it self, without conceiving high thoughts and estimation of
the Pleasure and Delight resulting from the very love of Virtue; from the
contemplation of what is worthy in it self, as well as from the mere
conveniences of a virtuous Life: which sort of Pleasure and Delight is likely
to gain but little opinion or credit where it is not highly experienced. The
chief ground and support, therefore, of this Opinion, of the constant Happiness
of Virtue, must be from the powerful feeling of this Affection, and the
knowledge of its Power and Strength. But this is certain, that there must be but
little encouragement or support of any such Affection as this, or of liking and
affecting any thing as in it self good and beautiful, where there is neither
goodness nor beauty allowed in the WHOLE it self; nor any perfect or wise
direction for the good of any thing, nor any good Affection of a supreme Mind
or Will toward the good of all in general, nor any consciousness in such an
all-knowing and perfect Mind, of the Virtue and good Affection of particulars.
This must tend rather to the cutting off of all love, veneration or esteem of
any thing decent, just or orderly in the Universe, to the weaning of the
Affections from any thing amiable or self-worthy, and to the suppressing even
of that very Habit and Custom of contemplating with satisfaction and delight
the beauties that are in Nature, and whatever in the order of things is
according to a harmony and proportion the most resulting to sense. For how
little disposed must such a Person be, either to love or admire any thing as
orderly and comely in the Universe, who thinks that the Universe it self is
nothing but disorder? how unapt to reverence or respect any particular or
subordinat Beauty (such as is part of the structure) when the WHOLE it self is
thought to want perfection, and to be only a vast and infinite deformity?

AND when we consider further concerning such an opinion of the WHOLE as this
is, and the thoughts of living in such a distracted Universe, from which so
many ills may be suspected, and in which there is nothing good, nothing lovely
to be contemplated, or that can raise any affection toward it other than that
of Hatred and Aversion; it will seem hardly possible for us to think otherwise
of such an Opinion as this, than that it must by degrees imbitter the Temper,
and not only make the love of Virtue to be less felt, but help to impair and
ruin natural Affection and Kindness. So that as there is nothing so exalting to
Virtue, or so hightning to the pleasure derived from it, as a pure and perfect
Theism; so on the other side a perfect Atheism is that which must tend
exceedingly to destroy all ground of delight in Virtue, and even that very
Principle it self of all Virtue, viz. natural and good Affection.

BUT now on the other side; neither is it impli'd that every one whosoever that
believes a God, believes to this effect, and with this advantage to Virtue; or
that whoever believes both a God, and Rewards and Punishments dispensed either
in this present, or in some future State, believes to this effect. For if he
believes that these Rewards and Punishments are tied to, or follow something
else than good or ill Affections (as they do, who believe Rewards for simple
actions or performances irrational, and without account; or who believe such
Rewards and Punishments as are tied to things casual and accidental, as the
being born in such a place, or of such Parents) then may the Affections grow
ill and vicious without hindrance, or rather with help, as has bin shown;
because of the supposed want of Rectitude in the adored sovereign Being.

WHOEVER therefore has a firm belief of a God whom he dos not merely call Good,
but of whom in reality he believes nothing but what is good, and is really
suitable to the exactest character of Justice; such a Person believing Rewards
and Punishments in another Life, must believe them Rewards and Punishments of
Virtue and Vice merely, and not of any other Qualities or Accidents, which make
them either Rewards for ill, or for nothing; and therefore not properly
Rewards, but capricious distributions of Happiness or Unhappiness to Creatures.
And such a Person as this has the advantage spoken of, and can grow to be, or
can keep himself virtuous where an Atheist cannot; in case there be a failure,
as abovementioned, in the thoughts or opinion as to the happiness of Virtue in
it self, and that it come to be believed the contrary way, that Virtue is an
enemy to Happiness, with respect to this Life merely: which that it is so in
the main, is an opinion that only an Atheist or imperfect Theist can have. For
whatever be decided as to that of any Life after the present one, and of
Rewards and Punishments to come, he who is a perfect Theist, and who believes
an eternal universal Mind, reigning sovereignly and through all things, and
with the highest perfection of Goodness, as well as Wisdom and Power, cannot
but believe that Virtue is made the good or advantage of every Creature capable
of having Virtue. For what could be more an unjust Ordinance and Rule, or be
imagined more a defective Universe and ill constitution of things, than if
Virtue were naturally made the ill, and Vice the good of every Creature?

THUS therefore there is an advantage to Virtue necessarily supposed in perfect
Theism, which is not in the Atheistical Belief: on the contrary it is, tho not
wholly impossible, yet very rare and difficult, that through all the ill
Chances to which a virtuous man may be exposed, the certain remembrance and
belief that Virtue is the best or only means of Happiness, or the consciousness
of his not being able to recede from it, without falling into greater Misery,
and a more deplorable State, should be able to keep it self a firm principle in
his Mind, if he be one who has no opinion at all of any wisdom or order in the
Government of the Universe; no example above himself of any Goodness or good
Affection, and whose natural reflections on this Subject cannot well be other
than melancholy and disgustful. Now, if there be wanting in a Mind that which
can more kindly dispose the Temper, and is able to raise the Affection to a
greater admiration and love of Virtue; then is there much wanting of what
should make the happiness of Virtue credited; since nothing is more assistant
to this Belief than the full experience of those better and kinder Affections,
and of that satisfaction enjoyed in the love of Virtue it self.

AND now in the last place, there is yet greater advantage to Virtue, in that
opinion of perfect and complete Theism, which we will endeavor to explain; tho
the matter it self be of that kind which is nicely Philosophical, and may be
thought, perhaps, to be so overmuch. There is no Creature, according to what
has bin proved above, but must be ill in some degree, by having any Affection
toward, or against any thing in a stronger degree than such as is suitable to
his own private good, and that of the System he is joined to: for, in this case
the Affection is an ill Affection. Now if a rational Creature has that degree
of aversion which is requisite against any particular ill (as suppose that Ill
of being overcome, banished, or ruined in Fortune) this is regular and well.
But if after the ill happened, his passion of aversion proves such, that he
still rages at the accident, and is in continual abhorrence toward his fortune
or lot; then will this be acknowledged vicious in it self, and further
prejudicial to Temper, and to all Virtue: as on the other side, the patient
endurance of the Calamity, and the support of the Mind under it, must be
acknowledged virtuous and preservative of Virtue. Now although that which Atoms
and Chance produce (supposing no other Principle besides) need not give
occasion to that excess of abhorrency, violent Rage and Anger, which is what a
tolerably rational man may allay by considering, that what is done is neither
meant nor designed, but is from Atoms and Chance only; yet if there be nothing
at the bottom, nor any Rule or Reason besides Chance and Atoms, there can be no
satisfaction at all in thinking upon what they alone produce: for if the thing
seems ill, and be ill felt, it cannot be admitted in that Hypothesis, (or in
the Atheistical one whatever it be) that this Ill is a real good elsewhere, and
with respect to the whole of things, as being according to the wisest and best
design that is conceivable. Now that which is thought ill, and altogether
unaccountable and without reason, cannot but raise some degree of Aversion
toward it. But in another Hypothesis (that of perfect Theism) the affirmative
of this, that whatever happens is good, must necessarily (as has bin proved) be
the Belief. Therefore in the course of things in this world, whatsoever Ill
occurring would seem to force from a rational Creature a censure and dislike,
or whatsoever may happen to be his private Lot; he may not only acquiesce in it,
and have patience, which is but an abatement of the natural anger and
dissatisfaction, but he may make the Lot or Part assigned to him, an object of
his good Affection in some sort, as having a good and kind Affection in general
toward all that is produced in the Universe, as coming from the most perfect
Wisdom, and being perfectly Good: which Affection, since it must in a much
greater degree cause a good support of whatever is endured for Virtue, or in
any state of sufferance; and since it must cause a greater acquiescence and
complacency with respect to ill accidents, ill men and injuries (and
consequently a greater equality, meekness and benignity in the Temper); so it
must of necessity be a good Affection, and the Creature that has it, so much
the more a virtuous and good Creature: for whatsoever is the occasion or means
of more affectionatly joining or uniting a rational Creature to his PART in
Society, and causes him to prosecute the public good or good of the System he
is joined to, beyond what he would otherwise do, is undoubtedly the occasion or
cause of greater Virtue in him. Now if the subject of such an Affection be not
just or deserving, if no such Hypothesis is to be admitted as that of perfect
Theism (so that there is real Ill continually produced in the course of things
in the Universe, and no good intelligent and powerful Principle able to exclude
such ILL) yet notwithstanding this, the Affection toward this false subject
(if it be to be supposed false) must be so far good, as that the having of it
will be the occasion of greater strengthening and forwarding of Virtue, as has
bin shown. But if the subject be just; that is to say, if every thing which the
Universe produces be according to all reason the wisest and best of what could
be imagined, and be therefore the most worthy of admiration, applause, and all
good Affection of rational Creatures, as coming from a most perfect, wise and
good Principle; then dos such an Affection become due and requisite in every
rational Creature, so as that it must be vicious to want it. On which it may be
grounded, that the relation which Virtue has to Piety is such, as that the
FIRST is not complete but in the LATTER: and that where this latter is wanting,
there cannot be the same benignity, perseverance, the same good composure of
the Affections, nor so good a Mind.

TO conclude then: Having considered how any Opinion about the Existence of a
God can have influence on the Manners of men, and cause either Virtue or Vice;
if the reasons we have offered be found to be of any weight, it will appear in
resolution of the question which has bin treated of: That one who has not the
Opinion or Belief of an intelligent Principle or God, may, tho very
difficultly, and at a great hazard, be capable of Virtue, so as to have an
Honesty, a Faith, a Justice perhaps of great note and worth; may have many
generous and good Passions, and possibly that of love to Virtue for its own
sake, as well as for being believed advantageous: but that in the other Belief,
there are not only greater securities and advantages to Virtue, but there is
besides a degree of Virtue which the Opinion contrary to it cannot admit. So
that the chiefest security, the perfection and the highest degree of Virtue,
must be owing to the belief of a God.

BOOK the Second. OF THE OBLIGATIONS TO VIRTUE.
SECT. I.
WE have already considered WHAT VIRTUE IS, who may be allowed in any degree
virtuous. It remains now to show, WHAT OBLIGATION THERE IS TO VIRTUE, and how
any one may have reason to embrace Virtue, and shun Vice.

WE have seen that to be virtuous and good, is for a rational Creature in the
use of good Understanding and Judgment, to have all his natural Affections* or
better Passions, his dispositions of Mind and Temper suitable and agreeing with
the good of his Kind, or of that System (as explained before) where he is
included, and of which he is a PART. So that to have all these Affections right
and entire, by which we are kindly and naturally joined to our PART in Society;
this is named Rectitude, Integrity: and to want any of these, or to have their
contraries, such as alienate from hence, is Depravity, Corruption, Nature
vitiated.

THAT in the Passions and Affections of particular Creatures there is a
relation to the interest of a Species or common Nature (as that there is an
Affection toward the propagation of the kind, toward the nurture of the
young, toward mutual Support and Succor) this is not deniable, neither will it
be denied; therefore, that such an Affection as this of a Creature toward the
good of that common Nature, is as proper an Affection, and as natural to him,
as to any member of a Body to work in its own way, as to a Stomach to digest,
as to other Intrails to perform their other offices, or as to any other Part in
an animal Body to be so affected, and to operate so as is appointed to it in
its System.

IT is certain also, that a Creature having such Affections as these toward
the common Nature, or System of the Kind, at the same time that he has those
other Affections toward the private Nature or Self-system, (as in the case of
self-preservation, self-support and maintenance) it must happen that in
following the first of these Affections, the Creature must often contradict and
go against these latter; as in the instance so often before used, where the
love to the young makes every other Affection toward private good give way, and
causes a total neglect of self-interest or concernment*

IT may seem therefore in this place, that there is a perfect opposition
between these two; as if the pursuing or being carried toward the common
Interest or Good, by such Affections as are suited to that common Interest, were
a hinderance to the attainment of private Good, as being a hinderance and check
to those Passions which aim thither. And it being found that hazards and
hardships make but ill for the animal State, in the private System; these other
Affections toward another Good (that of the Kind, or public System) being such
as do often expose to hardships and hazards, by overruling their opposites, the
self-preservative passions, and by necessitating the Creature thus to
self-denial, and, as it were, self-desertion; it may be concluded, perhaps,
from hence, that it is best for the Animal to be without any such Affections at
all. So that that Love which joins us to others of the same Kind; that
reconciling Affection toward a Species or fellowship of Creatures with whom we
are bred, and live; that social Kindness, or whatever else, be it what
Affection soever that goes against that other Principle, takes the place of the
self-interesting Passions, and draws us as it were out of our selves, so as to
make us disregardful of our own convenience and safety; whatever is of this
kind should be abolished; love to the young, tenderness and pity abolished; in
short, all natural Affections should thus be extinguished and rooted out, as
dangerous, tormenting and destructive.

ACCORDING to this it would seem to follow, that in the constitution of that
Order or System of a Kind or Species, the PART is ill affected, and in an ill
state as to it self, which is naturally and well affected toward the WHOLE:
and the only natural and good state of the private nature or single PART, as to
it self, is to be in an unnatural and ill state toward the common Nature or
WHOLE. A strange Constitution indeed! in which it must be confessed that there
is much disorder and untowardness; but which in Nature is no where observed
besides: that in a System, as in a Tree or animal Body, any Part or Member
should be in a good and prosperous state as to it self, which was under a
contrary Affection, and in an unnatural operation as to its Whole.

THAT this is otherwise, I shall endeavor to demonstrate, so as to make it
appear, that what seems thus to be an ill Order and Constitution in the
Universe, (and which, if true, would necessarily make natural rectitude the
Ill, and depravity the Good of every Creature) is in reality according to a
wise and excellent Order in the Universe; insomuch that for every particular in
its System, to work to the good of that System or Public, and to its own good,
is all one, and not to be divided. By which means natural Rectitude or Virtue
must be the advantage, and Vice the injury and disadvantage of every Creature.

IT has bin shown before, that no Animal can, as an Animal, be said to act in
any manner but through Affections or Passions, such as are proper to an Animal:
for in convulsive fits* where a Creature strikes either himself or others, it
is a simple Mechanism, an Engine, or piece of Clock-work that acts, and not the
Animal.

WHATSOEVER therefore is done or acted by any Animal as such, is done and can
be done only through some Affection or Passion, as of Fear, Love or Hatred,
moving him.

AND as it is impossible that the weakest Affections should overcome the
strongest (as that a lesser love should overcome a greater love, a lesser fear
a greater fear) so it is impossible but that where the Affections or Passions
are strongest, or where they make the strongest side, either by their number or
force, thither the Animal must incline, and by that be governed and led to
action.

THE Affections or Passions which must influence and govern the Animal are
either,

1. THE natural ones toward the Kind, or which carry to the good of something
beyond the private System.

2. OR the self-ones, which carry to the good of the private System, as toward
self-preservation, self-nourishment or support, self-defence, or repelling of
Injury.

3. OR such as are neither of these, and neither tend to any good of the public
or private System. And it is through these several Affections or Motions that a
Creature must be Good or Ill, Virtuous or Vicious. But, before we come to speak
of these separatly, it may be convenient to premise some few things in general,
in order to clear some matters which may create a doubt and disturbance.

WHEN in a rational Creature, any thing is done with real and full intention
toward public Good, and with that just and excellent natural Affection which
leads toward the good of Society; if there be any failure in the Judgment,
which notwithstanding guides and directs amiss; how far this may be vicious,
has bin before mentioned, so as not to need any thing farther in this place,
nor is this worth insisting on: it having little to do with the essential part
of Vice, and that which is with most reason complained of in the world, as
creating those disorders we see. For where there is in a rational Creature an
inclination and strong affection toward Virtue, superior to all other
Affections, prevalent over all Obstructions, and freed from the ill influence
of any unnatural Passions, such as those raised from Superstition, and horrid
Custom before spoken of; there is little fear of failure through wrong choice
or preference in moral actions, or through want of a right knowledge of Duty
when rightly and sincerely sought: but if notwithstanding such a search, it be
however missed in any small degree, the misfortune or self-injury is, as the
Vice it self, very slight and of little moment.

THE natural Affections separatly considered, as either Pity or Compassion,
love to the young, and such like, however excellent they are, they may
notwithstanding be in a too great, and therefore vicious degree: as when Pity
is so overcoming as to destroy its own end, and prevent the succor and relief
required; or as when love to the young is such a fondness as disables from
rightly taking care of the young, or such as destroys the Parent, and
consequently the young too. And tho it seems harsh to call that vicious which
is but an extreme of some natural and kind Affection; yet the thing being
rightly considered, it is apparent, that wherever any single Affection of that
kind is over great, it must be worst for the rest, and take off from their
operation: for a Creature possessed with such an immoderat and excessive Passion,
must of necessity allow too much to that Passion, and too little to others of
the same note or character, and equally natural and excellent as to their end;
so as that this must be the occasion of partiality and injustice, whilst only
one duty or natural PART is earnestly followed, and other duties neglected,
which should accompany, or perhaps take place and be preferred.

NOW as natural Affection of this sort may be too high, so may the Affection
toward the private System, or SELF, be too weak. For if a Creature were
self-negligent* insensible to danger, or wanted such a degree of Passion in any
kind, as was necessary to preserve, sustain, or defend it self, this would be a
vice or imperfection in the natural temper, with respect to the private System,
and the design of Nature in the animal Constitution; in the same manner as it
would be a vice or imperfection in that single part an Eye not to shut of its
own accord and unknowingly to us, by a natural caution and timidity; which,
were it, wanting, however we might design the preservation of our Eye, we
should not preserve it by any observation or steady intention of our own ever
so good toward the preserving it. And thus tho the Passions of this kind do
not immediately regard, nor have for their object the good of the Kind, but a
selfgood; and although no Creature be (according to the common way of speaking)
called good and virtuous for having any of these: yet since it is impossible
that the public Good, or Good of the System, can be preserved without these; or
that it should be well with the Particulars, if these were wanting, which are
for the good of the PARTS, and of the Whole together; it follows that a
Creature wanting any of these, and being wanting to it self and to the Whole,
is in reality wanting in some degree to Goodness and natural Rectitude; and may
thus be said to be defective or vicious, tho this be not what is commonly
called so.

IT IS thus that we say of a Creature that he is too good; when he either has
his affection of any sort toward the Kind so violent, as to carry him even
beyond his Part; or that it happens that he is really carried beyond his Part,
not by a too highly kindled passion of that sort, but through want of some
selfpassion to restrain him in some bounds.

IT may be objected here, That this of having the natural Affections too
strong, (where the self ones are overmuch so) or of having the self ones thus
defective or weak (where the natural ones are weak) may often prove upon
occasion the only reason of a Creature's acting honestly and well. For, thus
possibly, a Creature insensible to some self-interesting passion (as suppose he
were altogether indifferent to life) may even with the smallest degree of some
one natural Affection, do what the highest Affection of that kind should or can
perform: and thus a Creature excessively timorous may by as exceeding a degree
of some one natural Affection, do that which requires the perfectest Courage to
perform.

TO this I answer; That when we say of any Passion that it is too strong, or
that it is too weak, we must speak with respect to a certain Constitution or
Economy of a particular Creature, or Species of Creatures. For if a Passion
carrying to any right end, be only so much the more serviceable and effectual,
for being strong; if the violence of it be no way the cause of any disturbance
or distraction within, or of any disproportionableness between it self and
other Affections; then consequently the Passion, however strong and forcible,
cannot be blamed as vicious. But if to have all the Passions in equal
proportion with it, be what the constitution of the Creature cannot bear or
support; so that one or more Passions are perhaps raised to this height, but
that the others are not, nor can be in the same proportion; then is it to be
said of those more than ordinary forcible Passions, that they are excessive:
for, notwithstanding that they may be such as the Creature can well bear, that
they agree with his frame and constitution, and that they are no ways an
obstruction to their own end; yet these Passions being in unequal proportion to
the others, and causing an ill balance in the Affection, must be the occasion
of inequality in the Conduct, and must incline to a wrong moral practice.

BUT to explain a little further this of the Economy of the Passions, by what
we may observe in other Species or Kinds. As to those Creatures that have no
manner of power or means given them by nature for their defense against
Violence, nor any thing by which they can make themselves terrible to such as
injure or offend them; it is necessary that they should have very great and
extraordinary Fear, but little or no Animosity or Passion, such as should cause
them to make resistance, or should delay their flight, which is their only
sasety, and to which the passion of Fear is useful and of help. It is thus that
Timorousness, and an habitual and strong passion of Fear may be according to
the Economy of a particular Creature, both with respect to himself and his
Species: and that on the other side, Courage may be vicious. Even in one and
the same Species this is by Nature differently ordered, with respect to
different Sexes, Ages, Growths. At a time when the whole Herd flies, the Bull
alone makes head against the Lion, or whatever other invading Beast, and shows
himself conscious of his part; for so nature has made him to be: and should he
lose this generous Passion and Animosity, he would be degenerate. Even the
Female of this Kind is, we see, armed by nature in some degree to resist
Violence, so as not to fly a common danger. As for a Hind, a Do, or any other
inoffending and defenseless Creature; it is no way unnatural or vicious in such
a one to desert the young and fly for safety: for to do otherwise would be
contrary to the Economy of the Creature and Species. But for those Creatures
that are able to make resistance, and are by nature armed (as those Savages of
the Wood) with that which can mortally offend; it is natural in one of these to
be roused with fury, and to oppose it self to death against its Enemy or
Invader; by which known passion in the Creature its Species is secured: since
such a one can hardly on this account be assaulted, or injured with impunity,
and that a Creature, such as this, sells his own and offspring's Life at so
dear a rate. To do less therefore than this, is in such a one unnatural and
degenerate, and is a betraying of his Species. And of all other Creatures Man
is in this sense the most terrible: since if he thinks it just and exemplary,
he may in his own, or in his Countries cause, revenge an injury on any one
living; and by throwing away his own life (if resolute to that degree) is
almost certain Master of another's, tho ever so strongly guarded: of which
several examples given, have served to deter those in power, and restrain them
from using the utmost outrages, and urging men to extremity.

BUT to come to what was said: No Passion therefore, which carries to a right
end, and which is such as a Creature in his constitution can bear, without the
desorder or sufferance of his Body or Mind, and which is no other than
proportionable with respect to other Passions, such as are suited likewise to
the Economy of the Creature, and of the Species in which he is included; no
Passion such as this can be too strong or too forcible a Passion. But whatever
Passion (tho of the sort of those we call the natural Affections, or Affections
toward the kind) is overstrong in proportion to any other Affection, this is
immoderate Passion, and in too high a degree. And in answer therefore to the
Objection made: tho it be true that this of having a self-passion too weak, or
a natural affection too strong, may occasion Virtue in one place, and cause one
virtuous action; yet, with respect to the whole of Life, it is what must create
confusion and disorder, and must occasion too (as has bin shown before)
partiality and injustice.

BUT, to express this all at once, under an easy and very familiar Comparison.
It is the same with the Passions in an animal Constitution, as with the Cords
or Strings of a musical Instrument. If these, tho in ever so just proportion
one to another, are strained however beyond a certain degree, it is more than
the Instrument will bear; and by this the Instrument is abused, and its effect
lost: On the other side, if while some of the Cords are duly strained, others
are not wound up to their due proportion; then is the Instrument still in
disorder, and its part ill performed. The several Species of Creatures are as
different sorts of Instruments: And even in the same Species of Creatures (as
in the same sort of Instrument) one is not entirely like the other; nor will
the same Cords fit each: the same degree of strength which winds up the Cords
of one, and fits them to a Harmony and Consort, may in another burst both the
Cords and Instrument it self. Thus men who have the liveliest and exquisitest
sense, and who are in the highest degree affected with Pleasure or Pain, have
need of the strongest ground and foundation of other Passion, as that of
natural Affection, sensibleness to Friendship, Love, Pity, and the like, in
order to keep a right Balance within, and to preserve them in their duty, and
the performance of their part; whilst others, who are more flegmatic, heavier,
and of a lower Key, need not, nor are made for the feeling those other Passions
in altogether so high a degree.

IT would be agreeable enough to inquire thus into the different tunings (if
one may speak so) the different structures and proportions of different men,
with respect to their passions, and the various mixtures, temperatures and
allays, which make that which we call Temper, according to which the goodness
and worth of any Creature is esteemed. But here we should have too large a
Field: Tho however we may, in passing by, observe, that whilst we see in all
other Creatures around us so great a proportionableness, constancy and
regularity in all their passions and affections; so great a harmony, and such
an adherence to Nature; no failure in the care of the Offspring, or of the
Society (if living in Society); no prostitution of themselves, nor no excess in
any kind; whilst we see those Creatures who live as it were in Cities (as Bees
and Ants) never to go out of that constant Train and Harmony, nor contradict
those Affections which carry them on to operate to the public Good, the Good of
their WHOLE; and that even those Beasts that live the farthest out of Society
of that sort, maintain however a conduct one toward another, such as is
exactly well fitted for the good of their own Species; Man in the mean time,
vicious and unconsonant man, lives out of all rule and proportion, contradicts
his Principles, breaks the Order and Economy of all his Passions, and lives at
odds with his whole Species, and with Nature: so that it is next to a Prodigy
to see a Man in the world who lives NATURALLY, and as A MAN.

THUS having cleared this Part, and having explained what is meant by having
any passion in too high or too low a degree; and how that to have any natural
Affection too high, or any self Affection too low, is (tho not so called) a
Vice and moral Imperfection, and is prejudicial both to the private and public
System; we come now to that which is the chiefest and most considerable part of
Vice, that which alone is called Vice and Illness.

THE several senses in which a Creature may be said to be ill or vicious, are,
first, when the Affections are all orderly and right; but that through want of
judgment, any error is committed in the choice of moral Objects. Of this there
is no need to speak more than we have done. All other Vice or Illness besides,
must be through the immediate disorder of the Affections themselves; as when the
natural Affections are too strong, or the self Affections too weak: Tho nothing
of this hitherto be what we ordinarily call Illness or Vice. That which remains
of any way or sense, in which a Creature may be ill, or can possibly act ill,
is either through the want of natural and good Affections, and the having no
such thing at all to move him, or that is sufficient to move him; or, through
contrary Passions or Affections moving him to what is wrong, and overcoming
those others, whenever there are any of those to make opposition.

THAT is to say, either by having the natural Affections weak or deficient: or
by having the self Passions too strong: or by having such as are neither
natural Affections, nor self ones; and of which the smallest and moderatest
degree is not tending to the support or welfare of either the Species or private
System.

OTHER WISE than thus it is impossible any Creature can be ill or vicious. And
if it may be proved that it is the interest of the Creature to have his
Passions or Affections never thus, but contrariwise; it will then be proved,
that it is the interest of a Creature to be, and keep in that state in which he
cannot but be good or virtuous: so that Virtue, then, can never be but his
Good, and the contrary his Ill.

OUR business therefore will be to prove,

1. THAT to have those excellent Affections (the kind and natural ones, such as
have bin mentioned) is to have the chief enjoyment of Life; and that to want
them, is, and must be, besides the loss of that Good, the occasion of farther
and greater Ill.

2. THAT to have the self Passions excessive or beyond such a degree in which
they cannot but of necessity yield, as is fitting, to the natural ones,
whenever they meet or are opposed to each other, is also injurious to the
Creature, and is of self-ill.

3. AND that to have the other sort of Passions, those which are neither
natural Affections toward the kind, nor self ones, of which the least degree
is essential or requisite in the Constitution or Economy of the Creature, is
prejudicial to the Creature.

SECT. II.
THERE are few, who when they think of such a Creature as is void of all
natural Affection, all social Inclination, Friendliness, Complacency or Love,
but think of it as in a condition miserable enough as to it self, without
regard to the ill terms upon which such a Creature must live with those that
are his fellow Creatures: It Is generally thought, I believe, that such a
Creature as this feels but a little part of the satisfaction of Life, and
relishes but little those few Enjoyments which are left with him, those of
eating, drinking, and the like; when those others of sociableness, kindness and
love, are subtracted. It is well known, that to such a Creature as this, it is
not only incident, to be morose, rancorous and malignant; but that of necessity
a Mind or Temper thus destitue of all mildness and benignity, of all kind and
indulgent inclination, sense or feeling, must turn to that which is contrary,
must be agitated and wrought by Passions of a different kind, and be a
continual seat and lodgment of those bitter, hateful and perverse ones, made
from a constant ill humor, frowardness, and disquiet, in an uncalm, unaffable,
and unloving Temper; and that the consciousness of such a Mind or Nature, thus
dissociable, obnoxious, and averse to all humanity, hating and hated of
Mankind, must overcloud the Mind with dark suspicion and continual jealousy,
alarm it with fears and horror, and raise in it a continual disturbance and
disease, in the most appearing fair and secure state of Fortune, and in the
highest outward Prosperity.

THIS, as to the perfect immoral or inhuman state, is generally notic'd: and
where there is this absolute degeneracy, and a total deprivation of all
humanity, love, or natural affection, there are few who do not see and
acknowledge the misery of such a State, when at worst as here supposed. The
misfortune is, that this escapes us, and is not perceived in less degrees: as
if to be fully and perfectly horrid, unsociable and inhuman, were indeed the
greatest misfortune and misery that could be; but that to be it in a little
degree should be no misery nor harm at all: which is as reasonable as it would
be, to allow that it is the greatest ill of a Body to be in the utmost manner
distorted, maimed, and in an absolute disuse or perversion of all its Organs;
but that to lose the use of one Limb, or to be impaired in some one single
Member, is no inconvenience or ill at all.

THE parts and proportions of the Mind, their relation to, and dependency on
one another, the connection and frame of those Passions which constitute the
Soul or Temper; in short, the whole Order or Symmetry of this inward Part being
no less real and exact than that of the Body, yet by not being obvious to sense
as that other is, it comes not into consideration. So that tho the greatest
misery and ill is allowed to be from the Mind or Temper, which it is owned may
suffer by abuse and injury, as the Body dos; yet it is not known by what means
this former suffers, how it receives abuse or injury, or at what rate and in
what degrees it comes to be impaired; it is not known nor though of, what it is
that should maim or offend any particular part; or how it should happen to a
Temper or Mind, that* being wounded or hurt in any one particular part, the
whole should be the worse for it. On the contrary, we think that a man may
violate his Faith, commit any wickedness unfamiliar to him before, engage in
any Vice or Villainy by which a breach is made on good Affection, to the
furtherance and promotion of what is contrariwise malignant, horrid and
enormous, and all this without the least prejudice to himself, or any misery
following from the ill action merely. It Is thus that it is often said, such a
one has done ill; but what is he the worse for it? And yet we say of any nature
savage, cursed, and thoroughly inveterate, that such a one is a plague and
torment to himself. And we allow that by certain Passions, and merely by Temper
alone, a man may be fully miserable, let his circumstances, as to other
respects, be what they will.

NOW did it appear that this fabric of the Mind were such, that it was
impossible to remove from thence, or out of the natural Temper, any one good or
orderly Affection, or introduce any ill or disorderly one, without danger of
ruin and fatal destruction, without drawing on in some degree that horrid and
detestable state, and making in part that havoc and confusion, which at its
height, or but in some particular occasion, is observed and justly confessed to
be so miserable; were this made appear from the economy of the Mind, or of
those Passions which constitute the natural Temper or Soul, it would then be
confessed, that since no ill, immoral, impious, or unjust action could be
committed, without a violence committed here, without either a new inroad and
breach on the Temper and Passions, or a farther advancing of that execution
already begun; whoever did ill, or acted in prejudice of his Virtue, Integrity,
good Nature, or Worth, acted in the same manner toward himself, but with less
mercy, than he who with his own hands should wound or any way destroy or ruin
his own Body.

I. BUT to begin now in the first place with this proof, THAT TO HAVE THE
NATURAL AFFECTIONS (such as are founded in Love, Complacency, Goodwill, and in
a sympathy with the Kind or Species) IS TO HAVE THE CHIEF ENJOYMENT OF LIFE;
and THAT TO WANT THE SAME AFFECTIONS IS TO BE ON THE OTHER HAND AS MISERABLE.
We may consider, first, what those are which we call Pleasures or
Satisfactions, from whence Happiness is reckoned and esteemed. They are
satisfactions or pleasures (according to the common distinction) either of the
Body, or of the Mind.

THAT the pleasures of the Mind are greater than those of the Body, is allowed
by most people, and may be proved by this; that whenever the Mind having a
high opinion or feeling of some excellence (be it in what subject it will,
either where worth or excellence is, or is not) has received the strongest
impression, and is wrought up to the highest pitch or degree of Passion toward
the Subject; at such time it sets it self above all bodily pain, contemns
Torture and Racks: for thus we see Indians, Barbarians, Malefactors, and the
very horridst and most execrable Villains in the world, oftimes, for the sake
of a particular Gang or Society, or out of some cherished notion or principle
of Honor, of Revenge, of Gratitude, or something of that kind with which they
are taken, embrace any manner of Hardship, and defy Torments and Death. Whereas
on the other hand, a man being placed in all circumstances of outward
enjoyments, surrounded with every thing that can allure or charm the Sense, and
being then actually in the very moment of such an indulgence; yet no sooner is
there any thing amiss within, no sooner has he conceived any internal ail or
disorder, any thing inwardly vexatious or distempered, but instantly his
enjoyment ceases, the pleasure of sense is at an end; and every thing that is a
means of that sort becomes ineffectual, and is plainly rejected as uneasy, and
giving distaste when offered.

THE pleasures of the Mind being allowed, therefore, superior to those of the
Body, it follows, that whatever can create to any intelligent Being a constant
flowing, a series or train of mental Enjoyments, is more considerable to his
Happiness, than that which can create to him the same constant course or train
of sensual ones of the Body.

THE mental Enjoyments in a great measure are actually the very natural
Affections themselves, in their immediate operation.

OR, they proceed from, and are caused by natural and good Affections.

HOW much the natural Affections themselves are really Pleasures and
Enjoyments, cannot but be owned by any one who knows the condition and feeling
of the Mind under a lively and forcible affection of Kindness, Love, Gratitude,
Bounty, Succor, or whatever else is of a generous, sociable, or friendly kind;
and who is sensible of what pleasure the Mind perceives when it is employed in
acts of that nature, and is touched and moved in that sort. The difference we
find between a Solitude and Company; between a common Company, and the Company
or merely the sight of those we love; the reference of almost all our Pleasures
to Society, and the dependence which they have either on Society it self
immediately, or on the imagination and supposal of it, as present; all these are
sufficient proofs, or rather experiences and inward convictions of the truth of
this. That the Pleasures of this sort are thus forcibly felt, and are even
superior to those of any bodily kind, may be known too from effects; not only
from this (tho this withal may be remarked) that the very outward features, the
marks and signs which attend this sort of Joy, are expressive of a more
intense, clear, and undisturbed Pleasure, than those which attend the
satisfaction of Thirst, Hunger, Lust, and the like; but it may be known with
certainty from the prevalence and ascendency of this sort of joy over any
other; from the silencing and appeasing of every other motion of Pleasure where
this presents it self; and from the preference which is apparently given by
every Nature almost, at some time or other, to this feeling or affection, which
has the power of drawing from every other (as in the case of love to the young,
and a thousand other instances) or of so engrossing the whole Temper, as to
render it, in the midst of all other Pleasures, sensible in a manner only to
this alone, which remains as master of, and superior to the rest. There is not
any one who, by the least progress in Science or Learning, has come to know
barely the principles of Mathematics, but has found that in the exercise of his
Mind, or the discoveries he there makes, tho merely of speculative Truths, he
receives a pleasure and delight superior to that of Sense. But this again, how
great soever the Pleasure may be, must of necessity be infinitely surpassed by
virtuous Motion or Exercise, where, together with the strongest delightful
affection of the Soul, there is an approbation given by the Mind to what is
acted in consequence of that Motion or Affection; and where there is the
fairest matter of Speculation, the goodliest view and contemplation on Earth,
which is that of a beautiful, proportionable, and becoming Action, self
applicable, and of which the memory and consciousness is of any other thing the
most solidly and lastingly pleasing. In the passion of Love (we mean of that
sort which is between the Sexes) in which there is a mixture of the strongest
sensual Affection together with natural Affection, or affection of Kindness
(such as is in that case toward the object beloved) it so far appears that the
sense or feeling of the former, and the Pleasure enjoyed in it, is outdone in
this latter, that it is commonly known how that often, through that affection
of Kindness, and for the sake of the Person beloved, when in any danger, or any
ways exposed, the greatest things in the world have bin done, and are so every
day; the greatest Hardships submitted to, and even Death it self voluntarily
embraced, without any desired or expected compensation; not here in this World
surely, for Death puts an end to all; nor hardly, I suppose, hereafter, for
there are few who have ever thought yet of providing a Heaven or future
Recompense for the suffering Virtue of Lovers. But what is more yet, as to the
excellence of these natural Affections, and their agreeableness to our natures;
not only the natural Affections of this kind, when Joy, Sprightliness and Gaity
are mixed with them, have real enjoyment and happiness above Sensuality, or the
gratification merely of Sense; but even that natural Affection which is clouded
and under the worst appearance, the very Sorrow and Grief (if one may say so)
which belongs to natural Affection, to a generous, humane and kind Concern; tho
it may be thought contrary to Pleasure, is yet for contentment and satisfaction
far above those other pleasures of indulged Sense. And where a series or
continued succession of these Motions or Affections can be carried on, even
through fears, apprehensions, alarms, doubts (the object Virtue being still
kept in sight, and its Beauty appearing still in the midst of the surrounding
Calamities) there is inseparably joined to this a contentment and satisfaction
of the highest sort; insomuch that when by mere illusion, as in a Tragedy, the
Passions of this mournful kind are artfully excited in us, we prefer the
Enjoyment and Pleasure to any other entertainment of equal duration, and find
by our selves that the moving our Passions in this sort, the engaging them in
the behalf of Merit and Worth, and the exerting of that Goodness that is in us,
tho there be nothing more remote from sensual or bodily Pleasure, is yet of
exquisit sensation, and to such as are refined enough to feel it, more moving,
and of greater enjoyment than any thing of the other kind abstracted entirely
from this. And after this manner it may appear how much the mental Enjoyments
are actually the very natural Affections themselves.

HOW much they proceed from, and are caused by natural Affection, we have now
to consider.

THAT the affection of Love, Kindness, and Bounty, is it self of the highest
degree of mental Pleasure, has bin shown. The EFFECTS of Love or kind Affection
in a way of mental Pleasure are, a delight in, and enjoyment of the Good of
others; a receiving it, as it were, by reflection, so as to participate in the
Joy, Pleasure, or Prosperity of whom we love or kindly affect; And a pleasing
consciousness of love or approbation from others, or of our meriting it from
others.

THERE is nothing plainer than that both these Satisfactions and Delights, viz.
Joy in, and participation of the Good of others; and pleasing consciousness or
sense of merited Love from others, can possibly be nothing else but the EFFECTS
of Love in us; and that they increase and decrease, as their CAUSE diminishes
or grows. So that where no Love or natural Affection is, or where it is but
weak or unsound, there the consequent Pleasures cannot be at all, or at least
must be but weak and unsound. Now the Pleasures of sharing Good with others; of
receiving it in fellowship and company; of gathering it from the pleased and
happy States of those around us, from accounts and relations of such
Happinesses, Joys, Deliverances; from the very Countenances and pleased Looks
even of Creatures foreign to our Nature and Kind, whose signs of Joy and
Contentment we can discern or understand; the Pleasures or Delights of this
sort are so infinitely spreading and diffusive through our whole lives, that
there is hardly such a thing as Pleasure or Contentment, of which this is not a
part, and which, if this were taken away, would not totally sink and be
corrupted, or at least lose its chiefest vigor, that which made its refinement,
and without which it would be dross. And thus in the same manner, as to the
other Pleasure, that of Sensibleness to the love of others, and consciousness
of merited Esteem and Love; which in as far as it is a pleasure, must be wholly
the EFFECT of Love, and cannot be felt where natural Affection is not felt. How
familiar and natural it is to us, continually to be drawing some sort of
satisfaction from hence! How frequent and habitual it is with us, and how great
a part of our enjoyment of Life, to be in joy and delight, as either well
satisfied in the consciousness of merited Esteem and Kindness from others; or
as flattered by the imagination of it! What Wretch is there, what open violator
of the Laws of Society, destroyer or ravager so great, who has not a Companion,
or some particular Set, either of his own Kindred, or of such as he calls
Friends, with whom he shares his Good, in whose Welfare he delights, and whose
Joy he makes his Joy? Who are there amongst these that are not flattered by the
kindness of some that are near them, and sensibly moved by the Affection which
they apprehend is bore to them, even by such as are no way capable of assisting
them, or serving their Interest? It is to this that almost all their actions
have reference; and without this there are few even of these ununiform and
inconsistent livers, who would not find themselves in an unsupportable solitude
and desertion, and think Life it self a torment to them. It is this that goes
through our whole lives, and mixes it self even with most of our Vices. Of
this, Vanity, Ambition, Luxury, have a share, and many other disorders of our
Life partake. So that were Pleasure to be computed in the way that other things
commonly are, it might be said, that out of these two Branches would arise more
than nine tenths of all that is enjoyed in Life. Now there is not, nor can be
any thing of this kind which dos not immediately depend on the having natural
and kind Affection. And as natural Affection is narrow, broken, or imperfect,
so must be the Content and Joy arising hence.

FOR, first, PARTIAL AFFECTION, or natural Affection in part, and only to some
particulars, is an inconsistency and contradiction: And as it has no foundation
or establishment in reason, so it must be easily removable and subject to
alteration without reason. Now the variableness of such sort of Passion, which
depends solely on capriciousness and humor, and must undergo the changeable
successions of alternate Hatred and Love, Aversion and Inclination toward the
same Object, must not only in the end diminish natural Affection, and together
with it the pleasures enjoyed from reflected Good, or Good of Participation, as
above; but must create continual disturbance within, unquietness, disgust, and
give an allay to whatsoever is actually enjoyed in the way of natural and
social Affection. Whereas on the other hand ENTIRE AFFECTION (which is
throughout, and equal toward the Society, or Whole, wheresoever any relation
lies) as it is answerable to it self, duly proportioned, rational, and
accountable; so it is irrefragable, solid, and lasting. And as in the other,
every deficiency elsewhere, and every exorbitancy in the Affection, dos in some
manner resist and disturb the present and immediate feeling of social and
friendly Affection; so in this, every other good Affection, and the
consciousness of integrity and soundness, casts a good reflection, and an
addition of contentment on every particular Affection felt, and makes it of
more inward pleasant feeling in the Soul, and more satisfactory and rejoicing
in the Mind. Thus he who is least selfish, and can, according as there is
merit, love another with most sincerity and strongest Affection, dos not only
enjoy most by division or sharing of Good, and by communicating and imparting
of it; but through the consciousness of the Justice, Beauty and Excellence of
that Love, of its proportionableness to all his other Affections, and of the
sutableness of those Affections to Nature, and to the whole, he enjoys a
satisfaction vastly above what is received from that limited, entangled, and
much corrupted pleasure of imperfect, partial, and unintire Affection.

AND in the last place, as PARTIAL AFFECTION is fitted but to a small enjoyment
of those Pleasures of communicative and reflected Good abovementioned; so
neither is it capable of extracting any thing considerable from that other
principal Branch of human Happiness and Delight, The being sensible to the love
and esteem of others, and the being conscious of that which merits it. For in
the same manner as the Affection it self is narrowly limited, infirm and
changable; so accordingly is the merit arising hence very imperfect, and of
little account. And, as the Merit is but low and inferior, whilst only toward
some mean and inconsiderable part of Mankind, and not toward Society and the
Whole; so, accordingly, the consequent pleasure of the mind must below and
defective. And as it is not possible that any who esteem not, nor love
according to Virtue, should in the number of their so beloved and esteemed
Friends find either those in whom they can so constantly and thoroughly rejoice,
and have satisfaction in meriting from, or whose reciprocal love, esteem, or
merited approbation, they can equally and constantly prize and enjoy; so, they
of necessity must fall short in this other part of mental Enjoyment. Nor can
the Pleasures gathered from self-flattery in that unsound esteem and love of
those who are neither rightly nor constantly esteemed or loved, be any other
than unsound, disorderly and disturbed. Whereas on the other hand, ENTIRE
AFFECTION has all the opposite advantages; it has Applause and Love from the
best; and, in disinterested cases, from the very worst of men: and of this we
may say, that it has a consciousness of merited love and approbation from all
Society, from all intelligent Creatures, and from that which is the highest and
supreme of all Intelligences. And the satisfaction which attends this Entire
Affection, is full and noble in proportion to its ultimate and final Object,
which carries all in it self, and contains all Perfection, according to that
sense of Theism above established. This is the result of Virtue: and to have
this ENTIRE AFFECTION, or INTEGRITY, is to live according to Nature, and the
Dictates and Rules of supreme Wisdom; this is Morality, Justice, Piety, and
natural Religion.

THUS therefore it is evident that by reason of the EFFECTS of natural
Affection in reflected good from the joy and good of others, and in that of
sensibleness to kindness and love from others, the chiefest of mental Pleasures
(which are the chiefest of all Pleasures) are derived from, and owing to
natural Affection.

AND to show by farther instance yet, how much the mental Pleasures proceed
from, and are caused by natural Affection; let any one consider, that all those
Pleasures which a man can have in any other besides a merely sensual way, all
those Pleasures received from Converse, Familiarity, Society, in private
Contemplation, Thought and Retirement, in Mirth and Entertainment, or
whatsoever they be of that Species and Kind of mental Pleasures; they are
wholly in a manner founded in the having as well disposed and easy Temper or
Spirit, free of harshness, distaste, sowerness, turbulence; and in having a Mind
or Reason in good order, reconcilable to it self, such as creates it self no
unpleasant views, nor is of ill reflection. Now such a MIND and such a TEMPER
as this, which must fit and qualify for the enjoying of the Pleasures
mentioned, is, and must be owing to the natural and good Affections.

AS to what relates to TEMPER (which we will consider first) and how a Temper
of that happy sort comes to be really owing to natural Affection; it may be
considered thus.

THERE is no state of Health or Prosperity so great, where Inclination and Will
are always answered, Fancy and Humor pleased; where there are not hourly almost
some stops, impediments or crosses to the Intention, Appetite or Liking; some
Accidents or other from without to check the licentious course of the Desire;
or something from within, from the disposition of the Body, the Humors, or what
else is common in the ordinary course of a Constitution, which must occasion
distaste and vexation, and cause a habit of that kind, where there is nothing to
oppose it, so as to stop the progress of it, and hinder its gaining upon a
Temper. Now the only thing that can be opposed to this, is some natural and
kind Affection: for if the Mind by reflection resolves to suppress this ill at
any time when risen in the Temper, and that it thinks fit to do it in good
earnest on any account, it can no otherwise effectually and really do it but by
introducing into the Soul, or passionat Part, some affection of Love, some
motion of Kindness, Affectionatness or Candor, to allay and convert that motion
of Impatience and Discontent. For, if it be not done this way, the Countenance
may indeed be counterfeited, but the Heart not changed: and if it be done only
by the power of immediate Fear or Apprehension, or by the power of any other
Affection than such as is by nature opposite and contrary; the ill Passion is
suspended only during the time which that fear lasts, but is not subdued or in
the least debilitated against the next occasion, nor hindered therefore as to
its progress or gaining over the Temper. So that where an affable, benign, and
kind disposition reigns not; where there is not a mildness and serenity spread
through the whole Temper, so as to render it of easy acceptance, and fair
construction, compliant, easily conceding, charitable and good; there can be
but little of an easy and free Spirit long remaining, and consequently but few
and slender Enjoyments of a mental kind: for in a Temper where the slightest
thing diseases and provokes, where displeasure and offense are always ready to
arise, and nothing kind and reconciling to allay and turn those Motions; but
where bitterness and choler in a manner swim at the top and over all, and where
something of a froward and malignant kind is ever stirring and active; in such
a Temper as this there can be but little reception for any of those mental
Pleasures, which in this case can be but very rarely experienced, must be very
faint, and of small continuance.

BUT, to press this further yet: It is most certain that by what proportion the
natural and good Affections are lost or wanting in any Creature, by that
proportion the ill and unnatural ones must prevail. It is the nature of every
Passion by use and exercise to grow stronger and more confirmed. There are in
every Life, even in the most prosperous (as has bin said already) continual
sources of displeasure and uneasiness, either from inward bodily constitution,
variety of disposition, or the unconformity of things without to fancy, humor
and will: and if those who are in the highest circumstances of Fortune seem to
come off the easiest, it is to be considered that the most humor'd and indulged
State is what receives the most disturbance from every disappointment or
smallest ail. Now since besides what is of the kind of natural Affection, there
is nothing of any kind else which can hinder the course and growing habit of
impatience, discontent and vexation; much less can any thing else besides
natural and kind Affection, resist the more violent motions of Anger, Rage,
Revengefulness; and, where provocations, offenses and enmities arise, (as there
are subjects infinite) be able to correct the virulence and malignity of those
Passions once kindled, and to expel that which is infective in them, and
poisonous to the Temper: so that the forward, prone and sudden passions of
Resentment, Pique, Vexation and Frowardness, which are sure to be moved on a
thousand occasions, and which arise in a manner of themselves, without any
apparent subject, having no check or control; but, being left masters and
possessors of the Soul (when there is nothing there either of human or good
Affection to resist or make a stand) and growing thus by use and exercise into
greater strength and prevalence, they cannot but cause a settled inveteracy and
rancor, and make this the ground and bottom of the whole Temper. But, of the
misery of this we shall speak when we come to consider of the unnatural State.
In the mean time it seems to have bin proved, that all those mental pleasures
of Converse, Mirth, Familiarity, and the rest, depend upon a Mind and Temper
properly disposed; and that the TEMPER which produces these is and must be
owing to the natural and good Affections.

NOW as to the other part, a MIND or Reason thus disposed and in good order,
reconcilable to it self, and of good reflection; and upon what account this is,
and must be owing to natural Affection, we may consider it after this manner.
Whatever Creature has Intelligence and Reason in the manner that we have it,
and who from several degrees of reflection has risen to that Capacity which we
call Sense and Understanding; such a Creature as this, in the very use of his
contemplative or reasoning Faculty, is forced to receive reflections back into
his Mind of that which passes in it self, of the actions of his Will, and of
his foregoing Behavior in the common course of his natural Temper toward his
fellow Creatures, as well as in all occasions besides. And tho we say of some
giddy and heedless people, that they live without reflection, it is not that
they are exempt from this sort of feeling, or have not this consciousness with
them as others have (for their Memory is as good, and the necessary occasions
are as many of remembering and calling to mind what they did or felt before) but
they are said to have no reflection, because they do not designedly, or with
any service or help to themselves in their Conduct, call to mind any number of
circumstances to draw Inference from thence to what is present or future. Now
to such a reasoning or reflecting Creature as this, who is forced of necessity
to endure the review of his own Mind and Actions, and to have representations
of himself and his own Affairs constantly before him, obvious to him, and
passing in his Mind; to such a Creature as this there are TWO things which must
be horridly offensive and agrieving; to have the reflection in his Mind of any
past Action or Behavior which he likes not should be imputed to him, which he
knows odious, and feels to be of ill merit: or, to have the reflection in his
Mind of any thing foolishly done (either as supinely and negligently, or as
rashly and extravagantly) in the prejudice of his own Interest and Good.
CONSCIENCE is one or other, or both of these. For the fear of future Evils or
of eternal Ill inflicted at the will of some superior and supernatural Power,
is to have aw and terror of the Deity, but dos not imply Conscience, any more
than the fear of those evils which are apprehended from Spirits, Enchantments,
and such like, dos imply Conscience: for to fear the Devil and to fear God
would (as to Conscience) be then all one; and to fear God in any other manner
than as in consequence of some justly blameable and imputable act, is to fear a
devilish Nature, or Devil in the stead of God: so that Conscience may even be
where sense of future divine Punishment is not. Nor dos the terror of Hell, or
a thousand other terrors of the Deity imply Conscience except in this case,
viz. where there is ill reflection in the Mind of what is wrong, odious,
morally deformed, and ill deserving; or of what was committed contrary to
wisdom, and unaccountably: and wheresoever this is (whether joined or not
joined with any positive fear of future divine Punishment to be inflicted)
there Conscience is, there Conscience accuses. And thus there is besides a
religious Conscience that which we may call moral or natural Conscience: although
that also may be called religious Conscience which regards the odiousness of
any act with respect to the all* seeingness of the Deity; who being so highly
thought of as to all Excellence and Greatness, it cannot otherwise be, but that
in the conceived presence of such a Being, the shame of Villainy or Vice must
with great forcibleness be felt, even independently of that apprehension or
sense of any future Punishment of positive infliction.

AS for a rational Creature therefore, such as Man, who whilst he continues to
be Rational and to have a Mind, must of necessity through the course of his
Life be conscious of, and have before him still, the results of that Mind, the
determinations and actions of his Will, and the effects of his natural Temper
and Affections in his foregoing Life: if there be any action which, having
proceeded hence, is odious of imputation, and of ill reflection, it must be
discomposing and afflicting to him, as being acted against natural Conscience.
There is no sensible Creature who maliciously and intentionally dos ill, who is
not sensible likewise that he deserves ill: and in this sense every Creature
has Conscience. For, with all Mankind, and all intelligent Creatures this must
ever hold, that WHAT they know they deserve from every one, THAT they
necessarily must fear and expect from every one: and thus suspicions and ill
apprehensions must grow, and terrors arise both of Men and of the Deity. But
besides this, and over and above the very Return and Punishment which is
feared, there must, in almost every rational Creature, be yet farther
Conscience, from sense of deformity in what is thus ill-deserving and
unnatural, and from the consequent regret and hatefulness of incurring what is
odious, and moves aversion. There scarcely is, or can be any Creature whom
consciousness of Villainy as such merely dos not at all offend; nor any thing
opprobrious or hainously imputable, move or affect: or if there be such a one,
it follows then, that with such a Creature as this all things that are of a
moral kind, or relate to either the good or ill of the Species, must be equal
and indifferent in the Affection (for if it were not so, but that any thing of
that kind were odious, it must be most of all odious of imputation or self*
application.) If this be so, then neither can there be any natural Affection:
if not that, then neither any pleasure of Society, or mental Enjoyment, as
above; but instead of that, all manner of horrid, unnatural and ill Affection;
of the misery of which we are to speak distinctly under our last head. So that
not to be sensible to the odiousness or mere deformity of Crime and Injustice
(which is to have no sense of the goodness or illness of any act, nor any
natural Affection at all) and to be so far without Conscience, is to be most of
all miserable in Life: but where Conscience or sense of this sort remains,
there it follows, that whatever carriage, action or deed, is contrary to the
sense of goodness and deservingness, and is therefore odious of imputation,
unbecoming, and of ill consciousness, this must of necessity, by means of
Reflection, be continually grievous and offensive. A man who in the height of
Anger and Fury happens to kill another, dos, as we often see, relent immediately
at the very sight of what he has done, and only by beholding the miserable
state of a dying Creature, in that spectacle of Death which he himself has
caused: for this he suffers Agony; the subject of this continually occurs to
him in his mind; and of this he must have ill memory and consciousness. If on
the other side, he dos not relent nor suffer any concern at all, then, either
he is such a one as has no sense of Deformity, of Crime and Injustice, no
natural Affection, and consequently no Happiness or Peace within: or if he have
sense of moral Goodness or Illness, but that in this or any particular, he
affects THAT as noble, gallant or worthy, which is the contrary; it must
follow, that as there is no proportion, aptness or fitness but in Virtue alone
to Esteem, Approbation, or good Consciousness; he must either through the
inconsistency, contradictoriness and absurdity of such an unlasting and
unaccountable Esteem and Approbation, and through the ill influence it must
have in time upon his Temper, come to lose at last even this remaining
imperfect Conscience; or, if he still retains it in any degree, it must follow
that through the same unsutableness of Approbation or Esteem to any thing of a
contrary nature to Virtue, there must be great confusion and disagreement in
Life, and continual disturbance and dissatisfaction in the service of such a
Principle. For it is impossible that a Murderer, or one of the Banditi, a
Pirat, or any confederate Cheat or Ruffian, or in short, any one who is false
to the society of Mankind in general, and contradicts natural Affection, should
have any Principle that holds throughout, any fixed Standard or Measure upon
which he can regulate his Approbation or Esteem, any Reason or Rule for his
approbation of any one action moral; if any thing morally good or ill, amiable
or detestable has place with him: so that the more he engages in the love or
admiration of any thing as morally worthy, which is morally ill and detestable;
the more self-contradiction he must meet with, the more dissatisfaction and
self-disapprobation in the main, through the perpetual variableness and
instability of that Rule by which he approves and disapproves, and through the
irreconcilableness of his Mind and Reason to it self. And there being nothing
more certain than this, that no natural Affection can be contradicted, nor no
ill one advanced (as by false applause it is) without a prejudice in some
degree to all the other natural Affections; it must follow that natural
Deformity growing greater by the encouragement of unnatural Affection in any
particular, if at the same time there remains a sense of moral Good or Ill;
there must be of necessity more work created for ill Conscience, more subject
of ill consciousness; and the matter or ground of self-disapprobation or
self-dissatisfaction in Life, must be more increased, as irregular and ill
Affection increases.

IN short, there is no transgression, loss or violation of natural Affection in
any degree, without ill Conscience of the first sort, viz. of ill merit or ill
deservingness, such as loses us that supreme happiness of Rest, and security of
Mind in a freedom from ill Apprehensions and Suspicions; and such as must draw
on, necessarily, that contrary habit of Mind which causes us to live in terrors
of Mankind, and of all credited, or but suspected superior Powers: from which
fears we are by innocence and good consciousness so much delivered, and by that
means placed in such security and ease. If there be no farther Conscience than
this, if there be no Conscience at all from sense of deformity in moral Ill,
and consequently no natural Affection; then is the Mind farthest of all from
being at ease, by being (as it must necessarily be, when natural Affection is
lost) in the horridest state of Savageness, Immanity and unnatural Passion. If
there be indeed farther Conscience, as from a sense of moral Deformity and
Excellence, then there being certainly no durable or consistent
self-approbation from any thing besides what is of Virtue; there is ground of
constant self-accusation or dislike from whatsoever is contrary to, or is a
defect in natural Affection: as on the other side, there is ground of through
self-approbation, joy and contentment, wheresoever there is integrity of Life,
and adherence to natural and sound Affection.

THIS also is to be considered, that when any one by an immorality or injustice
offends his Conscience, and goes against natural Affection, or sense of Right
and Wrong; he cannot possibly see a reason in himself, why he should not be
carried further into all manner of Villainy, or why he should not esteem himself
as a person liable and open to all Crime and Wickedness, even that which is as
yet unknown to him. And this is a reproach which a Mind must of necessity make
to it self upon the least offense of Conscience, and where any thing is
committed in contradiction to a sense of Right and Wrong, that is, of an
amiableness or deformity in moral Actions.

AS for that other part of Conscience, viz. the ill remembrance or ill
reflection of what is unreasonably done, and in prejudice of Interest or
Happiness: This must follow still and have effect, wheresoever any action has
given occasion to sense of Deformity contracted by Crime and Injustice: or
where there is not the ground of any such sense; yet there must follow still an
ill Conscience from sense of ill Merit with respect to Men, and to the Deity.
Or tho there be a possibility (which is hard to suppose) of excluding for ever
all thoughts or suspicions of any superior Powers, yet it is impossible but
that an almost total defect in natural Affection, which no dissimulation can
long conceal, must occasion a sensible loss to us in the confidence and trust
of men, and consequently in Interest and Happiness. And the sense of this great
disadvantage is what can never fail to occur to us, when we see (as we must be
forced to do with envy) the better and more grateful terms of Friendship,
Trust, Love and Esteem, on which those who have not renounced their good and
natural Affection, live with the rest of Mankind. Where natural Affection
therefore is not; yet by Immorality, happening through want of such Affection,
there must be disturbance from Conscience of this sort, viz. from sense of what
is committed unwisely, and contrary to Interest and Safety: and this too,
notwithstanding any security in which men may live against the apprehensions of
a superior and animadverting Power.

FROM all this we may conclude, that a MIND and Reason, well at ease, orderly,
reconcilable with it self, and of good retrospect or reflection (on which, and
on a TEMPER such as we have spoken of, all those mental Pleasures before
enumerated do in a great degree depend, and are founded) is owing to natural
and good Affection.

SO that if the chiefest Happiness be from the mental Pleasures, and from the
constantest succession or series of such in Life; and that the chiefest mental
Pleasures are such as we have treated of, and are founded in natural Affection;
it follows, that To have the natural Affections, is to have the chiefest
enjoyment, possession, and happiness of Life.

NOW as to the pleasures of the Body, and the satisfactions belonging to Sense;
it is evident, that they cannot possibly have their effect, or be of any
valuable or delightful enjoyment, but by the means of natural and social
Affection.

IF from the highest voluptuousness in eating or in drinking, the circumstances
of a Table and Companions were withdrawn; so that all possible means of
enjoying these delights in fellowship, all occasion for social feeling or
Affection were denied; there would be hardly any Pleasure remaining that were
worth acceptance, even in the opinion of the most debauched themselves: and if
there are any of those Sensualists who can be sensual by themselves, who can be
contented to take these satisfactions when perfectly alone, and can indulge
themselves in the same manner, and eat and drink with the same relish then as
at another season; there is no body who thinks the Pleasure of these persons to
be very refined, or that they are so much as capable of enjoying it, so as to
be reckoned upon as men of Pleasure. The very notion of a Debauch (which is a
sally into all that can be imagined of Pleasure and Voluptuousness) carries
with it an apprehension of reference to Society, or to a Gang, or something of
Fellowship: it may be called a Surfeit or Excess of eating and drinking, but
hardly a Debauch of that kind, when the excess was taken separately, out of
Society or reach of People: and one that uses himself in this way, is often
called a Sot, but never a Debauchee. The Courtezans, and even the commonest of
Women, who live by prostitution, know very well how necessary it is, that every
one whom they entertain with their Beauty, should believe that there are
satisfactions reciprocal, and that Pleasures are as well given as received: and
were the imagination of this to be wholly taken away, there are hardly any of
the grosser sort of Mankind who would not think the remaining Pleasure to be
gross and sordid, and of very imperfect enjoyment. Who is there that can well,
or long enjoy any thing when alone, and abstracted perfectly even in his very
Mind and Thought, from any thing of Society? Who is there that on those terms
is not soon cloyed by any sensual Indulgence, and that is not uneasy with his
Pleasure, however exquisit it be, of Sensation, till such time as he has found
a way to impart it, and make it truly pleasant to him, by communicating his
Joy, and sharing it at least with some one single person? Let men imagine what
they please; let them suppose or believe themselves ever so selfish; or desire
ever so much to follow the dictates of such a Principle, and to bring Nature
under restraint; Nature will break out, and in agonies, disquiets, and a
distempered state, demonstrate evidently the ill consequence of such violence,
the absurdity of such a device, and the punishment which belongs to such a
monstrous and horrid endeavor.

THUS, therefore, not only the pleasures of the Mind depend on natural
Affection; but even the pleasures too of the Body do in so far depend, that
where natural Affection is not, they not only lose their force, but are in a
manner converted into disturbance, uneasiness and disgust: so as that the
matter which should feed joy, contentment and delight, feeds rather discontent
and sowerness, and breeds a nauseating, wearisom and restless disposition, by
reason of the absolute incapacity in any thing sensual to please, or give any
lasting or through contentment, where it is not mixed with any thing of affable,
kind, or social Affection.

AND thus both with respect to Mental enjoyment, and to the enjoyments of Sense
also; TO HAVE THE NATURAL AFFECTIONS, IS TO HAVE THE CHIEFEST SATISFACTION AND
HAPPINESS OF LIFE.

NOW on the other side, THAT TO WANT THE SAME NATURAL AFFECTIONS IS TO BE
CHIEFLY MISERABLE, appears first from the loss it implies both of the mental
and bodily Pleasures; and also from its carrying with it the horridest of
pains, those of the Mind: of which sort if (by what shall further be proved)
those derived from unnatural and horrid Affections appear to be the very worst;
it will follow that since (according to what has bin proved already) unnatural
and horrid Affection is and must ever be consequent to the loss of natural and
good; that therefore to want natural and good Affection, is certainly to incar
the greatest of Torments and Diseases.

BUT, before we conclude as to this of natural Affection, we may add something
in general, of the BALANCE of the Affection (of which we gave some hint before)
and by this endeavor to demonstrate how that for want of a due proportion or
balance in natural Affection, a Creature is at a loss and uneasy, disturbed,
and ill affected in his other Passions.

THERE is no body who has considered ever so little the nature of the sensible
part, the Soul or Mind, but knows that in the same manner as without action,
motion and employment, the Body languishes and is oppressed, its Nourishment
grows the matter and food of Disease, the Spirits unconsum'd help to consume
the Body, and Nature as it were preys upon it self; so also that sensible and
living part, the Soul or Mind, wanting its proper and natural exercise, is
burdened, and diseased; and its Thoughts and Passions being unnaturally witheld
from their due Objects, turn against it self, and create the highest
impatience. For the Mind or Soul, which more than the Body requires agitation
and exercise, cannot be but in a state of Feeling or Passion, of some kind, and
under some certain Affection or other: if not under such Affection as may fitly
employ it in proportionable and fit subject; yet however under such as will
make it a burden, disease and torment to it self.

IN BRUTES, and such as have not the use of Reason or Reflection (at least not
after the manner which Mankind has) it is so ordered in Nature, that between
their daily search after Food, their application and intention toward the
business of their own immediate support, or toward the affairs of their Kind,
almost their whole time is taken up, and they fail not to find full employment
for their Passion, according to that degree of agitation and vigor to which
they are fitted, and which their Nature requires. If it happens that any one of
these be taken out of a natural and laborious state, to be placed in the midst
of Ease, and of a Plenty furnishing abundantly to all his Appetites and Wants;
it proves, that as his Circumstances are luxuriant, his Temper and Passions
grow so too; and that coming to have these accommodations at a cheaper rate,
with respect to Labor and Employment, than was intended him by Nature, he is
made to pay dearer for it in another sense, by losing the good disposition of
his Temper and Passions, and the orderliness of his Kind or Species.

IT happens with Mankind, that some by necessity are tied to Labor, whilst
others are provided for in an abundance of all things at the expense of the
Labors of the rest. Now, if amongst those of this easy sort, there be not
something of fit and proper Employment raised in the room of what is wanting by
such a vacancy from common Labor and Toil; if there be not an application to
some sort of work, such as has a good and honest end in Society, as Letters,
Sciences, Arts, Husbandry, public or private Economy, or the like; but that
there be a settled Idleness, Supiness, and a relaxed and dissolute State; it
must needs produce (as is always seen) a total disorder of the Passions, and
must break out in the strangest irregularities imaginable. It is not thus with
those who are taken up in honest and due Employment, and have bin well inured
to it, as amongst the industrious sort of common People; where it is rare to
meet with any instances of those irregularities of Affection that are known in
Courts and where Idleness reigns. Neither may it be improper here, to remark
what many have done in advantage of Employment and Application; that where a
Person necessitated from his youth to a Life of the most laborious sort, has on
a sudden changed his circumstances and become rich, he has found in himself the
uneasiness and ill operation of that Ease and Rest he so much wished for, and
having no other proper employment to turn himself to, he has again betaken
himself to that Life out of choice, to which before be was only driven and
necessitated.

THERE is no need of going about by farther Instances, and Argument, to prove,
that as motion and exercise is of absolute necessity to the good state and
welfare of the BODY; so it is to that of THE MIND AND AFFECTIONATE PART.

NOW Nature having (as we see evidently in Creatures) made it so great a part
of the natural employment and exercise of the Mind and Passion, to be applied
and bent toward the Species: and having suited and framed the rest of the
Passions, the whole Constitution and Economy of the Creature to this; it
cannot but follow of consequence, that where this social Bent and Affection is
wanting, the Mind and passionat Part must suffer much by the want of it; being
sure to create to themselves unusual and unnatural exercise, where they are cut
off from such as is natural and good. And thus in the room of social and
natural Affection, new and unnatural ones must be raised, and all Order and
Economy be thus destroyed.

IT is to have a very imperfect idea of the Order of Nature in the formation
and structure of Animals, to think that so great a Principle, so fundamental a
Part as that of natural Affection in the Soul, should be possibly lost or
impaired without mighty disorder, calamity and injury to the Creature. In the
structure of the Body, where all is so aptly adjusted, there is not any of all
those which are called the noble or principal Parts, that can be wounded or
hurt without the immediate disorder and sufferance of the whole Body. Nor is
this otherwise in the structure of the Passions and Affections, which are with
equal art and exactness suited and framed to one another, to every different
Creature and different Sex; since we see the Whole so nicely built, that the
barely extending of one Passion but a little too far, or the continuance of it
too long, is able to overturn all, and bring irrecoverable ruin and misery, by
Distraction. How is it possible, therefore, that in a System such as this, a
principle of Life and Motion so great as that of natural Affection, so
interwove with all the other Faculties, and suited to the other Motions within,
should possibly be injured or lost, without the sufferance and ruin of the
inward Part, and a total intanglement, torture, and perplexity of inward
Disposition? We see in the example of Castration, how a small bodily alteration
has an effect upon the Passions, so as to take away those Appetites and
Affections that are the proper ones of the Sex, and how great a disorder this
breeds; how Man himself no less than other creatures, is rendered by it
unsound, imperfect, deformed, and miserably disposed in his Passions and
Affections as well as in outward figure; how impotent of mind, and how weak,
untoward and wretched in his whole state. It is the same thing when without any
change in the bodily Organs, and only by the force of unnatural Education,
Practice, or Use, any natural Passions are removed which are of the Economy
and Order of the Creature. A man effeminatly bred and used, tho not an Eunuch,
nor by any Metamorphosis changed into Woman, yet becomes a kind of Woman in
part, and is the same disfigured creature as to his Passions and inward
Composure, as that other sort of monster and creature of neither Sex. Who is
there that can think of any creature that becomes degenerate, and loses any
principal Feeling or Passion which is of the character of his Species (as of a
Lion that should lose his Courage, a Be his Industry, a Turtle his tender, and
as it were conjugal Affection) without having the idea of an untoward imperfect
Being, and of a Creature that for his own sake had better not be? Can any one
think either of a Male that passes into any of the Passions or Affections
proper only to the Female; or of a Female that loses the proper and peculiar
softness belonging to the Sex, and becomes Masculine, without being offended,
and without judging very readily, that as there is a different order of Life, a
different economy, different capacities of Pleasure, and enjoyments of Life;
so there is a different order set, and economy of Passions assigned in the
same manner to the one, different from the other? For, where the Faculties, the
Habitudes or Affections belonging to the Male, are joined to other Affections
which are proper only to the Female; this being disagreeable, preposterous, and
of disturbance to the smooth and regular course of the Passions, must be of
necessity a torment and disease.

NOW if for any Animal, even of the brutish kind, to lose any one of those
Affections proper to his Species and to the character of his Kind, or of his
Sex only, be of so great an injury to him; what must it be for Man to lose that
sense and feeling which is proper to him as a man; which is his proper
Character, his Make and Genius? What must it be for Man (whose dependence on,
and relation to Society is yet greater than in any of those other Creatures) to
lose any thing of that natural Affection by which he is carried on to the good
of his Species and Society, and of which passion he has naturally so much more
than other creatures, that he, of any other, can least bear Solitude or an
intermission of social Enjoyment which he is still seeking after, and if long
deprived of, is hardly able to endure his Being? Nor is any thing more apparent
than that there is naturally in every one such a degree of social Affection as
necessitates and drives him to seek the Familiarity and Friendship of others,
amongst whom he may let loose a Passion which wants to be employed, and which
when it is suppressed, creates a sadness, dejection and melancholy in the Mind,
as great as is on the contrary that healing and enlivening Joy it brings when
acting at its liberty and with full scope; as at that time we may see
particularly when the Heart is opened, and the secrets of the Breast unfolded
to a Bosom-friend. This we see confirmed in persons of the most elevated
Stations, in Princes, Monarchs, and those who seem by their condition to be
above ordinary human Commerce, and to affect a strangeness and distance with
Mankind. For although the wiser and better sort are perhaps out of a jealousy
rejected by them, as not fitted for their intimacy or secret converse; yet
there are those substituted in the room, who tho they may have the least merit
of any, and are perhaps the most vile and contemptible of men; yet serve
however to that end of Friendship, and are so much the subjects of a Kindness
and social Affection in these great ones, that for these we can see them often
in pain and in concern; in these they easily confide; to these they can with
pleasure be open, free, kind, succorable and bountiful, as rejoicing and taking
delight in it, having no intention or aim beyond it, and their interest (in
respect of Policy) often standing contrary to it. In Persons of but an ordinary
good Disposition, no better than what is common to the generality of Mankind,
it is discernable how much they are pressed with this necessity of entertaining
Friendship and familiar Commerce, and how much these social Affections want (if
I may say so) their daily exercise and discharge. How heavy dos Life grow when
without it? And how plain is it, that after a long absence, and a sort of
abstinence in this way, after a banishment from the company of near Friends,
and a disuse of Society but for a small time, the Mind is in distress, the
Temper discomposed; and that no sooner is the man restored to the means of his
former Enjoyment, but he takes new Pleasure, receives additional Delight, and
enjoys more than before the freedom, intimacy, and all those circumstances of
friendly Commerce, and of an inward Society from which he was separated?

AND thus it may appear how much natural Affection is predominant in us; how it
is inwardly joined to us, and implanted in our Natures; how interwove with our
other Passions, and how essential to the regular motion and course of all our
Affections, on which our happiness and self-enjoyment so immediately depends.

THUS much as to the System and Constitution of the inward part, and as to that
natural BALANCE of the Affections; which may not be thought (we hope) so odd or
unjustifiable a way of speaking, after what has bin said.

AS to both those Ills which follow the ill balance and defect of natural
Affection, viz. the enlargement and extention of the selfish Passions; and the
growth of the unnatural and horrid ones; how and in what degree these
Consequences are miserable, we come to speak in what follows upon each of those
heads, which make the second and third part of this Examination.

AND thus it appears, that As TO HAVE THE NATURAL AND GOOD AFFECTIONS IS OF THE
CHIEFEST ENJOYMENT OF LIFE; So TO WANT THEM IS OF THE HIGHEST DISORDER AND
MISERY.

II. WE are now to prove, THAT BY HAVING THE SELF-PASSIONS TOO INTENSE OR
STRONG, A CREATURE IS MISERABLE.

WE have already considered in some measure of the Passions and Affections of
this kind, as they are good and useful for the Creature, with respect to his
private Interest and self-Oeconomy. Now these, if they are moderate and in a
natural degree, are no ways inconsistent with the effects or right operation of
natural Affection; which will prevail still where it ought, and in every fit
occasion take place of any of those other Affections whilst thus moderate, and
make them to be no obstructions: For thus in a Creature who has a natural
affection toward its young, the Affections toward private good or safety, tho
abiding still in the Creature, are yet no hindrance to his operation toward
public Good, or good of his Kind, even where Sufferings and Violences are to be
undergon, and Life it self comes in question: And this is according to a right
Balance and Proportion. But if the Passions of this kind toward private Good, or
the Regards to private Good are excessive and beyond a certain degree; then is
this Operation hindered, and the effects of natural Affection toward public
Good prevented: and thus is the Balance broken, and Economy destroyed.
Therefore if it be supposed conducing to the Interest of any Creature, to have
these self-Passions thus violently strong, and the Balance to be after this
manner; then it must be according to his Interest resolutely to go against
those natural Affections. But if (as we think it will appear) it can never be
for the interest of a Creature to have his self-Passions thus strong or
violent, so as to make this ill Balance; then it must be always at his own
disadvantage, and not according to his interest, to go contrary to natural
Affection, through that which we call self-Love.

IF there were any of these self-Passions, which for the good and happiness of
the Creature might be set in opposition to natural Affection, and deserved a
degree of strength able to over-balance it; THE DESIRE AND LOVE OF LIFE would
be the most likely. But it may be found perhaps that there is no Passion which
(by having so much allowed to it) is the occasion of more Disorder and Misery.

THERE is nothing more certain, or that is more universally consented to and
confessed by every one, than this; That Life may sometimes be even a misfortune
and misery; and that nothing can be more desirable than to lay it down and
withdraw from under the heavy burden. To cause, or any way enforce the
continuance of Life in Creatures reduced to a certain extremity, is esteemed
the greatest Cruelty: and even there where any religious Faith forbids, as a
thing heinous and sinful, that any one should be his own reliever; still, if by
any fortunat accident Death offers of it self, it is embraced as highly welcome,
and as a Blessing. And on this account the nearest Friends and Relations often
rejoice at the release of one entirely beloved. even tho he himself may have
bin of so weak a mind as to have declined Death, and endeavored earnestly the
prolongment of his own uneligible and wretched State.

SINCE Life therefore may frequently prove a Misfortune and Misery, and that
even naturally it becomes so by being only prolonged till it reaches the
infirmities of old Age; and since there is nothing more commonly known than the
instances of Life overvalu'd, where, out of an eager desire of Life, men
purchase it at an overrate, and at such a cost as hardly any Life can be
thought worth; it follows evidently, that that Passion or Affection of love of
Life, and abhorrence or dread of Death, if it be over great and exceedingly
prevalent, and over balancing in the Temper of any Creature, must be the means
of carrying him directly against his own interest and good, and must make him
in occasions, such as are of the last importance, to become the greatest enemy
to himself that can be, and necessitate him to act as such.

BUT in the next place: tho it were always the interest and good of a Creature,
by all courses and means whatsoever, at any price or at any rate, to preserve
Life; yet according to this, it is not for the interest of a Creature to have
this Passion over great: for thus it will be ineffectual, and not conducing to
its end. Various instances need not be given: for what is there better known,
than that at all times an excessive fear betrays to danger, instead of saving
from it; and that it is impossible for any one to do the least thing
serviceably or well for his own preservation, or in his own defense, when
strongly pressed with such a Passion: insomuch, that on all extraordinary
Emergences, Courage is that which chiefly saves, whilst Cowardice robs us of
the means of safety, and not only deprives us of our defensive Faculties, and
hinders us from acting as we should do to that end of our defense; but even
runs us into the mouth of Ruin, and makes us meet that evil which we scarce
needed to have shunned?

AND now tho in neither of these senses it could be called an Ill, to have the
Affection of this sort thus strong and prevalent; yet the Affection it self,
when in this degree predominant in any one, must be the cause of Misery, if it
be misery to have a through Cowardice, and to feel those horrors that are proper
to the character of one who lives under a constant dread of Death. For, in a
rational and reflecting Creature (to whom the thoughts and imagination of Death
are continually in some manner or another presented) an inherent Passion of
this sort must be the occasion of the greatest Agonies and Torments, such as
must enter at all times into the pleasantest parts of Life, so as to corrupt
and poison all Enjoyment and Consent. And thus by reason of this Passion alone,
such a Life as this, if inwardly and closely viewed, would be found to be one
of the most miserable, tho attended with all other Circumstances that should in
all appearance make it happy. But when we add to this the meannesses and base
condescensions occasioned by such a fear of Death, and which necessarily follow
from such an eager desire of retaining Life; when we consider how we are
debased and shamed by it, when driven to actions which we cannot view but with
dislike; when the Life we thus cherish, is by this means grown to be of so
unpleasing reflection, sulli'd, deformed, and forced by degrees into still
greater crookedness and perplexity; in this case I think there is no body ever
so little ingenuous but feels that Life sits heavily upon us, and is worn
uneasily: whilst all that is kind and social, the chief pleasure and good of
Life, is for the sake of Life abandoned and given up, and things submitted to,
for which nothing in Life besides can make amends.

IN short, Is there any thing more miserable than the condition of a through
timorous Nature, where the terror of dying is always a close and pressing
Passion? And what Fortune, what outward State ever so secure, can deliver from
this? To what is not such a one necessitated and driven, who lives under a more
than ordinary fear of this sort? What torturing and endless work is still
growing upon his hands, who out of an earnestness to retain Life at any rate,
renders it so much the more exposed, as he is forced more and more into those
indirect courses upon which such a Passion runs him? On the other (...), is
there any one who will not esteem the life of a Person more easy toward this
subject, to be a Life capable infinitely of greater Happiness and Enjoyment? Is
not the very consciousness and feeling it self of such an Ease and Indifference
as this, an infinite satisfaction in a world of occasions? And is not the effect
of it an augmenting and heightning to our pleasures, and to the enjoyments we
take in Life; as the contrary Passion is by its effect destructive to the
pleasures of Life, and an allay and bitterness amidst all that is enjoyed of
that sort?

AND thus therefore, upon the whole, it seems evident, That to have that
Affection of DESIRE AND LOVE OF LIFE, or ABHORRENCE OF DEATH, too intense and
beyond a certain degree, is against the interest, good and safety of a
Creature, and is opposite to the Happiness he injoys in Life.

IN the same manner as this passion of Fear (under a certain degree) is
necessary to self-preservation, and to the avoiding of what is destructive; so
is there another Passion as preservative to us, and as useful to our safety, by
assisting us not to fly, but to repel Injury, and resist Violence when offered.
It is by this that a Creature offering an injury, is detered from it, as
knowing by the very signs which accompany this Passion whilst it is rising and
gathering strength, that the Injury will not go with impunity. And it is this
Passion which, when violence is actually used, assists us more effectually to
struggle against it, and adds a force to us, both in supporting it, and in
returning it on the Inflicter. For thus, as Rage and Despair increase, a
Creature grows still more and more terrible; and being urged to the greatest
extremity, finds a degree of strength and boldness unknown till then, and which
had not risen but through the height of Provocation. As to this Passion
therefore of ANGER (for I know no other word for it) tho its immediate aim be
indeed the Ill or Punishment only of another, and not the good of self; yet it
is plainly one of those Passions (of which we are now discoursing) that tend to
the advantage and interest of the self-System, the Animal himself: since a
certain degree of that Passion (whether that degree be properly called Anger or
no, it matters not) is most certainly requisite in the Creature for his
performance even of the better sort of moral Actions, whether tending to the
good of Society, or to his own preservation and defense. For, who can
resolutely enough divide from, or resist ill and detestable men; or who can
fight either singly against a private enemy, or for the public against a public
one, without feeling in some measure, and being armed as it were with a certain
degree of this Passion? But, on the other side, there is hardly any need that
we should explain how mischievous and destructive Anger is, if it be what we
commonly mean by that word; if it be such as denominates an angry Temper, and
be either hasty, rash, and violent in the instant of provocation only; or if it
be of that kind which imprints it self deeply, and for a long season, and
causes Revenge, and a vindicative Bent and Resolution. What can be a sorer or
deeper wound, a closer grief, or more sensible misery, than to be agitated by
this fierce Passion, and carry this sting within? And what wonder is it that so
much is done out of Revenge, and in the fury of Anger, when the relief and
satisfaction found in that indulgence is really the asswaging of the most
torturous Grief and pressing sensation of Misery; which being removed, or for a
while alleviated or abated, by the accomplishment of the Desire in the ill of
another, leaves behind it (as a rack newly quitted) the perception of the
greatest Comfort, and an overflowing of soft and pleasing Sensation? From hence
are those untoward delights of perverseness, and of an habitual froward,
envenomed and malignant Disposition acting at its liberty: for this is a
perpetual asswaging of Anger perpetually kindled, and always renewing; which is
the same as to be perpetually stung, and still curing of the Sore. Thus a
through home Revenge being raised once to a high pitch, rests not till it
attains its end; and that attained, is easy and reposes: making the succeeding
Ease and Relief to be by so much more enjoyed as the preceding Anguish and
incumbent Pain was of long duration, and of bitterest impatience. And certainly
if amongst Lovers, and in the language of Gallantry, the success of ardent Love
is called the asswaging of a Pain; this must be by far yet, more justly termed
so. And surely, however pleasing that other pain may be said to be, this can be
no pleasing one, nor can be any other than sound and through wretchedness, a
grating and disgustful feeling, without the least mixture of any thing soft or
flattering.

TO speak any further of this Passion of Anger; to show the ill effects of it
as to our Selves, our Minds and Bodies, our Condition, and Circumstances of
Life with those around us; or to show on the other side, the good effects as
well as happy feeling of a mild condescending Temper, easy of contentment, such
as not easily takes offense, and easily forgives; to show how much this is
suitable to Interest, to Health and Contentment, to easy and pleasant Living;
and how much the contrary is embroiling, dangerous, exposing, and of perpetual
disturbance, inconvenience and misfortune, would be I imagine needless. What has
bin said, may be enough to make this be understood, That to be subject to such
affection of Anger of any kind, as we have bin mentioning, is to suffer under a
worse sort of Disease, and to be subject to no small Misery.

WE are now to speak concerning other self-Passions that are of the Economy of
the Creature, as love or appetite to Nourishment; love of, and concern for
those Conveniences by which we are well provided for and maintained; love and
desire of Reputation, Authority, and Power of some kind, which advance our
Welfare, good Establishment and Condition of living. Now these affections of
Desire or Appetite toward what is self-advantageous, and of selfgood, if they
are moderate and in certain bounds, are such as are not blamable, by being any
ways injurious to social Life, or a hinderance to Virtue: but being in an
extreme degree, they become Luxury, Avarice, Ambition, and are known vicious
and ill with respect to Society. How it is that they are ill also with respect
to the private Person, and are his loss and injury as well as the Society's, we
may thus consider. As first in that of LUXURY.

WERE it true (as has bin proved the contrary) that the most considerable
Pleasures were such as came in by the sense; and were it true also that these
Pleasures of the sense lay in such certain outward things capable and sure to
yield always a due and certain portion of Pleasure according to their degree
and quality; it would then follow, that the certain way to procure Happiness
would be barely to procure largely of these Subjects to which Happiness and
Pleasure were thus annexed; and by using or consuming the most of these, make
sure of most enjoyment. But in what sense soever it be that this is called to
live, and to live fast, as if this were to make the most of Life; it will
hardly be found that the inward Faculties (such as are the cause that any thing
of pleasure is conceived) are able to keep pace with these outward supplies.
And if the natural disposition and aptness from within be not concurring, it
will be in vain that these Subjects are thus heaped on, and multiplied with
eager intention and desire. Now if those inward dispositions (such as of a
Stomach toward nourishment) be disordered, overturned, and ruined by excess,
then is there no longer the same enjoyment to be received from any thing; but
all is in a manner ruined, and the capacity of real Pleasure lost, whilst that
which remains is rather a sore and a disease: as may be observed in those who
have gained a constant nauseating, tho with a cravingness of stomach; or who
have contracted a continual, eager, and insatiable thirst. But how much better
dos Nature, that has so well and easily provided for our Pleasure, dictate also
and prescribe to us for the enjoyment of it? and who by quitting Nature ever
made advancement or improved in Pleasure? Was it ever known of any one, long
used and accustomed to an active Life, and to Exercise begetting Health, and a
kindly vigorous Appetite, that having then experienced the gratefulness of
Food, even of the plainest kind; it ever came into his thought, upon a
following change of Life and Diet, to compare or bring in competition the
Pleasures received from all those delicacies of Luxury, and of a continual
solicited and forced Appetite, with those former remembered satisfactions of a
homely and common Diet, prepared by cheerful and wholesome Labor, and preceded by
due Abstinence, and a suitable kind and natural Appetite? On the other side, Has
any thing bin more known, than the instances of People bred to a Life and Diet
just the contrary, used never to wait, but to prevent Appetite, and accustomed
to contend with an almost perpetual Society; who when by accident or choice
they came to fall into that other more natural course of Life, or but for a
while (as on a journey, or a day of hunting) came to experience once the
satisfaction had from the plainest Food, have afterward with freedom owned,
that it was then that they received the greatest contentment and delight of
that sort, and such as was infinitely above what arose from all those studi'd
Pleasures of variety and excess? It is plain, that by pressing on and urging
Nature thus, and by forcing continually the Appetite and Sense, the keeness and
edg of those natural Sensations are by degrees lost: and tho by vice and habit
the same things may be sought after with equal violence as before; tho the
impatience of being without them may be greater and greater; yet the joy in
having them is lessened and brought almost to nothing. The accompanying Palls
and Nauseautings which continually intervene, are of the worst and most hateful
sensation that can be; and hardly is there at last any thing tasted wholly free
from something of this ill relish and untoward feeling: So that instead of a
constant and flowing delight to be reckoned upon as belonging to this State;
the State it self is a perpetual Sickness or Infirmity, a corruption of
Pleasure, and cannot so much as admit of any through kind, natural, and
agreeable sensation, even of the very sort of those it so earnestly seeks and
aspires to with such eagerness.

AS to the Consequences of such a pernicious greediness, and excessive desire
toward Indulgence of this sort; how fatal to the Body, and to the health and
vigor of the manly Frame; how ruinous by Diseases, such as are the most
tormenting, and of the acutest pain and longest duration; all this needs scarce
to be repeated: Nor how on the other side, the reverse of this, a temperate
Life, and Desires moderated, afford every thing so happily contrary, by making
Life so much more lasting, vigorous, and so infinitely more delightful, and of
more pleasing inward sensation and lively feeling, proper always to that full
healthiness of a temperate State; as a contrary Torpor and heavy wearydness is
proper to a debauched State, and is spread still through the Senses of one used
to continual excess.

AS to the Consequences with respect to the Mind, the difference here between
Temperance and Intemperance; which of the two is the most thriving state for
the Mind, and which injurious and destructive, is superfluous to mention. Nor
needs it be told, that as there is a vigor and alacrity gained to the Mind by
temperance, so in the very practice of what is thus beneficial both to the Body
and Mind, and advantageous so many other ways besides, there is a peculiar Joy
and Satisfaction.

THE Consequences as to Interest are plain enough. The misery of such a state
of impotence and unforbearance, whilst it subjects us to the lowest and meanest
carriage and dependence, as well as to all profusion, to all irregularity and
extravagance of Conduct; the Injuries too, which even knowingly they do
themselves, who out of an impotence of this sort, and an impossibility of
restraint, forbear not what even they themselves declare they know to be
destructive to them; all this, and more of this nature is obvious enough. And
from less than what has bin said, it would be easy to conclude, That to have
this violent love, this luxurious and high desire toward the sort of pleasure
mentioned, is to be highly inconvenienc'd and prejudiced as to Interest,
happiness of Life, and enjoyment of real Pleasure.

NOW as to those other excesses of the self-Passions, such as mentioned, as of
regard toward the outward conveniences of Life (which in an extreme degree is
Covetousness or Avarice) and that of inclination and good liking toward what
is of Reputation and Authority (of which the extreme is Ambition and Vanity)
how far the first of these A COVETING OR AVARITIOUS TEMPER is miserable, needs
not that one should go about to explain. Who is there that knows not how little
a Portion that is, which is agreed by all to be sufficient for a man's single
use and convenience? And how much may even this be reduced still, and brought
into a narrower compass, if all superfluity being cut off, Temperance and a
natural Life were followed with near that application and earnestness that
Sumptuousness and Luxury is practiced by some, and studi'd as an Art or
Science? Now where Temperance is found thus advantageous, and the Practice as
well as the Consequences of it so pleasing and happy, there is little need to
mention any thing of the miseries attending those covetous and eager desires
after things that have no bounds or rule, as being out of Nature, beyond which
there can be no limits or moderation set to Desire. For where shall we once
stop when we are over this, when we are no longer contained within the bounds
of Nature? How shall we any way fix or ascertain a thing wholly unnatural and
unreasonable? Or what method or regulation shall we set to Excess or exorbitant
Fancy, in adding Expense to Expense, or Possession to Possession? Hence that
natural restlesness of coveting and eager Minds, in whatever state or degree of
Fortune they are placed; there being no through or real satisfaction, but a kind
of natural insatiableness belonging to this condition, whence it comes that
Enjoyment is hindered: since it is impossible that there should be any real
enjoyment but of what is in consequence of natural and just Appetite. Nor do we
readily call that an Enjoyment of Wealth or of Honor, when through Covetousness
or Ambition, the Desire is still forwards, and rests not as satisfied with its
gains. But of this vice of Covetousness, and the misery of it (especially of
that sort which is mere Avarice) there is enough said in the world; and in our
common way of speaking, a covetous and a miserable Temper has often but one and
the same meaning.

NEITHER is there less known or said as to the ills of that other aspiring
Temper, and the self-torments of a swollen PRIDE and AMBITION; which would be
indeed but little felt in the World, if those Passions were as much fought
against and controlled within, as they are condemned abroad, and owned by every
body to be unfortunat and tormenting. But when one considers the ease,
happiness, and the thousand advantages and securities which attend a satisfied
Temper, a free and easy Spirit, such as can be accommodated on easy terms, is
fitted to Society and Fellowship, and can suit it self with any reasonable
circumstances; it will not be necessary any further to suggest the excellence
and good of Moderation, and the mischief and self-injury of immoderat Desires,
and of a Mind that covets eagerly Fame, Honor, Superiority, or Power.

THIS too is obvious in this place, that as the Desires of this kind are raised
and become impatient, so the aversions and fears of the contrary side grow in
proportion strong and violent, and the Temper more subject to apprehensions
from all events, and more incapable of bearing the least repulse or ordinary
loss or disappointment. And thus all quiet, rest and security as to what is
future, and all peace, contentedness and ease as to what is present, is
forfeited by having Desires of this kind, and by having Appetites thus swelling
and immoderat.

THERE is a Temper which is ofttimes considered as in opposition to these eager
and aspiring Aims of which we have been speaking; not that it excludes the
Passions either of Covetousness or Ambition, but that it is the hindrance of
their Effects; and that by soothing of the Mind, and softning it into an
EXCESSIVE LOVE OF REST AND INDOLENCE, it makes the attempts of those Passions
to be impracticable, and renders the difficulties of their painful and
laborious course toward Wealth and Honors to be insuperable. Now tho an
inclination toward Ease, a love of moderate repose and rest from Action, be as
natural and useful to us as that inclination we have toward Sleep; and that to
want such an inclination would be in the same manner an Ill, as if we had not
at proper times a strong and pressing inclination to sleep; yet notwithstanding
this, an excessive love of Rest, and a contracted hatred and aversion toward
Action or Employment, must be greatly injurious, and be a disease in the Mind
equal to that of a Lethargy in the Body, and no less destructive of it by
keeping it in a perpetual dullness and in-action, than the other, by keeping it
in a perpetual slumber. How much this of Action or Exercise is necessary for
the Body, let it be judged by the difference we find in the Constitutions that
are accustomed, and those that are wholly strangers to it; and by the different
Health and Complexion which Labor and due Exercise create, in comparison with
that habit of Body which we see consequent to an indulged state of Indolence
and Rest. It is pleasing to observe what eager and impatient appetite toward
Exercise Nature has given to Youth of all kinds, in that desire of Play, which
is no other than the instigation or incitement of Nature to such an
extraordinary motion of the Body as is at that time chiefly requisite.
Afterward, when grown up, and no longer in their Parents but their own care;
when the subjects of labor increase, and self-defence, self-maintenance, search
of Food, and Venery, the consequent charge of the young, and other Affairs
begin to give them Employment in abundance; then is Ease and Quiet more
enjoyed, and love of Rest increased, as Toil and Business increase, and the
vigor and eagerness of Youth abates. But where through a corruption of Nature,
Sloth and Laziness is engendered: where it is contracted as a Habit that
slackens and enervates the Mind, and infeebles, and as it were dissolves the
Body; it is not only ruinous of the body's Health, and destructive in the end,
or by its consequences; but the immediate feeling of it, and the sensation it
self becomes no other than a lingering, drooping Pain and heavy Oppression: it
being impossible this way ever to feel (as those who live naturally) either the
sprightly joy of vigorous and manly Exercise, or the succeding Refreshment, and
the Pleasures of a natural and wholesome Rest after due Labor and Employment. So
that in the room of the Pleasures of a double kind that are thus parted with,
there is nothing gained but a dull and heavy feeling more weighty and tiresom
than any Labor whatsoever; a sort of languishing Disease prejudicial to all
other enjoyments of a vigorous and healthy Sense, and injurious both to the
Body and to the Mind: in which latter it is the occasion of worse disturbance,
and of a more immediate spreading Corruption; for however the Body may hold
out, it is impossible that the Mind in which the Distemper is seated, can
escape without an immediate Affliction and Disorder. The Habit begets a
tediousness and anxiety which infects the whole Temper, and is the occasion of
converting this unnatural Rest into an unhappy sort of activity, such as that
of vexatiousness, ill humor, and a preying active Spleen. And in the same
manner as in the Body, where no Labor or natural Exercise being used, the
Spirits that want their due employment prey upon the Body, and find work for
themselves in a destructive way; so in a Mind unexercis'd, and which languishes
and faints for want of due action, the Passions which should have an equal and
apt Employment, and be taken up in a settled Application to some sit work and
business in Life, being thus cut off from their course of action, find work
themselves, and turning inwards, raise disquiet in the Mind, and an eagerness
and irritation in the Temper, which becomes loosened toward Passion, is
rendered more impotent, more incapable of Moderation, and like prepared fuel,
is made apt to take fire by the least spark. Thus therefore by reason of the
injuries that this Habit brings both to the Body and to the Mind, and to the
Pleasure and real Ease of both; it is plain, That to have this overgreat
inclination toward Rest, this slothful, soft or effeminate Temper, averse to
Labor and Employment, is to have an unavoidable mischief and attendent plague.

AS to Interest, how far it is here concerned, how wretched that state is,
which by this habit a man is placed in toward all the circumstances and
affairs of Life, when at any time he is called to action; how subjected he must
be to all inconveniences wanting to himself, and deprived of the assistance of
others; whilst being unfit for all offices and duties of Society, he yet of any
other person most needs the help of Society, as being least able to assist or
support himself; all this is obvious, and need not to be explained.

THERE remains still one Passion more to speak of, which yet we can scarcely
call a self-passion, since the sole end of it is the good and advantage of the
Kind. But whereas all other social or natural Affections are joined only with a
mental Pleasure, and sounded in a Kindness and Love only; this has more added
to it, and is joined with a pleasure of Sense, and a necessity in some degree
of indulging the Appetite which is toward it, for the ease and welfare of the
Creature. And tho the necessity be not absolute here, as in the cases of
eating, drinking, rest and sleep; yet to abstain wholly from the use of VENERY
(which is that we are speaking of) can hardly be without the sufferance of the
Body in some degree: nor can the prejudice to the Constitution be absolutely
avoided, without the assistance of Art, and a method and rule of Living, as is
observable even in the Female Sex; where notwithstanding the toil and
sufferance of breeding and bearing the young, the natural consequences are
rather worse to the Constitution from being totally witheld, and never serving
to that use and design of Nature, tho through so much Labor and Fatigue. Such
concern, therefore, and care has Nature shown for the support and maintenance
of the several Species, that by an Indigence and a kind of Necessity which we
are thus cast in, it is made an immediate Self-interest to us, with respect to
our bodily state, to work toward the propagation of our Kind. The Passion
therefore which carries us to this service and good to our Species, is made as
it were a Self-passion, and is accompanied not only with an affection of
kindness and love toward the Female, but with a desire of self-ease, and
toward what is of use to the private animal Nature, and a satisfaction and
indulgence of Sense.

NOW whether or no it be the interest and good of the Animal to have this
indigence and need beyond a natural and ordinary degree, and to have this
Appetite toward Venery more eager, impatient, and more extended than of course
it usually is in Nature, where no additional incitement or provocation is used;
this is what we may consider.

HAVING said already so much concerning natural and unnatural Appetite above,
there needs less to be said in this place. If it be allowed that to all other
Pleasures there is a measure of Appetite belonging, which cannot be exceeded
but with prejudice to the Creature, even in his very capacity of enjoying
Pleasure: and if to have either a ravenous Appetite, such as is a Disease, and
has a peculiar name; or to have that other sort of exorbitant Appetite (no less
properly called a Disease) which we see in the Luxurious, be both of them
unfortunate, and of prejudice even to the very right enjoyment of the Pleasures
derived from those Senses, it will hardly be thought that there is no limit,
bound, or certain measure of this other Appetite toward Venery: as if this
were independent of Nature, and might extend to Infinite, and still be the
occasion of greater and greater Pleasure; which is too great an absurdity to go
about to confute. There are other sorts of ardent Sensations and eager
Incitements of Flesh, which we accidentally sometimes experience in our selves,
and which are acceptable perhaps whilst in a certain degree; but which as they
increase, grow intolerable. Even Laughter provoked by Titillation, grows an
excessive pain, tho it retains still in a great degree the same features of
delight and pleasure. And although in the case of that particular kind of Itch
which belongs to a Distemper that has its name from that effect, there are some
found so sensually inclined, that they esteem the continual allaying of that
Ardor, however eager and fierce, to be acceptable and delightful, yet it would
hardly be reputed so amongst the more refined sort, even of those who make
sensual Pleasure a study. Now if there be a certain height, a certain pitch or
degree of the other Ardor, which by being further advanced, is so much less
consistent with the pleasure of that Sensation, and is rather a sort of rage
and sury (like that which is raised by certain poisonous Medicaments and
Incentives to Lust;) and since there is a necessity of stopping somewhere, and
fixing some Boundary, where can that possibly be done but where regard is had
to Nature, beyond which there is no measure or rule of things? Now Nature may
be known from that which we see of the natural state of Creatures, and of Man,
when unprejudiced by unnatural provocation and youthful incitements of a
vicious Education. Where it happens that we see any one bred to a natural Life,
inured to honest industry and sobriety, and unaccustomed to any thing
immoderate or intemperate; it appears always that such a one as this, when at
full age, has his desires and inclinations of this sort at command, and no ways
enflamed, till by force upon himself, and by giving into debauch and excess, he
strains and widens his Appetite to a new and unnatural degree. But if such
excesses are never used, the Desires contain themselves in their just limits.
But when we reflect upon what is customary to almost all the Youth of human
kind, especially of those who are above the laboring sort, and at what early
years they are familiariz'd to the licentiousness of this Passion; when we
consider to what Obscenities the ears of our Youth are accustomed; how their
Inclinations are vitiated, and every day fed; and what practices are used to
urge and precipitate Nature; we need not find it strange that men are so
corrupted, and their Appetites so exasperated and enflamed to such a degree
beyond all natural temperature. All other Creatures in the world are for their
orderliness in this, a reproach to Man; since they, of what kind soever they
are, have regular and proportioned Appetites, and have the use of Venery
according to fit and proper Seasons and Subjects; whilst Man alone knows
neither season, nor bound, nor fitness of Subject, but breaks into all
horridness of unnatural and monstrous Lusts, regarding neither Sex nor Species
(tho of this latter the Instances are less common:) and all this through that
inflammation of the Desire and Appetite, which, being swelled beyond a natural
size, cannot be answered by plain and natural means. So that neither ought it
to be thought strange, if what has bin said in relation to that of Meats and
Drinks, be said to hold good, and be the same in this: and that although such an
abandoned indulgence as this is sure to bring a greater indigence and need on
the Body, and fix a greater lust and cravingness in the mind; yet this is so
far from resembling natural Appetite (which by being greater, is the occasion
still of greater Pleasure) that the more these excessive Desires are thus
increased, and the unnatural Appetite fomented, the less is there of a real
pleasant Sensation, and the more mixture there is of Allay. For thus, as we
have shown already, a Sensation which seems to hold all of Pleasure, often by a
small and almost imperceptible extension runs into Pain, and grows
insufferable. So nearly bordering and related are these two things, even so as
to be almost confounded with one another, which yet are really so distinct, and
in appearance so very contrary. But on the other side therefore, by due
abstinence, and more moderate use, the Pleasure spoken of is much clearer, and
more enjoyed. So that were both these Sensations to be compared, that of a
virtuous Course which belonged to one who lived a natural and regular Life, and
that of a vicious Course which belonged to one who was relaxed and dissolute;
there is no question but it would be pronounced in favor of the former, without
regard to Consequences, and with respect only to the very pleasure of Sense
perceived from hence: For it would be found, that a Man thus superior to his
Appetites of this kind, had yet no less a share of satisfaction from them in
that more sparing use, nor less pleasurable enjoyment in the whole, than he who
lived in a manner only in the service of these Appetites, and who indulging the
most that could be to this Sense, and seeking a perpetual support in it, had
nothing else to do but to force and solicit Nature to the highest degree, and
struggle against a perpetual Satiety, and against the heavy and dull intervals
of a surfeited Sense, and of a Mind and Body unnaturally held, and as it were
benumbed, and drooping in this imprisonment and restraint from other natural
Action. As for the other Sex; although there be less of this satiated feeling
experienced perhaps in them, yet they having once abandoned themselves, are
capable of the same inconstancy and desire of change, as being weari'd of the
present. But it is enough to say of this Sex, that having once forsaken
modesty, and given scope to their Desire and Appetite, beyond a duly restrained
temperat and honest way, they grow insatiable and monstrous, and fall into a
state which even they themselves, till grown into it, detest and think horrid.

AS to the Consequences of this Vice with respect to the Body (the health and
constitution of which is so much impaired, and so often wholly destroyed by it)
there is no need to mention any thing.

THE Injuries it dos to the Mind, tho less notic'd, are yet in proportion much
greater than those which the Body suffers. The prejudice to the Parts and
Intellect, the wretched wast of time, the effeminacy, sloth, supiness
engendered; the disorder, looseness, and impotence of a thousand Passions,
through such a relaxation and enervating of the Mind; all these are the effects
of this Vice, and are apparent when but reflected on.

NOR is it less apparent how much is suffered as to Interest, and to what
multiplied Inconveniences he is subject, who is under the power of such a
Passion as this. What irregularity of Life, and disturbance of Affairs; what
Animosity, War, and Contention must he undergo, who is thus addicted, and who
has this temper to such excess, as to be a Rage possessing him, and ruling his
Conduct? What trust or dependence is there on one of such a Character and Fame?
And how must such a Person stand with respect to Friends, Relations, the public
and general Society of Mankind, in an ordinary way of living and conversing? On
the other side; how fair and recommending is the contrary character and habit
of Virtue and Continence? How advantageous to all Economy, and management of
private and public Affairs, in all the duties and offices of Friendship, and of
a civil Life? How promotive of Society, and conducing to all ease, prosperity,
commodious and happy living?

THUS have we considered of those which we may call self-Passions; and what the
effect is of having them beyond a moderat degree; which when they once exceed,
when once grown imperious and high, are the occasion that a Creature is mean
and low, are the ground of that which we call selfishness, so much detested in
Creatures. Tho yet it be the misfortune of some men, in their way of reasoning
upon these Subjects, not to reckon upon such Selfishness as a real ill, or a
misfortune, except only so far as it happens to be known and marked, as a just
object of peoples aversion, and of the contemt and hatred of mankind; not as if
in it self it did imply any misery or disease: whereas there can be nothing so
miserable in it self, and so wretched in its Consequence, as to be thus
impotent in temper, thus mastered by passion, and to serve such a slavery to
things of such mean and wretched dependence, and from the contemt of which the
greatest satisfaction and selfenjoyment arises, and all generosity and
magnanimity depends. It is by such a slavery as this that we lose at last all
true Esteem both with our selves and others; that we lose all Character,
Authority and Respect; that we disagree and are at perpetual variance with our
selves as we alternatly serve and submit to these opposite Affections, so
inconsistent with one another, and so utterly irreconcilable: and it is by this
that we lose even the faculties of our Minds, which can never be so enlarged,
and in such a way of improvement toward Knowledge, as in conjunction with
Temperance, where there is a constant attention and obedience to Reason
practiced and established; and where, in the same manner as the Body by good
use is fitted to its proper exercise, so the Mind is rendered apt and disposed
by right Discipline and Rule to its proper Exercises and Employment.

BUT besides what we have mentioned of the private Ill and self-Injury of every
such self-Passion in particular; all these irregular and vicious Affections
have this necessary effect in general, that they are ruinous also of the
natural Affections, and by making them give place, by long suppressing and
controling them, must at length sink and destroy them. As indeed who is there
that knows not, and is not ready to own, that a Creature who is in a way of
growing every day more selfish, and of having those Passions still in a higher
degree, is in a certain and unfailing way of growing more and more unnatural,
unkind, unaffectionate, and more out of all friendly and social Feeling? Who
knows not that by the increase of selfishness, and of that subtilty and
feignedness of carriage which it brings along with it, the candor and ingenuity
of our Natures, the ease and freedom of our Minds must be forfeited; all trust
and confidence in others, familiarity, inwardness, and heartiness with others
must be in a manner lost; and suspicions, jealousies, hatred and enmity
succeed, and be in the room? Besides, a Creature used to Reflection, who by an
ill use of Reason confirms himself in selfishness, and who in a settled manner
is come to think it to be his good not to allay or correct, but to indulge and
satisfy such Appetites as these, must by certain consequence industriously
strive to silence and check his natural and good Affections, those that would
carry him to the good of his Kind, and of Society, against the interest which
he conceives he has elsewhere and in a contrary way. And this must work to the
subversion of all good Affection in him, and to the forming of a profligate,
inhuman and savage Nature. Now if these Passions, besides what other ill they
are the occasion of, are withal the occasion and means of destroying and
loosening the natural Affections; then, by what has bin proved before, they
must be the certain means of losing us the chief and best enjoyment of Life,
and consequently too (as has bin proved) of making us to incur those horrid and
unnatural Passions, and that savageness of Temper which makes the greatest of
Miseries and the most wretched State, as we are going in this next place to
make appear.

SO that we have seen thus, how that by a wrong balance in the Affections of
this sort, and BY HAVING THESE SELF-AFFECTIONS TOO INTENSE OR STRONG, A
CREATURE IS MISERABLE.

III. THE Passions that are now left to speak of, are those that carry neither
to a public nor a private good, and are founded neither in any advantage to the
Species nor to the Self-system: for were there no such Passions as these, what
then could be the meaning of THAT UNNATURAL AND BARBAROUS DELIGHT IN BEHOLDING
TORMENTS, and in viewing those spectacles of Horror with that satisfaction and
joy which is sometimes known, and which has bin the reigning Passion of many
Tyrants, and barbarous Nations? To see the sufferance of an Enemy with cruel
delight, may be from the height of Anger, Revenge, Fear, and other extended
Self-passions: but to delight in the torture and pain of other Creatures
indifferently, of Slaves, of such as are unknown; to feed upon Death and dying
Agonies; this has nothing in it accountable in the way we have bin speaking,
but is wholly unnatural, as being of a kind of which not the least degree can
be said to aim at, or tend to the good or interest of the particular Creature,
and much less of the Species, or of Society.

THERE is another Affection nearly related to this, which is a gay and
frolicsom Delight in what is injurious to others; a sort of WANTON
MISCHIEVOUSNESS and Pleasure in what is destructive; a Passion which instead of
being restrained, is usually encouraged in Children: so that it is no wonder if
the effects of it are very unfortunatly felt in the World. For I think it will
be hard for any one to give a reason why the same Temper that was wont to
delight in disorder and ravage when in a Nursery, should not afterward find
delight in other disturbances and imbroils, and be the author of as much
mischief in private Families, amongst Friends, and in the Public. But of this
Passion there is no foundation in Nature according to that sense above
explained.

MALICE or ILL WILL, such as is grounded on no self-consideration, and where
there is no subject of Anger or Jealousy, nor nothing to provoke or cause such
a desire of doing ill to another; this also is of that kind of Passion.

ENVY too, when it is such as arises from the Prosperity or Happiness of
another Creature no ways interfering with ours, is also of this kind of Passion.

THERE is also amongst these, a sort of HATRED OF MANKIND AND SOCIETY; a
Passion which has bin known perfectly reigning in some men, and has had a
peculiar Misanthropia.
name given it.

WE may add likewise to the number of these, all those Passions which are
raised from SUPERSTITION (as mentioned before) and from the custom and usage of
barbarous Countries; all which are too horrid and odious in themselves to need
any proof of their being miserable.

THERE might be other Passions named, as that of BESTIALITY, and of another
sort of perversion of the venereal Appetite within our own Species; which are
both of them in the same manner unnatural: of the misfortune of which depravity
of Appetite we need not speak, after what has bin already said on that subject.

SUCH as these are the only Passions we can strictly call unnatural, tho there
are others which are indeed so much beyond the common bent of any Self-passion,
that tho they may have their foundation thence, and be derived from several of
those combined; yet they so exceed all ordinary Appetite of that kind, and are
so directly opposite to all natural Affection, that they are called and may be
reckoned unnatural and monstrous: for instance, such an ENORMOUS PRIDE or
AMBITION, as that which would willingly leave nothing eminent, nothing free,
nothing prosperous in the World besides; such an ANGER as would sacrifice every
thing to it self; such a REVENGE as is never to be extinguished, nor ever
satisfied but with the greatest Cruelties; such an INVETERACY and RANCOR as
seeks, as it were, occasion to exert it self, and lays hold of the least
subject, so as often to make the weight of that malevolent Passion fall even
upon those who are mere objects of Pity and Compassion. These are in that other
sense unnatural: and of these therefore we may speak in conjunction with those
others, since they are such as join with those to make up that horrid and
monstrous State above described.

IT may be said here, that these Passions, unnatural as they are, carry still a
sort of pleasure with them; and that however barbarous a Pleasure it be, yet
still it is a pleasure and satisfaction which is found in that of Pride, of
Tyranny, of Revenge, of Malice, or of Cruelty exerted. Now if it be possible in
nature, that any one can feel a barbarous or malicious Joy of this sort but as
in consequence of the perfectest of Tortures (that of a rancorous and malignant
Disposition) then may this perhaps be called Pleasure and Enjoyment, like those
pleasures of the Body which depend still upon some preceding uneasiness. But if
to love, and to be kind, to have natural Affection, Complacency, Good Will, be
in its own nature Happiness; and be as it were original Joy and Delight, as
depending on no preceding pain or uneasiness perceptible, and as operating to
Pleasure and Joy only; and that on the other side, Hatred, Animosity and
Bitterness, be always original Misery and Anguish, always operating to Ill, and
never producing any satisfaction, but as that Torture and Inflammation is as it
were cooled and respited by something that looks like success in the fulfilling
of the horrid desire and monstrous Appetite attending this Affection; then is
the barbarous Delight improperly called Satisfaction or Pleasure; or if it must
be called so, it is of the same nature in the Mind, as that pleasure in the
Body which (as we had occasion to say before) is owing to Racks, Wheels, and
other engines of Torture, or to the acutest Diseases which admit of sudden
intervals. However strong therefore these Pleasures may be said to be, they do
but the more imply the misery of that State which produces them. For as the
cruellest bodily pains do by intervals of Asswagement, produce the highest of
that sort of bodily Pleasure thence raised; so the fiercest and most raging
torments of this sort in a Mind, are those which by certain moments of Relief,
afford the greatest of those seeming mental Enjoyments. If those who know but
little of this untoward disposition, and who are most easy in their Temper,
find themselves however but too sensible of what happens to them in a way of
Disgrace or Injury; if even these better Tempers are acquainted with the heavy
disturbances which small occasions are apt to give; if they know the weighty
pressure of an ill Humor (tho such as comes but seldom) and the ill moments
that are passed when the Temper is thus unquiet, fretted, or ever so little
galled or diseased; if this be in reality so great a sore, and so great a part
of through Misery; after what rate then must they be miserable who hardly know
any better hours in Life, and who for the most part are agitated by a more
active Spleen, a closer, bitterer Malignancy and passion of Hatred? How lively
must be the sense of every thwarting and controling Accident? How great must be
the shocks of Disappointment, the stings of Affront, the gripes and gnawings of
a working Antipathy and strong Hatred, at either the real or fancied presence
of the Objects that give offense? Nor can it therefore be wondered at, if to
such Persons as these who are thus oppressed, thus agitated and wrought, it
seems a high and exquisit Delight to appease and allay for the while these
furious and rough Motions, by an indulgence of their passion in Mischief and
Revenge.

BUT now are we come to that which is easiest of proof, that which indeed
scarce needs an Explanation; for who is there but knows that to hate, to be
envious, to be enraged, to carry Bitterness and Malice, is to suffer? This it
is which we properly call Displeasure; and to conceive Hatred or Displeasure,
is all one as to conceive Pain, Anxiety, Misery. Whosoever has ill meaning, and
an inclination or appetite to do hurt, it is through hatred thus conceived, and
through brooding passions of this rancorous kind. Now whoever hates, whoever is
angry, or feels rancor, is wounded, distressed, aggrieved; this cannot be
otherwise in its own nature. So that whoever has ill will, and is carried to
the injury, harm or sufferance of others, suffers within himself, and carries a
wound within: and where the Passions of this horrid kind are deeply infixt,
there the Heart is ulcerated, the Wound kept open and not cured; and the
horridest of Tortures are thus made perpetual.

NOW as to one who has in this manner lost all what we call Nature, and who has
these horrid Affections; how such a one as this must stand toward the Society
of Mankind, and how he feels himself in it, as conscious of his Affections
toward others, and of what the Affections of others must be toward him, this
is easily conceived. What enjoyment, or what rest is there for him who is not
conscious of the merited Affection or Love of any human Soul; but on the
contrary is conscious of merited Hatred, not only from every Fellow Creature,
but from every thing in the universal Nature? What ground of horror and
despair? what foundation of fear and continual apprehension from Mankind, and
from superior Powers, when ever any such are credited, or but suspected? How
through and deep must that Melancholy be, where there is nothing softning or
pleasing from the side of Friendship to allay or divert it when once risen; no
flattering view or prospect of that cheerful and reviving sort, not so much as
from the fancy or imagination of kindness or affection from any part; but where
every thing around is ghastly and horrid, every thing in appearance hostile,
and, as it were, bent against a private and single being, who is divided from,
and at war with the rest of Nature, in a disagreement and irreconciliation with
every thing, and with the Order and Government of the Universe? It Is thus at
last that a Mind becomes a Wilderness where all is laid waste, every thing fair
and goodly removed, and nothing extant but what is dismal and horrid. Now if
any thing that but looks like desert, or that feels like banishment or
expulsion from human Commerce, be so heavy to bear; what must it be to be thus
estranged from Mankind, and to be after this manner in a Desert, and in the
horridest of Solitudes, even when in the midst of Society; and to live with
Mankind as with a foren Species, and as with those Creatures that are most
remote from Man, and such as he has the most cause to fear? Were we to form a
Hell in our Imaginations, we could by nothing so well represent it, as by those
Terrors, Despondences, and Horrors which attend this dark state of a Mind
revolted from Nature, in no concord or unity with any thing, but every way
desperate; viewing its own deformity and disagreement; and as conscious of
universal ill merit, so conscious of universally merited hatred, and punishment
accordingly due, and ever to be expected from every hand.

AND thus therefore it appears that the greatest of Miseries is that State
which is consequent to the loss of natural Affection; and THAT TO HAVE THOSE
HORRID, MONSTROUS, AND UNNATURAL AFFECTIONS, IS TO BE MISERABLE IN THE HIGHEST
DEGREE.

CONCLUSION.
THUS have we endeavored to prove what was proposed in the beginning. And
since in the common understood sense of Vice and Illness, no one can be vicious
or ill, but either,

1. BY the deficiency or weakness of natural Affections;

2. OR by the violence of selfish ones;

3. OR by having those unnatural ones that carry to no end either in the private
or public System:

IT must follow that if each of these are pernicious and destructive to the
Creature, insomuch that his completest state of Misery is made from hence; TO
BE ILL OR VICIOUS, IS, AND MUST BE EVER, TO BE MISERABLE AND UNHAPPY.

AND since every vicious Action must more or less in proportion help toward
this Mischief and Self-ill, it must follow, THAT EVERY VICIOUS ACTION MUST BE
OF SELF-ILL, AND NEVER BUT BE TO THE INJURY AND SUFFERANCE OF THE CREATURE.

FOR, whatsoever is committed or done, that either goes immediately to the
impairing of the unnatural Affections; or to the promoting of the unnatural
ones; or to the widening and extending of the self-Passions, by an
encouragement of those Lusts which overturn all order of Life, and are as much
enemies to the ease and pleasure of the Body, as to that of the Mind; this must
ever be esteemed injurious, and against the greatest Interest which a Creature
can possibly have. For how can there be an indulgence of those irregular
Appetites, without a greater inflammation of them? And how can such an
Inflammation work, but to the disorder of the Soul, and to the corrupting of
sound and natural Enjoyment, even in a way of Sense, as well as to the
corruption of the Affections, the dissolution of the Temper, and the
distortion, rack and misery of the Mind? Which way therefore can it be said,
that any one through self-Interest can act either vitiously or unsociably; since
to do any thing through an imagination of self-Interest or Pleasure, that is
contrary to natural or social Affection, or out of the just limits of natural
Appetite and self-Inclination, is and must be of self-Injury, to that degree as
has bin shown?

THUS have we computed, in the best manner we were able, the Good and Interest
of Mankind, by enumerating and casting up all those Particulars from whence, as
by way of Addition or Subtraction, that Sum or general Account of Man's
Interest or Happiness in Life, is either swelled or diminished: so that the
method here taken may perhaps for this reason be called a sort of Moral
Arithmetic, and be said to have an evidence as great as may be found in
Numbers, and equal to Mathematical Demonstration. For it seems to us, that
there has not bin any degree of certainty wanting in what has bin said
concerning the preferableness of the mental Pleasures to sensual; and even of
the sensual ones accompanied with good Affection, and under a temperate and
right use, to those sensual ones that are no ways restrained, and are supported
by nothing social or affectionat. Nor is that (as we conceive) less just and
real, which has bin said of the united Structure and Fabric of the Mind, and of
those Passions which constitute the Temper or Soul, and on which its happiness
or misery so immediately depends. It has bin shown, that in this Constitution
the impairing of any one part must go to the disorder and ruin of other parts,
and of the whole, through the necessary connection and balance of the
Affections; that those very Passions through which men are vicious, are of
themselves a Torment and Disease; and that whatsoever is done that is knowingly
ill, must be of ill consciousness, and must in proportion, as the Act is ill,
impair and corrupt social Affection and Enjoyment, and destroy both the
capacity of kind Affection, and the consciousness of meriting any such: so that
neither can we in a manner participate thus in Joy or Happiness with others, or
receive satisfaction from the expressed kindness and love of others; on which
however the greatest of all our Pleasures are founded. If this be so, and that
the state which is consequent to this defection, and which immediately succeeds
to the loss or ruin of natural Affection and Integrity, be a state of all
others the most horrid, oppressive, and miserable; then it will appear, that to
yield or consent to any thing ill or immoral, is a breach of Interest, and
leads to the greatest Ills: And that on the other side, Every thing that is an
improvement of Virtue, and that is establishing to right Affection and
Integrity, is an advancement of Interest, and leads to the greatest and most
solid happiness and enjoyment of Life.

THUS the Wisdom of what rules, and is FIRST and CHIEF in Nature, has made it
to be according to the private Interest and Good of every Creature, to work
toward the general Good; which if that Creature ceases to promote, and to be
useful to, he in so far ceases to be kind and useful to himself, and is his own
Enemy, as being no longer good to himself than whilst he is such as to be good
also to Society, and to that whole of which he is a part. So that VIRTUE, which
of all Excellences and Beauties is the chiefest and most amiable; that which is
the Prop and Ornament of human Affairs, which upholds Societies, maintains
Union, Friendship and Correspondence amongst men; that by which Countries, as
well as private Families, flourish and are happy; and for want of which every
thing comely, conspicuous, great, and worthy amongst Mankind, must perish and go
to ruin; that single Quality, thus glorious in its effects, and of this good to
all Society, and to Mankind in general, is, after this manner, equally a
Happiness and a Blessing to each Creature in particular possessing it, and is
that by which alone Man can be happy, and without which he can never but be
miserable.

AND THUS VIRTUE IS THE GOOD, AND VICE THE ILL OF EVERY ONE.

THE END.
Books lately published.
AN Account of the first Voyages and Discoveries made by the Spaniards in
America* Containing the most exact Relation hitherto published, of their
unparalled Cruelties on the Indians, in the destruction of above forty
millions of People. With the Propositions offered to the King of Spain to
prevent the further Ruin of the West Indies. By Don Barthol* de las Casas,
Bishop of Chiapa, who was an Eywitness of their Cruelties. Illustrated with
Cuts. To which is added, The Art of Traveling, showing how a Man may dispose
his Travels to the best advantage. Price in Calf 4 s.

The Grounds and Occasions of the Controversy touching the Unity of God, etc.
The Methods by which it has bin managed, and the Means to compose it. With some
Account of the late Mr. Thomas Firmin and other Unitarians. By a Divine of the
Church of England. Price 12 d.

Johannis Clerici Ars Critica, in qua ad studia Linguarum I atinae, Graecae and
Hebraicae via munitur; Veterumque emendandorum, and spuriorum Scriptorum a
genuinis dignoscendorum ratio traditur. In 2 Vol. Price 5 s.

The Art of Memory. A Treatise useful for all, especially those that are to
speak in public. By Marius D' Assigny B. D. Price 12 d.

An Account of the taking of Carthagena by the French, in the Year 1697.
Containing all the Particulars of that Expedition, from their first setting
out, to their return into Breast. By Monsieur De Pointis, Commander in Chief.
Illustrated with a large Copper Plate, describing the Situation of Carthagena
and parts adjacent. Done out of French. Will very shortly be published by Sam,
Buckley, at the Dolphin over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. School.


